THE Practice of Physic, IN Seventeen several Books.

Wherein is plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and Several
Sorts of Signs; Together with the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man.

By
Nicholas Culpeper, Physician and Astrologer. Abdiah Cole, Doctor of Physic.
And William Rowland, Physician.
Being chiefly a Translation of THE WORKS OF THAT Learned and Renowned Doctor,
LAZARUS RIVERIUS, Now living: Councellor and Physician to the present King of
France.

Above fifteen thousand of the said Books in Latin have been Sold in a very few
Years, having been eight times printed, though all the former Impressions
wanted the Nature, Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only
the Medicines for the Cure of them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle.

The Names of the seventeen Books of the Practice of Physic, and the Principal
Matters treated of in each of them, are printed in one sheet of Paper, and put
before these Books.

With these Books is bound a Physical Dictionary, explaining hard Words used in
these Books, and others.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1655.

THE COMPLETE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, IN EIGHTEEN SEVERAL BOOKS.

Wherein is plainly set forth, The Nature, Differences, Diagnostick, and
Prognostic Signs. Together with the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man.

By
Nicholas Culpeper, Physician and Astrologer. Abdiah Cole, Doctor of Physic.
And William Rowland, Physician.
Being chiefly a Translation of THE WORKS OF THAT Learned and Renowned Doctor,
LAZARUS RIVERIUS: Now living, and Physician to the present King of France.

Above fifteen thousand of the said Books in Latin have been Sold in a very few
Years, having been eight times printed.

The Names of the seventeen Books of the Practice of Physic, and the Principal
Matters treated of in each of them, are printed in one sheet of Paper, and put
before these Books. The Eighteenth Book is a Physical Dictionary, explaining
hard Words used in these Books, and others.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1655.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
READER,
THY cheerful Acceptance of my former Endeavors in this kind for the Good of my
Native Country, has encouraged me, though with great Care, Labor, and Cost, to
present thee with the Learned, Judicious, and Worthily renowned Riverius his
Practice of Physic. He is an Author now living, and sufficiently known: And
his Work will speak for it self, and praise him in the Gates.

And if thou shall show a Friendly Countenance to this worthy Stranger, who now
speaks English, I shall be thereby encouraged by all other means to study to
promote thy Good by bringing thee more acquainted with this, and other
excellent Authors.

And whereas some, either out of envy, or misunderstanding, do condemn Works
of this Nature, published in our Mother Tongue, alleging chiefly, That such
Books increase the number of Empericks* are a hinderance to learned and able
Physicians; also occasion some to hurt themselves by rashly practicing on their
own Bodies. I shall Answer to these Objections in order.

First, as for Empericks: These Books, and such as these published in English,
are so far from making more Empericks, that they will spoil those that are, and
make that we shall have fewer of them. For an Emperick being one that gives
Physic (Hab Nab, as we use to say) relying only on Experience, and what he
has seen done before him, not being able to give any reason touching the
Disease, its Cause, or Cure: These Books will teach such persons how to go upon
good grounds, and to be able to give a solid Reason for what they do, and of
Empericks, make them Rational Physicians, if they be men of good Natural Parts,
though they be ignorant of all Tongues but their Mothers.

As for the hurt which is hereby pretended to be done to learned Physicians, it
is a mere Imagination, and no learned Physician that bethinks himself well,
will so judge. For the use of these Books respects chiefly the Poor of this
Nation, together with Sea-farers, and Soldiers. But for the Rich that have
Money to spare, and bide at home, no otherwise (in point of practice) than for
an honest Curiosity; and delightful Speculation. What rich man is there so mad,
who reading a Chapter in these Books, and seeing what a world of Considerations
and Cautions do belong to the knowledge and orderly Cure of every Disease, but
will be more fearful than ever he was before to commit himself to the Cure of
any but a learned Physician. Now it is not by the Poor, but by the Rich, that
the learned Physician maintains himself; the poor are but a trouble to him,
only before such Books as these were extant in the English Tongue, Conscience
(sometime) forced the learned Physician to take care of the poor, because the
unlearned were wholly unable: whereas now there may be found Industrious men
that know no more Languages than their Native one, who may in a rational way
contribute to the Necessities of the Poor. Nay, these kind of Books are
profitable to the learned Physicians; for many of the Gentry, especially of the
Ladies and Gentlewomen, viewing the state of their own Bodies in such Books as
these (as in Looking-Glasses) will perceive certain Diseases in themselves,
either now in being, or likely ere long to seize upon them, which otherwise
they would never have so much as dreamed of; and thereupon crave the Advice and
Assistance of the learned Physician.

Also the Ladies and Gentlewomen being well read in such Books as these, will
better know how to demean themselves toward their Husbands, Children, or other
Relations and Friends in their respective Sickness in point of ordering them,
and will be more apprehensive of the Physicians Directions, and so better able
to practice them; also more capable of his Reasons, and Prognostics, and so
more confident and cheerfully obedient. All which will very much advance the
Cure, and consequently the Honor and Gain of the learned Physician: for as
Hippocrates notes in his first Aphorism, It is not enough toward the Cure that
the Physician do what is fitting; but the bystanders and friends of the Sick
must play their part, or all will not be well.

And in the third place, Whereas it is objected, That people reading these
Books, will practice upon themselves and hurt themselves.

I Answer, If they do, they have none to blame but their own folly; for it is
not the intent of the Publishers of these Books, that every one that can read
English, should dare to take, of their own Heads, such Medicines as are
described in the said Books. But our intent is, That where in the Country there
is no learned Physician at hand; at Sea, in the States and Merchants Ship,
where the Chyrurgion is compelled to act both his own, and the Physicians part;
In Armies and Leguers, etc. an ingenious and diligent Chyrurgion, Apothecary,
or any other that has from his youth been exercised in these kind of studies,
and conversant about the sick, may attain such a competent knowledge in the
Causes and Methodical Cure of Diseases, as they may with honor to themselves,
and profit to the sick (by Gods Blessing) supply the place of a more learned
Physician. For the use of such persons, these Books are intended, and for
diligent Midwives; and not that every Fool should turn Physician, or that every
Reader should tamper with him or her self.

Also diverse Honorable Ladies and Gentlewomen, that out of a truly Christian
and Charitable Disposition have not disdained, but counted it a great Honor to
be helpful to the poor in the time of their sickness, may by perusal of these
Books, and the like, confirm and increase their knowledge, and become honorable
Instruments in the Hand of God, of much relief and comfort to many poor
distressed Creatures in their respective Countries and places of Habitation.
For the worthy sakes of which honorable Ladies and Gentlewomen in the first and
chiefest place, and for the ease of all others unacquainted with the Greek and
Latin Tongues, and consequently unable to understand diverse terms of Art, and
other words drawn from the said Tongues (which it was necessary to retain for
brevity sake, and to avoid tedious Circumlocutions) I have caused a Physical
Dictionary to be added at the end of these Books, explaining all such terms of
Art aforesaid, as are used therein.

When the Reader meets in these Books, with the names of Simple or Compound
Medicaments, and desires a more full knowledge of them, let him have recourse to
the London Dispensatory in English, where he may be satisfied; for it had been
an endless and vain work, to repeat what has there been said. If there occur
accidentally the name of any Disease which the Reader would better understand,
let him look into the Table of the Contents of the Chapters of these seventeen
Books, and he shall find the Chapter entitled from that Disease; in the
beginning of which Chapter he shall find the said Disease described and
explained.

Also the Reader may please to take notice, That many hard phrases in these
Seventeen Books are explained in the Context, by more easy words following,
which signify the same with the foregoing hard word. As for example,
MASTICATORIES, or Chewing Medicines, giving the Reader to understand, that
Masticatories, is as much as to say, Medicines Medicines that are only chewed
in the mouth to bring away Rhewm by spetting.

So GARGARISMS, that is, Medicines to Gargle in the Throat: A PLETHORICK, or
full Body: EMPYEMA, or Corrupt matter gathered between the Chest and Lungs:
HYPOCHONDRIA, or Parts under the short Ribs: A VESICATORY, or Plaster to draw
Blisters. Many such passages there are throughout these Books, where the latter
Clause is an exposition of the former.

And that thou may know to whose great Industry and pains thou art obliged
for the Englishing this most excellent piece of Art, know that (by reason of
eight several Editions in Latin, of which there has been fifteen thousand
Books sold) it has been three times translated at* my charge, By Nicholas
Culpeper, Physician and Astrologer; Abdiah Cole, Doctor in Physic, who has
practiced Physic twenty nine Years in the Service of three of the greatest
Princes in Europe: and William Rowland, a Knowing Physician: and also by an
eminently learned and pious Physician, who desires not to be named, being (as
he says) content with the applause of his own Conscience, which tells him that
while he was employed about this Work, he was doing that which would weigh down
in profit to his Country, all the good that all the Physicians in London did or
could do in the same time; a work that tends to profit many millions, not only
of this Generation, but of all that shall follow, till the world become one
great Bone-fire; or this Nation and Language perish together. And it has been
(he says) a longtime his Opinion, That it is more rational, manly, generous,
and Christian, whilst God shall please to afford him Food and Raiment, to
employ his time and pains in Actions largely conducing to the good of Mankind,
though little advancing his own Fortunes, than in matters of petty and poor
Concernment, that bring great gain with them: In which generous Resolution, God
(the Author of it) will, he hopes preserve him to his dying day; at which time
the fruit and profit of his Labors will comfort him, but all the gain in the
world will do him no good at all.

Use our Labors with Diligence, Care, Ingenuity, Compassion toward the sick,
and in the fear of God. Attribute the Success and Honor of all thy Endeavors to
him: Bless him for the Light he discovers to this Generation, denied to so many
Millions of our Ancestors: Bless him for the Piety and Noble Generosity of our
Governors, that give us leave to Be as Good as we Will, and to Do all the Good
we Can (though seeming to cross private Interest) Oh! what would we have given
for this single Privilege a few Years since? Or what would the poor Protestants
in France and Germany give for the like Favor? How many of them have been
lately Massacred, or made fly from all that was near and deer to them for want
of such a Mercy as this?

Finally, Pray for those that have taken pains in the Work, and among the rest,
for

Thy hearty Wel-wisher PETER COLE.
From my Printing House in Leaden Hall, June, 2. 1655.
The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, London, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near
the Exchange.
Right several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and
Astrology. 1 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of
Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen's Method of Physic.
2 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Wom^n. Newly enlarged by the Author
in every sheet, and Illustrated with diverse new Plates. 3 Galen's Art of
Physic, with a large Comment. 4 The English Physician Enlarged; being an
Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is
showed how to cure a man's self of most Diseases incident to Man's Body, with
such things as grow in England, and for three pence charge. Also in the same
Book is showed, 1 The time of gathering all Herbs, both Vulgarly and
Astrologically. 2 The way of drying, and keeping them and their Juyces. 3 The
way of making and keeping all manner of useful Compounds, made of those Herbs.
The way of mixing the Medicines according to the Cause, and Mixture of the
Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted. 5 The Anatomy of the Body of Man,
Wherein is exactly described, the several parts of the Body of Man, illustrated
with very many larger Brass Plates than ever was in English before. 6 A New
Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 7 A Treatise of the Rickets,
being a Disease common to Children; wherein is showed, 1 The Essence, 2 The
Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The Remedies of the Disease; Published in Latin by Dr.
Glisson, Dr. Bate, and Dr. Regemorter, translated into English. And corrected
by N. Culpeper. 8 The Practice of Physic, containing seventeen Books.
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex. The Wonders of the
Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch. An Exposition on the Gospel of the
Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward. Clows Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation.
Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance
of Baptism. Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.
Vox Pacifica, or a persuasive to peace. Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and
Satan's Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in Parliament Time. Mr. Symsons Sermon at
Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major. Mr. Phillips Treatise of
Hell. -- of Christ's Geneology. Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant,
showing that they oblige not. Eleven Books of Mr. Jeremish Buroughs lately
published; As also the Texts of Scripture upon which they are grounded. 1 The
Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed, 1 What
Contentment is, 2 It is an Holy Art and Mystery, 3 The Excellencies of it, 4
The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 2 Gospel
Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the Worship
of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving the Lords
Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. Wherein is showed, 1
That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of
Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And suitable to what Truths
the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men that have
their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-Mindedness, Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The
great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is
joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-Mindedness, and Walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24.
and on Phil. 3. 20. 5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and
tenth Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth Chapters of Hosea, being now complete. 8 The Evil of Evils, or the
exceeding Sinfulness of Sin, on Job, 36. 21. 9 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1. 1.
10 Of Hope, on 1 John. 3. 3. 11 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5. 7.
Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz. 1
The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied
from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love to, and
Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowing of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
time of Gods Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in New
England. A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein seven Questions are Answered, 1
Whereof Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Governors
have an Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whether Kings and Governors be
subject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of their Country. 4 How far the People
are to obey their Governors. 5 Whether all the people have, be their Governors.
6 Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor 7 What Confidence is to be
given to Princes. The Compassionate Samaritan. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.
The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. The Craft and Cruelty of
the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen. A Sacred Panegerick. By Stephen
Martial. Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortality of Man's Soul. The
Anatomist Anatomized. King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men
concerning his Trial. Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. A Vindication of
Free Grace; Endeavoring to prove, 1 That we are not elected as holy, but that
we should be holy; and that Election is not of kinds, but persons. 2 That
Christ did not by his Death intend to save all men, and touching those whom he
intended to save, that he did not die for them only if they would believe, but
that they might believe. 3 That we are not justified properly by our believing
in Christ, but by our Christ, believing in. 4 That, that which differenceth one
man from another, is not the improvement of a common ability restored through
Christ ^o all men in general, but a principle of Grace wrought by the Spirit of
God in the Elect. By John Pawson. Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill. Vix. 1
The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.
The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the
Scaffold. The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel. The
Discipline of the Church in New England, by the Churches and Synod there. A
Relation of Barbados. A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the
Indians in New England; By Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhew. The History of Montress:
and his Actions for Charles the First. His passions for Charles the Second King
of Scots. The Institutes of the Laws of England by John Cowel, Octavo. A
description of the Grand Signors Seraglio; or Turkish Emperors Court. By John
Greaves. Octavo. The reigning error Arraigned at the Bar of scripture, and
Reason. By Francis Fulwood. Octavo. The state of Future Life. By Thomas White.
Twelves. The Royal and delightful Game of Picquet, written in French, and now
rendered into English. Octavo. De copore Politico: or, The Elements of Law,
moral, and politic. By Thomas Hobs of Malmsbury. The History of the Rites,
Customs, and manner of life, of the present Jews throughout the World. Octavo.
The London Dispensatory in Latin in Folio. The London Dispensatory in Latin in
Twelves. A Poem upon the late Fight at sea, between the two great Fleets of
England and Holland. These several Books of Physic and Chyrurgerie will
shortly be printed in English. Riverius Observations, with fifteen hundred and
seventie other Histories and Observations of other men. Riolanus Anatomy.
Bartholinus Anatomy. All the Works of Daniel Sennertus, except some few, not
proper for Translation. The Idea of Practical Physic, being a complete Body of
Physic. And Fernelius his Works.
These Books of Divinity will speedily be printed. Mr. Buroughs, on 1 Cor. 5.
7. and 18, 19. 29. And fifty nine Sermons on Matthew, 11. 28, 29, 30. Seventeen
Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, being the substance of many Sermons preached in
New England.
Several pieces of Mr. Bridge of Yarmouth. Viz. 1 Scripture Light the most sure
Light: compa^ed with, 1. Revelations and Visions. 2. Natural and supernatural
Dreams. 3. Impressions with and without Word. 4. Light and Law within. 5.
Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial
Astrology. Delivered in three Sermons on 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Christ in Travel:
Wherein, The 1. Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after effects of his
Death. 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. And His satisfaction therein. Are opened
and cleared in three Sermons, on Esaias, 53. 11. 3 A Lifting up for the
Cast-down, in case of 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage of
Duties. 4. Want of Assurance. 5. Affliction. 6. Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8.
Unserviceableness. 9. Discouragements from the Condition it self. Delivered in
thirteen Sermons on Psalm, 42. 11. His Four Sermons concerning 1 Sin against
the Holy Ghost. 2 Sins of Infirmities. 3 The fifth Monarchy. 4 The Good and
means of Establishment.

Francisci Tayleri, Capitula Patrum: Hebrice and Latin edita. Una cum
Annotationibus sensum locorum difficilium Experimentibus. Francisci Tayleri,
Lamentationes Jeremiae vatis, Denuo e fontibus Hebraicis translatae, cum
Paraphrasi Chaldaica, Masora magna and parva, and Commentariis Rabbi Shelomoh,
Jarchi and Aben Ezrae, e Buxtorfii Bibliis magnis excerptis.


The Author to the Reader.
FIfteen Years ago (Friendly Reader) to Satisfy the Desires of my Auditors, I
undertook to explain unto them the Methodicall Cure of all inward Diseases of
the Body; which that I might accomplish the sooner, I meddled not at all in a
manner with the Theory, knowing full well that any Student might with ease
enough fetch the same from diverse Authors: which notwithstanding they could not
so easily do in point of Practice, because of the almost infinite Company and
variety of Medicaments, wherewith the Books of those that have delivered the
Practical part of Physic do swarm; with which Young Beginners are so
confounded, that they remain amazed, not knowing which to choose. I conceived
it would be most profitable for them, if out of such a multitude of
Medicaments, I should select the most choice, and which were most frequently
used, and dispose them into the same order which we are wont to observe in our
Practice, when we attend the Cure of our sick Patients.

This Method of teaching, gave such content to our Students of Physic, that as
many as came flocking to this University to study, after that I had finished
the same, did all earnestly desire to have written Coppies thereof; and many of
them did frequently exhort me, and earnestly Beg, that I would suffer it to be
printed; and so for the future free all Men from the tedious Labor of writing
it out. But I, who never had the thought (being very free from Self-Love) that
my writings were of so much worth, as to be published in Print, especially this
Method of Practice, which was slipped from me as a thing only begun with rude
Notes, hastily huddled up to perform my daily task of Reading, and half maimed
for want of the Theoretick part: I thought it better to believe my own
Conscience than their too favorable Opinion. I pondered likewise in my Mind,
that it was a very hazardous thing, to subject my Reputation to the Judgment of
the whole world, and (as it commonly falls out) to the biting Teeth of envious
detractors; especially in this polished Age, abounding with neat and pasing
fine Wits, who are hardly pleased with such works as have been wrought with
the greatest Industry possible, and who are wont to peep curiously to spy spots
in the shining Sun. Nevertheless this unperfect Birth of mine; which I desired
to keep close and hidden, was sent into the wide world by one of my Scholars,
who without my knowledge, and against my will, gave that imperfect, homely and
unpolished work to a Printer of Paris to print. And this Child of mine which I
did count Abortive, was more pleasing and found greater Favor in the Eyes of
Strangers, than in its Fathers; for all the Books of this first Edition, were
suddenly sold off. A second Edition, and a little after a Third was procured
by the same Printer, by which all Europe was filled with Copies. Nevertheless,
some years after, there came out three other Editions within two years time,
one at Lions, and two other in Holland viz. at Tergow and the Hague In the mean
while, I received very many Letters, out of the Chief Cities of FRANCE,
GERMANY, HOLLAND, and ITALY, from Doctors of Physic, whom I was acquainted
with, when they studied Physic in this University; seriously expostulating,
that this Work was Lame because it wanted the Theory of the Disease, and
withal advising me that it would be worth my pains, to spend some part of my
studies that way. Conceiving at length that it was fitting to consent unto
their just requests, I labored with all my might as far as my Employments and
Health would give me leave, to finish and publish this Theoretick part;
insomuch that at last (Blessed and Praised be God) I brought the same to a
conclusion. Accept it (freindly Reader) with a cheerful mind, being Joined to
the foresaid Practick part, so that in one continued Discourse thou may
Behold the Nature, Differences, Causes, Diagnostick, and Prognostic Signs,
together with the Cure ofall Diseases. I Suppose this Child of mine will merit
highly thy Favor, being now adorned in all its parts, and advanced to a far
greater Degree of Perfection; and seeing that thou were pleased with it in its
Cradle and Swadling-Clouts; now that it is greater and has attained its
perfect Stature of Body, it will not, I hope, Displease thee. Enjoy it with
Gods Blessing, and whatever thou shall learn therefrom, let Christian Charity
cause the to employ it for thee Good of thy Neighbor. Also I desire thee to
take notice, that many faults were crept into the former Editions through the
negligence of Printers, all which I have carefully corrected in this Edition.
And furthermore, I have added many and those very Choice Medicaments, to the
Cures formerly printed, which will not a little conduce to the happy cure of
difficult Diseases. Forewel.

From my Study at Monpelier, the first of July, Lazarus Riverius.

An EPIGRAM, showing who are Doctors of Physic, and who not.
Doctors or Teachers they of Physic are
(Whether by Pen they do it, or in Chair
With lively Voice) that teach the way to know
Man's Nature, Health, and Sickness, and do show
Diseases, Cause, and Cure. But they who spend
Their Life in Visits, and whose Labors end
In taking Fees, and giving Paper-scrowls
FACTORS of Physic are; and none but Owls
Do count such Doctors, that no Latin know,
From whence that Name did to our Language flow.
W. R. Doctor and Factor of Physic.

The Contents of all the Seventeen Books.
The First Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Head. The
PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Cold Distemper of the Brain. 8 Chap. 2. Of Drouzie
Diseases, called, Coma, Lethargy, Carus, and Apoplexy. 9 Chap. 3. Of Waking
Coma. 16 Chap. 4. Of the Sleeping Diseases called, Catoche, and Catalepsie, or
Congelation. 16 Chap. 5. Of the Palsy, or Paralysis. 18 Chap. 6. Of a
Convulsion. 24 Chap. 7. Of the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness. 28 Chap. 8. Of
the Falling Sickness in Children. 33 Chap. 9. Of Giddiness, called Vertigo. 35
Chap. 10. Of Tremor, or Trembling. 37 Chap. 11. Of Phrenitis, or Phrenzie. 38
Chap. 12. Of the Imposthume, and Spacelus, or Mortification of the Brain. 44
Chap. 13. Of Mania, or Madness. 45 Chap. 14. Of Melancholy: 48 Chap. 15. Of a
Catarrh, or Defluxion. 50 Chap. 16. Of the Headache. 56
The Second Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the eyes. The
PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of Gutta Serena or Amaurosis, 62 Chap. 2. Of the Disease of
the Vitrous, or Glassy Humor. 66 Chap. 3. Of the Diseases in the Crystalline
Humor. 66 Chap. 4. Of the Diseases of the Watery Humor, and especially of a
Suffusion. 68 Chap. 5. Of the Enlarging, or Dilatation of the Pupilla. 74 Chap.
6. Of the straitness, or Contraction of the Pupilla. 75 Chap. 7. Of Albugo, or
the white Spot called Pin and Web, and of other Colors of the Cornea Changed.
76 Chap. 8. Of Ophthalmia, or Inflammation of the Eyes. 78 Chap. 9. Of Hypopyo,
or Matter under the Cornea. 85 Chap. 10. Of Phlyctaenae, or Blisters in the
Eyes. 86 Chap. 11. Of the Ulcers in the Cornea and Adnata. 86 Chap. 12. Of a
Cancer in the Cornea. 87 Chap. 13. Of the Rupture of the Cornea. 88 Chap. 14.
Of the Coming forth of the Uvea. 89 Chap. 15. Of Aegylops, and Fistula
Lacrymalis. 89 Chap. 16. Of Rhyas and Encanthis. 90 Chap. 17. Of Epiphora. 91
Chap. 18. Of Pterygium, or Haw in the Eyes, called Unguis. 93
The Third Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Ears. The
PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of Deafness, and thick of dull Hearing. 95 Chap. 2. Of Noise
in the Ears. 99 Chap. 3. Of Pain in the Ears. 101 Chap. 4. Of those things
which come forth of the Cavities of the Ears preternaturally. 106
The Fourth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Nostrils.
The PREFACE. Chap. 1. Of the Ulcer of the Nostrils, and Ozaena. 108 Chap. 2. Of
Sarcoma, and Polypus. 110 Chap. 3. Of the loss of Smelling. 111 Chap. 4. Of the
Stink of the Nostrils. 112 Chap. 5. Of Coryza, or Pose. 112 Chap. 6. Of
Sternutation, or Neezing. 113 Chap. 7. Of Bleeding at the Nose, called
Haemorrhagia. 114
The Fifth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Tongue. The
PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Inflammation of the Tongue, and other Tumors of the
same. 123 Chap. 2. Of the Tumor called Ranula under the Tongue. 125 Chap. 3. Of
the Taste being Hurt. 126 Chap. 4. Of the Palzey of the Tongue, and the Hurt
Motion thereof. 127
The Sixth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Teeth, Gums,
Jaws, Pallat, and Windpipe, or Larynx. The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Toothache.
129 Chap. 2. Of the blackness and rottenness of the Teeth. 134 Chap. 3. Of the
Erosion or eating away, and of the Exulceration of the Gums. 134 Chap. 4. Of
bleeding at the Gums. 135 Chap. 5. Of the Ulcers of the Mouth, and Jaws. 136
Chap. 6. Of the Relaxation of the Uvula, or Falling Down of the Pallat. 137
Chap. 7. Of Angina, or Quinzie, or Squinvie. 138
The Seventh Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Breast.
The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of Asthma, or difficulty of Breathing. 146 Chap. 2. Of
Pleuritis, or a Pleurisy. 152 Chap. 3. Of Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the
Lungs. 158 Chap. 4. Of Empyema, or matter in the hollow of the Thorax. 160
Chap. 5. Of the Dropsy in the Breast. 163 Chap. 6. Of Haemoptysis, or Spetting
of Blood. 164 Chap. 7. Of Phthisis, or Consumption. 169
The Eighth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Heart. The
PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of Syncope, or Swooning. 178 Chap. 2. Of the Palpitation, or
Breathing of the Heart. 182 Chap. 3. Of Weakness. 245
The Ninth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Stomach. The
PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of Want of Appetite, or Loathing of Meat, 249 Chap. 2. Of
Dogs Appetite, called Fames canina. 254 Chap. 3. Of Pica and Malacia. 256 Chap.
4. Of the Thirsty Disease, called Sit is Morbosa. 258 Chap. 5. Of the Hurt
Concoction of the Stomach. 259 Chap. 6. Of Singultus, or Hiccough. 262 Chap. 7.
Of Nausea, and Vomiting. 295 Chap. 8. Of Vomiting Blood. 269 Chap. 9. Of the
Disease called Cholera. 272 Chap. 10. Of Pain in the Stomach, called Dolor
Ventriculi. 274 Chap. 11. Of the Inflammation. Ulcer, and Imposthume in the
Stomach. 277
The Tenth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Intestines,
or Guts, The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Chollick. 280 Chap. 2. Of the Iliack
Passion. ^85 Chap. 3. Of Astriction, or binding of the Belly. 288 Chap. 4. Of
Lientery, and Coeliack Passion. 289 Chap. 5. Of Diarrhaea. 291 Chap. 6. Of
Dysenteria. or Dysentery. 295 Chap. 7. Of Tenesmus. 303 Chap. 8. Of Fluxus
Hepaticus, or Flux of the Liver. 305 Chap. 9. Of the Worms. 307 Chap. 10. Of
the Immoderate Flux of the Haemorrhoids. 313 Chap. 11. Of the Pain of the
Haemorrhoids. 316
The Eleventh Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Liver.
The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Hot Distemper of the Liver. 320 Chap. 2. Of the
Inflammation, Imposthume and Ulcer of the Liver. 323 Chap. 3. Of the Stoppage,
or Obstruction of the Liver. 327 Chap. 4. Of the Jaundice. 333 Chap. 5. Of the
Scirrhus of the Liver. 335 Chap. 6. Of the Dropsy. 336
The Twelfth Book of the. Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the Spleen.
The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Inflammation of the Spleen. 347 Chap. 2. Of the
Pain of the Spleen. 348 Chap. 3. Of Obstruction* Tumor, or Puffing up of the
Spleen. 348 Chap. 4. Of the Scirrhus, or Hard Swelling of the Spleen. 349 Chap.
5. Of Hypochondriack Melancholy. 350 Chap. 6. Of the Scurvy. 357
The Thirtenth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of the Diseases of the
Mesentery, Sweetbread, and Caul. The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Obstruction of
the Mesentery 362 Chap. 2. Of the Inflammation of the Mesentery. 363 Chap. 3. Of
the Imposthume, Ulcer, and Scirrhus of the Mesentery. 364 Chap. 4. Of the
Diseases of the Pancreas, or Sweetbread. 365 Chap. 5. Of the Diseases of the
Caul, or Omentum. 366
The Fourteenth Book of the Practice of Physic Of the Diseases of the Reins
and Bladder. The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Stone in the Kidneyes, and Pain in
the Reins, called Dolor Nephriticus. 367 Chap. 2. Of the Stone in the Bladder*
378 Chap. 3. Of the Inflammation of the Reins and Bladder. 382 Chap. 4. Of
Pissing of Blood. 385 Chap. 5. Of the Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder. 387 Chap.
6. Of Diabetes, or extraordinary Pissing. 390 Chap. 7. Of Pissing the Bed, of
Involuntary Pissing, or not containing of Urine. 392 Chap. 8. Of stoppage of
the Urine, and Strangury. 394 Chap. 9. Of Dysuria, or Scalding of the Urine.
397
The Fifteenth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of Women's Diseases. The
PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of the Green Sickness, called Chlorosis. 400 Chap. 2. Of the
stoppage of the Terms. 403 Chap. 3. Of the Immoderate Flux of the Courses. 409
Chap. 4. Of the Whites. 413 Chap. 5. Madness from the Womb. 417 Chap. 6. Of the
Mother-Fits, or Womb-sickness. 420 Chap. 7. Of Inflammation of the Womb. 431
Chap. 8. Of an Ulcer of the Womb, 434 Chap. 9. Of a Scirrhus, or a Painlesshard
Swelling of the Womb 490 Chap. 10. Of a Cancer of the Womb. 492 Chap. 11. Of
Mortification, or Gangrenation, and Sphacelation, or Blasting of the Womb. 493
Chap. 12. Of the Wombs Wind-and-Water Swelling, or Dropsy. 494 Chap. 13. Of
the falling down of the Womb 498 Chap. 14. Of the Womb shut up, or Imperforated
501 Chap. 15. Of Barrenness 502 Chap. 16. Of Acute and Chronical Diseases of
Women with Child 509 Chap. 17. Of Abortion or Miscarriage 512 Chap. 18. Of Hard
Childbirth 517 Chap. 19. Of a dead Child. 520 Chap. 20. Of the Afterbirth
retained 521 Chap. 21. Of Immoderate flux of the Loches, or Childbed
Purgations. 523 Chap. 22. Of Suppression of Childbed Purgations. 524 Chap. 23.
Of Gripings after Childbearing 525 Chap. 24. Of Acute Diseases of Women in
Childbed 527
The Sixteenth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of Diseases of the Joints, and
Rheumatick Pain of the whole Body. The PREFACE. CHap. 1. Of Pain in the Joints,
called Arthritis, or the Gout. 531 Chap. 2. Of the Hip-Gout, or Sciatica 544
Chap. 3. Of Rheumatick Pains of the whole Body 547
The Seventeenth Book of the Practice of Physic. Of FEVERS. The PREFACE.
SECT. I. Of Simple Fevers. The Preface. CHap. 1. Of the Fever Ephemera. 553
Chap. 2. Of the Fever Synochus Simplex 554 Chap. 3. Of an Hectic Fever. 555
SECT. II. Of Putrid Fevers. The Preface. Chap. 1. Of Continual Putrid Fevers
560 Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms which accompany Putrid Fevers. 575 Chap. 3 Of a
Tertian Ague 580 Chap. 4 Of a Quotidian Fever 585 Chap. 5 Of a Quartan Ague
586 Chap. 6 Of Compounded or Complicated Fevers, and particularly of a
Semi-Tertian 593
SECT. III. Of Pestilential Fevers. The Preface. Chap. 1. Of a Pestilential
Fever. 611 Chap. 2. Of the Measlles, and small Pox 637


THE FIRST BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Head.
The PREFACE.
IN this our Treatise of Head-Diseases, we speak first only of those which are
in the substance of the Brain, and the Films which contain it: For although the
Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Teeth, Gums, Jaws, and Pallat, go to the making up of the
Head; yet we think it fit to speak of their Diseases in several Books for
better Method sake; And to call the Diseases of the Brain and its Meninges, or
Films, by the name of Head-diseases, most properly so from the excellency of
the parts wherein they are. These come from the hinderance of the Action of the
Brain, either in respect of Sense, Motion, or Nutrition. The Sense is divided
into Internal, and External: The Internal has the chief actions, as
Imagination, Reasoning, Memory; as also Sleep and Waking: the Diseases of which
are, Frenzy, Madness, Melancholy, Catoche, Coma waking sleep, and Coma long
sleep, Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy. The External Senses are five, namely, Sight,
Hearing, Smelling, Taste, and Feeling: But because the first four have their
peculiar Organs or parts, which have diverse Diseases, which we shall treat of
in several Books: We will in this Book lay down and declare those which belong
to the sense of Feeling, because they come immediately from the Brain and its
Membranes or Films disturbed, and are either termed Palsies, which come from
Sense destroyed or diminished; or Headaches, which comes from Sense depraved.
When the actions of the Brain are hindered in respect of motion, there arises
Convulsion, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Apoplexy, Giddiness, or swimming of the
Head, called Vertigo, and Trembling: Finally, When the acting or working of the
Brain is hurt or hindered in its Nutrition, or Nourishment, the Disease is
either in distemperature, or disorder of the excrement of the Brain, of which
comes a Catarrh, defluxion or distillation. We shall bring all these Diseases
under their proper Heads and Chapters, in that order which is most usual for
the way of Cure: Therefore we shall first declare the Cold Distemperature of
the Brain, and then all Diseases that come from thence, because the ground of
their Cure is in the Cure of that. Afterward we shall lay down the Diseases
that come from a Hot Distemper, and Hot Humors; which will all more clearly
appear in their several Chapters.

CHAP. 1. Of the Distemper of the Brain.
ALL Distempers are usually divided into Simple, and Compound; Material, and
Immaterial. Simple or single Distempers are seldom seen; as also immaterial
distempers, for they come from Primary Causes, and either vanish of their own
accord, or with very small Remedies or Medicines: But Material Distempers
produce all the Diseases of the Head; therefore we will fall close to discourse
of them; which few Authors have done, in handling them severally, because in
the laying down of the Diseases which are produced of those Distempers, they
are sufficiently explained. We therefore will transfer the handling of the Hot
distemper of the Brain, and also the Moist and dry Distempers to the Chapters
which contain those Diseases which are produced from them. But because the
greatest number of Diseases of the Head come from a Cold and Moist Distemper of
the Brain, we thought sit to discourse of that by it self in the beginning of
this Treatise; that the Cure of that may be as the Foundation of the Cure of
all Diseases coming from thence, and that the Medicines may be found in this
Chapter which appertain to the Cure of their Cause: Therefore we will avoid the
vain repetition of those Diseases, which is the Custom of almost all Writers of
Practical Physic, who by that means enlarge their Volumns, and make the Art
more difficult and tedious to young beginners.

The Cold Distemper of the Brain which is Compound and Material, or joined with
Matter, is for the most part waterish and moist; because the Brain is that
Mother of Moisture or Phlegm, and Coldness long abiding draws moisture to it
self. For albeit sometimes it is joined with a Melancholy Humor, yet that Humor
is seldom begot in the Brain as Phlegm is, but it is for the most part lodged in
the Hypochondria, or Parts beneath the Ribs, and sent from thence to the Brain,
whereby most grievous Symptoms are produced.

The Causes of a Cold and Phlegmatic Distemper of the Brain, are these:
1 Cold and moist Meats which easily turn into Phlegm; and also in the time of
their Concoction, by cooling the Stomach and the Liver too much, produce
abundance of Phlegm, which after is sent up to the Brain. 2 Too great a
quantity, not only of Meats which are too cold, but also of good and wholesome,
which destroys the Natural heat, and begets Crudities. 3 Eating presently
after or before meat, and before the former meat is concocted; whence come many
Crudities, which send Phlegm to the Head. 4 The ceasing of a Natural custom of
vomiting, or purging phlegm; or the omitting the Custom of taking Purges,
Sweats, Diuretics, or provokers of Urine, or omitting of accustomed Exercise.
5 To be born of Parents troubled with a cold distemper of Brain. 6 Old Age,
which by reason of the decay of Natural heat, produces much Phlegm: as also
Youth by reason of Gluttony and disorderly Diet. 7 A Cold and Moist dweiling,
near standing Pools, Marshes, Fens and great Rivers, open to the North winds,
Snow and Rain. 8 Long and deep sleep, especially presently after Meat. 9 A
sedentary idle life, without, or with too much Care, Study, or Sorrow, because
by dispersing the Natural heat, especially in the Brain, they make it cold. 10
To these may be added a hot and moist Liver, which sends many Vapors to the
Brain, which there condense or grow thick, and so turn into Phlegm.
The Signs of a cold distemper of the Brain, are taken either from the Causes
above mentioned, by the prefence of which we may easily conjecture of the
condition of the distemper; or they are taken from the effects of the
distemper; which that they may be particularly examined and tried, we shall
fetch from their Originals, namely, from Actions, Passions, Excrements, and
Habit of the Body.

1 The Animal Actions, which declare a cold Distemper of the Brain, are these;
A heavy and dull Mind, a slow blockish Wit, an unfortunate Memory, a great
inclination to sleep, and long and deep continuance therein, except a Catarrh,
or Defluxion, Pain of the Head, or Passions of the Mind do hinder it: Dreams of
Coldness, of Waters, as Rain, Snow, Floods, Pools, Seas, and of white things A
slowness and dullness of all the Senses: Slowness of Motion, yet continuance
therein; because gross Spirits are more difficult to be diffused or dissolved.

2 The Passions which declare a Cold Diseases, of the Brain, are Cold Diseases,
as Palsies, Lethargy, Catarrh, or Defluxion, and many others, with which if the
sick party have been formerly troubled, we may well conjecture that he is
subject to this distemper of a cold Brain. This will further appear if the sick
man be better in clear, hot, and dry weathr, than in cold, moist, winter, and
rainy weather. Moreover, an often and plentiful sending forth of snot and phlegm
from the Mouth and Nostrils, is a clear demonstration of abundance of cold
Phlegm and moisture in the Brain.

3 From the Habit of the Body, we may have signs both general and particular of
this Distemper: The general Signs are taken from the whole Habit or
Constitution; for if the whole Constitution be cold and moist, then without
question the Brain, which is most cold and moist of all other parts, is the
same: Therefore a Skin which is cold, soft, smooth, and white; a Body soft and
slow, not fleshy, with small veins, declare a cold constitution o^ temper. The
particular Signs of a cold Brain are in the Head; as paleness of Face, no Veins
to be seen in the Eyes, soft hair, smooth, and thin, growing slowly, red, and
not curling, continuing the whole life without baldness; and when the Head is
quickly offended with outward Cold, and refreshed with Heat.

As to the Prognosis, or Prognostical part concerning this Distemper; It is
hard to be cured, and often produces grievous Diseases: that which has been
long breeding is most hard to be cured; that which is Natural, Hereditary, and
from the Birth, is never to be cured; as also that which is in old folks, if it
has been of long continuance. Winter is not a sit time for the Cure of this
Distemper but Summer.

The Cure is wrought from two Indications or Intentions; namely by evacuating
or discharging the phlegm abounding, and correcting or qualifying the distemper
of the Humor by its contraries, which must be done by Diet, Chyrurgery, and
Physic.

The Diet must be hot and dry; and first make choice of a pure Air, somewhat hot
and dry, but not too hot, for that would dissolve and power forth the humors in
the Head too soon, and so produce a distillation, and other diseases which
happen to those who stay long in the Sun, or inflame their heads with too near
approach to the fire: The Air cannot be too dry, so it be temperate in its
active qualities, but it had better be too hot than too cold.

Let not the Chamber of the sick party be too little, too low, nor too moist or
filthy, but open to dry winds which may pass through: In moist, cloudy, cold
times, the Chamber air may be altered with hot and sweet Herbs strewed upon
floor; as Sage, Marjoram, Lavender, Rosemary, Time; or by burning the same, or
other dry Woods, and especially Juniper: let the fire be clear, and such as
will dry the Air in the Chamber: Fumigations if they be not too strong, do well
to consume moisture; but they must be carefully used, they must be very gentle
and moderate, otherwise they do hurt by melting and pouring forth the cold
humors too speedily, which cause defluxions: and also you must consider the
Patients Constitution in the use of them, for some men are presently brought to
the Headache by any strong scent, having their heads presently filled with the
vapor: A temperate and proper Fum^gation is made of the purest Amber, putting
little pieces thereof upon the Coals; it is no way offensive, dries well, and
strengthens the Brain, especially the Indian Amber, called Gum. Animi; or you
may prescribe this following, which is thus compounded.

Take Wood Aloes and Benjamin, of each two drams; of Storax, called Styrax
Calamita, one dram and an half; Frankincense and Sandarach, of each two
scruples; Gum-Animi and Cloves, of each half a dram: Make a gross Powder of
them to be thrown upon the Embers.

Southernly winds, and those that cause Rain are to be avoided, night-air, and
especially Moonshine, which much offend the Brain: Very cold and North Winds
are to bewared of, especially when they suddenly are changed from the South;
for such a wind does squeeze a Brain full of moist excrements, and sends them
down into the Body, even as a man's hand squeezes a wet sponge.

Secondly, A special care is to be had of Diet, for as Hippocrates says in his
Book of Humane Nature, Diseases are partly from Diet, and partly from the Air
wherein we breath: Therefore let the Diet be of good Juice, easy concoction,
neither cold, nor over nourishing: Therefore Mutton, Kid, Veal, are to be used,
and which are better, young Pigeons, Chickens, Capons, Hens, Partridges,
Black-birds, Thrushes, and all kind of Mountain Fowl, and Yolks of new laid
Eggs: roast Meats are better than boiled. Take heed of hard flesh, and of hard
concoction, as Beef, Pork, Venison, Hares, Geese, Ducks, and Sea Fowl: as also
of the Heads, Entrals, and Appurtinances of Beasts. Eat Fish but seldom, and
make choice of those which have solid Flesh, coming out of swift Rivers, and
stony places; boil them in Wine, adding Vinegar, Butter, and Spice, which Sauce
is to be allowed with other meat, unless the Liver be over hot; of which
principally use, Nutmeg, Cloves, Cinnamon: never or seldom eat cold and moist
Herbs, as Lettice, Purslain, Spinach: but in Summer time we can allow a
moderate use of Herbs which are gently cooling and drying, for the
strengthening of the Body, and fixing the Blood that it may not evaporate, as
Endive, Succory, Sorrel, but they must be taken boiled, not raw. Roots of
Parsley, Carrots, Parsnips, Mints, Hysop, Watercresses, are very good. But you
must avoid all things that easily disturb the Head, and fill it with vapors;
and they are of two sorts: Either they are such as discuss and melt the Humors
with their sharpness, as Onions, Garlic, Mustard, Rocker, Rhadishes: or such
as fill the Head with gross vapors, as Milk, and all Milk meats: All manner of
Pulse, as Beans, Pease, etc. of which the red Pease are the least hurtful, by
reason of their opening and abstersive nature; therefore the broth of them is
allowed. You must avoid all green raw Fruit, which are not lasting especially,
and those which are very moist: dried Fruits may be used at second or last
courses, as Raisons, Almonds, Pine-nuts, Dates, and the like; but you must use
them sparingly, for they are for the most part hard of concoction. Pears boiled
and Sugared, Citron Rinds Candied, Lemmon and Orange Pills Candied, may be
eaten at the last course: but it is much better to take one spoonful of
digestive Powder after meat, whose Aromatical sweet vapor ascending with the
vapor of what is eaten does strengthen and dry the Brain: It is made of
Coriander Fruit, Annis seeds, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, with a double quantity of Sugar
of Roses. Let your Bread be of the best Wheat, well baked and leavened, and made
with Salt and Annis seeds: in a great distemper Biscuit is best. Let your drink
be thin wine of small strength, which will not fill the Head with many vapors,
well mixed with Water; and also it is profitable one hour before meat to mix
wine and water that the vapors may be allayed, and to boil a little Coriander
seed in the water that it may better strengthen both Stomach and Brain: in
stronger Diseases use Hydromel, or Water and Honey. This is a good Rule in all
Diet, To eat moderately, and to let the Supper be less and lighter than the
Dinner. Sobriety, as in all Diseases, so especially in Head-Diseases is of
great concernment; for the Head by much food is filled with Humors and Vapors:
and contrarily, by little and slender Diet it is emptied of them.

Thirdly, You must use moderate Exercise, and every day continue it, for too
much rest weakens the Natural heat, and makes it so dull that it cannot well
concoct, and fills the Body full of Excrements: On the other side, Motion and
Exercise stir up the Natural heat, help Concoction, expel Excrements, and
cheereth the Spirits, and purifieth them, but you must exercise before meat,
and after meat rest for an hour or two, or at least move very easily.

Fourthly, Use a mean in sleep and waking, for as with moderate sleep the
strength is repaired, so with too long the Body is made cold, burdened with
excrements, especially the Brain: but too much watching, makes the Body thin,
spends the Spirits, and feeds upon the sound parts of the Body. Let not
therefore sleep be too long, but according to custom commonly seven hours are
allowed, but more or less may be taken according as age and custom shall
require; if you offend in either extreme, it is better to offend in too much
waking than in too much sleep. You must not sleep straight after meat, but two
hours after at least, having taken a gentle walk. You must sleep with your head
high, and upon one side; lying on the back is not allowed.

Fifthly, All the Excrements of the Body are to be evacuated in their season, of
the Brain especially; therefore every morning hawk from the Pallat, blow the
Nose, comb, and rub the Head with a course cloth, or sponge, which will fetch
the superfluities of the Brain through the sutures or seams of the Skull. The
Belly must be kept open; and if it will not otherwise, use a Suppository, or a
Clyster, or some gentle Lenitive at the Mouth. For the Excrements are not only
taken away by so doing, but also by degrees something is fetched from the Brain,
or at least something is retained and derived thereby from the Head, which was,
or would have been sent thither as to the weakest part.

Lastly, You must have special care of the Passions of the Mind, from which our
bodies are many times wonderfully altered and disturbed; especially of Anger
and Sorrow: Sorrow diminishes the Natural heat, wounds the Spirits, whence
comes small concoction, and many Excrements: Anger makes a great boiling of the
Blood, and motion of the Spirits, by which the Humors are diffused and
dissolved, and then if there be any Excrements in the Brain, presently they are
sent to the weak and infirm parts, from whence arise many dangerous Diseases.

The other two Means for Cure, namely, Chyrurgery and Physic, may be used as
follows:

In almost all Diseases which come of the Humors, we use to make a general
Evacuation by Bloodletting and Purging.

Blood-letting is not agreeable with Phlegmatic Diseases; but if in other parts
of the Body Blood do abound, the Liver be inflamed, and the age of the Patient
be flourishing, and consistent with it, we may then let blood: for so will the
ascension of vapors into the head be hindered, and superfluous Nourishment taken
away, that Nature afterward may more easily concoct what is raw and waterish
in the blood; and then purging Medicines may be given more safe.

But if Plethora, or two great repletion do not Constrain, it is better before
blood-letting to give a purge for Phlegm by way of Potion, Bolus, Pills, or
Powder. The Forms whereof are as follows.

Take of Senna half an ounce; Annis seeds, and Cloves, of each half a dram;
Leaves of Mints and Bettony, of each half a handful; of the tops of Time, half
a pugil: Boil them to a quarter of a pint in Spring Water; strain it, and
infuse in it two scruples of the best Agarick Trochiscated; of Cinnamon half a
scruple; strain it again, and dissolve in it three drams of Diaphoenicon, and
one ounce of Syrup of Roses. Let this be the Potion to be given with safe
Government. Or;

Take Diacatholicon, and Diaphoenicon, of each half an ounce; make it into a
Bolus with a little Sugar. You may ad two drams of Diacarthamum, and take away
as much of the Diaphoenicon: or you may make it of equal parts of Diacarthamum
and Diaphoenicon, without the Diacatholicon.

Or,

Take Pill. Cochie the less, two scruples; with the Water of Bettony make them
into five or six Pills gilded; which let him take early in the morning, having
eaten but a light supper over night.

The Pills of Agarick, and of Cochie the greater, are very fit for this
purpose. For a Powder.

Take Senna, Turbith, Hermodacts, of each a scruple; Diagridium half a scruple;
one Clove: Give this powder in Broth fasting.

After Blood-letting, if it be necessary, we come to the preparation and
purging of the Humors, which may be done with the following Apozeme, or opening
Drink.

Take the Roots of Cyprus, Flower-de-luce, Angelica, Zedoary, and of
Elicampane, of each one ounce; the Leaves of Bettony, Marjoram, Balm,
Penyroyal, Organ, Calaminth, of each a handful; of the tops of Time and Sage,
of each half a handful; Annis seeds, Seselis, or broad Cummin, Fennel seeds, of
each three drams; Liquoris scraped, and Raisons stoned, of each one ounce; the
Leaves of Senna sprinkled with Aqua vitae, two ounces; Carthamus seeds bruised,
and fresh Polipody of the Oak, of each one ounce; Agarick trochiscated,
Turbith, Hermodacts, of each three drams; Ginger and Cloves, of Each one dram;
Stoechas, Rosemary, Sage, and Lavender Flowers, of each one Pugil, or small
handful: Boil them in fair Water to two pints; strain it and ad four ounces of
white Sugar: clarify it, and aromatize it, that is, make it sweet with two
drams of Cinnamon; let this be for four morning draughts.

In the first and last draught dissolve of Diacarthamum, or Diaphoenicon three
drams; and let him drink it with Physical Regiment.

Or if you ad no Electuary to the last dose the day following. you may give the
purging Pills above mentioned.

After Purging, that the Brain may be altered and strengthened, and the
Medicines purging, not leave any offense, the Patient may take this Bolus
following:

Take of old Treacle one dram; Conserve of Rosemary and Roses, of each two
scruples: with Sugar make a Bolus, which let him take in the morning two hours
before meat, and drink after a small draught of small Wine.

But because this is a stubborn Disease, and will not always yield to gentle
Medicines, we must fly to stronger. And then after Purging, we must use a
sweating Diet, which dries and warms the Brain and the whole Body; concocts
crude and raw humors, and makes the thick humors thin, cuts those which are
slimy and clammy, cleanses those that are foul and dull, and sends forth
whatsoever is over moist by Urine, Sweat, or insensible transpiration. For the
effect of all which it is very good to use a slender Diet at the time of taking
it.

This Diet drink may be made either of a Decoction of Guajacum, or Lignum vitae
only, or by putting to it some Sassaphras, or Roots of Sarsaparilla, or those
things which are most proper for the Head, as the Prudent Physician shall think
fit that will consider the diverse tempers and constitutions of Bodies; in
respect of which he will prescribe a longer or shorter continuance of this Diet
to fifteen, twenty, or thirty days.

Now the Sweating drink is made as follows:

Take of Chips of Guajacum, and Roots of Sarsaparilla, of each two ounces:
infuse them twenty four hours in four pints of Water upon warm ^mbers: then
boil them gently without smoke to the consumption of half; strain it through a
Hippocras bag, and keep it in a glass bottle, and give half a pint warm in the
morning, covering him warm, and provoking sweat.

Take of Sarsaparilla two ounces; infuse them twelve hours in twelve pints of
Spring Water; then boil them as before to the consumption of the fourth part;
strain as before, adding Coriander seeds, Liquoris, Sugar or Cinnamon, as much
as will make it pleasant. Use this for ordinary Table Drink at the time of the
Diet; eating Biscuit made with Annis seeds, roast Meat, not boiled, Almonds
roasted, Raisons, Pinenuts, Prunes boiled with Sugar, and the like.

This is always to be observed in the use of Sudorofick or Sweating Medicines:
You must give a Purge once a week, and that day omit sweating, by reason that
sweating expels only the thinner matter, leaving the thick which must be sent
forth by stool. Moreover, because by the use of sweating Medicines the Body is
often bound, you must give a Clyster every third or fourth day.

If the Disease be not yet cured, you may use these bags for the Head, in the
time of sweat.

Take of Annis seeds, Fennel seeds, Bay Berries poudered, of each three ounces;
of Milium, or Millet seed, or Hyrse, one pound; of common Salt half a pound:
Fry them in a Pan, pouring by degrees a little strong Wine upon them. With
these fill two bags, apply them hot one after another to the mold of the head
being shaven; do this presently after he has taken the sweating Potion. Then
wipe off the sweat, and clap this strengthening Plaster to the Head.

Take of clear Amber, Frankincense, Mastick, of each one dram and an half;
Galbanum, Opopanax, of each one scruple; of Misselto of the Oak two drams; male
Peony seeds half a dram; Oil of Nutmegs as much as is sufficient: Make a
Plaster of them in an oval form. Or you may use the head strengthening
Plaster in the Apothecaries Shops at Mountpelior, not in the Dispensatory,
whose description follows:

Take of Storax, Benjamin, Laudanum, of each four ounces; Peony roots,
Flower-de-luce roots, Misselto of the Oak, Mastich, of each one ounce; liquid
Styrax as much as is sufficient to make a Plaster: of which one ounce upon
Leather in an oval form may be applied to the Coronal Suture.

If you desire a more drawing dissolving Plaster which is commonly called
Epispastick, thus you must make it.

Take of Emplaster de Mucilaginibus two ounces; Flower-de-luce roots,
Hermodacts, Pellitory of Spain, Staphisagre, Cubebs, Pigeons dung, Mustard
seed, of each one ounce; Nutmeg, Cloves, Cinnamon, long Pepper, and black
Pepper, of each half a scruple; Liquid Styrax as much as is sufficient: Make a
Body of Plaster, and spread a little upon Leather in an oval form for the mold
of the head.

After General Evacuations, you may come to Particulars; which are made by
Errhins or Juyces, for the Nostrils, sneezing pouders, Apoplegmatisms, or
Medicines chewed in the Mouth.

Take Leaves of Marjoram, Sage, and Bettony, of each one handful; beat them in
a Marble stone Mortar, sprinkling by degrees Bettony Water, and white Wine, of
each two ounces: Press out the Juice and make an Errhine, which you may make
sharper if you ad half an ounce of Flower-de-luce roots.

It is a custom now adays to rub the dry Leaves of Tobacco between the
fingers, and to snuff up the Powder: this fetches much humor from the Brain,
and is at hand.

But the best Sternutatories are made thus:

Take the Leaves of Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary, all dried, of each half a dram;
Pellitory of Spain and white Hellebore, of each one scruple; Musk three grains;
which with a Quil may be blown into the Nostrils. Or,

Take Ginger, and Flower-de-luce Roots, or Orrace, of each one scruple; Castor
half a scruple; Euphorbium six grains: Make them into Powder. But the chiefest
smelling Powder is made of black Hellebore, with an equal weight of Sugar Candy
finely poudered. Which also is excellent for curing a defluxion.

Apophlegmatismi, or Medicines drawing Phlegm out of the Head, are either called
Masticatories, that is, chewing Medicines; or Gargarisms, that is, Medicines to
gargle in the Throat. A Masticatory is th^s prepared.

Take of Pellitory of Spain two drams; Mustard seed and Stavisagre, of each one
dram: Make them up with white Wax into little Balls; of which let one be chewed
every morning, holding down the head.

A Flower-deluce root is usual for the same purpose, which will do good in small
infirmities. Mastich alone chewed is the mildest Masticatory, and it attracts,
and draws humors to the mouth without heat and inflammation, which others do not.

A Gargarism is thus made:

Take of Stavisagre half an ounce; Mustard seed three drams; Pellitory of Spain
one dram: Boil them in Water and Honey to three ounces, in which dissolve
Vinegar of Squils two ounces.

In the use of these Medicines we must observe, That the Evacuation which is
made by the Pallat, is more beneficial than that which is made from other
parts, because it is ordained by Nature for the only way by which the Head is
to be purged and cleansed. But the Nose is made for smelling and breathing
through, and Nature does oppress and abuse it, when she sends forth her
superfluous Excrements by it. Moreover the way of Evacuation by the Pallat is
more safe, neither is the Brain so much shaked by it as by sneezing. But
Errhines, or Medicines that purge the head by the Nose, do draw forth the
matter more violently, because not only the quality or vapor of the Medicine
stir up the Brain as in Gargarisms, but also the very substance it self.

We must also observe, That the use of Errhines or neezings is dangerous when
the eyes are sore, or the Nostrils are ulcerated or sore, and when the patient
is inclined to bleeding at the Nose, or to a giddiness of the Head, which
neezings will suddenly bring by shaking the Brain too violently.

Liquid and moist Errhines are snuft into the Nose from the palm of the hand,
or by lying down are powered in; but the mouth must first be filled with Water
or Wine, lest that Medicine come by the Pallat into the mouth, although that
which passes through brings the humors more forcibly out of the mouth.

They must take heed of Gargarisms that are subject to Defluxions or
Consumptions.

Moreover, For particular Evacuations we may use Vesicatories, or Plasters
that draw blisters, to the Nape of the Neck. In the Dispensatory of Mountpelior
is this Receipt, though it be not in any other.

Take of Galbanum and Ammoniacum, of each five ounces; of the Powder of
Cantharides, or Spanish Flies, one pound and an half; Mustard, Pepper, of each
half a pound; Virdegreece and Pellitory of Spain, of each two ounces and an
half; Euphorbium one ounce and an half; Wax one pound and an half; Pitch,
Rozin, and Turpentine, of each one pound; Oil a small quantity. One ounce or two
of this Plaster spread upon Leather, may be applied to the Nape of the Neck.

The Brain is also strengthened by outward application of Pouders. Rhewm-Caps,
by which it is comforted and made warm, and the remainder of the Humor
dispersed.

Take Powder of Orrace half a pound; Storax and Benjamin, of each two ounces:
powder the Head with them every night, and comb it off in the morning.

This Powder is very refreshing by its scent, strengthens the Head, dries
the Hair: If you will make it stronger, put Cloves, Nutmegs, and Cinnamon
thereto.

Take of Stoechas, Rosemary Flowers, and red Rose Leaves, of each half a small
handful; dried Bettony two scruples; Coriander seed, Lignum Rhodii,
Frankincense, Orrace, Nutmeg, Mastich, of each one scruple; Benjamin, Vernix,
Mace, and Cloves, of each half a scruple* Powder them, and wrap them in the
thrids of Scarlet or sweet Cotton, and with a piece of red Taffety make a
Rhewm-Cap for the Head, to be sewed in another Cap, or to be worn by it self.

The following Fumigation does dry the Head.

Take of Lignum Aloes, Frankincense, Mastick, clear Amber, yellow Sanders, red
Rose Leaves, Bettony dried, of each one dram; Cinnamon, Mace, Cloves, Styrax
Calamita, of each one scruple: make them all into gross Powder, which you must
sprinkle upon coals of fire, and let the Patient take the fume or smoke of it
fasting, covering his head with a large linen cloth to preserve the fume, and
opening his mouth: Let him do this twice or thrice in a week.

But if by Fumes he find pain in his head, you may only perfume his night-caps
every evening: For which use this following is easily prepared.

Take of Frankincense, Mastich, Styrax Calamita, Benjoin, and Sandarach, of
each half an ounce; Mace and Cloves, of each two drams: Make gross Powder of
them.

But because this is a stubborn disease, and uses to produce new Phlegm after
both general and particular Evacuations, we shall prescribe those usual
Medicines by which the humor may sometimes be drawn away, and the Brain
preserved longer in that state, into which by Physic it is restored. To this
end you may make a Magistral Syrup of those Drugs which are in the Apozeme, or
opening drink above written, taking three times as much of the purging things
as before, which he may use twice or thrice in a Month, the quantity of two or
three ounces in a Decoction of Bettony and Marjoram.

Or instead of Syrups he may use to take these Pills.

Take of the best Aloes half an ounce; Turbith that is Gummy, Hermodacts, and
Agarick new made up, of each two drams; Diagridium one dram; Ginger and Cloves,
of each half a scruple; Saffron and Salgem, of each seven grains. Powder them
all, and sprinkle them with the Water of Marjoram: then dry them in the shade,
and make them into a Mass or Body with Oxymel of Squils; of which let him take
half a dram or two scruples once in a week, two hours before Dinner.

The day after his Syrup or Pills, as also twice or thrice in a week, let him
take a quantity of this Opiate, or Electuary.

Take of Conserve of Acorus Roots, or of Ginger, and Citron Barks candied, of
each one ounce; the Conserve of Sage and Rosemary flowers, of each six drams;
Nutmeg candied half an ounce; one candied Myrobalan, old Treacle, and
confection of Alkermes, of each three drams; of the Powder Diambra, and
Diamoschi dulcis, of each one dram: with the Syrup of Citron Barks make it up:
And let him take every morning two hours before meat, the quantity of a
Chessnut; drink after it a little wine and water.

This following Balsom does more strongly corroborate the brain, of which he
may take now and then three or four drops in wine or broth.

Take of the Chemical Oil of Nutmegs three drams; Oil of Marjoram, Rosemary,
and Amber, of each half a dram; Musk and Amber-greese, of each one scruple:
with a little Oil of a Man's Skull mix them together. You may make the Oil of a
man's Skull thus: Take the shavings or raspings of a Skull that was never
buried, put them in a Retort, or Still so called, in as much white Wine as will
suffice: Let them stand in Balneo Mariae, that is, a kettle of warm water for
some time; then distill it in Sand till it is dry; and you shall find the Oil
swimming upon the Water which is drawn off.

Anoint your Nostrils within with this Balsom every night, and it will
strengthen the Brain wonderfully.

There is another cheaper for to anoint the Nostrils with: which is,

Take the Oil of Orange Flowers two drams; white Wax one dram; melt them
gently, and put thereto Oil of Amber half a dram; of the Chemical Oils of Sage
and Rosemary, of each fifteen drops; Oil of Spike five drops; mix them together.

It is also very good for the drawing away of the matter which breeds
continually in the Brain, by an issue in the hinder part of the neck.

Lastly, The Baths which come out of Brimstone, Niter, Bitumen, as those called
Bellilucanae, are very good for the drying and strengthening of the Brain if it
be washed therewith for some days, after general evacuations are made. Daily
experience teaches us that most grievous Head-Diseases coming of cold
Distempers are thereby cured. It is profitable also to drink those Waters for
the strengthening of the stomach which always does sympathize with the head.
Therefore I set down this digestive Powder.

Take of Coriander seed prepared one ounce; Annis seeds, and sweet Fennel
Seeds, of each three drams; Cinnamon and Nutmeg, of each two drams; Coral,
Ivory, and Pearl prepared, of each one scruple; Sugar of Roses as much as all
the rest, or for rich folk twice as much, of which let him take a spoonful
after every meal, not drinking or eating for three hours after.

CHAP. II. Of Drouzie Diseases, called, Coma, Lethargy, Carus, and Apoplexy.
THere are four kinds of Preternatural sleep, namely, Coma, Apoplexy, Carus,
and Lethargy. We will speak of them together in this Chapter, because they
proceed from the same Causes, and are cured all the same way.

These four Diseases differ one from another after this manner:

In the Disease called Coma, Cataphora, or Subeth, according to Avicen, is a
deep sleep; but such an one as from which the Patient is raised, opens his
eyes, and answers, but presently he is again in a deep sleep.

In a Lethargy, the sleep is like that of Coma, but it is joined with a Fever
and Frenzy, or Dotage.

In Carus there is no Fever as in Lethargy, but in Carus the sleep is more
deep and profound, so that when the sick party is rowsed up, he scarce opens
his Eyes, and answers not, as in the former, but yet being pinched he is
sensible, and his breath comes freely.

In Apoplexy the sleep is most deep, and a total privation of sense and motion,
except breathing: and so therefore the sick does neither open his eyes, answer,
nor feel when he is hurt; as also he breaths very difficultly.

There are many Causes of these Diseases.
The first and chief cause is Phlegm and waterish humor contained in the brain;
of which (when there is but a small quantity, that moisteneth and cools the
substance of the brain, stopping up its ^ores and passages) comes Coma. But if
the same quantity of Humor so gathered together, become putrified and corrupt,
or grow into a tumor or swelling, or be dispersed throughout the brain, it
procures a Lethargy. When it is gathered in a greater quantity without
corruption, and that the humor is sucked up into the substance of the brain, it
causes a Carus. And lastly, When the humor is in so great a quantity that it
does not only fill the brain, but also the ventricles thereof, stopping and
straitening them, and also when it does offend the Original of the Nerves which
comes from the brain, and is placed in the basis or bottom of the Skull, and
when it hinders the passage of the Animal Spirit, it begets an Apoplexy.
Secondly, Sleepy Diseases spring also from abundance of blood in the brain;
for if the store of blood contained, be more raw, waterish, and cold, it
thickens the Animal Spirits, and makes them unfit to move; as also the
abundance of humor charging the brain, hinders the free passage of the
Spirits, and according as the humor is more or less in quantity, more or less
in coldness, it produces a greater or a lesser Disease: So that both Coma,
Carus, and Apoplexy may be caused thereby.

But drowsy Diseases, especially the Apoplexy, are usually caused by blood out
of its Vessels, stopping and compressing the Ventricles of the brain, and that
falls out either from a vein broken in the brain, or from an over fullness of
the Vessels, or from some great bruise or contusion of the head, or from some
cut or punctured wound, by which the veins of the brain are divided, and so
send forth much blood. And the Fracture only of the Skul, compressing of the
brain may produce a dullness, drowsiness or sleeping Disease.

Thirdly, It is without doubt that a Tumor in the brain, burdening it with its
weight, may produce a sleepy disease. This is reported by Platerus to be found
in a certain Barron, who for a long time was sortish and sleepy, did nothing
rationally, nor desired meat, neither did eat any thing but what was forced
into him; went not to bed but by compulsion, but would sit al day at the Table
leaning on his arm, with his eyes shut, neither did he answer at any time
without much asking and importunity, and then very little to the purpose. After
his death his Skul was opened, and there was found in his brain, a great
Kernel, hard, and of a callous body; the cause whereof might be some stroke
upon the head, which he had received long before the beginning of his Disease.

Fourthly, Many Vapors flying into the Brain may be the cause of a sleepy
disease: for if the vapors be many and gross, that they burden the animal
Spirits, and darken them as with a mist, even as the clouds in the greater
world darken and obscure the beams of the Sun. But if they be overmoist they do
so wet the Brain that it becomes weak and faint in its functions and
performances: Therefore Drunkards sleep profoundly from the vapor of the Wine,
and the abundance of crudities sent up into the Brain. So Children that are
troubled with the worms are often taken with sleepy diseases from the abundance
of gross and thick vapors which arise from crude and waterish humors. Soin
intermitting Fevers or Agues, sometimes in the beginning of the Disease there
is irresistible sleep, by reason of the crude and stinking humors which are
contained in the veins, especially in the Meseraick veins, which humors being
made thin by the heat of the fit of the Ague, send many vapors to the head, and
produce such a sleep as ends with his cold fit sometimes, and at other times
continues to the end of the fit, according as the vapors are more gross or
thin; or as they are more or less in quantity, and so are longer and sooner
discussed and dispersed.

Fifthly, Many times so great a sleeping Disease is begot by the too frequent
use of Medicines called Narcoticks, that do produce sleep; that many unawares
by the unskilful use of Opium have slept their last. There is also the same
stupifying force in some living Creatures: as in the Torpedo, or Cramp-fish. So
Plutarch reports in the death of Cleopatra, That the sting of a Viper causes
deadly sleep. But in man's Body this stupid sleeping condition comes from the
putrefaction of humors, which is seen in malignant and pestilential Fevers;
hence it is that in those diseases they are very sleepy oftentimes, which is a
certain sign of venenosity and malignity, and sometimes of death.

The Diagnosticks or Signs which show the differences of these sleeping
Diseases were set down in the beginning of this Chapter. But the Signs of the
Causes that produce these Diseases are these:

When sleepy Diseases come from watery humors putrefying in the Brain, these
are the signs: A Phlegmatic Constitution, Old Age, Infancy, a cold and moist
dwelling and season, a stopping of an accustomed spitting and blowing of the
Nose, and when the sick man before the coming of the disease was troubled with
heaviness of the Head, dimness of sight, and dullness of the whole Body; and when
in the Disease there is a defluxion of Rhewm from the Nose or Mouth; or when
the sick party feels it trickle down his Throat.

That sleeping Diseases are bred of blood, appears by a plethorick or full
Body, red Face, pain of the Head going before the Disease.

A Tumor or swelling in the Brain is scarce by any signs to be known, but is
only manifest after death by opening of the Skull as was before mentioned.

That the Disease comes from vapors flying into the Brain, appears from those
signs which show the particular Diseases of those parts, from whence the vapors
are sent up to the Brain. A surfeit going before, with crude and sharp
belchings, and other signs of crude humors in the Stomach, and other parts of
the lower Belly, show that the Disease comes from vapors which are sent from
the Stomach. But if the Vapors come from Worms, you shall know that in the
Chapter of them.

As for the Prognosis or foreknowledg of things in these Diseases, Every
sleeping Disease is dangerous, but by how much the deeper the sleep is, and the
sick man harder to be awaked, by so much greater is the danger; and therefor a
Carus is more dangerous than a Coma, or a Lethargy; but an A^oplexy is worse
than a Carus, for if it be violent, it is altogether incurable, as Hippocrates
observes in his 42. Aporism of the Second Section; which is thus: It is
impossible to cure a strong Apoplexy, and not very easy to cure a weak one; a
strong Apoplexy is when the breathing is uneven and disorderly, and sometimes
intermitting, and if such a breathing is very violent the disease is stronger,
if the breath be stopped it is most strong; but when there is some order in the
breathing, the Disease is weaker, which is declared by Galen in his Comment
upon the said Aphorisms.

A sleeping Disease is very dangerous which comes upon an acute Di^ease, for it
either signifies the extinction of the Natural heat, or a poisonous malignant
quality which has seized on the Brain.

That Disease which comes by consent of the lower parts, and from vapors which
arise from them, is less dangerous.

Men sick of a Lethargy, die within seven days; if they live longer, they
recover. Hippocrates in his Book of Diseases.

Sleeping Diseases in old men, are for the most part deadly; for in regard of
their want of Natural heat, they having a weak concoction, and weak expulsion,
it comes to pass that they cannot overcome and expel that humor which causes
the Disease, much less can they expel that humor which abounds in the Brain,
for since the Brain is the coldest part of the Body, it must needs in old
people have its heat diminished and extinguished sooner than any other parts.

In a Lethargy, if a Tumor happen under the Ears, or if matter or filth come
forth of the Ears, and the symptoms abate, it is a sign of health, for it
shows the strength Nature has got over the cause of the Disease, which it
expels before perfect concoction out of the Emunctuaries under the Ears, or
purges it out being turned into matter by the Natural passages.

They who are preserved and cured of the Lethargy do use after to spit matter
and blood, Hippocrates in Coac. and Third Book of Diseases. This Opinion, say
some, agrees not with Experience, for few have seen a true Empyema, or corrupt
matter between the Breast and the Lungs, follow a Lethargy: But the
Interpretation of Mercurialis upon the Aphorism is very right, for he says,
That Hippocrates means by Empyema and Empyicus, not the disease of the
Breast, but when filth is discharged by the Ears and Nostrils. And Galen has
taught us in his Commentary upon Aphorism 8. Sect. 5. and Aphorism 44. Sect. 7.
That Hippocrates by Empyema understands there, not only that ^uppuration and
breeding of matter, which is in the Breast, but also that which is in all other
parts.

It is good sign when a Frenzy follows a sleepy Disease coming of a cold
cause, because by that violent heat which causes a Frenzy, the watery matter
which begets a sleepy Disease is concocted.

Men in Apoplexies die in seven days, except a Fever take them, Hippoc^ates
2. of Diseases, and Aphor. 51. Sect. 6. but that Fever must be a violent one,
and essentially spring^ng from the inflammation of the Humors and Spirits,
otherwise it will not discuss the matter which causes the Apoplexy: for if it
be gentle, and only symptomatical, or happening to the Disease as an accident,
as in an Apoplexy, coming from the burning disposition of the head through too
much blood contained in the veins thereof, then the Fever does not diminish
the Disease, but rather cause some symptoms of madness, which weaken the
Animal Faculties: and in this case a Frenzy coming upon a sleepy Disease* is
not good; as we said in the Prognostic before mentioned. Moreover, a Fever
that must dissolve a sleeping Disease, must have another condition, namely,
That it come in the beginning of the Disease, whiles Nature is in some strength
to put forth strong endeavors. For that Fever which comes after the Disease
has long continued is not healthful, as Hippocrates in Coacis, says,
Apoplexies being like to be di^^olved, it a Fever come upon them after they
have long continued, are deadly.

A faint Sweat in an Apoplexy is evil, for it shows great oppression of Nature.

For the Cure of these Diseases, as of al other, three necessary means are
required.

First, Order of Diet. Secondly, Manual Operations, or Chyrurgery. Thirdly,
Medicines, or Physic.
The Diet in the beginning of these Diseases must be very slender; because they
are very acute, or violent and sharp; therefore the Patient must be fed only
with thin broaths now and then: But in the time of the declination of these
diseases we may use the same Diet which is prescribed in the Chapter before
going, treating of the cold Distemper of the Brain.

The other two means are to be used by this following Method.

And because sleeping Diseases are sudden, and full of danger, they require the
Physicians chief diligence, and quick application of Medicines.

First therefore, when the Physician is called to one taken with a sleeping
disease, he shall endeavor to raise the Patient from his deep sleep, by
offering violence to al his Senses? and laying his eyes toward the Sunbeams,
and clearest light; he must make a great noise in his Ears, and he must be
called aloud by his own Name. He must put sharp things to his Nostrils, as Rue,
Castor, Vinegar, and sharp things into his Mouth also.

He must stir up his feeling with pinching, pulling of hair, by ligature or
binding, bending of the fingers, and the like.

Make first a Clyster of the common Decoction which is most ready, after this
manner.

Take of common Decoction for Clysters, one pint and an half: Hiera picra, and
Diaphoenicon, of each one ounce: Oil of Rue, and of Lillies, of each one ounce
and an half: Honey of Roses two ounces: Salt one dram: Make a Clyster, give it
presently.

While these things are doing, the Physician ought seriously to consider
whether Blood-letting be fit or not; for in these Diseases, as Celsus said,
Blood-letting either kills, or cures; and blood-letting is good, if blood be the
principal cause, or the assisting cause, or if it be sine quanon, that is, a
cause wirhout which the disease would not be, if strength permit. But his
strength is not to be looked upon as he is in his fit, when his Animal Actions
are hindered, but as it was before the Disease came. For if the Patient was
formerly strong, he will endure blood-letting, except the Apoplexy be very
strong: and if his strength be not taken away by resolution of the parts, but
by oppression of them, then is blood-letting good. But if Blood offend no way,
or if the strength be quite gone, or the Patient very old, you may omit
blood-letting, but otherwise presently.

The first thing to be done either by night or day to one in any of these
Diseases, is blood-letting, nay, before the Clyster, if it be not already
administered: But his Arm must first be well rubbed and chafed.

And this is to be observed, That it is more profitable and safe, not to let
out so much blood at once as you require, but by degrees in some hours
distance; for by the repeating of blood-letting, the matter is more easily
moved, and the strength more preserved. Look in the sick man's face after his
first loss of blood, and feel his pulse; for if his face be better colored, and
more lively, and his breath more free, and his pulse good, there is much hope,
and you may let blood the second time with more confidence. Make the Orifice
large, otherwise he will not bleed, his blood is so thick. The more plenty of
blood he has, the more he may lose: But if phlegm abound you must bleed
sparingly, lest the vital heat be lost, which is so absolute necessary for
discussing and dissolving of this Disease.

A singular Example of large and often bleeding in an Apoplexy, is laid down by
Zacutus Lusitanus, in his First Book of the Chief Physicians, and his 33.
History, in these words: A certain Noble young Maid, fell first into a general
forgetfulness of all things, and then into a true Apoplexy, with the flowing of
her Courses: Unto whom when they had applied many Medicines both above and
beneath, as Ligatures, sharp Clysters, Cupping with Scarrification: the
Indication which comes from the flowing of the Terms being neglected, and
danger coming on through continuance: I perceiving her strength to be
sufficient for it, having first rubbed her Thighs very well, and placed Cupping
Glasses thereon; in the space of eight hours, opened the head Vein four times,
and then she began to speak, and so recovered.

Some of our late Practitioners, are so bold as to open the Jugular Veins in
Apoplexies, and say they cure also: and in so doing they take this course:
First they bind the Neck gently with a linen cloth, after the Vein is opened,
they presently loose it, and the blood flows well without a Ligature, which
might attract it to the head: after they heal up the wound with a sticking
Plaster, without binding, and so they affirm the blood will easily stop: which
Zacutus Lucitanus confirms (though he uses Ligatures) in his 79. Observation
in his first Book of the Admirable Practice of Physic, where he relates a
Story of a most sharp Squinancy; in which, by the advice of most skilful
Physicians, the Jugular Veins were opened; from whence followed (as he says) a
most dangerous flux of blood not to be stopped, which brought the Patient very
weak. Zacutus being sent: for, applies Galens Plaster, which he in his 5. Book
of Method, and 4. Chapter, uses with good success for stopping blood in
Arteries and Jugulars, and bending the Patients Neck gently, he comes to his
strength, and is cured. This Plaster is made of Frankincense, Aloes, the hairs
of a Hare mixed with the white of an Eg, having twice as much Frankincense as
Aloes, as Galen teaches in the place mentioned sometimes an equal part of each,
when the Bodies are harder. And Galen commends the operation before written,
when he says, This Plaster stops the flux of the Jugular Veins without a
Ligature or binding. But this I would take notice of, That the blood does not
flow forth so violently in one that has an Apoplexy, as in one that has a
Squinzy, because the blood is congealed; as Hippocrates shows in his Second
Book of Diseases, in the former, from whence the Veins and Arteries called
Caiodites or Jugulars, are stopped: but in the latter the blood is hot and
thin, because they who have the Quinzy have always an acute Fever withal.

A few hours after bleeding you must purge without respect of time. Neither let
the Physician be too curious or fearful in purging, since the Disease does much
require it, and the time of the disease is not usually long. And that purge
ought to be very strong because the humor is stubborn, and the Senses so
drowned that they cannot be rouzed or stirred up without strong Medicines. And
that Medicine is usually one ounce of the Electuary Diacarthamum, dissolved in
Bettony Water with half a scruple of Castor. Or,

Take Turbith four scruples: Agarick two drams: Ginger two scruples: Fennel
seeds one scruple: Castor six grains. Infuse them in a sufficient quantity of
Bettony Water: and in three ounces of it strained, dissolve the Electuary
Diacarthamum three drams: Syrup of Roses one ounce. Let him drink it.

Take of Cochie Pills the less, one dram; Castor three grains: With Bettony
Water make seven Pills, and if the party cannot swallow them, dissolve th^^ in
Sage, Lavender, or Bettony Water. Or,

Take of Cochie Pills the greater, and Pills of Agarick, of each half a dram:
The Troches of Alhandal, Diagridium, and Castor, of each three grains: With
Honey of Rosemary, make Pills, or dissolve it in Sage Water. Or this Potion

Take of Senna half an ounce: of white Agarick one dram and an half: of Turbith
one dram of Ginger and Galanga half a dram: Boil them in Sage and Rosemary
Water. In two ounces and an half of the strained Liquor put two drams of
Diacarthamum the Electuary; and of Castor half a scruple; of simple Oxymel half
an ounce.

In a Lethargy, the purging Medicines must be milder from the beginning by
reason of its continual Fever accompanying; made of Agarick, with Rhubarb or
Scammony; or of Pills of Hiera with ^garick; because Choler is that which
carries the humors to the Head: Yet in the progress of the Disease, when the
matter is flown to the Head, and sticks there, we may use the Purges above
written.

Trallianus gives one scruple of Scammony with two scruples of Castor in
Oxymel, by which he has cured many desperate Lethargies. And Oribasius says,
That there is no better Medicine for a Lethargy to purge away that phlegm which
Choler brought to the Head, than Scammony and Castor.

It often happens that the Faculties are so oppressed that Physic will not
work, which is an evil sign, and such seldom recover. But because Celsus says,
when things so fall out, we must use such Medicines as are at hand; if they be
proper for the Disease; which is so desperate that we may use desperate
Medicines. For as Serenus says, The Physicians think such Medicines better in
desperate cases, than for the Patient without trial to die an easy death. And
as Celsus says, Many things may be done in time of danger and necessity, which
may well be omitted at another time. Therefore when we have used those Medicines
without any success, we may well rise higher, namely, To those Medicines which
are made of Antimony; especially to those which are less vehement and furious,
as Aqua Benedicta, of Dr. Ruland, made of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum;
which purging both upwards and downwards, brings such a quantity of Phlegm,
not only from the stomach, but the brain also, as sometimes the Patient is cured
only with this Evacuation. And I can witness upon my own Experience, That I saw
a Noble man thrice in two years cured from the Apoplexy with this only
Medicine. Although some learned men do forbid the use of Vomits in these
Diseases, yet we must yield to Experience, which daily teaches us, that
Children affected with sleeping Diseases are more readily and safely cured by
the vomiting Salt of Vitriol, than by any other Medicine.

The Tincture of Tobacco drawn with Aqua vitae, and taken in the quantity of
two drams, with Honey powered down the Throat does excellently.

After you have given a purging Medicine, before it begins to work, and also
while it works, you must think of al those things which cause revulsion of
humors, and bring them into practice, not only frictions or rubbings, and
ligatures or bindings, mentioned before, but also Cupping glasses to the back,
shoulders, arms, and thighs, without scarrification if he was formerly blooded,
and with scarrification if blood-letting was omitted.

In an Apoplexy you must not apply Cupping glasses to the Breast or
Hypochondria, or parts under the Ribs, lest the Muscles of the Breast and Belly
being contracted, the Breath be hindered.

The chief and only Remedy in an Apoplexy especially, is to apply Cupping
glasses to the head: Which kind of Cure the famous Physician Fracastorius being
taken with an Apoplexy, did direct for himself by his Nods and signs; but for
want of their understanding of them, he died.

Zaeutus Lusitanus in his 33. History, and the first Book of the Principal
Physicians, reports that he cured a desperate Apoplexy by setting a Cupping
glass twice upon the hinder part of the Head with deep Scarrification.

A Ve^^catory, or Plaster to draw Blisters to the Neck behind, and to the
Shoulders.

Let two or three sharp Clysters be given every day.

Take of Pellitory of the Wall, Hylop, Calamints, Organ, Sage, Rue, and the
lesser Centaury, of each one handful; of Carthamus seeds half an ounce; of
Fennel and Cummin seeds, of each three drams; of white Agarick tied in a linen
clout two drams; of Coloquintida tied with it, one dram and an half. Boil them
to one pint, strain them, and ad to the Liquor of Hiera Picra half an ounce; of
Diaphoenicon one ounce; of Oil of Rue two ounces: Make a Clyster.

The Chemical Physicians do usually ad two ounces of Aqua Benedicta of Dr.
Ruland, made of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, and then it will work
strongly.

You may give four or six ounces of the same infusion at a time, and also you
may take it out of the glass wherein the Infusion was made, shaking it before,
that it may have some of the fecies or residents of the Powder in the bottom to
make it more strong. Therefore for the most part we do prescribe Clysters of
Aqua Benedicta, or Vino Emetico, that is, the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum,
because in many Diseases, especially Chollicks, it does wonders.

Take of Emollient Decoction for Clysters one pint; of Diaphoenicon one ounce;
of Infusion of Crocus Metallorum shaked together, four ounces, make a Clyster.

If the Clyster come not away in due time, give this Suppository:

Take of the powder of Hiera Picra of Galens prescription, two drams; of
Coloquintida and Agarick the best, of each half a dram; of Diagridium one
scruple; Salgem two drams; Honey boiled to a sufficient consistence or
thickness, as much is sufficient; make Suppositories.

It often falls out that the Muscle of the Arse called Sphincter, is so weak,
that a Clyster is given in vain because it cannot be contained, which is a
desperate condition.

Apply Castor and Vinegar to the Nose, which are said to have a special quality
against sleep.

It is also very good to sprinkle sharp Vinegar upon a red hot Iron, that the
Patient may receive the vapor in his Nostrils. And it will be better to put
Nigella or Pepper-wort seeds, Rue seeds, or Castoreum to the Vinegar. But
Vinegar itself warmed and applied to the Nose, if it be sharp, stirs up the
Patient powerfully; and more powerfully if you put to it Pepper and Castoreum.
The Fume of Brimstone does also raise from sleep.

The Hairs of a Goat burnt, or the horn of a Deer or Goat burnt, held to the
Nose, are most strong for the raising up of him that is in a deep sleep.

The fume or smoke of white Amber, is excellent for the awaking of men in
sleepy Diseases; as also the Oil of it often applied to the Temples and
Nostrils.

Rub also the soals of the Feet with Salt and Vinegar, anoint the hands with
Oil of Rue, and of Castorium; touch the tongue and pallat with old Treacle
dissolved in Aqua Caelestis, or Apoplectica. But take heed that your Treacle be
not new, for then Opium will cause more sleep. The Medicine called Aura
Alexandrina, or Confectio Anacardina. You may also boil Mustard seed in Vinegar
or strong Wine, and wash the Pallat therewith. Roots of Pellitory of Spain
boiled in Oxymel, that is, Honey and Vinegar do the same thing. But with all
these Medicines you may safely use Castoreum.

When you have purged the Body generally in all parts, you must then purge the
Head either sensibly or insensibly.

Sensibly, by the Nostrils and Pallat, by Errhines or Neesings, which are
prescribed in the Cure of a cold Distemper of the Brain, and by the touching of
the Pallat as before. To all these you may ad Rue, Castoreum, and Vinegar.

Concerning Neesing, It is to be observed, That if the Disease remain and
increase; and if the Patient be hard to be raised, it is very profitable: but
we must not use them too long, lest they clog the Brain, and move the humors
too much. But in the beginning of the Disease we must abstain from unseasonable
neesing, because it disperseth the humor which will fix in other parts; from
whence come stubborn Diseases, or a small sleeping Disease turns into a strong
Apoplexy.

Last of all you must use those things which resolve the humor insensibly,
which are compounded in this manner:

Take Bay Berries and Juniper Berries, of each one ounce and an half: Roots of
Angelica, Zedoary, and Master-wort, called Impatoria, or Pellitory of Spain, of
each one ounce: Leaves of Bettony, Sage, Rosemary, of each one handful: Rue,
Savory, Marjoram, Lavender flowers, of each half a handful: Boil them in
Vinegar. Dip a Sponge or linen cloth in this Liquor, and apply it warm to the
Head. It is a wonderful thing to see what good this does in sleeping Diseases:
But you must rub the Arms and Hands, and the Legs and Feet with the same.

Take of Castor half an ounce: of Man's Hair burnt, three drams: of the Juice of
Rue, of Vinegar and common Oil, of each two ounces. Boil them to an Ointment,
and then anoint the Head therewith, after the Fomentation.

Take of Oil of Pepper-wort called Oleum Costinum, of the Oil of Castor, and of
Euphorbium, of each one ounce: of the Powder Mustard seed, and Euphorbium, of
each one dram: of Vinegar one spoonful: of Wax as much as will serve to make an
Ointment.

If the Disease does not decrease after al these are used, then you must apply
a great Cupping glass to the crown of the Head, and to the hinder part of the
Head.

But a Vesicatory is best if Euphorbium be in it, for that will draw the humor
outwardly which lies deep.

Some are so bold in the height of the Disease to burn the hinder part of the
Head, between the first and second Vertebra, or Backbone with an actual
Cautery.

Zacutus Lusitanus applied many in his time with good success, as he witnesses
in his first Book of Wonderful Practice, and the fourteenth Observation, in
these words: I being called to visit a sick man, who was for the space of
thirty days taken with drouziness and irresistible sleep, with a small fever,
not able to hold open his eyes: He had used many evacuating, and diverting or
repelling Medicines, but they perfected nothing; therefore I applied the
Cautery with much benefit; for with a red hot Iron I scorched the crown of his
head till it was hard and crusty, as also the hinder part, and almost every
where about his head, by which means be awaked, and the places burned beginning
to matter, he arose and came to himself. By this means I remember I cured two
sleepers contrary to expectation, after all other means had been used in vain:
and these were cured by the heat of the fire, melting, dissolving the humor
which came forth at their mouths and nostrils many days after.

Others have an Ancient Custom, to hold a red hot Drying Pan so near the Head
that it may burn the Hair, and not the Skin.

It is good in these Diseases to give the Patient a little Aqua Coelestis, or
Apoplectick Water; or other strong Water, which by its piercing quality do very
much good, and have freed many from Apoplexies present and approaching, if
Blood be not predominant or chief in the Body, which will be hurt by the use of
strong Waters.

Now there are many sorts of Apoplectick Waters, in Langius, Wickerus,
Quercitanus, Crollius, and others. But we shall here only lay down one Water
invented by my self, and made of the most proper Ingredients.

Take of Peony Roots, and Misleto of the Oak, of each two ounces: Calamus
Aromaticus, Galangal, and Cyprus, of each one ounce: Bettony, Sage, Marjoram,
of each one handful: Peony, Annis, Fennel, and Caraway seed, of each three
drams: Lavender, Stoechas, and Rosemary flowers, of each a pugil: Nutmeg, Mace,
Cloves, Cubebs, Grains of Paradise, cardamom, of each half an ounce: Cinnamon
two ounces: Saffron, one dram and an half: the Species of Diambra, and
Diamoschu, of each two drams: Cut and beat them according to art, put them in a
glass still, and then power in as much of the best Spirit of Wine as is
sufficient. Let it stand in Balneo Mariae, or a kettle of warm Water with Hay
in it for the space of eight days; afterward draw it off, and keep the Water
in a close stopped glass bottle.

Now if the Disease decline, and his deep sleep begin to cease, you must omit
al other Medicines and follow those things only which strengthen the Brain:
which may be very well done by the use of that Opiate or Electuary which I
prescribed in the Treatise of the cold distemper of the Brain. But if you will
use stronger than that, take the Aqua Apoplectica above mentioned.

Continue the use of Castor above all things, if the Disease continue, giving
every morning three or four grains of it in the Oxymel of Squils, or simple
Oxymel. Trallianus affirms that many overcome with this Disease, have been
recovered only with this Remedy.

Outwardly you may use some Chemical Balsoms against Apoplexies, of which there
are diverse. We will only discover one of the best unto you.

Take of the Oil of Nutmegs by Expression, half an ounce: Ambergreece, Musk,
and Civit, of each one scruple: the distilled Oils of Spike, Amber, Cinnamon,
Rosemary, Cloves, of each half a scruple. With this Balsom touch the pallat
every morning, and drop some into the ears, and snuff some into the nostrils.
For this purpose the distilled Oil of Nutmegs used in the same manner is much
commended.

Lastly, We must observe, That in the Cure of these Diseases, we must use less
hot things, and lose more blood, when the Disease is caused of blood; and also
we must mix Medicines that purge Choler with those that purge Phlegm.

They which have been troubled with any of these Diseases, and are cured, do
use many times to relapse and fall into the same again; which that you may
prevent you must correct the cold Distemper of the Brain, as before is taught;
by which Method you may prevent either Apoplexy, Carus, Lethargy, or Coma. And
if the Brain be very cold after general Evacuations, you may often use Aqua
Apoplectica; or these Tablets or Lozenges following:

Take of Ambergris half a scruple; the distilled Oil of Annis seeds,
Cinnamon, and Nutmegs, of each three drops; Oil of Cloves one drop; Sugar
dissolved in Orange-flower-water, four ounces. Make these into Lozenges, and
let him take a dram or two of it every morning.

Pills to strengthen the Head, are thus made:

Take of Cubebs, Mastich, Nutmeg, Cloves, of each one dram; Amber-greese half a
dram; of Musk six grains. With Juice of Marjoram make Pills, and let him take
one scruple at a time twice in a week at his going to bed.

This Powder is much in use, and is much commended:

Take of White Amber half an ounce; of the Powder of the Electuary called
Diarrhodon Abbatis, two drams; of Peony Roots, one dram and an half. Make a
Powder of them, and take a dram at a time in any Water for that purpose before
every New Moon.

It is good to hold Nutmeg in the Mouth, and to chew it very often.

Sweet Perfumes are to be used to the Nose, especially the Apoplectick Balsom.

Use Spices with Meat, after Meat a digestive Powder, mentioned in the Cure of
the cold Distemper of the Head.

If you fear a sleepy Disease will come from too much blood, you must first take
some away by the Arm, and use al means to make the Piles or Hemorrhoid Veins to
bleed, which is very good; for which you must purge with Senna and Rhubarb, and
with cooling things.

If you fear an Apoplexy from Melancholy you must purge Melancholy, and
provoke the Hemorrhoids, and give the Medicines prescribed for the
strengthening of the Brain, especially that powder which is made of white
Amber, Diarrhodon, and Peony Roots.

CHAP. III. Of Waking Coma.
THE Disease called Waking Coma, or Coma vigil, is put among sleeping Diseases;
yet because it is of another Condition different from the rest, we will treat
of it in this Chapter by it self.

This Coma vigil, is a Disease in which the Patient lies with his eyes shut as
if he were asleep, when he is awake and distracted; and if you touch him, he
presently opens his eyes, and looks strangely, and falls asleep again, which
is hindered by diverse strange imaginations and fancies. This Disease Galen
places as a mean, between a Frenzy and a Lethargy, and calls it Typhomania.

The usual Cause of this Disease, is Choler mixed with Phlegm, by which humors
the Brain is made too moist, or it is swelled or inflamed; from whence, either
the Tumor called Erisypelas oedematosum, or oedema Erisypelatosum. But because
those humors are diversely mixed, sometimes a greater proportion of the one than
of another, it comes to pass that the Diseases from them are diverse: for if
Choler be chief, then it is a Delirium, or Dotage, and the sick man sleeps
but little though his eyes be shut; but if Phlegm prevail, the Patient does
sleep more, and is less doting, and being raised makes less noise, and is not
so foolish.

This Coma vigil comes by sympathy from Chollerick vapors mixed with Phlegmatic
that fly into the Head; which happens in Fevers that come from mixed Humors,
especially in half Tertians, which are made of a Tertian and a Quotidian. We
may safely affirm that this Disease comes from Vapors, simply hot and moist in
strong Fevers, because sleep comes from moisture, and waking comes from heat.

The Diagnosis, or knowledge of this Disease, is plain enough by what has been
said, That they which have it, lie with their eyes shut, and seem to sleep, yet
they cannot sleep, but toss and tumble, lift themselves up suddenly, strive to
get out of the bed, and then fall again asleep. The diverse Causes are easily
known from what has been said.

This Disease is accounted dangerous if the Brain have a Swelling or
Inflammation, or if it be overcome with the humors above mentioned, namely,
Choler and Phlegm; or if it come of vapors which arise from the malignant
Humors of a Pestilent Fever.

If the Dotage, or Delirium be strong, it produces a Convulsion, for it comes
of a Humor or vapor which is very sharp, which falling upon Nervous parts
causes a Convulsion.

A true Coma vigil is cured as a Frenzy and Lethargy; and if it incline most to
a Frenzy, then the Medicines proper for that are most to be used; if to a
Lethargy, then the Medicines proper for that. But a Coma that comes by
Sympathy, is cured by curing the Malignant Fever from whence it comes; but
the more peculiar Remedies must also be used which draw and keep humors from
the Brain in the beginning of the Disease, as bleeding in the Arm and Foot,
Vinegar of Roses applied to the Forehead, Clysters, Cupping glasses to the
Shoulders, Back, Buttocks, Thighs, opening the Head Vein, applying Leeches to
the Temples, and behind the Ears, and laying living Creatures to the Head to
dissolve the Humor.

CHAP. IV. Of the Sleeping Diseases called, Catoche, and Catalepsis, or
Congelation.
THere is some Confusion among Authors about this Catoche; for some take it for
Coma vigil, Waking Coma; others for Catalepsis: Paulus gave them the cause of
their difference; in his Third Book, and the Eighth Chapter, he treats of a
twofold Catoche; and first under that name, he speaks of a Coma vigil; in the
end, under the same name, he speaks of Catalepsis. Custom has brought it to
pass, that Catoche, and Catalepsis, are taken for one and the same Disease in
all Authors; the Latins call it commonly Congelation, or stiffness of the Body.

It is a Disease seldom seen, and to be admired, and those Authors which have
seen the Disease do think it so much worth the observation, as to describe the
whole passage and History of it. First of all, Galen in his first Comment,
Prorrhet. Sect. 2. Part 56. mentions a story of a School-fellow of his, who
when he had wearied himself with long Study, fell into a Catalepsis, or
Congelation; He lay (says he) like alog all along, not to be bent, stiff, and
stretched out, and seemed to behold us with his eyes, but spoke not a word: and
he said that he heard us what we said at that time, although not evidently and
plainly, and told us some things that he remembered, and said all that stood by
him were seen of him, and could remember and declare some of their gestures at
that time but could not then speak or move one part of his body. But Fernelius
in his third Book of the Parts of Diseases, Chap. 2. relates two Stories, which
are these; One while he being very studious and writing, was so suddenly struck
with this disease, that sitting and holding his pen, with his eyes open, and
looking upon his Book, you would have thought he had been hard at study, til he
was by calling and jogging found to want alsence and motion. Another I saw like
a dead man, lying along, with neither seeing, hearing, nor feeling when he was
pinched: but he breathed freely, and whatsoever was put into his mouth, he
presently swallowed; if he were taken out of his bed he did stand alone, but
being thrust he would fall down, and which way soever his Arm, Hand, or Leg was
set, there it stood fixed and firm: you would have taken him for a Ghost, or
some rare Statue.

You may read the like Stories i^ Schenkius, Marcellus, Donatus, Rondeletius,
Jacotius, and others: From whom you may gather, That in this disease there is
found a destruction, or hinderance of the internal and external Senses with a
stiffness of all the Members; and sometimes the Senses are not so much hindered
but the sick party hears those that speak unto him; sometimes the Members are
not so stiff, but they may be bent and bowed by them that stand by, and put
into diverse Postures.

The Causes of this Disease are diverse: Galen in his Comments, Aphor. 3. Sect.
2. says that a Catalepsis comes from a cold distemper of the Brain, which
distemper chiefly seizes upon the hinder part of the Head, makes it stiff and
thick, from whence the Nerves proceeding are also made stiff, and such a
distemper may seize upon all the Nerves, whether it come of an external or an
internal cause: but some question this cause, supposing that no living body can
be so cold as to have such a Congelation: But Galen answers this in his 5.
Chap. of his Book of the Difference of Diseases, by a Reason taken from
Experience, in these words; For those who in a journey are taken with cold,
which is unto death, are thus stiff, whom the Greeks call Emprostotonos, or
Bowers forward; Opistotonos, or Bowers backward; Tetanos extended straight: and
others that are killed with cold are taken with this Catoche or Congelation.
Therefore Galen teaches us, that a Catalepsis may be got by external cold, and
Reason may easily persuade us to it; for they which are killed upon the way
with great cold, do first grow stiff, they have a stiffness or Congelation
before they die, therefore cold may bring a less stifness than that which
brings Death. So we see that Congelation of the Nerves, or Catalepsis, may
come of a cold Distemper, and the sooner if it be mixed with a dry distemper.

But this Disease is most often gotten by a cold and dry distemper joined with
matter, that is an Humor or Melancholy Vapor* from which comes a Constipation
or Congealing of the hinder part of the Brain, and extention of the Nerves, and
also a stiffness of the same; from this humor it comes (I say) not only in
respect of its quality, which is cold and dry; but also in respect of its
quantity, which by repletion makes a distention, or stretching forth of the
Nerves.

Aetius in his sixth Book, and fourth Chap. says, that a Congelation may be
caused of blood: Unto which thing Rondeletius consents, saying, that it comes
to pass when the Veins and Arteries of the Brain are so full, that the Body
grows stiff, and distended or stretched out like those bodies that are
congealed with cold weather: he confirms his Opinion by a History of a Noble
woman taken with a continual Fever, called Synochus, who had in the ninteenth
day a Congelation, which was cured by a large flux of Blood from her Nose.

Sennertus has found out a new cause, which he says is a congealing Spirit,
by which the Animal Spirits are fixed, and made immovable: he denies that the
force of congealing and fixing depends upon a cold and dry distemper, but
rises from some hidden quality. Such Congealing Spirits are found in the
greater World, as in Thunder, when men are thereby made stiff, and as it were
congealed: As Cardanus reports of eight Mowers, which supping under an Oak,
were struck with Thunder so as they kept the same shape of Body, the one
seeming to eat the other, to lay hold of the pot, another to drink, when they
were all dead. It is usually reported that Wine will be congealed in the Vessel
by the spirit of Thunder: In Earthquakes, many times such Spirits break forth
suddenly out of the Earth, as make men and other living Creatures to be stiff
and stark. Moreover, Sennertus adds, that there is great congealing force in
Nitre and other Minerals; he brings no Examples: We shall only bring one
Instance taken from Lead, whose Vapor does so fix and congeal Mercury, or
Quicksilver, that it becomes thereby malleable, or to be beaten with the
hammer.

This Opinion of Sennertus were not wholly to be rejected, if he had not made
this the only cause of the disease, and cast off all the rest; which when they
are allowed and confirmed by Galen, and the best of Authors are not easily to
be cast off and denied. Nor is it needful that we fall to hidden Causes when
there are enough visible and manifest, able to produce such effects as is
before declared. And when Sennertus says that this his congealing spirit is
caused of a melancholy humor, he seems to differ from the common Opinion,
which is, That a Congelation comes of a cold and dry or Melancholy vapor.

The Knowledge of this Disease, or Diagnosis, is manifest from the Stories of
Galen and Fernelius already mentioned; for the evil befalls a man quickly, and
leaves him in that posture in which it found him; and keeps him unmoved as if
he were congealed: The diversity of Symptoms which we propounded before, is
seen plainly. We foretell this Disease by the same signs as we do other sleeping
Diseases, as the Symptoms are greater or less, so is the Disease more or less
dangerous.

The way of Cure is Twofold either in the time of the fit, or out of the fit:
In the fit you may use those Medicines which are set down for sleeping
Diseases: Out of the fit you must labor to cure Melancholy, the disease so
called, if the Congelation come from a Melancholy humor or vapor, which is the
most common cause of it; but if a cold distemper either inward or outward give
this Disease a beginning, the Remedies which cure it are to be taken out of the
first Chapter of this Book. And lastly, it plenty of blood have begot this
Disease, or does maintain and nourish it, it is very proper to diminish it by
opening a vein.

You must advise the Patient to a hot and moist Diet, as in all Diseases that
come from a Melancholy humor.

CHAP. V. Of the Palsy, or Paralysis.
A Palsy, is the loss of Sense and Motion in some parts of the Body, by reason
of the stopping of the Passages of the Animal Spirits.

There are many kinds of Palseys; for either it is in all the parts of the Body
below the Head, and then it is called (...); or else it possesses only one
side of the Body, and then it is called (...); or it possesses but one part of
the Body, and then it is called a Particular Palsy; although some Authors use
all these terms, as Paralysis, Hemiplegia, Paraplegia, Paresis, and Resolutio,
promiscuously for one and the same disease, which is a loss to Sense and Motion
in any part of the Body.

There is therefore a double Palsy; one called Perfect, in which Sense and
Motion is quite gone; another Imperfect, in which Sense and Motion are decayed
and diminished, and if it be a small diminution, it is not a Palsy, but a
Numbness or Dullness, called Torpor, or Stupor, which is the way to a true and
perfect Palsy, and the forerunner thereof.

There is another kind of Palsy, which is, When the Motion is hurt, and the
Sense not; or when the Sense is hindered, and the Motion not.

The Causes of a Palsy are generally al those which hinder the passage of the
Animal Spirits into the Nerves and Muscles.

The chief of al is a waterish Humor, which by stopping, compressing,
condensing or making thick, refrigerating or making cold, hinders the passage
of the Animal Spirits.

This watery Humor comes from the Brain, and falls upon the Nerves and Marrow of
the Back: So a light Apoplexy turns into a Palsy, when the Humor that caused
it falls from the Head upon the Marrow and beginning of the Nerves, and so gets
into the substance of them, and shuts up those insensible Passages through
which the Spirits come to the Parts; or descending by the hollow of the
Backbone, and by the Marrow of the Back and running upon the Nerves, it
compresseth and streightneth them, whereby the Animal Spirits are hindered in
their Motion.

Moreover, The same Humor may so thicken the substance of a Nerve by its
coldness, that it cannot be passed through by the Animal Spirits.

And lastly, The Passage of the Animal Spirits to the parts of the Body may be
so hindered by a simple distemper in cold and moistness, that the Native temper
of a Nerve, and the heat in it may be destroyed, and the Animal Spirit not
perform his office; for the heat of the Animal Spirits must be joined with the
Natural heat of the part, for the performance of its Office.

There is a Controversy whether other Humors may be the cause of a Palsy
which we will not omit though they are very seldom mentioned by others.

Trallianus in his* first Book, Chap. 6. reports of a certain man that fell
into a Palsy through sadness and grief, and after taking of Hiera he became
immovable without motion, and had died if he had not used al moistening things
for his meat and drink, and other things to bring him to a temperate condition,
especially many Baths and Ointments of Hydroetrum, that is, of Water and Oil
beaten together.

Paulus in his Third Book, Chap. 28. and 43. talks of a Palsy which came of a
Chollerick Chollick, which is cured by cooling means: and in our time the
Chollick of the People of Poicteurs in France is very remarkable, for it turns
for the most part into a Palsy; and all men of understanding acknowledge it to
proceed of a Chollerick matter, of which I shall speak more at large in my
Treatise of the Chollick. An example is given by Forestus in his 97.
Observation, and his tenth Book, of a young man who had an extenuation for want
of nourishment in his Limbs; and when he grew worse by hot and dry Medicines,
which Physicians prescribed for him, was at last restored only by the taking
and applying of moistening Medicines.

And Reason does clearly show this: for Choler, Melancholy, or any other
Humor falling upon the Nerves; if they fall upon them inwardly, they may stop
the insensible passages of the Nerves, or if they fall upon them out wardly,
they may so press upon them that they may bring a Palsy. Nor do the Reasons
which Rondeletius gives to the contrary any way convince; when he says, That
Choler and Melancholy do rather dry, than soften and mollify the Nerves; and
Choler is more likely to produce a Convulsion by his sharpness and griping,
than a Palsy: For although commonly a Palsy be called a Resolution and
softening of the Nerves, which is always in a Palsy that comes of phlegm, yet
it is not requisite that a Resolution of the Nerves should be in every Palsy,
because it comes more properly and essentially from a stopping and hindering of
the passage of the Animal Spirits; which when it may be caused by a compression
or straitening of the Nerves, and the like; it does not always proceed of
softening and mollifying. But the opinion of a Palsy coming from a relaxing
and softening of the Nerves came from hence; namely. Because the parts which
have the Palsy being not able to be stretched forth, seem as it were to be
relaxed and softened; for the motion of parts is by the extension or stretching
forth of the Muscles, and by the contraction of drawing together of the same to
their Original; which extension when the parts do want, they are said to be
relaxed although they have neither been extraordinarily moistened nor softened.

Moreover, Since there are diverse sorts and degrees of Choler, it is not
necessary that every sort should have such acrimony and sharpness as is able to
beget a Convulsion.

Furthermore, There is a various mixture of Humors, and phlegm, or water may be
mixed with that choler which produces the Palsy, and so contemperate or
mitigate his sharpness. Such a mixture does often happen in Bastard Tertain
Fevers, which are probable to be those which Fernelius says turn into Palseys.

Finally, This is very manifest from the Scorbutic Palsy, or that which is
joined with the Scurvy, which has often a Convulsion accompanying it (as Galen
in many places, and Sennertus in his Book of the Scurvey, the fifth Chapter)
and albeit a true Scorbut or Scurvy is seldom seen in our Country, yet we often
see certain Scorbutic infirmities, in which some symptoms of the true Scorbut
do evidently appear. And therefore in our 74. Observation, and the first
Centaury; and in our 98. Observation, and the second Centaury, were given two
examples of Scorbutic Palseys accompanied with Convulsions.

There may be diverse other Causes of a Palsy which are little observed.

As first, A cold and moist Distemper simple and without matter, may by
congealing of the Spirits, not only hinder their passages and influence upon
the parts, but also by destroying the temper of the Nerves, make them incapable
of receiving the animal Spirits whereby they have Sense and Motion: and this
cold and moist distemper from overcoldness of the air, or from the touching of
a cold thing; as Galen teaches 4. de Loc. Aff. Chap. 4. of a certain man who
(when in a cold season, and a great storm, he had wrapped his wet Cloak a long
time about his Neck) fell into a Palsy in his hand, the Nerves which come from
the Neck and Marrow of the Backbone, being thereby made too cold and moist.

Some of our late Writers have reported, That a Palsy may be procured by a
stupifying or numbing quality, which is inhaerent in some Medicines and Poisons
and sometimes in the humors themselves. And hence they say comes that Palsy
which is caught by touching of the Torpedo or Cramp-fish: but it is not so much
to be termed a Palsy which comes by that way, as a Stupor or Stupifaction and
numbness: such like as that which Goldsmiths and Gilders have often by the
touching and much using of Quicksilver; and Looking-glass makers also which is
often seen in Venice. And Platerus supposes that Wine by narcotick or
stupifying quality begets Palseys and Numbness: although others differ from his
Judgment, yet Fernelius seems to favor his Opinion, affirming in the place
above cited that he once saw a man whose skin by gluttony and drunkenness was
all over stupefied and insensible. And Petrus Fabius in his Notes upon Altimar,
Chap. 14. relates a story of a certain Barbar, who after he had been strongly
tippling of Wine, awaked at midnight, and fell suddenly into an universal
Palsy of all the parts of his Body beneath his face, so deprived of Sense and
Motion that he felt not when he was cut and scarrified with a knife, nor when
he was pricked deeply with needles: But his surfeit and drunkenness being past,
he was cured in the space of three days, only by revulsions, and resolving
Ointments applied to the back: Notwithstanding this Author does not impute this
Palsy to the Narcotick or stupifying quality of the Wine; but to those gross
vapors which arose from his surfeit, and stopped the Nerves, and this cause may
be accounted among otheres that produce this Disease.

We have showed in our Treatise of sleeping Diseases, That there is a
stupifying quality in corrupt and malignant Humors, which being carried to the
Nerves, may hinder their Actions: and since the Humors which produce the
Scorbut have a venomous and malignant quality, they may also have a stupifying
for^e which may cause also a Palsy with the Scorbut, or a Scorbutic Palsy,
although (as we said before) an obstruction or stopping or pressing of the
Nerves may be sufficient to cause a Palsy alone.

Moreover, Tumors growing by the Backbone, and its Nerves, may without doubt
cause a Palsy by pressing upon the Nerves.

So the cutting and pricking of a Nerve may produce the same effect.

The dislocation, luxation, or making loose of any of the Back bones, or other
Joints, may cause the same by pressing upon the Nerves.

And lastly, The Condensation or thickning of the Nerves may hinder the
influence and passage of the Spirits which comes either by too much
exsiccation, or drying, or of a gross Earthy Humor which is taken into the
substance of them.

So in those that have the Leprosy called Elephantiasis, the sense and feeling
of many parts is lost by reason of their growing too thick and hard by an
Earthy and gross Nourishment which they receive.

The Causes of different Palseys are these: In a perfect Palsy, which
supposes a perfect privation of both Sense and Motion, there is more plenty of
the matter, which causes it by a general obstruction, or stopping and binding
of the Nerves. But in an imperfect Palsy there is less matter to stop and bind
the Nerves, whereby it comes to pass that the passage of the Animal Spirits is
not altogether so closed up, but it will suffer some portion of them to have
their recourse.

Sometimes the Motion is hindered, and the Sense not; because there is more
virtue to cause Motion than to cause sense or feeling, in regard feeling is a
kind of passion; but Motion consists altogether in action. Sometimes the Sense
is hindered, and not the Motion, for in some parts of the body those nerves and
their branches which serve for sense, do not serve for motion: as those nerves
which are in the skin, if they only be hurt, the Sense only is hurt, which is
seen in a particular Palsy, which is in one part only of the Body: But if the
chief nerves which are carried to the Muscles be hurt, the sense cannot only be
hindered, but the motion also.

The Diagnosis or Knowledge of this Disease is directed to three things; namely,
The kind or sort of the Disease to the part affected, and to the cause that
produces it.

We may easily know what kind of Palsy it is, because the want of motion, and
the privation of sense, are to be discovered by the eye.

It is harder to know the part affected; but it is found out by the knowledge of
Anatomy, which declares the original and joining of the nerves.

For if the right side of the face or left has the Palsy, and no other part
be hurt, the Brain is only hurt in that part from whence the nerves are brought
that come to those sides of the face: But if the parts under the head be hurt,
together with the Face, then it is a sign that the Back bone is hurt as well as
the Brain: And if the parts beneath the Head are hurt, and not the face, the
fault is only in the Back bone: If half the Body have the Palsy, only one half
of the Back bone is affected; but if the whole body suffer, then is the original
of the Back bone hurt. When the Palsy is in the Legs, the part affected is
about the bottom of the marrow of the Back, and the Vertebrae, or turning Bones
of the Os Sacrum, and so we must search out for the place whence the nerves
spring, which are brought to that part which is troubled with the Palsy.

Sometimes also the searching into the outward Cause does much avail for the
knowledge of the part affected: Two examples whereof are brought by Galen; one
whereof we mentioned before out of his fourth Book, de loc. affect. chap. 4.
concerning a man in a cold stormy time wrapped his wet cloak so long about his
neck til he fell into a Palsy in his hand. Another is in his first Book, de
loc. affect. chap. 5. of Pausinias Syrus, who lost the sense of three fingers;
and when Galen understood that he fell from his Chariot upon his back, he
concluded that some part was hurt in the original of that nerve which comes
from the seventh Vertebrae, or Spondil; therefore (after he had in vain applied
Medicines to the fingers) he used means to the back, and so wrought a brave
Cure.

The Diagnosis, or knowledge of the Causes of this Disease, if fetched from the
primary Causes, the Diseases before going, and the temperament and constitution
of the sick party: And therefore when external cold Causes and moist went
before, when the patient is old, when he is phlegmatic of Constitution, the
weather cold, diet cold and moist, and an Apoplexy has formerly been, it
signifies that a disease is approaching from a Cold Distemper, and Phlegmatic
Humor.

But when a Palsy is caused of a Chollerick Humor, or Melancholy, these signs
declare: Fevers did go before, or are present, a Chollerick temper and
Constitution, or else a Melancholy one; the coming of the disease in hot
weather, Summer or Autumn; the use of Spices, Salt, and other hot Meats; heavy
and long passions of Mind, avoiding of chollerick or melanchollick humors,
sharp and sour; many sharp defluxions falling upon diverse parts, and putting
them to pain; and lastly, when pain and a convulsion accompany the diminishing
of Sense and Motion, and the patient is the worse when he takes hot and dry
things, but the better by the use of cold and moist.

When Tumors, Luxations, or Dislocations, or Wounds, cause a Palsy, they are
evident of themselves.

As for the Prognostic part in the Treaty of this Disease, you may foretell
events as follows:
1 A Palsy coming of phlegm fixed to the substance of the nerves, is hardly
cured because it will not be easy to discuss or divide the Phlegm from the
nerves, by reason of their coldness, and their weakness in expulsion or sending
forth of that which offends, which must cooperate, or work together with the
Medicine, and in regard of the deep situation of the Spina and Nerves, so as
the whole force of the Medicine cannot reach them, and because the Patient must
of necessity continue long in the use of Medicines, which for the most part
people cannot endure, and therefore will not be cured. 2 A Palsy coming after
an Apoplexy is seldom cured, and often returns into an Apoplexy, by a new
flowing of the same matter into the Brain, which is made weak by the former
disease. 3 A trembling coming upon or after a Palsy is healthful, for it
signifies that the passages of the nerves are somewhat open, by which some of
the Animal Spirit begins to pass, for to move the Muscles. 4 If the part
affected has an actual heat in it, there is hope of health; but if it be
always actually cold, it is difficult to be cured. 5 An Atrophy, or want of
Nourishment in the Paralytick part, with great paleness, takes away al hope of
cure; for it does not only signify a decay of the animal Spirit, but a near
extinction of the shows natural heat. 6 If the Eye on that side which the
Palsy happens be hurt thereby, there is little hope; for it a great want of
Spirits in that part. 7 A Palsy in the Legs and Feet is easier cured than in
the upper parts, because those Nerves are harder and stronger. 8 In old men the
Palsy is incurable, by reason of their want of natural heat. 9 In Winter a
Palsy cannot be cured, but in the Spring and Summer it may, if other things
agree. 10 A strong Fever coming upon a Palsy is good; for it may consume the
matter which causes it. 11 A Diarrhoea, or looseness coming upon a new and weak
Palsy is good, for Rhasis says 1. Cont. that he has seen many Paralyticks
cured by a Diarrhoea.
The Cure of this Disease is to be altered according to the variety of the
Causes: And since for the most part it comes of phlegm and a cold distemper, we
must labor chiefly to take away that cause; which we must begin to do by a
general clensing and emptying of the whole Body.

As for bleeding it can scarce do any good, because the fault is not in the
Blood, but Phlegm; and this disease comes for the most part to old men, such as
are phlegmatic and cold by nature. But if plenty of crude blood unconcocted
seems to produce phlegm, and to feed it, we may open a vein in his Arm on the
sound side of his Body, but take but little blood least his weak natural heat
should be extinguished.

After we have omitted blood-letting, or taken a very little away, we must go
on to take away the antecedent Cause, which is a cold distemper of the Brain;
which must be done as before was showed by Apozemes, or opening drinks, by
Pills, sweating Diet, Bags for the head, Emplaisters, Errhines for the nose,
neezings, Masticatories, Gargarisms that draw phlegm, Vesicatories or Blisters,
or Cupping head pouders, Caps, Fumes, Magistral Syrups, ordinary Pills, a
strengthening Opiate or Electuary, by Caustic or burning, by digestive Powder
and Baths.

A Diet Drink in this disease ought to be made of Guajacum alone, and his Bark;
and after he has taken a draught, he must have hot bricks applied to the
diseased parts, but first they must be quenched in a Decoction of this, good
for the head made with white Wine and Vinegar, and be wrapped in a linen
cloth, for the stirring up of the weak heat which is in the parts; and every
fourth or fifth day you must purge; but it is better to give a purging drink
fif^een days before you give the sweating, that all the load of crude humors
may be better cast out, and afterward the relics and remainder may be
discussed by the habit of the Body. Which may be thus made:

Take of the chips of Guajacum, three ounces; of the bark of the same, one
ounce; of spring Water four pints: Infuse them twenty four hours: then let them
boil to the consumption of half, adding in the conclusion one ounce of Senna:
Turbith and Hermodacts, of each two drams. Let him take half a pint of this
strained every morning for fifteen days, not sweating.

Apply a Caustic to the hinder part of the Head, or to the sound Arm if the
other be affected. If the Legs be affected, apply a Caustic to them both.

After his Diet, let him use for his ordinary Drink, a Decoction of Guajacum,
or Water and Honey, wherein has a little Rosemary been boiled. Let him abstain
from Wine, which is very hurtful in this Disease; but if he desire to drink
Wine, let Bettony and Sage be boiled therein. And it is far better if in the
Vintage time those Herbs are put into a full Vessel of new Wine.

If the Disease be perverse and stubborn, omitting the usual Pills and
Magistral Syrup; after his Diet, use stronger Medicines, made thus:

Take of Pill. Foetida the greatest, and Pill Cochie the less, each half a
dram; of Troches of Alhandal four grains: Let him take them once every week.

But because the humor must be prepared before every purge, therefore for two
or three days before he takes the Pills, let him take three or four ounces of
this following Water every morning two hours before meat.

Take of the chips of Guajacum, four ounces: of the bark of the same, one
ounce: of Sarsaparilla one ounce and an half: of China Root one ounce: of
Sassaphras six drams: of Lignum Aloes, Galangal, of each one dram and an half:
of the Roots of Angelica, Peony, and Fennel, of each three drams and an half:
of Peony seeds two drams: Infuse them for twenty four hours in six pints of
Water, and four pints of white Wine: After ad the Leaves of Bettony, and Ivy,
and Sage, of each one handful: of the Flowers of Tile Tree, Primroses,
Stoechas, or French Lavender, and Rosemary, of each two pugils: of Lavender one
pugil: of old Treacle half an ounce: of Citron seeds and bark, of each two
drams and an half: of Polipody half an ounce: of Cinnamon six drams: Distill
them in Balneo Mariae according to art: and to every two pints and an half of
the Liquor, put of Manus Christi Prepared with the Oil of Cinnamon, four
ounces: Or instead of this Water you may use the Opiate prescribed in the
Chapter of the cold distemper of the Brain for the strengthening of the Head:
but you had better use the Opiate of Montagnanus described in the Cure of the
Epilepsis.

When other Purges do little good, it will not be amiss to come to the use of
Chemical Vomits, if the Patient be strong: and they are mentioned in the
Chapter of sleepy Diseases: For they draw the stubborn Humors from the Root,
and cure Diseases which cannot be rooted out with ordinary Medicines.

In the days wherein he takes no other Medicine, let him take the Cephalic
Opiate mentioned in Chap. 1. or the Apoplectick Water, or Tabellets, or
Lozenges, for sleepy Diseases formerly mentioned.

After Universal Medicines we must proceed to Topical or particular Medicines,
for the part, for the stirring up of heat, and recalling the Spirits, and for
drying and discussing in the Spinal Marrow where for the most part the Cause of
the Disease lies.

Therefore let the part affected be daily rubbed with warm clothes, but gently,
lest that the Natural heat and spirits drawn thither should be again dispersed.

Also let Cupping glasses be applied to the heads of the Muscles of the part
affected; and let them be narrow mouthed, and applied very hot; but let them
not stand on very long lest they disperse too much. After apply a Plaster of
Pitch, and the Rozin of the Pine tree, that what is drawn thither may be
preserved. Or rub gently the part benumbed with green Nettles, or lay on
Sinapisms, or Medicines of Mustard, while the part begins to grow red; but you
must not let them lie while they make Blisters, for so the Spirits and Blood
would be dispersed, but only til the part made red will not grow white by the
impression of the finger, but remain red still.

Afterward anoint the part, and the Spinal Marrow with Oils, Ointments, and
Balsoms, of which there are many forms in Authors. The Balsom of Guido which is
prepared by the Apothecaries, is excellent for this purpose. This we use alone,
or mixed with other Medicines.

It is made after this manner:

Take of Oil of Foxes, Earthworms, and Castor, of each one ounce: of Guido' s
Balsom, three ounces: of Aqua vitae half an ounce: of Oil of Rosemary
distilled, one dram and an half: Mix them for a Liniment. With which anoint all
the Spinal Marrow very hot, and the parts also resolved covering them with warm
clothes.

This following Ointment of Valeriola in his Observations, is much commended.

Take of Sage Marjoram, Bettony, Bays, Rosemary, and Primrose leaves, of each
one handful: of the Roots of Time, Acorus, or great Galangal, and Flower deluce
newly gathered, of each three ounces: of the Oil of Foxes, of Indian Nuts, and
Rue, of each one pound: of Oil of Terepintine, half a pound: of the strongest
Wine one pound: of Aqua vitae half a pound: Boil them till the Wine be
consumed, then strain them, and ad of Serapinum, or Sagapenum, Opopanax, and
Bdellium, of each two drams: Castor half an ounce: Mace, Nutmegs, S^yrax
Calamita, Benjamin, of each three ^rams: long Pepper and Pellitory; of each one
dram: the grease of an old Cat, of a Serpent, and a Goose, of each one ounce:
the Marrow of an Ox Bone, two ounces: the Juice of Dwarf-Elder, Sage, and Balm,
of each four ounces: of the best Wax, or Bee-glew which the Bees make at their
entering into the Hive to keep* out the cold, two ounces: Mix them, and with a
sufficient quantity of Wax melted into the foresaid Oils, make them into the
consistence of a thin Ointment; with which anoint all the back bone warm,
laying soft wool or linen cloth warm thereon.

But an Ointment of greater effect, and less trouble, is made in this manner:

Take of the Juice of Squils or Sea Onions, four ounces: the Juice of Cowcumber
and Rue, of each one ounce: Euphorbium, Castor, Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, and
Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, of each one dram and an half: Mirrh,
Frankincense, Pellitory, and Niter, of each one dram: the Oils of Elder,
Turpentine, and Euphorbium, of each half an ounce: Wax as much as is
sufficient: Make an Ointment.

You must chiefly use the Ointments in the time of his Diet, after the sweating
is wiped off, and after the time of bathing; for then the pores and passages of
the Skin being open do more easily receive the Ointment.

Let the Linen clothes that are used after anointing be warmed with this
Fumigation.

Take of Amber, Mastich, and Mirrh, of each one dram: Frankincense two
scruples: Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and Mace, of each half a dram: Wood of
Aloes half a scruple: Powder them, and sprinkle them with the spirit of Wine,
dry them, and do so five times, and then make a powder to be thrown upon Embers.

If the Disease do not yield to these, Cerats and Emplasters must be laid to
the Back.

Take of the Emplaster of Bettony, Melilot, and Bay Berries, of each one ounce:
Frankincense half an ounce: Castor and Euphorbium, of each one dram: the seeds
of Nigella or Gith, the seeds of Watercresses and Mustard, the Roots of
Pellitory, and of Sal Niter, of each half an ounce: with the Oil of Bricks make
them into the form of an Emplaster, which apply upon Leather.

But this following is better.

Take of Pitch, Galbanum, Sagapenum, and Ammoniacum, of each one ounce:
Pellitory, and Mustard seed, of each half an ounce: Euphorbium two drams:
yellow Wax three drams: With as much Oil of Turpentine as is sufficient make a
Plaster.

You may also provoke sweat in the part by the fume of the Decoction of Herbs
and Roots proper for the Head boiled in white Wine, which you must do by
putting it into such a Vessel as the Patient being fasting, may sit so covered
over it, that the Water may not touch him, but the vapor only. Or you may sweat
him with a dry Bath, called commonly Stuphes. Let the vapor of the former
Decoction be received from red hot flints, upon which it has been ^prinkled*

A Decoction of Burdock and other Dock Roots, is much commended for provoking
sweat: But our women use the Decoction of Danewort, called Ebulus, for this,
and diseases of the joints, by which they provoke sweat violently.

When the Patient has sweat enough, get him to bed, and give one dram of
Treacle with any proper Water distilled: He must bath thus twice or thrice in a
week. In Autumn he must hold his Limbs in the hot Grapes, or Wine Press an hour
or two; and afterward anoint them with a proper Ointment before mentioned:
this is to be done all the time of the Vintage.

Lastly, Sulphur or Brimstone, baths of Niter and Bitumen before mentioned, are
very agreeable, and many times go beyond al other Medicines; if the Patient use
them some days for drink, bathing and washing the head; after that ano^nt it
with one of the Liniments prescribed.

The Chymicks ^ave many Remedies for the Cure of this Disease: Among which, the
best are, Elixir Prop^ie^a^is, Spirit of Tartar, and Ballom of Galbanum.

All the time of the Di^ea^e, let the parts affected be wrapped in the skins of
Foxes, Hairs, or Lambs.

A Pal^ey which comes from Choler or Melancholy requires the same Cure which
is prescribed in the Cure o^ Hypochondriack Melancholy: but when the Disease
is more Chollerick, you must make choice of those Medicines which are more cold.

CHAP. VI. Of a Convulsion.
SPasmus, Cramp, or Convulsion, is an involuntary and continued retraction of
the Nerves and Muscles to their Original.

Convulsion is twofold: The one Proper, to which the Definition mentioned
agrees: The other Improper, which is called a Convulsive Motion: and they are
thus distinguished: In a true Convulsion, the retraction of the Muscles is
always; but in a Convulsive Motion, the retraction is every time new.
Moreover, in a true Convulsion the Limb is immovable, in a Convulsive Motion it
is moved diverse ways, as in the Falling Sickness, which is the chief of
Convulsive Motions.

They differ also in respect of their Causes; for a true Convulsion, is either
from Fullness or Emptiness; but a Convulsive Motion is from Irritation or
provocation. Lastly, they are distinguished, in that the true Convulsion comes
from the Disease only; the Convulsive Motion from the faculty alone. Which,
that Novices may rightly understand, they must know that Galen in his Second
Book; de sympt. cause. chap. 1. has thus distinguished the symptoms of a
depraved Motion: Some (says he) are only the work of Nature, which is
constrained to move so from some violent cause: Others accompany diseases,
Nature not assisting their production: Others are by the agreement and
concurrence of Nature and the Disease. Now Galen by the name of Nature,
understands a Faculty: the Operations of the Faculty are, Neesing, Coughing,
Yawning, Reaching, and Hiccoughs: But the operations of the Disease only, is
Palpitation and Convulsion: But the operation of both the Disease and Faculty,
is Trembling, and imperfect Palsy, or Resolution.

From Galens words above mentioned, there arises a great difficulty, when he
mentions the Hiccoughs in the operations of the Faculty; for it continues by
Irritation, or provocation, and is a Convulsive Motion: But Galen recites a
Convulsion among those operations which come only from the Disease. Yet
Hippocrates in his 39. Aphorism, and Sect. 6. affirms that the Hiccough and
Convulsion come of fullness and emptiness, and repletion and inanition, or
fullness and emptiness make only a true Convulsion. For the resolving of which
difficulty, we say that the word Repletion or fullness, in its large sense
comprehends Provocation, according to many Authors, because the provoking
causes are material, and therefore do in some sort fill the parts in which they
are contained; but thus Repletion is not the immediate cause of Hiccoughs, but
the mediate, because it does provoke the part in which it is to expulsion, by
its quantity or quality.

Lastly, We must know, and observe, Hippocrates and Galen do declare a
Convulsive Motion by the general name of a Convulsion; so that they cannot be
distinguished, but by the differences mentioned.

Again, A true Convulsion is divided into a total one, by which almost the whole
body is contracted; and a partial one, which is only in some one Member.

An Universal or total Convulsion, is caused either from the Brain, when the
Muscles of the Face are plucked together as well as the whole Body: Or from the
Spinal Marrow, when the Muscles that move the Head, and Spina or Back, either
before or behind, or both, are plucked and drawn together. Whence arise three
kinds of Convulsions. The first called Emprostotonos, when the Body with the
Neck and Head, is violently contracted and drawn forward, so that the Chin is
joined to the Breast, and the Body looks like the keel of a Ship; nay, it is
sometimes like a Bow, and sometimes round, and the Head of the Patient is joined
to his Knees, and then the two Muscles which bend the Head forward are chiefly
affected. The Second is called Opistotonos, when the Body is drawn backward,
and in that, either the twelve Muscles which extend the head, or some of them
are drawn together. The third is called Tetanos, when the Muscles both before
and behind, are equally contracted, and the parts drawn by the opposite Muscles
being balanced remain stiff and straight, and that is called Motus Tonicus,
which is a most violent springing from the contention of all the Muscles.

A Particular Convulsion is made from the contraction of the Muscle of some
part coming from the hurt of that Nerve which is ordained for his motion, and
sometimes it has a peculiar name from the effect or symptom. So the Convulsion
of those Muscles which move the Eyes, is called Strabismus: of the Jaws and
Temples is called (...). The Convulsion of the Mouth by Contraction of the
broad Muscle on the one side, is called Spasmus Cynicus, a dog Convulsion, and
a wresting of the mouth; but if the contraction be on both sides, it is called
Risus Sardonicus, or a grinning. But the wryness of the mouth may be without a
Convulsion, namely, from the Resolution of one Muscle, which being resolved,
the muscle on the other side draws it to the sound part, and there is a
distortion or wryness which is improperly called a Convulsion: The Convulsion
of the muscles of the Yard is called Satyriasis, or Priapismus. Other
Convulsions want proper names.

But the immediate causes of a Convulsion according to the Opinion of
Hippocrates and Galen, are Repletion and Inanition, or fullness and emptiness as
above mentioned. And this Opinion is confirmed by the Example of a Lute or Harp
strings, which use to be stretched; which Instance Galen does bring most
elegantly in his Book of Palpitation, of trembling and shaking, chap. 8. and
his third Book of Parts affected, chap. 6. and his second Book of the Causes of
Symptoms, chap. 2. and his Comment upon Aphor. 39. Sect. 6. For says he,
while the strings are moist and filled with humor, as it falls out when the
wind is Southernly, they are stretched, and so broken; and when they are over
dry, as it happens in Northern weather, they are contracted, and also broken.
So the Reins of a Bridle drying too near the fire, are contracted when they
were before extended with too much moisture: the same befalls the Nerves, which
being either too full of moisture, or too dry, are stretched and contracted;
and the Muscles into which they are united, are so drawn back to their
principal or original, from whence all the Body has a Convulsion.

The Mediate Causes of a Convulsion, which make Repletion and Emptiness, are
diverse. And first the Causes of Repletion are recited by Galen in his Book of
Trembling, chap. last, to the increase of phlegm, and inflammation, a waterish
Humor flowing to the Nerves, is supposed to stretch them in their breadth,
which must needs make them shorter.

But here is a very great difficulty which is propounded by diverse Authors, but
is resolved perfectly and plainly by none: namely, what difference there is
between the cause of a Palsy, and of a Convulsion, when both come from a water
flowing upon the Nerves: why that matter which makes a Palsy (which so fills
the Nerves that it stops all their passages or pores, whereby the Animal
Spirits are hindered in their motion) does not also stretch the Nerves in
breadth, and cause also a Convulsion; and why the matter causing a Convulsion,
filling the Nerves, does not also stop the passages, and cause a Palsy, when
contrarily in a Convulsion the feeling remains, and the part affected for the
most part is very much pained? For the resolving of this doubt, Authors are
much divided; and the most ingenious of them all, confess that is beyond their
capacity. Most witty Averroes considering of this Point, breaks forth in this
expression: I would I knew the reason (says he) why the Nerves are extended in
their breadth, and not in their length. And presently after he says: Know ye
that the words of all Physicians that write of this Symptom, are more proper
to Fiddlers and Singers than to Demonstrators, or such as should make things
plain. And Ingenuous Argenterius in his Comment upon the 26. Aphor. Sect. 2.
speaks thus: It is not easy to render a reason of all things, and especially
why Water which is said to be the cause of the Palsy, or resolution of Nerves,
and of the Convulsion, should sometimes bring one, and sometimes another, when it
is the same matter, and the same parts are affected, namely, the Nerves; why
should not the same Disease be always produced? Thus Argenterius. The great
difficulty of this matter has distracted all Writers into diverse Opinions, so
that some have left the Doctrine of Hippocrates and Galen, among whom are
Averroes, Erastus, Platerus, Cesalpinus, Sennertus, and others, whose diverse
Opinions, and long Disputations we cannot attend to repeat, for we desire to be
very short, and lay aside all Controversies, only adhaering to those things
which are most necessary for Cure. The Opinion of the soundest Writers, which
are unwilling to dissent from Galen, comes to this: That a Convulsion is caused
of a thick matter, which extends the Nerves in their breadth, and contracteth
them in their length: and that a Palsy comes of a thin humor which runs
through the substance of the nerve, and softeneth it, but does not open the
pores and passages. But this does not satisfy a soul that is greedy of Truth:
For if a thick humor by filling the Nerve, does stretch it broader, why does it
not also fill its pores and stop the insensible passages, and hinder the coming
in of the Animal Spirit? and so bring a Palsy? and why does not a Convulsion
follow a Palsy in process of time, when a thin humor long sticking upon a
part, must needs grow thick, even as the serous matter which makes the
Arthritis, or Joynt-gout by long continuance upon the part, causes the matter
which makes the stone. Others say that in a Convulsion, only the external part
of the Nerve which is Membranous and tender, is possessed with the humor; but
in a Palsy, the Internal: but this gives less satisfaction: For when the
Nerves are for the most part slender, it is not easy to conceive how the humor
should only possess the external part, and not the internal; or the internal,
and not the external: Or leastwise (if this could be so) a Convulsion would
follow a Palsy, and a Palsy a Convulsion, by the increase of the matter; and
that which at first did only possess the outward or the inward part, in process
of time would seize upon the whole Nerve.

Therefore we, although we cannot satisfy ourselves in this great Difficulty
while better Arguments are propounded, suppose that those Objections may be
taken off thus: A Convulsion and a Palsy differ in this; A Palsy is made of a
pure watery humor without mixture, which does not extend the parts, but
softeneth them, as we may see in the tumor called oedema; but a Convulsion is
caused of the same humor, but not pure and simple, but mixed with much wind, by
which wind the Nerves are stretched, and the Muscles also which are contracted
to their Original: For no cause can be thought upon more fit to make so great a
contraction, than wind, which Galen acknowledges in his second Book, de sympt.
cause. chap. 2. and Experience teaches us, that the greatest distentions are
made especially by wind, as we may see in the dropsy called Tympanites, and
the Chollick. And in Convul^ions, those are the greatest which are caused of
wind, which stretches and distendeth the parts. By this Argument, all the
aforesaid Objections are answered: For if it be demanded, Why that phlegm or
water which makes a Convulsion does not bring a Palsy by hindering the
passage of the Spirits? we may answer, That it is in so small a quantity, that
it cannot stop the insensible passages of the Nerves, and that it is so
extenuated and made thin by much wind, that it cannot produce a stoppage or
obstruction. Or we may say that wind is the chief cause of Convulsions, which
Galen acknowledges in the place mentioned: And in his 6. Book, de loc. affect.
cap. ult. he makes the only cause of a Priapism (which is the Convulsion of the
Yard) to be wind.

The other Cause of a Convulsion coming from Repletion, which Galen mentions in
the place ci^ed, is the Inflammation of the Nervous parts, especially in the
Original of the Nerves, or near to its original, by which they are stretched;
and that Inflammation is either from a cause only internal, namely, from a flux
of blood upon the part; or of an outward cause, as of a wound, contusion, or
bruise, or a puncture of a Nerve.

The Causes of a Convulsion by Emptiness or Inanition, are all extraordinary or
immoderate Evacuations, by bleeding at the Nose, or any outward part, by vomit,
flux of the belly, or sweat, as also all great consumptions of the Radical
moisture which happen in strong Fevers, immoderate exercise, watchings, cares,
immoderate Lechery, hunger and thirst, and the daily use of Food and Medicines
which heat and dry.

This kind of Convulsion from Emptiness is rejected by many; who suppose that
so great a drought cannot be brought into a living Body, as may contract the
Nerves; but that is usual in a Hectic Fever, or a Marasmus: these men are
thus answered: Every emptiness or dryness cannot make a Convulsion, but that
which is made suddenly and unequally; by which means there is a sudden
Evacuation or emptying of the Radical moisture, which makes the parts cling and
close together for the avoiding of a Vacuum or emptiness which Nature
abhors: but if the moisture be equally drawn from al parts, and by degrees,
there is no contraction because the parts made empty are filled with Air.

A Convulsive Motion, is of a sharp pricking matter which provokes the Nerves;
and it is for the most part, a humor or vapor full of acrimony or malignancy,
this comes often in malignant Fevers: These Convulsive Motions are caused for
the most part from the Brain and Nerves, suffering by sympathy or consent, and
then it is called Convulsio Sympathica: And this Sympathy is either by their
plain suffering together in respect of their likeness in substance and office,
and their vicinity or neerness; or from an evil quality, or poisonous air sent
to the original of the Nerves. And it is often caused by consent from the mouth
of the stomach through an aeruginous or rust like Choler, through worms,
poison, or other sharp matter which gripeth: and also from consent with the
womb, as it happens in Hysterical passions, or the Mother.

The Diagnosis or knowledge of a Convulsion is easily learned from those things
which we propounded in the beginning of this Chapter: For in a true Convulsion,
the part is contracted, stiff, and immovable, that it cannot be bent at the
pleasure of the Patient; but in a Convulsive Motion the part is shaken and
tossed hither and thither.

As to the Prognostic; A Convulsion which is in many parts, especially those
near the Brain, is dangerous; as also that which is in the Muscles of the
Breast, which gives us to fear a suffocation, by reason of the shortness of
the Patients breathing.

A Convulsion coming of too much bleeding or purging, is deadly, as Hippocrates
says in his Aphorisms: for as Galen shows in his Comment, that a Convulsion
comes of emptiness; but it may so fall out as it may come of irritation or
provoking by the motion of sharp and chollerick humors to the Nervous parts, or
of the malign quality of a venomous Medicine, as it happens after the taking of
Hellebore.

A Convulsion from a Frenzy is deadly. Aetius affirms, that he never heard
of, or saw any so taken, that recovered.

It is better that a Fever follow a Convulsion, than a Convulsion a Fever,
Aphor. 37. Sect. 2. for a Fever coming upon a Convulsion, takes away its
cause: but a Convulsion coming upon a Fever, shows a malignant matter which
threatens death.

Whosoever are taken with the Tetanus, or Cramp so called, die within four
days; but if they continue longer, they are cured, Aph. 6. Sect. 5. for the
great stretching of all the Muscles hinders breathing, so that they are
suffocated. And we must observe, that a Convulsion is not the cause of death in
respect of what is done to the Nerves: for a Palsy coming of the like cause
continues many years: but in respect of the suffocation it brings by the
Convulsion of the Muscles ordained for breathing.

The Cure of this Disease is diverse, as the Cause is diverse.

That which comes of Emptiness is seldom and incurable, therefore we shall not
insist upon the Cure of it. Authors do prescribe al kind of moistening
Medicines, and opening Ointments. That which comes of provoking or irritation,
is from other Diseases, and is comprehended under the Cure of them. It remains
therefore that we treat of the Cure of a Convulsion by Repletion, which when it
comes of phlegm and wind, must be cured by removing of them. This is done first
by blood-letting if it abound, and the party be strong; but it is better to
take too little than too much; for blood is an Enemy to that principal Cause,
which is phlegm.

After Blood-letting, or it being omitted if need do not require, you must
purge with pills which are strong (but have an eye to the Patients strength)
according to those forms in the first Chapter, you must ad to them three grains
of Castor.

If the Patient will not take pills, he may take Potions, Pouders, and other
Medicines prescribed in the first Chapter.

After Purging, if you have not let blood before, apply Cupping glasses with
Scarrification; otherwise without: first to the remote parts, then to the parts
near the part affected. But if the Thighs, or Legs have a Convulsion, apply
them to the Buttocks and Loins: if the Arms, to the Neck and Shoulders;
laboring always to bring the humor back to its original.

You may also with profit apply a Vencatory to the parts opposite to that which
is affected.

After the first purging, the matter is to be prepared with an Apozeme,
prescribed in the Cure of the cold distemper. Make it purging, if strength and
other things will permit; otherwise leave out the Purgatives.

The Apozeme done, give him Pills again, putting Castorium to them, and to all
his Purges.

If you u^e only an al^ering Apozeme, which changes the Humors, you must in
that time give several sharp Clysters, such as are prescribed in the Chapter of
sleeping Diseases.

Also anoint the part with this Liniment,

Take of Ointment of ^arsh-mallows, six ounces; Oil of Turpentine and Chamomel,
of each one ounce; Oil of Spike three drams; and of Foxes half an ounce; Liquid
Storax two ounces: Anoint the part and backbone often therewith.

Take of Oil of Dill, and Chamomel, of each one ounce; Unguentum Ma^^iatum half
an ounce; Oleum Petroleum, and Spike, of each one dram; Spirit of Wine three
drams

Ducks or Goose Grease prepared as follows is much commended.

Take a Goose or Duck that is fat, pluck it, and draw it; then fill it with
these things following:

Take of Sage, Marjoram, and French Lavender, of each one handful; Gum
Ammoniacum and Bdellium, of each one ounce; Calamus Aromaticus, Nutmeg, Mace,
and Cloves, of each half an ounce: Beat them in a Mortar, and moisten them with
the Oil of Earthworms; after, put them into the belly of the Goose sowed well
together, and roast it upon a Spit. Receive the Dripping into a Vessel half
full of Vinegar, and anoint with it.

But it is stronger thus*

Take of the dripping aforesaid six ounces; the Chemical Oils of Wax, Nutmeg,
and Sage, of each two drams.

After you have anointed, you must cover the part affected with a hot Sheeps
skin; and when it is cold, i^ you have not a fresh one, make it warm again with
the Oil of Dill, or the like hot Oil.

We apply successfully to the part affected, the hot Lungs of a Sheep, as also
young Pigeons, Whelps, and ^hickens slit in the middle.

Put the p^rt a^fected into an Ox or Sheeps Belly, or other great Creatures
newly killed, and let it remain there ^hile it is warm.

Baths of Head herbs are good, putting to them a third part of Oil, or
anointing afterward.

Some commend this Emplaster:

Take of Colop^ony two ounces; Rozin and Pitch, of each one ounce;
Frankincense, Mastich, Ceruss, of each ha^f an ounce; Sanguis Draconis, common
Salt, Ammoniacum, and Terepintine, of each two drams; new Wax, two ounces;
white Vitriol, two drams; Mother of Pearl, two ounces; Lodestone half an
ounce; yellow Amber one dram and an half; Oil of Eggs and Roses, of each two
drams: Make a Plaster upon Leather.

Baths coming of Brim^tone are excellent, especially in constant Convulsions.
Also dry Baths of the fume of the Decoction of Sage, Rosemary, Stoecnas,
Chamepitys, or Ground Pine, Origan, and the like, in white Wine spr^nkled upon
stones fire hot, or Iron.

It is very good to foment the hinder part of the Head and the Neck with hot
Aqua vitae.

Penotus does wonderfully extol the following Medicine for quite Curing of a
Convulsion.

Take Oil of Turpentine, half an ounce; Oil of Cloves six drops; of the
Mucilage or slime of Briony, so much as is sufficient to make a Limment: Anoint
the part affected, and the root of the Nerve which comes unto it.

Others say they quickly cure a Member with the Oil of Turpentine, of Wax,
Chamomel, and the like, mingled with Spirit of Salt.

The following Liniment is very powerful.

Take old Butter, and Bacon, of each a quarter of a pound; Bdellium, and
Ammoniacum, of each one ounce; Mirrh, and Castor, of each two drams; Stoechas
and Rosemary flowers, of each one pugil; Nutmeg and Cloves, of each one dram; a
Kitten or young Cat, flead, bowelled, and cut in pieces: Stuff a Goose with
these, and roast her; cast away the first dripping which is watery, the next
which is fatty receive in a Vessel half full of Vinegar: Anoint the parts
affected, and the backbone therewith.

Sometimes the pain is so intolerable that it must first be cured: For which
this is good.

Take of Oil of Violets, Lillies, and Chamomel, of each an ounce and an half;
Oil of sweet Almonds, Mastich, and Roses, of each one ounce.

If you will have stronger, make this Bath:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots, and Lillies, of each one pound and an half; of the
Leaves of Origan, Violets, Mallows, Sage, and Wormwood, of each two handfuls;
Linseeds and Fenugreek, of each one pound: Boil them for a Bath; in which let
the party fit, not long, but come ou^ as soon as he finds ease: It is
sufficient if the parts affected be only bathed therewith.

Others make Baths only of Oil, and if the Patient be rich, they boil a Fox or
two in it.

While these are doing, purge the Head with neesing, and chewing, described in
the first Chapter.

As also you must strengthen with the Cephalic or Capital Opiate, Apoplectick
Water, Treacle, and the like.

Rondoletius speaks thus of his Water of Swallows: A Water made of Swallows and
Castor, presently cures a Convulsion coming of Repletion: You may find the
description of it in his Chapter of the Epilepsie.

CHAP. VII. Of the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness.
THe Epilepsie, is a Convulsion of the whole Body, not continually, but by fits,
with a hinderance both of the Mind and Senses.

The Word Convulsion, is not here taken properly and strictly for a true
Convulsion; but improperly, for a Convulsive Motion: For an Epilepsy is a
Convulsive Motion, not a true Convulsion. But we keep the name of Convulsion in
imitation of Galen, who calls an Epilepsy always a Convulsion.

This Definition is taken out of Galen, 3. de loc. aff. cap. 7. and lib. de
diff. sympt. cap. 3. and defines a perfect Epilepsie, in which all the Body is
contracted, and all the Senses both internal and external are abolished. Yet
there are imperfect Epilepsies, in which only the Head, or Arm, Leg, and Thigh,
or half the Body is only contracted. There is also an Epilepsy in which the
mind remains sound, and the external senses, and also the voluntary motion of
some parts. I saw a Nun, which in her Epileptick fits had diverse contractions,
sometimes of the Arms, then of the Legs, sometimes of the Head, afterward of the
whole Body; yet she saw those that stood by and spoke; nay, she also endeavored
a voluntary motion against the Convulsive, so as she did in a manner diminish
the involuntary motion: sometimes she was in a small fit only, and walked about
her Chamber, but with a disorderly motion, leaping and using strange antic
postures, by which she caused the rest of the Nuns to be very merry, and she at
that time laughed with them, and spoke when she pleased.

Every convulsive motion (as I said in the former chapter) comes of
provocation, which proceeds from the quantity or quality of the matter. The
quantity of matter which causes the disease, burdening Nature, stirs her up to
expel that which is troublesome to her. Whence the Opinion of Galen is
confirmed, which is so disputed by late Physicians, That an Epilepsy comes of
an imperfect obstruction of the Ventricles of the Brain; for if the humor
obstructing or stopping is burdensome to Nature, the Brain will labor to expel
it. In the quality there is no difference, for all agree in this, That the
expulsive faculty is stirred up by sharpness and acrimony, and by any quality
which is offensive to Nature.

The Causes stirring up or provoking, are either contained in the Brain, and
make a proper Epilepsy, or come from other parts, and so make an Epilepsy by
consent or sympathy.

And that provoking or irritation makes an Epilepsy, when the Brain laboring to
expel that which is offensive shakes its self, and by consequence all the
Nerves which are adjoined to it.

There is in Galen, and almost all Authors, a threefold Epilepsy. The first is
that which hurts the Brain, in which the Disease is: The second is that which
hurts the Brain by consent from the Stomach: The third is when the disease is
sent from other parts of the Body to the head: And these have their proper
names; The first, as being chief, is called Epilepsia; the second Analepsia;
the third, Catalepsia: But (by Galens leave) that division is superfluous, and
in vain is that Epilepsy which comes from the Stomach separated from those
which comes by sympathy from other parts; when all ought to be called
Sympathicae, or Epilepsies by consent. Neither is it sufficient to say that an
Epilepsy from the Stomach is distinct from others, because it is most frequent
since that which comes from the Stomach and Spleen, is as usual and as
frequent, if not more.

Therefore we divide an Epilepsy into a Proper one, and one by Consent. Again,
we subdivide that which is by consent according to the diverse parts from whence
these sharp and malignant vapors are sent to the Brain, for there is almost no
part in the Body from which a malignant vapor cannot be sent. Two Stories are
related by Galen in the place quoted; the one of a Boy of thirteen years old,
who at the first had the Epilepsy in his Leg, after that it ascended into his
Thigh and Bowels, and by the sides into the neck til it came to the head, which
at first touch made him not able to stand Another is of a Youth who in the
beginning of his fit perceived as it were a cold air to ascend. But it is
remarkable and well known, that an Epilepsy comes for the most part from the
Guts, the matter that breeds worms, from the Matrix and other parts, and it is
confirmed by many Authors.

Therefore it is manifest from what has been said, how Galens Opinion may be
defended, who affirms, That a proper Epilepsy comes of an imperfect obstruction
of the ventricle of the Brain; which we cannot defend to be the constant cause,
as Galen seems to grant who lays down no other: but we are rather forced to
confess, that it is less usual than the rest.

Nor do the Arguments brought against Galen any way convince, the chief whereof
are these:

First, As Fernelius says, if an Epilepsy comes from plenty of Humors, it
would come most in the sleep, at which time there is plenty of Humor. I answer*
That the humor of which sleep is begot, is in the substance, not the Ventricles
of the Brain, and therefore does not stir up the expulsive faculty which
resideth most in the Ventricles.

Secondly, Fernelius says, That because an Epilepsy is quickly dissolved, it
should turn into a Palsy, as an Apoplexy does when the humor is cast into the
nerves. I answer, That in an Apoplexy, by reason of the weakness of the
expulsive faculty which is oppressed by many humors, they are cast into the
parts adjoining; but expulsion being stronger, and more free in an Epilepsy,
they are sent to those parts which are ordained by Nature for their discharge.
And it is false which Fernelius says, That an Epilepsy never ends in a Palsy;
for we have seen a Palsy come after it. And sometimes Apoplexies at their first
coming are turned into Convulsions before there be a perfect obstruction of the
Ventricles of the Brain; and also many Epileptick men die by an Apoplexy when a
little obstruction turns into a total stopping.

Thirdly, Against Galen some argue thus: As a complete Obstruction of the
Ventricles totally takes away the functions of the Brain in an Apoplexy: So an
incomplete Obstruction would only diminish, not deprave the Functions, nor
produce such convulsive motions as are sometimes more violent than sound
motions. I answer, That Nature being wholly oppressed by a total obstruction
does not labor for expulsion; but she has strength enough in a half
obstruction to move and stir up the Brain to expulsion. This is confirmed by
the Example of a defluxion falling upon the Lungs, which if it fill the whole
Lungs, it makes great difficulty of breathing without a Cough, as comes to pas
in an Astma, or shortness of breathing: But if a small quantity only of humor do
fall, the Lungs are stirred up to expulsion, whence comes a Cough.

The Signs of an Epilepsy are of three sorts: Either they are such as signify
an approaching Epilepsy, or one that is present, or such as show the difference
of Epilepsyes.

The Signs of an Epilepsy approaching, are twofold: Either they signify the
first coming of the Disease; or some Fit to be at hand. ^he same signs serve
for both, but most surely in those who are actually possessed therewith, do
they show the condition of it in its return; for in those who never had this
disease formerly, these signs are doubtful for the most part, and may declare
many head diseases; but all of them together may give some certainty.

Therefore al signs of an eminent Epilepsy are to be propounded with this
admonition, That al signs do not meet in all; but some in one, some in another,
as the causes and constitutions do differ. But that they may orderly be laid
down, we must search the originals of these signs, which flow from Animal,
Vital, and Natural actions, from excrements, qualities changed, and proper
accidents.

In respect of the Animal Functions, and unaccustomed disturbance of the mind
and Body, threatens an Epilepsy, heaviness of head, headache, vertigo or
giddiness, or much sleep, from whence the Body has no refreshment; troublesome
dreams, dullness of mind, or perplexity, forgetfulness, sorrow, fear, dread,
sloth, graveness of actions, snatching and trembling of the parts, dullness of
the senses, a down look, clouds and other things flying before the eyes, noise
in the ears, a stink in the nostrils, a stiff tongue, and its inordinate
Motion, yawning, and neezing.

In respect of the Vital Function, these with others are the signs: Anger,
Beating or palpitation of the heart, straitness of Breast, and alteration in
Breathing.

In respect of Natural Functions, these are forerunners of an Epilepsy; disdain
of meat, or immoderate Appetite, Squeamishness, heart-burning.

In respect of Excrements, these are signs: Much spittle, thin and crude Urine,
often Nocturnal Pollutions.

In regard of qualities and proper accidents changed; Paleness of Face, and
swelling of the heart.

A present Epilepsy is easily known, if it be perfect; but it has many
differences which cause difficulty, as we shall show.

In a complete fit all the Senses both internal and external are hindered. The
party suddenly falls, and the whole Body, or at least some parts are diversely
moved: Moreover, there is a staring and thrusting forth of the eyes, gnashing
of Teeth, a difficult breathing, as in those that are hanged; the seed, dung,
and urine are sent forth involuntarily, and about the end of the fit, he
foameth at the Mouth and Nose, which happen only in a vehement Epilepsy, and
the fit being ended, he forgets all things he then acted.

Some of the Ancients make three kinds of Epilepsies: One which is like a deep
sleep; another which does shake the body after diverse motions; a third which is
made of both the former. The late Physicians deny the first kind, saying, That
it is more like a Coma, or a Carus than an Epilepsy; and these two Diseases
cannot be otherwise distinguished, but that in a Coma is a deep sleep without a
Convulsion, and a Convulsion is a certain sign of an Epilepsie. But Avicen
says otherwise, namely, That an Epilepsy comes many times without an apparent
Convulsion. And experience teaches us, That many men in Epilepsies have fits
like Coma: and it is known to be an Epilepsie, not a Coma, or a Carus by this;
The sleep in an Epilepsie comes and goes by fits, when in a Coma it comes all
at once.

A true Epilepsy is distinguished from an Epilepsy by consent thus: In the true
there appears many signs of the Brain affected; as heaviness of mind, and
slowness, decay of memory, troublesome sleep with dreams, dullness of senses,
slowness and idleness of Body, pain of the head, and other things. Moreover,
the sick man does not perceive the fit coming, but is suddenly taken therewith
unawares, at the new Moon for the most part. The due proportion of the inferior
parts being without blemish do confirm this sign.

But we may know whether it come from the right or left side of the head most:
By this, either the sight of one eye is more obscured, or the hearing more
thick with the noise of the head on that side; or if the right or left side be
more dull.

But we may know from what humor, especially an Epilepsy comes by those signs
which declare when phlegm, choler, or melancholy abound.

An Epilepsy by consent, is thus known: There appear no signs of a distempered
Brain; the Patient perceives his Disease Coming, and a wind rising from the
parts below: or some lower part is weakened, or else affected strongly in the
time of the fit.

These things following do show that the Cause of an Epilepsy is in the
stomach: Disdain of meat, an inability to fast, loathing, vomiting, pain of the
stomach, gnawing, pricking, and distention; sometimes beating of the heart,
which arises from the Stomach.

That the disease comes from the Liver or Spleen, appears by often belching and
breaking of wind, a swelling of the belly with rumbling and noise, sour
belchings, straitness of the Midrif, and pain sometimes reaching to the back,
besides some distemper in inferior parts.

An Hysteric fit, or the Mother, mixed with Convulsions, if a retaining of the
Courses or Seed went before, shows that it comes from the Womb.

If the Epilepsy comes from an external part, some wind is perceived to rise
from that part, and the matter causing the Disease, sometimes tickleth and
beats in the part, which is a sign there is a fit at hand; and if that part
be tied hard, the fit is hindered.

Lastly, The Signs of worms, show that the disease come from them, as stinking
sour Breath, itching of the Nose, pain of the Belly, earthy Excrements, grating
of the teeth, sleepiness, and the like, especially if sometimes worms are voided.

But the extraordinary Causes, as Imposthumation, foulness of a Bone, stopping
of urine, and the like, may be taken from their proper signs.

As to the Prognostic, An Epilepsy is a Disease of long continuance, and very
stubborn and deadly in Infants.

An Epilepsy coming haereditary is incurable; but that which comes from
external causes, and evil diet, is curable.

An Epilepsy coming before fourteen years of age in Boys, and twelve in Girls,
is curable: after twenty five years of age it is incurable; out of Hippocrates,
Aph. 7. Sect. 5. For in the time of ripeness of Age, there is great store of
Natural heat, which is powerful to discuss-Diseases. Moreover at that time
women begin to have their terms, by which the uncleanness of the Body is
purged. Yet although Hippocrates supposed an Epilepsy to be incurable after
twenty five years of age; yet this is not always true, for we find by
experience that many have* been cured after, although but seldom seen;
therefore we may say that the Aphorism is true for the most part, A strong
Epilepsy often kills the Patient in the fit, or it turns into an Apoplexy, or
by reason of the strength of the symptoms, and the violent shaking of the
Brain, the Fabric of the Body it is overthrown, and some parts thereof are
broken, and it happens sometimes that pieces of the bones called Processus
Mammillares, come out of the Nose.

An Epilepsy coming of Melancholy turns sometimes into madness, when the humor
is sent from the Ventricles of the Brain into the substance thereof.

The same humor when it is only in the Ventricles of the Brain, stopping them
and paining them, causes an Epilepsy: But when it offends the substance of the
Brain which is the seat of the chief ^unctions, by defiling its Natural temper,
and corrupting the Animal Spirits, and darkening them, it makes a M^lancholly
doting. Hence Hippocrates, 6. epid. sect. 8. text 40 says, that Melancholy
men turn for the most part Epileptick, and Epileptick to Melancholy. But these
Diseases thus change in a twofold respect; either by the change of the matter
causing the Disease from its proper seat* and so when one comes, another goes,
or by the propagation of the matter, and then both remain.

An Epilepsy coming of phlegm turns either into an Apoplexy, or a Palsy.

A Quartan Ague coming upon an Epilepsy, and continuing long, cures it, by
reason the matter of the Disea^e is by degrees co^^^^ned by the heat of the
Fever if it be of phlegm; but if it come of Melancholy, it is sent from the
part affected, to the place where the ground of the disease lies, that it may
supply matter to the new sits.

The ^ure of the Epilepsy is twofold; the one in the fit, the other out of it.

Physicians are seldom called to the Cure of the fit, except it continue over
long: in which cafe those Remedies which we laid down in the Cure of sleepy
Diseases, especially the Apoplectick Water, the Cinnamon Water, Aqua vitae, and
other Spirits which are very proper to discuss the fit.

Out of your fit you must vary your Cure as the Cause requires.

And first we shall lay down the Cure of a proper Epilepsy, which consists in
Evacuation of humors throughout the body, in the discussing of the matter of
the Disease, and rectifying its evil qualities; as also in strengthening of the
Brain. And since the matter offending in a true Epilepsy is for the most part
Phlegm, we will direct our general Cure in oppo^^tion to that; admonishing young
beginners that if Choler or Melancholy abound, they would prepare and purge
them. But the specifical Remedies are always the same, of what cause soever
the Disease does come.

For a perfect Cure we must thus proceed:

First, Give him a Potion to purge phlegm, or some other Medicine to that
purpose, which the Patient can best take, mentioned in the first Chapter. First
giving a Clyster, if his body be bound.

After, if there be signs of Repletion, or if the party be Sangume he must be
let blood; otherwise not.

Afterward the Universal Cure, of the cold distemper of the Brain is to be
followed, with this Caution, That to the Decoctions, Apozemes, Diets, Sweats,
Syrups, Chewings, and head Pouders, you ad the Root and Seed of Peony, and
Misleto of the Oak, which all ancient Authors hold to be most proper for the
Cure of this disease.

For his D^et, Guajacum is the best Sweater: By the use of which Jachinus
reports that he cured many, but let it be continued thirty or forty days.

To every Dose of the Sudorifick Decoction, put some drops of the Spirit of
Vitriol, which is thought very proper for the Epileply.

You must often use the common purges, namely, the Pills, or Magistral Syrup
once or twice a week if the Patients strength will suffer them, and continue
purging for diverse Months: and sometimes use stronger purg^s, as Massaria
ordains, who says it comes from hence that Epilepsies are not, or seldom
cured, because the Physicians always give weak Medicines.

For this cause, the Chymicks use Minerals, which draw the Humors from remotest
parts, but not without much danger, especially if they be not well prepared.
But if good success may be expected from these Chemical Medicines, it is to be
found in Mercury or Quicksilver, either by its self, or with Gold calcined in
a Furnace of Sand, with a long continuance of fire, watching narrowly lest any
crude portion of him remain, which would make the Medicine very violent;
otherwise it will work gently, if given in the quantity of four or five grains
in Cochie Pills, or any Extract that purges phlegm, or all humors.

A new Epilepsy is sometimes cured with Salt of Vitriol; as Angelus Sala says,
that he has cured at thrice taking of it, an Epilepsy, giving it every fourth
day. And after in his 77. Gurat. Gent. 2. he boasts that he cured a Girl of
eleven years of age, of an haereditary Epilepsy, with Stibium calcined, given
only thrice.

Quercitan's Syrup of Tobacco, is very good for the Cure of the Epilepsy: But
it is not to be used but by a wise Physician, it is so vehement.

Instead of the Opiate before mentioned, this may be used, which is more
Specifical.

Take of the conserve of Rosemary flowers, Peony, and Bugloss, of each half an
ounce: Citron barks candied, two drams: of the powder of Misleto of the Oak,
Peony seeds, and Elks Claw, of each half a dram: Man's skull that was not buried
calcined white one dram and an half: Coral, Pearl, and Hartshorn prepared, of
each four scruples: right Bezoar stone, one scruple: Diamoscu dulce, Diatrion
santalon, of each two scruples: old Treacle, and Confectio de hyacintho, of
each one dram: Spirit of Vitriol fifteen drops: With the Syrup of candied
Citron barks, make an Opiate; of which take the quantity of an Acorn, or
Filbert, drinking a little Cinnamon water after it.

But this following is most powerful for the rooting out of the Disease after
the Body is well purged.

Take of Conserve of Bettony Flowers and Rosemary Flowers, of each two ounces
and an half: Eringus Roots candied, and Mithridate, of each one ounce: the
powder of Sassaphras six drams: Castoreum three drams: Man's Skull not buried,
and Elks hoof, of each two drams: of the roots and seeds of Peony, and Gith
seeds, wild Rue, and Pellitory, of each one dram: Oxymel as much as is
sufficient, make an Opiate, of which take two or three drams.

The Opiate of Montagnus goes beyond all, by which many have been cured: It is
made thus:

Take of the Roots of male Peony, Stoechas, and Pepper-wort, of each ten drams:
Agarick five drams: Pellitory, Carua seeds, Dill, Assafoetida, and Aristolochia
or round Birthwort two drams and an half: of the juice of Squils, and Honey, of
each one pound and two ounces: Boil the Squils and Honey gently to a good
consistence; then ad the Pouders, and make an Electuary: of which, take two,
three, or four drams, as age requires, continuing it twenty or thirty days.

After the use of the Epispastick Plaster, you must apply a Vesicatory to the
fore part of the head, and a Cautery to the neck.

But a Seton or Skein of Silk drawn through the neck, draws the Humors more
strongly out of the Brain. And Fabricius Hildanus reports that he cured a Youth
that had the Falling Sickness every day, and had used all means he could get,
in vain; and a Girl of eighteen years of age, born so, only by the continuance
of a Seton.

If you conjecture that the vapors rising from the parts below, and flying into
the Brain, produce this disease, and nourish it; it is good to apply a Caustic
to the fore part of the head, avoiding the Sutures: for Carolus Piso reports
that he cured two by so doing. Also if the Disease come from the inferior
parts, the Waters of Germany called Aquae Acidulae do work wonders, and
sometimes root out the Disease, if first evacuations have been sufficiently
made, and the veins inferior have been opened.

But an Epilepsy coming from the Matrix requires a special Cure.

The Powder of Elder Berries described by Quercetanus, given three days
together, the quantity of a dram with some Hysterical Water, is good.

If al means fail, the last remedy is, to open the fore part of the Skul with a
Trepan, at distance from the Sutures, that the evil air may breath out. By this
means many times desperate Epilepsies have been cured, and it may be safely
done if the Chyrurgeon be skilful.

Let the Patient drink ordinarily Hydromel, or a small Decoction of Guajacum
with Peony Roots.

Let him carry a Bag about his Neck made thus:

Take of Peony Roots and Misleto of the Oak, of each one ounce: Elks hoof two
drams: Nutmegs, Cloves, and Mace, of each two drams: Rue and Hysop, of each one
dram and an half: Powder them and put them in red Sarsnet to be bung about his
neck that he may often smell to it.

After Universal Evacuations, among other Medicines you must use Specifical
Medicines, which you may find in many Authors. We shall set down some of the
best (besides those Opiates prescribed) which are of no small Consideration in
the Cure of this Disease.

Rondeletius commends much the Water of Swallows, which Quercetanus borrowed
of him in his Dispensatory. Treacle Water is of no less value, and Aqua
Cephalica, and Syrupus Antepilepticus, mentioned by Quercetanus.

The Root of wild Valerian is much commended by Fabius Columna, that (once or
twice taken) it cures the Epilepsy. And he reports he gave it to many of his
friends, who affirmed that (under God) they were cured by it. The Dose is half
a spoonful in Wine, Water, Milk, or any other proper Liquor; but it is given to
Children in a less quantity in Milk.

The Chemists commend the Spirital mixture, than which no better Medicine can
be required (as they say.) The Composition whereof is as follows:

Take of the spirit of Vitriol, one part; spirit of Tartar, three parts;
Treacle Water with Camphire, four parts: Mix them, and let them stand in a
glass well stopped three or four weeks.

The Dose is one dram in any proper Liquor, or Vehiculum to swallow it down
with.

Rulandus used much the Oleum ligni Heraclei (which the Chemists affirm to be
of Coryline, or the Oil of the Hazel-nut, or Filbert tree) And in his Centuries
he relates some passages of them, which by the use of the Medicine were cured.
The Dose is three or four drops in any proper Liquor for five days together.

The Oil of white Amber is inferior to none, if not the best, being drawn by a
good Artificer, and smelling of no fire, but sending forth a most fragrant
scent. The Dose is from half a scruple, to one scruple.

The Oil of Box-tree taken by four drops at a time, in four ounces of the Water
of the Tile-tree flowers with four drops of the Spirit of Sulphur for some
certain days together, is very powerful, and is thought by many to be the true
Oil of Lignum Heraclei.

Crato calls the Natural Cinnaber the Lodestone of the Epilepsy, and makes
this Powder of it.

Take of Natural Cinnaber, or Vermilion, which is clear, and finely poudred
half an ounce: red Coral, and Pearls prepared, of each two scruples: Saffron
one scruple: the Leaves of Gold five: Grind them all very finely upon a stone.
The Dose is from six grains to a scruple in the time of the fit, in some proper
Liquor.

The Cinnaber or Vermilion or Antimony, which is taken after the extraction of
Mercurius vitae, is thought by Chemists to be of no less virtue than the
former: for if it be mixed with an equal weight of the Magistery of Pearl,
Coral, and powder of a dead Man's Skull, it is a specifical Medicine in an
Epilepsy; though it be old, the Dose is from ten grains to fifteen in a proper
Liquor.

The Cure of an Epilepsy by consent is first to begin with the part affected,
and that part is to be cleansed and strengthened by convenient Medicines taken
out or those proper Chapters wherein they are mentioned: not omitting
Specifical and Antepileptical Medicines, which are always to be used in every
Medicine. But if the Epilepsy come from any external part, besides the
Universal Cure, we must have a special eye to that, and the malignant matter
therein contained, is to be evacuated by Cupping-glasses with scarrification,
Vesicatories, and Cauteries. And if the Disease continue after the Ephar or
Scab is fallen off, you must apply the Cupping glasses again; and at last, when
necessity urges, you must apply an actual Cautery. If the disease come from a
foulness of the Skul, that is to be taken away with the Trepan and burning.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Falling Sickness in Children.
BEcause this Disease is common among Children, and uses to be very dangerous
unto them, therefore we shall ad a peculiar way for their Cure by it self,
because it is very much differing from that in elder People.

First therefore make the Belly soluble with a Suppository or Clyster.

After, or about the same time, give a purging Medicine proportionable to the
strength of the child: We need not fear to give of the Electuary of
Diacarthamum two drams to a child of one year old, if the Disease come of
corrupt Milk.

Take of Hiera Picra haly a scruple, or one scruple: Pulvis de gutteta half a
scruple: Give it with a proper Liquor, or with Honey of Roses.

Apply Cupping glasses to the Shoulders and Loins, and with Scarrification, if
the Child be one or two years old.

Apply a Vesicatory to the hinder part of the Neck.

If the Purgation have not done well, or little profited, you must vomit with
white Vitriol prepared, or with Salt of Vitriol, which may be given twice,
thrice, or four times, if the Disease increase. The Epileptick Powder commonly
called de gutteta, may be given often with Milk or Broth, from half a scruple
to a scruple.

That Epileptick Powder is not found written in our Dispensatory; but in the
Shops at Montpelior. It is usually compounded thus*

Take of Peony Roots and Seeds, white Dictamnus, Misleto of the Oak, of each
half an ounce: the seed of Atriplex or Orage, two drams: the Powder of Man's
Skull, three drams: red Coral prepared, Hyacinths prepared, of each one dram
and an half: Elks hoof prepared, half an ounce: Musk one scruple: Leaf Gold one
dram: Mix them into Powder.

Take it in a small spoonful of Water against the Epilepsy: or instead thereof
in Cinnamon Water, or Imperial Water, or with some drops of the spirital
mixture with a proper Liquor.

Apply to the hinder part of the head, a Plaster of Ammoniacum, the hair being
shaven; for it hinders a flux of humors that falls from the Head upon the back
bone outwardly.

Use this Powder to the fore part of the head.

Take of Nutmeg half a dram: Peony seeds, one dram and an half: Lavender
flowers, one pugil: Amber two scruples: Make a Powder.

Or apply the strengthening Plaster prescribed in the Cure of the cold
distemper of the Brain.

Two or three drops of Oil of Amber with an equal quantity of Spirit of Vitriol
given in Bettony Water, do presently free a child from a sit of the
Falling Sickness. The same Oil is good to anoint the Nostrils. Instead of Oil
of Amber, give the Oil of Box; as also the Water of Tile-tree flowers, and
Bettony Water.

The smoke of Tobacco does free children from the Epilepsy, if you put in the
small end of the Pipe into the child's Mouth, and blow in the smoke, or if you
blow it from your mouth.

Let the Back bone and the Members contracted be anointed with this Liniment:

Take of the Oil of Rue, and of Earthworms, of each two ounces: Oil of Castor
one dram: a little Aqua vitae, make a Liniment.

Take of Old Treacle, one dram; Confection of Alkermes, and Hyacinths, of each
one scruple; Bettony, Sage, Marjoram, and Cinnamon Water, of each half an
ounce: 'Mix them, and has therewith the Nostrils, Temples, and Ears. You may
also give a spoonful to be drunk.

But it is better to anoint the Nostrils, Temples, and Crown of the Head with
the Apoplectick Balsom described for sleepy Diseases; as also the Mouth and
Pallat.

Skenkius in his 5. Century of Exotic Experiments, number. 85. has this Receipt
out of George Kufner: This is an approved Medicine in Childrens Epilepsies:
Give a little fine Musk in thin Wine, twice or thrice in a day, and it will
cure perfectly.

While these things are performing, you must give once or twice in a day, a
Clyster, thus made:

Take of the Roots of round Birthwort, of Polipody of the Oak, of Carthamus
seeds, of each half an ounce: Peony and Cummin seeds, of each three drams: the
flowers of Chamomel and and Rosemary, of each one pugil: Boil them to one pint;
take half a pint of it strained; Hiera picra three drams; Honey of Rosemary one
ounce; Oil of Rue and Lillies, of each three drams.

Two special things are to be practiced:

The one is the Root of wild Valerian before commended by Columna; which he
says he has given poudered in Milk, and thereby cured very many.

Another is the Gall of a sucking Puppy, which is mentioned in Untzerus, thus:
Take a little black sucking Puppy (but for a Girl take a bitch Whelp) choke it,
open it, and take out the Gall, which has not above three or four drops of
pure choler; give it all to the child in the time of the fit with a little
Tile-tree-flower Water, and thou shall see him cured as it were by a miracle
presently.

If the Child suck, look that the Nurses Milk be good, let her have meat of
good juice, and light of digestion: Let her drink no Wine, but Water, or Water
and Honey, and a small drink made of Sarsaparilla.

Some Children are so subject to this Disease, that it will return again after
it is once cured. Nay, in some Families all the Children use to die of this
Disease. Therefore you must use preventing Medicines, not only to those which
are newly born, but to those also which have recovered.

First therefore give to Children newly born, before they suck, give one
scruple of the Powder de gutteta, mentioned before, in a little milk, and give
the same quantity thrice in two days.

It is good both for them which have been cured, and children when they are a
few days old to apply a Caustic to their Necks. But an actual Cautery is much
better, which our Physicians will not use, because they abhor violent and
terrible Medicines. Rondeletius affirms, that the Actual Cautery is so used in
Florence, that the women do use to apply it themselves. And this does
Aquapendens witness in his Chyrurgery Operations, and teaches the way of
applying them in his proper Chapter of the burning of the hinder part of the
head in children.

Let the Child be purged twice in a month, with Manna, Syrup of Roses, or of
Cichory with Rhubarb.

Every new Moon give it a dose of the Epileptick Powder de gurteta above
mentioned.

Make a Bag to strengthen the head, and a Fume for the Head-cloaths, as in the
cure of cold Diseases of the head; and also powder its hair with the powder
before mentioned.

For the Cure of this Disease, this is a good Preservative:

Take of Spirit of Wine, four ounces: Spirit of Castor, one ounce: Peony Roots,
three ounces: Let them be infused and strained. Wash the whole body of the child
with it warmed.

CHAP. IX. Of Giddiness, called Vertigo.
Avertigo is a false Imagination, in which all objects, and the head it self
seem to turn round, so as the Patient often falls to the ground, unless he lay
hold on some stay at hand.

It may be objected, That in a Vertigo, the Imagination is not hurt; for if it
were so, the Patients would think the objects truly turned round; as men in
Madness and Phrenzy do think what they imagine to be truly so. We answer, That
in a Vertigo, the Reason is not hurt, which perceives the error of the
Imagination; but in a Phrenzy, or Melancholy, the Reason is hurt as well as the
Imagination.

There are two sorts of Vertigoes; the one simple, called in Greek (...), in
which the Sight remains unhurt: the other is called (...), or (...), a dark
Vertigo, in which the Eyes are both darkened as it were with smoke, or a cloud.

In both kinds the Sight is somewhat hurt, because the Spirits which use to go
directly to the Eyes, are moved out of order by the visive Nerve, by reason
whereof the Eye does not so sitly enjoy them. But in a dark Vertigo there is a
more violent Motion of the Spirits, so that they come less to the Eyes, from
whence the sight is darkened or hindered.

The immediate Cause of a Vertigo, is the circumvolution of the Spirits coming
of a vaporous matter or wind, which coming into the Ventricles of the Brain,
and Plexus Choroides, disturbs the Spirits, and makes them run round; whence
the species of the Objects brought by those spirits are moved in like manner;
and so the objects themselves seem to be moved also the same way. But here we
may doubt, since a Vertigo is a symptom of a hurt action, and every action hurt
depends immediately upon a Disease, how the Circumvolution of the Spirits can be
the immediate cause of a Vertigo, when it can be referred to no kind of
Disease. To which we thus answer, A Circumvolution of the Spirits, is a Disease
in respect of Situation; for at that time the Spirits do not keep that place
or position which they Naturally ought, but move preternaturally, and amiss.
And this Answer has a weighty instance: For a Disease is an affection of a
true part, but spirits are not true parts. We answer, That Axiom is not
always, but sometimes true; according to Galen that which is principal and
hinders the action of its self, is the true Disease: We say that the word Part
ought to be taken in a larger sense, comprehending all those things which go to
the making up of the Body, and whatsoever hinders the action of any part, is
called a Disease. So a yellow color in the Eye, hurts the sight immediately,
and therefore it is called a Disease in number; so a better savor in the
tongue, and noise in the Ears, are Diseases in number, in regard there is
something in those parts besides, which offends the actions. After the same
manner is the Circumvolution of the Spirits, a Disease in Situation or
Position, for the Reason above mentioned.

But those Vapors are sent up from evil humors, not continually without
intermission, but by compass and going about, and at a distance, namely, as
often as they are raised up by an external cause; and the humors are such as
use to produce vapors, namely, Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, and the
watery Humor; because both a cold as well as a hot vapor, may cause a Vertigo;
as Galen, 3. de loc. affect. chap. 8. and Comment. Aphor. 23. Sect. 3.

These evil humors are either contained in the Brain, or in the inferior parts.
Hence a twofold Vertigo arises, one Proper, the other by Consent.

Waterish and flegmy humors heaped up in the Brain, send wind and vapors to its
ventricles, which stirring about there, do cause a Vertigo. And so a proper
Vertigo comes to be a forerunner of an Epilepsy, or Apoplexy.

But Humors contained in the inferior parts, especially the stomach and the
spleen, do easily send up Vapors to the head, which if they touch the
Ventricles, and the Arteries, cause a Vertigo.

The external Causes are all such things as will quickly dissolve the Humors,
and turn them to Vapors, or make an inordinate motion in those Vapors. Among
which are reckoned by Hippocrates, Aphor. 17. Sect. 3. a South wind, and sudden
change of Air. To these ad the heat of the Sun, windy Meats, Garlic, Mustard,
Radish, Pease and Beans, Drunkenness, Gluttony, immoderare Exercise, and
unseasonable, the suppression of a wonted evacuation, Anger, Baths, Hunger,
especially in those which are full of bitter Choler, often turning of the Body
round, long looking upon Wheels and things that run round, and of Waters that
run swift, looking down from a high place, a Fall, a stroke upon the Head, a
Fracture, or depression of the Skull, compressing and lying upon the Brain.

We shall lay down no Diagnosis, or general signs to know this Disease by,
because it is of it self manifest. Yet in particular we shall declare those
signs which show the part affected that contains the mine or matter of the
Disease; as also those which show the humor offending.

Pain of the Head shows that a Vertigo comes from a Disease of the Brain,
which is a true or proper Vertigo. Also Heaviness, and the loss of some Sense;
as Dimness of sight, noise in the Ears, thickness of hearing, decay of smelling
and tasting; the beating of the Arteries of the Head when other parts are free.

The signs that show what the matter is that offends, are these: That
abundance of phlegm offends, is signified by a dullness of the internal and
external Senses, heaviness of Head, slowness of motion, drouziness, much
spitting, want of Appetite, want of Thirst, white Urine, and crude, with the
other signs of abundance of phlegm.

But watchings, wrath, nimbleness in actions, thirst, bitterness of mouth,
quickness of pulse, a thin and yellow Urine, and the like, show that the
Chollerick matter offends.

The signs of a Melancholy matter are, Fear, sorrow, troublesome thoughts, much
watching, fearful dreams, sour belchings, and the like.

The signs of Blood abounding, are, Stretching of the Veins with fullness,
redness of face, and heat, beating of the Temples, heaviness and distention in
the head, long sleep, dreams of red things, weariness, reaching, thick and red
Urine, sometimes thin and transparant by the ascension of the blood into the
head.

A Vertigo by Consent is known by the want of those Symptoms, which come from
the Head, when no disorder is found in the Brain, but rather some part beneath
is sensibly hurt.

These things show that a Vertigo comes from the stomach, want of appetite,
loathing, sour belchings, pain of the stomach, or swelling with wind.

That a Vertigo comes from the Liver, Spleen, or Matrix by Consent, the same
signs declare which were laid down in an Epilepsy by Consent coming from the
same parts in the Chapter aforegoing.

The Prognostic, or foreknowledg of this Disease, is thus:

A new Vertigo that comes but seldom, and which comes only from external
Causes, is more light and easier cured: On the contrary, that which is old, and
comes often, turns for the most part into an Epilepsy, or Apoplexy.

A Vertigo in an old man is most dangerous, because his Brain is colder and
weaker, and phlegm does more abound.

A Vert go in which not only external things, but also the Head and whole Body
seem to be turned about, and which happens with hurt to the sight, is more
dangerous, for it signifies greater force in the cause of it; and if the sick
man falls to the ground, it foretells an Epilepsy, or Apoplexy.

A Vertigo coming of hot Humors, is sooner dissolved than that which comes of
cold, because hot Humors are sooner dispersed.

The Cure of the Vertigo is much like that of the Epilepsy, because both
Diseases come almost of the same Causes: whence it comes that a Vertigo often
turns into an Epilepsy. But because a Vertigo is a lighter Disease, it does not
need so many Medicines as an Epilepsy: but they will serve, which we will here
lay down; and also we shall demonstrate in short what is that which this Disease
most properly requires for its Cure.

In the first place, Therefore if blood abound in the whole body, or in the
head, you must open a Vein, and let the blood out by degrees, giving before a
Clyster that is somewhat sharp.

After that, give the ordinary Purge which is prescribed in the Cure of the
cold Distemper of the Brain.

Afterward we must come to the particular Evacuations of the Brain, by
Errhines, Sternutatories, and Gargarisms, or Apophlegmatisms, mentioned in the
first Chapter.

Cupping glasses dry, and with Scarrification; Frictions of the extreme parts,
and opening of the Hemorrhoids are to be used for to cause revulsion.

Apply Vesicatories and Cauteries for derivation, and at last use those things
which strengthen the Brain, and disperse Vapors and Humors as well externally
as internally, as Opiates, Pouders, and Bags that are described in the first
Chapter.

And you must not omit the digestive Powder, because the weakness of the
Stomach often causes this Disease.

And lastly, You must use those Medicines which are esteemed by special quality
to cure the Vertigo; such as are those which were prescribed for the Cure of
the Epilepsy; namely, Antepileptick* Waters, a Balsom to anoint the Nostrils,
Temples, and Crown of the head, Oil of Amber, Powder of Cinnaber, and many
other.

Moreover, Quercetanus in the twentieth Chapter of his Dispensatory, commends a
Medicine made of Peacocks dung, whose Preparation and manner of use, may be
seen in the Author.

If the Disease do obstinately resist the propounded Remedies, you must fall to
a Diet of the Decoction of Guajacum.

A (...) in the fore part of the Head, is much commended by Zacutus Lusitanus
in his first Book of Admirable Practice, Obs. 38. in these words: A certain man
was so troubled with a dark Vertigo, that his Brain did almost continually seem
to run round: and when he had tried many Medicines, and there was fear of an
Apoplexy to follow; with no other means (besides general and particular
Evacuations, and Fontanels or Issues in diverse parts, and a Seton in the nape
of the Neck) could he be cured, but with a Cautery in the fore part of the
^ead; by which only (beyond the expectation of Physicians) I have cured many of
the Falling Sickness, letting them run a long time.

CHAP. X. Of Tremor, or Trembling.
TRemor is called (...) in Greek; it is a voluntary Motion depraved, by which
the Member is sometimes elevated, sometimes depressed, through the mutual
contention between the faculty, and the part affected.

It is called a depraved motion from Galen, 2. de sympt. cause. chap. 1. and he
says the same in his Book of the Difference of Symptoms, chap. 3. but he
seems to contradict himself, when in his Book of Trembling, chap. 4. he reckons
Trembling among the Motions which are diminished. But that contradiction may be
reconciled, by saying, that Motion may be considered two ways, Either in
respect of it self, or in respect of the faculty: If it be considered in
respect of it self, it is depraved, because it is not in that manner it ought
to be; if it be considered in respect of the faculty, it is a deminished
motion, because it comes from a faculty so weak that it cannot produce motion
strong enough. But one may instance, That the action is always diminished when
comes from a weak faculty, but never depraved. I answer, That it is true if all the actions depend upon the faculty; but Trembling comes partly from the
Faculty, partly from the heaviness of the part; therefore it is a depraved
Motion.

The moving faculty desires to lift up the Member, and to keep it in that
Position; but the weight of the Member presses it downwards, whence comes a
trembling Motion.

The Mediate Cause of Trembling, is weakness of the Motive Faculty, or rather
of its nearest Instrument, that is, the Animal Spirit, which is not able to
exercise a voluntary Motion perfectly.

The Spirits are made weak, either by a fault in themselves, or by a defect in
the Nerves, which are the Conduit Pipes by which they are carried, and do act.

The fault is in the Spirits, either when they are but few at the first; or
when they are afterward dissipated.

They are few at the first, either by reason of the cold distemper of the
Brain, as in old men, or through the want of vital Spirits, which are the
matter of which the animal are made.

The Spirits are dissipated from many external Causes, as immoderate
Evacuations, much use of Venery and unseasonable, great pain, and constant
fasting, sorrow, and long violent Diseases.

The Spirits are hurt by defect in the Nerves, and are weakened either when the
Nerves are too cold, or are infected with a malignant quality, or obstructed or
compressed.

They grow too cold, either from a cold Air, from use of cold meats, or much
drinking of Water, swimming often in cold water, and the like.

They are infected by the use of Opium, Henbane, Poppy, and the vapor of
Quicksilver, as it is seen in Goldsmiths, and them which have the French Pox,
and have been cured with the fume of Cinnaber. So in malignant Fevers
tremblings come also (which are rather to be accounted Convulsive Motions) and
also they come from the provocation or irritation of the Nervous parts.

They are stopped not wholly, as in a Palsy, but much less, but by the same
cause, namely a watery humor gently sprinkled upon the Nerves, which is
produced of gluttony, drunkenness, and other Causes.

Lastly, Trembling may come from compression of the Nerves, when
excrementitious humors abounding in the whole Body do compress the Nerves, and
hinder the free passage of the Animal Spirits.

Hercules Saxonia, besides the causes mentioned borrowed from Galen,
acknowledges another Tremor coming of wind; and Cardanus another from pain in
nervous parts: But they are deceived, because the Motion produced from those
Causes, are to be referred to Palpitation, or Convulsive Motion.

There is no need of signs in this disease, because trembling appears of it
self: But the Causes that produce it, are to be known by their proper signs; as
also we must search for those external Causes which went before.

As for the Prognostic. Trembling of it self is not dangerous, but if it be in
old people it continues with them til they die. But it may be deadly by
accident, in as much as it usually goes before a Palsy, or an Apoplexy.

You must Cure Trembling as you cure the Palsy, and therefore we shall not
make vain repetitions of Medicines.

CHAP. XI. Of Phrenitis, or Phrenzie.
A Phrenzy is an Inflammation of the Brain, and its Membranes with a continual
dotage, and a a sharp constant Fever.

By the word Inflammation, we understand a true Tumor, which is commonly called
a contracted Inflammation, coming of Blood out of the Vessels falling upon the
substance of the part; for the Blood being hot and Chollerick, and in the
Membranes or substance of the Brain, causes a true Erysipelas, or an
Erysipelas Phlegmonodes, or Phlegmon Erysipelatodes.

By Delirium, or Doting, we understand the erring of Reason, for we suppose
that fault cannot be in the Imagination alone, without a fault be in the
Reason, in a Phrenzy; whatsoever others think, we are led by the Authority of
Galen, who in his Book of the Difference of Symptoms, chap. 3. gives an
Example of one Theophilus a Physician, who thought Fiddlers sat continually in
a corner of his house playing, and believed that he saw them sometimes standing,
sometimes sitting, and cried continually that they should be cast out of doors.
And Galen says, that in him the Imagination was hurt without the Reason. First
therefore we may say that Theophilus had not a Phenzy; for Galen does not say
that he had, but speaking of a Delirium (which Theophilus had) therefore it was
rather Melancholy, because they sometimes err in one object, and discourse well
concerning other: so says Galen of Theophilus, that he had wisdom in other
things, both to discourse, and to know his friends. But we say further of
Theophilus, that not only his Imagination, but also his Reason was hurt,
because he really thought the Fiddlers were there, and desired they should be
put forth: For when the Imagination alone is hurt, the Reason being not hurt,
acknowledges the error of Imagination, as in a Vertigo, in which the Patient
thinks al things run round, but Reason knows that it is not so indeed, but
that Imagination does err.

Nor is the Opinion of Eustachius Rudius to be received in this case, who
says, That it never comes to pass that the Imagination should be hurt, the
Reason being sound, because Reason works upon Phantasms received from the
Imagination, and therefore if foolish Phantasms are offered to the Reason, he
thinks it necessary that the Understanding beholding those foolish fancies,
should also be foolish: And hence Eustachius gathers, that the Imagination is
not depraved, but there is a mere and simple deceit of the sight. We say that
the understanding does run from one thing to another, and is busied about those
Species which are retained in the Memory; and though the Fancy presents
absurdities to the Mind, yet the Species before received, are still retained in
the Memory, and are presented to the Reason, it can know and correct that
mistake of the Fancy; namely, if it judge that those absurd fancies which are
brought to it by a depraved Imagination do neither agree with time, place, or
other circumstances which still remain in the Memory, and are known to be true.
So in a Vertigo, Reason being in order judges that it is impossible that
Roofs, Walls, and Pavements, should turn round, and therefore they are falsely
represented to the Imagination. So the Philosopher that was bit with a mad dog,
and his Imagination began to decay, going into a Bath, perceived the false
Image of a Dog therein; but Reason being sound reproved the error of his
Imagination, and made him speak thus; What has a Dog to do in a Bath? and
presently he cast himself into the Bath, by which means he was delivered from
the danger of a Disease called Hydrophobia, or fear of Water.

There are two kinds of Phrenzie; namely, a true Phrenzy, which is laid down in
the Definition above mentioned: Another which is called Paraphrenitis, or
Bastard Phrenzy.

A true Phrenzy is sometimes in the Disposition, which is most usual, sometimes
in the Habit, which is called Hectical Phrenzy, in which, the Chollerick Humors
are strongly fixed in the Brain, and possess many parts thereof, sticking
thereto like a tincture or dye.

A Paraphrenitis, or bastard Phrenzy is, when a hot distemper is communicated
to the Brain, either from the whole Body (as in burning Fevers) or from some
part inflamed, as the Stomach, Liver, Lungs, and especially the Diaphragma or
Midriff, which by inflammation does produce a Disease very like a Phrenzy;
namely, a cont^nual Dotage called Delirium; which comes to pass by the great
consent which is between the Brain and the Diaphragma through the Nerves that
come thither, and by the perpetual motion of the Diaphragma or Midriff, by
reason wh^reof continual vapors are sent to the Brain.

The Cause of a true Phrenzy is Chollerick blood, to which there is joined also
Excrementitious Choler, and this produces a greater or less Phrenzy according
to its diverse degrees; namely in heat and adustion. So a Pale Choler produces
the mildest Phrenzy, and an Adust or burnt Choler stirs up a bestial Phrenzy.

But when the Brain is inflamed, and the Membranes thereof; the Chollerick
blood is out of its Vessels, and shed abroad into the substance of those parts:
which is done Two ways, either when the Brain is principally affected; or when
it is affected by Sympathy.

The Brain is primarily affected when it does immediately grow hot from an
external Cause, as from the Sunbeams, drinking of Wine, Wrath, and the like;
so that the blood which is contained in the veins of the Brain is moved and
carried out of its Vessels: and this may come from a wound, or stroke, or
contusion of the head: And a Phrenzy so coming may be called a primary, or
principal Phrenzy.

But a secondary Phrenzy is that which follows burning and malignant Fevers,
when a part of that humor which causes the Disease, is carried to the head.

It follows many times in these Fevers, That Nature being disturbed by the
malignity of the Cause which makes the Disease, sends some portion thereof to
some flesh between the skin and the bone; whence we see Pluresies, shortness of
Breathings, Squinseys, Hipatitides, or Inflammations from the Vena porta, and
other parts, to follow these Fevers: So if these humors are sent to the Brain
they make a true Phrenzy, and then the Fever goes before the Delirium, or
doting: But in primary Phrenzies a Delirium appears with the Fever from the
beginning.

The Signs which declare a Phrenzy to come are these, watchings, troublesome
sl^ep, much talk, an urin that is first thick, and after thin, and perspicuous;
heat of the head: for these declare that hot matter is carried to the head: the
eyes are altered because (the brain being hurt) they want the animal spirit.
There is a pain about the hinder part of the head, because the jugular veins
are carried to that part and send forth the Chollerick blood.

These are the signs of a Phrenzy present: a continual doting, because the
Brain is always affected: troublesome watchings coming from the hot distemper
of the Brain; seldom and great violent breathing, because men in Phrenzies
forget to breath: for when by forgetfulness, or great trouble of the mind by
many fancies which are presented to a doting imagination, and withdraw the
animal spirits: Respiration, or breathing is very seldom, it is made up with
the greatness of the blast.

Moreover, in a Phrenzy there is no thirst, or very little; albert there are
strong causes of thirst present, because the mind is sick, and the animal
spirits (by reason the Brain is hurt) do not send their beams to the mouth of
the stomach wher^unto thirst belongs. The Pulse is weak because the heart
suffers with the brain: hard; because the Membrana is inflamed: quick and
often; by reason of the great urging; and something moist; because the brain is
affected. Moreover, there is a continual Fever because the inflammation of the
brain must of necessity cause a Fever. The tongue is rough, black, and yellow,
by reason of the Chollerick vapors which dry up its moisture.

An Hectical, or Habitual Phrenzy is known from Hippocrat. 1. Prorrhet. text.
33. by small doting, and little perceived; when the sick do not speak, but lie
still and seem to sleep.

But a Phrenzy, or Phrenitis is di^tinguished from a Paraphrenitis in this; The
Disease which produces that, is sooner known than a Delirium or Doting; and by
the increase or diminution of that the Delirium is increased or diminished; and
sometimes it intermits and is not constant. But a Paraphrenitis springing from
the Inflammation of the Midriff, in which there is a constant doting, is
distinguished by other signs. Namely, because in a true Phrenzy there is great
and seldom breathing: but in the other, little and often. Little; because the
Diaphragma, or Midriff being inflamed, cannot easily be extended and dilated.
Often; for necessity, that the smalness might be made good by the frequency.
Moreover, in a true Phrenzy the voice is high, and the Patient cries out loud;
in the other the voice is low, because the instrument of Breathing is hindered.
And lastly, In the inflammation of the Midriff, the Hypocondria are drawn up
(according to Hippocrates in Coacis) and the reason is, because the Midriff is
covered beneath with a Membrana coming from the Peritoneum; and therefore when
it is inflamed, it contracts the Peritoneum, and with it the Hypochondria.

Lastly, The Signs of the Causes may be known from the predominancy of the
Humor in the whole Body, and from the manner of the Delirium: For a pale Choler
makes a more gentle Phrenzy; a yellow Choler make a more violent; an adust
Choler makes the most violent: But Chollerick blood causes the most mild of
al.

The Prognostic of this Disease is for the most part deadly; for few escape in
regard a noble part of the body is affected with a great Disease.

The greatest hope of recovery is when there is Dotage with laughter, and a
decrease of Symptoms, continuance of strength; as also when after the height of
the Disease there happens some beneficial evacuation, as sweat, blood, or
looseness.

But these show the Disease to be deadly. The Tongue quavering, and Hand
trembling, gnashing of Teeth, Convulsion, a great Chilness or Cold in the
beginning of the Disease; as also when the Patient picketh the Wool or Straws
about his bed. You may farther Collect Death to be at hand by a drop of black
blood flowing from the Nostrils, by white stools, white and thin urine: For all
these signify a great oppression of the Brain, or a flowing of Choler from
the whole body to the part affected.

For the Cure of this Disease, the blood that flows to the Head must be let
forth, and revelled, derived, repelled, and intercepted; and that which was
there before must be evacuated and discussed. The distemper of that part must
be corrected; the strength of it, and of the whole body is to be preserved.

All these things may be done with the following Medicines.

In the beginning of the Disease, at any time of the day you must let blood out
of the Head vein, because the Disease is very violent, giving a Clyster before:
or if blood do much abound, out of the Liver vein: or first, out of the middle
vein; and a little after out of the Head vein.

If the Disease come from stoppage of the Terms or Hemorrhoids upon the vein
called Saphena in the foot. In the next place you must open the Chephalick or
Head vein, that you may draw forth what is received into the brain, or what is
nigh unto it.

For the most part once bleeding will not be sufficient in this Disease, but
twice or thrice, or oftener in the beginning or increase of the Disease; you
may adventure upon it, according to the condition or plenty of the Humor; the
age, temper, and strength of the patient.

If a Phrenzy takes one that has a constant Fever, (as it is often in the
increase of Fevers, or in the state of them, when nature is out of order and
disturbed by the malignity of that matter which causes the Disease, sends
Chollerick humors to the head) you must again let blood, though you have done
it before in respect of the Fever; but you must do it sparingly, because the
strength is abated by the Fever and former bleeding. Therefore at that time
open the Head vein, or if strength will not bear that, open the Saphena in one
foot, or both; which is approved in such Diseases: neither is it less
beneficial to open the Hemorrhoid veins by Leeches.

But in all Bleedings which are made in time of a Delirium, you must observe
this that the Orifice be not large, for then it will quickly heal, and you must
bind it up carefully lest the Patient being unruly cause it to bleed again; as
also it is very good for the sudden Cure of it, to lay a plaster of Aloes,
white of an Eg, and the hair of a Hare.

After Bleeding provoke sleep. For if after bleeding there comes watchfulness,
the Humors wi^ be again inflamed, and the patient grow worse.

Sleep is caused by repelling Medicines laid to the forehead which are cooling
and narcotick or causing sleep, which we shall mention hereafter.

When you cannot conveniently let blood, apply Cupping Glas^es with deep
Scarrifications; first, to the lower; than, to the upper parts: and also to the
Thighs, and other parts, without Scarrification.

Use Frictions in the same parts; and use Ligatures to the Legs for reuulsion.

Apply Vesicatories to the Shoulders and Arms.

Give every day a Clyster, made of cold and moist things: For by these the
Acrimony of the Humors is qualified, and they are put downwards.

And they are thus made,

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce: the Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Lettice,
Pellitory, Beets, of each one handful: the flowers of Water Lillies, and tops
of Dill, of each one pugil: Prunes six: boil them in Barley water; to one pint
of the straining ad of Cassia newly drawn, and Diaprunes simple, of each six
drams: red Sugar one ounce: make a Clyster.

Use no Oils in these kind of Clysters, because they will then inflame.

You must not Purge in a primary Phrenzy, such a one as comes not from another
Disease, but it is good sometimes to Purge when the Phrenzy comes upon a
continual Fever. For if there be an evil digestion or ill juice in the Body,
and the Phrenzy begin: then the matter is wandering, and is taken for that
which is called Turgent, or abounding: And therefore by the Counsel of
Hippocrates, Aphor. 22. Sect. 1. is to be presently evacuated.

But the Purge must be made of cold things, with gentle, as Senna, Rhubarb,
Cassia, Tamarinds, Catholicon, and Syrup of Roses.

Presently after blood letting you must use repelling Medicines, which hinder
the assent of humors and cool the head, as Vinegar of Roses made of Oil of
Roses and Vinegar, in time past; but now we use distilled Waters and Juyces of
Herbs with it, and we repel and cool more or less, as there is a greater or
less flux of humors, and inflammation, which we must diligently observe.
Therefore we will lay down many forms that in particular cases we may choose
those which are most fit.

Take of Oil of Roses three ounces; Vinegar of Roses one ounce; Rose and
Plantane Water, of each two ounces: lay them on the forehead shaven* and with
four-folded clothes. Or,

Take of Rose water four ounces; Oil of Roses two ounces; Vinegar of Roses half
an ounce; two whites of Eggs; mix them together. Or,

Take of Oil of Violets and Water Lillies, of each half an ounce; Rose,
Lettice, and Houslee^ Water, of each two ounces; Vinegar half an ounce. Or,

Take of the Juice of Lettice, Purslain, Nightshade, Penny-grass, or
Venus-navil, of each two ounces; Oil of Roses three ounces; Vinegar of Roses
one ounce. Or,

Take of Oil Olive in which Roses are infused, one ounce and an half; new
Poplar Ointment (for the old inflameth) one ounce; Vinegar of Roses half an
ounce; one white of an Eg: Beat them together, and apply them with Flax.

The Milk of a Woman which has brought forth a Girl, with the Juice of
Lettice, and Oil of Roses, is very excellent.

Concerning these cooling Medicines, you must observe that they be administered
warily, and with judgment, because the Brain is of its own Nature cold, and a
principal Member, therefore it is to be feared left the Patient by too much use
thereof should fall into a contrary Disease, as a Coma, or the like, especially
if he be weak or old; and although they are used sometimes more, sometimes less,
yet the extent of the time of their usage ought not to be above three days.

Moreover, Those Medicines do stick to the face and eyes, therefore you must
lay about them a cloth, or a little wool: in the fore part of the head you must
apply them to the middle of the forehead; in the sides of the head, above the
ears; in the hinder part, about the nape of the neck and toward the crown of
the head: and these are in Winter, to be applied hot; in Summer, cold, as Galen
says, 2. de comp. med. cap. 2. But it is best in old and weak people never to
apply them actually cold.

If the Inflammation comes to the Skin, as it sometimes does; then we must avoid
repelling Medicines, especially those that are strong, lest the matter driven
to the Brain should augment the Disease.

You must apply cloths wet in Rose Water and Vinegar to the neck, to hinder the
humors from flying into the head.

Causticks applied to the Legs do very well for revulsion or drawing down of
the humor to the inferior parts.

While these things are doing, you must use al those things which do cool the
whole Body, especially the principal parts both internally and externally.

Inwardly you must use Juleps, Emulsions, and Electuaries.

Take of the distilled Waters of Lettice, Purslain, Roses, and wild Poppies, of
each three ounces: Syrup of Violets, and Pomegranates, of each one ounce and an
half: Sal Prunellae three drams: Make a Julep for three Doses to be taken twice
or thrice in a day. Or,

Take of Lettice, Purslain, and Plantane, of each two handfuls: Water Lillies,
and Violet flowers, of each a pugil: Boil them in Barley Water to one pint; and
being strained, dissolve in it Syrup of Violets three ounces; Sal Prunellae
three drams: Make a Julep for three doses or draughts.

It is very good to put to your Juleps, besides the Sal prunellae, the spirit
of Sulphur, or Vitriol, for those do much allay the heat of Choler.

Take of the four great cold Seeds, six drams: white Poppy seeds two drams:
Barley Water, half a pint: Lettice and Water-lilly Water, of each two ounces;
Rose water, one ounce: Make an Emulsion according to art, to two Doses, putting
thereto Syrup of Violets two ounces.

Take of Conserve of Violets and Roses, of each one ounce: Conserve of
Water Lillies and candied Lettice stalks, of each half an ounce: the powder of
Diamargariton frigid. half a dram: With the Syrup of Violets make an Electuary.

You may also make an Electuary of white Poppy Seed, beaten in a stone Mortar,
and mixed with Sugar; this may be called Diacodium album: this temperates sharp
and hot humors, and brings rest; it is made of one ounce of Poppy seeds beaten
with so much Rose water; after put two ounces of Sugar to it: Or make it of
equal parts of each.

Outwardly you must apply cold Epithems to the Heart and Liver.

Take of Rose water three ounces: Borrage, Bugloss, and Sorrel Water, of each
two ounces: white Wine Vinegar, half an ounce: the powder of three Sanders one
dram and an half: of burnt Ivory half a dram: Wood of Aloes one scruple:
Saffron eight grains: Camphire six grains: Make an Epitheme for the Heart.

Take of Lettice and Rose Water, of each three ounces: Endive and Purslain
Water, of each two ounces: Vinegar of Roses one ounce: white and red Sanders,
and burnt Ivory, of each one scruple: Camphire and Spicknard, of each six
grains: the powder of Diarrhodon one dram: Make an Epitheme for the Liver.

Let the Liver and the Loins be anointed with this Ointment.

Take of the Unguent of Roses one ounce and an half: the cerate of Sanders one
ounce: the Juice of Lettice and Oil of Roses, of each half an ounce: Make a
Liniment.

Let the Breast be anointed with supling Oils, as Oil of Violets, and the like.

Apply clothes wet in Water and Vinegar to the Stones or Cods, or which is
better, let them be wet with Rose water and Vinegar.

It is good to wash the feet with an actually hot decoction, made of cold
things; for it will soften those parts by its hot moisture, and make the humors
descend, and its potential coldness will be communicated to all the Body, and to
the Brain especially by the Nerves, whereby sleep will be provoked. It is made
thus:

Take of Violets, Mallows, Willow Leaves, Vine Leaves, Water Lillies, of each
two handfuls* the flowers of Roses, and Water Lillies, of each one handful:
Poppy heads, ten: Make a Decoction for the use aforesaid.

Fair Water may suffice to wash the Feet, and if the feet of the sick man be
put therein when it is a little warmed, for three or four hours, it frees him
from his Delirium, and makes him sleep.

The same effect is wrought by Housleek beaten into a Cataplasm, and laid to
the soals of the feet: and also by Pompions or Guords beaten and so applied.

Sweet Scents often applied to the Nose, cool the Brain: they are prepared
after this manner following:

Take of Violet flowers, and Water Lillies, of each one pugil; of Roses two
pugils: yellow Sanders one scruple: Tie them in a clout, and dip it into Rose
water, and let the Patient smell to it often. Or,

Take of yellow Sanders, Roses, and Water Lillies, of each one dram: Camphire
half a scruple* put them with Rose water into a narrow mouthed Vessel: Let them
boil over the fire, and after let the Patient receive the vapor at his Nose.

But because watchings do chiefly trouble in this Disease, you must use all
your skill from the beginning of the Disease to provoke sleep. For which, the
repelling Medicines before mentioned are very good; especially if you anoint
the head with Oil of Violets cold, before you apply Rose Vinegar, which is good
against watchings and Convulsions which come in this disease. But the Medicines
following, will do it more powerfully.

Take of the heads of white Poppies with their seeds, in number six: the
flowers of Water Lillies two pugils: beat them together, and with Rose and
Lettice water make them like a pultiss, which apply to the forehead between two
clothes.

Note that in Medicines to provoke sleep, you must use but little Vinegar,
because it causes watching.

Take of Lettice flowers one handful and an half: Roses half a handful: white
poppy seeds half an ounce: boil them in water till they grow soft; stamp them
in Barley Meal, and woman's Milk, of each ha^f an ounce, and a little Oil of
Violets: Make a Frontal thereof.

Take of Oil of Violets, water lillies, and new Ointment of Poplar, of each
three drams: Opium and Oil of Nutmegs, of each three grains: Mix them into a
Liniment to anoint the Forehead and Temples.

Great Housleek bruised with Woman's Milk, and laid to the Forehead, appeaseth a
Phrenzy, and provokes sleep. But as soon as the Patient begins to sleep, you
must take it away, lest he fall into a Coma, or sleeping Disease.

Guords of Pompions do the same thing with less danger.

Penotus does extol this Epitheme:

Take of Musk twelve grains; Camphire twenty grains; red Rose water in which
Sanders has been infused, twenty ounces; mix them: Shave the head, and wet
double clothes therein, and apply them warm to all the Sutures of the head.
When they are dry wet them again, and continue the application twenty four
hours, and so doing you shall provoke sleep, strengthen the brain, and
wonderfully recover the Patient, except the very substance of the brain be
corrupted.

Inwardly you may give one ounce of Syrup of Poppies sometimes in his Juleps and
Emulsions.

Or you may give four or five grains of Laudanum, which also given in a
Clyster, does provoke sufficiently to sleep, and with more safety.

The Physician must be wary in the use of Narcoticks, or Medicines that provoke
sleep; for they must not be given if the Patient be very weak, lest the Spirits
and Natural heat, be thereby extinguished.

Having sufficiently used Evacuations, Revulsions, Derivations* and
Interceptions: we must come to the bringing forth of the matter. And first we
must open the forehead vein if it appear, and may be taken, not tying a
Ligature about the Neck as usually they do, for so the blood will be forced
upwards.

But you may with most profit open the veins in the nostrils, and if the
Disease be any ways curable, it will be cured thus: You must bleed
plentifully, and betimes, in the beginning of the Disease, after you have made
general Evacuations. And they are opened with Bristles put up into the Nose,
and pricking often therewith.

Or you may draw blood from behind the Ears, from the Nostrils, Forehead,
Hemorrhoids, with Hors-letches.

Apply to the Head, things that resolve, with things that repel, in that
proportion, that first you use a little of the resolvers, and as the disease
declineth, increase the quantity, so that at length you use only resolvers to
discuss the relics of the Disease. For this end we use Oil of Chamomel, and
of Dill mixed with Oil of Roses.

But among Resolving Medicines, the chiefest are Creatures newly killed and
applied to the head, or pieces of them; as young Pigeons, Chickens, Puppies cut
along the Back, and Sheeps Lights; for they fortify the part with their
Natural heat, discuss the humor, and qualify the sharpness thereof.

Which things, if you have tried one or two days, and have found no benefit,
Mercatus teaches to apply a Cupping glass to the crown of the head, that the
humors may breath through the Sutures into the Skin: and if it appear^red, and
be swelled under the Cupping glass to scarifie. This Counsel he says (if
followed) will do good when al things besides fail; especially if you bath
presently after with sweet Water in which you have boiled some discussing
Medicines: But he advises that this be not used in Phrenzies that come from
other Fevers, but only in that which begins of its self.

This Remedy is confirmed by Zacutus Lucitanus, who says that he cured a most
desperate Phrenzy by applying a Cupping Glass to the fore part of the Head with
Scarrification.

Some are so bold as to apply Vesicatories, or Medicines to raise Blisters to
the fore part of the Head, which they say has sometimes had success: But this
requires extraordinary premeditation before it be used.

For his Drink, let the Patient use Barley Water, or Water made of Sorrel
Roots, with Syrup of Pomegranates, Barberries, or Lemmons; or let him drink
this following Infusion.

Take of Spring Water two pints; the Leaves of Sorrel, and wild Poppies, of
each half a handful; the Flowers of Borrage, Water Lillies, and Violets, of
each half a pugil; the spirit of Vitriol one dram: red Sanders rasped two
scruples: Let them be infused for some hours cold; then strain* them with a Cap
paper, and ad as much Sugar as is sufficient to make it pleasant.

There is in this Disease for the most part a stoppage of Urine, because the
Patient neglects to make it; from whence those parts that contain it are
distended, and bring so great an Inflammation, that it alone is able to bring
death to the Patient. Therefore you must often call upon the Patient to make
water, and you must foment the place where the Bladder lies with warm Water,
and drive the Urine forth by the compression of the hand. But if the Symptoms
do not yield to these light Medicines, you must proceed to stronger.

Take of the Leaves of Pellitory of the wall two handfuls; Parsley with its
roots, one handful* Boil them, and after they are strained ad three ounces of
the Oil of Scorpions, and foment the hairy place of the Privities therewith.

Let the remainder of this Decoction after the straining, be fried in a pan
with the Oil of Scorpions, and applied to the same part after the Fomentation.

If you desire a stronger Decoction, ad the Seeds of Smallage, Parsley,
Gromwel, Seselis, or large and broad Cummin, of each two drams.

You may also profitably apply this following Ointment after the Fomentation:

Take of the Fat of a Rabbit, and of Oil of Scorpions, of each two ounces:
Smallage Seeds, Parsley seeds, Asarabacca, and Cummin seeds finely* poudered,
of each half a dram: Make an Ointment.

Chap. XII. Of the Imposthume, and Spacelus, or Mortification of the Brain.
THe Imposthume and Mortification of the Brain is described by few Authors,
although it was observed by Hippocrates in his 3. Book of Diseases, and
happens sometimes in Practice, and deluding those Physicians who are not well
grounded, making them conceive it to be another Disease.

Now a Spacelus, or Mortification of the Brain, is a suppuration, or
corruption, or matter of the substance of the Brain, which is called a
Gangrene, Syderation, or blasting of the Brain.

The Immediate cause whereof, is an Inflammation of the substance of the Brain,
which is distinguished from a Phrenzy, in this: In a Phrenzy the Membranes are
chiefly inflamed, and they do communicate an inflammation to the external part
adjoining; but in this Disease, the inward parts of the Brain are inflamed, and
the whole substance thereof is putrified; for so great an inflammation in a most
tender part and moist, will quickly produce a Spacelus, or Mortification.

The Cause of this Inflammation is Blood overheated, or over chollerick,
running into the Body and internal parts of the Brain.

The Primary Causes, are, all such things as produce hot and much Blood in the
whole Body which is sent to the Brain; as violent Exercise, the heat of the Sun,
heat of the head by Fire, Wrath, and the like: But great Wounds do more usually
produce this Disease, as also Contusions. But a Spacelus or Imposthume coming
from a Wound or Contusion, is different from the former in this: An Imposthume
made by a Fall or Contusion, does n^ possess so many parts of the Brain, but
for the most part adhaereth to one. Hence the Symptoms are higher, especially
in the beginning, and the Di^e^^e continues longer.

The S^gns of an Imposthume or Spacelus, which comes without a Wound, or
Contusion, are these:

In the beginning there is a great Headache, which is communicated by the
hinder part of the head to the neck and all the back; after which comes a
general decay of all the Senses both internal and external, as in an Apoplexy,
from which it is distinguished by the Signs hereafter mentioned*

The Patient is tossed to and fro, and cannot remain in the same place; he
lays hold with his hands upon his head, and desires to tear and scratch his
face, plucking his hair: but as the Disease en^reaseth, his Body grows faint,
and cannot use such violence.

A most sharp and strong Fever always accompanyeth this Disease, which comes
from the great Inflammation of the brain.

Lastly, In this Disease, the Patient never takes meat or drink, neither can
you take any course to give them any thing, and therefore their strength soon
fails.

An Imposthume by a Wound or Contusion, is known by these signs following:

After the Wound or Contusion is received, there is a kind of numbness and
sadness in the Body, the Animal Spirits beginning to be weakened by the matter
which is got out of its Vessel. When the Disease increases, there arises a
kind of Fever, when the matter begins to putrify, thence comes headache and
drouziness: after, when putrefaction is increased, all the symptoms grow
stronger, the Fever sharper; the Patient rising from sleep suddenly roareth
out, and then presently lies down again; he often brings his hand to his head:
Hence it is, that many before they die do send forth filthy green matter out of
their mouth and nose.

As to the Prognostic part thus:

This Disease is most dangerous, and commonly deadly, even in three days
space, as Hippocrates shows in his 51. Aphorism, Sect. 7. saying, That they
who have a mortified and putrified brain, die in three days; but if they live
longer, they recover. Galen in his Comments teaches that we are not to
understand here by a Spacelus, a complete corruption of the Brain because that
is uncurable, but such as is at hand by reason of the great Inflammation.

In those which recover, who are very few, there is no remembrance of things
past: they can neither remember their Disease, nor any thing concerning it.

We must make great have for the Cure of this Disease, for if we do not apply
Remedies in the beginning, there is no time for Cure.

Therefore in the first beginning of this Disease we must let blood in great
plenty, and very often twice, or thrice, or four times in the same day, as
strength will permit: for all the hope of the Cure lies in this only Remedy;
for when a great quantity of blood possesses the substance of the Brain, which
is large, soft, and moist, we cannot make so great a revulsion from thence,
except we draw almost all the blood in the veins: and here that common saying
of Celsus is to be observed; Many things are done well in time of sudden
danger, which at other times may be omitted.

You must also give sharp Clysters every day, that the humors which tend
upwards may be brought down.

At the same time apply those Medicines of Rose Vinegar pre^cribed in the
Chapter of Phrenzy.

For the greater revulsion and derivation, apply Cupping-glasses to the
Shoulders and Back, with deep scarification; use Frictions and Ligatures to the
extreme parts: first open the Ankle Veins, then the Forehead, and the Arteries
in the Temples; apply Hors-leeches behind the Ears, and to the Hemorrhoids;
Vesicatories to the Neck and Arms, and other Medicines which we prescribed in
the cure of the Phrenzy.

At last, if the Disease decline, you must apply to the head things that gently
resolve; among which, the best is, the hot Lungs of a Sheep newly slain.

CHAP. XIII. Of Mania, or Madness.
MAnia is Delirium without a Fever, with raging and fury.

It is distinguished from a Phrenzy, in that there is in a Phrenzy an acute
Fever, coming from the inflammation of the Brain and its Membranes. But a Mania
has no Fever in respect of its Being; but a Fever may be joined with a
Mania, coming from some other cause, but not from that which produces a Mania.
And therefore in a Phrenzy* a Fever is sy^ptomatical; but in a Mania it is
essential, and original, coming from some other cause* And ^^ is Galen to be
understood, Book 3. de loc. affect. chap. 7. where he says, The (...) which is
made of Choler burnt, begets beastial madness, sometimes without, sometimes
(...) a F^aver.

It is distinguished from Melancholy by the symptoms which declare the
disease; for Mania is with fury and boldness, but Melancholy is with fear and
sorrow.

The immediate causes of a Mania according to Galen, is a cold and dry
distemper, coming o^ black Choler, which is urged with many difficulties.

For if there were such a distemper in the Brain that it would disturb the
Mind, it should produ^^* a Fever, when a less heat than will produce a
Delirium, can produce a Fever, as appears in th^^ that are inflamed by the Sun.

To this Doubt, diverse Authors answer diversely: the Answer of the most solid
is, That the (...) which produces a Fever must be ^moaky, that the vapors
sent to the heart may cause it* and this vaporing heat ought to be in a moist
matter, such as is in putrid Fevers: but in a madness the Humors are adust and
burnt, so that no Vapors can ar^^e from them. In one word they ^ay, That the
heat in a Madness or Mania, is as ^eat in a live coal, but heat in a Fever is
as heat in the flame (...) and this answer is urged with a strong instance;
namely, in a Hectic Fever, there is more consumption of moisture than in a
Mania: yet the Fever continues to the absolute consumption of all moisture,
even Radical also, and the death of the Patient.

Pla^erus being persuaded by this and other Reasons, supposes that besides the
hot and dry distemper, there is a malignant and venomous quality, which is the
chief cause of a Delirium. A great probability for this Opinion is, That a
raging from the Mother, comes from Seed corrupted and poisoned in that part.
Because Hydrophobia or fear of water, which is a kind or Mania coming from the
biting of a mad dog, is caused in any constitution, without the mixture of
Melancholy: And the disease which comes from the bite of a Tarantula, is
called a kind of Madness: And lastly, certain poisons do cause madness, as is
reported of the Brain of a Weesil, and Nightshade: Therefore it is probable
that some certain poison bred in the Body may be the chief cause of madness;
since malignant Fevers which are very mild, and so sometimes that the pulse and
Urine is like to those that are in health, use to produce Deliriums more than
burning Fevers without malignity. And Experience teaches us that Madness
happens often, not only in Melancholy men, but also in all Natures and Ages,
especially if it be haereditary, or come from Parents: and it is often cured by
hot Medicines which have special virtue against it. But we must con^ess that
this disease is oftenest in Melancholy people, because that humor is more fit
to receive such poison. And Galen seems to acknowledge that malignity to come
upon Melancholy in his Comment upon Aphor. 56. Sect. 6. where he says, That
the cause of a Mania is a Melancholy humor, not always, but when it is burnt
above measure, or when it is putrified, and has received a malignant
sharpness. There remains yet one dimculty, That mad men can endure the coldest
weather naked without hurt, and to be hot externally, which shows an
extraordinary heat. But we answer, That this is not proper to all mad folks,
for some cannot endure cold, but go as warm as they can. And the other are not
disturbed with the external air by reason of Custom, because from custom there
is no passion; so we see tender women in Winter go with naked Breasts, which
are hot to the touch, albeit according to Hippocrates cold is a great enemy to
the Breast.

The matter producing this Disease, is contained in the veins and arteries,
either of the whole body, or those nearest to the Brain, or in the vessels of
the Brain, and in respect of the difference of the place containing, greater or
lighter symptoms do arise. Sometimes the matter causing this disease is in the
Vessels of the Matrix, as Blood, and Seed corrupted: hence comes the raging
called Furor Vterinus.

If the matter offending be in all the Veins, or those near the Brain, there is
a continual madness: but if it be shut up only in one part, the disease has
intermission, and comes by fits.

The signs by which it is known, sometimes shows the disease to be present,
sometimes that it is growing.

For the knowledge of Madness to come, first consider the Natural disposition of
the Patient, which is chollerick, or melancholy. So in Hippocrates, 2. epid.
5. He who has a Vein beating in his Arm, is like to be mad, and is subject to
wrath; but he that has it moving by degrees, is slow and stupid. Here
Hippocrates calls Arteries by the name of Veins. For he does not mean a
simple, but a violent Pulsation, unto which he opposes that which is by
degrees* So that the meaning of his saying is this; They who have naturally a
high strong Pulse, great and swift, are inclinable to anger and fury; but they
who have a slow pulse, are dull and blockish.

Secondly, You must regard the Sex, for Men are more often mad than Women:
Which is to be understood of the Original Disease of Madness; for Wo^en are
often mad by consent from the Matrix.

Thirdly, The Age is to be considered; for Madness comes oftener to young men
than to boys and old men.

Fourthly, Mark the time of the year; It comes often in Spring, oftener in
Summer, most often at the fall of the Leaf, according to Hippocrates and Galen,
Aphor. 20, 21, and 22. Sect. 3. In the Spring, the humors bred at other times,
and kept al Winter quiet, are moved and stirred, and produce proportionable
diseases: In the Summer, much choler, not only yellow, but black is increased
in them that are inclined to it, which causes madness at that time; or else
increasing till Autumn, the disease comes then.

These Signs are more remote, and show only in general a disposition to this
disease; but these following show it to be at hand. Constant pain in the head,
watchings, short and little sleep, troublesome dreams, cares, and
thoughtfulness, frights from small causes, a rash and often fury from none, or
the ^mallest occasion, eyes not enduring light, noise in the ears, an
unaccustomed desire of Venery, Nocturnal pollutions often, laughter
unaccustomed and without Reason, much talk not formerly used, and sometimes much
silence. These show that a Mania is begun.

But that the Mania is present you may know by the ^igns mentioned in the
Definition; namely, a Delirium without a Fever, with fury and boldness; diverse
are the kinds of Dotage or Delirium in diverse sick men, and at diverse times
they come according as the cause is more or less vehement; for some have a rash
madness, and seize upon every man they meet, tear their own clothes, sometimes
lay violent hands to destroy themselves. Others ate milder and tamer, and hurt
no body, but speak distractedly and ridiculously, sometimes they sing, sometimes
they laugh, and have diverse whimseys, and symptoms much like those in
Melancholy men and fools.

And from the variety of those symptoms you may gather the variety of the
cause: For immoderate laughter, mirth, and singing, signify that the matter
offending is dashed with much blood: but wrath, restlessness, howling,
striking, pale and yellow color in the face, show that choler is in fault: but
a furious madness that lays hold on all it meets, and sometimes stays them,
comes from choler burnt, which is called black choler; but if this black
choler comes not of yellow choler, but melancholy adust, the Patient looks
furiously, sometimes is long silent, and then breaks forth into earnest
discourse; they are unruly and untoward, and sometimes cry and lament grievously.

The Prognostic of this Disease is,

A Mania is a strong Disease, and continues not only months, but years, even
to death, especially if it be haereditary. All Diseases of black choler are
hard to be cured, and this especially, because the Patient will not be ruled,
and take their Medicines prescribed.

A Mania which comes with laughter, and those light symptoms is easier cured
than that which comes with sadness and fury.

That the Disease will shortly be cured, appears by Natural Evacuations, by
sweat, stool, bleeding at no^e, or hemorrhoids or var^ces, or crooked swelled
veins appears: whence Hippocrates, Aphor. 21. Sect. 6. if varices or
hemorrhoids come to mad men, the disease is cured.

Bloody Flux, Dropsy, Tertian Ague, or Quartan happening to a mad man, takes
away his disease, for there is a remove of the humors unto the lower parts from
the Head, in which they produce a new Disease.

For the Cure of this Disease, the matter offending is to be evacuated,
revelled, and repelled, the hot Distemper is to be corrected, the Brain and
other principal parts are to be strengthened, which may be done by the means
following.

First, Let blood, out of the vein of the Arm which appears most; but give a
Clyster before: the day after bleed again in the other Arm; and do thus often.
For Platerus affirms that innumerable mad folks have been cured by Chyrurgions,
and others who have studied the Cure, and have let them blood twenty, or twenty
six times; not only in the Arms, but Feet, Forehead, Nostrils, Hemorrhoides, if
the veins appear there; and also in the Hand, or Salvatella: This is to be done
by degrees, intermitting Clysters, and purging Medicines here prescribed,
Cupping Glasses to the Shoulders and Back with ^carification, are to be applied
after the other veins are opened: as also Horsleeches to the Temples, and
behind the Ears.

And you must intermix Preparations and Purges proper for the matter offending
when you let blood so often; and they must be continued long: for which use are
al those which we have mentioned for preparing and purging of Choler, to which
we may ad these following, as being more excellent and choice.

Take of La^is Lazuli, one dram and an half: Diagridium half a dram: the best
Turbith one dram: Senna half an ounce: Epithymum, and Cream of Tartar, of each
two drams: Cinnamon, and Citron peeles, of each one scruple: Saffron half a
scruple: make a powder: the Dose to be given at once, is one dram, or four
scruples, with any proper liquor or broth.

Take of black Hellebore one ounce: infuse it for three days space in four
ounces of rain water: boil them with a gentle fire, to three parts: ad to the
straining of the best clarified Honey two ounces: and take one spoonful in fat
broth* Or,

Take of the Extract of black Hellebore half a scruple* Sirup of Violets one
ounce: mix them for one Dose.

All Medicines made of H^llebore; as the Wine, Syrup, and Oxmel of it are very
good against this Disease.

Hence it is reported that Melampus the Son of Amythaon the Physician, Cured
the Daughters of Praetus King of Greece with Hellebor'd wine, when by Madness
they supposed themselves to be Cowes.

Antimony in this Disease is not only Commended by Chemists, but also by all
Galenists: both in regard it does di^charge Melancholy from the whole Body;
and also because the Patients will be easily persuaded to take it. The Dose is
diverse according to the diversity of the preparation of it.

Baths of hot Water are to be often used, and after every Purge.

The Or^er of Purging Medicines for this Disease is as follows: First give
altering Apozems that Purges for three or four days together after you have
let blood in both Arms. After give twice in a week gentler Potions, or Pouders,
or a Magistral syrup: but give strong Purges, only twice in a month; letting
blood constantly before as is before mentioned.

In the time of Intermission, use Baths, preparing Juleps, or altering Broths;
as also strengthening Opiates.

Besides the vulgar Juleps, this following made of Juyces is very profitable.

Take of the juice of Borage, Bugloss, and Pairmains, of each three ounces:
Fumitory, and Succory water, of each four ounces: white Sugar six drams: boil,
clarify, and aromatize them with yellow Saunders: and take six ounces thereof
morning and evening.

You may make Opiats as follows.

Take of Conserve of Roses, Violets, and Bugloss, of each one ounce: Conserve
of Tamariskflowers, Clove-gilli-flowers, Cand^ed Lettice-stalks, and
Citron-peels cand^ed, of each half an ounce: one Emblick Myrobalon candied,
Confection of Alkermes and Hyacynths, of each three drams: the Powder of the
Electuary called Diamargariton Frigidum, and Laetificans Galeni, of each one
dram: Coral and Pearl prepared, of each half a dram: with the syrup of
sweet smelling Apples, make an Opiate, of which let him take the quantity of a
Chestnut, drinking after it a little o^ his Julep, or of some other proper
liquor.

Tablets also may be made in this manner:

Take of Confectio Alkerm^^ two drams: Species de Gemmis, and Diamargariton
Frigidum of each half a dram: Sugar dissolved in the juice of Apples, four
ounces: make Tablets of the weight of two drams, and give one for a Dose.

Sometimes we may try Specifical Medicines, and Amulets, or things to be hanged
about the Neck; of which sort Sennertus has many: but we will mention only one
which is in a Noble Family of Montpelior, is accounted as an Hereditary Secret:
which is this,

Take of Balm-flowers one handful* chop them small, and infuse them in four
ounces of the spirit of Wine: then ad of prepared Pearl half a dram: mix them,
and give two spoonfuls at a time* while you use these things, you must with all
possible art procure sleep by Medicines both internal and external; such as you
have for the Cure of the Phrenzie.

And besides external sleeping Medicines, you must apply such Remedies
outwardly to the head, which may temper and allay the vehement heat and fury
thereof. And these must not only be cooling, but also more moistning and (in
the beginning of the Disease) repelling.

Therefore in the beginning, Oil of Roses, Violets, Dill, and Chamomil are very
good: After you must leave out the Oil of Roses: but when you will Cool more,
you must ad the Oil of the Cold Seeds and Poppyes. And lastly, that they may be
brought into the form of a Liniment, you may ad Butter, or the Mucilage of
Linseed, or Fenugreek.

An Epithem thus made, is very good.

Take of the water of Water Lillies, one pint: Sal. Prunella one ounce:
Camphire one scruple* mix them, and apply double clothes dipped therein, to the
forepart of the Head.

And Epithem of Sal. Saturni, or Salt of Lead with Rose Water, is very
profitable.

As also that which is formerly mentioned, made of Rose Water, red Saunders
being infused therein, with Musk and Camphire.

The Chemists prefer the Balsom of Lead, and anoint the Head therewith, as with
a Liniment.

But in the height of the Disease, it is very necessary to apply some Creature
newly killed, or some part of it; and especially a sheeps Lungs; which must be
warmed again in hot water after it is grown cold.

Some use stronger Discussients in the declination of the Disease, and also in
the vigor of it after sufficient evacuation; this following Fomentation is of
wonderful Virtue.

Take of the Head Herbs with their flowers, as many as you think fit, boil them
in Spring water: then take of Bay Berries, and the Roots of black Hellebore, of
each as much as will suffice: beat them grossly, and sew them into a long Bag,
and then let it boil in the Decoction before mentioned.

Afterward for Nine days together, Take Two Pints of the Decoction, and
Foment the Head being shaved, with double Cloat^s for the space of an hour:
after apply the Bag to the Coronal Suture, bin^ing it about with linen
Clothes. Let the Patient lie down, and rest if he can: then will he Purge by all
the Emunctuaries of the Brain, and also somewhat by stool; so will the filth
sticking to his Skul and Brain be wonderfully dissolved, which few other
Medicines can perform.

Lastly, Apply a Cautery to the Coronal Suture, which is much approved by
Gordonius, who confirms the benefit of it by the Hist of a certain Madman; who
had a wound in his Head, with a Fracture of the Scull; and was ^^^y well as long
as it was Open, but still when it was Healed, grew mad again.

Although the Brain be principally affected in this Disease, yet other parts
are to be altered, especially the Heart and Liver, with Epithems and Liniments
prescribed in the Cure of the Phrenzy.

CHAP. XIV. Of Melancholy:
Melancholy is a Doting or Delirium without a Fever with fear and sadness.

It is distinguished from a Phrenzy by want of Fever; and from Madness, by
Fear and Sadness, because that comes with Fury and Boldness.

We say this Disease has no Fever: namely, of its own nature of it self: but
a Fever may Accidentally be joined with it: For nothing hinders, but a
continual or intermitting Fever may happen to one in this Disease; but this
Fever will not be essentially in it, as in a Phrenzy, where a Fever is
essential to the Disease.

But we may doubt how Fear and Sadness may be said to be of the essence of
Melancholy: when we perceive that in many Melancholic people there is much
laughter and appearance of joy. For some laugh, some sing, some think
themselves to be very rich Kings and Monarchs. We Answer, That there are diverse
degrees of Melancholy, and diverse mixtures of Melanchollick humors with
others; from whence come varieties of Passions, so that they who have much
blood or phlegm mixed with Melancholy, may have joy and Cheerfulness: but that
Disease is not at that time a true Melancholy, but is more like foolishness.

Also great variety of Doting arises from the various disposition of the
Melanchollick humor: Hence it is that some think themselves to be Kings,
Princes, Prophets: Others, that they are made of Glass, or Potters-Clay; or
that they are barely Corns ready to be devoured by the Hens* Some think they
are melting Wax, and dare not approach the Fire: Others, That they are Dogs,
Cats, Wolves, Cuckows, Nightingales, or Cocks, whose voices they imitate.
Others fancy themselves dead, and will neither eat nor drink. Others dare not
piss least they should drown the World by a second Deluge. Some think they have
lost their heads, or some other Member, or that they carry the world upon their
fingers end, or that they have Sparrows in their heads, or Serpents, Frogs,
Mice, and other Creatures in their Bellies.

The immediate Cause of Melancholy (that I may use the words of Galen) is a
dark spirit or vapor very black; for when the Animal Spirits ought in their own
Nature to be pure, thin, and transparant for the cheerful performing of the
actions of the Brain, and to cause cheerfulness, if they change their
constitution, and become dark and ob^cure, they produce sorrow and fear. Galen
in his 2. de sympt. cause. chap. 6. by an Example borrowed from external
darkness, does explain the matter: Of those things (says he) which are without
the Body, we see nothing that does more terrify us than darkness; therefore
when darkness does encompass the rational part of man, it is necessary that
that man should exceedingly fear who does always carry about with him, another
cause of fear, besides that which is external.

The cause of this e^il disposition of the Spirits, is a Melanchollick humor,
which being possessed with thickne^s, darkness, and blackness, does infect the
Spirits, and makes them cloudy and dark.

And this Melanchollick humor is cold and dry, and therefore proper for fixing
and condensing of the Spirits, which fixing and condensing or thickening of the
Spirits must needs cause sorrow and heaviness. For if the humor be thin and
hot, as is black choler (from which comes madness) it does rather produce fury
and boldness than fear and sorrow. Therefore the immediate cause of Melancholy
is thickness and darkness of the Spirits Animal; but the necessary condition,
and without which it cannot be, is a cold and dry distemper. But if any shall
instance of an Hypochondriack Melancholy from Galens third Book de locis
affect is, chap. 7. that it is an inflammation in the Hypochondria, and
therefore the hot distemper does prevail. We answer, That that Inflammation or
burning of the Hypochondria, comes from the heat of blood long retained in the
spleen and Meseraick Veins by reason of obstructions, from whence many vapors
are sent up into the Brain, which though they be hot, yet are overcome by the
coldness of the Brain, and are easily brought to a cold and dry temper which is
proper to Melancholy. But if the heat of those vapors be such, that they spoil
the temper of the Brain, and make it hot and dry, then comes Madness and not
Melancholy. So that in Madness or Mania, and Melancholy, there is this
difference; That in the first, namely, Mania, there is a hot and dry distemper;
In the other, called Melancholy, a cold and dry distemper.

The former mentioned darkness of the Spirits confirmed by Galen, is rejected
of Averroes, in this respect, Because darkness brought upon the Animal Spirits,
and the black color of a Melanchollick humor cannot infect the internal Senses;
according to that vulgar Axiom, There is nothing in the Understanding which was
not first in the Sense; therefore since that black color, or internal darkness
was not first represented to the eyes, it cannot be perceived by the internal
Senses. We answer, That the blackness of a Melanchollick humor, or the darkness
of the spirits does not affect the internal Senses under the notion of color;
but as they are somewhat besides Nature in the brain hindering its actions. For
the Animal Spirits for the perfect performance of the Actions of the brain,
ought to be pure thin, and clear: But if (on the other side) they be impure,
thick, and dark, they hinder the actions of the brain by infecting the species
which are sent thither, even as a colored glass does represent the species of
the object to the eye with its own Tincture.

A cold and dry distemper, which is propounded for a necessary condition to
this disease of Melancholy, may be opposed by this Argument taken from Avicen
in Fen. 1. Lib. 3. Tract. 4. Chap. 18. he says, That Stammerers are for the
most part Melanchollick. But these Stutterers are very moist in temper
according to Galen, Comment. Aphor. 32. Sect. 6. where Hippocrates says, That
Stammerers are most subject to looseness: And Galen thereupon says, That
Stammerers have the moistest temper, as appears in children who are most
subject to looseness. We answer, That Avicens Text is not to be understood of
those which are true Stammerers, which cannot pronounce the letter R. of which
Hippocrates and Galen spoke in the Aphorism aforesaid, who are of a moister
temper: But of those which are called Trauly and Stutterers, which repeat the
same syllable very often before they can pronounce a whole word: Which comes
from their headlong fancy, when they strive to speak very quickly, for then
the tongue foldeth its self, and is constrained to stop and stay in the
production of Words. And these Stutterers are of a melanchollick temper.

Lastly, It may be doubted, how darkness of the Spirits should be an immediate
cause of a melancholy Delirium, when every hurt action depends immediately
upon some disease; but this tenebrosity or darkness can be referred to no kind
of Disease. We answer, That tenebrosity or darkness, is a Disease in number, by
reason that the coming thereof does increase the number of those things which
are necessary in the Brain for the performance of animal Functions. And the
instance which may be brought against this Argument, namely, That a disease is
an affect of a true part, is answered in the Treatise of Vertigo.

The Proper signs of Melancholy, are propounded in the definition, namely,
Fear, and Sorrow, without any manifest Cause, which are found in every kind of
melancholy. But the several sorts of melanchilly are known by their proper
signs. So these following signs do show that melancholy does only* reside in
the head, namely, an evil habit of the Brain, or hot Diseases going before, by
which the blood contained in its Veins, is torrefied and burned, and at last
brought into a melanchollick humor. Short and interrupted sleep, troublesome
dreams, giddiness, noise in the Ears, and no symptoms from other parts, and
especially from the belly.

That this Disease comes from the whole Body, appears by a melancholy habit of
the whole body; either Natural, known by a black color, roughness, and leanness;
or acquisite, coming by cares, labors, watchings, course diet, and the like.

That it comes from the Hypochondria, these signs declare; Heart-burning with
no thirst, often spitting, sour belchings, and windy, eruptions upwards and
downwards, rumbling of the guts, pain and heaviness of the midriff, perplexity,
nauseousness, sometimes insatiable appetite, heart-beating, sometimes a swelling
in the Hypochondria: And other signs which shall be shown more at large in the
Discourse of Hypochondriack Melancholy.

That this Disease comes from the womb, may be known by those which are set
down in their order for the declaring of Hysterical Diseases.

The Prognostic of this Disease is thus:

The Disease is dangerous, if Chronical, of long continuance, and very fixed:
For a melanchollick humor, especially that which comes by adustion, and
inclines to black choler, contemns the force of Medicines, if weak, and
opposes the strongest: whence a melanchollick humor is said to be the scourge
and disgrace of Physicians.

But a new sprung melancholy coming of immediate Causes, is easily cured: For
Galen reports in his third Pook, de loc. affect. chap. 7. That he has often
cured a melancholy in the beginning with only Baths of sweet Waters.

The Hemorrhoids, or Piles coming upon melancholy men, sometimes bring cure, if
the humors be cast down thither critically by Nature: For sometimes they come
symptomatically, and multiply the matter of the Disease in many parts.

Sometimes it is cured by flux of the Hemorrhoids, by Scabs, Itch, or other
diseases breaking forth of the Skin.

As to the Cure of it, from whencesoever the Disease took its original, we must
observe always two things:

First, That the whole Body be freed from a melanchollick humor, and the filth
of other humors; for it seldom happens that one part alone is troubled with it.

Secondly, That the main Cure be directed to the Hypochondria, because that in
the spleen and liver there is the first generation of Melancholy, and the
gathering of it is in the parts thereabout; therefore the Cure of
Hypochondriack Melancholy set down by us, will serve for the Cure of other
diseases of Melancholy: for you can scarce cure the Hypochondria from the
abundance of any humor, and the generation of any new, but by consequence the
whole body must be cured of the same. Therefore for all diseases of Melancholy
those Remedies will suffice which are propounded in the Cure of Hypochondriack
Melancholy.

CHAP. XV. Of a Catarrh, or Defluxion.
A Catarrh is a preternatural Defluxion of an Excrementitious humor, from the
head into the inferior parts. It is therefore a Symptom of the third kind,
namely, a fault in the Excrements.

The substance of the Brain being large, needs much nourishment; of whence
comes necessarily abundance of Excrements, especially by reason of the cold and
moist distemper of the part: which excrements if they have only their moderate
and natural quantity are received into the fore Ventricles of the Brain, and
are sent by the Choana, as by a funnel to the moist Glandels, and so are spit
forth every day from the pallat; but if they grow more plentiful, and yet
consist in their Natural condition, they are dispersed about the Brain and the
Meninges, and so are sent forth, not only by the pallat, but also by the
nostrils.

But when the Brain is affected with distemper and weakness, or is constrained
to receive too much and disproportionable nourishment, which it cannot
sufficiently concoct, there is a great increase of excrements. Ad further (as
Hippocrates says) that the Brain like Cupping-glasses applied to the Body,
never cease to attract humors and vapors from the inferior parts; hence the
excrements are increased, which by their quantity and quality provoking the
expulsive, and overcoming the retentive faculty, run immoderately by unusual
and improper ways which they find out, to the great disturbance of the Body.

Since then a fluxion is the motion of matter from one part to another, we must
consider in that as in all motions, five things. The Terminus, or place from
whence the place to which it moves; the Mover; the Moved; and the ways by
which it is moved. The place from whence, is the Brain; the place to which, is
some part beneath the (...), the ^^lover, is the expulsive faculty stirred up,
or the retentive weakened; the thing (...) is an excrementitious humor* the way
by which is the Pallat, Nostrils, Eyes, Ears, and in e^^ble ^assages, as also
the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves.

In the place from which, or the part which sends forth, we may observe two
kinds of Causes: One is that which begets much moi^^ure in the Body; the
other is that which make the humors flow: That is called the generating, this
the expelling Cause.

The generating Causes (...) the hindering of Concoction, which comes either
from the fault in the nourishment, or in the faculty.

The Concoction of the Brain is hindered chiefly from distemper, either cold or
hot.

A cold distemper causes that the Nourishment brought to the brain, is ill
concocted and turned into phlegm; as also that the vapors brought from the
inferior parts, are not sufficiently discussed, but are turned and condensed
into Water.

But a hot distemper does attract more plentiful nourishment and vapors, so
that Nature cannot sufficiently discuss them.

The Concoction of the brain is hindered through the Nourishment, either when
there is too much, or when it has evil qualities; so cold, gross, and slimy
meats and drinks immoderately taken, cannot be perfectly concocted, and make
the Brain crude and moist. So sharp and windy nourishment send many vapors to
the head.

To these you may ad external Causes, which use to fill the head with
superfluous humidity* as Southernly Air, long sleep, especially at noon, an
idle life, and the like.

Although the Brain be called the chief sending part, yet it is not always the
chief cause of defluxion; but for the most part, the matter is sent from other
parts to the Brain: for after evil humors are collected, either in the Veins,
or any peculiar part, as the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Womb, not only many
Vapors are sent from them to the head, but also the humors themselves are
carried to the head, and descend again to the inferior parts* and the fault
lies most in the inferior parts in the breeding of a defluxion, whose
distemper is diverse, and the Obstruction also diverse.

For a hot distemper of the Bowels, makes abundance of vapors, from which comes
defluxions, as in a Still or Alembick: But a cold distemper by weak concoction
begets crude humors, which upon the least occasion ^ly to the brain.

But the Obstructions of the parts of the lower belly, hinder the voiding of
Excrements, whence it comes, that they being increased by degrees, when they
cannot find their free and ordinary course fly up to the brain. And to this
does also concur the weakness of the brain, fit to receive these Excrements,
for (as we said) the stronger parts to disburden themselves upon the weaker,
and it often happens that the brain by reason of its soft and loose substance
is weakest, and can less resist than solid and compact substances.

The impulsive causes are, too much heat of the brain, or coolness, or some
concoction of humors: Too much heat does extenuate and diffuse the humors
contained in the brain, and opens the pores by which they use to flow: such is
the heat of the head with the Sun or fire, or too much covering, smelling of
hot Spices, and other passions.

Coldness does compress the brain, and strains forth the humors therein
contained, as a Sponge is squeezed in the hand: Such change is often in Winter,
and especially in sudden alteration of Air; as when a Southern wind hot and
moist, is turned into a North wind cold and dry; or when one going out of a hot
place, comes speedily into a cold. To these Causes you may ad coldness of the
feet, which by sympathy is communicated to the Brain.

Many there are who deny the aforesaid compression of the brain by cold,
because cold does incrassat and condense the humors, and makes them less apt to
flow; neither does the example of a Sponge prove any thing, which will not
empty its self in the Air. But this Opinion delivered by Hippocrates in lib. de
loc. in homine, seems to be true; Fluxions (says he) come of cold, when the
flesh and veins of the head, are extended: for those when the head is cold and
contracted, bound together, and excluding, do strain forth moisture. And also
the flesh does assist them, and the hairs are on end, as being every where
strongly pressed, and therefore whatsoever is strained from thence, falls where
it is occasioned. From whence is manifest, That a Coarctation and compression
of the Parts may be made by cold, and from thence a humor may be expressed.
Neither does it hinder that densation or thickening of humors which is made by
cold, as was said; for it may be so when the whole body is equally cold. But
when the external parts are offended by sudden cold, they are presently
straitened, and strain the humor contained. Of less force is that Argument
against the Sponge, that it is not expressed by the cold Air; for there is
another Reason to be given of living parts, whose heat and spirits fly from the
sense of cold, and cause the parts wherein they are to be contracted; which
cannot be in a Sponge full of Water. Yet we must confess, that this is not the
only way by which a Defluxion comes through cold; for cold of the feet will
produce a Catarrh by communicating a cold distemper to the brain by the
chiefest Nerves that come through the marrow of the back bone; and this
coolness goes into the innermost parts of the brain, not the external, as cold
air, which affects the head immediately: therefore we may rather think in this
case, that the retentive faculty of the brain is weakened by cold of the head,
so that it cannot contain the superfluous humors which are many, but lets them
flow forth.

There is also another way very usual, by which a Catarrh of a cold cause
comes, namely, The stoppage of the external pores, especially in the time
wherein the body requires most sweat: Hence it comes that men very much
inflamed, running suddenly into the cold air, are troubled with Catarrhs. So
Catarrhs comes to be most frequent in Autumn, because the Body being made thin,
and the ports opened in the Summer, casting forth many excrements by insensible
transpiration, if they be presentsently stopped by contraction of the body with
cold, do cause humors and vapors to fly into the head, and center of the brain,
So about the beginning of Autumn there are not only Catarrhs, but also
abundance of watery humors are sent forth by most men in their urine, and by
stool, which cause fluxes of the Belly at that time. But if any ask why
defluxions do not last al Winter when by reason of cold the pores are always
stopped? We answer, That Nature does in Winter discharge her self by other
ways rather than by sweat, namely, by stool, urine, and spittle. How great
that Evacuation is which is usually by insensible transpiration or sweat, is
pleasantly taught by Sanctorius in his Book de Statica Medicina, where he
says, That it is larger than all the sensible Evacuations put together: so
that if the meat and drink of one day be eight pound in weight, the insensible
transpiration will be five pound: he is very curious in this matter. What light
he has left to the finding out of Causes, and Curing Diseases, I leave to be
judged by the Learned.

In the part receiving, you must consider the imbecility, or other disposition
to receive and attract defluxion. In regard of weakness, it is an usual saying
among Physicians, That the stronger parts do always lay their superfluous
burden upon the weaker; as in Commonwealths, the Great Ones lay the chiefest
burden upon the poor Commons.

Now the weakness of the parts is either Natural, or Adventitious. A Natural
weakness comes from the softness and looseness of the parts from the Glandles
and Lungs, do easily entertain defluxions: But an Adventitious weakness, is
from a distemper, or from solution of continuity. A cold distemper by weakening
the Native heat causes the part to have less power to resist the humor flowing
unto it. And also a Solution of continuity or wound, makes the part more fit to
receive defluxions by its weakness; hence arose the use of Cauteries or Issues,
because the part being thereby weakened, the humors do flow from other parts
unto it. And so the Lungs being ulcerated receive the humors from the head, and
from al other parts.

Among other dispositions for the attracting of a defluxion, heat is chiefly to
be reckoned; for we may observe, that parts inflamed do plentifully attract
humors. So in a Consumption, many humors are drawn from the head to the lungs,
not only by reason of the ulcer, but also by reason of the inflammation. Whence
Hippocrates speaking of a Phthi^is or Consumption in his first Book of
Diseases, says thus: The Lungs being inflamed draw humors from the whole Body,
and especially from the Head; and the Head being made hot from the Body, spits
forth that thick matter.

There are two ways by which the humors are carried from the head into the
inferior parts, either internal or external: The internal way is when the humor
flows from the parts under the Skull, chiefly from the Ventricles of the Brain,
and makes diverse diseases and symptoms according to the diversity of the parts
receiving, of which some have peculiar names, according to those vulgar Verses
in Schola Salerni:

That Rhewm is called Catarrhus which does fall Upon the Breast; upon the Jaws
we call It Branchus; Coryza through the Nose does fall.
When the Humor flows upon the Breast, the Disease keeps the general name of a
Catarrh, or Defluxion; when it falls upon the Jaws, and Aspera Arteria, or
rough Arteries, it is called Branchus, Raucedo, or Hoarsness; when it flows
into the Nostrils, it causes not only a Coryza or Murrh, but Ozaena and
Polypus. But in other parts it produces various effects; if it fall upon the
Nerves it produces a Torpor or Numbness, a Palsy, Convulsion, Trembling: if
in the Ears, Deafness, Swelling; if in the Eyes, Ophalmy, or Inflammation,
Tears, Blindness; if upon the Uvula or Pallat, Swelling, Looseness or Laxity, or
Ulcer; if in the Throat, the Squinzy; if on the Lungs, the Pleuresie,
Inflammation or Imposthumation, Cough, shortness of Breath, spitting of Blood,
Consumption; if into the Stomach, Vomiting, want of Appetite; if into the
Bowels, it causes Diarrhaea, and Dysentery: therefore it is rightly conceived
that the greatest part of Diseases that trouble man's Body, have their original
from the Head.

Moreover, Sometimes the humor flows from the Brain with the blood into the
veins, whence comes the Disease called Febris Catarrhalis, when Nature is
strongly moved to expel the superfluous humor, and the Spirits being thereby
much disturbed, are inflamed, and cause a Quotidian Fever: hence it is that a
defluxion is reckoned among the causes of a Quotidian Fever. And always
before the coming of the Joynt-gout or Inflammation called Erysipelas, such a
Fever does proceed.

The external ways by which the humor flows from the head, are those which are
without the skul under the skin; and Fernelius supposed that the humors which
chiefly carried between the flesh and the skin, although by the continuity of
the Muscles, Membranes, and Nerves, as also the Veins and Arteries, the humors
use to flow into the Eyes, Teeth, Jaws, Neck, Shoulders, Joints, and other
external parts.

Some Authors make difference of Catarrhs, which are these: Some are called
Ferini, or wild; some Suffocating; some Epidemical, or common.

A wild violent Catarrh is that which by its sharpness ulcerateth the Lungs,
and brings a Consumption, and it comes of a sharp and salt humor rising from a
hot Liver, and sent into the brain, and from thence into the Lungs.

A Suffocating Catarrh, is when the humor flows violently into the hollow of
the Lungs, and is still renewed to the danger of strangling.

Lastly, An Epidemical Catarrh has a malign quality, and is common among the
people, and comes from the corruption of the Air.

The Knowledge of this Disease, is from three signs: of the Subject, of the
Disease, and of the Cause.

The Subject, or Body apt to fall into a Catarrh, is known by the slender
Fabric of it, easily pierced with either hot or cold air; as also by the too
compact Fabric of it, which hinders a free transpiration: as also a weak and
cold brain, which cannot discuss the vapors which are sent unto it, or
sufficiently concoct its own nourishment: also a hot brain that attracts too
many vapors: also the contrary actions of the Stomach and Liver, when one is
hot and the other cold.

The Signs which show the Disease, either declare it to be coming, or present.

The aforesaid Causes show it to be coming; but especially, heaviness in the
head, dullness and numbness of the Senses, long sleep, much snorting, a snotty
nose, and more spitting than usual, costiveness of Body, and abundance of wind.

The signs of a Catarrh present are manifest, for either the humor flowing from
the brain, is plainly seen, or the swellings and pains which it produces in
diverse parts.

The signs of the Causes are also evident; for if a Catarrh come of a cold
humor, there will be sense of cold, paleness of face, sweet spittle, sour
belchings, slimy matter, or watery, and a general phlegmatic habit of Body.

But that the humor distilling is hot, appears by redness of the face, thirst,
saltness and sharpness in the mouth, inflammation, pain, and ulcers in the parts
affected, and a chollerick habit of the whole Body.

An external Defluxion is known from an internal, in regard the pain is more
external in the former, especially under the skin of the crown of the head,
where sometimes you may perceive a soft tumor; often a painful combing back of
the hair: and many times the humor is felt to fall down upon the outward parts
with great pain, heat or cold.

The Prognostic of this Disease is elegantly laid down by Cornelius Celsus, in
these words: If the humor flow from the head into the nose, it is small; if into
the jaws, it is worse; but if upon the Lungs it is worst of all. But
Hippocrates says, That a Catarrh is very hard to be concocted in those that
are very old.

Where there is a great plenty of humors, either from repletion, or from evil
Concoction: there is a dangerous Catarrh, for it is to be feared lest the humor
flow suddenly, and cause Suffocation, or some other grievous accident.

The Cure of this Disease is twofold; The one is of the Cold, the other of the
Hot Catarrh.

The whole Cure of a cold Catarrh consists in the preparing and evacuating of
the humor off ending, and in the revelling of it if it flow to the breast, or
other part, and the stopping of its motion; and after let the distemper of the
brain be amended.

First then, If the matter be much, and flow very violently, and we fear least
it flow also from other parts, especially if the Liver be hot (for it is often
seen, that men subject to Catarrhs, have a hot Liver, and a cold brain) we must
breath a Vein; but if the matter be but little, and move gently, and the party
be aged, and the temper of the Liver not hot, so that there is no suspicion for
humors to be sent to the brain from any other parts, you may omit Phlebotomy.

The matter offending is first to be diminished with a Potion or Pills, or
other Purging Medicine, mentioned in the chapter of the cold distemper of the
Brain.

Afterward the remainder of the humor is to be prepared with an Apozeme, there
also mentioned; or if you fear not to disturb the humor too much, you may give
a purging Apozeme, and at last make a complete Evacuation with stronger Pills,
or other Purges.

If the Catarrh be very strong, you may give that which will powerfully root
out the Matter.

Coloquintida is very excellent for to purge the Brain strongly; but it works
very violently, and is offensive with its bitterness: both which faults are
corrected by steeping it in Urine; for so it lays aside its bitterness, and
becomes almost without taste, and also is so gentle that it may be given to the
quantity of a dram safely, and it is a most gallant Remedy for all cold
Diseases in the head.

It sometimes happens that Excrementitious Humors sent from the parts beneath
into the brain, produce a Catarrh: and they find a preternatural course that
way, by reason the natural course by which those humors use to be evacuated is
stopped; and then the Catarrh is best cured by opening those ways with gentle,
mild, and constant purging, that the humors flowing upwards, are so sent
downwards, and by degrees brought to their proper motion. And these gentle
Purges may be made of Decoctions or Broths long continued; but in the mean
while you must not neglect strengthening Medicines.

For Revulsion, apply Cupping-glasses and Vesicatories, or things to cause
blisters, to the neck and shoulders, and make issues in the hinder part of the
head and arms. Zacutus Lusitanus in lib. 2. Praxis admirandae, observat. 160.
commends Issues behind the Ears for the best remedy against all distillations
from the head: And we have seen good success by them, especially in defluxion
upon the Eyes. You may use Errhines, Neesings, Gargarisms, and Masticatories;
but with this Caution, That you use Errhines and Neesings only when the Catarrh
falls upon the Jaws, Lungs, and Stomach; but when it falls into the Eyes or
Nose, use Masticatories and Gargarisms.

The forms of all these Medicines were set down in the Chapter aforegoing. But
observe in the use of them, that when the matter is somewhat thin, you use not
strong discussients and dissolvers, for by these you shall cause the humors to
flow more violently upon the Breast, Lungs, or other parts; but you must mix
some thickning things that may constrain the humor, as red Roses, Mastich,
Coriander, Nutmeg, and other things which we shall declare more at large in the
hot Catarrh. You may make an Errhine for this purpose as follows:

Take of * Marjoram Water four ounces: the Juice of Bettony one ounce: Nigella
or Gith seeds poudered, half a dram: Nutmeg one scruple. For rich people you
may ad two grains of Musk and Ambergris. Or,

Take of Lignum vitae one ounce: Spring Water one pint: Infuse it all night
upon warm embers; then boil it to the consumption of half, adding in the
conclusion, sweet Marjoram, and red Rose leaves, of each two pugils.

So when the matter is but thin, you may make a Masticatory, either of Mastich
alone, or after this manner:

Take of Nutmeg one dram: Mastich, and Gum Arabic, of each half a dram: Powder
them, with Rose water make Troches to chew.

The best Neesing is made of black Hellebore, and Sugar, equal parts.

The Extract of Tobacco made in Aqua vitae, and held under the tongue in the
bigness of a Pease, brings forth abundance of Water; but if you take too much,
or swallow it down, it will cause violent vomiting. We have showed that
Cauteries to the Arms, hinder part of the Head, and behind the Ears, are very
good, as also to the nape of the Neck, and Shoulders, which are now adays in
great request. But there is a new place found out by some, namely, in the Neck,
near the Jugular veins, between the Muscles: And by this means two men have
been cured of old Catarrhs which caused hoarsness.

Finally, After convenient Evacuations, things that strengthen the Brain and
dry it, are to be used both internally and externally, as Opiates, Pouders,
Bags, Fumes,, described in the Cure of the cold distemper of the Head. But you
must remember to put unto them some Conserve of Roses, Nutmeg, or white
Frankincense, when you cure a Catarrh.

The Decoction of Mastich Wood used as a Sudorifick, dries the Brain, and stops
Defluxions. For which, the following things are good.

Take of Coriander seed prepared half an ounce; Nutmeg and Frankincense, of
each three drams; Liquoris and Mastich, of each two drams; Cubebs one dram;
Conserve of red Roses one ounce; white Sugar dissolved in Rose water ten
ounces: Make a Confection in little rolls, weighing three drams. Let him take
one morning and evening.

These following Troches are much commended by Solenander, Cons. 10. Sect. 4.
which he borrowed which he borrowed from both the Ancient Greeks and Arabians.

Take of the best Frankincense and Juice of Liquoris, of each one dram: Opium,
Saffron, and Mirrh, of each one scruple: With Syrup of Poppies make Troches, or
Pills to be taken now and then, two scruples, or half a dram at a time.

These Tablets following are very good:

Take of Diambra, and Diamoschi dulcis, of each one dram: white Amber one
scruple: Oil of Annis seeds, three drops: Sugar dissolved in Lavender Water,
four ounces: Make Tablets of two drams in weight; take one morning and evening.

The Balsom for the Head prescribed in the Chapter for the cold distemper,
after the Opiate is excellent taken inwardly, and into the nostrils.

Lac Sulphuris, and the flower of Brimstone are commended by Chemists for the
Cure of a Catarrh: and the Galenists use it much in Tablets.

In a new Catarrh, Water of Nuts, with Hydromel, given three nights together
does much hinder it.

Shave the fore part of the head, and apply a Cataplasm, of two ounces of
Leaven, and two drams of Amber: But if the Patient will not permit his head to
be shaved, let it be cut, and lay a bag of Chamepits or Groundpine, mixed with
Amber.

Besides the before mentioned Fumes, one made of Tacamahaca is excellent; for it
dries a Catarrh, and hinders his Motion; neither is the scent too strong, but
the Patient may shut it into his chamber without offense.

It is profitable to dry the Head with bags of Bran, Gromwel, and Salt, Leaves
of Sage, Bettony, French Lavender, Annis seeds, Fennel seeds, and the like.

Lastly, If the Disease be stubborn, all those Medicines which are mentioned in
the cold distemper of the head, are to be used.

A hot Catarrh is Cured by Medicines which discharge the matter offending, and
which do thicken it, and revel it; as also by correcting the distemper of the
parts, sending and receiving it.

For this end, first let blood, if nothing hinder, by which the humor flowing
is revelled, and the sharpness abated.

Then carry away part of the humor by a gentle Purge, which may no ways stir
violently the humors, as follows:

Take of the best Rhubarb, four scruples: Citrine Myrobalans rubbed with the
Oil of sweet Almonds, half a dram: yellow Sanders half a scruple: Infuse them
in Lettice and Purslain Water, and strain it, adding of Manna and Syrup of
Roses Solutive, of each one ounce: Make a Potion.

Or instead of the Waters before mentioned, you may make a Decoction of cold
Herbs, and Tamarinds; to which you may put your Purgatives.

Then you must alter and thicken the humor with convenient Juleps.

Take of Lettice, Purslain, and Plantane, of each one handful: the four great
cold Seeds, white Poppy seeds, of each two drams: Violets, Water Lillies, and
red Poppies, of each one pugil; boil them to a pint: Dissolve in the straining,
the Syrup of Violets and dried Roses, of each one ounce and an half. Make a
Julep for three draughts, to be taken twice in a day.

Or instead of this Decoction, use the distilled Waters of those Herbs, or
Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds.

After use a little stronger Purge, putting to the former, Senna, or
Catholicon, or Diaprunes, or the like.

A light sweet Medicine, thickening and sweetening the humor, is made of the
Yolks of two new laid Eggs, dissolved in five or six ounces of spring Water with
one ounce of Sugar; heat them well, and stir them upon the fire, and take it as
hot as you can morning and evening for three days together.

And at last you must labor for a stronger restraning of the flux, and
thickning of the humor with this Syrup.

Take of Syrup of Violets and dried Roses, of each one ounce: Syrup of Poppies
half an ounce: Give an ounce at a time in a spoon at Bed time.

The following Opiate is good for the same purpose.

Take of old Conserve of Roses six drams: the species of Diatragaganth frigid.
two drams: Bole-armenick washed in Rose water, two scruples: With the Syrup of
dried Roses make an Opiate. Take the quantity of a small nut at night*

This Barley Cream is very profitable.

Take of cleansed Barley as much as is sufficient, steep it six hours, and then
boil it well, and strain it; then take three ounces of blanched sweet Almonds;
Pompion seeds husked, one ounce and an half; Melone seeds one ounce; white
Poppy and Lettice, of each half an ounce: Beat them together, and with Barley
Water take out the Milk, which with two pound of the Pulp of Barley boil a
little and mix it with Sugar: Let him drink ten ounces at a time, some mornings
in his bed, and sleep after it, and sometimes in the evening. Hold the Troches
in the mouth.

Take of Gum Traganth, and Arabic, of each two drams: Bole-armenick, and Terra
Sigillata washed in Rose water, of each one dram: white Poppy seeds, and juice
of Liquoris, of each half a dram: Sugar Penids one ounce: With the Mucilage of
Quince seeds, extracted with Rose water, make little Cakes to be held in the
mouth day and night.

The Spirit of Sulphur and Vitriol, three or four drops given morning and
evening in convenient Liquor, has great force against all Catarrhs, especially
against those which come from Inflammation of the Bowels: It may be given in
drink in a smaller quantity, for it goes with the drink through all the veins,
and hinders the motion of the humors.

The Crystal Mineral is for the same use given with Juleps and other Medicines.

When these do not avail, we must be constrained to use Narcoticks or
Stupefactives: Among which Laudanum is the best, given to four or five grains
at bed time; or one ounce or half an ounce of Syrup of Poppies: These do
wonders being used in the beginning of the Disease. New Treacle given at night
from a scruple to half a dram, has the same force.

Benedictus Faventius uses the following Pills in a Salt Catarrh with good
success.

Take of the Juice of Liquoris two drams: washed Aloes one dram: Filulae de
Cynoglosso, half a dram: With Syrup of Violets make a Mass, of which take a
scruple at bed time.

The Troches of Solenander before mentioned, are excellent.

Diacodium album prescribed in the Cure of the Phrenzy is good for this.

In the mean while the matter flowing must be revelled by Clysters, Cupping
Glasses, Frictions, and binding of the external parts, and chiefly by
Vesicatories in the Neck, and finally with Issues in the hinder part of the
Head and Arms, if the Catarrh be old.

But for the strengthening of the Head, and stopping of the fluxion, and
consuming the remainder; Pouders, Bags, and Emplasters, are good.

Take of white Amber, Sandarach, Mastich, Benjamin, Nutmeg, of each one ounce:
Frankincense, Grains of Kermes, and red Roses, of each half an ounce: all the
Sanders, Mirtles, and Pomegranate flowers, of each two drams; make a Powder.
Use it to the Head at night, and (...) it off in the morning.

Take of the Gum of Juniper two scruples: red Roses two pugils: Mirtles one
dram: Mace and Nutmeg, of each one scruple: Frankincense, and Peony seeds, and
Poppy heads, of each two scruples: Cyprus nuts half a scruple: Powder them, and
take them up with red wool, and with a red cloth make a lining for a Cap to
wear constantly.

Take of Mastick and Frankincense, of each half a dram: Sandrach, red Coral,
red Roses, Mirtles, Pomegranate flowers and Peels, of each one dram: Labdanum
two drams: Wax and Oil of Roses, as much as is sufficient. Make an Emplaster
for the Coronal Suture.

But because this Catarrh for the most part comes from a hot distemper of the
Liver, therefore you must use Medicines to that.

Finally, This is most remarkable, which is also mentioned in the Cure of a
cold Catarrh; That Excrements use to cause Catarrhs by flowing to the Head when
their usual natural passages are stopped: And then a Catarrh is best cured by
opening those passages with a gentle and constant purging in Broths, or the
like.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Headache.
THe word Cephalalgia is used generally for every pain of the Head: but more
especially it signifies a new Headache: But the word Cephalaea signifies an
old Headache; and Hemicranea signifies that pain which only is in one side of
the Head.

There are other differences of Headaches: they are divided into Internal, and
External; Pains by consent, and by propriety: and of these, one is called a
pricking pain; another a stretching, or extending pain; another a heavy;
another a beating or shooting pain.

The internal pain of the head is in the Meninges or Membranes, that is very
deep, and reaches to the roots of the Eyes: But an external pain is in the
Pericranium or Membrane without the Skull, and will not endure the roots of the
hairs to be combed back, and is made greater by the least compression of the
Head. This is the Doctrine of Galen, which he teaches 3. de loc. aff. cap. 1.
and lib. 2. de comp. med. secundum loc. cap. 3. saying very solidly, That the
internal Headache is distinguished from the external by this peculiar sign,
That in the internal the pain comes to the roots of the eyes, not in an
external, and he gives this Reason, Because the coats of the Eyes come from the
Meninges of the Brain, whence it comes that the grief is conveyed to the
Eyes. But Fernelius contradicts this Doctrine, lib. 5. Pathalogiae cap. 1. and
affirms, that external pains do reach to the roots of the Eyes, because the
Pericranium or Skin of the Skul wherein those pains are, does reach to the
cavity of the Eyes: to whom Rondoletius answers, lib. 1. meth. med. cap. 5.
that the Cavity of the Eye does not suffer with the Pericranium, although it
reach to it, by reason that the pain of the Pericranium comes for the most part
of external cold; for a cold part will easily suffer from the like quality. But
that cold cannot reach to the hollow of the Eye, because it is preserved by the
heat, blood, and spirits of the Eyes; but if at any time a headache comes of
external heat, or the like, the Skin of the head is only affected, not the
Pericranium which lies deep. But this Doctrine of Rondeletius does not
altogether take away all difficulty; for although all things which he alleges
should be granted, yet if a pain arise from a tumor gathered upon the
Pericranium, or of some other cause that dissolveth continuity, and divides,
there is no reason why the grief should not reach to the hollow of the Eye. We
can say this in defense of Galen, that this sign was given by him for two
Reasons: First, Because the Membrane which reaches to the hollow of the Eye
from the Pericranium, is not so sensible, and therefore cannot suffer but
obtusely: but the coats of the Eyes which come from the Meninges are very
sensible, and therefore have great pain: Moreover, that Membrane which comes
from the Pericranium does not touch the Eye so inwardly and deeply toward the
optic Nerves, as the coats which come from the Meninges, whence it is that the
external pain cannot extend it self to the roots of the Eyes as Galen says.

A pain by propriety is constant and permanent, nor does it follow the disease
of other parts: But a pain by consent or sympathy, depends upon the infirmity
of another part, so that as that increases or diminishes, the Headache
increases or diminishes. Now this pain by sympathy, is either by consent from
the whole Body, as in Fevers; or from some peculiar part as the Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, or Mother.

But we may know what part is affected when a pain is communicated to the head
by its proper signs.

A pricking pain comes from a sharp chollerick humor or vapor which touches
the Membranes of the Brain. A heavy pain comes from much thick, and cold
matter, namely, phlegm or melancholy compressing the sensible parts. An
extending pain comes from wind or mild humors which work themselves into the
Membranes and distend them. A beating or pulsative pain, comes of thin
chollerick blood or spirits abounding, by which the Arteries being stretched
and swollen, do beat more vehehemently, and shake the Membranes, and so striking
the adjoining parts, cause in them a sense of Pulsation, as Galen teaches more
at large, 2. de loc. aff. c. 3.

From what is said, the chief causes of a Headache are sufficiently declared,
which in general are referred to the solution of continuity, as to the
immediate cause: For whatsoever does bring a manifest or hidden solution of
continuity, is like to bring a headache.

The signs of the kinds of Headache, and of the causes that produce them, may
be learned from what is said, and therefore we come to the Prognostics.

An external headache is always less dangerous and easier cured than an
internal.

A Headache in a sharp Fever with thin and white urine is dangerous, for it
signifies the chollerick matter is sent into the Brain, whence there is fear of
a Phrenzy.

A strong pain of the Head suddenly seizing without evacuation following, or
mitigation of the disease, is deadly: for it signifies the destruction of the
animal faculty, which no more feels that object which caused the grief.

In a great Headache it is evil to have the outward parts cold; for by the
vehemence of the pain there is a strong attraction of heat to the part
affected, which will cause inflammation.

They that recover of a disease in the inferior parts, and have after a
vehement Headache, if a manifest evacuation went not before, will have an
imposthume in their Brain, for it signifies a translation of the matter which
caused the disease into the Brain.

They who vomit green in a headache, and are deaf being awake, are suddenly very
mad, 1. Porrh. for it signifies a collection of choler into the Brain, which
makes the Stomach consent therewith and suffer.

Headache and noise in the Ears without a Fever, or a giddiness, or deafness,
or numbness of the hands, signifies an Apoplexy or Epilepsie to be at hand,
Hipp. in Coacis: For those symptoms come from abundance of thick phlegm in the
Brain.

To women with child sleepy and heavy headaches are evil, 1. Porrh. for they
signify the flux of humors to the head, which when they are many in women with
child by reason they have not their courses, do threaten danger.

A Headache which was not from the beginning of the Disease, but rose from the
disturbance of the body, shows that there will be a crisis by bleeding at the
nose, or by vomit.

Since then the pain of the head comes either of a cold or hot cause, we must
direct the Cure for the taking away of both.

For the Cure of a cold Headache the flegmy matter is first to be evacuated
being prepared, as is showed in the ^hapter before going. Then we must correct
the cold distemper of the Brain, and the relics of the humor are to be
discussed with Bags, mentioned in the former Chapter, or in the Chapter of the
cold distemper of the Brain: With which being warmed, let the head, being
shaven, be rubbed for an hour and an half every morning till the cause of the
pain be spent and exhausted.

After the head is well rubbed, sprinkle upon it this following Powder, having
upon it Cotton or Wool.

Take of Nutmegs, Cloves, Pepper, Pellitory, of each half an ounce: the Leaves
of Sage, Bayberries, of each two drams: Mustard seed, and Water-cress seeds
bruised, of each six drams: Make a powder of these, sprinkle it upon the Head
as aforesaid; and comb it in the morning before the use of the little Bags,
that the powder laid on the day before may be taken off.

Errhin^s are also pro^itable, Neesings, and Apophlegmatisms or things to chew,
which were described formerly.

A Magistral Syrup also made as follows is very profitable.

Take of Guajacum wood, and Roots of China sliced, of each one ounce and an
half: Infuse them twelve hours in four pints of spring Water: Boil them till
half be consumed, adding in the end, the Leaves of Vervain one handful; the
flowers of French Lavender and Marjoram, of each a small handful: dissolve in it
being strained half a pound of white Sugar. Boil it up to a Syrup; but before
it be perfectly boiled cast in two ounces of Senna tied in a clout; the best
Agrick two ounces; Rhubarb three ounces: let him take two or three ounces, once
a week.

These Pills also following are very good which in times past were of great
esteem in Italy in the days of Eustachius Rudius chief Professor in the
University of Padua, who was reported to be the Inventor of them, and accounted
them a great Secret; and therefore gave them to one Apothecary only to be made
by him, lest others should know the Receipt which indeed he borrowed out of
Wickerus, who propounds it from Andernacus: and it is thus:

Take of Coloquintida six drams: Agarick trochiscated, Diagridium, black
Hellebore, and Turbith, of each half an ounce: Aloes one ounce: Diarrhodon
Abbatis half an ounce: Let the purging things be bruised and beaten together,
and put in a glass with the spirit of Wine, so much as is sufficient, and let
them be digested for eight days in a warm place, and then ad the powder of
Diarrhodon, and infuse them four days longer, then strain them and press them,
and let the Liquor so pressed forth be distilled in Balneo, so long till the
extract in the bottom of the Alembick grow so thick that it may make Pills, the
dose whereof is one scruple.

But the following Pills are ascribed to Fernelius, of which he affirmed he
found by experience such excellency, that he never met with a Cephalalgia, or
Hemicrania, that is, half Headache, but he cured it.

Take of the best Aloes half an ounce: the Powder of the Electuary of Pearls,
the three Sanders, and red Roses, of each three grains: With Syrup of Wormwood,
and Violets, make a Mass. Give a dram thereof twice in a week one hour or two
before Supper.

And finally, in a stubborn pain that is old, all those Medicines are
convenient, which were before mentioned in the Cure of the cold distemper of
the Brain; among which, Epispasticks, or blisterdrawing Plasters are not the
meanest. Which also not prevailing some are so bold as to apply Vigo's
Emplaister with Mercury, which they say has cured old headaches sometimes, by
causing them to spit much.

Baths of Brimstone and Bitumen are very efficacious in this case, used both to
the Head, and the whole Body.

Also in an old Headache, sweating Decoctions are very good, and famous Authors
declare that many have been cured thereby,

Which not prevailing, Mercatus is bold to fly to the use of Stibium, and
commends it highly in his first Book of the Cure of internal Diseases, and the
eighth Chapter. But in an old grief, it is better to strengthen the head often,
than to use too many Evacuations: Therefore Pouders and Caps, and other topic
or external Medicines are very necessary before mentioned in the Cure of the
cold Distemper of the Brain.

But Pouders are more commendible, because the virtue of a Cap is not so much
communicated to the Brain, and the pain may be increased by the filth which is
contracted by the long wearing of them.

Moreover, An Ointment may be applied of the Oil of Almonds, in which wild
Bettony, Bay leaves, Mastich, Lavender, Mints, Marjoram, Thyme, Penyroyal,
Nutmeg, Cloves, and Cinnamon, or some of these have been boiled, adding in the
time of the boiling a little red Wine.

Or this following Chemical Oil.

Take of Turpentine one pound: Mastich, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, of each one dram:
Cloves, Zedoary, Galangal, Ladanum, of each one ounce and an half: the juice of
Ebulus or Dwarf-Elder, and of the wild Cowcumber, of each one dram: the Oil of
Chamomel and Lillies, of each half a pint: red Wine one pint and an half: wild
Marjoram green one handful: Powder those that are to be poudered, and put them
into a Glass Retort, and extract an Oil; with which anoint the head after it is
shaved.

Oil of Amber is very good, and it will be sufficient only to anoint the Head
therewith.

While you use the before mentioned Remedies, you may also use from the
beginning of the Cure specifical Medicines, such as this Epitheme.

Take of the powder of Zedoary one dram: the Water of Bettony, Vervain, and
Elder, of each one ounce: Mix them and apply them hot to the part grieved with
Scarlet cloth.

Among the proper Medicines for the Headache, from what cause soever it
arises, Vervain is the chief; whose Water distilled, you may both apply
externally, and give of it internally to the quantity of ounces, with three
drops of the spirit of Salt. Green Vervain alone only hung about the Neck, has
cured two Pat^^^^s when many other Medicines failed, as Forestus reports.

Zacutus Lucitanus it (...). 1. Praxis Med. mirab. observat. 7. 8. 9. and 10.
propounds four Remedies, confirmed by Experience; namely, An Issue in the back
of the hand, Hors-leeches to the Temples, opening of the Vein in the Forehead
and the corner of the Eye, which you may read in the place cited.

These things are to be noted concerning those Observations:

First, That the ^^sue between the Thumb and fore Finger is approved by other
Experiments, and has cured great Headaches.

Secondly, In the Cure by Hors-leeches, Zacutus is not content to apply two or
three as ordinarily is done, but ten or twelve round about the Temples; whence
comes a great attraction of Blood, which may draw forth the whole matter of the
Disease.

Thirdly, In the Curing by opening the Veins in the Forehead, we must observe,
That that Vein was twice opened, whence it appears that the first was not
sufficient; when ordinarily our Practitioners do seldom open it the second
time, if the first has been to little benefit.

The hot Cause of a Primary and Essential Headache, is Blood or Choler. And the
like Remedies are proper for both, though they must be made stronger or weaker
according to the strength of the Disease.

First then (after a Clyster is administered) begin with Blood-letting, drawing
forth more when the grief proceeds of blood, than when it proceeds of choler.

Then give a Medicine to purge Choler, not only when Choler is the Principal
Cause, but when blood abounds whose thinner part is easily turned into
Choler.

If the matter offending is not sufficiently taken away by one purge, you must
purge again at a due distance.

After apply Repelling Medicines to the Head, and Vinegar of Roses, such as
were propounded in the Cure of the Phrenzy, making choice of the mildest.

And after it will be very profitable to apply Creatures newly killed, or parts
of them, to discuss the relics of the Disease, and to assuage the pain.

In an Headache which goes with a continual Fever, a Sheeps Lungs applied hot
do much assuage the pain.

Also a Cataplasm of bruised Guords, and Housleek to the feet.

The opening of the Saphena after sufficient bleeding in the Arm, cures often
times a Headache with a Fever very suddenly.

You must use Cupping-glasses with, and without Scarification and Frictions of
the extreme Parts.

And in the whole time of the Disease, if the Belly be not loose, you must every
day give an Emollient and cooling Clyster, and which do gently purge.

After general Evacuations and Revulsions, you may rightly, and with profit
derive the matter by opening the Head Vein, or with Hors-Leeches to the
Forehead, or with Vesicatories to the Neck.

In the mean while let the whole mass of Humors be qualified with Juleps,
Emulsions, and Broths, as was mentioned in the Cure of the Phrenzy.

Lastly, If the pain be very violent you must apply Narcoticks both externally
and internally, as they are set down in the said Cure of the Phrenzy.

Here also may avail the opening of the Forehead Veins, and Leeches to the
Temples, commended from Zacutus Lusitanus.

Paraeus lib. 16. cap. 4. reports that a desperate half Headache was cured by
opening the Arteries in the Temples, and says there is no danger in doing it.
The Artery is opened as a Vein, and six ounces of blood forcibly leaping forth
are to be taken: After apply a convenient Ligature, and open it not in four
days.

Botallus also says, That it does miraculously cure old Headaches; and we
also have cured desperate ones the same way, and never found any danger in the
opening of the Artery.

You must apply a Plaster to the Orifice, of Frankincense, Mastich, Bole
armenick, and Hares Hair, with the white of an Eg, and then make your Ligature
as you use to do in Wounds of the Head.

In all pains of the Head, of what cause soever, if other means fail, and the
greatness of the pain, make thee run to extremities; a Vesicatory applied over
all the Head, after it is shaven, will cure it.

A Cautery upon the Coronal Suture sometimes has perfectly cured a violent
Headache.

But it is more powerful if it be applied to the Temples, of which see
Poterius, observat. centur. 3. cap. 8. and our Observations thereon.

The End of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Eyes.
The PREFACE.
THE Diseases of the Eyes are so diverse, that it is very hard to lay them down
clearly and plainly, and to distinguish one from the other: which that we may
endeavor as much as may be, and clear up our Treatise for Practice, we will so
divide them, the Diseases by which the sight is immediately hurt, may first be
expounded, and afterward the rest which happen to the Parts of which the Eyes
are Compounded, or which are near unto them, without any, or very little hurt
to the sight. The sight is hurt when it is diminished, abolished, or depraved.
Sight abolished is called (...) in Greek: in Latin Caecitas. But sight
dimished has diverse Names according to the degree and manner of the
diminution: of which the chief are Amblyopia, Myopia, Nyctalopia, and Acies
Vespertina.

Caecitas blindness, comes either from an absotute Obstruction of the Optic
Nerves (and then it is called Amaurosis) or from a total Suffusion, or from
some great fault in the Tunicles and Humors.

Amblyopia, in Latin Obscuritas, Hebetudo, or Caligo, dark or dim sight, when
the Object is not clearly seen at what distance soever placed; comes from the
same Causes, but more light and imperfect, as an imperfect Obstruction of the
Optic Nerves, a light suffusion, want of spirits or grossness of the same, and
the like.

Myopia, in Latin Lusciositas, or Pur-blindness in which the Objects are not
perceived, except they be very nigh, and close to the Eyes, but not at all a
far off, or very little; and imperfectly: so that they perceive not their known
Friends passing by: And according to the Opinion of Galen, and all Modern
Physicians, from the thinness and smalness of the visour spirits which stand
not in need of a medium, much enlightened to make a perfect sight, but is
thereby dissipated. On the contrary, they which have gross and thick spirits,
see things best at a distance, because that gross spirits needs more
enlightening which is brought by the larger illumination of the medium: But this
Doctrine is demonstrated to be false, and to spring from ignorance in Optics
whose Principles declare, that these diversities of sight proceed from the
diversity of the situation of the Crystalline humor. For when the species of
the Objects are received into the Crystalline humor by a Pyramid or sharp Point
thereof called Conus; if the Crystalline humor be too much inward toward the
pupil of the Eye, the remote Objects are better seen, because it is necessary
that the Objects should be at a farther distance, that the Conus, or point of
the Pyramid may come to the Crystalline bumor, and there be terminated: But if
the Objects come nearer the Eye, the Conus goes by the Crystalline, and they
are seen more obscurely: Again, If the Crystalline lie too low and too far from
the Tunicle called Uuea, the Objects must be nearer to the Eyes, that the Conus
or point of the Pyramid may come to it: whence it appears that Myopia comes no
other ways then from the Crystal me lying too low; and so this Disease
becomes connatural, and not to be cured. But the affect of Myopia is contrary
in which the Object is better seen at a distance; and this happens for the most
part in Old Men, in whom some of the portion of the watery Hamor is spent, so
that the Crystalline goes to the Pupil of the Eye: Farther, By long holding
down of the Head either with Reading, Writing, or otherwise, the Crystalline
Humor comes by degrees forward: This is demonstrated by the use of Spectacles;
because that they who have Myopia, or are Pur-blind, see best with hollow or
concave spectacles, by which the rays or beams of the visible species are
dispersed, whereby it comes to pass, that the Conus of the Pyramid is more
long, and so that thing which by reason of the great distance could not be
seen, is now plainly perceived; because the Conus of the Pyramid is extended as
far as the Crystalline, which before ended in the Pupilla, or in the watery
Humor, or in the white Humor: On the contrary, Old Men are helped with Unequal
Spectacles, by which the beams are united, and the Conus of the Pyramid is made
shorter, and so things are better perceived whose Conus before passed by the
Crystalline, which was too near to the Pupilla.

Nyctalopia, or Nocturna Caecitas, is when men see well enough at day time; at
Sunset worse; and at Night not at all: and it comes from the over thickness of
the spirits, or Humors, or Tunicles; or the straightness of the Pupilla. For in
these Cases a greater light is necessary for true sight, which being wanting,
at Sunsetting, or at Night by a Candle, they see little, or not at all.

Vespertina Acies, is when men see worse by day, and better by night; and this
sometimes is called Nyctalopia, as we see in Hippocrates, 2. Prorrhet. but the
Modern Greeks have from long Custom used the word Nyctalopia only for Night
blindness: it comes from the thinness of the spirits which are spread abroad by
too much light: or from the enlarging of the Pupilla, by which too much light
goes into the Eye, and hurts the sight, for a little light at night does more
illustrate and shine to them, than to those who have the Pupilla enlarged.

After what manner the sight is hurt by diminishing, abolishing, and depraving,
we shall lay down more plain when we explain the Diseases of all parts of the
Eyes by themselves. For when all the parts of the Eye do conduce to the action
of it, namely Sight, when any part is distempered, the sight must also suffer.

The Eye is compounded of Tunicles, Humors, and the Optic Nerve, for the
action of which parts, the Animal Spirit does concur as a principal and
universal Agent.

And therefore that we may run through the Diseases of those parts, we will
begin from the distemper of the constitution of the optic Nerve; next we will
proceed to the Disease of the Humors and Tunicles. But the faults of the
Spirits either depend upon the distemper of the Brain, and then other Senses
are also hurt; or from the distemper of the Eye it self, which being cured the
spirits receive their ancient and due constitution, so that we need not make a
particular tractate of them. But in curing Diseases of the Eyes, when sight is
hurt, we must always mingle those things which comfort the visive spirits with
other Medicines.

CHAP. I. Of Gutta Serena, or Amaurosis,
WHen the sight is gone, and no fault appears in the Eyes, it is called Gutta
serena, or Amaurosis. And it comes to pass, when the Animal Spirits cannot pass
from the Brain to the Eyes; for when the Animal Spirits come into the Eyes from
the Brain by the Optic Nerves, we must find out the stoppage of their influx
in the Optic Nerves. The Optic Nerves are many ways affected, but chiefly by
obstruction or stoppage, astriction or binding, and by solution of continuity.

Obstruction is the most common and most ordinary cause of Gutta serena, which
comes of a watery humor flowing down from the Brain upon the Nerves, even as
other Nerves are obstructed in a Palsy by the same humor; so that the Diseases
may be said to be alike by reason of that Obstruction.

But it is most certain that this Disease is also begot by adstriction and
compression of the Optic Nerves; which compression may come both or a moist
humor gathered about the optic Nerves, and pressing upon them: as also of
blood, filth, or matter: Whence sometimes certain tumors rising in those parts,
produce the like Disease. For Experience teaches, That sometimes blindness in
one Eye, sometimes in both, comes upon inflammation of the Brain, and from
Phrenzy in malignant Fevers. And Platerus reports lib. 1. Observation, That he
saw a blindness which came from a round tumor growing in the Brain, and
compressing the optic Nerves, which appeared by opening of the Head after the
Patient was deceased.

Finally, Wounds in the Head, in which the Optic Nerves are divided, without
controversy do cause that the Animal Spirits can no more come to the Eyes.

This Disease is known, in that the Eyes seem to be in their natural condition,
and there is no fault apparent in them, only the Pupilla seems blacker and
larger. But in distinguishing the differences of Causes, there is great
difficulty; for although the Disease coming of blood or matter is known by
inflammation, aposthume, or wound going before, yet no certain sign can be given
by which we can distinguish a compression made with phlegm from an obstruction:
but we may in some part conjecture, for in the obstruction only of the optic
Nerve, the Eye is only affected; but if a compression be made of the same Nerve
by phlegm gathered about the roots of the Eyes and Mamillar Passages, that
matter possesses other parts of the Brain, and then all or some of the other
Senses are hurt; but if it seize only upon the Optic Nerves, there is more
plenty of humor sent forth at the Nostrils, and the Patient perceives a
heaviness in the fore part of the Head, especially about the Eyebrows.

As to the Prognostic part; If this Disease be absolute, that is, if there be
a total loss of sight, especially if it come from obstruction of the optic
Nerves, it is for the most part incurable; as we see in Palseys also, that they
are scarce or never cured which come from the obstruction of the Nerves,
especially if the Patient be old. But if the obstruction be imperfect, which
only causes a diminution of sight, but not blindness, there is more hope of
recovery, although it cannot be brought about without much pains, and long use
of Medicines.

But if this Disease come of humors gathered in the fore part of the head,
which compress the Nerves, it may be more easily cured. So says Fabricius
Hildanus, observe. 19. cent. 5. That a certain man after a strong vomit lost his
sight, and that he cured him with giving him the same Medicine again; for as
the humors being too much stirred by a violent vomit, and cast upon the Optic
Nerves, compressing them, did hinder the passage of the Spirits to the Eyes: so
the same humors being carried away by the same Medicine, the disease became
cured. Almost the like story is mentioned by Sennertus of a certain Student,
who taking too strong a Purge became suddenly blind. He also affirms, That
certain women after they had conceived with child, became blind through the
straightness of the optic Nerves, and that this Disease went away after four
or five months, or in the time of their Delivery.

We also have seen some which fell suddenly into extreme diminution of sight,
who within fifteen days, were cured by universal Evacuations, and some
revulsions, and by the easiness of the Cure we supposed that the humor was not
fastened within the substance of the nerve, but only gathered together in the
Brain about the original of those Nerves.

For the Cure of this Disease, The matter fastened upon the Nerves, or cleaving
thereto, and makes the obstruction or adstriction, is to be evacuated; which
cannot be done, except first the whole body be cleansed, as Galen says 4. meth.
The Eye is not to be cured before the whole Head, nor the Head before the whole
Body.

And that Remedies may be set down in a convenient Method, we will first set
down a Course of Diet, which must be attenuating and moderately drying.

And first, The Air must incline to hot and dry, and a thick, cold, cloudy, and
moist Air, must be altogether avoided. Let him cat meats of good and laudable
Juice, avoiding them which beget gross Juice, as Pork, and all Swines flesh,
Geese, Fish, Pulse, Cheese, and the like; as those which are windy, and fill
the head, as Milk-meats, and hot Spices, viz. Pepper and Ginger, etc. Let his
Bread be made with Fennel Water, or with the Seeds thereof; being careful that
the Wheat of which it is made, be not mixed with Darnel, which all the Ancients
believed to be very naught for the Sight: hence in the Comedy, he that derideth
another for defect in his sight; I think (says he) thou have sed upon Darnel.
In the sauce to his Meat, and in his Broths, let him use things extenuating, as
Hysop, Fennel, Marjoram, Bettony, Sage, Eyebright, and especially Nutmeg,
which strengthens the Brain, and clears the Sight. He must eat Turnips often,
which are thought to quicken the Sight: So do Sparrows, Pigeons, often eaten.
Cold Herbs must be forborne, and especially Lettice, which hurts the Eyes.

Let him take but a small quantity of Meat at a time, and let the sick man never
fill himself immoderately: Let his Supper be less than his Dinner: and to
abstain from a Supper twice or thrice in a week is very good. At his Meat,
instead of Salt let him use this Powder following:

Take of common Salt two ounces: Eyebright dried two drams: Nutmeg one dram:
Cinnamon two scruples: Mix them into a Powder.

After every Meal, let him take one spoonful of the Powder following:

Take of Coriander seed prepared half an ounce: Annis seeds, and Fennel seeds,
of each two drams: Cinnamon and Nutmeg, of each one dram: Eyebright dried three
drams: Sugar of Roses, a double weight to all the rest. Make a Powder.

Wine in this Disease is not good, because it is too full of vapors, and fills
the Head, and is apt to cause defluxions: therefore a Deoction of Sarsaparilla,
sweetened with Liquoris, and aromatized with Coriander, will be very
profitable. But because the Disease is of a long continuance, and all cannot
abstain so long from Wine; if we must permit Wine, let that be chosen that is
weakest, and less vaporing; and it would be more beneficial if Eyebright dried
were first steeped therein: and that he may make Eyebright Wine for a long
time, in the Vintage let him put Eyebright into a vessel filled with new Wine,
and let the Patient use that for his ordinary Drink.

Let his sleep be less and shorter than usual, and let him he upon his back
with his face upwards as much as may be: Let him avoid sleeping at noon,
because it is very hurtful. Let his Exercise be moderate, and instead of
exercise let him use frictions or rubbing of the inferior parts. Let his Belly
be always kept loose, and let him avoid disturbance of mind.

The course of Diet being thus ordered, you must begin your Cure from Universal
Evacuation And first you must purge with the following Medicine:

Take of clean Senna half an ounce: Fennel seeds one dram: the Leaves of
Bettony, Eyebright and Vervain, of each half a handful: Liquoris three drams:
Boil them to three ounces. Dissolve in the straining three drams of
Diaphaenicon; Syrup of Roses one ounce. Make a Potion and give it in the
morning with orderly Government.

After this first Purge, let the Physician consider seriously with himself,
whether he may bleed or not. For it is disallowed in this case by almost all
Practitioners, because it is a Chronical Disease of long continuance, coming of
a cold distemper and of a flegmy humor. Hence they fear least by blood-letting,
the Brain should be made more cold, and so beget more phlegm, and least the
conjunct cause of the Disease should be more incressated or thickened, and so
become more difficult to be discussed and dissipated. But although their
Opinion may take place as to old men, and such as are of a Phlegmatic
Constitution, yet it is not to be admitted to them that are young, or of a hot
Constitution, especially if there be manifest signs that blood does
predominate; for then there is no doubt but seasonable blood-letting may much
profit. Nay, where the aforesaid signs of blood do appear, it is profitable in
the judgment of Paulus and Aetius after the Vein in the Arm is opened, to open
the particular Veins of the Head, and those which are nearest the Eyes, namely,
the Frontal and Temple Veins, and those which are in the corners of the Eyes
near the root of the Nose. But you may better apply Hors-leeches to the
Forehead, as also behind the Ears. Some Practitioners do relate, that some by a
wound in the Forehead have been cured of blindness. In which it is most
probable that the cause of their blindness was the compression of the optic
Nerves by the Veins and Arteries adjoining, and swelling with too much blood,
which the Wounds aforesaid emptied forth. Whence Spigelius (as Plempius reports
in his Book of the Eyes) was wont in Gutta serena with good success to open the
middle Vein in the Forehead, and let it bleed while it stop of it self.

But if the suppression of the terms went before this Disease, you must draw
blood from the lower veins, or apply Leeches to the Hemorrhoids: if the Patient
had formerly a flux thereof, which then is stopped, or if he have a very hot
Liver, or be of a melancholy temper.

Afterward the whole body is to be more exactly purged by this following
Apozeme.

Take of Fennel Roots, and Sarsaparilla, and Flower-de-luce-roots, and
Elicampane roots, of each one ounce: the Leaves of Bettony, Marjoram, Balm,
Eyebright, Fennel, Vervain and Celendine the great, of each one handful:
Liquoris sliced, and Raisons of the Sun stoned, of each one ounce: Annis-seed,
and Fennel-seed of each three drams: cleansed Senna two ounces: Gummy Turbith
and Agerick newly made into Troches, of each two drams: Ginger and Cloves of
each one scruple: flowers of Stoechas, Rosemary, and Lavender, of each one
small handful: Boil them in five quarters; that is a pint and a quarter of
water; dissolve in the straigning four ounces of white sugar: make an Apozeme,
clarify it and perfume it with two drams of the best cinnamon, for four
mornings draughts: After the Apozeme is done, let him take these Pills.

Take of the mass of Pill, Lucis major, and Cochia the less, of each half a
dram: malax them with Bettony water, make six gilded Pills thereof, which let
him take early in the morning.

After this general Evacuation the antecedent Cause is to be revelled; and the
conjunct Cause is to be derived and discussed. For this Frictions of the
extreme parts, especially beneath, are to be used every morning.

Cupping-Glasses must be applied to the shoulders and back without
sacrification; especially to the hinder part of the Head with scarification;
for they do so powerfully draw the humors from the fore-parts and the principle
of the Nerves, that some presently after the application thereof have recovered
their sight: At the same time apply a Vesicatory to the hinder part of the
neck, and let the Blysters that are raised be kept long open, with Beet or
Colewort Leaves often applied.

When the Vesicatory is dried up, apply a Caustic to the hinder part of the
head or neck between the second or third Vertebra; or (as it is now most usual)
apply two Causticks to the Neck behind upon the fourth and fifth Vertebra; so
that the back bone may lie untouched between them, and both may be Cured with
one Plaster.

Instead of Cauteries a Seton applied to the same part is most efficacious; but
the tenderness of our Country men has almost abolished the use thereof.

If the aforesaid Cauteries avail not, you may lay a potential Cautery to the
Coronal Suture, which sometimes has done the work when other Remedies have
failed.

When these things are doing, presently after universal Evacuation by seege,
you must order a sweating Diet of the Decoction of Guajacum Sassaphras, and the
Roots of Sarsa, according to the method prescribed by us in the Cure of the
Cold distemper of the Brain. Observing this; That toward the end of the
Sudorifick Decoction, you and those things which peculiarly respect the Eyes;
as Vervain, Fennel, Eyebright, and Celondine the greater.

And for the better drying of the Brain; let the Bags prescribed in the Chapter
above mentioned be applied to the Temples if you fear not an inflammation.

Also after the Sudorifick Diet it is very convenient to use Sulpherous and
Bituminous Baths and washings of the head; because they are very proper for the
correcting of a Cold and Moist Distemper, for the consuming of Phlegm, and
strengthening the brain.

Besides the universal Evacuation of the body and Head, particular may be
ordered; as Medicines that cause spitting; called Apophlegmatisin; by which the
Rhewm is brought out of the Brain by the Palate; which may be made either in
the ^orm of a Gargarism or Masticatory; according to the forms prescribed in
the Cure of the cold distemper of the brain.

Errhins and Sternutatories or Neesings are condemned by almost al
Practitioners in this Disease; because they draw humors to the eyes: but yet if
some of the milder and gentler sort be used (after an exact purging of the
whose body and head) for some few days they may be profitable in regard they
may by degrees draw forth and derive the humor which causes the Disease, and
is fastened in the Optic Nerves; nor can they fetch any thing from the profound
part of the brain to the fore-parts: Otherwise in every derivation which is an
evacuation by the part affected, or that which is near unto it; we should
always fear lest there should be an attraction to the part affected, which is
easily hindered by universal Evacuations which ought to precede; and those
Errhins may be made of the juice of Beets and Marjoram with white Wine in which
Manna has been dissolved.

But a stronger and yet safe Errhine may be made of the powder of Tobacco
corrected with Cephalicks, and Oxydorcicks; or Medicines that help the sight;
for by that the Rhewm is drawn forth rather by the Palate than the Nostrils;
and the brain is so fortified, that it will not so easily receive the defluxion
of humors from other parts. The Composition whereof is as follows.

Take of dried Tobacco one ounce: the leaves of Sage, Marjoram, Bettony,
Eyebright, the Flowers of Clove-gilli-flowers, and Red Roses, of each one dram:
make a powder to be snufft into the Nostrils for some few days.

Neither is it sufficient once to cleanse the Body of Excrementitious Humors
with universal Purging; but you must keep it in that condition all the time of
the Cure; therefore with Purges intermixed, the Excrements which daily increase
must be brought forth; which may be done with usual Pills made after this
manner;

Take of the best Aloes half an ounce: clean Senna, Turbith, Hermodacts, and
Agarick newly trochiscated, of each two drams: Diagridium, one dram: Mace,
Cloves, and Eastern-Saffron, of each seven grains: sprinkle them with the
juyces of Marjoram and the greater Celondine: then dry them again in the shade.
And with the Oxymel of Squills make a mass of Pills of which let him take half
a dram or two scruples twice or thrice in a month.

While these things are used, you must continually labor to strengthen the
brain and the eyes: and the Patient must take diversity of Medicines, lest by
taking the same a long time, it prove Nauseous unto him; and lest Nature be too
much enured to a Medicine, and so it loose its Operation. Old Physicians say,
Treacle is reputed to be of excellent virtue to this purpose, which may be
taken by a dram every night with Fennel, Eyebright, or Celondine water twice or
thrice in a week. Nutmeg eaten every morning fasting, is much commended if it
be long chewed that the vapor may be carried to the Eyes; if you fear that the
swallowing down thereof should offend by reason of the heat: it may be spit
forth after it is chewed. Candid Myrabolans taken in the morning are thought to
clear the sight exceedingly.

The usual Opiate is thus made:

Take of Conserve of Bettony, and Rosemary flowers, of each two ounces: Candied
Myrobalans two: old Treacle two drams: the Leaves of Eyebright poudered, three
drams: Fennelseed two drams: Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Cloves, of each one scruple:
With the Syrup of the Juice of Fennel, Rue, and Celondine made up with Honey,
make an Opiate.

Let him take thereof the bigness of a Chestnut, drinking after it a little Wine
mixed with Fennel Water.

Nor must you omit external Medicines which strengthen, warm, and dry the Head;
of which sort is the Cephalic Powder for the Hair, a Cap and Fumigation,
mentioned by us in the Cure of the cold distemper of the Brain.

Finally, You may apply Topical Medicines to the Eyes to strengthen them: these
are usual in Authors; but they are of little force which cannot reach to the
optic Nerves; but if any desire to try some of them, they may find enough of
them in my Treatise of the Cure of a Suffusion.

In a desperate case when all other Medicines have been used in vain, a
Vesicatory applied over the whole Head (being shaven) in form of a Cap, has
many times been very successful: if it be twice or thrice used after the drying
up of the former Blisters, it is more advantageous.

CHAP. II. Of the Disease of the Vitrous, or Glassy Humor.
THe Vitrous Humor is next under the Crystalline, and therefore it is made by
Nature transparent, that the Species carried to the optic Nerve may be pure
and clean. If therefore the cleerness of that humor be hindered by the mixture
of another, and so made dusky: according to the degree of that duskiness or
foulness, the sight is either diminished or abolished.

Moreover, This humor may be out of order in respect of its situation; namely,
when any part of it by a blow or contusion shall be brought before the
Crystalline; for then the sight will be darkened, in regard the vitrous Humor
is more thick than the watery, and therefore the species of the objects cannot
be carried pure and clear unto the Crystalline.

The first affect, namely the Mixion of a Humor with it, cannot be perceived by
any signs, but only it is judged probable by reason, for the vitrous Humor
cannot be seen, or its condition known; and therefore Practitioners are
constrained to confound it, and to make it one with Gutta serena, because no
fault appears in the Eye, and this they do without offense to the Patient, in
regard any humors that are mixed with the vitrous, are to be discussed with the
same Remedies that a Gutta serena is cured.

But you may know that this vitrous humor is disordered in respect of its
Situation, when it appears white under the Pupilla, yet it is not easily
distinguished from Suffusion, except the antecedent and first cause be
diligently observed. For a Suffusion is caused by a simple defluxion of an
humor; but this transposition or displacing of the vitrous humor uses to come
of a Wound or Contusion.

This last Disease is incurable, for the vitrous humor being displaced can by
no art be reduced to its former condition. But this by Nature has sometimes
been done, and therefore the whole business is to be committed unto her.

CHAP. III. Of the Diseases in the Crystalline Humor.
THe Crystalline Humor is the chief instrument of Sight, and therefore ought to
be kept more pure and perspicuous than the rest, that that Sense may more
freely be exercised. And if it be soiled in the least measure, the sense of
Seeing is much hindered.

The chief Disease whereby the purity thereof is infected, is called Glaucoma
(or the changing of the Crystalline Humor into a fiery redness) and this
happens when the Crystalline Humor is made thick by dryness, as in old people,
from some drying and condensing cause it is often seen.

This Disease is known, by a plain appearance of a thick white about the
Pupilla, and when all objects are apprehended by the Patient as through a cloud
or smoke. But it is hard to distinguish this Disease from a Suffusion which
represents such a whiteness about the Pupilla: hence it* is that many Authors
do not distinguish between a Glaucoma and a Suffusion. But they which
diligently observe may distinguish them thus: In a Suffusion there is a white
in the very Pupilla, and very near the Membrane called Cornea; but in a
Glaucoma it lies deeper.

This Disease is incurable; especially in old folk in whom the dryness of the
part cannot be amended; but if it be not manifest that the fault is in the
Crystalline, and there is a suspicion of a su^^usion; you may use the remedies
prescribed for it.

Moreover, the Crystalline may be out of place, namely when the broader part of
it which is flat like a Fetch or Lentil is not directly against the hole of the
Pupilla, but either is too high or too low, and then objects appear double when
one Eye only suffers; because the p^^ (...) ^^eight line is lost which ought
to be one and the same in both Eyes, that whatsoever (...) is (...) both Eyes
may appear but one and the same. And if they be not in that order, things
(...); which you may prove by depressing or lifting up one of your Eyes with
your ^^^nger: for then the parallel is lost, and things appear double: But this
Depravation of sight by which objects appear double, comes not only of the
Cause now mentioned, but also from vapors, or water which hurt the Crystalline;
by which the visive Spirits are divided, whence it comes to pass that the
species of the same thing is received into two places, which Drunkards usually
per^^ive when they see double.

Secondly, The situation of the Crystalline is altered, when it declineth
backward or comes forward, if it comes forward to the Pupilla, then things
near at hand are not so rightly perceived as those which are more remote, as in
old men often. But if it decline backward toward the Optic Nerve, things near
are truly seen, but not afar off, and then is the Disease called (...) which
was mentioned in the Preface; where we showed, That these Diseases are only
Cured by Spectacles.

Thirdly, The Crystalline is out of its place when it tends either to the
right or left side, which is called Strabismus, or Squinting; when the Pupilla
is not directly but oblique upon the Object, and appears not in the middle of
the Eye, but in one side: so that there appears more white in one part of the
Eye, than in the other.

This Disease comes not only from the displacing of the Crystalline, but also
from the Evil Disposition of the Muscles which move the Eyes: which is either
natural, or else proceeds from a Palsy or Convulsion of the said Muscles.

Of what Cause soever it c^meth, if it be connatural, it is incurable: but, if
it come from Palsy or Convulsion of the aforesaid Muscles, you may find out a
way of Cure, in my Treatise of head Diseases.

Finally, Other Depravations of sight may come from the inversion of the
Crystalline be it greater or less; as when straight things appear crooked, or
when the Objects seem to be ^oulded: which happened to a certain Physician (as
Sennertus reports) who going up a Ladder to take a Book from a shelf, and
turning his Eyes violently upwards, saw al things afterward turned upwards as
though men walked upon their Heads, which ca^e by the attraction and displacing
of the Crystalline. For a quarter of a year after when again he turned up his
Eyes violently, his natural sight returned, and al things appeared in right
order.

Hence it appears that by a violent motion of the Eye that the Crystalline may
be displaced, and again by the same motion be set right. I suppose that the
displacing of the Crystalline was thus, It was so inverted that the forepart
of it (which is more depressed than the other) was not right against the
Pupilla; but rather its side which being more round and unequal might represent
the species of the Objects inverted, as we may observe in round Glasses, which
discover the Object inverted; and this is true from the principles of the
Optic art: for in a Medium that is Unequal and thick, the species are so
broken, and as it were cross-cut, That they which come from the upper part of
the Object, do represent the lower part; and so contrarily, but if the
inversion of the Crystalline be less, so as both the depressed part of the
Crystalline and also the Unequal part thereof, be right again^* the Pupilla, the
Objects may seem crooked. Although that Depravation of sight whereby Objects
seem crooked, may come by other means: namely when any part of the Crystalline
is mixed with the watery humor then by reason of inequality of the Crystalline
in regard of thickness, the refractions are diverse, which are the Cause of
Depravation of sight whereby things appear crooked. This may be demonstrated by
a clear Example: A staff put half into the water, appears crooked for this
Cause, namely, The species of that part in the water, when it is carried out of
the water into the air, from a thicker to a thinner Medium, is broken by the
perpendicular; but that part which is in the air is not broken, because it does
not pass through diverse Mediums as that which is in the water: Hence it comes
that the stick seems crooked. After the same manner the species of the object
which is carried into the thicker part of the Crystalline is more broken, than
that which is carried to the thinner, which is in its natural state, and not
mixed underneath with the watery humor; and so by reason of the diverse
refractions the objects appear crooked.

But since Medicines are to no purpose, we shall prescribe none for these
Diseases.

CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of the Watery Humor, and especially of a Suffusion.
THe Watery Humor is out of its Natural Condition, when it is distempered in
quantity or quality. When the Distemper is in quantity; it is enlarged or
diminished, and makes the Pupilla be dilated or contracted, which Diseases
shall be mentioned in their places. When the distemper is in quality, it
becomes thicker, and that comes from another Humor mixed with it, and that is
called Suffusion, which we here speak of. For although Galen 1. de Symp. cause.
cap. 2. shows that a Suffusion may come from the condensation of the watery
humor without the access of an excrementitious Humor: yet because it happens
seldom, and is known rather by imagination than art, and is altogether
incurable: omitting that, we shall speak of that Suffusion only which comes
from the afflux of another excrement or humor. This is called in Greek (...),
in Latin Suffusio, by the Arabians, Water, vulgarly a Cataract. Some Authors
would distinguish these names, and make them signify diverse sorts of this
Disease: They call it in the beginning (when the sight is only a little
darkened) a Suffusion; but when it is grown older, and something gathered into
the Pupil appears like water, then they call it only Aqua, Water: but when the
matter is grown thick in the Pupilla, and the sight almost gone, then they call
it a Cataract. A Suffusion comes from a serous Watery Humor spread in the space
between the Cornea and the Crystalline: and since a Watery Humor is contained
in that space, it may well be reckoned among the Diseases of the Watery Humor.

This is the Cause of a true Suffusion: There is another Bastard Suffusion
which comes from vapors sent from the Stomach and other parts into the Eyes.
Galen 4. de loc. aff. cap. 2. taught that vapors may be sent from the Head to
the Eyes, and make a bastard Suffusion; but although Authors speak of two sorts
of Suffusions, yet they are for the most part united, and a spurious or false
pleuresie is complicated or joined with a true one; because vapors sent from
the lower parts to the Brain, are easily carried to those parts of the Head
which are weakened with any Disease, and this appears in that all troubled with
Suffusions are less troubled, and see better in the morning than at noon or
night, because after dinner or supper many vapors are sent up from the Stomach
to the Eyes which disturb the sight. And Experience teaches, That men so
diseased have their sight more dull and dark presently after meat, than a few
hours after. Moreover, all that have a Suffusion relate that they see in the
Air little bodies, as Gnats, Flies, Hairs, Cobwebs, and the like; which could
not be but by the gross vapors which are sent to the Eye, and there move: for
although Authors suppose that these representations depend upon some thick
Humors contained in the Eye, which make a Suffusion: yet this is not credible,
Because then it should always move in the Eye, to represent those little
Bodies which fly in the air, which is contrary to reason. But rather without
question, the vapors are in perpetual motion, and so can represent those flying
fancies.

A Watery Humor is the chief and most ordinary cause of a Suffusion, yet other
Humors at least in a small quantity may be mixed therewith: and if Choler be
mixed, then it is citrine or yellowish; if Melancholy, then it is a black
Suffusion.

And those Humors use to slow to the Eyes when they are weak, either Naturally,
or by Accident.

From a Natural debility comes a thrusting forth of the Eyes, for they who have
such Eyes, are very subject to a Suffusion; for such Eyes use to be great, and
therefore the virtue spread abroad is less in them: as also by reason of their
largeness they do more easily receive humors and vapors. External causes make
an accidental or adventitious debility, as a stroke, contusion, baths, a
Southern and rainy habitation or season, heat of the Sun, smoke, continual
reading, especially by candle light, and the like: All which may also cause a
flux of humors to the Eyes.

Now the Humors flow from the Brain to the Eyes by the Veins, by the Tunicle
called Wea, and by the Optic Nerve. The Veins by which they flow are diverse:
either those which come from the Pericranium to the Conjunctiva, thence to the
Cornea and Wea: or those which come from the Men^nges, from which some
branches come to the Membranes of the Eye, from which Membranes, especially
from the Wea, the excrementitious humors may easily fall into the watery humor
being so near.

Finally, Humors may easily be carried by the Optic from the Brain; by the
Tunica Retiformis and Aranea, to the Crystalline; and then the matter of the
Suffusion sticks upon the superficies of the Crystalline. Although a Suffusion
for the most part comes by a defluxion, yet sometimes it may come by congestion
or gathering, when that nourishment of the Eye is not well changed, and the
expulsive Faculty is so weak that it cannot expel sufficiently the remaining
excrements, so that they are by degrees gathered together about the Pupilla,
and so make a Suffusion, in which case other humors are ordinarily disturbed,
and difficult diseases are produced.

The Differences of a Suffusion are taken from the thickness and quantity of
the humor causing it, and from the place in which the humor resideth.

In regard of thickness more or less, the sight is more or less offended, for
if the humor be thin and serous, of which the Suffusion is made, which is cured
by pricking, as Galen taught 14. Meth. cap. ult. The sight is little worse, and
it is called a Suffusion only begun, if it be somewhat thicker the sight is
darker; if very thick blindness follows.

In respect of the quantity and the place, Either the humor possesses the whole
Eye, and the sight is equally hindered which way soever it be directed; or it
possesses one part of the Pupil more than another, and so the objects are not
seen wholly at one direct view, nor can many objects be seen at one time: but
if the humor be very little, and possess the middle of the Pupilla, the objects
appear with holes through them. But if the matter be divided into diverse parts,
possessing diverse parts of the Pupilla, the forms of Gnats shall seem to be
before the eyes: All these differences are exactly distinguished by Galen, 1.
de symp. causis, c. 2.

Moreover, In respect of the place or Situation of the matter, other
differences may be made, as sometimes the matter is in the very hole or cavity
of the Wea about the Cornea; sometimes about the Wea, and between that and the
watery humor; sometimes it is mixed with the Watery Humor; and finally,
sometimes it is between the Crystalline and Watery Humor.*

Some Differences may be taken from the figure or shape of the matter, which
Galen relates 1. de sympt. causis cap. 2. and 4. de loc. affect. cap. 2. for as
the figure of the humor adjacent to the Pupilla is various, so diverse objects
are present thereunto, as Gnats, Hairs, Cobwebs, Circles about Candles, and
other things.

The knowledge of this Disease, is first in distinguishing a true from a bastard
Suffusion, and then in the discovery of the differences of true and right
Suffusions.

A true Suffusion does for the most part affect only one Eye; but if both be
affected, they are not at one time, or alike affected, as in a spurious
Suffusion.

Secondly, In a true Suffusion, some dark matter appears in the Pupilla,
which does not in a Spurious or Bastard Suffusion. But this is not always a
true sign; for if the Suffusion comes of a thin and serous humor, because it
is no thicker than the Watery humor, there appears no change in the Eye, by
which Physicians are sometimes deceived, not knowing that kind of Suffusion,
take it* for Gutta serena, perceiving no change in the Pupilla: but this kind
is easily distinguished from Gutta serena. First, in Gutta serena the sight is
quite gone, or much diminished, no hurt appearing in the Eye: On the contrary,
In a Suffusion which we cannot see, there is only a small decay of sight,
because the serous humor from whence it proceeds, is thin, and transparent, so
that it may be pierced by the species of objects like Glass. Secondly, They
differ in this, For the most part in a Suffusion, the Sight is not equally
hindered in all parts of the Pupilla; but the objects sometimes are seen better
when they are direct before the Eye, sometimes when they are opposite to the
corner of the Eye, because the humor is thicker or thinner in one part of the
Pupilla than the other.

Thirdly, In a true Suffusion the Symptoms are continual, and have no
intermission: in a bastard Suffusion, they are sometimes increased and remitted,
as the vapors are more or less which are sent unto the Brain. So they are fewer
when the Stomach is empty, than when it is full, especially presently after
meat, for then a greater company of vapors do ascend, which sent to the Eyes,
represent to the sight, Flies, Gnats, Cobwebs, and such like small bodies, not
always, but at some times only. Which little bodies represented in the Air,
depend upon the Vapors as aforesaid: but in regard the Eyes are weakened by a
true Suffusion there is almost a continual sending up of vapors unto them, and
therefore there is a continual appearance of these little bodies flying in the
Air. Moreover, there is a constant darkness of sight in a true Suffusion, being
always after the same manner, as if all the objects were seen through a cloud
or thick glass, which is the proper sign of this Disease: but in a bastard
Suffusion, there is sometimes a greater, sometimes a less, and sometimes almost no
dimness at al of the Sight, even as the vapors are many, or few, or none that
are sent to the Eyes.

Lastly, A true Suffusion grows in a short time, and is confirmed for the most
part in six Months, and sometimes it increases in a few days: and Fernelius
says, 5. Pathol. cap. 5. that a Suffusion was perfect in one day, which we
also have often seen: but a bastard Suffusion continues many years without
increase.

The Differences among true Suffusions are these:

In a Suffusion beginning certain small Bodies, as Hairs, Gnats, Flies, pieces
of Wool and Cobwebs, fly before the Eyes.

But when it is far gone, the Air appears cloudy, and the objects are seen
thicker, as through a glass; the color of the Pupilla is changed, and it
appears either troubled or cloudy, or like filthy Glass, or of a sky color
when a suffusion is perfect, the sight totally perishes: the Pupilla is either
white, or of some other color is mixed with white.

Some signs are taken from the Color: for when it is like a Pearl in color,
it signifies that the phlegm is still fluid and transparent: when it is white as
Chalk, then it signifies a thick and compacted matter: when yellow, then phlegm
and choler are mixed: when black, it shows Melancholy.

The Place in which the Suffusion grows, is thus known; For if the matter be
placed between the Uuea and Cornea, the Pupil appears more dark, because the
matter is nearer to the beholder* Moreover the Pupilla is dilated by the Humor
contained therein; and when the Disease is confirmed, white or red veins, or
swellings are perceived to be about the Iris, or circle of the Eye; or certain
white spots appear about the Pupilla.

If the Matter be contained between the Crystalline and the Uuea, contrary
symptoms will appear* as also the Pupilla will be contracted if the matter lie
deep, and enlarged if the matter lie higher.

The Prognostic of this Disease, is to be diversely made, according to diverse
seasons: For when a Suffusion is only begun, when the Patient can perceive an
object as through a cloud, it is curable as Galen says, 14. Meth. Cap. ult.
and Celsus lib. 6. cap. 6. which Opinion wants a restriction: Namely, if the
Patient be young, but in old it is incurable: and if the eyes be not naturally
of a weak constitution. We also have seen some that have been cured in fifteen
days space, of a Suffusion newly began; who have been above fifty years of
age, only by universal Purging, sweating Diet, and a Vesicatory, without any
other application of Topics.

This Cure is better wrought in a warm air and in summer time, because the
Pores are then open, the matter of the Di^ea^e ^^ more moveable and obedient;
so that oftentimes it discharges it self by seege; which, is very much to the
Cure of this Disease: as Hippocrates shows, Aph. 16. Sect. 6. in these words,
It is a good sign, when men with sore Eyes, have a loose (...)

If a Suffusion come from an acute Fever, a Peripneumonia, a Phrenzy, or from
a violent pain of the Head, it is hard to be Cured.

A Cataract or Suffusion confirmed when the matter is grown thick, cannot be
discussed with Medicines, but must be couched with a Needle.

This Operation is not safe; and often has ill success: For either the Tunicle
Uuea is torn, or by the pain and inflammation, a new flux of Humors is brought
to the Eye, which has been long before weak: and many other inconveniences by
which the sight is for ever lost. But since this Operation has been sometime
succesful, it may be tried by those who have no other hopes of Cure; For it is
better, as Celsus says, to try a Doubtful Medicine, or Remedy, than None at
all.

In a confirmed Cataract, if when the other Eye is shut the Pupilla appears
larger in the Eye affected, there is hope of Cure by Couching; but if it be no
larger, it is uncurable; as Galen teaches, 1. desymp. cause. cap. 2. because
the optic Nerve is obstructed, and the spirits cannot come to the Pupilla,
though it be open.

But if the Patient perceive no light when the Pupilla is enlarged by the
shutting of the other Eye, he cannot be recovered by the Needle, because the
visive spirit is troubled and obscure, and therefore unfit for sight.

A black Cataract, free from al brightness, can neither be Cured by Physic,
nor Surgery; because the Visive Spirits are destroyed; but a clear Cataract
that has some splendour, is Cureable.

These also are uncurable for the most part, a green, dark, very yellow, and
hard Cataract; and that which moves and is colored like quicksilver.

A Cataract which represents objects full of holes, is not to be tampered
with: For since the matter is in the Center of the Pupilla, it is to be feared,
lest when the Needle is thrust in, the whole Pupilla be filled with the matter,
and so the fight be utterly lost.

The Operation of the Needle, is more succesful, in a full Eye; and that which
keeps its natural greatness: But if the Eye be small and decayed, it is less
succesful.

In Old men, this Operation is not to be tried; nor in Children, in them the
Disease is incurable; in these the Humor is too soft being not ripe; there is
most hope of success in young persons.

If this Operation be, when some part of the Suffusion flows down (if the eye
be compressed) and appears more large, and after returns to its former
station and figure, it is not succesful; because the Cataract is not yet ripe,
but thin and crude: But if by a compressing with the finger there is no change
of the shape and figure of it; it is then ripe, and may be couched with a
Needle. But we must take notice, That the ripeness or thickness of the Cataract
ought to be moderate and not too much compacted, that it may be easily couched:
for it ought to be like a thin skin which may be rolled about the Needle and so
couched down; for if it be too thick and solid, it cannot be couched, which you
may perceive when it is like Chalk or Hail. Contrarily that which is fit for
couching uses to be Sky-colored, and Seagreen, of the color of Iron or Lead
not black.

The Cure of a Cataract must be directed not only to the Conjunct, but to the
Antecedent cause. And therefore you must purge the whole Body, and especially
the Brain very exactly. After you must discuss that humor which obstructeth the
Pupilla, and some way soften it.

Which intentions, when they are almost the same which were propounded in the
Cure of Gutta serena, we may use the same Remedies for Diet, evacuation or
purging of the whole Body, for revulsion of the humor offending, and for the
strengthening of the Head and the Eyes, so we shall not in vain repeat them.

Having therefore first used all that Method which was laid down for the Cure
of Gutta serena, we will declare unto you those Medicines, which belong
properly to the taking away of the matter about the Pupilla. And though Topical
Medicines are counted little worth according to Galens Opinion, 2. (...), who
says that they promise more than they can perform: yet their Lawful use is not
to be rejected: and Experience has taught, by very good Authors confirmed,
that Cataracts in their beginning, after universal Medicines used, have been
cured with Topics, that is, Medicines applied to the Eye.

First therefore begin with mild dissolvers, and such as dry not overmuch lest
the matter grow hard, and be made unfit to be dissolved: then use mollifiers
with your dissolvers, that induration may be hindered, and it may more easily
be dissolved. For this purpose the following Fornentation may be first used.

Take of the Leaves of Rue, Fennel, Eyebright, the greater Celondine* of each
one handful: Foenugreek seeds one ounce: Chamomel and Melilot flowers, of each
one pugil: Boil them in three parts of spring Water, and one part of white Wine
added toward the end of the Decoction. Foment the Eyes with a soft sponge dipped
in the strained Liquor, morning and evening.

Of the same Decoction you may make a Fumigation, covering the head that it may
be received into the Eyes.

In the beginning of the Disease, while the defluxion is new, and that
revelling Medicines are used, it is good to wash the Eyes with only red Wine,
which by its astriction hinders the defluxion, and by its spirits discusseth
and dissolveth it.

In the progress of the Disease, a Fomentation of white Wine, in which Crocus
Metallorum has been infused, is most profitable.

It is no less profitable to let a child eat sweet Fennel Seeds in a morning,
and afterward breath into the Eyes.

As also to let him lick them, or to let a Dog lick them.

Also Bread hot from the Oven, in which is sweet Fennel seed cut in the middle,
may be so placed to the Eyes that they may behold it when they are wet with the
vapor.

These Medicines are to be used in the morning.

At night you may apply this Cataplasm:

Take of Fenugreek seed beaten one ounce: Aloes half an ounce: Saffron one
dram: Make them into fine powder, put it into white Wine wherein Crocus
Metallorum has been infused, and make a Cataplasm to be applied to the Eyes at
night.

Many commend Pigeons blood, put hot into the Eyes, for with the Natural heat
of that Creature the part will be much strengthened, and the excrementitious
matter dissolved: but because the heat will quickly depart from the blood, it
is better to take a young callow Pidgeon, and slit it in the back, and apply it
to the Eye.

With these Medicines you may discuss the matter if it be possible.

Topical Medicines called Collyria, which are dropped into the Eyes, are of
little force, and those are they which Galen said did promise more than they
perform; for all their virtue is spent in the Cornea; neither can they reach to
the internal parts, except they be made very sharp, by which, pain would be
caused, and a greater defluxion: hence many that have used them immoderately,
have from a light infirmity become stark blind. But because many of those
Collyriaes are found in Authors which have good report by them, lest we should
seem defective, we will show some of the choycest, that they who please may try
them.

Take of the best Honey two pints: Fennel Roots, and the Roots of long and
round Birthwort, of each one pound: the leaves of Rue, Eyebright, Celondine the
greater, and the tops of Fennel, of each six handfuls: Centaury the less three
handfuls: Roses four pugils: the Urine of a Boy two pints. Mix them all in a
glass Vessel and distill them in Balneo Mariae. Drop this Water often into the
Eyes.

Or you may make Bread with the Bran in it, with the Powder of Rue, Celondine,
Eyebright, Bettony, and Fennel with a little Honey, which as soon as it is
drawn and cut in pieces, must be put between two Pewter or Silver Dishes; from
whence will come a Water, which Zechius affirms, dropped into the Eyes, does
wonders. Also this following is highly commended.

Take of white Violet Leaves, one handful: Radish seed, one dram: Amoniacum,
half a dram: mix them, and powder them; then steep them twenty four hours in
one pint of Fennel water: then let them boil a little space: ad to the
straining one ounce of the clarified juice of Fennel: the Balsom of Peru, two
drams: make a Collyrium: which Zechius says, Dropped into the Eyes morning and
evening, after the Body is sufficiently Purged, does so cleanse the Eyes, that
it takes away a Cataract wonderfully, without Couching.

Hollerius Describes a Water, that he says, Cured one that was Nine years
blind: Which is this.

Take of the juice of Smallage, Vervain, Germander, Burnet, Avens, Sage,
Celondine, Rue, Knot-grass, Chickweed, the powder of Cloves, of each one ounce:
gross Pepper, Nutmeg, Lignum Aloes, of each three drams: steep them all in the
Vrin of a Boy, and the sixth part of Sack: Let them boil a little, then strain
them, and press them, put it in a Glass close stopped; drop every night some of
it into each Eye.

The juice of Brooklime only, being often dropped into the eyes, has sometimes
Cured a young Suffusion, when a Cautery also has been applied to the Coronal
Suture.

The Juice of Celondine and Calcitrap mixed together, are as good.

Quercetan, in his Dispensatory does much commend* Water in which Crocus
Metallorum has been infused, which is thus made.

Take of the Water of the greater Celondine, six ounces: Crocus Metallorum, one
dram: infuse them, and drop three or four drops of this Water warmed into the
Eyes for three or four times a day for a long continuance.

Fonseca says, That he knew one Cured by this Water, who was very dim sighted
many months: This is the excellency of it, which few other Medicines have; It
cleanses very powerfully without any sharpness.

The same Fonseca says the Water following is admirable.

Take many Swallows, beat them with their feathers in a Mortar: put to every
pound of them four ounces of bread crumbs: of white wine, four pints: infuse
them six days, and distill them in Balneo till they are dry: then set that
Water in a Glass in the Sun for twenty days, and drop it into the eyes morning
and evening.

There is a Water made of Rosemary flowers, which discusseth Films in the Eyes
after this manner.

Take of Rosemary-flowers as many as are sufficient to fill a Glass which must
be well stopped, and set it in the Wall against the South Sun, thence will an Oil
come, which with a feather anoint the Eyes with.

Some Authors commend the Galls of Beasts because they cleanse and discuss
strongly, but they cause pain with their sharpness, and therefore are seldom
used.

Forrestus, Obs. 35. Lib. 1^. commends a certain Fish in his Country, out of
whose Liver there comes a moisture, by which he says Cataracts are presently,
as by a miracle, Cured. See in the place cited the use of it. William Lozellus
says, That he has Cured many stark blind, after universal Medicines have been
used, with this Water.

Take of the Liver of a sound Goat, two pound: Calamus Aromaticus, and Honey,
of each half an ounce: the juice of Rue, three drams: the Waters of Celondine,
Vervain, Fennet, Eyebright, of each three ounces: Long Pepper, Nutmeg, and
Cloves, of each two drams: Saffron, one scruple: Rosemary-flowers bruised, half
an handful: Sarcocol, and Aloes, of each three drams: the Gall of Ravenous
Birds, Capons, or Partridges, one ounce: let those that are to be sliced be
sliced, and that are to be bruised be bruised; then mixed altogether, with two
ounces of white Sugar and six drams of Honey of Roses, cast them into an
Alembick of Glass, and distill them in Balneo Mariae with a gentle fire, keep
this Water in a Glass close stopped, for precious; which you may drop twice or
thrice in a day into the eye affected.

Zacutus Lusitanus commends the Water following, in these words, For an old
Disease in the Eyes, called Ophtalmia, or any other which comes of overmuch
moisture, and gross humors and mists; as in thickness, whiteness, the Haw, and
Suffusion; this Water is the best in his Experience; if after sufficient
Purging, you drop six drops cold every night three hours after meat into the
Eyes, then about two hours after you shall have Water flow out of them in
abundance.

Take of Aloes, three drams: Rue, Fennel, and Pettony, of each two handfuls:
Vervain and Tormentil, of each one handful: Sarcocol, three drams: the froth of
Nitre, two drams and a half: Sugar Candy, three ounces: syrup of Roses, four
ounces: the Vrin of a young Boy, half a pint: Lizzards dung, three drams:
Horehound, three handfuls: Eyebright, one handful and a half: Ginger,
Spicknard, long Pepper, Cloves, and Tutty, of each two drams; Balsom, three
drams: Honey of Roses, two ounces: Verdegreese, one dram: Licium, two scruples*
Radish leaves, one handful: powder those which are to be powdered, mix them,
and infuse them in the best white wine, in a Still, putting to a fourth part of
the best Honey, for ten days, and stir them daily, then Distill them, and keep
the Water.

The same Zacutus commends the Ointment following, in these words: For the
drying up of moisture flowing from the Head into the Eyes, and for Purging them
by the Corners very strongly; this Magistral Ointment is excellent; being
applied after universal Evacuations from the Head and the whole Body; let the
upper Eyebrows be anointed lightly therewith morning and evening twice in a
day three hours after meat: one hour after there will slow plentiful Water from
the corners of the Eye, especially from the great corner.

Take of the Oil of Roses, three ounces: Rose Water, nine ounces: Camphire, one
dram: Tutty, one scruple: Honey, two ounces: the Gall of a Goat, half an ounce:
Lupin meal, half a dram: Aloes, Succotrine, one dram: Sugar candy, half a dram:
the juice of Horebound, Fennel, and Rue, of each half an ounce: Mirrh, one
scruple: Ammoniacum, half a dram: Sarcocol one dram and a half: Powder them
that may, mix them, and boil them a little with a gentle fire* and the grease
of a Goat or Sheep, and a little wax: make an Ointment according to art.

Finally, when al Medicines fail, when the Disease is almost desperate, it were
good to try an experience with the Ointment of Quicksilver; which Fonseca says
was his invention, yet seldom used; for in his 19. Consultat. lib. 1. he thus
says: I have thought sometimes that the Unction used for the Cure of the
French Pox, has power to take away Cataracts in their beginning and increase;
by the same reason that it takes away the Humors remaining in the Eyes from the
French Pox; for by it the Head may be so Purged, that a Cataract may be Cured;
and I have determined to make trial of it. Fonseca had much commended his
Judgment if he had seen Skenkius his Observation, 309. Lib. 1. which is taken
out of the 5. Book of Alexander Trajanus Petronus, of the French Pox, Cap. 1.
One (says he) before he had the French Pox was blind of one Eye with a
Cataract or thick Suffusion; by the Unction with Quicksilver was freed
wonderfully from his Pox and Cataract both at once: Neither is it without
reason that Cataracts may be dissolved with that Unction, when we see by
Experience that very hard Tumors of thick and gross Phlegm are powerfully
dissolved by the Unction of Quicksilver.

When a Cataract can be dissolved with no other Medicines, the last Remedy is
the Chirurgical Operation, which with a Needle put into the Eye, after the
matter of the Cataract being thick, and turned to a little skin, thrusts it
to the lower part of the Eye, so that the sight is restored as if a window were
opened. This Operation is successful sometimes; but often not: But when the
case is so that no hope remains of other ways, it is better according to the
Opinion of Celsus, formerly Commended, to try an uncertain Medicine than none:
But it uses not to be tried by reason of its uncertainty by ordinary
Chirurgions; but of Quacksalvers, who go to and fro practicing, and therefore
the time and manner of the Operation is to be left only to them.

But because those things ought not to be hid from a Physician, you may find
them exactly treated on in diverse Practical Authors, when the Cataract is Cured.

Whether it be with dissolving Medicines or manual Operation you must use a
course of Physic long after, because there is a great fear of a Relapse. For
the Eyes having been much weakened by a long Disease, are very ready to receive
any Defluxion again from the brain. Therefore you must follow the usual
Purging; you must have Issues continually for diversion; and use often
strengtheners of the Eyes, such as are prescribed in Gutta serena: to which you
may ad a washing of the Eyes, which must be done every day thus:

In the morning first chew sweet Fennel seeds some space of time, then fill the
mouth with Wine, and after it is warm in the mouth, wash the Eyes therewith
till they begin to smart, which will cease when you leave washing.

Moreover Spectacles are very good to preserve sight which do make the Objects
neither bigger nor less than they naturally are. And it is profitable to
refresh the sight with green or sky colored Spectales.

And Lastly, You must avoid al things which hurt the sight, and use those
things which help it, as is declared in the Diet for the Cure of Gutta serena.

CHAP. V. Of the Enlarging, or Dilatation of the Pupilla.
THe Tunicle called Wea, out of Galen, 1. de sympt. cause. cap. 2. is obnoxious
to diverse diseases, and especially to Ruption, Distortion, Dilatation, and
Constriction.

A Ruption may come both of an external Cause, as stroke or contusion; and of
an inward, when much humor distendeth and breaks the Tunicle: But this being
incurable concerns not us.

A Distortion of the Wea cannot be but in the first constitution of it,
because it adhaereth to the Cornea. Therefore Galen in the place quoted does
only reckon it among the different symptoms of the Wea: and does not stand to
explain it, because it is of no concernment in the practice of Physic. We
therefore omitting the first two differences, will only insist upon the
explaining of the Dilatation, and constriction of the Pupilla.

The Dilatation of the Pupilla, which is a hole in the Uvea Tunicle, by which
the Species of Objects pass into the Eye, is called in Greek Mydryasis; this
hurts the sight because too much light goes into the Eye; hence it is that
they which have this disease, see better in a darkish place than in a light.
Which appears by Natural and ordinary change in the Pupilla in bright and
obscure places; for when the Sight is exercised in a clear light place, the
Pupilla is contracted that the light may go less into the Eye, and not hurt it
with too much, by dissipating and dispersing the Spirits; and hence it is that
they which go out of a very light place into a dark, see almost nothing at
their first entry: because the Pupilla being formerly contracted, does not in
an obscure place receive light enough to make a perfect Sight. After, when they
have continued a while in an obscure place, the Pupilla is by degrees dilated,
to receive more light, for the clearing of Sight, and then those things which
at first entrance were not seen, are clearly perceived. On the contrary, they
which go out of a dark, into a very light place, cannot at first endure the
light, and their Eyes are much dazzled, because the Pupilla being much dilated
before in the dark place for to get light enough into the Eye, when it comes
suddenly thus enlarged into a great light, too much light gets into the Eye,
and so makes it dazzle and disturbs the Sight. Whence it appears, that light
necessary to sight ought to pass into the Eye in a moderate quantity, and for
the receiving thereof, it is necessary that the Pupilla be moderately large.

Now the Preternatural Dilation of the Pupilla is either in the first original,
which is not to be tampered with; or comes of Preternatural causes which are
internal or external.

The nearest and immediate of the internal causes, is the stretching of the
Wea, which comes either of dryness or repletion.

Dryness does stretch the Wea, and makes the form of the Pupilla larger, as
when leather pierced through, when it is dried has the hole larger: And this
dry distemper comes from long watching, Fevers, and other drying causes.

The repletion of the Wea when it distendeth it on every side, makes the
Pupilla larger, and this is produced either of vapors, and wind sent into the
Eye, or of humors flowing thither, or from the extraordinary increase of the
watery humor of the Eye, or lastly from the swelling of the Tunicle Uvea it
self. To these Causes we may ad, the Convulsion of the Uvea, which appears
chiefly in Epileptical fits; for then all the Nervous and Membranous parts are
distended, and so is also the Uvea; and this appears chiefly most manifest in
Epileptick Children, in whom the dilation of the Pupilla is so great, that it
is over all the Circle called Iris, and therefore the sight is abolished.

The internal Causes are, a stroke, or a fall, or a retention of the Spirits,
as in Women in Childbirth, and Trumpeters. A stroke or fall make a defluxion to
the Eyes, hence comes extending of the Pupilla: retention of Spirits makes wind
and humors, from whence comes distention.

The knowledge of this Disease is not difficult, because it may be seen with
your Eyes, especially if the Physician knew before it became infirm how large
naturally the Pupilla was; as also if there be a hinderance of the sight by
reason of the over largeness of it.

Moreover, The natural largeness of the Pupilla is known by this, If when you
shut one Eye, the Pupilla of the other is larger, which will not be in a
Preternatural dilatation, because then the Uvea cannot be further extended.

Lastly, If this dil^aation of the Pupilla be only in one Eye, it is
Preternatural, and signifies one Eye only is affected.

As to the Prognostic, The Dilatation of the Pupilla from the original so, is
incurable; but that which comes after is hardly cured, especially that which
comes of dryness, but that which comes of other ^inuance, is curable; because
young diseases of the Eyes, according to Galens Doctrine may be cured, out old
may not but with very much difficulty be cured.

The Cure is to be varied according to the variety of the Cause; and if it come
from dryness, which can scarce come from an internal cause, but also the whole
Body must be so afflicted; therefore we must refresh the whole body with moist
Remedies, and nourishments, and such as are restaurative, such we use in
Hectic Fevers: but more peculiarly the Body is to be moistened with a bath of
warm water, and new milk, which also must be often put into the Eyes,
especially woman's Milk.

If it comes from a humor which fills the Eye, because it flows from the
Head you must purge the Head and the whole Body also, and then you must discuss
the humor that is fixed in the Eye. Which when they may be sufficiently
performed by the Remedies propounded for the cure of a Cataract or Suffusion,
we shall not in vain repeat them here, but send you to the asoresaid Trearite
for them, where you shall find all things necessary for the discussing and
dissipating humors contained in the Eyes. Yet you may after use some
astringents which may make the Pupilla which is too much enlarged more narrow:
for this end you may make use of this following Collyrium, o^ Water for the
Eyes.

Take of red Roses dried two scruples: Saffron, Spicknard, the Bark of the
Frankincense Tree, of each half a scruple: Tutty prepared, burnt lvory, and
Acacia, of each one scruple: Bring them into a Powder, and put them in a thin
linen cloth, and tie it; then hang it in three ounces of Rose Water, and wash
the Eyes often with the Water, dropping into them, squeezing the cloth as often
as you use the Water.

If it comes from wind (after universal Evacuations) those Medicines are to be
used which discuss wind in the whole Body, and especially in the Eyes, and so
they may be fomented with the Decoction of Fennel, Rue, Dill, red Roses,
Myrtles, made in Rose Water with the fourth part of white Wine.

Finally, If it come with a stroke, you must alter the manner of Cure,
according to the greatness of the Contusion; and if there be an Inflammation,
you must cure it as an Opfithalmy: But if there be no Inflammation, you shall at
the first apply a Cataplasm of Bean flower, Plantane Leaves, and red Roses made
up with Rose Water. After that, you shall often drop therein the blood of a
Pidgeon, which is a most excellent Remedy in all Wounds and Contusions of the
Eyes.

CHAP. VI. Of the straitness, or Contraction of the Pupilla.
THe Pupilla being too straight, hinders the sight, as the being of it too
large, as was showed in the former Chapter, because a moderate largeness of the
Pupilla is necessary for receiving perfectly the visible Species. So when the
Eye is in its Natural condition, and is in a light place, the Pupilla is
contracted lest it should take in too much light, if suddenly it be in a dark
room, the things therein contained are little or scarcely seen at the first
entrance, by reason of the aforesaid contraction. Afterward when the Pupil is
dilated, al things are seen rightly, therefore in a place moderately light, the
breadth of the Pupilla ought to be moderate, that it may receive moderate
light, not too much, nor too little, for making a perfect sight. But if the
Pupilla be too narrow, it receives not light enough, therefore they who are so
affected, the sight is diminished, yet they see well in a very light place,
because at that time light sufficient will pass through a narrow hole, if no
other Disease of the Eyes be joined with it.

Now the narrowness of the Pupilla, comes either from the original, or first
constitution, and then it little hinders; for if they who are so affected see
less in a dark or dusky place than they who have a Pupilla of its moderate
natural breath, yet in a clear light place they see better. Hence Galen said in
1. de symp. cause. cap. 2. that they who are born with small Pupilla's see best.

Or the straightness of the Pupilla comes from preternatural causes, namely,
overmuch moisture, dryness, or defect of the Watery Humor, and want of Spirits.

The Pupil is contracted by humidity, when the Uvea is relaxed, and so makes
the hole less or narrower: For although the dilatation of the Pupilla come of
the same humidity, yet contrary effects come not of the same cause, because if
the cause may be called the same, it ought to have the same re^ation to its
effects, but humidity is not in the same manner when it makes a Dilatation, for
it makes that by filling and distending the Membrane, but it makes the angustia
or narrowness by relaxing it: (...) relaxeth when it is united to its substance.

Concerning dryness there is the same difficulty, since it is mentioned among
the causes of dilating ^he Pupilla. But this is the difference: When the Uvea
is dried, and the humors of the Eye remain in their due quantity, then it makes
a dilatation of the Pupilla, because it loses not the extention which it
formerly had, as was said in the precedent Chapter, concerning Skins extended
when dried, make their holes larger; but if the Tunicle Uvea when it is dried,
wrinckled, falls together, and loose its former extension, from the defect or
diminishing of the humors of the eye, then is the hole of the Pupilla made
straighter.

And so the constriction of the Pupilla by dryness will be almost the same with
that which happens from a defect of the watery humor in the eye; although it
may come without dryness, when by the pouring forth of the watery humor the
Uvea falls down.

Lastly, she narrowness of the Pupilla comes from the defect of Spirits, or
from the fewness of them, when by reason of the obstruction of the optic Nerve
or some other cause, the visive spirit cannot come to the eyes, which when it
is filled with spirit keeps its Tunicles extended; but when it wants spirits
they grow lax and fall together: Hence the constriction of the Pupilla usually
comes. This appears in very Old men, in whom the Pupilla is made narrow by
reason of the want of spirits.

This Disease is known easily being open to the sense, for if one eye alone
suffer, by comparing it with the other you may perceive the straightness of the
Pupilla; but if both suffer, by looking upon the eyes of another man who is
sound sighted, you find it out.

As to the Prognostic, a straightness in the Pupilla which comes from the
loss of the watery humor in the eye, is incurable, because when that is once
lost it cannot be recruited; especially in old folk: in young people sometimes
the watery humor of the eye has been let forth by a wound, and has been
repaired again: A Constriction of the Pupilla from dryness, can scarce, and
very hardly be cured: But that which comes from moisture, in the beginning, and
being young, may be easily Cured: but an old one very hardly.

The Cure of this Disease differs not from the former, for they come both
from the same Causes, namely, Dryness, or Moisture; which distempers, although
they produce contrary effects, after the manner before Explained; yet are they
to be Cured by the same Remedies.

CHAP. VII. Of Albugo, or the white Spot called Pin and Web, and of other
Colors of the Cornea changed.
THe Natural Constitution of the Cornea Tunicle is destroyed when it loses
its brightness and transparentness; or when its infected with another color.

It loses brightness when it is grown thicker; now the Cornea does grow thick
by dryness, as in old men, which is incurable; or by gross humors fastened upon
it, which happens often in an Ophthalmy; when either by too much use of
Resolving Medicines the thinner parts of the humor are dissolved, and the thick
remain: Or when by an extraordinary use of cold Medicines the humors are
thickened: and the Cornea does not only become thicker in that part unto which
the humor is fastened, but it also contracteth a white Color, which is called
Leucoma, or Albugo; sometimes this also comes from a scar after an Ulcer,
whereby the Cornea is made thicker in that part, and loses its
transparentness.

The Differences are diverse, as they are more or lessthick; one does possess
only the superficies of the Cornea: another lies more deep, and pierces the
whole Cornea: another is greater, and possesses the whole Pupilla, or the
greatest part thereof: another is less, and comprehends but a little space of
the Pupilla, and then it is properly called Macula, or Pin and Web.

The Cornea is altered in Color when it is blood-shot, which Disease is called
Sugillatio, and then al Objects appear red: Or when Choler is got into it, as
in those who have the yellow Jaundice; and then the Objects use to appear
yellow according to Galens Doctrine, which is to be understood of a great
effusion of Choler upon the Cornea, for if it be only lightly died therewith,
which often happens (for the Tunicle Adnata receives more Choler than the
Cornea) then the Objects will not seem yellow, but as they naturally are.

These Diseases need their peculiar Diagnosis for the knowledge of them;
because they are apparent to the Senses, but especially Albugo, which is
thicker and more white; and more hinders the ^^ght: So also that which is
more superficial is more white; but that which is deeper declineth unto black
because it is nearer to the Uvea, which being its self black, communicates its
Color unto that.

The Causes which produce these, are easily known by what has been said;
namely, if an Ophthalmy, or Wound, or Ulcer went before.

As to the Prognostic: An Albugo which comes of Phlegm, or a thick humor
remaining after an Ophthalmy, it is easily Cured, especially if it be not
inveterate: but that which comes after a Wound or Ulcer, and is a scar, is
very hardly cured; because in a part which has exquisite sense, sharp
Medicines, such as are proper to wear away a Cicatrize or Scar, c^nnot be
endured.

The Cure of an Albugo congealed or gathered in the Cornea from Phlegm, is done
by Emolients attenuating and discussing Medicines, but by always using
universal Medicines first, which may take away the antecedent Cause, and hinder
a new defluxion from the eyes, which would be caused by Medicines to the place;
especially if they be sharp, or hot, except the matter be first removed.

Therefore first make universal Evacuations, then revulsions, then Derivations,
as it is set down in the Cure of Gutta serena, and Cataract.

Afterward apply a Fomentation to soften the hard matter (with soft spunges)
made of the Decoction of Foenugreek, Melilot, Celondine, and Fennel.

Or, Let the Vapor of it be taken into the eyes; and to this purpose you may
make this that follows.

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce: the Leaves of Mallows, Eyebright,
Celondine the great, of each one handful: Linseed and Foenugreek of each three
drams: Melilot flowers one pugil: make a Decoction of these in springwater, and
let the steem or vapor of it be taken into the Eyes, morning and evening.

Afterward use Discussives, such as are prescribed in the Cure of a Cataract
or Suffusion; for they also will do well here. And so Collyria Eye waters which
do attenuate and resolve the Humor fastened in the eye, may be taken from
thence, and especially those which are made of Honey and things that quicken
the sight. For the Water of Honey distilled used alone, is very good to take
away al blemishes in the Eye if you continue the use of it any time.

Sugar Candy is good for the same, Dissolved in the Water of Eyebright,
Celondine, or Fennel.

As also it would be very good to let a Child that has chewed Fennel-Seed to
lick the Eye often.

Amatus Lusitanus reports that he Cured thick clouds in the Eye of a Girl of
twelve years of age after he had given the Decoction of Sarsa twenty days,
with this Medicine.

Take of Honey from the Hive two pints: the tops of Fennel, the flowers of
Elder and Eyebright, of each two pugils: Sugar Candy four ounces: distill them
in Balneo Mariae; and let the water be dropped into the Eyes.

The Seed of Clary put into the Eye at bed time, purges the Eye from Filth,
and fo cleanses it, that it conduces to the Cure of Albugo.

The juice of Fennel does potently discuss an Albugo if newly made, and mixed
with a drop of the Balsom of Peru.

The same does an Oil made of burnt Rags mixed with the spittle of Child, and
laid on with a Feather: It is made by burning of a Linen Rag, and quenching it
between two dishes; when it is cold you shall find the Oil in drops upon the dish.

But Albugo coming of a Scar, is cured with Remedies that are good to mollify,
attenuate, and dissolve Scars; but since such are always sharp, you must be
more careful in applying, first universal Medicines, and revulsives, lest a
flux of humors be brought to the part. Having therefore used them as aforesaid,
first it is good to apply emollient Fomentations or Fumigations above
prescribed. Then use abstergent and discussing Remedies: First those that are
gentle, such as are above mentioned, especially the compound Water of Honey:
After you may come to stronger, such as are the Galls of Fishes, of the
Uranoscopus, or one-eyed Fish; of the Pastinaca, or fish like the Ray; or of
the Pike; as also of other Creatures, as of a Partridg, Cock, Goose, Ox, and
others. After the same manner may be used the juice of great Celondine, of the
lesser Centaury, of Brooklime, and the like, which must be mixed with Honey
both because Honey has a clensing and discussing quality, as also because
Liquors that are put into the Eye, flow to the corners, and stay not in the
Pupilla in which their operation is required; but being thickened with Honey,
they cleave well to the Eye: But if their sharpness cannot be endured, the said
Juyces or Galls may be thickened, with that Mucilage or slime of Gum Traganth,
of Fleabane, or of Quinces, being drawn with the Water of Fennel, Eyebright,
or other proper to the Eyes.

The form of a Collyrium made of Juyces, is thus:

Take of the Juice of Fennel, Celondine, and Brooklime, of each three drams:
the juice of the lesser Centaury, ha^f an ounce: white Honey one ounce: 'Mix
them like a Liniment. If with the Albugo there be redness of the Eyes, the
Collyrium made of Salt, white Wine, and Wheat prescribed in the Ophthalmia, is
very good. Or this,

Take of Aloes and Agarick, of each one scruple: Powder them, and tie them in a
clout; which steep in the Water of Eyebright or Fennel, and wipe the Eyes
therewith morning and evening. Aloes does cleanse, strengthen, and stop the
defluxion; Agarick does powerfully cleanse.

Sugillatio or blood-shot, or that red color in the Eye which comes of blood
sent thither, if it be young, is easily cured with Pigeons blood dropped in:
but in the want thereof you may use Women's Milk with a little Frankincense and
Saffron. Or you may apply the Yolk of an Egg with Wine; which is commended of
Galen, 4. de comp. Med. sec. loc. cap. 8. But if the disease be stubborn, you
must foment the Eye with the Decoction of Foenugreek, Marshmallows, Fennel,
Rue, Celondine; or let the fume of the same be received into it. And finally,
all Medicines prescribed in the Cure of a Cataract may be very proper for the
cure of this. But more especially, when the disease is old, and the redness
turns black, Galen commends dried Hysop tied in a rag, and put into hot
water, and applied to the Eye: and Experience teaches that this Medicine is of
such force that the blood is drawn away by it sticking to the clout.

And lastly, The yellow color of the Jaundice, which most appears in the Eyes,
when the Jaundice is cured is easily discussed: if you would hasten the Cure,
take the fume of Vinegar into the Eyes.

CHAP. VIII. Of Ophthalmia, or Inflammation of the Eyes.
THe Tunicle called Adnata is so joined to the Cornea, that many diseases are
in both; as the Inflammation of the Eyes, though it is proper to the Adnata, yet
it is often extended to the Cornea, and produces diverse Diseases in it,
namely, Ulcers, Hypopyon, when matter is underneath, Albugo or Pin and Web, and
others. So also Pustals, and other Tumors, Wounds, and Ulcers are common to
both Tunicles. Therefore because all the Diseases of these Tunicles cannot be
spoken of severally, we will only speak of the Diseases of the Adnata before we
speak more of the Cornea.

Beginning with an Ophthalmy; We say that it is, as the word in Greek shows,
only an Inflammation of the Eye, and by all Authors it is used for the
inflammation of the Adnata, or Conjunctiva. It is called by the Latins
Lippitudo or blood-shotness since Cornelius Celsus.

This Inflammation, as it is greater or less, has a threefold difference. The
first is called in Greek Taraxis, in Latin Conturbatio, which according to
Paulus comes from an external cause, namely, the Sun, smoke, dust, oil, and
the like: but it may also come of an internal, namely, by fault of the stomach
after drinking of Wine, or other Distempers; and this is a light Inflammation
called Phlogosis, with a small pain and redness, yet it sometimes turns into a
true Ophthalmy, and is the original of it.

But a true Ophthalmy comes always from an internal cause, and it is a true
inflammation with which tumor, redness, and pain, it is called by Celsus,
Lippitudo or blood-shotness, because there cleaves a thick excrement, which
the Latins call Lippa.

The third is called Chemosis in Greek; in Latin Chemosis also, and it is when
an inflammation grows so high that it is very great with vehement pain, and
both the Eyebrows are inverted so, that the Eyes can scarce be covered
therewith; and the white of the Eye stands higher, and the red does cover most
part of the Iris or Circle. In Children, and such as have great Eyes, this has
often happened, and it comes from a great repletion, and from flegmy humors.

There is another Difference of the Ophthalmy taken out of Hippocrates, Aph.
14. Sect. 3. by which it is divided unto a moist and a dry Ophthalmy: The moist
Ophthalmy is that which is already described, and has a weeping. But the dry
Ophthalmy called by Hippocrates, Xerophthalmia, which comes in dry weather, is
made of Choler, or burnt or adust Melancholy, and is such as wants humidity
in part, and therefore there is no weeping. There are other subdivisions from
the adjuncts; for if there be an itching joined with it, it is called
Psorophthalmia; but if it come with hardness of the Eyelids, it is called
Sclerophthalmia.

There is also another Difference of Ophthalmies, taken out of Galen, 2. de
diff. febrium, cap. 11. where he says That some are Periodical, or such as
comes by fits, to those which have a very hot and moist head, and weak Eyes,
fit to receive a defluxion. These after many years have a consumption of their
Eyes, and lose their sight; hence it is called Tabida Ophthalmia, or a
consuming Ophthalmy, or an Ophthalmy which ends in a consumption of the Eye.

There is also another difference taken from the immediate cause, which is
defluxion or congestion, that is, gathering of humors. It comes for the most
part by defluxion; but by congestion only, when there is either a distemper or
weakness of the Conjunctiva, by which there is no equality, or Omoiosis in the
part, but many excrements are gathered together, from whence through the
weakness of the part comes an inflammation.

The Conjunct cause of an Odhthalmy is Chollerick, or Waterish, or
Melanchollick Blood flowing into the Eyes, or gathered into them. The Causes of
defluxion are manifold, both external and internal ordinarily known. But the
causes of Congestion or Cumulation are all such as distemper or weaken the
Eyes; so that an Ophthalmy which at the first came only by defluxion, in time
by weakening of the part may spoil its concoction, and so it may be said to be
an Ophthalmy partly from defluxion, and partly from Congestion, which is often
seen in old Ophthalmies.

But when an Ophthalmy comes only by way of defluxion, it is certain that it
comes for the most part from the head, and almost all Authors acknowledge this.
Notwithstanding Experience teaches that many violent Ophthalmies come from the
Liver, and the humors that come from thence to the Eyes; insomuch that
Cauteries applied to the hinder part of the head, e^crease the Disease, which
otherwise are good Remedies when the defluxion is from the head, for they draw
up the humors: and we have often seen that old Ophthalmies which were accounted
incurable, have suddenly gone away of their own accord, by stopping of an issue
which has long been kept open, namely, when the motion of the humors from the
inferior to the superior parts has ceased, which before was caused by the
Cautery or Issue in the Neck, by Nature sending part of the humors to the
weakened Eyes, not far distant from the Issue.

That defluxion which comes from the head, either is carried by internal
Veins, which are under the Skull, into the Eyes; or by the external Vessels,
which is most frequent, namely, by the Veins, and Arteries which come from the
Pericranium by the Forehead and Temples, to the Conjunctiva.

An Ophthalmy is easily known, because the blood diffused upon the Conjunctiva
may be easily seen, and if redness appear without a tumor coming of an
external, it is called Taraxis, or Conturbation. But if besides the redness
there be swelling and heat with weeping, it is a true Ophthalmy, and at length
if it so increase that it cover the black of the Eye, and the Eyelids be
inverted, then is it called Chemosis.

Hence we fetch the signs of the Causes: for if it comes from repletion, and of
blood alone, not only the Tunicle Adnata, but also the whole face will be red;
as also there will be a swelling of the Veins, drouziness of the Senses and
whole Body, and a manifest swelling.

If it come from Chollerick Blood, there will be sharpness of tears, and not
only the corners of the Eyes, but also the very cheeks will be corroded, there
will be a pricking and intolerable pain, a little swelling with redness
inclined to yellow; and the patient has formerly used immoderate exercise been
inflamed by the Sun, subject to anger, and eating of sharp things, his
complexion is Chollerick, or he is young, and the disease comes in hot weather.

If it come from phlegm, there will be a heavy pain, little heat, not much
redness, little shooting, no sharp tears, but many, and slimy and glutinatious.

If it come of Melancholy, the Tumor will be small, the redness will be dusky,
few tears, little clamminess, but very thick, a Melanchollick constitution, and
the like signs of Melancholy.

If the defluxion come from the inner parts of the Head, there will be a pain
in the Head internally coming to the Roots of the Eyes. But if the defluxion
come into the Eyes by the exterior Vessels, the pain of the Head will be more
external, the Veins of the Forehead will be distended, and also there will be
perceived a great beating in the Temples.

The Prognostic is either in respect of an Ophthalmy coming, or already begun.

An imminent Lippitudo is known by an itching and pricking in the Eyes, with
heat also, and the disposition of the Eyes to receive defluxions, does give
advantage to the prognostic of it; wherefore they who have great Eyes are more
subject to this disease: Moreover, the season does much conduce to the breeding
of it, as Hippocrates teaches, Aph. 11. Sect. 3. If the Winter be dry and full
of North winds, and the Spring rainy, and with South winds, in Summer you shall
have sore Eyes very common, especially in women, and men of moist constitutions.

A flux of the Belly coming upon an Ophthalmy is good, according to
Hippocrates, Aph. 17. Sect. ^6. because the superfluity of humors is
discharged, and carried downwards.

An old pain in the Eyes is very dangerous, for it signifies the cause to be
violent, and it is to be feared lest Imposthume, Suppuration, or Ulcer do
follow.

An Ophthalmy beginning in one Eye uses ordinarily to pass to the other.

For the Cure of an Ophthalmy, the external causes must be first removed, as
also the antecedent causes are to be evacuated, revelled, and repelled; the
conjunct cause is to be derived and discussed, and the part affected
strengthened. For the performing of which Indications there are these usual
means to be applied.

First, Let his Diet be cooling and moistening, of Meats that breed good
nourishment, boiled rather than roasted; of suppings rather than solid things;
because the Eyes are moved in chewing: let him avoid sharp things, Salt and
Pepper. As also things that Fume, and will fill the Head with vapors: As also
such as quickly turn into Choler, as Milk, Sugar, Honey, and al sweet things;
Wine especially is not good; but instead thereof use Barley water, with Liquoris
and cooling things.

Sleep is very profitable, because then the Eyes rest from motion which is apt
to stir up pain and defluxion; besides pain is assuaged by sleep, and the
matter causing the Disease is concocted: Let the Patient sleep with his Head
high, and more inclined to that side which is least affected.

Let him avoid almotion of his Body, for rest is so profitable that Celsus
commands that the first day of Cure they speak not, lest by that motion matter
be carried to the head.

The Belly must be kept Solluble, for Hippocrates says it is good for him that
has sore eyes to fall into a looseness.

Let him avoid Passions, especially Anger.

Let the Air be temperate and pure, without Smoke, Dust, and Winds, and somewhat
dark; of the light by moving the Spirits causes defluxion: Let him have a
black, green, or sky colored cloth before his eyes; and keep not only his sore
but his sound eye shut or covered; for while the sound eye is moved toward the
Objects the sore is moved also, whence the pain increases; and this is the
reason why men have greater pain when one eye is affected, than when both.

The Diet being thus ordered, let us lay down the Cure of the Disease; and
since it comes for the most part of external Causes: first let them be removed
lest they nourish it: next make a Collyrium, or Eye-water, or Rose and Plantane
Water, with the white of an egg, and Woman's milk, and let that be instilled
into the Eye often in a day; as also let a linen clout be dipped therein and
applied.

At the same time let him sleep as much as he can; for sleep is very profitable
to concoct and discuss the matter causing the Disease. If it yield not to
these, you must use the Remedies proper for a true Ophthalmy, in this Order.

First open a Vein (having given a Clyster) on the contrary Arm, and do it
often, till you have made sufficient Evacuation and Revulsion: For Avicen
teaches, That in a true Ophthalmy you may let blood till they faint. But
Galen, lib. de curat. per sangu. miss. cap. 17. tells a story of a Steward
which was freed of a great Ophthalmy by blood letting: first three pound; and
four hours after one pound: And in his 16. cap. of the same Book he affirms,
That Ophthalmies are often cured in an hours space only by Phlebotomy: which
could not be but by loosing of a great quantity, as they did in those times in
that case.

Phlebotomy must be regulated and moderated according to the temper, age, sex,
strength, and kind of the Disease; for in a Plethorick body, and when it comes
from blood, you must take a greater quantity: but in a Chollerick body, or
Melancholy, or Phlegmatic, and other Circumstances which prohibit
blood-letting, you must take less.

If the whole body be full of blood, first open the Liver or Median vein, after
the Head vein; but if you intend to loose but little blood, begin with the Head
vein.

But in them who have a stoppage of any ordinary accustomed Evacuation by the
Terms or Hemorrhoids, you must open the veins beneath, or apply Leeches to the
Hemorrhoid veins.

After you have bled enough, you must labor to make Revulsion by applying of
Cupping glasses to the shoulders and the back, both dry and with scarrification.

Frictions also are good for the same; and Ligatures in the lower parts.

To the aforesaid Revulsions you must ad means to derive, which are by the
opening of the veins of the Forehead and Temples; to which some ad the opening
of the veins in the corners of the Eyes: others apply Horsleeches to the
Temples, others behind the Ears; al which derivations are very profitable after
sufficient Evacuation.

Galen 13. Meth. Cap. 22. Commended the opening of an Artery in the Temples,
when the Disease comes of very hot blood: And though this way of Practice is
not used in our times, yet it is very excellent and profitable, without any
danger; for in those lesser Arteries the blood is stanched by good Ligature and
bondage only; nor is the Plaster mentioned by Galen in the same place
necessary, which is made of Bole, Frankincense, Mastick, and the Hair of an
Hare, with the white of an Egg: yet for the better security, they who are
afraid of the opening of an Artery, may make use of it; you may see what we
have said concerning the opening of Arteries in the Cure of the Headache.

Vesicatories also are very profitable in this Disease, both applied to the
Neck and behind the Ears.

When you have bled sufficiently you must purge, that the Chollerick Humors,
especially such as make the blood hot, may be evacuated: And Hippocrates says
it is very requisite, Aphor. 17. Sect. 6. For it is good for him that has an
Ophthalmy to fall into a flux. And Galen, 13. Meth. Cap. 11. says, That he
has seen some who began to have sore Eyes to be cured in one day only by a
Purge. But it must be made of gentle ingredients, and such as do allay the heat
of the blood, taking heed of al Medicines that have Scammony in them, and they
be made thus.

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce: clean Senna three drams: Annisseeds half a
dram: Endive, Succory, and Fumatory, of each half a handful: boil them to four
ounces; and when it is strained infuse in the liquor of the best Rhubarb and
yellow Myrobalans rubbed with the Oil of sweet Almonds, of each one dram:
yellow Saunders half a scruple: after strain it again, and dissolve of Manna
and syrup of Roses of each one ounce. Make a Potion.

Or in Form of Bolus, thus.

Take of Cassia newly drawn six drams: Diacatholicon three drams: Powder of
Rhubarb one dram: make a Bolus with Sugar.

So many times we prescribe Pills in an Ophthalmy which comes of Phlegm, namely,
Lucis majoris, of Agarick, and the like: which though they are very good in the
state of the Disease, yet it is better to abstain from in the beginning, lest
the Humors moved with too violent a Medicine should fall more upon the part.

Nor is one Purge sufficient, but you must repel it a distance, if the Disease
be old; first giving good preparatives by Apozemes or Juleps proper for the
Humor offending: therefore in the beginning allay the heat of the Humors with
cooling Juleps, and such as thicken; or with Emulsions made of the greater Cold
Seeds, Lettice and white Poppy seeds, in some cooling Decoction, with a little
Rose water.

After universal Revulsions and Evacuations come to Topical Medicines with that
part, which from the beginning must be repelling; yet the soundest
Practicioners do warn us not to use repelling Medicines to the Eyes at first,
because for the most part they stop the Humor and retain it in the Eye, and so
increase the grief and inflammation: For Galen Comment. Aphor. 31. Sect. 6.
reproves a certain Oculist which used these kind of Medicines in the beginning
of the inflammation; for they may be suspected in the beginning not to stay
violent defluxions, but rather to keep them from coming forth: Hence it comes
to pass that when the humors are sharp the Cornea is sometimes ulcerated, but
when they are many it is streaked and sometimes broken: But Avicenna, fen. 3.
lib. 3. tract. 1. cap. 9. says, That it is fit, that if possible, we abstain
from Collyriums the first three days. And a little after, he says, That we
ought not in the beginning to apply strong Astringents and thickners: because
they thicken the Tunicles or coats, and hinder resolution and increase pain.

Yet we need be so exact in the time and number of days, because the Disease
is in some older, and in some younger: But we may with profit apply Astringents
at the beginning to the Forehead and Temples; for by those, the veins by whith
the humors flow to the Eyes are stopped, and they driven back.

The Form of this is as follows.

Take of Bole-Armonick, sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, Mastich, of each one
dram: red Roses, Balasts, or Pomegranat flowers, and the powder of Lentils, of
each two scruples: mix them with the white of an Egg and Vinegar of Roses, and
make a Cataplasm for the Forehead, and Temples.

Moreover, A Cataplasm made of the Juice of Nettles and Wheat flower, applied
to the Forehead and Temples, is excellent to stay a defluxion by reason the
Juice of Nettles has a special Virtue for the stopping of al sorts of
Bleedings, as it does the bleeding at the Nose or Mouth.

But if the pain be very great, which uses to increase the defluxion upon the
Eyes, you must apply Anodines or Medicines asswaging pains upon them. Among
which new milk, especially if it be that which a sound woman gives is best, if
it be often milked fresh into the Eyes from the breast* and not be used stale,
for then it will grow sour and be offensive to them: instead thereof you may use
fresh Cheese made of Sheeps milk, which you must often change, lest it turn
like Butter, and so inflame the Eye.

The white of an Egg well beaten til it turn to water, is commended of Galen,
for it asswageth pain, and gently stays the Flux.

Also an Apple roasted in the Embers does much assuage the pain of the Eyes.

The Mucilages, or slime of the seeds of Fleabane, Quinces, Foenugreek, drawn
with Rosewater, do take away pain; but they must be renewed every day or they
will grow sour.

Of these things you may make diverse kinds of Medicines. As for Example.

Take of the pap of a sweet Apple roasted in the embers, an ounce: the Mucilage
of the seeds of Fleabane and Quinces drawn with Rose Water, of each six drams:
the white of a new laid Eg beaten into water, and woman's Milk, of each one
dram: Make a Cataplasm and apply it to the Eyes. Or,

Take of the pap of a roasted Apple one ounce: Crumbs of white Bread half an
ounce: one Egg mixed with Breast milk: Make of these a Cataplasm.

Thin slices of Goats Flesh, Veal, or Mutton, often applied to the Eyes, do
very much assuage pain.

A Cataplasm may be made more easily with crumbs of white Bread, and Woman's Milk
mixed with Rose Water.

If the pain be intolerable, you must fly to Narcotick or stupifying
Medicines, which you must use sparingly, and with good advice, because they do
thicken the visive Spirits, and make the Humors and Tunicles gross, by which
the Sight will become dim.

Among Narcoticks for the Eyes, the white Troches of Rhasis are principal; made
with Opium thus:

Take of Rose water two ounces: the Water of an Eg well beaten one ounce: the
white Troches of Rhasis with Opium, one dram: Make a Collyrium, or Water for
the Eyes.

When the pain is aslwaged, you must come to repelling Medicines, which must be
gentle and mixed with Anodines continually: for this end make this Collyrium
following:

Take of Plantane and Rose water, of each one ounce and an half: the Water of
the white of an Egg beaten, one ounce: the white Troches of Rhasis with Opium,
one dram: Make a Collyrium, and drop it often into the Eyes.

If the pain be very great, you may put to it Woman's Milk, and the Mucilages
aforesaid.

This following Medicine does powerfully resist inflammation, and stay the flux.

Take of the white of an Eg, beat it in a pewter dish with a piece of Alum
very well, till it come to the consistence of an Ointment, which you must
spread upon a linen cloth, and apply it warm to the Eyes: After two or three
hours take it away, left by its long continuance having an extraordinary
astringent quality from the Alum, it retain the humors in the Eyes.

Also the Water of Alum distilled in an Alembick, laid to the Eye with a
linen clout, does allay the inflammation thereof.

The Salt of Lead dissolved in Rose Water, or Wine Vinegar, or mixed with
Pomatum, does powerfully cool the inflammation.

In the increase of the Disease you must mix digestives with Repelling
Medicines, and therefore you must put the Water of Eyebright, Fennel, Celondine,
and the Mucilage of Linseeds, Althaeae, o^ Marshmallows, and Foenugreek, Gal.
13. Meth. commends especially the Decoction of Fenugreek, because it digesteth,
concocteth, and moderately repelleth: but you must sift the Fenugreek to take
out the dust, and after wash it often in warm Water, before you boil it, or
make the Mucilage of it. You may thus make a Collyrium.

Take of the Mucilage of the seed of Foenugreek, and Quinces drawn with Rose,
and Eyebright Water, of each one ounce and an half: the white Troches of Rhasis
with Opium, one dram: Tutty prepared half a dram: Make a Collyrium.

When the Disease is at the height, you may put Sarcocol to it, which is of a
more digestive quality; but since it is apt to hurt the Eyes by its over
dryness and sharpness, it must first be steeped some few days in Milk, often
changed, and you must prepare but a little at one time, for if it be long kept
it will grow sour, and hurt the Eyes. You may use it thus:

Take of the flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, and red Roses, of each one pugil:
the seeds of Foenugreek cleansed one dram: boil them in Plantane Water. Dissolve
in four ounces of the straining, Sarcocol one dram: Tutty prepared, and of the
white Troches of Rhasis without Opium, of each half a dram: Make a Collyrium.

Authors do commend some Waters to be very powerful.

Quercetan commends the infusion of Crocus Metallorum made in Eyebright and
Fennel Water, which is strong enough, and is no ways too sharrp for the Eyes
as others are.

Crollius and the rest of the Chymicks, do highly commend the Salt of Lead
dissolved in Rose Water, to which they put a few grains of Sul Armonick. The
manner is thus:

Take of the Salt of Lead twelve grains: Sal Armonick three grains: Rose Water
three ounces: Mix them, and drop some into the Eye morning and evening.

There is also a Water made of calcined or burnt Lead, or Litharge, or Menium
infused in Vinegar, which laid to the Eye with a linen clout presently cures
their inflammation.

The Water of white Vitriol is most common, being dissolved in Rose or Plantane
Water; this mitigateth inflammations, discusseth, and hinders defluxions. Thus
they are proportioned:

Take of white Vitriol one scruple: Rose or Plantane Water four ounces:
Dissolve the Vitriol in it at the fire: Strain the Water and drop it into the
Eyes. If it be too sharp, you may qualify it as you please with more Rose or
Plantane Water.

This following Medicine is not so sharp, and more dissolving.

Take of Flower-de-luce Roots, and red Roses, of each one scruple: Rose and
Plantane Water, of each three ounces: Boil them to the third part with a gentle
fire. Ad to the straining white Vitriol poundered eight grains: Make a
Collyrium.

Many Ointments also are used for the Eyes, of which, these three following are
the best, and sometimes do wonders. The first is in Renodaeus his Dispensatory,
called Vnguentum Ophthalmium, made thus:

Take of Bole-Armenick washed in Rose Water, one ounce: Lapis Calaminaris
washed in Eyebright Water, and Tutty prepared, of each two drams: Pearl finely
poudered half a dram: Camphire half a scruple: Opium five grains: Butter as
much as will be sufficient to make an Ointment according to art, for to be
applied to the corners of the Eyes, and the Eyelids.

The second is John Cratoes, which is set down in his Physical Counsels
gathered by Laurence Scholzius, Cons. 6. thus:

Take Butter made in May, if you can get it, or other that is fresh and well
worked, or the marrow of an Ox or Deers Shank, and mix therewith as much of the
fine powder of Lapis Calaminar is as it will receive, make an Ointment.

The third is from Paenotus in denario, thus made:

Take of Tutty prepared one ounce and an half: Camphire one dram: Verdegreece
twelve grains Beat the Tutty with the Camphire together in a Mortar, the
Verdegreece by its self, all very sine: Then take of fresh Butter one ounce:
Rose water, one dram: boil them gently together, and then take them from the
fire, and first put in your Camphire with your Tutty, then your Verdegreece by
degrees; stir them very well, and reserve them in a glass. Make an Ointment and
strain it through a Sarsenet; anoint the inside of the Eyelids, especially
about the corners, and the Patient will soon recover. This is a most approved
Medicine against Inflammations both with matter and dry, against itching of the
Eyelids, and weeping.

There is another very good, though sharp, and therefore must be only applied
to the Eyelids; it is thus made: (And when al have failed, this has cured the
most desperate Ophthalmy) namely, Of May Butter, and Juice of Tobacco boiled to
an Ointment, which must be applied, the Eyelids being closed, and in a
darkroom; as soon as the Patient opens his Eyes, it will begin to bite, and
will certainly cure.

In the height of the disease, you must apply more resolving than repelling
Medicines, therefore they which were prescribed in the increase of it are good
in the height or state of it, if you increase the quantity of the Resolvers,
and diminish the Repellers. But especially these two following Ointments may be
used not only in the state and height, but in the declination, to the perfect
cure of the Disease.

First Fomentations to discuss the matter, are good in the height of the
Disease, made thus:

Take of the flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, and Roses, of each one pugil:
Foenugreek seeds prepared as before showed, two drams: Make a Decoction, with
which foment the Eyes with fourdouble clouts. This is good in the end, of the
increase, and the beginning of the state of the Disease; and in Winter you must
use it hot, in Summer only warm.

In the end of the state and declination, you must make a more resolving
Fomentation, which is done by adding to the former Ingredients, the Leaves of
Eyebright, Marjoram, Bettony, and a little white Wine.

The best and rarest Secret fro the Cure of an Ophthalmy, is made of the Oil
which comes from Linen burnt between two close dishes; one drop of which
mixed with the spittle of a Child must be dropped into the Eye with a Feather.

In the declination, not only the Remedies before mentioned, but also Waters
more resolving are to be used, as thus:

Take of Frankincense and Aloes, of each half a dram: Sarcocol washed with
Breast-milk, one dram and an half: Saffron half a scruple: the Mucilage of
Foenugreek half an ounce: Fennel and Eyebright Water, of each one ounce and an
half. Make a Collyrium.

But if you will, dry more, and also digest.

Take of Sarcocol one dram and an half: Tutty prepared one dram: Aloes one
scruple: Mirrh half a scruple: the Mucilage of Foenugreek half an ounce:
Vervain and Celondine Water, of each one ounce. Make a Collyrium.

In a defluxion which comes of phlegm, you may use strong Resolvers, not only in
the declination, but also in the state and increase of the Disease very
confidently.

Moreover, In the declination Authors do set down two special Remedies, namely,
The use of Wine, and Baths: which first were delivered by Hippocrates, Aph. 31.
Sect. 6. in these words; Drinking of Wine, or Baths, or a Fomentation, or
Blood-letting, or a Potion, do take away pains in the Eyes.

Galen in his Commentary thereon, distinguishes the Case and the Time in which
these Remedies are good, which we have explained as to Blood-letting,
Fomentations, and Purging: But Galen in the place cited, cap. 22. lib. 13.
meth. teaches that Baths are then good, when an Ophthalmy (...) of sharp
humors, and when the body is sufficiently cleansed by purging and bleeding:
because they qualify the sharpness of humors, and stays their motion and
defluxion; the chiefest part (...) them being sent forth by insensible
transpiration, and that which remains of the Chollerick hu^mor is easilier
overcome by nature.

Galen also commends a Bath in a Phlegmatic Ophthalmy, always using before
Evacuations necessary, because the thick humors fastened in the Eyes are
extenuated by Baths, and so are easily discussed.

So Galen in the same place says, That the drinking of pure Wine is good for
those who have thick blood in the veins of their eyes, and have not gross or
phlegmatic bodies; because Wine does dissolve, diffuse, and discuss the thick
blood, and also opens obstructions.

For the taking away of the remainder of Redness and Inflammation, make this
Fomentation following.

Take of the Leaves of Eyebright and Pennyroyal of each one handful: the
Flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, and red Roses; and of Oaten chaff, of each one
pugil: Foenugreek-seed three drams: Fennel-seed one dram: make a Decoction,
adding in the end a little white Wine, foment the Eye with this, dipping
therein linen Clothes, or with bags being half filled with the aforesaid
ingredients.

Fennel watter alone mixed with astringent wine is a good Fomentation to
discuss the relics, and to strengthen the eyes.

An Egg boiled hard, and the shel taken off, and cut in the middle, laid hot to
the eye, takes away the remainder of redness.

So does a Fomentation made only of the Decoction of Hysop.

An old Ophthalmy requires another and longer way of Cure, and is sometimes very
troublesome to a Physician; because he can hardly hinder a delicate and noble
part from receiving a defluxion by which it has been long weakened.

Moreover, This Disease is not only nourished by defluxion, but by congestion
whereby there is destemper brought into the part, which also is hard to cure.

But for the Cure of it you must first observe whether the Disease come not
from a hot Distemper of the Liver, as often it does: and then you must first
administer such things as amend that. And chiefly after convenient Purging and
Bleeding, Baths are good, Whey, and Mineral waters of Vitriol, as also
Horsleeches applied to the Hemorrhoids.

But if the matter of the Disease come only from the distemper of the Brain
through which watery Humors flow to the eyes being mixed with some blood: then
you must fall to purging the head with ordinary Pills, twice, thrice, or four
times in a month, after you have given universal Medicines, as Apozemes or the
like; which you may make according to our description in the cure of cold
Diseases of the Head.

If the aforesaid Purges with other Medicines now prescribed do not prevail,
you must use Mercurial Purges as the most excellent, by way of intermission.

Moreover a Cautery applied to the hinder part of the head is very profitable,
to divert the humor flowing.

Instead whereof you may apply a Seton to the Neck behind, with better success,
to them who can endure it.

A Vesicatory applied to the forepart of the Head, as Forestus reports, Obs.
11. lib. 11. did a wonderful cure upon an Old Woman with sore eyes.

But Rondoletius says, That a Cautery applied to the Coronal Suture, is better
than to any other part.

Masticatories are profitable for the deriving of the Defluxion, but not
Errhins because they are applied so near the part affected that they may draw
humors to it.

But if the Brain does seem to want drying, you must have recourse to your
sweating diet drink of China, Saria, and the like.

To these you may ad Topics, which resolve and strengthen the eyes; such as
are Fomentations and Unguents before mentioned for the state and declination of
the Disease, which also are excellent for old Ophthalmies: nor must you forget
the washing of the eyes as above mentioned with Fennelwater and red Wine, to
take away the remainder of the redness, and to strengthen the eyes every
morning.

For which purpose also,

Take of the best Aloes, and of Tutty prepared, of each six drams: white Sugar
one ounce: Rose Water, and mild white wine, of each six ounces: set them in the
Sun forty days in a glass well stopped: put some drops of this water not
strained, into the Eyes. Or,

Take of white Wine three pints: Rose Water half a pint: Tutty prepared three
drams: poudered Cloves one dram: Camphire half a dram: mix them in a glass
close stopped, and shake them for two hours, and set in the Sun one whole month;
remembering every day a little before Sunsetting to take it out of the air, and
never bring it forth till the Sun is risen: two or three drops of this water
strained by filtration, must be put into the Eye before he go to sleep, or in
the morning one or two hours before he rise.

This takes away the oldest redness; it dryes up weeping, and Fistulaes; it
consumes al superfluous moistures upon the outward membranes and quickens the
sight. This also following is excellent.

Take of Wheat two handful: poudered Salt one handful: put them in a Copper
Vessel, and put white Wine to them two fingers breadth above them; cover the
Vessel, and let them stand in the shade six or seven days till the liquor
turns green, stirring them often with a wooden Spatula, after pour off the
liquor by inclination without the dregs, and if need be, filter it. One drop
into the Eye, takes away redness, and defluxion, and all spots or blemishes
thereon, and quickens the sight.

Solenander, commends highly the Decoction of Quince Leaves, which are to be
gathered without breaking in the beginning of the spring, and kept diligently
that they neither be dusty, nor musty; nor otherwise defiled: and when you use
them, boil one handful of them in pure water, and let the Eyes be often washed
therewith: It is a wonder (says he) to see how it does preserve, cleanse, and
stop Rhewms in the Eyes.

Sometimes in a^ inveterate Ophthalmy much filth like matter is gathered in the
eyes, which can scarcely be cured with Collyriums, or other remedies: but in
this case fine Cotton dried at the fire and laid like a small pillow upon the
eye and rolled down, is very good; for the next morning you may take much filth
away with it. And with this Remedy used many nights together many eyes have
been cured which could not otherwise; and this kind of Medicine prevails
chiefly among Children that have sore eyes.

For a Conclusion of this Chapter, it will not be amiss to set down the
experimental Medicines of Sacutus Lusitanus who cured an old Ophthalmy which
would no otherwise be removed in a whole year with a Mercurial Unguent, although
there was no sign of the French Pox: being persuaded by Mercurialis, who in his
Book of the French Pox says, When you see any Disease that will not be Cured
by ordinary means, imagine it to be the French Pox. He asked the Patient if
ever he had the French Disease, or ever lay with a foul bodied Woman? He denied
al but only confessed that he lay with one Man once in the bed, whom he
suspected to be Frenchified: Upon this conjecture, the Physician prescribed a
sudori^^ck diet of Sar^a for twenty days, but to no end. And though the
Disease was chiefly in the upper parts, so that it was to be feared, least if
he fluxed him at the mouth with Mercury that the humors should fall more into
the eyes, but in regard it was old, and the force of the defluxion was
attained, he prescribed the Unguent of Mercury after his body was well Purged,
and by it in seven days space after plentiful Salivation or Spitting, his
pains ceased, that inflammation was gone, the itching abated which was before in
his eyelids, with much acrimony: And so leaving him only an issue in his Arm
to breath the Brain; and prescribing a good diet, which he kept; the Patient
returned to his former health.

The same Zacutus Lusitanus in his Praxis ad Hist. commends that Water and
Ointment which we mentioned in the Cure of Suffusion, for an old Ophthalmy.

Chap. 9. Of Hypopyo, or Matter under the CORNEA.
WHen the Inflammations of the Eyes are great, and swelling; sometimes they
cannot be resolved, but they will be suppurated; which is much to be feared, and
to be prevented by all means: For from thence Ulcers will come; and sometimes
Matter is gathered under the Cornea, which Disease is called Vpopuon; and this
comes often from a stroke or contusion, and blood-shotness: sometimes it
covers all the Pupilla, and hinders the sight: sometimes it compasses the
circle of the Iris, and is like the pairing of a nail, and thence it is called
Onux, or Vnguis.

This Disease is known not only by the whiteness which is like Matter, but also
from the Inflammation and Blood-shot that went before; for when the Eye is
moved, there appears a motion of the Pus or Matter urder the Cornea. There is a
redness in the Eye, and Pulsation; or at least went before it.

For the Cure, first using universal Medicines, if there remain any relics of
Inflammation, you must take them away by the Remedies prescribed in the
Ophthalmy: then you must apply gently Discutients mixed with Emollients, lest
when the thin part is resolved, the matter become thicker, and less fit to be
dissolved. Therefore make your Fomentations of the Decoction of the flowers of
Chamomel, Melilot, the seeds of Fleabane and Fenugreek, to be used with Linen,
or Bags. You may ad the Leaves of Eyebright, Celandine, and Fennel seed: or
use this following Collyrium.

Take of the Water of Vervain, Rue, Celandine, Roses, and Fennel, of each half
an ounce: the best Aloes and Tuity prepared, of each half a dram: Sugar Candy
one dram. Powder and mix them; with a little Breast-milk make a Collyrium, of
which drop some into the Eyes twice or thrice in the day.

This following is excellent:

Take of Saffron, Aloes, and Mirrh, of each one dram: Wine three drams: Honey
six drams: Dissolve the Saffron in the Wine; then mix them with the Aloes and
Marrh, then put them to the Honey, and anoint the Eyes.

Lastly, Those Medicines which were prescribed in the declination of an
Ophthalmy, in the spots or Maculae of the Eyes, and in Suffusion, or Cataract
are good here.

If the Matter cannot be discussed with Resolving Medicines, you must seek
others. Gal. in 14 Meth. reports, That there was one Justus an Oculist in his
time, that cured many of this Disease by shaking their heads; for setting them
straight upon a seat, and taking hold on both sides of their head, he shaked
them till he perceived the matter to descend.

But if the matter which hinders the sight cannot be thus cured neither,
Galen in the place cited flies to Manual Operation, or Chyrurgery; whom Aetius
and others do follow, which is done by pricking of the Eye, which is used also
in a Cataract. Which operation, as it is little used in our times, so it
requires the hand of a most skilful Chyrurgion; and it is much to be feared,
lest when the Cornea is opened, the Watery Humor come forth with the matter.

Chap. 10. Of Phlyctaenae, or Blisters in the Eyes.
IN the Cornea and the Adnata Tunica, as in other parts of the Body, there
breed sometimes little blisters full with water, like bubbles, or bladders,
which come from the heat of the Humor Phlyctainai in Greek, and called in
Arabic Bothor: and they are little tumors like Gromwel seeds, coming from a
sharp watery humor.

They are easily known. They in the Adnata are red: in the Cornea, blackish, if
they be outward; but white if they be in the inner part of it.

As to the Prognostic P^lyctaenae which grow in the Adnata, are less dangerous
than they in the Cornea. The more superficial these Pustles are, the le^s
dangerous they are; the more inward, the more danger; for it is to be feared
lest the whole thickness of the Cornea be eroded, and so either the watery humor
will flow forth, or else the Uvea will start out.

The Cure consists wholly in the resolving of the matter conjoined, and the
averting of the antecedent cause. And we must take heed lest we bring these
Pustles to suppuration, lest they turn into Ulcers.

Therefore those Universal Evacuations, Revulsions, and Derivations, which were
declared in the Cure of the Ophthalmy, must here be used.

Afterward, we must apply Topics, or Medicines to the part, which at the
first must gently repel, and discuss; such as were laid down for them in the
treaty of the increase of Ophthalmy, which are most proper when there is an
Inflammation also, as it often falls out.

Afterward you may u^e more drying and dissolving Medicines, such as are
described for the state and declination of Ophthalmy; and especially the
Ointments there set down, which are very proper to discuis and dry up Pustles.

Chap. 11. Of the Ulcers in the Cornea and Adnata.
AFter an Ophthalmy, there follows often Ulcers in the Tunicles called Cornea
and Adnata, when it comes to suppuration. They follow also the Phlyctaenae or
Pustles, which bred in the Cornea, but not till they break. They also use to
come from sharp corroding humors flowing into the Eyes.

There are diverse sorts of these Ulcers mentioned in Authors, taken from their
diverse circumstances, as they are superncial or profound, broad or narrow, and
according as they differ in shape and figure, and the like. So a hollow,
narrow, and hard Ulcer is called Bothrion, or Fossula like a little trench: A
broad and not so deep an Ulcer, is called Coil oma: That which comes in the
Circle Iris, is called Argemon, or Vlcus Coronale: Finally, that which is deep
and hard, is called Epicayma, and Egcayma.

The knowledge of Ulcers is easy, for they may be seen: If the Ulcer be in the
Cornea, there will be a small white blemish in the black of the Eye; if in the
Adnata, there will be a small white blemish in the white of the Eye, because the
Veins of the Tunicle Adnata are full of blood.

The Ulcer of the Eyes are dangerous, and hard to be cured; but more in the
Cornea than in the Adnata. An Ulcer in the Pupilla is more dangerous, because
after it is cured, it will leave a Scar, which will hinder the perspicuity of the
Cornea, and so the sight will be hurt; and if the whole Tunicle be corroded, the
Watery Humor will flow out, and the Uvea start forth.

The Cure of this Disease, as of other Ulcers, is, By clensing and drying
means; but they must be very gentle by reason of the tenderness of the part,
and exquisitness of the sense. But you must first use such things as revel and
hinder the flux or humors from the Eyes; as in Ophthalmy either old or new,
were declared. And if there be an Inflammation with it, you mix must things that
are proper for that. With which also you may use things that assuage pain, if
there be any.

These things do moderately dry and cleanse: Sugar, Honey, Saffron, Mirrh,
Frankincense, Aloes, Sarcocol, Tutty, and Ceruss; of which you may make these
following Medicines:

Take of Barley and Foenugreek Water boiled, four ounces: the best Honey half
an ounce: or of the Syrup of dried Roses, one ounce: Make a Collyrium to wash
the Eyes often.

Take of Vervain and Plantane Water, of each two ounces: Sugar candy half an
ounce. Mix them for a Collyrium.

Take of the Water of Honey distilled in Balneo, and of Rose water, of each
equal parts. Or,

Take a hard Egg peeled, cut it in two pieces, and taking out the Yolk fill the
hollow with the powder of Sugar candy; tie it fast, and hang it in a Wine
Celler, and you shall have a Water drop from it, which is excellent to cleanse
the Eyes without pain.

But if you will have it stronger mix the Powder of Mirch with your Sugar candy.

Montanus highly commends this Powder following:

Take Twenty Whites of new laid Eggs, put them in a pewter dish in the Sun till
they are dry: then powder them finely with as much Sugar; and this powder put
into the Eyes, does much good without causing pain.

In the Progress of this Disease, if you will cleanse and dry more, put to the
former Medicines the white Troches of Rhasis, Frankincense, Aloes, Mirrh,
Sarcocol, or the like, but in a small quantity lest it be too sharp, and also
mix them with Milk, white of an Eg, some Mucilages, and other Anodines, or
things that mitigate and assuage pain.

Tutty is the best, for it causes no pain, and dries and heals; therefore
Collyriums, or Unguents are good that are made thereof. And chiefly the
Ointment prescribed in the cure of Ophthalmy, which has in it a great quantity
of Tutty.

This following is very clensing, drying, and healing.

Take of Sarcocol steeped in Rose Water, Ceruss and washed Aloes, Mirrh, and
Tutty prepared, of each half a dram: Sugar candy one dram: With the Mucilage of
Gum Traganth drawn with Rose Water, make a Collyrium, with which anoint the
Eyelids.

Chap. 12. Of a Cancer in the Cornea.
AS a Cancer may come in other parts, so sometimes it breeds in the Eyes. And
though the knowledge and Cure of a Cancer is in the Treatise of external
Diseases, yet we will speak briefly here of those things which properly belong
to a Cancer in the Eye.

A Cancer is either occult, or hidden, or ulcerated. The occult is reckoned
among Tumors, and it is called a Cancerous Tumor, or Cancer of the Eye: But the
ulcerated is called a Cancerous Ulcer in the Eye.

But in both there is an unequal hardness, a blew Lead color, a strong pricking
pain, especially about the Head and Temples: the Veins adjoining are blew, and
very full. Sometimes adust and sharp blood flows from the part affected, when
the Cancer is ulcerated. And this pain is increased by any warm Medicines.

This Disease is incurable, as well in the Eye as in any other part, when it is
fixed; except it be taken away by manual operation.

Authors propound two ways of Cure, namely a True, and a Palliative. A true
Cure (as was said) cannot be wrought but by Chyrurgery when the Cancer is
fixed: but when it is new in the beginning, it may be cured by often evacuation
of the Chollerick humor, first having let blood; as Galen teaches 2. ad
Glauconem, cap. 10. where he boasts that he has often cured this disease,
adjoining a convenient Diet with the aforesaid Physic.

A Palliative Cure, which tends only to the mitigation of Symptoms, is done not
only by the aforesaid Evacuations' but also by convenient Topics.

First then you must appoint a convenient Diet, such as is good against burnt
Cholle^; and it must be cooling and moistning.

Then draw Blood on the same side, and apply Horsleeches behind the Ears, and
also to the Hemorrhoids if they do appear, applying Cupping Glasses to the
Shoulders, and use other kinds of Revulsions.

You must also prepare and Purge Melancholy by Potions, Apozemes, opening
Broaths, by Magistral Syrups, and the like: But above al for the purging of
Melancholy black Hellebor well prepared is the best; and by giving the Extract
thereof twice or thrice, we have sometimes cured a Cancer in the beginning.

These Remedies do exceedingly diminish the Humors that flow to the Eyes, and
take away pains and other Symptoms: for which purpose also Topics are good,
such as are prescribed in Ophthalmy, for asswaging of pain: especially the
Collyria made of Mucilages, the white Troches of Rhasis, and prepared Tutty,
with the water of Roses, Nightshade, and Plantane.

This following Water is a good Collyrium to wash the Eye with.

Take of the Roots of Pilewort, and herb Robert, of each two handfuls: Ribwort,
Nightshade, Borrage, Bugloss, Purslain, Eyebright, and Bettony, of each one
handful: green Frogs, and whites of Eggs, of each twelve in number: the seeds
of Foenugreek and Quinces, of each one ounce: let the Roots and Seeds be
bruised, and the Leaves Cut: then pour upon them of Eyebright and Rosewater of
each one pint: mix them and Distill them in a pewter Still.

The flesh of Chickins is very powerful to alswage pain: and some say that the
Disease it self has been Cured by it alone. So Maritius Cordaeus, Comment. 7.
in lib. 1. Hipp. of Women's Diseases, relates a history of a noble Woman, who
had the right side of her face a long time infected with a Cancer ulcerated,
and having tried al means she could from Italian, French, German, and Spanish
Physicians, was at length Cured with this vulgar Medicine by a Barber: He took
Chickins and cut them in thin broad pieces, which he often applied to the
Cancer: Others apply the flesh of young Pigeons so cut, while it is warm.

Finally, The true Cure of a fixed Cancer is only by taking it out by the
roots, and is by a taking out of the Eye; which Fabricius Hildanus says may be
done very safely; and he shows the manner and Circumstances thereof at large,
Observe. 1. Cent. 1. so that we shall not here Repea^ them.

Chap. 13. Of the Rupture of the Cornea.
Sometimes the Cornea Tunicle is so divided, that the watery Humor, and sometimes
the Wea also comes forth; and this is called the Rupture of the Cornea.

The Cause of this is an Ulcer, or Wound in the Membrane, or a great afflux of
Humors, by which the said Membrane is so distended, that it cracks in the
middle, and the Humors contained are let ou^: As Paraeus reports it happened to
a certain Woman in Paris, lib. 16. cap. 13.

This Disease is for the most part incurable, and takes away sight, because the
Humors of the eye cast forth cannot be repaired: but if the Wound be small, so
that only a portion of the watery Humor is only lost, it may be Cured; for the
watery humor may sometimes be renewed: as Galen taught 4. de ^ymp. cause. cap. 2.

You must use Astringent and Glutinating Medicines; having first Bled and
Purged if necessary, as the white of an Egg, with the white Troches of Rhasis
dropped into the Eye.

Let the part be Fomented with a Decoction of red Roses of Solomon's Seal,
Bramble buds, shepheards-purse, and Plantane boiled in red Wine if there be no
inflammation; but if there be, in spring water.

Take of Quinces half a pound: red Roses three pugils: Acacia two drams:
Saffron one scruple: boil these in red Wine, and make a Cataplasm to be applied
to the part.

For the perfect Consolidation and Cure, use this Collyrium.

Take of washed Aloes, Tutty prepared, and Sarcocol steept in breast Milk, of
each half a scruple: Saffron five grains: with the Mucilage of Gum Traganth,
make a Collyrium.

Chap. 14. Of the Coming forth of the Uvea.
UPon the Rupture of the Cornea, often comes the shooting forth of the Wea,
which is called in Greek, Propto sis Ragoidous: there are four kinds mentioned
by Authors, especially by Paulus; of which the first is called Mu^cephalon,
because it is like the head of a Fly: and this is when a small portion of the
Wea comes forth. The second is called Staphuloma, and this is when a great
part of the Wea comes forth so that it is like the stone of a Raison. The
third is called Melos, when there is so great eruption of the Wea, that it
seems like an Apple. The fourth is called Elos, or Clavus, when the Wea being
come forth grows hard.

The Cure of this Disease is Difficult, and the more when the Wea comes most
forth: but when it is small, as in Muocephalon it is Curable by moderate
astringents, such as we prescribed in the Rupture of the Cornea.

The Ancients as Paulus Aetius, and Celsus, do labor to Cure them when old and
not moveable by Medicines, with Surgery; but this is now out of fashion, by
reason of its great difficulty and doubtful success: but if any will try it, he
shall find the way exactly set down in Jerome. Fabricius, ab Aquapendente, cap.
destaphylomate.

Chap. 15. Of Aegylops, and Fistula Lacrymalis.
HItherto we have spoken of the Diseases of the Eyes which happen in the humors
and upon the Tunicles; it remains that we speak of the Diseases of the
Corners of the Eyes and Eyelids.

And first of the Tumor in the great Corner of the Eye, by the Root of the
Nose, called Aegylops, and Anchylops if not broken.

This little Tumor, is either with, or without Inflammation.

When it is inflamed, it is like a small Phlegmon: or Bile, red about, with a
shooting pain. And it comes of thin and chollerick blood that flows into the
part by the veins of the Temples, Forehead, and Face, and so impostumateth;
which being open produces an Ulcer, which speedily turns hollow, and then it
is called Fistula Lachrymalis. And if this continues one year, there is a
Caries or foulness of the Bone, as Hippocrates says, 45. Sect. 6. In Ulcers of
a year old, the Bone is foul: And this Caries is known by the Cavity, which is
known by the finger: and by the stinking Matter flowing from it.

Sometimes it comes without Inflammation, and then it is bred of a thick slimy
Humor, like Pulse or Honey: As the Tumors called Atheromata, Stea^omata,
Meliceris, which are without pain.

The Cure of an Aegylops is very hard, both in regard Medicines are ill to be
applied to it, by reason the sight is so nigh; and because an Impostume will
quickly Ulcerate in such a tender part (as aforesaid) But it is most difficult
when the Impostume breaks out at the Nose, and the Matter flows through the
Nostrils; because thereby the Bones will be putrified.

Sometimes Aegylops turns to a Cancer, which comes with a pricking pain;
extension of the veins, hardness and blewness of the skin, and then it is
better to let it alone, because Medicines will enlarge it, and increase pain.

A Lachrymal Fistula that is newly begun, and which has an external orifice to
be seen, is cureable by Medicines; but that which is deep and old, and has
fouled the Bone, is scarcely Cured without burning.

The diverse times of these Diseases require diverse Medicines.

And First in the beginning of an Aegylops you must revel the defluxion from
the part by bleeding and purging; and use repelling Medicines to the Forehead,
by which sometimes the Progress is stopped before it come to suppuration.

For this end, use the following Ceratum.

Take of Pomegranate-peels, Acacia, Pomegranate flowers, Galls, Cypress-nuts,
Roch-Alum, Bole-Armenick, of each one dram: white Wax four ounces: Turpentine
three drams: Make a Cerate.

After the use of Repercussives, you must apply Resolvers to the part affected,
as this Decoction.

Take of pure Honey and Aloes, of each two ounces: Mirrh one ounce: Saffron one
dram and an half: Water two pints: Boil them gently to the consumption of half:
dip a piece of soft Sponge therein, squeeze it a little, and apply it hot to
the part, bind it on; and do thus often.

Amatus Lucitanus, Curatione 68. Cent. 5. prescribes a Cerat against Aegylops,
which he highly commends, which is this:

Take of the Powder of Cockle shells, two drams: Mirrh, washed Aloes, and
Frankincense, of each half an ounce: Sarcocol, Dragons blood, and Ceruss, of
each three drams: Opopanax dissolved in Wine, Vinegar and Boodstone, of each
one dram and an half: Saffron two scruples* Wax and Rozin, of each three
ounces: Mix them according to art at the fire, and make a Cerate to be applied
to the corner of the Eye.

If the Tumor will not be resolved with the former Medicines, but will come to
suppuration, you must help it forward with a Plaster of Simple Diachylon; or
if there be pain or inflammation, you may apply a Cataplasm of Crumbs of Bread.
If it will not break* open it with a Lancet, and delay not least the matter
contained do corrode the parts, and make an incurable Fistula. Many open it
with a hot Iron, but the cold is best.

After the imposthume is opened, you must cleanse the Ulcer, and heal it as
others. But if it fistulate, cure it thus:

First make a general Evacuation by bleeding and purging. You must divert the
defluxion from the Head by Cupping-glasses, Vesicatories, and Causticks applied
to their proper places; and then use the decoction of China, or Sarsaparilla,
for many days. And at the same time dry the Brain with Fumes and Head Pouders,
as in a Catarrh.

Instead of a Cautery you may apply a Seton to the Neck; for Fabricius Hildanus
reports Obs. 41. Cent. 1. that it has done it alone without other means.

If the distemper of the Liver be the Cause of the defluxion (as it often is)
you must have a special care to administer Medicines proper for that.

When you use Topics, open the orifice of the Ulcer, and dilate it by degrees,
with a Tent made of an Elder pith, a sponge made fit, or a Gentian Root. When
it is large enough, apply this following Medicine, commended by Forestus, Obs.
17. Lib. 11.

Take of Honey two ounces: Verdegreece one dram: Water of Rue four ounces:
Powder the Verdegreece very fine, and boil it with the rest at a gentle fire
till the third part be consumed, and make a warm injection of the strained
Liquor with a Syringe: if this be too sharp, wash the Ulcer every day with the
Water of Rue, and after apply a little Unguentum Apostolorum. Continue this
course for three weeks, laying on some convenient Plaster, and defending the
Eye with Rose Water.

When the Ulcer is sufficiently purged, use this following Collyrium to
incarnate and cicatrize:

Take of Frankincense, Aloes, Dragons blood, Pomegranate flowers, Alum, and
Antimony, of each one dram: Verdegreece five grains: Powder them fine, and with
Rue Water make a Collyrium to be dropped in with a stalk of Rue, thrice in a day,
and put in a tent wet therewith, laying upon it a Diapalma Plaster: Lessen
your Tent by degrees, and at length take it quite out, only washing the part
with the aforesaid Collyrium, and laying on Diapalma.

Forestus in the place cited says, that new fistulaes have been cured thus by
a famous Chyrurgeon of his time.

If it appear that the bone be foul, it must only be cured by an actual
Cautery; the manner of which is exactly described in Paraeus, Fallopius, and
Aquapendente in their Works: But Fabricus Hildanus Obs. 22. Cent. 5. boasts
that he cured a Fistula lachrymalis with foulness at the Bone, that was four
years old, and counted desperate, in a child of thirteen years of age, with
Medicines alone, dilating of it with prepared Spunges, and after sprinkling
Euphorbium into it, and that very much and often; and after applying only an
Emplaister of Gum Elemi. Having used these things diligently for the space of
diverse weeks, he perceived a scale of the Bone, which he drew forth; and then
with half a drop of Tolutan Balsom upon a little Lint, once in a day conveyed
into the Ulcer, he perfectly consolidated the Fistula in a short time.

Chap. 16. Of Rhyas and Encanthis.
ANother Disease often follows the Fistula Lachrymalis called Rhyas; and this
is the consuming or diminishing of the small flesh in the great corner of the
Eye, from whence it is enlarged: This comes also of other Causes, as sharp
humors falling upon the part, or from clensing Medicines formerly misapplyed.

Encanthis is contrary to Rhyas, which is the immoderate increase and swelling
of the Caruncle, or little flesh in the great corner of the Eye; and this comes
from much blood flowing to the part, and the not orderly curing and drying up
of the Ulcer.

The Cure of Rhyas is by Incarnatives, such as follow:

Take of red Roses, one pugil: Cypress Nuts, and Myrtles, of each two drams:
Aloes one dram and an half: old Wine one pint: Boil them till the fourth part
be consumed: wash the part often with this Decoction. Or,

Take of Aloes and Frankincense, of each one dram: Dragons blood half a dram:
red Roses and seeds of Sumach, of each one scruple: Rose Water one pint: boil
them to the consumption of the fourth part. Make a Collyrium.

Encanthis is cured by taking away of the superfluous flesh growing in the
corner of the Eye; this is done with eating Medicines, beginning with the
mildest first, therefore first use burnt Alum; after proceed to Apostolorum
Aegyptiacum, or burnt Vitriol. But if these will not do, cut it out, or burn it
with an Iron. But before you do these things you must prepare the Body with
convenient Evacuations least you cause a new defluxion: but in the cutting,
burning, or consuming of this Caruncle with Medicines, you must take heed that
you take it not wholly away, but only that which is superfluous, otherwise it
will turn to Rhyas.

Chap: 17: Of Epiphora.
THe word Epiphora signifies any Defluxion into any part. But through custom
it is used especially for the defluxion of a thin Rhewm from the Eyes; hence it
is called involuntary weeping, which flows daily from the corners of the Eyes.

For the producing of which Humor flowing preternaturally there is an evil
disposition in the part from whence it comes, and in the part receiving it:
the part that sends this humor is the Brain, which when it is too hot, or too
cold gathers a watery Humor, and so sends it to the inferior parts, which are
fit to receive it: The part receiving is the Glandle or Kernel by the great
corner of the Eye, and the Caruncle upon the corner; the thinness, or
thickness, or other weakness of which parts causes that they easily entertain
the humors that flow thither. Therefore an Epiphora happens often in an
Egylops, a Lachrymal Fistula, a Rhyas, and Encanthis, because the superfluous
humors use to be easily received into the parts affected.

This humor is carried from the Brain into the corners of the Eyes, sometimes by
the internal Veins, sometimes by the external, as we shall show you hereafter by
their proper signs.

But the Humor which makes an Epiphora, is sometimes cold, and brings no other
inconvenience, but only defluxion, sometimes it is salt and sharp, and causes
pain, heat, and redness, and exulceration of the Eyebrows.

There need no signs to be given of Tears, they are visible. It will appear by
what has been said whether they are cold or hot, and sharp. But we must
distinguish whether they come by the internal or external Vessels. When by the
internal, there is pain in the inside of the head, and sometimes violent
neesing. But if they come by the external without the Skul. The Vessels of the
Forehead and Temples are stretched, and the head seems to be bound about and
astringent means, outwardly applied do help.

As to the Prognostic; New Epiphora's coming from outward causes are easily
cured, especially in youth: but old, and in old men very hardly. They which
proceed from other diseases, as Aegylops, Fistula Lachrymalis and the like,
have their Cure with the diseases whence they came.

The Cure of this Disease consists in taking away the defluxion, and
strengthening the part receiving.

You must take away the defluxion with Evacuation of the humor offending,
revulsion, derivation, and strengthening the part from whence it comes.

The Peccant humor which is a Water superfluous in the Brain, must be evacuated
with bleeding and purging.

Blood-letting is not good in a cold distemper of the Brain, except there be
manifest signs of plethory or fullness; but in a hot distemper, when the humors
are very sharp, it is very good, and you may use it twice or thrice if need be.

You may purge by Potions, Apozemes, Pills, and the like, which you may
proportion to the condition of the Patient.

Make a revulsion of the humors flowing by Cupping-glasses often applied to the
shoulders, by Vesicatories to rai^e blisters behind in the Neck, or with
Cauteries to the hinder part of the Head, and Issues in the Arms.

In a stubborn Epiphora, a Vesicatory applied to the forepart of the Head does
wonders; as Forestus shows, Obs. 11. lib. 11. concerning an Old Woman who had
sore Eyes, weeping and mattery, with great pain and itching, and could by no
means be Cured, that with applying a Plaster of Cantharides with Honey and
Leaven to her head being shaven, he perfectly Cured her.

Rondeletius says, That a Cautery applied to the Commissura, does more good
than when it is used to any other part.

For Derivation, use Leeches behind the Ears; and Masticatories every morning.

But least the Humors once evacuated should breed again, the Brain must be
strengthened and dried; and if it be too cold, you may use al our Remedies
prescribed in the Cure of the cold Distemper of the Brain. But if it be too
hot, those things which we prescribed in the Cure of a hot Catarrh; especially
such as respect the Brain most, are here to be used.

While the former Medicines are used, you must apply Topics to the part
receiving; and first if the Humor comes through the external veins, apply
Astringents to the Forehead and Temples: and if the Defluxion come from a sharp
hot Humor, use the following Cataplasm.

Take Bole-Armenick, Dragons Blood, Pomegranat Flowers, and Mirtles, of each
one dram and an half: Accacia and Hipocistis of each one dram: Frankincense and
Mastich of each two scruples: Red Roses one pugil: Powder them and mix them
with the white of an Egg and a little Vinegar, make a Cataplasm, which spread
upon a Cloth and apply to the Forehead and Temples, and renew it as fast as it
grows dry.

If it come of a Cold Humor, apply this following Cerat.

Take of Frankincense and Mastich of each one dram and an half: Gum Anime,
Tacamahacca, and Boodstone, of each one dram: Gum of Juniper two scruples:
Turpentine and Wax as much as will serve turn: make a Cerat.

But you must apply Astringent and Drying Medicines to the part affected: which
are thus made.

Take of Tutty prepared one dram: Sarcocol half a dram: Frankincense and
Mastich of each a scruple: Spicknard six grains: make Troches, which being
mixed with the white of an Egg, or the juice of Quinces may be applied to the
corner of the Eye. Or,

Take Tutty prepared in a fine Rag, and tie it with a string, and put it in
sharp Wine, and with this often wash the Eyes. Or,

Take Tutty prepared, Egg shells poudered, the best Aloes, of each one dram:
tie them in a Rag and make a little Ball which steep in Fennel-water, and
squeez the Ball often into the Eyes.

Only Aloes poudered and made into a Ball (as above) and put into Rose Water,
is very good. Or,

Take Aloes, Cypress Nuts, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, of each two drams:
Tutty prepared, and Sarcocol, of each one dram and an half: Sanguis Dragonis,
Barberries, Sumach, red Roses, of each one scruple: Powder them finely, and
with Fennel-water make a Collyrium.

In a Hot Defluxion this is excellent.

Take of white Troches of Rhasis without Opium, Sarcocol, Lycium or Box-thorn,
Acacia, Olibanum, of each one dram: the stones of Myrobalans calcined, of white
and red Coral, of each half a dram: Pearlhalf a scruple: as much of the juice
of Pomegranats boiled to half, as will make a Collyrium.

If Redness be joined with it, this following is profitable.

Take of the seeds of Sumach bruised one scruple: hot Plantane Water one ounce:
macerate them a while, then press them strongly, and put of Rose, Eyebright,
and the Waters of the white of an Egg well beaten, of each half an ounce: Sugar
Candy finely poudered and strained with a little water, one scruple: Make a
Collyrium.

Lastly, Those Medicines which were prescribed for an Old Ophthalmy, are good
in this Disease.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Pterygium, or Haw in the Eyes, called Unguis.
THis is a Hard and Nervous little Membrane, which coming out of the great
Corner of the Eye, first covers the white, and after by continuance, the
black; and covering the Pupilla, hinders the light.

Sometimes it is thin and white; sometimes it is fleshly with many red veins, and
it is called a Pannicle, and Sebel, by Avicen; although some distinguish a
Pannicle from a Haw, or Vngula; because Vngula is a Nervous Tunicle without
repletion of veins, and is only in the Adnata: But Sebel, or Pannicle, Covers
the whole Eye, and is very Red, and full of Veins.

This Disease comes from Ulceration of the flesh in the Corner of the Eye; or,
of the Adnata, whence there comes a roughness or inequality in the part, which
while the Nourishing Faculty labors to make equal, it fills with blood, and
begets a preternatural increase, or covers it with a Skin.

And because many Excrements do use to flow to an Eye disordered, therefore the
Haw is not bred of pure Blood, but of many Excrements also, whence arise many
sorts of Haws: Because,

Some are Hard, others Soft, some White, some Red, some Yellow, some Brown,
others are easily separated from the Adnata and Cornea, others stick fast; some
are simple and without Malignity, others are Cancerous and filthy.

The Diagnosis, or Knowledge of this Disease, is known by what is said; also
the Causes, namely, The Humors of which it is made, may be known by their
Color; for a Red Haw comes of pure Blood: a Yellow, of Choler: a White, of
Phlegm: a Dark and Black one, of Melancholy.

As to the Prognostic, This Disease is scarcely to be Cured, and that in a
long time; because sharp Medicines which are proper for to eat it away, cannot
be used but by degrees, by reason of the exquisite sense of the Eyes.

If the Eye Affected grow smaller, it is an evil sign; for it argues the
Debility of the part.

A new Haw and small, may be Cured with Medicines; but an overgrown, old, and
one covering the black of the Eye, cannot, but by Surgery.

A Haw which is thick, turned out, stretched forth, hard and black, cannot be
Cured; for it is of a Cancerous nature.

The Cure is to be by the Antecedent and Conjunct Cause.

In respect of the Antecedent, first good Diet is to be enjoined, such as is
mentioned in other Diseases of the Eyes from Fluxes.

Also the aforementioned Evacuations and Revulsions may here be used, namely,
Purgations, Bleeding, Cupping, Vesicatories, and the like.

And when the Body is sufficiently Purged, we must come to Topics, which may
Consume the Haw.

Beginning first with Mild, such as were they which we spoke of in Curing of
the Spots in the Eye, called Phlyctaenae: which not prevailing, we must use
stronger, which are frequent in Authors.

Forestus commends this following.

Take of the juice of Fennel four ounces: the juice of Celandine three ounces:
the juice of Rue two ounces: the juice of Mallows two ounces and an half: Aloes
one dram: Vitriol two scruples: Verdugreese one scruple: Ginger and Cinnamon, of
each half a scruple: the Gall of an Eel half an ounce: the Gall of an Ox, or
Hog two drams: Sugar Candy two scruples: Let the juyces boil with the rest, and
then clarify it and make a Collyrium.

This also is by him Commended.

Take of Boodstone two drams: white Vitriol and Verdegreece calcined, of each
three drams: Myrrh and Saffron, of each one dram: Long Pepper half a dram:
Sugar Candy half an ounce: Powder them very fine, and mix with one dram of this
Powder two drams of Radish-water, and apply twice or thrice in a day, as the
Patient can endure it.

Before you use these Remedies, you must Foment the part with an Emollient
Decoction, which you must do also afterward to assuage the pain.

Among the Mildest, this following is best.

Take of Cuttle Bone, one scruple: Sugar Candy, one dram: Vitriol, half a
scruple: Tutty Prepared, half a Dram: Mix them, and make a fine Powder, to lay
upon the Haw.

If it cannot be taken off with these Topics, you must fall to Surgery, and
taking up the Vngula with a Hook at the bottom or root; draw a double Thread
through it with a Needle, then laying it down close on both sides beneath, cut
it off with your Cissours; as is more at large showed by Celsus, Paulus,
Aetius, Jerome ab Aquapendente, in their Surgery, and by others.

Having made Incision, lay on a little Lint dipped in Rose Water and the white
of an Egg, to assuage pain, and hinder Inflammation.

And Lastly, you may Heal it up with drying Medicines, as Collyriums of Tutty,
Frankincense, Aloes, the white Troches of Rhasis, and the like.

The End of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Ears.
The PREFACE.
THe Ears as Galen shows in 1. de symp. cause. cap. 2. have diverse Diseases
similary, organick, and common; which because they are not to be known, but by
their Symptoms, I determine to reduce them into a Series of Symptoms. The
symptoms in the Ears either are such as come from the Action hurt, or the fault
of the Excrements. The Action is hurt either in the Ear alone, or in all
instruments of Sense. The Action proper to the Ear, namely, Hearing, is hurt by
being abolished or diminished and depraved. It is abolished by Deafness,
diminished by thickness of Hearing, depraved by a noise in the Ears. The Action
common to all the Instruments of Sense, is Feeling, by which they are subject
to pain. The fault in the Excrement is seen by all those things which come
preternatur ally out of the Ear. So this whole Book has four Chapters. The
first is of Deafness and thick Hearing. The second of noise in the Ears. The
third of pain in the Ears. The fourth of those things which preternaturally
come forth of the Ears.

Chap. 1. Of Deafness, and thick or dull Hearing.
WE comprehend Deafness and thick Hearing in one Chapter, because they come of
the same Causes, differing only in Degrees, so that when they are great they
take the Hearing quite away; when less, they diminish it: And both these are
called vulgarly Deafness; for they who cannot hear any but such as speak very
loud, are called deaf folk.

But Surditas properly, or Deafness, is called in Greek Cophosis, when the
Hearing is totally gone; so that the Patient either hears no noise, or if he
do, he cannot distinguish it. These are often dumb if they are born so; not
only because men learn to speak by Hearing; but by reason of the great consent
that is between the Instruments of Hearing and Speaking by the Nerve of the
fifth Conjugation, whose chief Branches are brought to the Ears, but some of
them reach to the Tongue and Throat; whence ^^ is, that when the inner Ear is
pulled, there is a cough raised; and the reason is plain, for they who are born
deaf, if they had their Instruments of Speech corrupted, would by a Natural
instinct send forth some Articulate voice; as other Creatures, although they
are kept from their birth, from other Creatures of the same kind, so that they
never hear them, yet they produce their connatural voice; but men born deaf
never sent forth an articulate voice, but only a confused sound, which argues
a manifest hurt of those parts which serve for Speech. Now the hurt of those
parts is chiefly from humidity, which affecting that Nerve which goes to the
Ears, Tongue, and Throat, must needs hinder both Speech, and Hearing.

Thick Hearing is called in Greek Baruecoia; and they who are so hear
difficultly, and understand not what men say, except they speak very loud:
Others cannot hear so well, and not except the speakers whoop and hallow in
their Ears.

Both these Diseases come from the distemper of the Brain or Ears.

A cold distemper of the Brain, or repletion, or weakness, or some other hurt
in that part, especially in which is the rise and progress of the Hearing
Nerve, may cause Deafness or thick Hearing.

The Diseases of the Ears are either in the inside or the outside thereof.

In the exterior Cavity, a perfect or an imperfect stoppace from a Tumor,
Imposthume, or Blood, Matter, Phlegm, and other things coming either from within
or without, may cause a defect in the hearing. But you must observe, that the
stoppage of the external passage cannot make a perfect and absolute Deafness,
but only thick hearing, because sounds may be carried by the mouth also, to the
Ears. For there is an open way from the internal Cavity of the Ear to the
Pallat, by which sounds do easily pass, and insinuate themselves into the Ears;
and this passage is made for the purging of the Ears. And many Experiments do
show that a sound may pass through the open mouth to the Ears. We may observe
that they who are very thick of hearing, will open their mouths that they may
better hear those that speak unto them. And if you stop both Ears close, and
strike a Music Instrument with a stick held in your Teeth, you will hear the
sound better. And when you travel in the night, you will better hear any man
coming afar off, if you put one end of your Sword or Staff between your Teeth,
and fasten the other end upon the ground.

The Humors which are gathered into the internal Cavity of the Ear, and
especially such as flow from the Head do cause deafness or thick hearing in the
inner part of the Ear, and these are for the most part flegmy, and sometimes
chollerick; as appears Aph. 28. Sect. 4. where Hippocrates says, that
chollerick Evacuations are good for deaf men; sometimes bloody are good, for it
is manifest, that the deafness accompanied with the Crisis, comes from the flux
of blood to the Ears. Now the Humors are sometimes sent from the whole Body to
the Ears, as in continual Fevers and especially those that are malignant. The
ill composition of the Instruments of Hearing produces the same effect; as
when the Tympany or Drum grows too loose by a violent noise or over
moistness; and for this reason deaf people are more thick of hearing in
Southernly weather, because the Membrane is relaxed by the moistness of the
Air; or when the Tympany is over stretched or dried after a violent disease,
long watching, or fasting; or when it is broken by violent motions, or eaten by
a corroding humor: Sometimes blood comes forth after a great hurt, and matter
without hinderance to the Hearing, because the passage is between the bone and
the Membrane. Or when any parts of the Ear, either originally; or by some
outward cause, as stroke, fall, or the like, are put out of their Natural
order. Moreover, a cold distemper uses to produce this disease, coming either
from the cold Air, or very cold Water powered in, or over much use of
stupefactive Medicines called Narcoticks.

It Is very hard to distinguish al these causes by their proper Signs, but by
Art, and conjecture thus:

If Deafness come from the distemper of the Brain, either other Senses suffer,
or there appeared some peculiar Dileases in the Head, as headache, drouziness,
Apoplexy, Lethargy, and the like.

The stoppage of the External Cavity of the Ears is discernable by the Eyes, if
you look upon them in the Sun, for then it will appear whether it be a tumor, or
thick matter, or any other heterogeneal substance of another Nature which
fills the Cavity. As also the Patient will tell you if any thing fell into
his Ears.

But if the internal Cavity be filled with a humor, we may conceive it to be
phlegm, if the Patient were formerly subject unto defluxions of that sort.

But that this comes from Choler, is known by some Chollerick Fever that went
before, or now possesses him, or by some violent pain. But when it comes from
blood, there is a heavy pain, and abundance of blood in the whole Body, and this
happens often in critical disturbances.

The looseness and moistness of the Tympane is known by the causes preceding,
which were moist, and distempered some other part: for it can scarce be, that
moist causes should only affect that part, and no other.

You may also know the distention and dryness of the Tympane by the dryness of
the whole Body, and by the drying causes aforegoing.

And for the breaking or corroding of the Tympane, you may know that if there
were formerly any vehement Causes that could break or gnaw the same.

You must make your Prognostic thus:

Deafness by Birth, and of long continuance, if it be absolute and total, is
incurable; and that which is not absolute if it be old, is never or hardly
cured.

A Deafnels from Choler or Blood which happens only in sharp continuing
Fevers, uses to be cured with these Fevers.

Thick Hearing, if it be not speedily cured, ends in perfect Deafness;
witness Galen, 3. de comp. med. sec. loc. cap. 3.

The Membrane of the Tympane being broken, or a scar left thereon, makes an
incurable Deafness.

A Deafness increasing and decreasing by degrees, is curable, for it signisieth
that it comes from a movable humor, which sometimes is more, sometime less in
quantity.

A Deafness coming from distemper of the Brain, is more easily cured than that
which comes from a proper disease of the Ear.

As to the Cure: That Deafness which depends upon any Disease of the Brain,
requires no other Cure, than that which belongs to such diseases, which you
may find in their several Chapters. That which comes from a Tumor, if it be
hard and old, admits no Cure; but if it be hot, you may find the Cure for it
in the Chapter of pain in the Ears. But if it come from matter gathered in the
Ear, you may find the Cure in the last Chapter of this Treatise, where we shall
speak of those things which preternaturally come forth of the Ear.

If this Disease comes of Dryness, it must be cured by the way of Rhasis, that
is by moistning things, long sleep, and washing of the Head with warm water; as
also putting of moist things into the Ear, as Oil of sweet Almonds, and the
like. If Deafness or thick Hearing come from any thing that is fallen into the
Ear, that must be taken away with washing, shaking, or extraction: or if any
Vermin are g^t into the Cavity of the Ear, they must either be taken forth, or
killed there: they are washed forth by making the part moist and slippery, and
enlarging it, with either Milk, the Oil of sweet Almonds, or some mollifying or
relaxing Decoction: they are shaken forth by neesing, for so by the force of
the air the parts being moved, that which lies in the passage of the Ear is
excluded, and the sooner if the way be first made slippery and enlarged with
Medicines (as we said) It is good also to hang down that side of the head, and
to hop upon the log on that side; by which way the Boys after swimming get the
Water out of their Ears. If these will not do, you must endeavor to draw it
forth with an Ear-picker, taking heed, lest when you put it in, you thrust that
which you would draw forth, further in; therefore let the spoon of the
Ear-picker be very thin that it may easier pass by the thing in the Ear. Or you
may lay hold of it, and take it out with a pair of Forcepts made on purpose,
rough on both sides within. And if this avail not, when the body is hard, as a
nut or stone, it must be laid hold on with an Instrument and broken, and then
the Ear must be washed as aforesaid. If the Ear-picker will not enter, arm your
probe with a little Cotton all over, and then dip it in Turpentine, or in some
other clammy substance, and put it in the Ear that it may stick to that which
is there, and stops the Ear. The same may be done with a Wax Candle touched
with Bird-lime; and if any of the Bird-lime stick in the Ear, you may
afterward take it out with the Ear-picker. There are some which put a hollow
quil into the Ear, and draw out things with sucking.

The worms in the Ears are enticed forth by laying to such things as they love,
as Milk with Sugar laid to the Ear in a sponge, or easily put in; or a Fig
turned inside out; or the pap of a sweet Apple, or Bacon, and turning the Ear
to the Sun at that time; and especially if Horsleeches get in, they are drawn
forth by an Injection of blood. Fleas are drawn forth with Dogs hair; but if
they be living they must be killed, and then they willess hinder the hearing,
and will be drawn forth more easily: And they are killed with fasting spittle,
or your own Urine dropped into the Ear.

Bitter things do sooner kill those Vermin, as the juice of Wormwood, Centaury,
or the Decoction of Aloes, or Beasts Gall. Also sharp things, as Vinegar, juice
of Onions, and the like.

And because the usual cause of Deafness is a cold distemper and a defluxion of
moisture to that part, you must labor most to oppose that.

But because this defluxion comes originally from the Brain, therefore we must
begin the Cure there, as in the cure of the cold distemper of the Brain; which
a Prudent Physician will moderate according to the degrees and violence of the
distemper.

The brief way of Cure is, first an attenuating Diet, moderately warm and
drying, such as is prescribed in Gutta serena: and then avoiding of Southernly
winds, by stopping the Ears; and vaporing nourishment, as Garlic and Onions;
as also of things that beget thick and flegmy Humors, First, Let a general
Evacuation be made by Pills Cephalic Purging Apozemes; then by Phlebotomy if
need be; to which ad if the Disease be stubborn, a sweating Diet; and then use
particular Remedies that revel the defluxion, as Cauteries, Vesicatories,
Neesings, Masticarories, Gargarisms: but Masticatories, or Chewings; are
peculiarly necessary in this Disease, by reason of the passage which comes from
the internal Ear to the Pallat, and throws out the excrements of the Ears.

And finally, When the Disease grows old, you must use ordinary Pills,
Magistral Syrups, Cephalic Opiats, Pouders and Caps to strengthen the head,
and the like. Al which are laid down in the Treatise of the Cold Distemper of
the Brain.

In time of Diet, if the Disease be stubborn, Bags are good applied to the Head
after the sweating Potion is administered, as in the said Treatise is
prescribed, not only to the fore part of the Head, but to the Ears also.

Brimstone and Bituminous Baths are very proper in this Disease, with washing
of the Head, for by them sweat is provoked, and the matter of defluxion is
drawn out. But by washing of the Head, the Brain is strengthened and dried, and
the humors fixed in the Ears are discussed. The way of using them is described
by Penotus, and much commended, in these words: There is nothing in the Cure of
Deasness more prevalent after the use of an bundred Medicines, than that the
Patient after his Body is first well purged, and then his Head. Wash his Head
well in Brimstone Baths, thus: Let him wear a great cap reaching to his
Eyelids, and beneath his Ears, made of Spunges sewed together; let him sit
under the cock or spout in the Bath, and let it run upon his Head; which Water
the spunges will suckup, and so keep the head in a continual heat; and so
opening all the Sutures of the Head, and Commissures, it will take away all the
vapors: or it will breath away the matter compacted in the Nerves, and the
passages for Hearing, or so change it, that it will quickly be gone: It is good
for him to sit so twice in a day for two hours, and presently after to sweat in
his bed, and use a slender Diet of Juyces and Broth, and to beware of Wine
except it be very weak.

Then you must use Topics, to discuss the matter fastened in the Ear; which
may be thus applied:

Take of the Leaves of Organ, Wormwood, Penyroyal, wild Marjoram, Sage, Mints,
Centaury the less, Mallows, and Marshmallows, of each one handful: the flowers
of Chamomel, Melilot, Stoechas, and Rosemary, of each one pugil: Cinnamon and
Cloves, of each half an ounce: Boil these in equal parts of white Wine and
Water: Foment the Ear wuh the straming hot in a sponge morning and evening.

Of the same Decoction you may make a Fumigation into the Ear by a Funnel which
must needs be excellent because the vapor arising from the hot Decoction must
needs reach into the innermost parts of the Ears.

Instead of a Fomentation you may apply a hot loaf made with Caraway seeds, and
cut in the middle.

Or take ordinary Bread from the Oven, and break off the lower crust, and dip
it in Spirit of Wine, and let the Patient endure it at his Ears as hot as may
be, that the vapor may be received in.

Bread made of Bran is better with Caraway seeds, Bay Berries, Juniper berries,
and Nutmegs mixed before it be baked: then after it is a little baked, break it
and apply it hot to the Ears.

If you desire a stonger Decoction for Fomentation and Fume, you may ad one or
two drams of the Pulp of Coloquintida, and the root of white Hellebore. You may
make this Decoction in white Wine alone, or with Vinegar, that it may pierce
more, and discuss.

The Fume of Cloves may be taken with much profit to the Patient by a Funnel
into the passage of the Ear when the Head is covered with a warm cloth.

After Fomentations and Fumes, you must put some liquor into the Ears, and then
stop them with Muskified Cotton.

Take of the Oil of bitter Almonds, and Rue, of each one ounce: Mixthem and put
them hot into the Ears. Or,

Take of the Oil of white Lillies, and Castor, of each one ounce: the Oil of
Dill, half an ounce: white Hellebore half a dram: Aqua vitae one ounce. Boil
them in Balneo Mariae till the Aqua vitae be consumed; strain them for the use
aforesaid. Or,

Take of Cypress Roots, Bay Berries, Annis and Cummin seed poudered, of each
one dram: Powder of Castor half a dram: Oil of Rue as much as will be
sufficient: Mix them and put them into a great hellow Onion; roast it, and
strain out the Liquor to be dropped into the Ears.

Chemical Oils work most powerfully; as Oly of Rosemary, Marjoram, Sage,
Fennel, Spike, Cloves, which are too strong to be used alone, therefore you
must mix a very small quantity of any of them with the Medicines mentioned; thus:

Take of the Oils aforesaid two ounces: Oil of Spike, Fennel, Cloves, or the
like, half a dram, o^ a dram: Mix them.

There are also some Waters, which if dropped into the Ears do much good. Some
Authors commend the Water of an Ash, which is made by putting one end of a
green Ash into the fire, and taking the water out of the other end: this is
best when deafness comes of a hot cause, and you fear to use hot Medicines.
But if not, then you may mix as much Aqua vitae therewith. Mathiolus mixeth
this Water with Juyces, and commends it highly, in these words: We know that
the Water which ^^mes out of Ash, when it is burnt, mixed with the Juice of
Sowbread, Squils, and Rue, in equal ^^rts warmed together, to be excellent
against Deafness, if it be dropped into the sound Ear when the Patient goes to
bed, and lies upon that Ear which is Deaf: but when both Ears are deaf, then
into that which is least affected.

The Spirit of Wine wherein white Hellebore has been infused, being dropped
into the deaf Ear, is very efficacious.

Others commend the clarified juice of Ivy mixed with strong white Wine.

The Galls of Beasts, as of Hairs, Goats, Partridges, are much commended if
they be used fresh, with an equal portion of Honey, and warmed in the shell of
an Onion.

The fat dripping of an Eel is much used; Put a great Eel upon a Spit, and take
the dripping upon Bay Leaves, and drop it warm into the Ears.

Zechius commends Ants Eggs, in these words: Ants Eggs mixed with the Juice of an
Onion, and dropped into the Ear, do cure the oldest Deafness.

The Blood of a young Wolf, dropped hot into the Ears does the same.

Lastly, If the Disease be so stubborn that it will not yield to the Medicines
prescribed, it will not be amiss to use the last Remedy which is prescribed by
Fonseca, consult. 58. tom. 2. namely, an Unction with Quicksilver, because
when Deafness comes of the French Pox, it is so cured, and it may be when it
comes otherwise; and the reason is, because Quicksilver does dissolve and
discuss ^ard tumors, when they are gathered upon any part, and therefore when
phlegm is gathered in the Ears, which no other means can dissolve, Quicksilver
may dissolve it. But this Remedy must not be tried but in a desperate
condition; for it is doubtful what the event will be, and the Unction with
Quicksilver does much weaken the Brain, and cause defluxions. So that some who
have been cured of the Pox by Quicksilver, have after fallen deaf by
defluxions; although sometimes (as I said) deafness coming of the French Pox is
cured thereby, and Quicksilver rightly used after due Purgation does ^o hurt
to the Brain.

This you must always observe in the use of Topics, That you never put cold
things, but warm, into ^he Ears, and you must not dress them till the old
Medicine be taken out. And after dressing you must ^top the Ear with Cotton
Muskified, for that only conduces much to the Cure: as Forestus says, Obs.
15. lib. 12. in these words: A woman of Delf after a long disease fell deaf,
which after sufficient ^urging abstained from Physic: at length she was
persuaded by an old woman to put a grain or ^wo of Musk into her Ears with a
little Cotton, and so doing she was wonderfully cured. I have ^ured many the
same way whose Ears have run.

Chap. 2. Of Noise in the Ears.
THe sense of Hearing is hindered by noise in the Ears; for as the Eyes must be
void of all colors that they may truly perceive the colors of all Objects, and
when they have a preternatural co^or, as in the Jaundice, the sight is
depraved; so the Ears must have no sound in themselves, that they ^ay more
distinctly receive al other sounds; and if there be any noise in them, the
Hearing is depra^ed. This is called in Greek Paracousis, in Latin Obauditio,
vulgarly a noise in the Ears.

This comes from a preternatural motion of the Air which is naturally contained
in the Ears; for ^s Aristotle says, Though the natural Air in the Ear do move,
yet the noise is not heard except you ^top the Ears with the hollow of your
hand, or the like, for then the hearing is more inward when ^he outward air is
kept out. This is seen by Experience, when one stops his Ears, and holds the
^andle of an Instrument in his teeth, the sound will be four times greater than
when his Ears are open, ^or it passes through the moutth, there is a Natural
Motion of air in the Ear by the Spiritus Acou^^ico, continually working. But if
it be too violently moved, then there is a preternatural noise in ^he Ear which
hinders the hearing.

The Causes are many of this preternatural Motion, but chiefly a vapor or wind
sent from other ^arts into the Ear, or bred there; either coming from the whole
body, or from some peculiar part.

In Fevers it comes from the whole body; whence Hippocrates says in Coacis; A
noise in the ^ead coming in an acute Disease is deadly, for it comes of wind
sent by the Arteries from the whole ^ody into the Ears; it uses to come chiefly
in the beginning of a fit, and before bleeding. Wind is ^lso sent to the Ear
from a peculiar part, namely, the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Midriff, Womb, and
^he like, whence it comes to pass, that in great Vomitings, in Hypochondriack
Melancholy, and ^^ts of the Mother, there is for the most part a noise in the
Ears. Often there is a wind sent from the ^ead coming of a cold phlegm, through
want of heat to the Ears by the Veins and Arteries, and the ^erves of the fifth
Conjugation, by which passages also vapors come from the inferior parts.

Wind is bred in the Ear also, of phlegm contained therein; whence it comes to
pass that thick Hearing is always accompanied with a noise in the head. For by
the humor there is a stoppage, from whence comes deafness, and from the wind
that proceeds from that humor, comes the none.

There are other causes of this noise, as a great stroke upon the head, a great
sound, Ulcers in the Ears, a hot distemper, weakness, and exquisite sense.

A stroke, by moving the Spirits in the Head too violently, causes a noise.

A great sound does violently move the natural Air.

And Ulcers by the heat of the matter boiling and working, make a noise; and by
the Spirits gathered thither, and moving the Natural Air.

A hot distemper fills the inward Arteries of the Ear with much Spirit, whence
a great beating noise proceeds. Sometimes too much Spirit is sent by those
Arteries into the Ears, and the Natural Air is thereby moved, from whence
comes a noise. And from this cause may come a continual none for some months
or years.

Weakness of hearing uses to make a noise in the Ears, as in sick people,
because every sense debilitated is hurt by every violent or moderate object: so
they who have weak sight, are offended by a small light.

And lastly, When the sense is most exquisite, as Galen, lib. 3. de comp. med.
sec. lo^. cap. 1. there will be a noise in the Ears, because even moderate
objects are too vehement for it. Now this exquisite sense must be
preternatural, for the exquisitness of ^ence cannot of its self produce a
depraved action, but rather the more exquisire it is the le^s will it Err. This
preternatural exquisitness of sense, comes from a hot distemper, ulcer, or the
like: as parts inflamed do deprav^dly, that is painfully, feel moderate
touchings. Or if the exquisitness of sense be Natural, you must suppose that
the cause of the noise is Preternatural; for the vapor which is so little that
it cannot be felt of dull sense, and so the action not be hurt, will be felt of
him that has exqui^^te ^ense, and will cause a noise; so that in one it is
Preternatural, in another Natural.

There are diverse sorts of sounds in the Ears, which proceed either from the
quantity of the vapors as they are more or few, thinner or thicker, swift or
slow in motion; for if the vapor be much, thick, and of quick motion, it will
make a noise like swift running water, or like a drum, or like ^ome such
Musical Instrument, or a rushing wind, or the like; but if it be little, thick,
and move quick, the noise is like the falling of a ^ree or House.

If it be much, thin, and swift in motion, it causes a hissing, or is like
falling of a gentle Water. If it be little, thin, and quick in motion, it
causes a tickling. If it be much, thick, and of slow motion, it makes a
murmuring noise. If the matter be little, thick, and slow in motion, it makes a
kind of whispering noise. If it be much, thin, and of slow motion, it causes a
hissing. And lastly, Because the degrees of thickness and thinness, of
greatness and smalness, of swiftness and slowness, are infinite, therefore
there are innumerable sorts of sounds in the Ears.

There is no certain knowledge of the causes aforesaid, as Galen teaches 3. de
comp. med. sec. loc. c. 1. but we may make conjecture from the precedent Causes
and Circumstances.

We conjecture that the noise comes from wind, because sometimes it cease, and
returns again; as also when the Patient has formerly used to eat windy meat.

It comes by consent from other parts, when there is some peculiar disease in
them.

It appears to come from the Brain when pain and heaviness of the Head went
before, and when other senses also are hurt.

That the fault is in the Ears, appears by a continual noise without any
intermission.

We know that that Disease comes from a cold matter; if the Patient be better
for the use of hot things, and if in time of health great noise be not much
disturbance.

The difference of sounds above mentioned, do show whether the disease comes of
thick or thin, many or few vapors, it will easily appear by what has been said.

When it comes from the weakness of the faculty of hearing; as from some
Diseases aforegoing, of which the Pati^nt is scarce recovered.

We conjecture that it comes from a hot distemper, and from an exquisite sense
coming thereupon, when the Patient perceives a heat in his head about his
Ears; when some hot Causes went before, and Medicines that discuss wind do
increase the disease: as also when the Patient in time of his health could not
endure any great noise by reason of the exquisitness of sense.

As to the Prognostic: A new begun noise in the head is easily cured, but an
old, hardly, and the more if it come from the French Pox. That which proceeds
of a hot cause, is more easily cured than that which comes of a cold.

An old noise coming of phlegm contained in the Ear, turns to deafness; for
when the matter is increased, the passage of Hearing is stopped.

The Cure of this Disease is diverse in respect of the diversity of Causes.

And first the Cure of Noise in the Head coming from consent with other parts,
depends upon the Cure of the Diseases of those parts, and must be taken from
their proper Chapters.

But that which comes principally from the Ear Distempered, must have its
proper Cure: And if it come of a cold Distemper, and thick Vapor, it will be
^ured as in the Treatise or thickness of Hearing; for they are complicated and
joined together; For Noise in the Ears is the forerunner of thick Hearing, and
Deafne^s.

Therefore al Remedies both Universal and Particular, may be used here which we
prescribed in the former Chapter of Deafness and thick Hearing.

If the Noise come from an Ulcer in the Ear, it requires no other Cure, than
that which is proper for the Ulcer. And that shall be laid down in the following
Chapter.

If it comes from weakness of Sense as in them who are lately Recovered of
some great Disease, it will vanish of its self as the Body gathers strength:
yet you may drop some proper temperate Oils sometimes into the Ears to mitigate,
as Oil of Chamomel, Dill, Sweet Almonds, and the like.

And Finally, If it come from a hot distemper and exquisite Sense, you must
prescribe a Cooling and Moistning Diet; as also drop Cool things into the Ears,
beginning with mild first, and after proceeding to stronger.

And first, U^e the Decoction of Barley, Violets, Lettice, Water Lillies, to
which you may put a little Balm or Chamomel to make it pierce: which not
prevailing, you must use the juice of Lettice, Purslain, Henbane: Galen
allows the Juice of Poppy and Opium its ^elf, but these must be used
sparingly and with much Caution, lest by weaking the natural heat of the part,
the Hearing grow more dull.

Chap. 3. Of Pain in the Ears.
PAin of the Ears called Otalgia in Greek, is a violent Disease, both in
respect of the part affected, namely, the inward Membrane which goes about the
Cavity of the Ear; as (...) by reason of the neerness of the Brain which often
suffers at the same time.

But since al pain comes from the solution of Continuity, al those things do
cause pain in the Ears, which do dissolve the Continuity of those sensible
parts which compass the Cavity of the Ear: the chief whereof are Distempers
both without, and with, Matter, Wounds, Ulcers, or things fallen, or put into
the Ears Externally.

A Cold Distemper does sometimes cause pain in the Ears, and it comes from cold
Winds, cold La^hs, and other very cold Causes.

A Hot Distemper without Matter, seldom or never produces a pain in the Ears,
as a cold does: For Cold is an Enemy to these Nervous and Membranous parts, but
Heat is a Friend to them. Nor can it cause any pain but that which is
excessive, and will cause a defluxion of Humors to the parts, and then it is not
without Matter. For this Cause neither Galen, nor any of the anci^^t Greeks
made mention of a Hot Distemper, although Avicen of all the Arabians have
mentioned it.

Now the Cold Matter which causes pain in the Ears is either phlegm or water
which comes from the Brain into them, or else wind coming from the Brain or the
inferior parts.

But the Hot Matter, is either Choler that falls from the Veins and Arteries
into those parts, or Blood, from whence comes Inflammation.

The before aid Cause produces an occult Solution of Continuity from whence
comes Pain. But manifest Solutions of Continuity, as Wounds and Ulcers, are
more evident Causes of pain. Wounds come from external Punctures, Cuts, and
Contusions. But Ulcers come either after Inflammation and breaking of an
Impostume, or from sharp Humors that corrode the parts,

Finally, Things that get into the Ear outwardly, if they be hard, sharp, or
any ways piercing or biting, will cause pain.

You may know al these Causes thus, If the Distemper be without Matter, there
will be no heaviness, distention, or tumor: And you may know that the Distemper
is Cold, when cold Causes have preceded, as travel in Winter, when the pain
increases in cold weather, or with cold Medicines and decreaseth with hot: but
you may know a hot distemper by hot causes preceding, as being long in the Sun,
or heat, and when hot Medicin^s hurt, and cold do profit.

If the Pain come from phlegm, there will be a heavin^ss in the Ear, and the
Head; as also a Rhewin will fall upon some other part, besides cold Causes did
pr^cede, as cold and Northerly weather, cold meats; or it is winter and the
Patient is old, and the like.

If it come from Wind there will be a great pain without weight or heaviness,
not constant, but intermitting and with noise.

That it comes from Water, the Patient will have other Diseases from the same,
as sharp and thin defluctions upon the Teeth, Eyes, Ears, Breast, and other
parts; and Evacuation of serous Matter by Vomit* Stool, Urine, or Sweat.

If it come from a Chollerick Humor the pain will be sharp and pricking, and
there will be sensible heat; it will be mitigated with cold things, and Choler
will sometimes come forth of the heat* the Body is of a Chollerick temper, the
Party young, the Weather hot, and Diet also with the like, by which the Patient
is often distempered.

An Inflammation is known by a great beating pain, with great heat and redness
about the Cheeks and Temples, to which there is joined a continual violent
Fever; sometimes Doting, Swooning, Convulsion, and coldness of the extreme
parts.

A Wound is known by the blood which will come forth of the Ear, but an Ulcer by
the filth, or matter; but because sometimes there is a defluxion of filth from
the Brain by the Ears, we must distinguish, for it if comes from the Brain;
there w^nt before it a Headache and other signs of an Impostume in the Brain:
And first the matter is sent forth in great abundance and after by degrees
while it is al spent. From an Imposthume in the Ear may come plenty of Matter,
but then there went signs before of an Inflammation there, and afterward
followed an Ulcer, which you may know whether it came from an Imposthume or a
Defluxion of sharp Humors by the^e signs following; There is a constant Flux of
a little filth or matter by degrees; there is felt a pain burning and shooting
in the Ear, especially if it be picked. Moreover, We may conjecture of the
Difference of the Ulcers, For if it be in the Bone, it is known by the thin
Matter yellowish, and by the long continuance o^ the Disease: If it be deep,
you shall know it by much Matter: If it be clean, by the ^audible Matter* If it
be foul, by the thickness and plenty* If it be virulent, by the thinness: If
putrid, by the stink of it: If it be corroding, by blood following. If
fistulous, from the oldness of the Ulcer, the virulency of the Matter, the
callosity and hardness of the flesh.

Finally, If there be any thing fallen into the Ear, either it may be seen, or
related by the Patient.

The Prognostic of pain in the Ears is diverse, according to the diversity of
the Causes. That which comes from a bare distemper is easily cured. That which
comes from a cold ^^egmy ferous, or windy matter, is not very dangerous, but
u^eth to continue ^ong* But that which comes from hot humors, and especially
such as cause inflammation, is very dangerous, for the Brain being nigh must
needs consent, and be also affected; from whence Deliriums, and Convulsons use
to proceed. In this Disease young men are in most danger: for they being of a
hot temper, and their blood ^ot, the inflammation is greater; and this
dissolveth the natural heat of the Brain, and kills the Patient: Hence it is
that they die for the most part within seven days. But old men who are colder,
have ^ess inflammation, and so are in less danger.

Ulcers in the Ears are hard to be cured, because the Brain being nigh, does
send its excrements to those parts: But those which follow an Imposthume* are
easier cured, especially if the matter be ^audible. But where the matter is
virulent, stinking, or the like, it is difficult, especially if the Ulcer be
cavous, and the bone foul.

The Cure, as the Diagnostick and Prognostic, is to be varied according to the
Cause.

For if it comes from a bare cold distemper, hot Medicines applied to the Ears
are sufficient, such as are in the cure of Deafness, esp^cially Fomentations
and Fumes, as also the warm Oils there described. But when a hot distemper
comes without matter, it may be cured with Topics, which are cooling, which we
will show afterward, and especially with the white of an Egg beaten with
Breast milk, and put into the Ear.

If it come from a cold distemper with matter, as phlegm, water, or wind, you
must use the Medicines prescribed in the cure of Deafness. First, Purge the
whole Body, then correct the distemper of the Brain, and apply warm Topics that
discuss unto the Ears.

If it come from a hot distemper with Choler, which is of long continuance, or
comes by fits. First revel the humor that flows to the part by Phlebotomy, by
which the hot distemper of the whole Body with the Liver, in which Choler is
made, is amended. Then purge the Humor with proper Medicines. You may amend the
hot distemper of the* Liver with Juleps or cooling Broths, with Whey of Goats
milk, with sharp Vitriolat, Mineral Waters, with hot Baths, and the like. And
lastly, All things are proper for it which are prescribed in the Cure of the
Head from a hot cause* But you may use cooling Topics and Anodines that take
away pain, which we shall show afterward concerning the Inflammation.

Inflammation of the Ear is cured first by blood-letting, according to the
quantity of the humor, for revulsion of it from the Ears, first having given an
emollient and cooling Clyster: This must be done in great quantity, at diverse
times, for the greatness and violence of the Disease requires it. You must open
the Head Vein on that side the Ear is that is pained. If you think it comes
from stoppage of Terms or Hemorrhoids, open the lower Veins, first having let
blood in the Arm. When the cause is not from thence, it will do good for
revulsion to apply Leeches.

Also you make good Revulsions by Frictions and Ligatures of the Arms and
Thighs, by cupping the Shoulders and Back with Scarrification, or without.

Sometimes for Derivation it is good to apply Cupping glasses behind the Ears,
with Scarrification; as Zacutus Lucitanus teaches, Obser. 64. lib. 1. Praxis
Admirandae, in these words. The Divine old man in his second Book, Epid. Sect.
6. toward the end, says thus: For pain in the Ear, clap on a Cupping glass.
This worthy saying gave much help to a poor man which was in pain; and when al
things failed, and he grew weak with watching, and mad with a continual Fever,
being ready to depart; having opened a Vein, and applied Cupping glasses to the
Shoulders and Neck, and taken revelling Clysters, and purging, and the like; as
also Anodines into his Ear without any profit, he was cured only with a Cupping
glass with Scarification applied by the Glandles of the Ears, which drew much
blood, and took away the inflammation.

The same Zacutus Lucitanus in Praxi ad Histori^s, commends four Hors-leeches
applied behind the Ears, which he says gave much ease to a young man which had
a violent inflammation in his Ears.

The cutting of the Arteries in the Temples of the Forehead, does produce rare
effects for the appeasing of the greatest pain in the Ears, by taking away the
hot and windy blood which produced that grievous symptom. The way of doing it,
is set down by us, in the Cure of the hot Headache.

A Purge against Choler is good, for so the Choler mixed with Blood, which by
it is made so fluid, is drawn down, and sent forth.

Afterward the whole mass of humors is to be tempered with cooling Juleps, made
of the Decoction of Lettice, Purslain, Plantane, Sorrel, and the like, with
Syrup of Lemmons, Pomegranats, or wild Poppies.

In the mean while, these Medicines are given; you must always apply Topics,
which must always be Anodine, by reason of the vehemence of the pain, the
mitigation whereof must be your chief intent; and this will be more rationally
done, if in the beginning and the increase of the Disease, you mix things that
do gently repel; but in the state and declination, things that resolve, such as
these following:

Take of new Breast-milk two ounces: the white of an Egg beaten to Water half
an ounce: drop these mixed together, warm into the Ear.

Or Milk alone squirted into the Ear from the Breast; this does much assuage.

Take Plantane and Nightshade, of each one handful: the flowers of Chamomel and
Melilot, of each one pugil: Make a Decoction, and let the Patient receive the
fume thereof into his Ear by a Funnel.

Take of the Oil of Water Lillies and Roses, of each one ounce: Mix them, and
drop thereof into the Ear; after the fume.

Called ^ Ch^s^ip, or Kitchinbob, with many feet* which being touched gathers
it self round like a ball.
Sows infused in the aforesaid Oils and strained, are the best Anodines; for
these Creatures have especial force to appease pain, and therefore are used in
the toothach, hemorrhoids, and the like; or take them asive, and boil them with
Water in the Oils til the Water be consumed.

If the burning be very violently, you may mix cooling Juyces with the
aforesaid Oils, thus:

Take of the Oil of Water Lillies, and Roses, of each one ounce: the Juice of
Nightshade and Plantane, of each half an ounce: Mix them, and drop thereof into
the Ear.

Rose Vinegar is used of some Practitioners made of two parts of Oil of Roses,
and one part of Vinegar, which ought to be suspected, as al strong repelling
Medicines; for there will be danger, lest the humor flowing thither should
return to the Brain; and it is a general Precept always to be observed. That
you never lay repelling Medicines to inflammations which are near unto noble
parts: but you may mix gentle Repellers with Anodines and Relaxers; for ^o they
will moderately repress the Defluxion, nor will they drive it far back: Such are
the before mentioned, to which you may ad this following:

Take of the Oil of Roses, and Water Lillies, of each one ounce and an half:
Rose and Plantane Water, of each half an ounce: Breast-milk one ounce: the
Mucilage of the Seeds of Fleabane and Quinces drawn with Rose water, of each
six drams: mix them. Put some drops thereof warm into the Ears, and bind clouts
dipped in the same Liquor about the Ears.

In vehement pain we are constrained to fly to Narcoticks, or Stupifactives;
but you must use them seldom, and with much care, because they offend the
Brain. Galen says, 3. de comp. med. sec. loc. I knew one, who only with the
use of Opium, took away both speech and sense from his Patient, that he could
be cured neither with Opobalsam, nor any other hot Medicine injected. Therefore
if necessity constrain, thus they are to be prescribed:

Take of Oil of Poppy-seeds one ounce and an half: Camphire and Opium of each
two grains: mix them, and drop them into the Ear.

Take of the Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces: the Juice of Mallows half an
ounce: Myrrh half a dram: Saffron half a scruple: Opium three or four grains:
mix them for the use aforementioned.

In applying of Topics, the Rule of Galen is diligently to be observed, which
is in lib. 3. comp. medic. sec. loc. cap. 1. that an inflamed Ear be not
touched, but let the Medicines be injected by an instrument for to see into the
Ear, or a Probe armed with lint and dipped in the Medicines. Then that you ask
the Patient if he feel it warm, and if he can endure it hotter? and let it be
used so hot as he can suffer: You must put the Probe so armed gently into the
Hole of the ear that the Medicine may soak from it into the ear, you must do
thus till the passage of the ear be ^illed with the Medicine, then you must dip
lint in the same Medicine, and lay it to the Hole of the ear, and round about.

In the state of the Disease you must mix gently resolving Oils with Anodines,
thus.

Take of Oil of Chamomel, sweet Almonds and Violets, of each one ounce: the Oil
of Lillies half an ounce: Mix them.

But these Fomentations and Fumigations which are made of the following
Decoction, do resolve more powerfully.

Take of Marsh-Mallow-Roots one ounce: Mallows, Nightshade, St. John's Wort, of
each one handful: Linseed half an ounce: the seeds of Mallows, Ma^sh ^allows,
and white Poppies, of each two drams: the Flowers of Chamomel, Dill, and Roses,
of each one pugil: make a Decoction in Water and Milk for a Fomentation and
Fum^gation: ^ate^ taken out of Ashen sticks, being dropped into the Ears eases
pain and dissolveth the cause of it. You must put green Ashen sticks in to the
fire, and take the Water that comes from both ends.

If the Tumor cannot be dissolved but it seems to tend to suppuration, which
you may perceive by the increase of pain, by greater Pulsation, and a stronger
Fe^ver.

You must help the motion of Nature, and apply this following Cataplasm.

Take the faeces of the former Decoction made for a Fomentation and Fumigation:
and put to them of D^cks and Hens-grease, Marrow o^ Vea^, and the Mucilage of
Fleabane and Foenugreek-seeds, of each one ounce: the Oil of Chamomel and
V^olets, of each ^n^ ounce: Fresh Bu^ter one ounce and an half: Saffron half a
dram* Make a Ca^a^lasm.

A Cataplasm o^ Crumbs of Bread is also very good; for it a^^w^ge^h pa^ns and
furthers supp^ration gently without inflammation: and therefore it is very
proper in all Phlegmous or ho^ Tumors: you must make it thus.

Take of the Crumbs of white Bread one pound* boil it in Goats Milk to a Pultis,
then ad of the two Yolks of Eggs, the Oil of Roses two ounces: Saffron one
scruple: Make a Cataplasm.

The Cataplasm made of an Onyon, is much commended of Victorius Faventinus.
Made thus.

Take one Onyon: Fresh Butter two ounces: Oil of Chamomel and Roses, of each
one ounce: Saffron one scruple: Make a Cataplasm, apply it warm.

The Suppuration being made, the Imposthume breaks, and the Matter comes
forth either by the Membrane of the Ear made thin, or else corroded, and then
the Patient must lie upon the Ear that is pained, that the quittour may come
forth; and you must drop such things into it as may cleanse.

Take of the Decoction of Barley four ounces: Honey of Roses one ounce: drop
this warm into the Ears at several times.

If an Ulcer come from sharpness of Matter, you must have a peculiar way of
Cure; such as is used to an Ulcer caused from a Defluxion of Humors.

And first, because according to the opinion of Galen, 4. de comp. Med. sec.
loc. we may not apply Topics to any part, except the whole Body be first often
purged: we must use ordinary Evacuations by Bleeding and Purging according to
the nature and temper of the Patient; and these must be repeated through the
whole time of Cure, as often as need requires.

Then we must apply Drying and Clen^ing Topics or Medicines to the place
affected, beginning with the mildest first.

The Examples of which are these.

Take of the best Honey and old white Wine of each three ounces: boil them, and
skim them: drop of this into the Ear, and stop it with Cotton dipped in the same.

After that it may be stronger; mix the juice of Horehound, Smallage, Wormwood,
and the lesser Centaury, or of Sowbread with Honey: boil them gently, and drop
thereof into the Ear.

Or,

Take of the Juice of Beets one ounce: Horehound half an ounce: the best Honey
six drams: ^oyl these a little, then ad of the Syrup of Wormwood two drams: Mix
them.

You may make a stronger Medicine thus.

Take of the Juice of Sowbread one ounce: Myrrh one dram: Saffron half a
scruple: Frankincense one scruple: Verdegreece half a scruple: old Wine one
ounce and an half: boil them gently till the Wine be consumed: drop of this
twice or thrice in a day into the Ear.

Observe, Before you drop any liquor into the Ear, you wash the ear in warm
Hydromel, or water and Honey, and wipe it well with lint upon a Probe armed.

When the Ulcer is sufficiently Cleansed, you must come to Cicatrizing. Thus.

Take of Round Birthwort, Pom^granate peels, and Galls, of each half an ounce:
boil them in equal parts of Wine and Smiths-forge-water, to half a pint, when
it is strained, ad to it of the juice of Plantane and Poligonum, of each one
ounce: Honey of Roses two drams: mix them, and drop of this into the Ear. Or,

Take of Frankincense and Myrrh of each one dram: Gum of Juniper half a dram:
Sarcocol, and Labdanum, of each one scruple: Make a Powder of them and mix it
with Turpentine into Balls, which you must lay upon the Coals so that the
Patient may take the Fume into his Ear by a funnel.

Or, You may mix that Powder with some of the aforesaid Juyces, and drop
thereof into the Ear.

Or, You may mix burnt Alum with white Wine, for this has a very great Drying
quality.

If the Ulcer be stubborn and old, it is nourished by a Defluxion, which you
must labor to remove by usual Purges, Diets of Lignum vitae and Sarsa, by
Errhins, Masticatories, Cauteries, and other Remedies that will divert.

Then must you use stronger Medicines to dry the Ulcer; such as we prescribed
of juice, of Sowbread, Myrrh, and Verdegreece.

Or this following Medicine of Valescus, with which he says that he Cured a
Priest that had an Ulcer in his Ear from the eighth year of his age.

Take of Honey ten drams: Vinegar eight drams: boil them: take off the scum,
and put to one dram of Verdegreece: Mix them.

These must be dropped morning and evening into the Ear, after it is washed with
this Decoction.

Take of Wormwood, Marsh Mallows and Agrimony, of each one handful: boil them
in equal parts of water and white Wine put to it toward the conclusion, to
half a pint: Dissolve in the strained Liquor Oximel simple one ounce and an
half: Alum poudered one dram: wash the ear with this warmed, and after dry it
with an armed Probe.

If the pain come from sharp Medicines, drop in the Oil of sweet or bitter
Almonds with Myrrh* Aloes, and Saffron: and if it be violent, mix a little
Opium, or drop in the Oil made of yolks of Eggs in a leaden Mortar.

If the Ulcer be very foul, you must use Aegyp^iacum, Dissolved in the
aforesaid Juyces.

Lastly, Galen, Aerius, and Others, both Greeks and Arabians do much Commend
the Rust of Iron for the drying of Ulcers in the Ear.

Galen, 3. de comp. med. sec. loc. uses Scales of Iron ground or boiled with
the sharpest Vinegar.

Hollerius in his Comment upon that Chapter does prefer the Arrabian
Preparation, for they first grind the Iron with Vinegar, then they dry it; thus
they do seven times, then they make it very fine, and boil it long with the
best Vinegar, while it is as thick as Honey, and then they dry it, and use it
with Honey or other liquors.

If the Pain of the Ear come from any thing fallen into it, as a little stone,
Cherry-stone, or the like; which will be very grievous, and sometimes cause
Convul^ions, Inflammations, and Death; as Matthaeus de Gradi says of a Boy of
ten years had a Cherry-stone in his ear, and through the ignorance of the
Surgeon, he endured great pain, and after died.

You must draw out these things thus.

First, You may try with an Ear-picker which you must carefully attempt, lest
your instrument force it further, which often hapeneth.

Therefore if that which is fallen into the ear do fill the hole. it is better
to abstain from the use of the Ear-picker, and try these Remedies.

Paulus u^eth to dip his armed Ear-picker in Rozin, Turpentine, Gum, or the
like; and to put it into the Ear, turning of it till you get it out by degrees.

If thus you cannot, put hot Oil continually into the Ear to relax the part,
and make the thing contained slippery, so it will easier come forth.

Use Neesings with the mouth and nostrils shut, for so it will be forced out of
the Ears.

These are to be followed till the party be freed; for if it continue long in
the Ear, it will be inflamed, and then the thing will be more difficult and
dangerous to be drawn forth.

Arculanus upon Rhasis, affirms that the Head of a Lizard applied to the Ear,
will draw out any thing, and confirms it by his own Experience, in these
words: In my Experiences for drawing things out of the Ear, this is one; Tie a
live Lizard, or one lately dead, with his head to the Ear, for the space of
three hours, and when you take it away, you shall find the thing sticking to
the head of the Lizard: and this is good for the extraction of any thing
wheresoever it is fastened.

Lastly, If the former Medicines do not prevail, you must come to the use of a
Chyrurgical Instrument, which is at large elegantly declared by Fabricius
Hildanus, Cent. 1. Observe. 4, 5, 6. and by Aquapendent, in his Chyrurgical
Operations, in his Chapter of the Chyrurgery for the Ears.

Sometimes Fle^s get into the Ears, and moving themselves in the Cavity, bring
much disturbance. For the taking out of them, make a little ball of dogs hair,
and put it into the Ear, so *will the Flea by reason of its affection to dogs
come into it. Or make a tent, and put it often into the Ear, with a little
Turpentine.

Oftentimes through swimming, or washing of the Head, water gets into the
Ears, which is very troublesome: this is shaken forth by hopping on the contrary
foot, and holding the Ear down. If this will not do, you must ^uck it out with
a reed, or a pair of bellows. If you arm the pipe with tow to make it stick
clo^e, and keep the air out of the Ear, it will be better.

Galen and Aetius continue in pouring in of Oil, suppling the Ear, and then
wiping it with wool; and after using Oil for diverse times.

And lastly, Put soft and dry Sponge into the Ear often, till it come out dry.

CHAP. IV. Of those things which come forth of the Cavities of the Ears
preternaturally.
MAny Preternatural things come out of the Ears, which we will set down
particularly with their Remedies.

First, After an imposthume is broken which came after an Inflammation, or from
an Ulcer coming from sharp Humors, filth, or matter, uses to come forth; whose
Cure is laid down in the former Chapter.

Sometimes blood comes out of the Ears; as in wounds of the head, or blows by
which the Veins of the Ears are broken or rent. If this flux be small, it is not
to be stopped, because then being retained, it would cause Inflammation; but if it
be great, or of long continuance, it must be stopped by bleeding in the Arm, and
Cupping glasses applied to the Shoulders with Scarification. Then you must drop
cooling and binding things in, as juice of P^^ntane, Polygonum, or the
Decoction of Madder, red Roses, Mastich, Acacia, Hypocistis, Pomegranate
flowers, Sumach, and the like, made in Wine and Vinegar, or Smiths Forge-water.

Sometimes Water comes out of the Brain into the Ears, as in children, which
must not be stopped, for if it be suddenly stopped, it cau^eth the
Falling Sickness, or some grievous Disease of the Brain; for Nature casts forth
Excrements by that way, though not proper; and the great moistness in childrens
heads is not only purged by the ordinary ways ordained by Nature, as the
Nostrils and Pallat, but also by the Ears, Eyes, and the who^ Head, from whence
it becomes sore. But when this Evacuation is symptomatical, and the humor
begins to ulcerate the Ears, and hurt the hearing, we will lay down a
convenient Method for the ^ure.

And first, The abounding ^umors in the Head are to be purged with gentle
Medicines often repeated, and to be derived by Ve^cator^es to the Neck, and by
a Caustic.

Then you must cleanse the Ears, and dry them with this Medicine:

Take of the Juice of Agrimony, and Wormwood, of each four ounces: white Wine,
and Honey of Roses, of each one* ounce: Boil them a little, and drop into the
Ear after it is wiped; then stop it with Cotton dipped in the same.

Take o^ white Wine four ounces: the Juice of Agrimony, Wormwood, and Centaury
the less, of each one ounce: Boil them, and drop into the Ear.

In elder people, if water flows out ^f the Ears long, you must purge the
whole Body and the Brain with a Cephalic Apozeme that is purging; then you must
consume the superfluous Humidity with a Sudorifick Diet; derive it with
Vesicatories, Cauteries, and Cupping glasses; and use other Remedies which are
set down in the Cure of the Cold Distemper of the Brain.

Lastly, There are Worms sometimes in the Ears coming out of filthy Ulcers,
which are cured with the Ulcer; but because the Ulcer cannot be speedily cured,
you must therefore endeavor the Cure of the Worms.

Take this one Medicine as an Example:

Take of the Oil of bitter Almonds: the Juice of Smallage, and the less
Centaury, of each two ounces: Vinegar two drams. Boil them a little; then ad of
Mirrh, and Aloes, of each one scruple. Mix them, and drop into the Ear.

If you will make it stronger, put half a scruple of Coloquintida thereunto.

The End of the Third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Nostrils.
The PREFACE.
THe Nostrils use to have many Affects which are referred either to the Series,
or Method of Diseases, or of Symptoms. These are Diseases, An Ulcer, Ozaena,
Sarcoma, and Polypus. These are Symptoms, The loss of Smelling, Stinking in the
Nose, the Coryza or Pose, Sneezing, Bleeding. Therefore this Fourth Book shall
be referred to Seven Heads: The First Chapter is concerning the Ulcer of the
Nostrils, and Ozaena. The Second of Sarcoma and Polypus. The Third of the loss
of Smelling. The Fourth of the Stink of the Nose. The Fifth of Coryza. The
Sixth of Neezing. The Seventh of Bleeding at the Nose.

Chap. 1. Of the Ulcer of the Nostrils, and Ozaena.
THe Ulcer of the Nostrils is either New and Simple, or Old and Stinking; This
last is called Ozaena.

The New Ulcer which is Simple, either comes of External Cause, as a Wound, or
Contusion: Or, from an Internal Cause, as the sharpness of Humors, flowing to
the part; and especially salt Phlegm coming from the Brain.

Ozaena comes from a simple Ulcer neglected, or from the Malignity and
Acrimony of the Cause by which it becomes putrid and filthy.

The Diagnosis of both is this; a Simple Ulcer Causes little or no pain, but
only sends forth blood often, especially when it is meddled or tampered withal;
otherwise is is covered with a dry black Scab which sometimes is cast forth. But
Ozaena Causes great pain, the Scab is fouler; as also Stinking Matter comes
from it. The Patient is not only annoyed therewith, but noysom unto others: and
the Greeks call it Ozaena from the stink. Often this Ulcer creeps, or either
eats the Gristle of the Nose, or the parts between, or the tender Bones
thereof, and putrifie^h them, and sometimes destroys the Pallat, especially if
it turn to a Cancer, or if it come from the French Pox as it often does, or
from an Elephantiasis.

As for the Prognostic, Ulcers that are New, and come from a gentle Humor that
has little Malignity are easily Cured: but Old Ulcers that are sordid and
putrid are hardly Cured, and if they turn into a Cancer, never. If they come of
the French Pox, or Elephantiasis, they cannot be Cured except those Diseases be
first Cured.

For the Cure: First you must appoint a good Diet, which may assuage the
sharpness of the Humors, and hinder the breeding of them; then you must
Evacuate the whole Body by Bleeding, convenient Purging, and by Cupping Glasses
with Scarrification: And if the Defluxion of Humors into the Nostrils be very
stubborn, it must be derived by Vesicatories and Causticks applied to the
hinder parts, and then you must give things to strengthen the head.

After Universal Remedies you must come to Topics. And first take notice if
the Ulcers be Crusty and Hard. and before you proceed, take away that with a
little warm water and fresh Butter, or Goo^e grea^e, or Hens grease, Oil of
sweet Almonds, or the like.

The Scabs being mollified, must not presently be taken off by force, lest the
Ulcer be exasperated with a Defluxion; but you must expect til they fall off of
their own accord by blowing the nostrils; or at last you may take them gently
off with a little Oil of sweet Almonds upon the tip of your ^inger.

After the Scab is off you must use astringent and drying Remedies.

In a Simple Ulcer it is sufficient to wash it with Barley water, and Honey of
Roses, and then to anoint it with Ointment of Tutty, or with the white Ointment
of Rhasis, or the Oil of yolks of Eggs which will be of more sorce if it be made
in a Leaden Mortar.

But for the Cure of Ozana, you must prepare the^e following Medicines.

Take of Barley one pugil: Agrimony, Plantane, Wormwood, and the lesser
Centaury, of each one ^andful: Red Roses half a pugil: boil them in
Forge-water: in the straining dissolve of Honey of Roses four ounces: Make an
Errhine to be often snuffed into the Nostrils.

After it is somewhat clean, you must use this following Decoction.

Take of the Flowers and Rinds of Pomegranates of each two ounces: Plantane,
Horstaile, Fleabane, and Rapture-wort, of each one handful: the Roots of
Bistort, or Snakeweed, one (...): Crude Alum, one ounce and an half: Make a
Decoction.

Alum Water is also good; as also those Remedies which shall after be
prescribed for the Cure of P^lypus, in the following Chapter.

Aegyptiacum* Dissolved in Barley Water is good for the same.

After this make Ointments which may Ast^ing or Bind, Cleanse, and Dry
exceedingly, as of Pom^holygos, with Alum Chalcitis, and the Pomegranate Peels.

Or, This following.

Take of Oil Olive, half an ounce: Pomegranate Peels, and Flowers, of each
three drams: (...). Alum, La^^anum, of each two drams. Chalcitis, Aloes,
Frankincense, of each one dram: Oil of Roses and Myrtles, of each two ounces:
Red Wax as much as is sufficient: Make an Ointment, which apply to the Vcer; or
dissolve it in Wine, Plantane, Rose or Myrtle-water, which f^en snuff unto the
Nose, the mouth being filled with Water.

If these things prevail not, wash the Ulcer with sublimate Water, twice,
thrice, or four times in a day, for it dries very much, and clen^eth without
any pain or biting: You must make it thus.

Take of Plantane water four ounces: Crude, Sublimate Poudered, twelve grains:
boil them in a Glass to the Consumption of half, you may increase or diminish
the quantity of the Sublimate as you desire to have it stronger or weaker.

When the Ulcer is well Cleansed, you must proceed to the Drying of it up: for
which purpose the Po^der of Red Roses blown into it, is very good.

Rondeletius witnesses that there is nothing more efficacious for the drying
of Ulcers after sufficient clensing than a Fumigation, becauset it enters deep
into the parts, and dries, and he says it must be made of powerful dryers, as
of Orpiment, and Cinnaber, to which you must ad some sweet things, from whence
there will arise a fume or sm^ak to dry the Ulcer; as Mirrh, Frankincense,
Mastich, ^enjamin, and the like, which may be brought into this form:

Take of the best Labdanum, Hypocistis, Mastich, and Mirrh, of each three
drams: red Storax, and Styrax calamita, Frankincense bark, Sandarach, and
Orpine, of each two drams. Make them up with Turpentine into Troches, with
which let the Patient be fumed morning and evening in his Chamber.

It is excellent also to burn Candles of red Wax; for the smoke of them will
powerfully dry the Ulcers in the Nose, especially if the Patient be kept in a
close room. And Rondeletius says, That we may perceive that the smoke of a
Candle does affect us by receiving it: for if at any time we sit long in a
little Study by Candle light, our spittle and snot will appear afterward
black: And by this means he says he cured an Ulcer, which neither Italian nor
French Chyrurgeons could Cure.

Chap. 2. Of Sarcoma, and Polypus.
SOmetimes there is not only an Ulcer, but an excrescency of flesh in the Nose,
which makes preternatural Humors called Polypus and Sarcoma.

Sarcoma is flesh growing in the Nostrils without any certain shape, but like
the proud flesh of an Ulcer.

But Polypus is an Excrescency of flesh growing with small roots, and spreading
and hanging down to the lower part of the Nose, like the fish called Polypus,
from whence it has the name. Rhasis calls it the Hemorrhoids of the Nose,
because like those of the Fundament. This flesh is soft, sometimes white,
sometimes red and blew, and if it grow big, it hangs out of the Nose: but if
it grow in the highest part of the Nose, it sometimes hangs down to the
Pallat, and stops the common passages, and may easily be seen behind the Uvu^a.
In Southernly weather, and at the full Moon, it is much swelled. But in a
Northernly dry time, and at new Moon, it is le^s. It differs from Sarcoma in
this: Sarcoma grows chiefly in the lowest part of the Nose, where it is
^^^shy; but Pol* pus grows in the highest part by the Root of the Nose.

The Cause of both, is a gross slimy humor coming from the Brain mixed with
blood; sometimes with melancholy, and then you may fear a Cancer. Sarcoma often
comes from the sup^r^luous nourishment of the Nose turned into proud flesh,
and therefore is more easily cured.

The knowledge of these Diseases is ea^ie by what has been said, they being
app^rent to the Eyes.

The Prognostic is thus made:

A Sarcoma is easily cured for the most part; but Polypus hardly. But that
which is soft, white, or red, or white and red, is more easily cured; but that
which is hard and livid or blew, is di^^icultly cured, and is like to be a
Cancer. Also that Polipus which grows low, or in the middle of the nostril,
is more curable than that which is rooted high, because Remedies will not so
well reach it.

Both are cured with the same Medicines, which are to be ^o ordered that the
superfluous flesh may be taken away; but first you must remove the antecedent
Cause, that is, the slimy humor which comes from the Head, which you must do
by a drying and attenuating Diet, general purging, by Revulsion, derivation and
drying of the head; all which may be done by those Remedies which are
prescribed in the cure o^ the cold distemper of the Brain, being di^cree^ly
used; and although many Authors commend the Decoction of Guajacum with a drying
diet, you must take heed lest by so doing you mix the phlegm with not humors,
and ^o it turn into a Cancer.

After this, you must take off the superfluous flesh with Causticks, or with
Cissers made purposely, and t^en cicatrize. But in the beginning of this
disease, it may be cured with only strong dryers and astringents; and
constantly you must apply such kind of Medicines first, before you come to
stronger.

First of all, try the Medicine made of the three sorts of Pomegranates
prescribed by Galen, lib. 3. de comp. med. sec. loc. cap. 3. thus: Take three
Pomegranates, one sour, another sweet, and the other of the middle sort: let
them be ripe, bruise them in a ^ortar; then take the Juice, and boil it to a
Limment; dip a tent therein, and often put it into the Nose. This dries and
astringeth without sharpness, and consumes the Excrement.

This following Water does it more powerfully:

Take of unripe Grapes three pound: Pomegranate peels and flowers, and Sumach,
of each two pound: macerate them in Vinegar, and distill them: then put to it
Alum one pound: Vitriol three ounces: then distill them all together again, and
touch the part affected often with that Water.

If these things will not do, you must u^e stronger, by putting Sandarach and
Orpiment to the aforesaid Water.

Or you may mix the Spirit of Vitriol, or the Water for separating Gold,
commonly called the second Water, with Plantane Water, and touch the Polypus
often therewith.

Or with the Mercury Water prescribed in the Cure of the Ulcer in the Nose.

Or you may put in a tent dipped in the juice of Cuckoo-pintle roots, and if it
be too sharp, mix it with Plantane Water.

Mercury Precipitate, which is red, is accounted the best Medicine to consume
proud flesh without pain, if it be often washed. This Powder is to be mixed
with Honey of Roses, and applied with a ^ent.

There are also Plasters of the same virtue to consume a Polypus, without
pain, as this:

Take the Emplaister de Mucilaginibus half an ounce: the powder of Savin two
drams: Incorporate them, and put thereof into the Nostrils. Or,

Take of Verdegreece, Orpiment, Vitriol, and Alum, of each one ounce and an
half: Antimony six drams: Steep them in Vinegar, then beat them fine, then dry
them: thus beaten and steeped eight times, let them be steeped in Plantane
Water, and then dried. Then take of Oil of Roses four ounces: Litharge two
ounces: Boil them, and about the conclusion ad two drams of the said powder:
Make a stiff Plaster thereof, of which make tents.

In the use of Causticks, first you must observe that before they be applied,
you defend the Nostrils with the cooling Ointment of Galen, or with Nutritum,
or Populeon, or white of an Eg beaten with Oil of Roses, and the like.

Secondly, lest the Causticks should hurt the Nostrils, they must be applied
through a silver pipe, so that it may compass the Polipus, and the Medicines
may be conveyed to it without touching the Nostrils.

Thirdly, You must observe that these Medicines are to be used in the decrease
of the Moon, for the tumor then is less, and therefore Medicines may easily be
conveyed to the root.

Lastly, If Polypus cannot be taken off with Medicines, you must come to
Chyrurgery, or Manual operation; which is described in Paulus Aegineta,
Cornelius Celsus, Jerome, Fabricius de Aquapendente, and other Modern Writers.

Chap. 3. Of the loss of Smelling.
THe Sense of Smelling is hindered and hurt three ways, as other Actions are,
that is, by diminishing, abolishing, and depraving.

The Causes are the same that diminish, and abolish the Smelling, only they
differ in degrees, namely, distemper, obstruction, and astriction.

A cold and moist distemper joined with phlegm, as it can easily make any sense
dull, so does it especially hinder the Smelling, or abolish it; hence it is
that the Smelling is often hurt when there is a Catarrh, or a Coryza, for cold
does either diminish or abolish the sense, because it does dull and we^ken the
Natural heat, which is the producer of every action.

Obstruction comes also from phlegm which fills the sensible Passages, as the
Nostrils; and also the insensible; as the pores of the Brain, and the processus
of the Temples, called Mamillares, so that the scents and smells cannot come to
the parts: it may also come of a Sarcoma, Polypus, or other cause filling and
stopping the Nostrils.

Astriction sometimes may come from phlegm gathered in the fore part of the
Brain, and compressing the Processus Mamillares, as we said of the diminishing
of sight, from the astriction of the Optic Nerves. This astriction may also
come from the Natural shape of the Nostrils, when they are so straight that
there is no free passage for the Scents.

The Cause of Smelling depraved, is a stink always coming to the Nostrils,
either from an Ulcer there, or from stinking phlegm in the Nostrils, and Os
Et^moides: for those things which putrify either in the very sense of
Smelling, or near it in the Meninges, are not smelt by the Patient, but by them
that stand by; for it is fit that whatsoever touches the sense of Smelling,
should be brought from other parts. Moreover, a foul stinking vapor arising
from other parts, as the Stomach, Jaws, and Brain be carried to the Processus
Mamillares, and so infect them, that all the scents that are brought thither
shall smell thereof; as when the Tongue is foul with Choler, all things which
you taste seem bitter.

The Causes are easily known. A cold and moist distemper of the Brain, and
slimy phlegm coming from the Brain, show an abundance of phlegm.

An obstruction if it come from phlegm shall be known by the same signs. If it
come from Sarcoma or Polypus, you may learn the knowledge thereof from their
Chapters.

Now the place in which the matter causing obstruction is contained, is known
thus: If it be in the passage of the Nostrils, the voice is hindered, because
the Nostrils conduce to Speech: but the voice is per^ect if the matter be in
the Processus Mamillares, or the fore part of the Brain.

You may know by the default of the parts, from whence comes the scent which
hurts the instrument of Smelling.

As to the Prognostic: When the Smelling is newly hurt, and coming of a simple
Coryza or defluxion, is easily cured; but when it is of long continuance, and
from a settled distemper, hardly: that which comes from the ill shape of the
Nostrils, is incurable.

You must order the Cure diversely according to the diversity of the Causes: If
it come from a cold Distemper, you must use those Medicines which were
prescribed for a Cold Catarrh.

For the taking away of the Obstruction or stopping of the Nostrils and
Processus Mamillares by phlegm fastened there; You must use Medicines that Purge
those parts, as Errhins, Neezings, and Gargarisms; which were propounded by us
in the Cure of the Cold Distemper of the Brain.

If the Nostrils be stopped by a Sarcoma or Polypus; you must fetch the Cure from
the Precedent* Chapter.

Chap. 4. Of the Stink of the Nostrils.
THe Stink of the Nostrils, and of the Breath, do much differ; for that comes
only from the Nostrils, and this from diverse parts, as from the Stomach, Lungs,
Gums, Jaws, or being Ulcerated, which you may know by sense, or by their proper
signs.

But the stink in the Nostrils comes of stinking Vapors either bred in the
Nostrils, as in Ozaena, Sarcoma or Polypus: or sent thither from putrid Humors
contained in the forepart of the Brain; or about the Processus Mamillares, or
Os Cribrosum. Now the Humors do putrify in the said parts when they are too
long retained in them, especially if the Brain be hot and moist; and they are
retained either by the stoppage or astriction of the parts, and in flat Noses.

The Diseases of the Nostrils which produce this stink, are known by their
proper signs above mentioned; but if you find none, you must conjecture that
the stink comes from a putrid Humor in the Brain, Processus Mamillares, or Os
Cribrosum.

The Prognostic of the stink in the Nose coming of an Ulcer, Polypus, or
Sarcoma, depends upon their Frognostick: but that which comes from corrupt
Humors contained in the forepart of the Brain, if it be New, is easily Cured;
if Old, uncurable: especially if it come from a depression and flatness of the
Nose.

The Cure is performed by removing the Causes, and appeasing the Symptoms.

The Cure of an Ulcer, Sarcoma, and Polypus is above mentioned: but you must
take away the putrid Humor in the Brain, Processus Mamillares, or Os Ethmoides,
by emptying and Clensing means.

And first, You must use Universal Evacuations for Clensing the whole body and
the brain from flegmy Excrements, by Pills, Apozems, and the like; to which you
may ad, if there be great plenty of Humors, a Sweating Diet: afterward
administer Errhins that cleanse and bring forth the Matter conjoined.

And first of al, Let him morning and evening snuff up white Wine from the palm
of his hand in which the Lesser Centaury and Calamints have been boiled.

Then let the juice of Beets extracted with the Water of Marjoram be used in
like manner.

Or,

Take of Cyprus Roots and Calamus Aromaticus, of each half an ounce: Red Roses
one pugil: Myrrh two drams: boil them in white Wine for an Errhine.

That you may draw down the phlegm more violently, make this.

Take of Flower-de-luce-Roots half a dram: white Hellebore and long Pepper of
each half a scruple: Annis-seeds and dried Marjoram poudered of each one
scruple: Euphorbium one grain: Oil of Spike Chiry, and Violets, of each as much
as is sufficient: make a soft Ointment, in which dip the top of your little
finger, and ano^^ the Nostrils within; or put it with a Tent or Pledget as big
as a Pease into the Nostrils*

Lastly, To oppose the stink, you must snuff up sweet things, as Galla Moschata
dissolved in sweet Wine, Angelica-water, or the like.

Chap. 5. Of Coryza, or Pose.
COryza, called in Latin, Gravedo, is a Catarrh falling from the Brain into the
Nose; which Defluxion is of a crude Humor contained in the fore Ventricles of
the Brain, and comes for the most or an External Cause, as from the heat of the
Sun, drinking of much Wine, hot Baths, and the like, which do melt and dissolve
the thick phlegm gathered in the Brain: It comes also of External Causes which
Cool the Brain, for then it is squeezed like a sponge, and so it sends down the
Humor into the inferior parts: as also by over-cooling the Brain there is an
increase of phlegm, for through want of heat the Excrements are not concocted;
therefore are they sent forth through the open passages by the Expulsive
Faculty.

This Disease appears of its self, for the Humor is sent in abundance out of
the Nose.

Among al kinds of Catarrhs that which is through the Nose is most safe and
gentle, easily Cured if it be New, and come of an External Cause; but that
which is Old, and comes from a stubborn Distemper of the Brain, is difficult.

As also, when it proceeds of a hot Distemper of the Liver, which sometimes
causes sharp and hot Catarrhs; by which the Nose is often Ulcerated and ill
affected otherways.

The Cure of this Disease is by Curing the Catarrh; for it requires the same
Evacuations, Revulsions, and Derivations; except that here you must not use
Errhins, lest they should draw the Humors to the part affected; but Gargarisms
and Masticatories after Universals are very good.

And besides these, Authors do commend those things which properly belong to
the stopping of a Cataarh; as the vapor of boiled Marjoram; or of Marjoram
water taken into the Nose. The fume of Vinegar sprinkled upon a red hot Iron is
good for the same; and the better if red Roses have formerly been infused
therein: If the Defluxion be very Cold, dry Fumigations of Nigella,
Frankincense, and the like, thrown upon Embers are very good; for by these the
cold Distemper of the Brain is amended, and the superfluous moisture consumed.

Chap. 6. Of Sternutation, or Neezing.
ALthough Neezing come often to sound men, and uses to be so light an Affect
that it deserves not the name of a Symptom; yet sometimes it is troublesome,
that it requires a Physician: As we may read in Forestus, Obs. 127. Lib. 10.
in his History of a certain Maid which had so grievous a fit of Neezing from a
sharp salt Catarrh, that she had the advice of many Physicians. This is
confirmed by the Old Custom of saying God bless you to him that Neezeth; which
some say came from hence, In the time of Gregory the Great there was an
ordinary Disease of Neezing by which the Patients died; albeit some say that
Custom is more ancient.

Sternutation is a swift motion of the Brain, with which the breath is forced
out of the Nose for the throwing forth of things that offend: By the Brain we
understand not only the substance thereof, but the whole Body with its
Membranes; especially the fore-membranes, which are especially contracted in
this Disease, which we may gather from hence, because when we hold up the head
we Neez more easily; for then the matter provoking which for the most part is
windy and tends naturally upwards, is more easily carried to that part.

But the motion which happens in Neezing belongs to the natural Expulsive
Faculty of the Brain and its Membranes, according to Galen, 2. de symp. cause.
cap. 1. where distinguishing Neezing from Trembling and Palpitation, says,
That Palpitation comes only from a Disease: Trembling from Nature and a
Disease: but Neezing from Nature only.

But Galen at the first sight seems to contradict himself; who in Cap. 4. of
the same Book, says, That a Cough and Neezing are Symptoms of the Voluntary
Faculty; but it is no contradiction: and Galen cleers himself wisely; saying,
That in Neezing the Animal Faculty does concur only secondarily; because in
Neezing breath is sent from the Head and from the Lungs; yet the Head gives the
original of the motion to the ^reast; for when it hastneth to send forth those
things that offend in the Nose, it uses both ways at once to send forth
breath: One way which it makes by it self, Another way which it makes by the
Nerves, descending like long arms into the breast; whence Galen, Com. Aph. 51.
Sect. 7. teaches, That Neezing comes with antecedent inspiration or taking in
of breath when Nature gathers it together to make Sternutation, then the air
which goes forth of the breast, joined with that which is drawn by the Nose
into the Brain, does expel with Noise and violence whatsoever offends the
Membranes of the Nostrils which have most Exquisite Sense.

From this place of Galen, we may gather, That the irritation which causes
Sternutation is made chiefly in the Nose; which is confirmed, Aph. 51. lib. 7.
where he says, They only Neez of those thus Affected which have a sharp
moisture flowing from the head, as when you put sharp things into the Nose: For
as a Cough is a certain natural motion to purge the Arteries which are in the
Lungs; so does Neezing the passages of the Nose.

But it may be objected, That many standing bare-headed, or otherwise in the
cold Air, do presently Neez, that one would think the Brain was provoked
immediately at that time. We Answer, That cold Air is the Cause of Sternutation
not while it does immediately act upon the brain: but because through
compression of the brain and its Membranes, it causes a sharp Matter to
descend to the Nostrils; although therefore in this Symptom the Membranes of
the brain may be provoked: yet Neezing is not produced before a sharpness or
tickling come to the Membranes of the Nose which are exquisitely sensible.

The Causes of Neezings are known by what has been said, namely, What things
soever can provoke the internal coat of the Nostrils, such as are sharp humors
or vapors, either coming from the Brain, or sent from the inferior parts; hence
men neez in fevers, says Avicen, because sharp vapors are sent from the whole
body into the head; or it is caused when sharp things are externally put into
the Nose, as sharp Medicines called Ptarmica Neesings. These are the external
Causes which provoke neezing immediately. There are many other mediate Causes
which make internal Causes, or move them, as all alterations of the Air, as
above said of cold Air. Galen in his Book de instrum* odoratus, cap. 6. says,
That neezing is provoked by beholding the Sun, because the Spirits of the
Brain, like to a vapor, are discussed by the Sun.

The knowledge of this Disease is manifest. The outward Causes appear by the
relation of the Patient; but the internal from the signs of the parts affected,
by which the matter provoking is sent to the Nostrils, and fore part of the
Brain.

As to the Prognostic; This Disease is of it self without danger. But in the
beginning of a Catarrh or Coryza it is very hurtful, because it keeps the humor
from concoction by its motion. Sometimes in Fevers it is so strong that it
takes away all strength, and causes bleeding at the Nose; sometimes it is no
ways hurtful, and in sound men it expels the superfluities of the Brain: In
sick men it is held a good sign. It promises help in Fevers, especially in
malignant Fevers when all things are desperate. If neezing happen to a woman
in fits of the Mother, or that has hard travel, it is good, Aph. 35. Sect. 5.
Neezing provoked with Medicines is good against Apoplexies, and other great
Diseases of the Brain. And if being provoked they do not neez, it is a sign of
death, for it signifies that Nature leaves to act.

In Diseases of the Lungs, especially in a Pleurisy, and Peripneumonia, or
inflammation of the Lungs, neezing is evil, Hipp. 2. Progn. because from the
shaking of the Brain in neezing, the parts of the Breast are violently pulled
and torn; from whence the inflammation is increased, and there is no other
evacuation of the matter causing the disease; but for the expelling of phlegm
contained in the Gristles of the Lungs, which could not be cast out by a Cough:
Galen shows that neezing is good, Gal. 2. de symp. cause. cap. 5, and 6.

The Cure when it is necessary, or when neezing brings inconveniences, is
made first by removing of the External Causes, if it come from them. If it come
of an internal Cause, you must remove that also, by Evacuations, Revellers,
Derivers, and Discussers.

If a hot distemper of the Brain or any other part send sharp vapors to the
Nostrils and inward Meninges. Then you must open a Vein, and then purge, then
revel the vapors with Frictions, and Ligatures, with Cupping Glasses to the
Shoulders; also use other Revelling, Deriving, and Discussing Medicines, comb
the Head, pull the Ears, rub the Eyes, blow the Nose, and hold the Breath.

Lastly, To take away sharpness, and hinder the Nostrils from being provoked,
it is good to take the vapor of hot water into the Nose; or to anoint the
Nostrils with Oil of Roses, sweet Almonds, Violets, or with fresh Butter; or to
snuff up warm Milk into the Nose; by which only Remedy Forestus presently cured
the Maid mentioned formerly.

Chap. 7. Of Bleeding at the Nose, called Haemorrhagia.
THe word Haemorrhagia, vulgarly signifies any flux of blood coming from any
part. But peculiarly, when it is named simply of Hippocrates, it signifies
only that flux which comes from the Nose, as the first and most evident kind,
as Galen observed, Com. 1. in 1. Epid.

An Haemorrhagia of the Nose, is a Symptom in the excrements of those things
which are wholly against Nature. For Blood coming through the Nose, either
comes from the Veins and Arteries in the Brain, or from the Vessels coming from
the Pallat to the Nostrils, which ate like the Hemorrhoid Veins in the Womb and
Fundament.

But since every Symptom depends upon a Disease as its immediate Cause, the
cause of this will be either an Organical, or a Common Disease.

The Organical is twofold: The opening of the Vessels, which is called in
Greek Anastomosis; and the thinning, or rarefaction of them, called Diapedesis.

The Common Disease is twofold: The breaking of the Vessels, called Rexis; and
the Erosion called Diabrosis.

The Causes immediately producing those Diseases, are either exceeding in
quantity or quality of Blood.

Blood offending in quantity can either break the Veins, or open the Orifices
of them.

In quality, if it be too hot, or too thin, it will flow out by Anastomosis,
because heat does dilate the Orifice, and thinness makes it flow more easily.
Also the same qualities make a Diapedesis: for heat makes the coats of the
Vessels thin, and the thinness of the blood makes it easy to pass through the
pores of those coats.

Lastly, The sharpness of the Blood gnaweth the Tunicles of the Veins, and
ulcerateth them, from whence comes a Diabrosis.

The external Causes also do concur to produce this Disease, either mediately,
or immediately.

Immediately, as falls, strokes, wounds, and the like, which break and divide
the Veins.

They work mediately which do increase, warm, and make thin the blood, as
plentiful Diet, Drunkenness, Idleness, too much Exercise, great Noise, Heat,
long staying in the Sun, and the like.

The Differences of Hemorrhagia are these: Some are Critical, some
Symptomatical.

Critical Hemorrhagia's are in acute Fevers, by the force of Nature endeavor
to expel the cause of the Disease this way, as especially in those Diseases
which are joined with the Inflammation of some Entral, especially of the Liver,
or the Spleen, which are many times discharged by these ways; sometimes it
comes without a Fever, when Nature discharges her self of the superfluous
blood, whence we see many in their youth have an Hemorrhagy by fits, and others
bl^ed other ways.

A Symptomatical Haemorrhagy happens chiefly in Chronical Diseases, in which
filthy blood is produced by reason of the debility of the Liver, or some other
great Distemper, which either flows through those Veins by the weakness of the
retentive faculty, or is sent forth by the expulsive, as an unprofitable
burden, because impure blood is not fit to nourish the Body.

Haemorrhagia is known of its self. But its Causes are thus distinguished: That
which comes by Anastomosis, has this common with that which comes by Rexin,
or rupture, in that in both the blood flows plentifully; but in this they are
distinguished, If a blow or a fall went before, we should suppose it to be
Rexin: But when Ruption comes from Plethora, or much Blood; as also apertion
of the Veins; thus they may be distinguished: When the Vessel is broken, the
Blood sloweth constantly; when it is opened, at a distance, and by fits only;
because the Orifices of the Vessels use to be knit and closed when there is
less plenty of the Humor which dilateth flowing thereto; but broken Vessels
stand always open, and therefore blood continually sloweth till the solution
of continuity be united. Moreover the opening of a Vein, is distinguished from
the breaking, by the substance of the blood: For if it be thin, it comes from a
Vessel opened; if thick, it comes from a broken. Hence it is that Hemorrhagy
comes in young men for the most part by the opening of the Vessels, because
their blood is thin; but in old men from Ruption, because theirs is thick.

If it comes from Ero^^on of the Veins, there will be signs of Cacochymia, or
ill juice in the body of an Ulcer, and matter sometimes comes forth: or at least
a salt Catarrh has gone before. If it comes by Diapedesis, or Rarefaction, the
blood is thin and little.

The Causes autecedent and external, are easily distinguished: For if it come
from plenty of blood, there is a red face and large veins: as also the Diet
has been large and hot, or there has been some external cause which has
melted and made thin the blood, and these especially befall them who have very
hot Livers.

If it come from evil Juice, it is known by its proper signs, which declare
whether Choler or Melancholy does abound: Moreover, the Blood will appear
corrupt either from the Nose, or taken from the Arm.

If it come from the weakness of the retentive faculty, the face will be pale,
and the whole body weak; as also some Disease has gone before, by which the
Liver was first weakened, and then very little blo^^ comes forth, and by
degrees.

If the blood comes immediately from the Veins of the Nostrils, it is easily
stopped with astringent Medicines applied thereto, and there will be no pain in
the Head. Contrary wise, if it come from the Brain, there is some pain in some
part of the Head, the flux is hardly stopped, and things put up into the Nose
do no good. Sometimes blood comes from other parts, as the Liver, Spleen, Womb,
whose signs are the pains and extensions in those parts.

If the blood flows from an Artery, it comes with force, it is hot, pure,
fresh, and clear; but when it comes from a Vein, it is dark, red, thick,
sometimes foul, and comes forth with small force.

The Prognostic of Hemorrhagy coming, especially if it be Critical, is taken
from the hurt actions, when the Excrements and qualities are changed: as
watchings, and dreams of red things, a great pain of the Head and Neck,
heaviness in the Temples, and great beating of those Arteries, ringing and
noise in the Ears, dullness of the Eyes, with redness thereof, and of the whole
face, hating of light, involuntary tears, itching of the Nose, a drop of Blood
upon the day that declares the Crisis, difficulty of breathing, an extension of
the Hypochondria without pain.

The Reason of which signs is: When the Blood begins to be carried to the Head,
it begets in the Head Phantasms of red things, both waking and sleeping: as it
happened to a young Roman which Galen mentions, lib. de praesag. ad Posthumum,
cap. 13. he had an acute Disease, and thought he saw a red Serpent about the
Chamber Seiling, at which being frighted, he leaped out of his bed: Hence Galen
foretold a Haemorrhagy at hand, and hindered the letting of blood which other
Physicians had prescribed.

The pain of the Head and Neck comes from the translation of the blood into the
superior parts, which by distending and pulling the Membranes causes pain.

The Arteries in the Temples beat by reason of their compression which is
caused by the fullness of the Veins.

The noise in the Ears comes from vapors flying in abundance into the head.

The sight is dim because many thick vapors sent up do stop the passages. Hence
it is that when passage is denied to the Animal Spirits, the sight is dim.

The things flying before the Eyes called Marmaryges, are nothing but thin
bodies divided and of diverse colors contained between the Cornea and the
Crystalline, coming from vapors ascending: which though they be inward, yet
through deception of the sight they seem to be outward; because the Eye being
used to see External things, supposes whatsoever is within, to be without.

The Redness of the Face and Eyes comes from blood in those parts increased:
there is a detestation of light, because the Eyes being distended with plenty
of humors, will be more distended with light, because it disperseth the Spirits:
Hence the Eye is dilated, which causes pain, which that the Patient may avoid,
he avoideth the light.

The involuntary Tears come from the repletion of the Eyes, and the parts
adjacent, which being too much Distended to press the Glandles that contain the
moisture of which tears are made.

The Itching of the Nostrils comes from vapors ascending upwards.

Drops of blood upon the day of demonstration, namely, the fourth or eleventh,
shows that there will be an Haemorrhagy upon the day of judgment; namely, the
seventh or the fourteenth, because in those days Nature begins to transfer the
Humors to those parts.

The breathing is difficult, because while the blood flies upward it
compresseth the Diaphragma.

Lastly, There is a stretching of the Hypochondria, because the blood begins to
move in its fountain, and in the roots of the veins: but this distention is not
constant, and is without pain, as the difficulty of breathing is: for if they
should last long and increase they would be signs of the Liver inflamed.

The Prognostic of a present Bleeding at Nose is thus.

If Blood flow moderately out of the Nose in the day of judgment it is sign of
Health; although Galen does confirm this; yet Fernelius denies it, saying,
lib. 2. de sanguinis m^ss. cap. 1. That no discharge of blood, although
critical, is sign of health; for though it ease madness, watchings, headache,
and other Symptoms, yet it scarce ever cures the Disease, because the purer
portion of blood is sent forth and the pure remains; and this is thus proved,
because the blood coming from the nose is of a laudable color and substance,
when blood at the same time taken out of a vein in the arm or else where, shall
appear to be corrupt.

This Doctrine of Fernelius is very real, but not altogether to be received: It
is true, That in acute Diseases, especially malignant Fevers, a Haemorrhag
does not always Cure the Disease: as Sweat is not always a sign of Health in
those Diseases* because these Evacuations being forced by Nature before the
time, come for the most part from the malice of the matter of the Disease: Yet
sometimes acute Diseases are cured by Haemorrhagia, as Galen taught in his Third
Book de cris. cap. ult. and elsewhere. And the reason why blood out of the
Nostrils is always pure, is because it comes by drops, and therefore would be
so quickly cold that the impure parts could not be separated; and the purer
parts mixed with the rest would make the whole mass red. But blood taken out of
the arm, because it comes flowing freely, keeps the color long in the vessel
from which the impure parts are separated, so that the thick and drosly part
goes to the bottom, but the choler and phlegm which is more altered and impure,
swims at the top, and so the blood seems impure and sordid.

On the other side, if blood should drop from the vein it would appear pure,
because it presently goes together before the Haeterogeneal parts can be
divided by the heat; nay if blood flow freely and be caught in a large vessel,
it will appear pure because it is quickly cold.

Haemorrhagyes that are very great are the worst, for they tend to a
Convulsion: For sometimes it comes to pass that Nature being burdened with much
blood, and stirred up to throw it forth, cannot observe a Mean, and makes an
over Crisis, which Physicians must stop.

An Haemorrhagy in the beginning of the Disease is evil, because it is
Symptomatical, and comes from the malignity of the matter of the Disease,
Nature being stirred up to send it forth before her time.

An Haemorrhagy which is on the same side with the part affected is good, but
otherwise it is evil so in the inflammation of the Liver when blown forth out of
the right Nostril it is good, but out of the left, bad.

Contrarily, When the Spleen is inflamed, if blood come forth of the left
Nostril it is good but out of the right bad: because al good Evacuation ought
to be ^ata ixin.

A few drops coming from the Nose are evil: for it signifies the weakness of
nature, and the malignity of the disease.

For all Excretions are condemned by Hippocrates, in acute diseases if they be
begun only and not finished, because there is greater security in those Fevers
in which nature puts forth nothing, than in which she puts forth little to
no profit.

For then it is to be supposed that she tends to Concoction; but if a drop
appear, it is a sign that nature was stirred up before her time.

But a drop coming upon the day of Indication, and signs of Concoction also
appearing, it signifies that there will be an Haemorrhagy upon that Critical day.

Haemorrhagies continuing long, foreshews the weakness of the Liver, and the
coldness also, and an evil habit with a dropsy to be at hand.

To him who have bled at the nose in Quartane Fevers it is evil, Hippocrates,
Aph. 87. Sect. 7. For as Avicen says bleeding in Melancholy and Phlegmatic
people is hurtful, because i^ cools too much.

To them who in Fevers have lost much blood at the Nose, or any part, when
they amend their belly will be loose, Hip. aph. 27. sect. 4. For as Galen says
in Com. when the natural heat is debilitated by bleeding, neither can their
meat be well concocted, nor turned into blood, nor distributed into the body:
and therefore it is fit they should be loose bellied, until Nature recover her
strength.

In the Cure of Haemorrhagia, first observe whether it be Critical or
Symptomatical: For a Critical is not to be stopped, but you must suffer it to
flow in a great quantity: For Avicen says, That blood has come from the Nose
to the quantity of four pints by a Crisis without any decay of strength. And
this seems to be taken out of Galen, who in his Book de Progn ad Posthum. cap.
13. suffered a young Roman to bleed four pints and an half before he would stop
it.

Which as it may fall out well in very Plethorick people, so in others it may
endanger life; and it is certain that a Critical Haemorrhagy, although it is
the work of Nature, yet sometimes is beyond measure; for Nature being burdened
with blood, and stirred up to expel it, sometimes cannot keep within measure,
but makes too great an Evacuation; whence we ought to fear a great dejection
of strength, and death, and then it is to be stopped, as often as any notable
infirmity follows.

So also that blood which customarily flows without a Fever is not to be
stopped, but to be left to Natures ordering, except it be immoderate; for many
by such bleeding have been freed from great Diseases, into which after, upon
suppression thereof they have fallen.

But a Symptomatical Hemorrhagy is to be stopped, which may be done by revulsion
of the Blood from the Nose, and by repelling it to the parts adjacent, by
stopping of the Veins which are open, by staying the disorderly motion of the
blood, and by evacuating the sharp and thin humors mixed with the Blood, which
are the chief Cause of Haemorrhagy, by correcting them, and hindering their
increase, and by strengthening the retentive faculty of the Liver and Veins:
All which may be done with the Remedies following.

And first Blood-letting is the chief thing for Revulsion, which must be done
quickly before the Patient grow we^k, and that out of the Vein on the same side
the Nostril is, out of which it comes: on the right ^ide, if from the right
Nostril; on the left, if from the left: And Galen, lib. de sang. miss. cap. 11.
confirms the efficacy of this Remedy, affirming that he has presently
stopped violent bleedings at the Nose only thereby. But it must be taken in a
large quantity if the Patient be strong, and from a large orifice: Although
most of the Ancient and Modern Physicians think otherwi^e, and say that blood
must be let out at a final orifice by little and little often, by which means
they say the Revulsion will be better. But that you may make the blood move the
contrary way, you must have a stronger motion for hinderance of a weaker;
therefore by how much the larger the orifice, and the more violent the motion
is of the blood from the Vein opened, by so much the sooner will the blood at
the Nose be stopped: But if by once letting blood, and applying other Remedies,
the Haemorrhagy be not stopped, you must repeat Blood-letting according to the
strength of the Patient. You may also open the Vein in the Foot, that a
Revulsion may be made at a great distance, which also avails much, as Avicen,
Paul. and Trallian say.

After Blood-letting, as also before, rub and bind the extreme parts, and clap
great Cup-glasses to the Hypochondria; to the right side, if the right No
stril; to the left, if the left do bleed: For Galen stopped an Hemorrhagy in a
young Roman, by a Cupping-glass to the Hypochondrion without blood-letting, as
he says lib. de prog. ad Posthum. cap. 13.

Notwithstanding, the applying of Cupping-glasses to the Hypochondria, is not
altogether safe, for the blood then being hot may be drawn in too great a
measure into the Liver, or the Spleen, and inflame them. Of which there is an
example in Fabricius Hildanus, Obs. 47. Cent. 2. of a Gourtier who bleeding
violently at the Nose; to whom, with other Remedies, there were great
Cupping-glasses applied to his Liver: The blood stopped, but there followed a
great inflammation of the Liver. Therefore you must be wary in applying
Cupping-glasses to the Hypochondria, and never use them but when all other
Remedies fail, and after diverse Phlebotomies: For after the plenty of blood is
taken out of the Veins, there is less danger of attracting too much Blood to
the Liver to inflame it, but which way soever they are applied, they draw blood
and spirits to those parts whereby their heat is increased, which seems to be
contrary to the opinion of Hippocrates. Aph. 13. Sect. 5. where he says, That
in those parts from whence Blood comes, or is about to come, you must use cold
things. The Interpreters say, that cold things are to be applied to those parts
from whence the motion of the Blood begins, as the Liver and Spleen.

Forestus commends Cupping-glasses to the Feet, by Experience, Obs. 14. Lib.
13. in these words: When a Gentleman exceedingly bled at the Nose, and no
Remedies would help him, having lost at least twelve pound of blood from both
Nostrils; I was sent for* and after he had bleda whole day, I commanded two
Cupping-glasses without scarrification to be applied, one to his Liver, the
other to the Spleen, and the blood seemed to stay a little; but after my
departure, when his wife perceived him to bleed again out of both Nostrils, and
that his cupping had done no good, she commanded that the cupping should be set
upon his feet, and the blood wonderfully stopped beyond expectation: But after
the Cupping-glasses had been a while fixed, the Patient fell into a swound; and
therefore they took them off, and threw water in his face, by which he
recovered; and then being refreshed with the scent of Wine, he came to himself,
and was restored to his former health, from his bleeding, as it were by Miracle
or Enchantment, beyond all expectation.

Moreover, Cupping-glasses applied to the Shoulders both dry and with
scarrisication, do draw back the blood from the Nose. But they be not always
safe, for they may attract blood from the inferior parts, and so give occasion
to a further bleeding.

Some Practitioners do apply Cupping-glasses to the Biceps Muscles of the Arms,
by which they make revulsion.

Crato in his Counsels, reckons the bending of the little finger on the same
side among the revulsives: for by the great pain that will be caused thereby,
there will be a drawing back of the blood.

But the Blood and Spirits are drawn inwardly more strongly by swouning,
whereby we saw a Bishop in the year, 1629 cured of a violent Hemorrhagy; for
being in a malignant Fever with the inflammation of the right Cidney, which
after in the twenty seventh day of his sickness, turned to an Imposthume, he
was taken with so violent a bleeding, that in four hours he lost two pounds,
and still bleeding and strength decaying, we bethought how we should stop it;
and after the use of many remedies to no purpose, the Patient desired to ease
his belly, and could not be compelled to do it in his bed: we foretold him,
that if he arose, he being very weak would faint away, but that would be good
to stay his bleeding: and so it came to pass, for after he rose he swouned;
from which with a little Wine he was recovered, throwing also Water in his
face; after that he had a large stool was brought to his bed, and bled with
less violence; then giving a dram and an half of Lapis Prunellae in cold Water,
presently the blood franched when the same and other Medicines could not
formerly do it. Although fainting be not vulgarly accounted a Remedy against
bleeding at the Nose, yet Hipp. lib. 3. Epid. Sect. 7. says thus: These things
stop the bleeding of the Veins, swouning, the alteration of the posture or
figure of the Body, m^erception, a tent, apposition, and deligation or binding.
Galen in 5. meth. cap. 5. teaches the same, in these words: Moreover Blood is
stanched (...) by fainting, and by revulsion, and derivation to the parts
adjoining, and by cooling of the whole Body, and especially the part afflicted:
But you must observe that fainting does only profit when the blood flows from
the Veins which are terminated in the superficie of the body, which Hippocrates
also hints at, when he prescribes tents, bandage, and the like. For when blood
comes from the internal parts, as in an Hemoptoe, or spitting of blood,
immoderate flux of the terms, or internal wounds, then fainting will increase
the bleeding, the heat being thereby drawn into those parts from whence the
blood comes.

Zacutus Lucitanus, Lib. 1. Praxis admirandae, Obs. 66. reports that he cured a
desperate Hemorrhagy, which would yield to no other Medicines, by an actual
Cautery to the soals of both feet; which Remedy he says had like success in a
great bleeding at the mouth coming from the opening of the Vein called
Ranuncula under the Tongue by corrosion from a sharp Gatarrh; and when the
Blood had flowen two dates to the quantity of twenty pounds, and many
astringents and Empla^ers had been used, as also Revulsies and thickening
Medicines, with Narcoticks or Stupefactives, by a Cautery in the soal of the
foot it was stanched.

If still he bleed after all the aforesaid Revulsions have been tried, you must
come to repelling Medicines, such as are vulgarly called Anacollemata, things
to be applied to the Forehead and Temples, which are thus made:

Take of Bole-Armenick, Terra Sigillata, Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense,
Mastick, and Aloes, of each one dram: Bran and the hair of an Hare cut small, of
each half a dram: one white of an Egg, the Juice of Plantane, and Nightshade,
of each as much as is sufficient to make a Cataplasm for the Forehead, and the
Temples.

In extremity you may quickly make a Cataplasm of Bole-Armenick only, mixed
with the white of an Egg and Vinegar for the same parts.

The most excellent is made of Time and Vinegar, and applied to the Temples and
the Forehead as thick as two fingers: and if the first application do it not,
let it be repeated, and it will certainly cure.

Amatus Lusitanus commends a cap made with the aforesaid Pouders, mixed with
Vinegar and Water, laid upon the Head being shaven; which you may try in great
extremity.

Also you may make a Fomentation of very cold Water, or Water and Vinegar to
the Temples and Forehead, changing your clothes as they grow hot.

Or you may make a Fomentation of the Juice of Plantane, Knotgrass, Hors-tail,
Shepheardspurse, and the like, with a little Vinegar to make it pierce. Where
mark, That the Head is not to be washed with cold Water, nor repelling
Medicines to be laid to the Forehead, before you have made sufficient
Revulsions; otherwise the blood being struck in with cooling will fill the Veins
above, as Galen shows, 5. meth. cap. 6. and so the flux will be increased, by
the heat increased through Antiperistasis, by which the motion and force of the
blood is increased; or if the blood be stopped, there will follow a Convulsion,
Apoplexy, short and difficult breathing, called Dyspnoea, or the like.

Vinegar alone will stop blood if the Forehead be fomented therewith in a
Sponge.

Or if you dip a Sponge in Vinegar, and put it into the Nose.

To throw cold Water in the Face, does not only drive back the blood, but also
draws inward by fear, if done on a sudden, and unawares. As a syncope or
swouning, as we said before, stancheth blood by the retraction of it inward; by
the same reason does fear also. A great quantity, namely, two or three glasses
must be cast into the face diverse times in a short time.

Ordinarily they use to hinder the ascent of the Blood with fomenting of the
Neck with a cloth dipped in cold Vinegar and bound about the Neck, changed
often before it turn warm.

Vinegar and Water held in the mouth, does drive the blood down, and keeps the
blood from falling into the Throat.

Also Vinegar put into the Ear next to the Nostril bleeding, is good to close
the Vein.

A Bean, or piece of money bound to the root of the Nose, between the Eyebrows,
stops the flux.

Also you must observe if the Veins or Arteries in the Forehead or Temples do
swell, for then you must bind them down with Money, or a dry Bean slit in
length, and this is a special Remedy. And for the better Compression, you must
lay a Pledget dipped in the white of an Eg beaten with Time, upon the Bean or
Money.

The sum of Vinegar sprinkled upon a hot Iron, taken into the Nostrils, will
close the opened Veins.

As also Vinegar and Water often snuffed up.

Besides those things which repel, we must use things that close and glutinate
the Veins. For which end, many Remedies may be put into the Nose.

Galen, lib. de paratu facilibus, cap. 13. used Frankincense and Aloes
poudered, with white of an Egg, and the hairs of an Hare, upon lint.

Or you may make a Tent thus:

Take of Frankincense, Aloes, Dragons blood, Bran, Cobwebs, and the hair of an
Hare cut small, of each half a dram, made up in a Tent with juice of Plantane.

The same Pouders may be blown into the Nose. For which purpose also great
Practitioners do commend the powder of Eg shells burnt, and burnt Paper. But you
must remember besides the use of these pouders, at the same time to fill the
mouth with cold Water lest the Medicine get into the mouth.

The Cotton of an Ink-horn squeezed a little, and made into a tent, does
powerfully stop.

As also laid and bound to the Forehead.

If it yet continue, you must come to Escharoticks, which by burning the mouths
of the Veins produce a Scab, and so stay the blood. But these must be used
warily, for when the Eschar falls off, they will bleed again.

Burnt Vitriol is the best, which besides its Escharotick quality, is good to
stanch blood.

If you will make it gentle, you must mix other Medicines thus:

Take of Galls half a pound: Alum a quarter of a pound: Calcine them, and blow
the powder into the Nose. Or,

Take of Bole-Armenick, Dragons blood, Frankincense, Aloes, Time, burnt
Vitriol, Sarcocol, and Mastich, of each one dram: Make afine Powder.

White Vitriol is more gentle than burnt Vitriol, and is not very Escharotick:
yet it stays bleeding very powerfully by astringing the Orifice of the Veins,
if it be put into the Nose with a Tent.

You may make Remedies to stop blood, by restraining its motion by cooling,
thickning, and co^gulating, thus:

Take of Sal Prunellae one dram: Troches of Amber half a dram: Boodstone and
red Coral prepared, of each one scruple: the Syrup of dried Roses one ounce:
Plantane Water three ounces. Make a Julep to be taken twice or thrice in a day.

Take of Conserve of Roses and Quinces, of each one ounce: the Troches of
Spodium, or burm Ivory, and Terra Sigillata, of each one dram: Coral prepared,
and burnt Hartshorn, of each one scruple. Make an Opiate, of which let him
take the quantity of a Chestnut twice or thrice in a day.

Vinegar and Water called Oxycrate, drunk plentifully stays an Hemorrhagy.

Outwardly to cool the blood, and to hinder its motion, you must apply cold
Water, or Water and Vinegar to diverse parts, pouring it upon the Arms, and
putting the feet therein, and applying to the Cods, as also to the back,
because the Vena Cava runs that way, and so the blood will be cooled when it is
exceeding hot, when the aforesaid Medicines cannot remedy, some wet the whole
Body with Vinegar and Water, or put him into cold Water, which is not without
danger, when the Patient is weak.

It is excellent to temper the heat of the blood, to lay Epithems to the Liver
and Spleen made of warm Vinegar and Water.

Finally, In the most desperate Case, when no Medicines will prevail, you must
use Narcoticks, or Stupefactives, which presently stop all fluxes and
evacuations and motion of Humors; and among the rest three or four grains of
Laudanum is the best. But take heed that you give it not to the Patient being
very weak, for it is to be feared that the native heat being very little, will
be thereby quite exstinguished. One ounce of the Syrup of Poppies given in an
astringent Julep at night will do the same.

At length you must come to proper Remedies which by an occult secret quality
stop bleeding. The most usual and best are these:

The Juice of Nettles is extolled for strengthening any blood, of what part
soever, and therefore it is both given inwardly to four ounces once or twice,
as also snuft into the Nose, and applied to the Forehead and Temples made like
a Cataplasm with Bran, or the whole Nettle beaten. Some say that the Root held
in the mouth will do the same.

Hogs Dung is one of the best Specifical Medicines, if it be applied hot to the
Forehead and Temples, or smelt unto, or put dry into the Nose, of which this is
a form.

Take of Hogs Dung dried three drams: the powder of Roses to take away the
scent of it, half a dram. Mix them with juice of Plantane, and dip a Tent
therein to be thrust into the Nose.

Asses Dung used thus is also commended. And Rodericus a Castro lib. 1. de
morbis mulierum, cap. 5. says that a Physician of seventy years old given to
violent bleeding, carried always Asses Dung not quite dry in a box about him,
than which he confessed he never knew a better Medicine; especially if when it
was dry he mixed it with the Juice of a Nettle, or if wet he put it alone into
his Nose.

Zacutus Lusitanus, lib. ult. praxis Histor. cap. 2. says that he cured one of
seventeen years of age that was weak and lean, after he had lost seventeen
ounces of blood and used many Medicines, only with this, He gave him the Dung
of an Ass very finely poudered in all his Drink and Broth, he made Tablets of
the same with sugar, and gave them with steeled water, by which means only the
Patient recovered in seven days space.

The blood it self which comes out of the Nose, is not only vulgarly commended,
but by the learned to stop an Haemorrhagie by a specifical quality; they fry it
in a pan and give it the Patient to eat, he not knowing of it.

As also they Calcine it in a Potsheard, and mix it with the mentioned
Astringents.

Others commend the Powder of Snails burnt with their shells: and others put the
Powder of Frogs Calcined into the Nose.

Pereda speaks of an old Woman of Mount pelior, that she was Cured of a Flux at
the Nose of three days continuance, by only Mints put into the Nose.

Among other Remedies this is excellent and usual, The fine Powder of Spicknard
taken the quantity of a dram in Broth, Plantane-water, or other liquor, not
only by a specifical force, but also by strengthening the Liver it stops
bleeding.

Finkius witnesses that a dried Toad poudered and put in a fine red Sarcnet
under the Armholes, or held in the hands til it grow warm, will stanch blood
presently: And that the blood will be immediately congealed as if it apprehended
some terrible thing.

Others hang a Toad in the Air while all the flesh is consumed, and keep the
bare thigh bone which they put into the Nose, and then it stops bleeding
presently.

While you use the aforesaid Remedies, you must think of the taking away of the
Cause, which usually is a thin watery Humor or Choler which abounds in the
blood, and makes it move disorderly, and provokes Nature to throw it forth:
whence it comes to pass that when it is purged away and the blood cleansed that
then Nature embraces blood most familiarly as its chief Friend and the
treasure of Life, and will not labor to cast it forth.

Therefore you must purge twice or thrice if need be with binding and cooling
Medicines, thus made,

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce: Plantane Leaves one handful: boil them to four
ounces, being strained infuse of the best Rhubarb one dram: yellow Myrabolans
half a dram: Spicknard seven grains: strain it and dissolve therein one ounce
of Syrup of Roses, and ad one scruple of the Powder of Rhubarb. Make a Potion.

In an old Disease that Returns often, such a Purge repeated once every Week,
is excelent.

And after every Evacuation, Astringent Juleps, or Opiates, that are above
mentioned; you may make Juleps thus.

Take of the Roots of Snakeweed, and the greater Comfrey, of each one ounce:
Plantane, Knotgrass, Rupture-wort, and Fumitory, of each one handful: of the
four great Cold seeds, of each one dram: boil them to a pint, and dissolve in
the strained Liquor of white Sugar, three ounces: Make a Julep for three
mornings draughts.

Instead of Juleps or Opiats, or after they have been used a while, you may
give a Syrup made of the Juice of Nettles, and an equal proportion of Sugar,
two spoonfuls at a time every morning.

Nor is it sufficient to take away the present Cause of the Hemorrhagy, namely,
To Evacuate the Peccant Humor, but you must see that it return not again.

The Bowels are to be strengthened, and their Distempers amended; especially
the Liver in which those Humors use to breed.

And the Juleps formerly prescribed will do this, as also the Tincture of Roses
to Cool the Liver and strengthen it, is very good.

Outwardly you may apply Epithems made thus,

Take of the Water of Roses, Plantane, Purslain, Sorrel, and Succory, of each
four ounces: the seeds of Purslain, Sorrel, and Succory, of each one dram: the
Troches of Camphire, and yellow Saunders, of each two drams: Vinegar, two
ounces: Make an Epithem.

To these you may ad all the Remedies which are prescribed for the Cure of a Hot
Liver.

Sometimes the Hot Distemper of the Spleen and Reins is the Cause of this
Disease; and then you must apply Cooling Medicines to those parts also.

To these must join a good order of Diet, which from the beginning of the Cure
must be diligently observed.

And therefore, first the Air where the Patient is, must be Cool: and if it be
Summer time let it be altered, by sprinkling the floor with Vinegar and
Rose Water, and strowing of the Leaves of the Vine, Willow, or Water Lillies, or
the like.

Let his Meat be thickning of little nourishment, as Calves-feet, Sheep and
Goats-feet, and the like: Rice, new fat Cheese, hard Eggs, and the like.

Let him eat Fruits that are somewhat sharp, binding, and bitter; as Pears,
Quinces, Medlars, Services, and Sawces of the Juice of Pomegranats, Lemmons,
Orenges, Sorrel; some commend the use of Lentils or Pease boiled in Vinegar,
because they have virtue to thicken, astring, and allay the Acrimony of the
blood.

Let the Patient abstain, especially in the beginning of the Disease while his
strength is good, from Wine, Flesh, and Rear Eggs, which breed much and thin
Blood: you must give him Moist Meats and Suppings in the time of his bleeding:
As cooling Broths made of Barley, Oats, and Rice, with Water, for chewing does
provoke bleeding, if he be weak you may give him Flesh-broth and Panadoes, in
which there is Starch dissolved, which is made without Chalk or Gum Arabic.

Let his Drink be steeled Water, and let al his Meat be boiled in the same,
which will be of more force if Nettle Roots be first boiled therein.

Command him to rest, so that he neither Walk, nor Cough, nor Speak loud or at
al, for the motion of the Tongue and Jaws provoke bleeding.

Let his Head be covered, and let him not see the blood, for thereby the
imagination being moved, he will bleed faster.

Let him sleep, for long Watchings make the blood more sharp, Chollerick, and
thin: but sleep does contemperate the Humors, and restrain the motions thereof.

Lastly, Let him avoid the Passions of the mind, which cause the blood to
ascend, as Anger, Laughing, and Joy.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Tongue.
The PREFACE.
THE Tongue is the Instrument both of Speech and Tasting: But both these
Actions are hindered by diverse tumors which grow thereabout: And especially
every Action is diminished, abolished, or depraved by its peculiar Cause. That
all these may be severally described, this fifth Book has four Chapters: Of
which, The first is of Inflammation, and other Tumors of the Tongue. The Second
is of the Ranula under the Tongue; which though it belong to the kinds of
Tumors, yet it is handled by it self, because it requires a different Cure from
all the rest. The Third is of the Taste hurt. The Fourth of the Palsy of the
Tongue, and other binderances of its Motions.

Chap. 1. Of the Inflammation of the Tongue, and other Tumors of the same.
AS all the Parts of the Body, and especially the fleshy parts, use to be
inflamed; (...) also the Tongue by blood flowing unto it; which blood as it is
either pure, chollerick, phlegmatic, or Melanchollick, produces either a true
Phlegmon, or a Phlegmon erisipelous, oedematous, or schirrous, which sometimes
comes to suppuration: of which there is an Example in Forestus, Obs. 24. Lib.
14. of a Brewer which had a great Inflammation of his Tongue that brake, which
came to suppuration.

Also the Tongue often suffers a soft and loose Tumor, which is purely
oedematous, by the falling of Rhewm from the Head; of which Galen propounds an
Example, Lib. 14. meth. cap. 8. in a certain man whose Tongue was so swollen,
that he could not contain it in his mouth.

Sometimes the Tongue grows very great, which cannot be accounted any kind of
tumor; as Galen teaches, lib. de diff. morb. cap. 9. that he saw a Tongue
which grew exceeding great without, any sense of pain, neither would it pit or
yield to the finger, but it was a bare increase of quantity in the Tongue, and
the substance was no way hurt, which came by too much nourishment brought and
converted into the substance of it.

And Claudinus, Consult. 9. gives an Example of this in a maid of twelve years
old, whose Tongue grew to a great bigness, and the Tumor could neither be
called an Oedema, nor a Schyrrus, because it was without pain; neither would it
yield to the hand pressing of it, nor take an impression or pit, nor was it
without Natural sense.

The Original of it was a forceable breach of the bridle of the Tongue, by the
pain whereof blood was attracted to the part; which being sent thither
continually caused this largeness. But in this case Glaudinus observes that it
is bigger at night, and less in the morning, and always livid, or bluish: The
reason whereof he says is, because in the Concoction and assimulation of the
Blood, (which is flegmy otherwise, such as is bred in children by reason of
their moist Nature and intemperance) many vapors are raised, especially at
night, when the heat is drawn in and contracted, by which the Tumor is
enlarged: but in the day they are discussed by the motion and heat of the
Tongue, by which means it becomes less.

The reason of the blewness is the Air, to which it always is open; for by the
coldness of the Air, the blood which comes to the superficies of the Tongue,
before it comes to be like in the substance, does increase somewhat, and so
turns livid. For Galen says that blood waxes black with cold, 3. de symp.
cause. cap. 2. which yet is not so in other parts, because there is no
superfluity sent to them, but as much as is sufficient for nourishment.

The knowledge of these Tumors is not difficult, because the preternatural
greatness of them is visible.

But the differences of these Tumors are these: If there be an Inflammation,
then there is pain heat, and redness also in the Tongue, wherewith also the
face is somewhat infected: But if the Tumor come originally from phlegm, the
Tongue is white, and there is much spittle whose taste is sweet or without taste.
If there be only a bare increase in the Tongue, there are no signs of other
Tumors and Vitrous humors.

As to the Prognostic: Tumors in the Tongue for the most part do not endanger
the life unless they grow so big that they cause suffocation, or come from a
malignant melanchollick humor; from whence they may prove Cancers, which is
known by their hardness, blewness, and pricking pain.

You must begin the Cure of the Inflammation of the Tongue with Revulsive and
Repelling Remedies; and therefore first, after you have given a laxative
Clyster, open a Vein, and take away as much blood as the Patients strength will
permit.

Then apply Cupping-glasses with scarrification to the Shoulders.

After that use cooling and repelling Gargarisms, and among the rest the Juice
of Lettice, is commended of Galen to wash the Tongue with often, Meth. 14. Cap.
8.

Or you may make one more compounded of the Decoction of Plantane, Nightshade,
Pease husked, and Pomegranate peels, adding some Syrup of dried Roses, or
Diamoron, that is, Syrup of Mulberries.

After bleeding, appoint a Purge made of things to purge Choler and Phlegm,
because phlegm from the Head does peculiarly concur to the production of these
Tumors.

After the flux is stopped, you must labor to derive the humor fixed to the
part by Evacuations, Revulsions, and Repercussives; and to this end open the
Vein under the Tongue, which if you cannot reach by reason of the largeness of
the Tongue, you must apply a Cupping-glass with Scarrification under the Chin.

If it tend to suppuration, it must be furthered with a fig slit in the midst,
often applied, or with a Gargarism of the Decoction of Barley, Mallows,
Violets, Figs, Raisons, Quince seeds, and Foenugreek seeds, with a little Syrup
of Violets and Jujubes.

Suppuration being made, if the Imposthume will not open of it self, make
incision: then cleanse it with the decoction of Barley, Agrimony, and Plantane,
with Honey of Roses.

But a soft and lax humor coming of phlegm, is cured first by a Revulsion with
Phlebotomy, if the Patient abound in Blood: then give him a strong Purge, such
as Pilulae Cochiae minores, made of Aloes, Scammony, and Coloquintida, which
were happily used by Galen to one of sixty years, 14. Meth. above mentioned.
But if he cannot swallow Pills, make him a Medicine of Senna, Agarick,
Diaphoenicon, and the like.

After these Evacuations you must first apply cooling and repelling Medicines,
as we showed in inflammation. And Galen in the place quoted, cured a Patient of
sixty years, only by washing with the Juice of Lettice after Purging.

Moreover, You may with good success wash the mouth with Juice of Lemmons,
Pomegranates, Sorrel, and Plantane, because they do not only repel with their
coldness, but also with their sharpness draw forth the moisture that is
fastened in the Tongue.

Also the Tongue may be embrochated with Oxymel simple, unto which you may ad a
little Ginger, Sal. gem. or Sal. armoniack.

You may also wash the Mouth with the Decoction of Origan, and Pellitory, with
Hydromel, or Honey and Water.

Zacutus Lucitanus, lib. 1. in his History of the chief Physicians, Obs. 47. in
a desperate case, when the Tongue grew to a wonderful bigness, so that he
feared suffocation, after emptying and revelling Medicines used in vain,
applied four Hors-leeches to the Tongue, and in a short time, after plentiful
bleeding, it became thin and small, and the Patient escaped.

The same Zacutus, Obs. 48. of the same Book, says that he cured a child of
ten years old, who had a Tongue swollen by a defluxion, so big that it could
not be contained in his mouth (after Revultions by bleeding, Cupping-glasses
with scarrification, and sharp Clysters) because the Tumor was soft and loos,
only by profound scarrification of the Tongue, and after he commanded that it
should be washed with salt Water, from whence there came such abundance of
humors that the child presently recovered. Which Observation he took from
Joachim Camerarius, who says in his Book of Observations, that one who was
almost suffocated with a swollen Tongue, cured himself by cutting it a cross
with a sharp Penknife, after he had lost much blood.

Finally, A fleshy Tumor of the Tongue, or the over-growing of the Tongue,
coming of the superfluous flesh, although it seem to be uncurable; yet it is
showed by Claudinus by Chyrurgery to be done, in the place cited; namely, If
whatsoever be superfluous be taken away with an incision Knife, first giving
fit preparations, all which are described by him in the same Place.

Chap. 2. Of the Tumor called Ranula under the Tongue.
ALthough in the former Chapter diverse Tumors of the Tongue are laid down by
us, yet there remains one called Ba^rachos in Greek, in Latin Ranula; for
since it differs from the rest in Nature, and requires a different way of Cure,
we thought it best to describe it in its proper Chapter.

Ranula is a Tumor under the Tongue in that part by which it is bound to the
Ligament; and for the most part it is so large that it is above the lower
Teeth; a cleft being in the middle dividing the right side of it from the left,
it represents the hinder parts of a Frog, from whence it is called Ranula, a
little Frog. Others say it is called so, because they who have it, have an
impediment in their Speech, and croak like Frogs, when they speak. It is like
the Tumor Oedima, or Meliceris, from which when it is opened, there comes as it
were the white of an Egg, or matter like Honey. And because the said matter is
contained in a bag, therefore it is accounted a Meliceris. In these bags
sometimes is found a stone as many observe, which Schenkius also observes, Obs.
388. Lib. 10.

The knowledge of this Disease is not difficult, for when the Tongue is lifted
up, there is seen a certain loose and soft carnosity, and on both sides of the
Ligament there is a certain round swelling like a Pease, Bean, or Che^nut.

This Disease is commonly without danger: But in Children sometimes it
threatens suffocation by Reason of the neerness of the Larynx to the rough
Artery. In men if they have pain and a Fever there is danger, for it may turn
to Squinancy. Also that Ranula is dangerous which is black or dusky and hard,
and inclining to the Nature of a Cancer, and this must not be touched.

For the Cure of this Disease, first you must take away the antecedent cause by
blood-letting, and with purging agreeable to the age and nature of the Patient.

And if the Disease be old you must use Cauteries and sweating Drinks.

Then you must endeavor to dissolve the Tumor with Topics, thus:

Take of Pomegranate peels, dried Hysop, and common Salt, of each two drams:
Make a Powder thereof to hold under the Tongue, and use it often.

Forestus speaks of a Girl of twelve years of age, that was cured in two days
space with this only Medicine; whose Author is Nicolaus Florentinus, who
instead of common Salt, uses Sal. armoniack to men, because it pierces more,
and dissolveth better. And Forestus used the said Powder to a Student made with
common Salt: as also a Decoction made of equal parts of Gals, Alum, and
Pomegranate flowers: And lastly, he commanded the part to be rubbed with
parched Salt, and Sal. gem. and the Patient was cured without manual Operation,
which is seldom seen, because those Tumors are of the Nature of Imposthumes,
and are contained in a little bag, so that when the matter has been discussed,
they have been filled again.

If this Tumor cannot be cured with discussing Remedies, you must open it,
which must be often done, for it will not often be discussed.

You must not make a small Orifice when you open it, because the matter
contained in the Bagg, will be again gathered and the bagg filled (unto which
the part being loose and soft, is very much disposed*) but you must make a very
long Incision through the height of the Tumor in both sides that the whole
matter may be discharged at once: then you must wash the Ulcer, first with
gentle things, as the Decoction of Mallows: and then with Clensers, as white
Wine and Honey of Roses, or Diamoron, and after with Oxymel till it be clean
and free from the Bagg: And finally, to heal it up, wash the mouth with red
Wine in which Alum is dissolved.

Forestus Cured the like in a Woman by an Incision made on both sides, and
after by washing with Wine and Water mixed with a little Salt.

If the Disease be old, and the Ulcer will not be cured by the aforesaid Remedy,
let it be touched with Oil of Sulphur twice every day, mixed with Rose Water,
one drop of Oil to six of Water; for so the Distemper will be corrected, and the
part dried, which must be often washed for confirmation, with Red Wine with
Alum dissolved in it.

If after the use of these the Disease return, you must come to an actual
Cautery, the manner whereof is taught by Paraeus, lib. 7. cap. 5.

Chap. 3. Of the Taste being Hurt.
THE Taste as other Senses, and al actions of the Body, is hurt Three ways, by
being Diminished, Abolished, Depraved; it is lessened when it scarce perceives
remiss savors and strong savors but a little: It is Abolished when it no ways
perceives those savors whether they be great or little: It is Depraved when
the object seems to be of another taste.

The Causes of Diminishing and Abolishing the taste are the same, only they
differ in degrees; for if they be light and weak, they Diminish; if great, they
Abolish the taste.

And these Causes are either a Defect of the Animal Spirit in the part, or a
Distemper of the Third pair of Nerves which come to the Tongue; or the Tongue
it self is Preternaturally affected.

The Spirits fail, either by reason of their scarcity, as in dying men; or of
the obstruction of the Nerves of the Third Conjugation by which they are
carried: or by reason of a Tumor bred in that part of the Head from whence
those Nerves do arise.

The Tongue is either covered with a moist slimy matter, or has Tumors,
Pustuls, or Ulcers, and by these the proper action of taste may be diminished
or abolished.

The Taste is Depraved when the Tongue is infected with an evil Humor, as in
Fevers, when the Tongue is infected with Choler, al things tasted are thought
better: otherwise if it be with salt phlegm or melancholy al things appear to
be salt or sour, for the outward objects being brought to the Tongue do move
the vicious juice of it, which at that time striking upon the tongue most
leaves its savor thereon, and so those things which are tasted, seem to be of
the same taste.

It happens also sometimes that the Tongue perceives the savors of the juyces
contained in its self, although no external Object be applied, as Galen
teaches, 1. de sympt. cause. cap. 4. And it is confirmed by daily Experience in
men in Fevers, whose tongue is covered with Choler; which if it be very
bitter, they find a continual bitterness on the Tongue though they take nothing
into their mouths.

The Diversity of the Causes aforesaid is known by the variety of the tastes and
disposition of the Tongue; for a sweet taste and redness of the Tongue
signifies blood: bitterness and yellowness Choler: whiteness with sweetness
Phlegm: blackness and sharpness Melancholy: a Nauseous taste shows that evil
Humors are contained in the stomach: Pustuls, Tumors, and Ulcers are manifest
to the Eyes. And Lastly, If the taste be hurt, and there appear no change in
the Tongue, you must suppose that the Cause lies in the Brain or Nerves.

The Cure is various according to the diversity of Causes; and therefore if the
Disease lie in the Brain or Nerves, you must apply Remedies thereto, especially
such as use to be prescribed for the Cure of the Palzey: but when the taste is
depraved by ill Humors, commonly that Symptom depends upon other Diseases,
especially upon Fevers, which being Cured the Symptoms also are removed.

If the Taste be offended by Tumors, the Cure thereof depends upon the Cure of
the Tumors above mentioned.

Finally, If it come from Pustles or Ulcers of the Tongue, you must Cure them
by blood letting and Purging of sharp Humors; to which you may ad Cooling,
Drying, and Binding Topics in form of a Gargarism: And if foul Ulcers be
found, let them be cleansed with Honey of Roses, with a little Oil of Sulphur or
Vitriol, in such a quantity as may gently touch upon the Tongue.

Or, if you will Dry more violently, Let the part Affected be often touched with
the aforesaid Oils, pure and not mixed; for so the Aphthe or Thrush and al
Ulcers of the Mouth and Tongue are quickly Cured.

Chap. 4. Of the Palzey of the Tongue, and the Hurt Motion thereof.
THE Chief Action of the Tongue, is Speech: and this is Abolished, Diminished,
and Depraved by diverse Causes, which are referred to Similary, Organick, or
Common Diseases.

As for the Similary; A moist Distemper with Matter makes the Tongue more soft
and loose, so that it cannot freely exercise its motions.

Dryness does too much foul the Tongue, as in Fevers.

But Organical, or Diseases of the Instrument, are when the Tongue is enlarged,
as we said before concerning Tumors, which hinder the free motion of it: also
when the figure or shape of it is deformed* as when the Tongue is naturally too
short, or by being partly cut off, or if it be tied too strait; as also when
the seventh pair of Nerves which come from the Brain to the Muscles which move
the Tongue are stopped.

Lastly, Common Diseases are Solutions of Continuity or Wounds in the part.

Too much moisture makes Balbuties, a kind of Stammering, which keeps men
from prououncing of the Letter R.

And this is either natural as in Children by reason of their much moisture,
who are Cured by age when the superfluous moisture is consumed.

But in some there is a moist distemper al their Life, and they are always
stammerers; of which Hippocrates speaks Aph. 32. Sect. 6. thus, Stammerers
are most subject to long Fluxes of the Belly. Galen in his Comments says, That
they who naturally stammer, have either a moist Brain, or Tongue, or both. From
the moist Brain much moisture may fall into the belly, whence the Flux is
caused. And when the tongue is naturally too moist, it is probable also that
the belly will be loose and weak through moistness: because the Stomach and the
Tongue have both the same Tunicle: Now the proper passion of a moist belly is a
looseness.

But Avicen seems to be against this Doctrine, saying, Fen. 1. lib. 3. tract.
4. cap. 18. That Stammerers are given much to Melancholy, and Melancholy
comes from a dry Brain: but this Contradiction is Reconciled, thus, Avicen
means by Stammerers, not such as are properly so called and cannot pronounce
R, but such as Stutter, and repeat the same Syllable often before they speak a
word; and this comes from a hot and dry Distemper of the Brain; in which the
thoughts are so quick that they outrun the tongue, and hasten its motion,
whence comes that disturbance.

But the Stammering aforesaid coming from the Birth, is incurable.

In some an accidentary Stammering comes by a Catarrh; and great Defluxion of
Rhewm upon the Jaws and Tongue, which is cured by Evacuation, Revulsion, and
Derivation of the Humors; as also by Strengthening and Drying the Brain: but
because the Remedies are the same with those for the Palzey of the Tongue of
which we shall now speak, they may be taken from thence.

Two pair of Nerves go to the Tongue: the Third pair to Exercise the act of
Tasting and Sense: And the Seventh pair for Speech and diversity of Motion; by
the Obstruction and Relaxation of the taste, comes the Palzey of the Tongue,
which is a Privation or Diminishing of the motion of the Part; and this uses
to follow an Apoplexey when the hinder part of the brain is too moist, and then
other parts of the body, and for the most part half the body has the Palzey;
sometimes it is only in the Tongue when the Nerves and moving Muscles are too
moist: also by cutting of those Nerves there comes a Palzey of which there is
an example in Avicen, Fen. 6. lib. 3. tract. 1. cap. 12. in these words, A
certain man was* Cupped and Scarified, and the small hair like Nerve, was cut
with Scarification, which is in the substance of the Pannicle joined with the
Tongue; wherefore the Tongue was relaxed. We may suppose that these Cupping
Glasses were applied to the Neck and hinder part of the head; for since the
Nerves that move the Tongue, come from the beginning of the Spinal Marrow which
is in the Neck: It is most certain that the Scarification was made so deep that
some branch of them was divided.

But although the matter producing this Disease be Phlegm, yet sometimes it is
thicker and colder; sometimes thinner and hotter as the Humors which predominate
in the Body; the knowledge whereof is from* Avicen, Fen. 6. lib. 3. tract. 1.
cap. 6. in these words, And sometimes the redness of the Tongue and hotness show
that the matter is blood; and sometimes much watery spittle shows that the
matter is thin, and when there is little benefit by Resolving Medicines, and
much by binding and astringent.

This Disease, if it come from the Brain, and follow an Apoplexy, so that other
parts also are affected is seldom cured, especially if the Patient be in years;
but if it be single, and in the part only it is to be cured, and the easier if
the Patient be young.

The Cure of the Pal^ey in the Tongue, is by taking away the antecedent Cause,
that is the humor abounding in the Brain, and by discussing and dissolving the
conjunct cause, namely, the humor which is fastened upon the Nerves that move
the Tongue.

The antecedent cause will be taken away by the Medicines prescribed in the
Cure of the cold distemper of the Brain.

And first you must purge with Pills, or a Potion there mentioned. After if
blood abound, and be either the Principal, or the assistant Cause of the
Disease, take so much as age and strength will permit, then administer a
Cephalic Apozeme, and if the Disease seem stubborn give a sweating diet; all
which are formerly prescribed in the place mentioned.

After general Evacuations, come we to the Derivation of the matter, causing
the Disease by Cupping and Vesicatories applied behind; as also by Cauteries.
Avicen applied a Cupping-glass under the Chin, which is now also allowed.

Open the Vein under the Tongue, and it will profit, if before you have made
general Evacuation to derive the Humor from the Muscles of the Tongue.

For the discussing and drawing forth of this Humor, let the Gargarism
following be often used.

Take of Flowerdeluce roots half an ounce: Origan, Sage, French Lavender,
Rosemary, of each half a handful: Cubebs three drams: Liquoris one ounce: Boil
them in equal parts of white Wine and Water to a pint: Dissolve in the
straining, Oxymel of Squils two ounces. Make a Gargarism; to which if it work
not strong enough, you may ad two or three drams of the Decoction of Pellitory
of Spain, or of Mustard seed. You may also ad Castorium if it offend not the
Patient with the scent.

To this end you may often rub the Tongue with Oxymel of Squils alone, or mixed
with Mustard Seed.

A bag of Sage is much commended for to rub the Tongue with often, to which you
may ad Mustard seed also.

Also these following Pills ought to be held often upon the Tongue.

Take of the Juice of Bettony and Liquoris, of each one dram and an half:
Castor and Assafatida, of each half a dram: Nutmeg and Spicknard, of each one
scruple: Incorporate them with Honey, and make them into the form of Lupines.

Here also Gargarisms, Masticatories, and Errhines, which are prescribed in the
Cure of the cold distemper of the Brain may be used.

Also for the strengthening of the Brain, and dispersing the relics of the
humors therein contained, Fumigations, and Pouders for the Hair, with Caps
mentioned in the same Chapter are here to be used.

Lastly, You must prescribe the usual Medicines against increase of phlegm,
namely Syrupus Magistralis, or ordinary Pills, with a strengthening Opiate, as
is there declared.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Teeth, Gums,
Jaws, Pallat, and Windpipe, or Larynx.
The PREFACE.
THE Parts contained in the Mouth and Jaws suffers diverse Diseases, the Chief
whereof we only desire to lay down, and to omit those that are ordinarily Cured
by Surgeons: Therefore this Book shall contain Seven Chapters: First, Of the
Toothache: Secondly, Of the Blackness and Consuming of the Teeth: Thirdly, Of
the Eating away and Exulceration of the Gums: Fourthly, Of the Flux of Blood
from the Gums: Fifthly, Of the Ulcers of the Mouth and Jaws: Sixthly, Of the
Relaxation or Falling down of the Pallat: And, Seventhly, Of Angina, or Quinzy.

Chap. 1. Of the Toothache.
GAlen in his Fifth Book of the Composition of Medicines, cap. 8. and 16. of
the Use of Parts, cap. 2. says, That the Teeth are not only sensible in
respect of their Nerves at the Root, and Membrane which inwardly covers their
Cavity, but also in their proper substance; and says, That the Teeth and other
parts of the Mouth do taste, as also does the tongue. And in his Book of Bones,
cap. 5. he says, Of Bones only the teeth are partakers of the tender Nerves of
the Brain; and for that cause they alone do manifestly feel.

Therefore pain reaches not only to the Nerves and inward Membrane, but also
to the substance of the teeth.

The Toothache comes from a Flux of Humors, either Cold and Flegmy, or Hot and
Watery, Salt and Sharp: hence comes the Distention or Convulsion of the parts:
and these Humors either flow to the Membranes of the Jaws, and of the holes
wherein the Teeth are, or to the Nerve which is inserted in the root of the
Teeth, or to the substance of the Teeth. Although some think that the Teeth
cannot receive into their own substance afflux of humors and distention,
because they are most hard and thick; yet this is taught by Avicen, Fen. 1.
Lib. 1. Doct. 1. Cap. 5. and Fen. 7. Lib. 4. Tract. 1. Cap. 4. And sometimes,
says he, there is matter which does imposthumate the Tooth it self. Which
Opinion he confirms and treats of chiefly, Fen. 1. Lib. 3. Tract. 3. Cap.
1. in these words: It is not as some Physicians think, that the Brain it self
will not imposthumate, reasoning thus; That which is soft, as the brain, and
hard, as a bone, is not extended, and that will not imposthumate which cannot
be extended. But this is erroneous, because that which is soft, if it be
viscous or claminy, may be extended, and bones are imposthumated, as Galen
teaches, and we will show in our Chapter of the Teeth. Moreover, we say that
whatsoever is nourished is extended and increased with the nourishment, and it
is likewise possible that it may be extended and augmented with its
superfluity, and that is an imposthume. This Avicen teaches from the Doctrine
of Galen, who Lib. 5. de comp. med. sec. loc. cap. 8. says, Because the Teeth
cannot grow without nourishment, they are only obnoxious to these two Diseases
following, namely, of want, and superfluity of nourishment: by want of
nourishment they grow dryer and thinner, and by superfluity of it, there will
be an inflammation about the fleshy parts. Thus Galen. But it is probable that
pain is more usual (if it be vehement) in those parts which have most exquisite
sense, namely, the Nerve and the Membrane in the hole of the Tooth next to the
root, which does not only suffer distention and vellication, but also sometimes
inflammation of the humors flowing down; for it blood be mixed with other
humors, then the pain has two causes, namely, Distention, and Compression,
which comes from the hardness of the Tooth, which the Membrane being inflamed
cannot endure: and this Inflammation of the Membrane is for the most part
accompanied with the inflammation of the Gums; which also is reckoned by Galen
and Avicen among the causes of the Toothache.

Now the Humors commonly flow from the Head upon the Teeth and parts adjoining,
sometimes from the inferior parts; for when any bad humors, especially watery,
bred in any part, are abounding in the Veins, Nature desiring to cast off her
burden, sends them to the weakest parts And if the sees by reason of the
distemper, foulness, or erosion are such, the flux will chiefly come thither.
Charles Piso propounds an Experiment of this (who also thinks the Toothach con
comes chiefly from a serous humor) lib. de morb. ab illuv. ser. obs. 7. where
he reports that himself being troubled with the Toothache for many days, halr
an hour after he had taken a purging Medicine, vomited up above a pint of clear
water with such success, that ten years after he was never troubled with it. By
which Experience he always prescribed Medicines that purge water to them who
were so troubled, and with good success. Moreover, he striveth to prove that it
comes from this cause, by this sign, Because they who have the Toothache, do
continually spet.

Besides the Causes mentioned, there are also Worms in rotten Teeth, and they
breed of any matter which is contained and putrified in the Cavities, whether
it be excrementitious, or come of putrefying meats, especially flesh and sweet
meats, which by reason of their clamminess stick to the Cavities of the Teeth.

Others think that the Toothache comes sometimes from wind contained between
the Cavity and the Nerve, which does violently stretch the inward Membrane,
whence comes such intolerable pain.

The principal external causes of Toothache, are all those things which cause
defluxions; the chief are, Cold Air, South winds, staying in the Sun, or night
Air, Surfeit, and all faults in Diet. Ad to these, things that debilitate the
part, and make it more fit to receive a defluxion, as rotteness and hollowness
in the Teeth, which sometimes make violent pains.

The diversity of Causes is k own by diverse igns. For pain when it comes from
hot humors is stronger, the constitution hotter, the age younger, if Summer,
there is heat sensibly in the part, and inflammation of the Gums often times; it
is better for the use of cold, and worse for hot things. But if it come from a
cold humor, the signs contrary to these will appear.

If worms are the cause of pain, it will be intermitting, coming and going
often, and sometimes the motion of the worm will be felt.

When it comes from Wind, it is known by the excess of pain, and sensible
stretching, and it ends in short time, and is easily cured with discussing
Medicines.

The Prognostic is diverse, according to the variety of the Causes; for that
pain which comes from a hot, thin, watery, sharp and salt humor, is more
violent, but sooner at an end, by reason of the sudden change of the humor; but
that which comes from a cold and flegmy humor, is less, and lasts longer.

A Tumor rising in the Gums or Jaws, takes away the pain of the Teeth, for the
flux is carried to the external parts, so that it no longer lies in the
internal Cavity of the Tooth.

The Cure must be directed for the taking away the Cause, and mitigating the
pain; for although Anodines profit but little except the defluxion be stayed,
yet sometimes we are constrained not only to use them, but also Narcoticks or
Stupefactives before we take away the Cause; therefore the humor flowing to the
Teeth is to be revelled, evacuated, and repelled, and that which is there, is
to be derived and discussed.

First therefore, if the pain comes of hot humors, open a vein in the Arm on
the same side, by which the humor flowing will be revelled. But if it come of
cold, bleeding is not so good; but in regard of the defluxion it may be used,
because it is the chief reveller. But then you must take less blood, except
there be a Plethory, in which regard although it be from fiegm, you may bleed
freely according to Galen, who said that a large evacuation of blood agreeable
to the Plethory, is the best remedy for all pains, which we have found true by
experience, not only in the pain of the teeth, but in other parts.

Let him purge the day following, with that which is proper for the humor; in
the form of a Potion, if a hot, with Pills, if a cold humor be the cause of
pain.

After this, if the pain continue, apply Cupping-glasses to the Shoulders with
scarrisication, or one great one between the shoulders without scarrisication.
A Vesicatory applied to the neck, or behind the Ears does violently draw back
the humors.

Also to hinder the defluxion, apply astringents to the Temples, as Emplaister
of Gum Elemi, or Mastich only, upon a piece of Silk, and heat with a brass
pestle, the Shop Emplaister of Mastich, or that against Ruptures called ad
berniam. Or this following is good.

Take of Frankincense, Hypocistis, Labdanum, of each one dram and an half:
Pitch and Mastich, of each one dram: Opium half a scruple: Oil of Mastich as
much as is sufficient: Make a Mass of Emplaister.

The Root of Comfry fresh and bruised, applied to the Temples does intercept
the defluxion very well.

There is also a good Plaster made of powder of Alum, and Galls mixed with
Pitch.

Riverius the chief Physician to Henry the Great, had this Plaster as a Secret:

Take of Cyprus nuts, red Roses, Mustard seed torrefied or parched, Mastich and
Terra Sigillata, of each one dram and an half. Let them be steeped in Vinegar
of Roses twenty four hours; then dry them: Opium dissolved in Aqua vitae three
drams: Pitch and Colophonia, of each one dram: yellow Wax melted in the
expressed Oils, Henbane and white Poppy as much as is sufficient: Make an
Emplaister; apply it to the Arteries, and the part affected with pain.

And because the small Veins by which nourishment is carried to the Teeth do run
by the Ears, you put Medicines into them for the Cure of the Toothache; as Oil
of bitter Almonds to the Ear on the same side, or the fume of Vinegar, in which
Penyroyal and Origan have been boiled.

Others put Vinegar into the Ear, by which the defluxion is mightily stayed,
especially if the flux be hot.

But in a cold defluxion, the Juice of Garlic mixed with Treacle and dropped warm
into the Ear, does wonderfully assuage the pain of the Teeth. A Clove also of
Garlic peeld and put into the Ear, is good.

Also astringents in the beginning of the defluxion, may be applied to the part
pained, cold, if the matter be hot, but if it be cold, you must put hot things
with your repellers: But in every cause, if the pain be great, you must mix
Anodines with Repellers. As,

Take of the Roots of Snakeweed, Five-leaved-grass, and Tormentil, of each one
ounce: the Leaves of Vervain, Plantane, and Maudlin, of each one bandful:
Cypress Nuts, Galis, and Acorn Cups, of each two drams: red Sanders, and
Crystal, of each one dram and an half: red Roses and Pomegranate Flowers, of
each one pugil: boil them in red Wine and Vinegar, and wash the part grieved
often therewith warm.

This may be used in the beginning of a hot defluxion, but in a cold ad Cypress
Roots, Box Bark, Ivy Leaves, and the like.

A plainer Medicine is made of Plantane and Rose Water, with as much Vinegar
like an Oxycrate.

Or boil Galls in Vinegar, and wash the Teeth therewith. Or,

Take of the Roots of Cinkfoyl half an ounce: Willow Leaves half a handful:
Galls two drams: boil them in red Wine, and wash the mouth. This stays the
defluxion, and takes away pain.

Then you must use these Remedies, which assuage pain, and take away the cause,
of which there is in authors, and vulgarly a multitude: we will give you the
best; of which you must make your choice with this judgment, That those which
do not only dissolve and discuss, but also astringe and stop the flux, be used
in the beginning and the increase of the pain, but things that only discuss in
the state and declination.

Take of the Juice of Housleek and Nightshade of each two ounces: Cow or Sheeps
milk eight ounces: Oil of unripe Roses one ounce and an half: Opium and Saffron
of each three grains: mix them and apply it warm with a cloth to the Jaw of the
same side often.

Take the Papp of sweet Apples two ounces: Bran steept in Vinegar three ounces:
Oil of Roses one ounce: Saffron half a scruple: Opium two grains: mix them for
a Cataplasm to the part pained. Or,

Take of Barley and Bean meal of each three ounces: Oil of Roses and sweet
Almonds of each half an ounce: the juice of Housleek one ounce and an half:
Milk as much as is sufficient; make a Cataplasm to be applied often warm to the
part. Or,

Take two whites of Eggs, beat them with Rose Water, and dip stuphs therein
sprinkled with two drams of Pepper Poudered: Apply them to the pained side over
the whole Cheek.

But here observe, That you apply not Astringents to the Jaws if they be swollen,
for it is to be seared, That the Humor will so be Repelled to the Throat, and
the Patient Choked: An Example of which Valesius de Taranta gives, of a
Physician troubled with the Toothache and Inflammation of the Jaws, who applied
only Oil of Roses with Vinegar, which brought him to a Squinzy and he died.

Other Waters may be made to wash the mouth: Thus.

Take of the best white Wine four ounces: white Henbane Roots two drams: let
them boil to the Consumption of the third part: strain them, and ad one ounce
of Vinegar: Varnish one dram: let them boil a heat, and let the Mouth be washed
often therewith.

The plain Decoction of Vervain is Commended of many for the same.

Also a Decoction of Guaiacum made with Wine, or Water, and a little salt. Or,

Take of Arsmart, and the barks of the Roots of Henbane, of each equal parts,
boil them in Rose Vinegar, and wash the mouth.

And if the pain comes from a Hot Cause, only boil a Henbane Root in Vinegar.

If the Arsmart be too sharp, take a less quantity: Nay, you may leave it quite
out in a Defluxion coming of a Hot Cause, and put Persicaria Macutata instead
of it, which is Astringent and Cooling, and his juice may be given safely at
the Mouth in all Defluxions that are sharp and Chollerick: Also you may use the
Leaves of Henbane instead of the Root.

Some use the Leaves of Henbane and Persicaria Maculata as a secret Magnetic
Charm, they boil them in Vinegar, they burn the Leaves being boiled with a
gentle fire, and wash their Teeth with the Vinegar, and they say that as soon
as the Leaves are burnt the pain will be gone: But I rather think it is Cured by
the Vinegar with which the Teeth are washed.

In the aforesaid Decoctions if the Vinegar be so sharp that the Patient can
scarcely endure it, you may mix* half Wine; and in a Cold Cause make them of
Wine only.

Amatus Lusitanus, Commends Exceedingly Sandarach boiled in Vinegar and Wine,
Thus.

Take of Sandarak one ounce: Wine and Vinegar of each half a Pint: boil them
and let the strained liquor be held a long time in the mouth.

The Decoction of the Roots of the great Nettle, with a little Nutmeg and
Saffron made in equal parts of Wine and Vinegar, and held warm in the Mouth,
does wonderfully draw the Humors forth.

But at the first, the pain will seem to increase; but afterward, it will be
mitigated, and cease.

The Root of the sharp Dock gathered in the Spring before it grows forth and
dried, applied to the Tooth pained, does appease the pain by a specifical
propriety: which is confirmed by the experiment of Forestus, in Obs. 6. lib. 4.
where he says, That he applied this Root green, and cut in small pieces to the
Tooth of a Maid with good success; and that he Cured many other therewith after
he had given them universal Medicines.

If the body be well purged, and the head be not very full of phlegm,
Masticatories to draw the Humors from the part affected will do very well: which
are made either of Pelitory of Spain a long time h^ld in the mouth and chewed,
or as follows.

Take of Mastich, Pelitory of Spain, and Staphisagre* of each one dram: the
seeds of Henbane half a dram: Powder them, and mix them together, and make
little balls thereof in a thin linen Rag, which let him long chew, to make him
spet.

Commonly the Oil of Cloves is used in a little lint to stop the Tooth if it be
hollow, or otherwise, for so the humor adhering to the part is drawn forth and
the part strengthened.

Oil of Camphire is very profitable for the same purpose.

Or Dissolve eight grains of Camphire in one dram of the Oil of Cloves; and use
it as above.

But above all the rest the Oil of Box is extolled, which being but once dropped
into the Tooth presently stays the pain.

This Oil is made of Box cut in small pieces, and then Distilled by descent, in
two Vessels, the one put into the earth, the other above, upon which you must
make a strong fire, and so the Oil will fall into the lower vessel.

Besides the aforesaid Oils, the Chemists commend the Oil of the Hazel Nut used
in the same manner.

If the pain be so great that it will not away with the aforesaid Medicines, you
must come to Narcoticks, which are set down by Practitioners under diverse
forms; although their effect is as uncertain as others: but they do surely
stupifie the Pain: Among the rest Laudanum is chief, which does not only
appease the pain, but also stop the Flux; and it may be given safely after
universal Remedies to the quantity of three or four grains, if it be well
prepared.

Many Topics made of Narcoticks are carried about; These Two following are the
best.

Take of Opium, Myrrh, and Labdanum, of each one dram: Powder them, and with
white Wine boil them into a Liniment, which put with lint into the Tooth.

The Other is the Emplaister of Riverius, Chief Physician to Henry the Great
above mentioned.

If Worms be in the Teeth you must kill them with bitter things: And this
following is good for that.

Take of Aloes one dram: Camphire half a scruple: Aqua Vitae half a dram: mix
them and apply thereof with lint to the Tooth.

It is to be observed, That the Teeth do seldom ache except they be hollow to
the Nerve; therefore to take away the sense of pain burn the Nerve with an
actual Cautery, or with Aqua Fortis, or Oil of Vitriol, which often done to a
very hollow Tooth, it will be broken in pieces, and so drawn forrh.

If the Pain still continues, and the Tooth be very hollow, you must draw it
out, and then the pain will presently cease and never return.

But you must take heed that you draw not the Tooth when the Defluxion falls
violently, or when the Head aketh, or the Gums swel, or when there is great
pain.

And the Surgeon is to be Admonished, That he pull it not out violently at
one pull lest the brain be too much shaken, and the Jaw bone broken; from whence
comes a great Flux of blood, a Fever, and sometimes death.

After it is Drawn, close the part with your fingers, then let the mouth be
washed with warm Oxycrate; and let him take heed of Cold Air, lest a new
Defluxion fall upon the other Teeth.

But if the blood flow so fast that it will scarce be stanched (which sometimes
happens by the breach of the Vein and Artery, without the breach of the Jaw:
And Varaiola reports of one that had his Tooth pulled out without iron or force
but with the fingers, and yet bled a pint at one time, and as much the next day
from the Artery under the Gum) This Flux of blood is stopped by laying a hard
piece of lint like a ball, and holding it down for one hour or two with the
fingers: If that will not prevail, apply burnt Vitriol, and lay a Ragg upon it
dipped in Vinegar, and compress it with your finger til you make an eschar. The
last Remedy is an actual Cautery by which the blood will presently be stopped.

If any fearful people refuse burning and require other means, you must try
those which Authors prescribe; As Paste made of the milk of Spurge, and the
powder of Frankincense mixed with a little Starch, the Root of Crowfoot, the
Bark of the Mulbery Root, the powder of Earthworms, Pellitory of Spain st^ept
in Vinegar, and the Root of Wild Cowcumber so steept, and the like. But the
Leaf of Elleboraster rubbed upon the Tooth is best; but you must not touch the
other lest they also fall out.

A Country man troubled with the Toothache, was persuaded by another to rubb
his Tooth with Elleboraster; he unwittingly rubbed all the Teeth on that side,
and presently almost al his Teeth fell out: Therefore if any will try this
Medicine, I advise them to defend the other Teeth with soft Wax.

Although when there is a Tumor in the Jaws, the pain for the most part
cease; because the matter is carried outward: Yet for the quick Dissolving
of it, use this Liniment.

Take of Fresh Butter, and Hens Grease, of each one ounce: the Powder of
Flower-de-luce-Root, one dram: Sa^^ron half a scruple: Oil of Chamomel and
sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce: make a Liniment.

A Cataplasm made of Figgs, Bread and Vinegar, is better.

A Nettle bruised, and laid to the Jaw, does quickly assuage the pain*

This is the Cure of the Toothache for the present. But if it return often, as
is usual, you must use prevention, which is to hinder the breeding of those
humors that flow thither; and let the Teeth be strengthened that they may be
less capable to receive them. Therefore if it proceed from a hot cause, you
must use such Medicines as were prescribed in the Cure of a hot distemper of
the Liver and a hot Catarrh. If from a cold Cause you must take that course
which is prescribed in the Cure of the cold distemper of the Brain; but you
must strengthen the Teeth with the Medicines in the Chapter following.

Chap. 2. Of the blackness and rottenness of the Teeth.
MAny times the Teeth do contract a black, livid, or yellow color, from the
evil Humors, cleaving unto them, which by long continuance do also corrode
them, and make them rotten: and these Diseases come from filthy vapors that fly
upwards, and are engendered of evil nourishment, or from the distemper of the
stomach, which corrupts good nourishment.

Quicksilver does black the Teeth, whether it be used to the whole Body, as in
the Pox, or only to the Face. Hence it is that women which use Mercury to make
them fair, have black and ill color'd Teeth.

For the Cure you must first remove the antecedent Cause, and if it comes from
evil humors in the stomach, they must be discharged, and the distemper of the
parts which produce them must be corrected, and a good diet prescribed, and
those things forbidden which do corrupt the teeth, especially sweet things.

Infinite Medicines are prescribed by Authors for making teeth white, which may
be experienced. We are contented with one, which presently makes them white,
cleanses them, and keeps them from rotting, namely, the spirit of Sulphur, or
Vitriol, in which you must dip a little stick, and rub the teeth with the end
thereof, and then wipe them with a clout. In a great foulness you may use the
Oils by themselves, otherwise you must mix them with Honey of Roses, or fair
Water, lest by the often use of them the Gums should be corroded. Montanus,
consil. 113. reports that he learned that at Rome, of a Woman called Greek
Mary: to whom when he came when he was young, and she twenty years old, and
after when she was fifty, he found her almost in the same condition, and she
confessed that her Beauty and strength was preserved by the Spirit of Vitriol,
and that her Teeth which were very bad in her youth, were by that, made very
fair and firm, and also her Gums; and also that she perceived her self by the
use thereof to seem more youthful, and she used every day one drop or two to
rub gently her Teeth and Gums.

The Ashes of Tobacco is very good also to cleanse and make white the Teeth.

For prevention, and to preserve the Teeth, first cleanse them with a
Tooth-picker made of Mastich Wood, or the like; then wash the mouth with Wine,
and rub the Teeth with this Powder:

Take of the Roots of Snakeweed, Alum, and white Coral, of each one ounce:
Make a Powder to rub the Teeth.

Or wash them with this Water.

Take of the fine Powder of burnt Alum two drams: whole Cinnamon half a dram:
Spring and Rose Water, of each four ounces: boil them in a Glass upon hot
Embers to the consuming of the third part. Wash the Teeth therewith every
morning with a cloth dipped therein.

Chap. 3. Of the Erosion or eating away, and of the Exulceration of the Gums.
THe Gums are eaten away and exulcerated by sharp corroding humors which come
unto them. The parts from whence they come are, the Brain, Stomach, Spleen, and
others. Men that have Diseases in the Spleen, are most subject to Ulcers in the
Gums, as in the Scurvy; sometimes the erosion of the Gums comes from worms, or
the corrupt humors which cause worms, so that it is a plain sign of worms when
it continues long. So says Fabricius Hildanus, Obs. 59. Centur. 1. the Son of
a Citizen of Dusseldorp was long troubled with erosion of the Gums, and died,
after the use of many internal Medicines and Topics: when he was opened we
found abundance of worms, which had eaten through his Guts, and many in his
Stomach.

The Cure is first to be directed to the antecedent cause, and the vicious
humors are to be evacuated by blood-letting and purging; the sharp and hot
humors are to be tempered with Apozemes, Juleps, and Physical Broths, and the
like. The flux of the same is to be diverted by Cupping-glasses, and Cauteries
fitly applied. And lastly, the faults of the parts affected are to be corrected.

Afterward you must use Topics, which are to be altered according to the
greatness of the disease, so that to a simple Erosion, you must apply only
those which astringe and dry, as this Water following:

Take of unripe Galls, Acorn Cups, and Flowers of Pomegranates, of each one
ounce: red Roses one pugil: Alum three drams: boil them in two parts of
Forge-water, and one part of old red Wine, and wash the Gums often therewith.

If the Erosion be not taken away with that, use this Opiate:

Take of Dragons blood three drams: Lignum Aloes, red Roses, Spodium; and burnt
Hartshorn, and Cypress nuts, of each one dram: Mirrh and Tobacco Ashes, of each
three scruples: Alum one dram. Make them into Powder, and mix them with Honey
and a few drops of Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur. Make an Opiate, which must be
spread upon linen cloth and laid to the Gums at night.

The Spirit of Vitriol and Sulphur, as they cleanse and whiten the Teeth, so
they take away the rottenness of the Gums, either alone, or mixed with Honey of
Roses, or Water, as in the former Chapter.

If the Ulcer be deep and foul, anoint with this:

Take of choice Mirrh and Sugar Candy, of each equal parts: powder them, and
fill the white of an hard Egg cut in the midst therewith; then tie it with a
third, and hang it in a Wine-Celler with a glass under it, and there will come
forth a Liquor or Balsom, with which anoint often.

But if by the use of the aforesaid, the disease be not cured, if the Tooth
near the Ulcer be rotten, you must pull it out, and then it will be presently
cured, otherwise never.

Chap. 4. Of bleeding at the Gums.
Sometimes abundance of blood flows from the Gums, either Critically, or
Symptomatically, although the former be very seldom, yet it is sometimes; so we
may see by Experience, and by reading. So says Dodonaeus, Obs. 14. A certain
Quarrier having the small Pox, had a flux of blood from his Gums, and being
stopped, it made the Urine bloody, which being stopped it returned again to the
Gums, and there continued till he recovered of the small Pox. Amatus Lucitanus,
Curat. 5. Centur. 5. says that some have had benefit by bleeding at the Gums,
and have been worse when it was stopped. Also Zacutus Lucitanus, obs. 86. lib.
1. Praxis admir. speaks of a Goldsmith who when he fell into a Fever by
laboring at the Furnace, being of a strong constitution, lost much blood by
opening a Vein and amended, so that the seventh day (having had an itching of
his Gums, and a pain in the lower Lip) the blood gushed from the Veins of his
lower Gums for three days in such a quantity that he lost above five pints
more, and the more he bled, the more his Fever abated, and when it was gone
the blood stopped.

The Gums bleed Symptomatically when the blood is sharp, and the Liver or
Spleen distempered: So that in the Scurvy this flux is ordinary.

Sometimes after a Tooth is drawn, there is so great a flux of blood by reason
the Artery is torn, which is the root of the Tooth, that sometimes men have died
thereof.

The Cure of a Symptomatical flux, is by bleeding and purging, and other
Remedies for the bowels. As also by Topics astringing, made into Gargarisms,
Pouders, Liniments, or Opiates.

If it come from a Tooth drawn, you must first let blood and Cup to make
revulsion, and apply astringents to the part, as a Cataplasm, of Bole-Armenick,
Terra Sigillata, Sanguis Draconis, and the like astringents made up with the
white of an Egg. Also Time alone with the white of an Egg is good. But if they
do not suffice, you must lay the Patients finger upon the part, and let him
hold it there till the blood congeal above the orifice of the Artery. If it
cannot be stopped with slight things use stronger. Valeriola, obs. 3. lib. 5.
reports that an old woman who had a Tooth taken forth with the singers only,
had a violent bleeding upon it, from the Artery under the Gum; which he stopped
with burnt Vitriol when other things failed; which is excellent both for
astringency and burning. Zacutus Lucitanus, obs. 84. lib. 1. Prax. Med. admir.
relates a History of one who having a grievous Tooth that ached, drew it
violently forth* and after had a great flux of blood from the Artery torn,
which when it could not be stopped by Blood-letting, Cupping, and Astringents,
nor by laying on the finger, nor by burnt Vitriol, at last by his advice the
place was filled with Gum Arabic, which stopped it in three hours space, for it
has power to stop, cool, glutinate, and dry. The same Zacutus Obs. 85. of the
same Book, reports of a certain strong Soldier, who after great pain drew a
Tooth violently, and bled much from the Artery under the Tooth, for two days:
the best Physicians use al Astringents to the part, with Revulsives, and burn
the Artery with a hot iron, but al in vain, for he bled still even unto death:
Zacutus being called, applied the Plaster of Galen, made of Frankincense,
Aloes, the hairs of an Hare poudered, and mixed with the white of an Egg, by
which in a few hours the blood stopped and the Patient recovered.

Galen boasts that he invented this precious Medicine, lib. 5. meth. cap. 7.
and stopped the Artery in the Elbow: And cap. 4. of the same Book, and in his
Book of Curing by Blood-letting, Chapter the last, he confirms the Excellency
thereof by many stories.

Chap. 5. Of the Vcers of the Mouth, and Jaws.
THe small and superficial Ulcers of the Mouth are usually Aphthae or Trush,
although in Galen and Hippocrates, it is sometimes used for Ulcers in other
parts; but they which are deeper are absolutely called the Ulcers of the Mouth
and Jaws: Such as are in the French Pox.

These Ulcers breed of sharp Humors or Vapors coming from diverse parts into the
Jaws; so in malignant Fevers they often happen, or to those that have hot
Livers, or foul Bodies: So the Children have the Trush, as Hipp. aph. 24. sect.
3. either from the sharpness of the Milk which Ulcerates those tender parts in
its passage, as Galen teaches in his Comment upon the same Aphorism, or from
the corruption of the milk in the Stomach by which sharp vapors are sent to the
mouth, as Galen affirms, 9. de compos. med. sec. loc. cap. ultimo.

Now these Ulcers are diverse, as some are slighter, some more dangerous; some
are in Children, some in Men; some are joined with Inflammation, some are
without; these diverse degrees are according to the variety of the Humors of
which they come: For they proceed either of Blood, Choler, Phlegm, or
Melancholy, or Choler Adust, which has not only a burning, but often a
malignant quality, and begets evil conditioned Ulcers.

These Differences are known by their proper signs, for if the Ulcers be Redish
they come of Blood: if Yellow, of Choler: if White, of Phlegm: if Livid or
Blew, from Melancholy, if they stink they are foul.

As for the Prognostic.

Aphthae, or Truth is easily Cured, but deep Ulcers and putrid, called in Greek
Nomai, are hardly Cured: And in Children they are more dangerous by reason of
their tender flesh which they sooner devour: As also because strong Medicines
cannot be applied unto them; hence sometimes Children die of them, when they are
Malignant and putrid.

Also in respect or the Cause, those Ulcers which come of Phlegm, are least
dangerous: those that come of Blood or Choler, more: and those that come of
Melancholy, most of al.

Black and Crusty Ulcers are deadly, especially in Children.

The Jaws Ulcerated in a Fever are hard to be Cured, as Hipp. teaches, 3.
Prog. Because as Galen explaineth they show the malignity of the matter.

The Cure is first by good Diet, which Cools and Dries, and hinders the
Generation of the antecedent Cause: Therefore when Children have it from their
Suck, let the Nurse be changed, or eat good Diet, as also let her blend and be
purged, if need be: especially let her eat Cool Astringent things, as Quinces,
Pears, Medlers, Services, Lettice, and Purslain, prescribe the same to men, and
let them avoid sharp things, salt, and pepper.

Then you must look to the antecedent Cause, with Universal Evacuations
according to the age; And first Phlebotomy does powerfully revel the Humors,
and tempereth their sharpness, by Cooling the whole body.

After this ^up and Scarrifie, put Horsleeches behind the Ears and under the
Chin, and apply a Vesicatory to the Neck behind.

The next day after you have let blood, you must prescribe a Purge, agreeable
to the Humor offending, and the age of the Patient.

From the beginning of the Cure use Topics, called by Galen Stomatica, or
Medicines for the Mouth: and at first they must be mild, as Gargarisms,
Mouth-waters made of Plantane, Honeysuckle, and Roses; Water with Syrup of
dried Roses and of Mulberies: or Decoctions of Plantane, Bramble Leaves,
Knot-grass, Pomegranat Flowers, Red Saunders, and the like; with Syrup before
mentioned.

And if there be Inflammation, you may do well if you ad the Juice of Nightshade,
Housleek, and Purslain, with as much Sal Pruneilae as will not make it too
sharp: Or a little crude Alum.

If there be no Inflammation, the Chief and only Remedy is Spirit of Vitriol, or
Sulphur, which may be used alone to Men, upon a little lint at the end of a
stick, gently touching the part, by which it will be presently Cured if it be a
simple Aphtha: But to Children you must mix the Spirit aforesaid with Honey of
Roses, so that it may be but a little sharp, and with a little Lint at the end
of a Probe often apply it, and they will be quickly Cured.

If the Ulcers are very painful and inflamed, they must Gargle with Milk often,
or with an Emulsion of the Cold Seeds, or the Mucilage of Fleabane-seeds and
Quince-seeds extracted with the waters of Roses, Plantane, and Nightshade.

If the pain will not be removed with these Revulsions and Topics, but the
Humors are still drawn thither by it, which causes want of sleep, and
Consumption of the body, which endanger the life; the last Remedy is Narcotick,
which will assuage the pain and stop the Flux, you must give it according to the
strength and age of the Patient.

I once saved a Child's life (by Gods assistance) of Four Years old with one
grain of Laudanum, when his Jaws and Tongue were deeply Ulcerated with such an
Inflammation, that he could neither take Broth, nor Topics, the Humors flowing
so fast from his mouth, that he lay night and day complaining without any rest.

If the Ulcer be sordid, First wash it with the Decoction of Barley, and Honey
of Roses; and in Children, with Milk chaly beated, or in which Steel has been
often quenched, mixed with Conserve of Roses; then use stronger Medicines, and
principally Honey of Roses above mentioned made a little sharp with some drops
of Spirit of Vitriol:

If these will not do, you may ad to the Waters and Decoction above mentioned
burnt Alum, the Collyrium of Lanfrank and Aegyptiacum, in a quantity agreeable
to the Disease.

Lastly, If it come from the French Pox, it will not be Cured til the Pox be
Cured.

Chap. 6. Of the Relaxation of the Uvula, or Falling Down of the Palate.
THe Relaxation of the Uvula comes from a Rhewm falling from the Brain upon it,
with which there is sometimes blood mixed, and then there is an Inflammation
also, and this often falls upon the Tonsils or Spongious Kernels; the
Inflammation whereof shall not here be treated of, because it is Cured by the
same means, with the Inflammation of the Tongue, and of the Ulcers of the Mouth.

A Waterish Humor falling upon the Uvula or Collumella, does so moisten,
soften, and relax it, that it will be extended to the upper part of the
oesophagus or Wezand, and cause a Nauseousness, and the Patient will seem to
have something in his Throat which he cannot swallow down, by which you may know
it without looking into the mouth.

The Cure is first by the Antecedent Cause, that is, by Evacuating the Humors
flowing from the Head, by Revelling and Deriving them with such Medicines as
were prescribed in the Cure of a Catarrh.

The Chief Topics are Astringents and Repellers, such as were prescribed in
the Cure of the Ulcers of the Gums and Jaws, and shall be prescribed in the
Chapter following of the Cure of the Angina, to which afterward you must ad
some Resolvers and Dryers: And though the Gargarisms in those Chapters
mentioned, are here good, yet when there is no Inflammation the use of Pouders
is better; for with them the Uvula relaxed is more powerfully dried and
Astringed.

And therefore, First apply Pomegranat peels poudered, and after mix it with a
little Pepper: Or,

Take of Red Roses and Pomegranat flowers and Peels of each half a dram: the
Roots of Snakweed and Tormentil, Galls and Flower-de-luce-Roots, of each one
dram: burnt Alum, two scruples: make a Powder. Ordinary Surgeons apply the
Powder of Long Pepper, but it is dangerous, for it is to be feared, lest the
Humors should be drawn violently from the Brain, to the part.

The Manner of applying this Powder is to depress the Tongue with a Speculum
Oris, and then blow up some powder in your Uvula spoon: do this often til the
Humor be spent: The instrument invented by Fabricius Hildanus, Obs. 21. Cent.
2. is the best for this.

And if the Uvula relaxed cannot be brought to its former condition by these
means, but continues extended and painful; your last Remedy is to cut off a
piece thereof: in which Operation you must take some Cautions. The first is
from Hippocrates, 3. Progn. Text. 21. where he says, That Vvula's are Cut and
Scarrified, and burnt when they are red and swollen, but not without danger; for
an Inflammation follows, and a Flux of Blood; but you must endeavor to
extenuate these accidents by other means at that time: But when the Uvula hangs
down, and the lower part of it is greater than the higher, and round, then it
is safe to operate: but it is better first to administer a Clyster, if time
will permit. Galen in his Commentary upon these words of Hippocrates, says
that an Uvula inflamed, is not to be cut off, or scarrified; but after the
inflammation is gone, so that the superior part is lessened. Another Caution is
taken out of Paulus Aegineta, lib. 6. cap. 31. you must not touch the Uvula
with an iron to cut it when it is livid or blackish, that is, when it has
malignity in it, and inclines to be a Cancer. But out of the same Author we
have a lawfulness of the operation, when they are long and white, or as
Hippocrates says, small at the top. We have an Example of the good success of
this operation in Amatus Lucitanus, Obs. 65. Cent. 3. upon a Student who had
his Uvula hung down like a thong, long, and without blood in it; which when
Medicines could not cure, he cut off, and after touching the part with a little
Spirit of Vitriol, he cured the Patient.

The third Caution is, That you cut not off too much; for then the Voice and
Breathing will be hurt according to Galen, 11. de usu part. cap. 11. and
consumption and death it self will ensue as often is seen in the French Pox.

Chap. 7. Of Angina, or Quinzie, or Squinzie.
THe word Angina taken generally signifies every Disease of the Jaws and
Throat, by which breathing and swallowing are hindered, when there is no defect
in the Lungs and Breast.

And this is twofold, a Legitimate and proper Squinzy; and a Bastard, or or
improper.

A Legitimate Squinzy comes from an Inflammation by which the Muscles of the
Jaws and Throat being swelled, do stop and contract the ways of breathing and
swallowing. This Inflammation does either possess the Throat or the Jaws, called
Pharynx. Both these parts have both internal and external Muscles. And though
for the most part the Pharynx and Larynx, Jaws and Throat, do suffer in an
Angina by reason of their neerness, yet one is more affected than the other:
Hence many differences of Symptoms do arise, in respect whereof Galen in 4. de
loc. aff. cap. 5. makes four sorts of Angina's, which the Grecians before his
time named too curiously. One is called Sunagchen; another Cunagchen; the third
Parasunagchen; and the fourth Paracunagchen. If the Inflammation be in the
inward and proper Muscles of the Larynx, it is called Cunagche; if it be in the
inward Muscles of the Pharynx, Sunagche; if in the outward Muscles of the
Larynx, Paracunagche; and if in the outward Muscles of the Jaws or Pharynx, it
is called Parasunagche.

Not only the Muscles of the Jaws and Throat are for the most part inflamed, as
aforesaid, but also the parts adjacent, and the outward part of the Neck, as
shall be said in the Diagnostick and Prognostic of this Disease.

In all these kinds of Angina's, when there is great danger by the difficulty
of swallowing, then those things which are given use to fly out at the Nose,
especially if they be liquid things, which are more hard to be swallowed at
that time; because they spread themselves abroad, and therefore cannot so
easily be comprehended of the Muscles to be sent into the Oesophagus, which
Muscles cannot sufficiently contract themselves by reason of the inflammation;
but solid nourishment being more corpulent, need only the superficial action of
the Muscles, and are swallowed down by a small contraction of them. But it
sometimes falls out that solid things are harder, and liquid things easier to be
swallowed, which depends upon the diversity of the parts affected: For the
Muscles of the Larynx are ordained for to swallow meat, as well as for the
voice; and when the meat is thrown into the Oesophagus, the Larynx is lifted up
with the Tongue: But for to swallow drink we use the Tongue most, which while
it is drawn inwards it brings the drink from the Lips to the Jaws. If therefore
the Muscles that move the Tongue are more affected, it is harder to swallow
drink. But if the Muscles of the Larynx are more hurt, it is harder to swallow
meat.

Here by the way we must mark, that Hippocrates sometimes by the word Angina,
does understand only the inflammation of the Larynx, and so it is taken more
strictly; of which there is an Example 6. Epid. Sect. 8. Text. 1. where he
says thus: Some had inflammations of their Jaws, some had Angina's; where by
the name Angina he understands the inflammation of the Muscles of the Larynx,
and distinguishes it from the inflammation of the Jaws.

A Bastard Angina is without a Fever, and is twofold.

The first and most ordinary comes of Rhewin falling upon the Jaws and parts
near unto the Larynx.

The other comes from the Luxation of the Vertebra's of the Neck, by which the
passage of the Gullet and Throat, is pressed and made narrow.

The Cause of a true Angina, as of other inflammations, is either pure blood, or
mixed with Choler, Phlegm, or Melancholy, which falls upon the parts aforesaid
out of the Branches of the Jugular Veins, and this is either attracted by the
heat or pain of those parts, or sent from other parts, because these parts are
weak, loose, and fit to receivea defluxion, especially if the whole Body abound
with humors, or the Head, or the parts near the Jaws. For when evil blood
abounds in the whole Body, and is carried unto the Head, if the Brain be
strong it will not receive it, but sends it down by the same Veins into the
lower parts; hence come diverse inflammations as Parotides, or tumors under the
Ears, Ophthalmies, Angina's, and the like.

Young men are more subject to the Angina, than old, because they have much
Chollerick blood, and because they are full bodied, and have much blood,
especially in the Head.

Some Authors say that men are more subject to Angina's than women; which it
seems Hippocrates observed, 6. Epid. Sect. 7. where describing an Epidemical
Constitution, in which Angina's, Coughs, and Peripneumonia's, or Inflammations
of the Lungs, were frequent, he affirms that few women were sick, and he
gives no other reason, but because they went less abroad than men, and
therefore were not so subject to injuries from the Air. Which Reason does not
agree with the universal Proposition, That women are less subject to Angina's
than men; but this may be a true Reason, because women have colder Blood, a
less Larynx or Windpipe, and narrower Veins of the Throat. For which Reason
those parts do not so easily receive defluxions.

The precedent Diseases may be reduced to their internal Causes, as continual,
putrid, burning, and especially Epidemical Fevers, such as were mentioned by
Forestus, Obs. 2. Lib. 6. which happened in the year 1517. at which time all
that were infected had an inflammation of the Jaws, and died within sixteen or
twenty hours, except they were let blood within six hours. But in this Angina
the Fever is not Symptomatical, but Essential, and the Angina is symptom to
it, because part of the matter causing the Disease is sent to this place; for
in Epidemical Fevers, Angina's, Pleuresies, Inflammation of the Lungs,
Disenteries, and the like do happen, from some secret force and influence of
the Stars, by which sometimes one part of the Body, and sometimes another is more
affected.

Whatsoever can cause a flux of humors to these parts may be reckoned among the
external Causes of this Disease: As Southernly winds, according to Hippocrates,
Aph. 16. Sect. 3. in time of much rain, many diseases happen, as long Fevers,
Fluxes of the Belly, Putrifactions, Falling-sicknesses, Apoplexies, and
Angina's. Also for the producing of this last, the inequality of weather does
much, when the parts are made loose by heat; and by cold suddenly coming
thereupon, the humors are sent thither. A sudden cooling after heat, and
drinking of cold water does the same, or if the Head be kept too hot or too
cold.

The first Cause of a Bastard Angina, is propounded by Hippocrates, 4. de vict.
rat. in morb. acut. text. 39. where he says, an Angina comes when in Winter
and Spring time much slimy phlegm falls from the Head to the Jugular Veins,
which obstructeth the passages of the Spirits with its cold glewiness.

There is another Cause of a Bastard Angina given by Hippocrates, 2. Epidem.
Sect. 2. namely, a Tumor rising in the Vertebra's of the Neck, and especially
in that which is called Dens, or the shape of a Tooth by Hippocrates, by which
the Vertebrae are drawn inward, and therefore a Cavity appears in the external
part. Now this Tumor either comes from phlegm, removing by its increase the
Vertebra from its seat, or from blood falling upon the Muscles, from whence
comes an inflammation by which the Muscles being contracted draw the Vertebra's
inward, and then it is a true Angina coming from the inflammation of the said
Muscles. There may also be a Luxation of the Vertebrae by a phlegmatic humor
loosing their Nerves, and making them slippery between the Joints. And lastly,
it may come from an external Cause, as a fall, or stroke, as in other parts.

An Angina is generally known, first by its proper signs, namely, difficulty of
breathing and swallowing, when there is no fault in the Breast and Lungs, and
when pain is felt about the Jaws and Throat: and in a true Angina, redness,
heat, and a fever are signs.

The Differences may be distinguished by their proper signs. In Synanche there
is less difficulty of breathing, but great difficulty in swallowing, so that
moist things can scarce be swallowed, but come out at the Nostrils.

In Parasynanche there is less difficulty of breathing, nay, very little,
because the inflammation of the external Muscles of the Jaws does little hinder
respiration, there is pain and redness outwardly in the Neck, when the outward
parts are inflamed.

In Cynanche there is great hinderance of Respiration, so as the Patient seems
to be strangled, and sometimes is strangled for a short time, and cannot breath
but with the Neck upright, and the Mouth open.

The Jaws are much pained, yet there is no redness or Tumor inwardly in the
Jaws, nor outwardly in the Neck; the Tongue is livid, black, and retorted, or
bent by reason of the great fullness of the Veins about it. There uses also to
be an acute Fever, you may find an acute description of this kind of Angina in
Hipp. 3. de Morbis. And this is remarkable, which is observed of few, the
inward Muscles of the Larynx are not here only affected but the Lungs
themselves, from whence is difficulty of breathing and Suffocation, which
Dodonaeus observes very well, Obs. Med. Cap. 18. where he relates a history of
a Butcher who at noon felt a pain about his Jaws and Throat, and some
difficulty in swallowing, and died strangled the same night; his body being
opened the substance of his Lungs were found turned into matter.

He gave other Examples, Anno 1565. in which year many had the Angina, with
pain about the Larynx, which ceasing, they fell into Peripneumonia, and they
being opened after death, had either their Lungs full of Water or imposthumated;
but nothing was perceived about the Larynx or its Muscles, which might show an
inflammation: And in these Causes he supposes that the Larynx did not suffer
principally, but by consent; and it is probable that the Aspera Artery, or
rough Artery and its branches may be filled and extended with the Humor flowing
from the head, and then if the Humor be sent to other vessels, the Aspera
Artery and Larynx are freed from pain, and the Lungs are infected, and so an
Angina may turn into a Peripneumonia: We may gather that the Lungs may be
affected in an Angina from Hippocrates, 4. acut. text. 30. and 31. where he
lays down Two kinds of Angina's from the diversity of the Humors; one, in
which a Flux of Rhewm in Winter and Spring is carried to the Jugular veins;
another, in which Choler abounds, which is in Summer and Autumn: of the last
he speaks thus, When a hot and salt Defluxion comes from the head, being sharp
it gnaws and ulcerates, fills with Spirits, brings an Orthopnaea or difficulty
of breathing with the Neck stretched forth, and much drouth. Besides, there is
no Tumor; the Tendons of the Neck behind are stretched like a Cramp, the voice
is hindered, the breath is little, and often stopped, such have the Artery
ulcerated, and the Lungs inflamed, so that they cannot breath: Thus Hippocrates
he says also that a hot and sharp Defluxion will bring an Orthopnaea, because
it biteth, ulcerateth, and fills with Spirits, which are carried to the place
hurt; hence comes the filling of the Lungs from whence Orthopnaea comes: When
there is no room for receiving of the external Air, how much so ever the Lungs
be enlarged. Hippocrates affirms this, 3. de morbis, where in the Cure of a
Squincy he says, the vein under the Breast or Papp is to be opened, for in
this part there is a hot Spirit from the Lungs, and a little after he says,
You must make have to cause Spetting, and that the Lungs may grow less, as if
the Lungs were swollen by the hot Spirit contained therein. But it is most
remarkable that when the Spirits are carried in great plenty to any part, there
is also blood carried therewith, which if it flow in such a quantity that it
cannot be well governed by nature, it uses to make inflammations and
imposthumes; from whence it is no wonder if in such an Angina the lungs become
purulent or full of water.

In a Paracynanche the breath is less difficult than in a Cynanche; but more
difficult than in Synanche, there is some redness and tumor about the Jaws.

A Bastard Angina is known by the Phlegm, by want of Fever, by the plenty of
humors flowing to the mouth.

But a bastard Angina coming of a Luxation is known by the hurt motion of the
Head and Neck, and by the Preternatural Cavity which appears in the Neck by
reason of the Vertebra inwardly depressed.

The knowledge of the Causes is taken from the universal and particular signs of
the humors predominating in the whole Body.

When an Angina comes of blood, there is heat and redness in the Face, and a
great distention in the part affected. When it comes of Choler, the pain and
heat is greater, with thirst, bitterness in the mouth, and sharpness. And if it
comes from phlegmatic blood, the pain and redness is less, and the Fever
little.

From the part affected some knowledge of the humor offending may be had. For
Chollerick blood for the most part makes an inflammation in the Muscles of the
Larynx; but flegmy blood goes rather to the Jaws; for when the Veins of the
Larynx are small, only thin blood goes thither; but the Jaws being loose and
spungy, do more easily receive the phlegmatic humors.

Finally, From the time of the year you may know the peccant humor: For
Chollerick Angina's do come chiefly in the Summer and Autumn, because in the
Summer Choler breeds, and in Autumn it is ^eteined. But phlegm breeds in
Winter and the Spring, because the humors gathered in Winter are then melted
and sent from the Head into the infe^ior parts.

As to the Prognostic. A true Angina is a most acute Disease, and very
dangerous by reason of the hinderance of respiration, and for strangulation,
which sometimes happens by the stoppage of the passages, by which respiration is
made. Therefore by how much the greater the Constriction, so much the more
danger, and so the first kind of Angina is most dangerous, because the
inflammation of the internal Muscles of the Larynx does more stop the passage.
Whence Hippocrates, Aph. 34. Sect. 4. says thus: If a Suffocation comes
presently upon a Fever, and no Tumor in the Jaws, it is mortal. Which Opinion
he confirms in coac. and progn. saying that these kinds of Angina's do
strangle in the same day, and in the second, third, and fourth.

The second sort of Angina, though it be very dangerous, yet is it not
altogether deadly as the first, because the inflammation of the external Muscles
of the Larynx does not make so great and so sudden a constriction. Of this
Hippocrates spoke 3. Prog. Text. 17. thus: Whatsoever Angina's do resemble
others in pain, and make a Tumor and redness in the Jaws, are very deadly, and
are of longer continuance than others if they be very red.

The third kind is less dangerous, because the Breath is less hindered than the
Swallowing, from the inflammation of the internal muscles of the Jaws: But the
Swallow hurt is not so dangerous. Of this Hippocrates speaks in the Book above
cited, Text. 18. in these words: If the Jaws and Neck are red, these Angina's
continue longer; but they are chiefly preserved who have red necks and breasts,
and the holy fire without, not within.

The fourth kind is least and safest, because the inflammation is furthest from
the Throat. Hence Hippocrates, Aph. 37. Sect. 6. says, If a Tumor appear in
the neck in him that has an Angina, it is good, for the Disease comes forth.
He confirms the same in 3. Progn. Text. 20. thus; But it is most safe to have a
Tumor or redness come forth.

Hippocrates seems to comprehend all these Differences in one Sentence, 6.
Epid. Sect. 7. where speaking of the signs of an Epidemical Angina, he says:
In the sum of all, To them that could only not swallow, the disease was mild,
and easy to be endured; but it was desperate to them who had withal a
difficulty of breathing.

If the matter causing the Angina be carried to the Lungs, either the Patients
die, or else turn Fools, or Empyick, that is, imposthumated between the Breast
and Lungs; as Hippocrates, Aph. 10 Sect. 5. and 3. Progn.

In an Angina that is strong, if the Patient foam at the mouth, it is deadly,
Aph. 43. Sect. 2. for it shows a great straitness about the Heart, and violent
heat, from which the proper moisture of the Lungs is squeezed forth, and
carried to the mouth in a kind of froath.

They who have an Angina, if they spit not concocted matter, but a little,
viscid, slimy, and thick, are desperate; Hipp. in coac.

The Tumors of the Jaws in an Angina suddenly vanishing without reason are
deadly, Hipp. in coacis. Without cause or reason, that is, without a precedent
Evacuation by Art or Crisis; for it signifies the returning of the matter
inward, from whence a more dangerous Disease may be in the internal parts; or
as it sometimes falls out, the matter returning to the same part makes a sudden
suffocation.

The Cure of the Angina is made by the same Indications which are observed in
the Cure of all Inflammations, so the humor flowing to the part is to be
revelled and repelled, that which is there is to be derived and dissolved: But
if it cannot be dissolved, it is to be disgested and suppurated; all which may
be done as follows:

First, appoint a slender, cooling, and moistening Diet, of Barley, Cream,
Chicken Broth, or Capon Broth, with cool Herbs, and the like. If the Patient
cannot swallow by reason of the narrowness of the Oesophagus, so that from
thence you fear loss of strength and death. You may free him from that danger
by putting down a Catheter into the Oesophagus, to which you may fit a Syringe
by which you may send Broth into the Stomach. The Practical Physicians use
nourishing Clysters, by which some nourishment may be carried to the Liver from
the Meseraick Veins. Let his drink be Barley Water, and other things used in
acute Fevers. Let the Air be temperate, and without extremity, for the cold
will stop the pores, and the hot will increase the defluxion and inflammation.
The Patient must lie with his head high, and his neck upright, that he may
better breath: he must avoid much sleep, as in internal inflammations; for as
Hippocrates says, Blood runs inward in time of sleep, and so the confluxion of
humors to the part affected will be increased.

But since Angina is a most acute Disease, and sometimes kills a man in one day,
you must use great Remedies with much diligence. Therefore in what hour soever
the Physician comes, let him presently let blood, on the same side that is
affected, out of the Head Vein, or if that appear not, out of the Median, to a
pound, or a pound and an half, or two pound, as much as his strength will
permit, for in this there is most hope; but you must not take all that blood
away at once, lest the Patient faint, by which he would be in danger; but by
degrees, and intermission, at every third or fourth hour. This kind of
blood-letting is so necessary in this disease, that it may be hindered by no
contrary indication. So in the flowing of the Terms, or at any other time you
must take away blood in a great quantity. Of which we have a president in
Zacutus Lucitanus* 2. Prax. admir. cap. 135. of a Woman which was in her
seventh month great with Child, and was taken with a Squinzy: but being seven
times let blood in one day was cured. If the Disease be not violent, you may
first give a Clyster; but if otherwise, afterward.

While Phlebotomy is iterated, make other revulsions in the same day with
Cupping-glasses, both dry, and with scarrification upon the shoulders and
loins, make frictions and painful Ligatures upon the extreme parts.

Having bled enough, fall to purging the next day, not expecting the concoction
of humors, because the disease admits of no parley; therefore give one proper
to the humor, nay, if the disease do constrain you, let blood, and give a
purge, both in the same day; as Trallianus did by his confession, Lib. 4. Cap.
1. in these words: I truly remember that I, when occasion required, opened a
Vein in the morning under the Tongue, and at night gave a purge of the extract
of Scammony in Broth, and could scarce hinder strangulation for all that, and
another the next day; after I had opened both the Arms, purged him again.

Now your purge must be of gentle things, if the disease come of Choler, lest
the humors should be moved too violently, and so come to the part affected.
Also if the Inflammation come only of blood, it is better to abstain altogether
from purging. But if phlegm run with it, make stronger Purges, and give Agarick,
and Diaphoenicon with Senna; nay, in a strong phlegmatic Angina you may rise to
those Medicines which cause violent vomiting, and among the rest, the Aqua
Benedicta of Dr. Rowland is the best, which given to the quantity of two
ounces, does wonders, and for the most part cures the disease in the space of
two hours. Moreover, it has no evil taste, and so may easily be sipped up,
which you cannot do in other Medicines, which by reason of their evil taste
cannot be taken but at one draught by the Patient; therefore they can seldom be
purged till the passages are a little opened. But that is supplied by often
Clysters, and therefore they who cannot take Aqua Benedicta Rulandi, by reason
of its heat, or their weakness (because they must be strong who take it) nor
any other Medicine, must use often Clysters that are very sharp to draw down
the Humors.

For the same Revulsion, it is good to apply Cupping-glasses to the Neck and
Shoulders with scarrification, Frictions, and Ligatures, to the lower parts,
and to wash their Feet with hot Water.

But a Vesicatory to the Neck behind, does more strongly revel the humors
flowing from the head, which you must do presently after blood-letting.

After Revulsions are sufficiently and diligently made, you must derive the
Humor from the part, and first open the Veins called Ranulae under the Tongue,
it is commended by Hippocrates, Galen, and the Modern Physicians, by which the
blood which does immediately cause the inflammation, is drawn forth.

The Ancients in a desperate Angina, open the Jugulars, which though some late
Writers have approved, yet it is out of fashion, being thought dangerous by
reason of the bleeding, which can scarcely be stopped by reason of the
largeness of the Veins. But Experience has taught that this operation is not
so dangerous if it be well administered. First then, bend the Patients Head on
one side as much as you can til his chin almost touch his shoulder; then open
the Vein without a Ligature, with a small Orifice, according to its longitude,
for so it will more easily cicatrize; and having taken a sufficient quantity of
blood, bring the Head to its natural position, and so sometimes the blood will
stop of its self. But you must presently apply Galens Emplaster described 5.
Meth. Cap. 4. made of Hares hair, Aloes, Frankincense, and the white of an Egg,
so the flux of Blood is surely stopped. Trallianus reports in Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
that he cured many of the Squinzy with opening of the Jugular Veins; and
Zacutus Lucitanus, obser. 89. lib. 1. Praxis admir. tells of a Spaniard which
was cured of a most violent Angina.

A Cupping-glass with Scarrification under the Chin, is good for derivation, by
which Zacutus Lucitanus, obs. 88. lib. 1. Prax. adm. says he cured a woman of
a Cunagche, or dog Squinzy.

Scarrifications under the Jaws, and upon the Neck are good, if deep, by which
means Benivenius faith in lib. de abdit. morb. cause. cap. 38. Nicholas Rota was
cured of a desperate Angina; whose story Sennertus has fully related, Pract.
Med. lib. 2. part 1. cap. 24.

While the aforesaid Medicines are used, the inflammation of the Throat and Jaws
is to be allayed with Topics, and they are to be varied according to the time,
as in other inflammations, so in the first Repelling Medicines, are good made
into Gargarisms that they may presently touch the part inflamed.

Take of Plantane, Nightshade, and Woodbine Water, of each three ounces: Syrup
of Mulberries three ounces: Sal prunellae, one dram and an half. Make a
Gargarism.

Or of a Decoction thus:

Take of Plantane, Sorrel, and the tops of Brambles, of each one handful: the
Grains of Sumach half an ounce: one Pomegranate beaten with grains and peel:
red Roses one pugil: make a Decoction to a pint: Dissolve in the straining
Syrup of Mulberries, and the composition made of Nuts, of each one ounce and an
half; Sal prunella two drams: Make a Gargarism.

Concerning Gargarisms you must observe, that they are to be suspected, because
the parts inflamed are moved thereby, which should be at rest; but you may
remedy that if you hold the Gargarism in the Mouth, turning backwards, and not
move it.

Without Gargling you may use the Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, or Vitriol, which
mixed with Water, to qualify their sharpness, are to be taken by little and
little; for by passing through the part affected, they qualify its heat, and
being sent from the Stomach to the Liver and Veins, it allaies the heat of the
blood; which remedy is also good in the Inflammation of the Jaws and Tonsils.

While you use repelling Gargarisms, you must apply outwardly to the neck,
loosning and resolving Liniments, that the matter may be brought forth; thus
made.

Take of Oil of Chamomel, Lillies, and sweet Almonds, of each one ounce: Hens
grease and fresh Butter, of each one ounce and an half: Saffron one scruple:
Make a Liniment to be applied with greazie wool.

This Liniment will assuage pain, which if violent, it may be qualified also
with a Gargarism made of Milk, or an Emulsion made of the four cold great
seeds, or of Mucilages of Fleabane and Quinces, drawn with Rose water, adding
Syrup of Violets, or Cassia dissolved in Whey, or in a Decoction of
Marsh-mallow Roots.

After the beginning of the Disease when it increases, or is at a stand, you
must mix Digesters and Dissolvers with Repellers, which must be done the second
day, because the Disease is most acute.

Take of the Leaves of Hysop and Plantane, of each one handful: Liquoris,
Raisons stoned, of each one ounce: fat Figs twelve: red Roses and Barley, of
each one pugil: make a Decoction of a pint. Dissolve in the straining Honey of
Roses, and Syrup of Violets, of each one ounce. Make a Gargarism.

Observe, That as long as the Inflammation continues, you must mix some things
that repel with Dissolvers and Astringents, lest the part which by Nature is
soft, should be more relaxed, and made more fit to receive a defluxion.

But outwardly you must apply Dissolvers most, with a Swallows nest, which by
the Opinion of all Writers has a specifical property against this Disease.

Take of the powder of a Swallows nest, and of Album Graecum, of each one dram:
the powder of Flower-de-luce Roots and Chamomel, of each half a dram: Hens
grease and Oil of Lillies, of each one ounce, yellow Wax a little: Make a
Liniment.

Or it may be made into a Cataplasm thus:

Take one Swallows nest, Mallows, Violets, of each one handful: Althaea Roots,
Lilly Roots, of each half an ounce: fat Figs three or four: Chamomel and
Melilot Flowers, of each one pugil: boil them and beat them; then put to them,
Barley meal, Linseeds, and Foenugreek, of each three drams: Saffron, one
scruple: fresh Butter one ounce: Oil of Chamomel and sweet Almonds, of each as
much as will make a Cataplasm to be applied to the fore part of the Neck.

In the mean while, you may use Eclegma's, or things to be licked, now and
then, that the matter which breaths forth of the part, or falls upon it from
the head, may be cleansed.

Take of the powder of the Electuary of Diatragacanth frigid, two drams: Simple
Diaireos one dram: Sugar Candy, and Penides, of each half an ounce: Diamoron
one ounce: Syrup of Jujubes, as much as is sufficient. Make a Lohoch.

If the Tnmor will not be discussed, but tends to suppuration, which uses to
be upon the fourth or fifth day, you shall assist it with the Cataplasm
aforesaid, and other Emollients and Suppuratives, and he must hold those
Medicines at the same time in his mouth, which was prescribed formerly for
asswaging of pain. Or,

Take of sliced Liquoris and Raisons stoned, of each one ounce: fat Figs six:
Althaea and Quince seeds, of each two drams: the flowers of Chamomel, one
pugil: boil them in Hydromel. Dissolve in the straining, boiled Wine two
ounces. Make a Gargarism.

It is also good to hold Cassia new drawn, in the mouth, that by degrees it may
dissolve into the Throat, for it asswageth pain, dissolveth and maturateth.

If the Tumor come to suppuration, which may be known by the decrease of
symptoms, and will not break, let the sick man, or some about him, put their
fingers into his mouth, and endeavor to break the imposthume, which if it
cannot be done, let his mouth be wide opened with a Speculunt oris, and then
open the imposthume with a crooked incision knife called a Bistort. Then let
the Patient hold down his Head lest the matter fall upon his Lungs: after, wash
the Ulcer with Barley Water and Honey of Roses, Water and Honey called
Hydromel, or Wine and Honey called Oinomel; after this, dry it up with Alum
Water.

Others put a Wax Candle anointed with Oil of sweet Almonds into the Oesophagus
to break the Aposthume; which if they cannot do, they use a sharp wooden knife,
or at last an incision knife.

Others touch it with Oil of Vitriol, which presently breaks it, Arcalanus
opens it with a Lancet fixed at the end of a stick lest it should touch other
parts. Faventinus commends the same, in these words; Take a little round stick,
and in the end of it, fix a little sharp Iron as long as half a finger; then
open the mouth, and put a stick between the Teeth, then let him open the
imposthume with the former Instrument: when it is open, let him bend forward
with his mouth open, that the matter may come forth.

Schenkius out of Dovynetus, used to break an imposthume with the Decoction of
Agarick, and confirms it by the following History taken out of Dovynetus,
Apolog. lib. 3. cap. 1. A Noble Woman called Gabriella Goufier, Lady of
Saulton, being taken with a Squinzie in Autumn, which is most dangerous, I
remembered that I read in Aetius, lib. 15. cap. 6. that Agarick does destroy
bidden imposthumes, or draw them forth; presently I took Agarick, and cut it
and steeped it in the decoction of Althaea with the fourth part of white Wine,
and Figs, and a little Ginger, with a little Syrup of Marshmallows, and gave
it to the Lady to drink, commanding that she swallow it not down suddenly, but
hold it in the mouth a little, if she would be cured: she obeys, and while I
was talking with her, behold abundance of white stinking matter came forth of
her mouth, in so much that her daughter that held the Basin fainted, the other
people ran away, others came and took away the matter, others perfume the room;
which done, I came to the Patient, and found her delivered from the impediment
in her voice, difficulty of breathing, and her fever, and out of all danger.

If the matter seem to tend to the external parts, you must open it outwardly;
which Lanfrank says he did with good success, Chir. maj. doct. 2. tract. 3.
cap. 5. in these words: Because the Chyrurgeon is much confirmed by good
experience, I will tell you what befell me in the City of Millane, with a Lady
of fifty five years old, which had a phlegmatic Squinzie in the whole Throat,
inwardly and outwardly, but outwardly it appeared most swollen, and she could
neither speak nor swallow: being sent for, I felt her pulse, and found her
exceeding weak; touching the part affected I found the matter very deep, and
that she was more likely to be choked, than that it should break either
internally or externally: then I got ready my Raysor, and touching the place
with my singers I found ripe matter between the Chin and the Epiglot, and there
I made a deep incision, by which I drew forth a great part of the corrupt
matter, but willingly left a great deal behind, for a reason known; then her
breath grew better, and pulse stronger; then giving her Broth, a great deal of
it came forth of the wound: then I invented a silver pipe which should pass the
wound being put into the mouth, and by which she should receive her
nourishment. I used Mundificatives, and Maturatives to the whole Throat and
Neck, till I drew out of the wound a great piece of viscous matter, and
stinking, like a Gut as long as my finger, which was condensed by heat; which
taken away, the place did no longer stink, and the Patient began to cheer up:
but I continued to mundifie, and after with Incarnatives and Cicatrizers, I
healed up the wound, and the Patient was cured.

Here may be related the History of Beniven before mentioned, of one in a
Squinzy, who was left of other Physicians, and was cured by him with deep
scarrification under the Jaws, and in the Neck, from whence much matter flowed.

If the Aposthume break inwardly in the Mouth, let it be cleansed with Barley
Water, and Hydromel (as is said.) But sometimes the Ulcer is foul, and then you
must use stronger, thus made:

Take of Scabious and Agrimony, of each one handful: Cypressnuts one dram:
Flowerdeluce Roots, and round Birthwort, of each half an ounce: Mirrh half a
dram: red Roses two pugils: boil them in Hydromel to a pint; strain it, and
wash the part ulcerated therewith.

This Decoction is very good to cleanse Ulcer; but if it be not sufficient, use
the Collyrium of Lanfrank, which is wonderful.

After it is well cleansed, you must endeavor consolidation with Bole-Anmenick
mixed with Honey of Roses for an Eclegma, with Frankincense and Mirrh.

It comes to pass sometimes that the Inflammation decreasing, the Tumor will
neither be dissolved, nor suppurated, but grow harder; in which case you must
Emollient and Suppurating Cataplasms, made thus:

Take of Althaea, and Briony Roots, and of the wild Cucumer, of each one ounce:
Mallows, Pellitory, Origan, and the lesser Centaury, of each one handful: fat
Figs, six or seven: Linseed and Foenugreek, of each one ounce: Boil them, beat
them, and strain them, and then ad of the powder of a Sallows Nest burnt, and
of Album Graecum, of each three drams: Brimstone one dram: fresh Butter, and
Ducks Grease, of each one ounce: Oil of Dill two ounces. Make a Cataplasin.

For a Conclusion, we will speak something of Laryngotomia, or cutting of the
Throat, which Ancient Physicians mentioned, and the Modern approve and confirm
by experience: As when in a desperate Squinzy when the Patient is almost
choked, an incision is made in the rough Artery, by which there is a passage
for Air into the Lungs, and for vapors coming out of them. This Avicen
allows, Fen. 9. lib. 3. cap. 11. Paulus, lib. 6. cap. 33. Rhasis, 3.
continuentis. Alsaharavius, Avenzoar, Albucasis, and Halyabbas in their proper
Chapters.

Galen sets down the same out of Asclepiades, in his Introduction, chap. 13. Of
the Modern Brassavolus, comment. in lib. 4. Of Hipp. concerning Diet in acute
Diseases, Sect. 35. says, that he made this operation with his own hands, and
good success.

But this is seldom used by Chyrurgeons for fear of disgrace through the death
of the Patient; for men are more apt to make the operation the cause of death
than the disease, although the Physician have been very careful, and foretold
them the danger.

Moreover, In a desperate Angina the Lungs are often affected, and full of
humors, whence comes suffocation; and then the incision of the rough Artery
will not profit. Which danger Jerome Fabricius ab Aquapendente observing, being
a good Chyrurgeon, says that he never undertook this Operation, nor any other
in his time. But he confesses it may be used, so that the Lungs and rough
Artery be not full of filth: and he shows the manner of it in its proper
Chapter most exactly, from whence any one may take it.

The End of the Sixth Book
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Breast.
The PREFACE.
BY this name Thorax, or Breast, we mean those parts only which serve for
breathing; for although the Heart be contained in the Thorax, yet the Diseases
thereof shall be set down in a Book by themselves. But in this we will only
speak of those which hinder breathing, and hurt the part of Respiration; as
Astbma, Pleuresie, Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs, Empyema, and
Phtysis; and we have ordained proper Chapters for each of them.

Chap. 1. Of Asthma, or Difficulty of Breathing.
THe Breath is hindered by diverse Causes, either by sympathy, or propriety of
part.

The hinderance of breathing by propriety called Idiopathica, comes from the
Lungs distempered, and therefore every Disease of the Lungs hurts their action,
which Diseases are either in the substance of the Lungs, or in the Vessels
thereof.

In the substance of the Lungs come inflammations, pimples, imposthumes, ulcers,
and sometimes a drying, and atrophy of the part; sometimes a serous watery humor
is sucked into the spungy substance of the Lungs, and hinders their free
dilatation; sometimes, though seldom, there is a schirrus, a stone, or hard
swelling in them.

In the Vessels of the Lungs, there are often obstructions, which hindering the
free passage of the Air, cause difficulty of breathing.

Breathing is hindered by sympathy or consent from other parts, which are not
only near, but remote, so the Membrane that goes about the ribs being
inflamed, or the Diaphragma, or Mediastinum, the breath is hindered. So by
custom there is a great and often breathing when the heart is inflamed, as in
Fevers; and on the contrary, when the Heart is cold, as in dying men, it is
diminished and cease; the same happens in swouning or syncope, when the
action of the Heart, and consequently Respiration cease.

So in the Empyema, or Dropsy of the Breast, when matter or water is collected
in the Cavity of the Thorax, the Dilatation of the Lights, and Respiration is
also hindered.

So the Muscles of Breathing being hurt, hinder Respiration, as in wounds and
tumors of them, especially in an Apoplexy, when the influence of the Animal
Spirits is kept from them.

Moreover, The Inflammation of the Muscles of the Larynx makes difficulty of
breathing in a Squinzy.

So also the Diseases of the Hypochondria do hinder Respiration by consent, as
tumors of the Liver, Spleen, Sweetbread or Pancreas, do by their weight draw
down the Diaphragma to which they are joined, and so hinder the motion of it.
Also vapors and wind sent from those parts compress the Diaphragma, and hinder
its action, from whence comes a flatulent Asthma. The same happens by the
abundance of wind or water contained in the belly of an Hydropical man, and
compressing the Diaphragma. Lastly, Vapors coming from the Mother hinder
Respiration, from whence this disease is called, Suffocatio Hysterica.

Among the aforesaid hindrances of Respiration, the Asthma is handled by it
self, because the other depend upon other Diseases; they shall be mentioned in
their places.

Although Asthma used generally, comprehends in a large signification, all
kinds of difficulty of breathing; yet it signifies more specially that
shortness of breathing which comes from the stuffing of the Lungs, and the
obstruction of the Bronchion, or Gristles of the Windpipe; which of its self
essentially is without a Fever, although sometimes it be joined therewith. And
again, it is subdivided into three other kinds; as first, Dyspnoea; the second
called also Asthma; the third Orthopnoea.

Dyspnoea is a difficulty of breathing, in which the breath is drawn oftener
and thicker, from the stuffing of the Lungs. This is less than Asthma, or
Orthopnoea, because the matter obstructing is less, and it rather stops the
substance of the Lungs, than Gristles or Bronchia: hence it is that there is no
snorting at all, which comes from the commotion of the humors contained in the
Bronchia, with the Air continually passing through.

Asthma is a great and often breathing, in which the Diaphragma, the
Intercostal Muscles between the Ribs, and of the Abdomen, are violently moved,
joined with snorting and wheesing. For in a true Asthma properly so called, the
Btonchia of the Lungs are filled with phlegm, which (as is said) being moved by
the Air, make that noise.

Orthopnoea is a great difficulty of breathing, in which the Patient cannot
breath but sitting, and with the neck extended upright; and the aforesaid
Muscles are not only moved vehemently, but also those of the Breast and
Shoulders.

The names Dyspnoea and Orthopnoea, as we said of Asthma, are used commonly for
all difficulties of breathing, which happen in Pleuresies, or Inflammation of
the Lungs, or the like.

The same may be said of Apnaea, which does not only signify a depravation of
breathing as the former, but also a diminishing or abolishing thereof; and this
happens in syncope, Hysterical Passions, and strong Apoplexies.

The humor which causes an Asthma, is for the most part phlegm, which falls
from the Head into the Lungs, and obstructs the Bronchia or Windpipe. Sometimes
it comes from crude and serous humors brought by Arteria Venosa into the Lungs,
and if these flow to the Bronchia, they produce a true Asthma with snorting;
but if to the substance of the Lungs, or smooth Arteries, they cause a bastard
Asthma without snorting.

This kind of Asthma, which is unknown to vulgar Physicians (who will
acknowledge no other cause but a defluxion from the Head) is confirmed, not only
by not snorting, but from the thick and turbulent Urine of the Patient at that
time, especially in the sit, because some part of those thick and crude humors
in the Veins is sent to the Reins and Bladder. And some Asthmatical men are
subject to stoppage of Urine, and when they are so, they are free from it. But
when the fit of the Asthma comes, the difficulty of Urine cease, because the
matter of the disease contained in the Veins goes from one place to another: We
have also seen some subject to a flux in the Belly, who while they were so,
were free from the Asthma; but when that stopped, the Asthma returned.
Moreover, this kind of Asthma which is without snorting, is so directly
opposite to bleeding, that when a Vein is opened in the fit, as soon as it
bleedeth, the Patient begins presently to breath better, and in the end, or
after a little space, they are cured of their fit. And finally, these kind of
Asthmatical men, are for the most part of an ill habit of body, and have an
oedematous humor in their feet, which shows that the cause of the Asthma at
that time came from the Liver, and is contained in the Veins, so that sometimes
a Dropsy follows in many. Hence Aretaeus reckons a wind in the Midriff,
and belchings, without reason among the signs of an Asthma at hand, which
certainly do come from a crude matter moved in the Midriff.

That flatulent matter does of its self sometimes produce another kind of
Asthma, which is called Asthma flatulentum, or Hypochondriacum; when many thick
vapors rising from the Hypochondria, do compress the Diaphragma, and hinder its
motion, whence comes great difficulty of breathing, without snorting.

The Knowledge of this Disease, and its kinds, may be by what has been said.

In a Dispnoea, the breath is thick, without noise or anhelation, and with less
trouble.

In an Asthma the Breast is more heavy, the Breath thicker and quicker, with
anhelation, snorting, and wheesing.

But in Orthopnoea, the Patient cannot breath but with his neck upright, and if
they lie down, they are ready to be choked.

The Signs of the Causes are these:

If Asthma come from gross humors gathered in the Lungs, the difficulty of
breathing comes by degrees, by little and little, and is continual.

But if Humors come at a distance from other parts into the Lungs, the
difficulty of breathing is not continual For albeit Asthma which comes from
matter contained in the Lungs, uses to be increased by external causes, as
Anger, Southernly winds, and the like; yet in Asthma which comes from matter
flowing from another part, the increase is more manifest. If this matter come
from the brain, there is a manifest Catarrh; but if no signs of a Cararrh
appear, you must conjecture that the matter comes by the Veins to the Lungs,
and the swelling of the feet, and evil habit of body called Cachexia, is a sign
that the Liver is affected.

If a thick humor be contained in the Bronchia of the Lungs, the Respiration is
with noise and cough; as also by spitting the disease cease, or is diminished.

If the Humor be in the Veins, or substance of the Lungs, there is no noise,
and there is seldom any spitting by Cough.

As to the Prognostic. An Asthma is a Chronical disease, and very hard to be
cured, and often ends in a Cachexia or Dropsy. Young men are sometimes cured,
and not without great labor, but old men never. Infants except they be speedily
cured, die by a Catarrh, which follows:

They who grow crooked upon an Asthma or Cough, die before they come to
ripeness of age, because the gibbosity hinders the convenient growth of the
breast, nevertheless get their due increase and bigness, but having not room
enough to dilate themselves; from whence the heat of the Heart being not
sufficiently fanned, the patient dies.

A Pleuresie, or Peripneumonia commg upon an Asthma, is deadly, because the
Lungs being weakened by a long disease, cannot resist so great a disease coming
thereupon, and expel the matter.

The Cure of the Asthma is twofold. namely, in the Paroxysme, and out or it.

In the fit, presently you must open a Vein, a Clyster being given, if the
blood do seem any way to abound: for when the Veins are empty of blood, the
Respiration is more free. But if the disease be elder, and blood has been
often drawn, it is better to abstain from bleeding, because by diminishing the
natural heat, it will increase phlegm.

It is good to open the Veins in the Ancles in this disease, coming by consent
from other parts.

After bleeding, or if it be omitted as not thought fit, you must purge phlegm,
with the things prescribed in the Cure of the cold distemper of the brain,
putting to them always things proper for the breast as much as may be.

Vomits, althongh disallowed by some in this disease, yet are they most
convenient, as frequent experience has taught, and sometimes the sit is taken
away with a vomit only.

Among these the chief is Aqua Nicotiana, or Tobacco Water. given in the
quantity of an ounce; and it may be made into a Syrup with Sugar: In want
whereof you may use the Salt of Vitriol, Aqua benedicta Rulandi. Now the reason
is excellent why Vomits do so much good in this disease. For while the thin
humor falling from the head insinuates it self into the Aspera Arteria, and
the Bronchia of the Lungs; and the thick falls into the Stomach, and is there
so fixed that it can scarcely be taken away. And while the weak heat of the
Stomach does stir the matter, thick vapors are produced, which puffing up the
Stomach, compress the Diaphragma, and cause difficulty of breathing. Hence it
comes that when the Stomach is emptied, the fit cease, or is much less.
Moreover, An Asthma sometimes (nay often, according to Sennertus) comes of
crude humors about the Liver, and in the Veins, which are carried by the Vena
Arteriosa into the Lungs, and compress the Bronchia, from whence comes an
Asthma. For the evacuating and revelling of these humors from the Lungs, a
Vomit is very good. As also for this cause, the Remedies purging humors
downward are very excellent.

The Juice of our Flowerdeluce, does gently move and purge downward, taken to
the quantity of half an ounce, with one ounce of Hippocras, which Placerus in
his Observations says he has used with good success.

You may give two ounces of the juice of Flowerdeluce, if the former did work
sufficiently.

Also you may use sharp Clysters often for revulsion. But they must be given in
small quantities, lest by filling the Bowels the Diaphragma be compressed.

You must also use Frictions to the inferior parts, and apply many
Cupping-glasses thereon, as also to the Neck. Afterward you must extenuate and
dissolve the thick humors, and discuss the vapors that come from them. For
which purpose you may give a spoonful of Cinnamon Water, either by its self, or
with Syrup of Violets: as,

Take of Cinnamon Water two ounces: Syrup of Violets one ounce; or instead of
that, mix with the Water one ounce of Oxymel to discuss the humors better.

It is also profitable to give three, four, or five drops of Chemical Oil of
Sage, Rosemary, or Annis feeds with a little Wine; or sprinkle therewith the
Tablets of Diatragacanth frigid, and so let the Patient eat them.

Others commend one scruple of Saffron given in a spoonful of Wine. Also Aqua
Clareta thus made is very good.

Take of Aqua vita four ounces: Water of Coltsfoot and Scabious, of each two
ounces: Cinnamon six drams: strain them through an Hippocras Bag. Let him take
two or three ounces.

Tobacco taken in a pipe hinders the sit; so does the Leaf chewed: and also the
smoke of Cloves in a pipe.

In the mean time you must use expectorating Medicines, which bring forth the
thicker matter upwards. As,

Take of the Syrup of Horehound, Liquoris, and Coltsfoot, of each two ounces:
Oxymel simple one ounce. Mix them, and let him lick it by little and little.

Take of washed Turpentine one ounce: Ammoniacum two scruples: Flower of
Brimstone one scruple: mix them into soft pills, of which let him take one
every second hour with half an ounce of the Syrup of Hysop.

Take of the Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn without fire six ounces: Sugar
Candy* two ounces: Mix them for a Lambitive. Or

Take of candied Elicampane three drams: Sugar Candy half an ounce: Syrup of
Hysop and Horehound, of each one ounce: ammoniacum dissolved in Aqua vitae half
a dram. Mix them for a Lohoch. Or,

Take of Conserve of Violets and Elicampane, of each six drams: the powder of
the Electuary Diatragacanth frigid, Diaireos Solomonis, of each one dram: Syrup
of Violets and Maidenhair, of each as much as will make a Lohoch.

Take of Althaea Roots one pound: Elicampane four ounces: Quinces, or Marmalet
thereof, sixteen ounces: boil them in Water till they are dry: Beat them and
strain them, adding two pints of Honey: boil them again gently. Take them from
the fire, and ad of Cinnamon one dram: flower of Brimstone half an ounce:
Liquor is perfumed with Musk and Rose water two drams. Make a soft Electuary;
of which let him hold now and then as much as a Hazel nut in his mouth: it is
also very good to take half an ounce thereof morning and evening, when the fit
is off.

Also you must anoint the Breast with Mollifying and discussing Ointments and
Liniments, thus made:

Take of the of Oil of Chamomel, Flowerdeluce, and sweet Almonds, of each half
an ounce: fresh Hens grease, one dram: the Powder of Marsh-mallow roots and
Flowerdeluce, of each one dram: the meal of Linseed and Foenugreek, of each two
drams: Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Wine one dram and an half: Wax, as much as
is sufficient. Make a Liniment. Or,

Take of the Mucilage of the seeds of Quinces, Line, and Foenugreek drawn with
Scabious and Coltsfoot Water, of each six drams: the Powder of Flower deluce
root and Hysop, of each half an ounce: Saffron one scruple: Oil of Lillies and
sweet Almonds, of each two ounces: Wax as much as will make a Liniment.

If the fit be long, clap a Vesicatory to the hinder part of the head.

Out of the fit you must stop the Defluxion, and also cut, cleanse, and
expectorate that which has fallen into the Lungs.

For staying the defluxion, all those Remedies are good which were mentioned in
the cure of the cold Catarrh.

But you must take a Caution concerning some of them.

First, In Apozems, Syrups, or the like, you must not make them two hot and
dry, which by consuming of the thin parts, may make the remainder thicker, and
so the Disease will be worse, But you must rather mix moisteners, as Raisons,
Figs, Liquoris, Jujubes.

Secondly, Instead of Head Medicines, you must use things fit for the Breast,
above mentioned.

Thirdly, For the Derivation of the Humors that abounds in the Head, use
Errhines, Sternutatories, Gargarisrus, ar Apophlegmatisms: Which last are not
so proper, by reason of the neerness of the part by which the humor runs to the
Lu^gs. But Errhines and Sternutatories may be used safely.

Fourthly, To strengthen the Head, and dry it, Fumigations are there commended;
which are not so proper in this, especially if taken in at the mouth and
nostrils, because they make the breath shorter, and bring the fit. But with
them you may air the Patients Caps, without, from the Chamber.

For to cleanse and expectorate the thick Humors that stick to the Bronchia of
the Lungs, the Medicines already mentioned, or these following, may be used.

Take of Elicampane root, and Polypody of the Oak, of each half an ounce: the
Leaves of Origan, Calamints, Hysop, Savory, Maidenbair, Scabious, and
Coltsfoot, of each one handful: the seeds of Marshmallows, and Cotton, and
Carthamus, of each three drams: Liquoris and Raisons stoned, of each six drams:
Jujubes, Sebestens, and fat Figs, of each five, make a Decoction to a pint and
a quarter of Hydromel; dissolve in the straining a pound and a quarter of white
Sugar; make a Syrup well boiled, for a Lambitive.

You may make a better and cheaper Syrup thus.

Take of Elicampane Roots three drams: Spanish Tobacco one dram: infuse them a
whole nigh^ in six ounces of Aqua Vitae: in the morning strain them, and ad of
the best Sugar four ounces; stir it well upon the fire, and ad of the syrup of
Erysimum or Coltsfoot two ounces: Oil of Sulphu^ as much as will make it sharp:
make a Lohoch.

These following are proper for to unstuffe and clear the Lungs.

Take of Ammoniacum, and Bdellium, dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, of each
half an ounce: Flower of Brimstone three drams: the leaves of Coltsfoot and
dried Savory, poudered, Diaireos simple, of each half a dram; with syrup of
Hysop and Oximel of Squills make a mass of Pills; of a dram whereof make six
Pills, and let him take three of them two hours before supper twice in a week*
Or,

Take of Aloes Succatrine, half an ounce: Myrrh and Ammoniacum, of each half a
dram: Saffron half a scruple: Flower of Brimstone half a dram: with the syrup
of Coltsfoot make a mass of Pills, of which let him take a dram two hours before
dinner for some days.

Let the Water which is taken out of a hollow Briony Root, be distilled in
Balneo Mariae to eight ounces, whereof mix half an ounce of Spirit of Vitriol
or Sulphur, let him take every day a spoonful fasting.

Take of Tobacco Leaves, Hysop, white Horehound, and Maidenhair, of each two
handfuls* the Roots of Flower-de-luce and Liquoris of each half an ounce: boil
them to a pint and an half, dissolve in the straining of white Sugar one pound*
of the best Honey half a pound: make a syrup: well boiled, clarified, and
perfumed, with a little Saffron and Cinnamon, let him take a spoonful or two
every morning.

The Oximel and Syrup of Tobacco invented by Quercetan, prescribed in his
Dispensatory, is of the same virtue.

The Tincture of dry Tobacco is drawn with Aqua Vitae, a little thereof mixed
with Honey, and that held in the Mouth as big as a Pease or Bean, swallowing it
by degrees, this draws Phlegm in abundance from the Stomach and Lungs.

Hogs Lice, called Millepedes, or Aselli, in number twelve, put into a linen
Cloth, are to be steep^ in white Wine* and then strained and so given to be
drunk, and do in a short time cleanse the Lungs.

Oleum Sacchari does powerfully dis^olve thick glutinous Humors in the Lungs,
and causes expectoration: But the Compound Oil following is best.

Take of the Roots of Flower-de-luce, and Elicampane poudered, of each half an
ounce: the Pulp of Dates and Raisons, of each three drams: Citron and Orange
peels, of each one dram and an half: Benjamin two drams: Saffron one dram:
infuse them two days in the spirit of Wine well rectified: then take of the
liquor by inclination, dissolve as much Sugar Candy poudered as you can
therein, then fire the spirit of Wine stirring them continually till* it comes
to a liquor as thick Oil, then mix as much Oil of Sulphur as will sharpen i^*

A Decoction of Red Coleworts taken many days with a little Sugar, does help
the Asthma.

But the Juice of Red Coleworts with Sugar of Roses, or Syrup of Coltsfoot,
taken in form of a Julep for many days is better.

The Spirit of Sulphur does dissolve slymy Phlegm, and open the Bronchia if four
or five drops are taken in Broth, or convenient Syrup.

Turpentine is much Commended for this use* given often to two or three drams
with the Oil of sweet Almonds or Conserve of Violets, or you may make it into
the form of an Opiate thus.

Take of Turpentine well washed in Clotsfoot Water one pound: fat Figgs half a
pound: Penides four ounces: Oil of sweet Almonds one ounce: mix them into an
Opiate.

Saffron in Sauce is good for the Breast; also a Junke^ made of Mustard seed
and Honey does expectorate.

Oxymel also with Agarick taken two spoonfuls in a morning, does purge the
Lungs.

The flower of Brimstone made into Pills with fresh Butter, given three days
together to one scruple, does much help the Asthma. Lac Sulphuris does the same
better in ^ight grains, which is the greatest dose.

Also these Tablets following are excellent.

Take of the pulp of Marsh-mallow roots, and of the greater Comphry, of each
two ounces: flower of Brimstone two drams: the flower of Benjamin half a dram:
Sugar dissolved in white Lilly Water eight ounces: make Tablets, which let the
Patient hold often in his mouth.

The Decoction of an old Cock is commended, and it is thus made:

Take of the Roots of Elicampane, and Flower deluce, of each half an ounce:
Hysop and Horehound dried, of each six drams: Carthamus seeds one ounce: Annis
and Dill seed, of each two drams: Liquoris and Raisons stoned* of each three
drams: the powder of Fox Lungs prepared two drams. Beat them, and fill the
belly of an old Cock therewith; then boil him in fifteen pints of Water till
his flesh comes from his bones. After it is well strained, set it in a cold
place that the thickest may settle, and the thin may be taken off; of which let
the Patient take six ounces with one ounce of Oxymel simple.

If you will make it purging, you may ad two or three drams of Senna for every
dose, or half an ounce of Manna. Or if you will have it stronger, you may
sometimes put in some Electuary that purges phlegm.

Platerus prefers the following Preparation of a Cock before the rest:

Take an old Cock, kill him, pull him, and draw him; stuff him with these
things following: Fox Lungs fresh, or prepared and dried, one ounce: Raisons
stoned, and Figs, of each two ounces: Elicampane one dram: Hysop, Savory,
Horehound, Thyme, Calaminth, Penyroyal dried, of each one dram: Fennel and
Annis seed, of each one dram: Carthamus seeds bruised and Polypody, of each
half an ounce: white Tartar one dram: Salt half an ounce: two yolks of Eggs:
fresh Butter half an ounce: Cut them and bruise them, and sew them into the
Cock, boil him till his flesh comes from his bones in a large vessel with so
much Water as you may need to ad no more: then strain it, and put to ten pints,
one pound of pure Honey that it may not quickly corrupt. Let him take a
Porrenger full every morning; in which let him dissolve Manna and new drawn
Cassia, of each half an ounce, continuing it for a month and longer; which will
be the better, if presently after he take a dram of Turpentine with Penides in
form of a Bolus, or otherwise.

Ludovicus Septalius in his Practical Observations condemns these Cock-broths
as unprofitable, or hurtful: His Reasons are, Because they do not answer
Experience, and have been used in vain by him and other Physicians of Millane.
For by long boiling, the nitrous parts (by which those Broths are thought most
to profit) do settle, and are lost in the straining: but the slimy, glutinous,
thick, and fatty, from the skin, feet, wings, musculous and nervous parts do
remain. Hence the matter is made thicker, and less fit to be expectorated.

But Septalius his Experience, must not be preferred before so many famous
Physicians Experience, both old and modern. For if it did not profit some which
he and others have cured, many other things might hinder, as namely, the evil
disposition of the Patient, and contumacy of the disease, or other things not
well ordered which concerned the Cure, or the Medicine it self not well made.
And whereas he says, that the nitrous parts do fall to the bottom by long
boiling, and are lost in the straining, it is ridiculous; for only the Earthy
parts do settle, but the nitrous part once taken into the liquor, is never
separated. Hence it is that the longer you boil Broth the Salter it is. But
this Salt does cut, extenuate, and open, it is so far from incrassating being
salt. Neither has the flesh, or other parts of a Cock, such a glutinous
substance as he imagines, as you may find in Neats feet* or Calves feet, but
rather an attenuating quality, because it is full of nitrous substance. And if
purging and altering Medicines be made according to the Precepts of Pharmacy
and Art, they do leave all their strength in the Decoction, because daily
Experience teaches us that such Broth of an old Cock does purge. And if we may
oppose our Experience to that of Septalius, we can truly say, that we have
found admirable effects of these Broths in violent Asthmaes and Chollicks. But
this we use to alter in these Broths; We give many draughts in a day lest it
should be spoiled by keeping. But this is the Example of what we prescribe in
this disease:

Take of the Roots of Elicampane and Flowerdeluce, of each one dram and an
half: Hysop and Coltsfoot, of each one handful: Liquoris and Raisons stoned
three drams: fat Figs four: Senna three drams: Polipody of the Oak and
Carthamus seeds bruised, of each half an ounce: Annis seeds one dram and an
half: Boil them with the third or fourth part of an old Cock: make a Broth for
twelve or fifteen days.

By this Purging Wine following, Platerus cured a Woman of a Dyspnoea,
inclining to a Dropsy:

Take of Flower-de-luce-Roots one ounce: Elicampane, and Squills prepared, of
each half an ounce: Horehound one handful: Elder Bark and Danewort, of each one
dram: Senna one ounce and an half: Agarick two drams: Ginger one dram: shake
them well together, and ad of Wine four pints, boil them a little: she drank
hereof six days together when she went to Bed, the Dyspnaea ceased, the Tumor
vanished, and she was finely Cured.

But we must observe that we repeat Purging often in this Disease, under diverse
forms, lest nature should be used too much to one Medicine: So Clensing,
Cutting, and Expectorating Medicines, and the rest are to be alterated for the
same reason.

Chap. 2. Of Pleuritis, or a Pleurisy.
APleurisie is either True; or Spurious, called a Bastard Pleurisy.

A True Pleurisy is the Inflammation of the Membrane that goes about the Ribs
of the internal intercostal Muscles.

But a Bastard Pleurisy is the Inflammation of the external intercostal Muscles.

There are also other pains of the Side and other parts of the Breast which are
improperly called a Bastard Pleurisy.

When the Mediastinum is inflamed, the Lungs cleave to the ribs, or when serous
humors flow from the Head to the Membranes of the Breast, or when Wind does
tear the Muscles or Membranes of the Breast, or vapors rising from the Stomach,
as in the Worms.

We have said that in a true Pleurisy not only the Membrane Pleura, but also
the internal Muscles are inflamed, because it is impossible but the Inflammation
of the Membrane should be communicated to the contiguous Muscles.

Besides, Others do affirm that the Lungs are inflamed in every Pleurisy, and
confirm their Opinion by Authority, Reason, and Experience: The Authority is
that of Hippocrates, lib. de loc. in homine, where he says, That a
Peripneumonia is when both parts of the Lungs are inflamed; but if only one
part be inflamed, it is a Pleurisy. Also Reason may seem to confirm this, for
the signs of a Pleurisy are also the signs of Peripneumonia; namely, a Cough,
continual Fever, difficulty of Breathing, and spetting of Blood.

Also the Prognostic and Cure is the same in both.

They say moreover, That they have found by experience in the opening of those
who have died of Pleurisies that their Lungs appeared always to be inflamed.

It is to be granted that in many the Lungs are affected as well as the Pleura,
for the Defluxion may easily fall upon both; because the Lungs are fastened to
the upper part of the Pleura: but we must avouch that often the Pleura alone is
only affected, and not the Lungs: or at least they are so lightly affected,
that the Disease cannot be said to be an affect of that part. The Authority of
Hippocrates in this, is cast off by some as false, and contrary to many of his
own Assertions, in which he acknowledges the Pleura only as the part affected;
especially in his 1. lib. de morbis. where he often says, That Choler and
Phlegm do stick to the side, and cause vehement pain. But Mortiamis does
reconcile this; saying, That Hippocrates speaks in that place of a
Peripneumonia which comes of a Defluxion from the Head, a portion whereof falls
upon the Pleura, and he calls it by the name of a Pleurisy, that he may
distinguish that which inflameth one part of the Lungs, from that which
inflameth both: For the same nature of a Disease being in both the Pleurisy
and Peripneumonia, makes the likeness of Symptoms in both, being both from
inflammation, and nearly adjoined.

And though many who have died of Pleurisies, have been found to have their
Lungs affected, it is not to be concluded that it is so in all; for the most
vehement Pleurisies which use to cause-Death, do many times turn into a
Peripneumonia. But many do witness, and we have found by experience, That in
many bodies dead of Pleurisies, the Pleura only has been found putrified.

It may be questioned, Why the Pleura, rather than other Membranes, should be
inflamed? But the Answer is from Hippocrates, 1. de morb. text. 124. according
to the Division of Salius, where he says, That the side is a very weak part,
because it is naked from flesh in respect of other parts, and has nothing to
rest upon; therefore when the humors are moved and inflamed, their Defluxion is
easily sent thither.

The matter Causing a Pleurisy is for the most part Chollerick Blood which
does easily penetrate a thick Membrane; As Avicen speaking of a Pleurisy,
says, Except the Humor be thin and Chollerick it cannot pierce into the
Membrane. Other Humors may also Cause this Disease so they have a serous
Chollerick Humor mixed with them for a Vehicle: I say other Humors not
Excrementitious but Natural, which are contained in the form of blood, and are
called either blood it self, or blood that is waterish, or melancholy.

But you must note, that thin Humors make a true Pleurisy, and thick, a
Bastard Pleurisy.

Now this blood is carried by the Vessels which nourish the Breast, especially
the Vena Axillaris, and Azygos; and if it offend either in quantity, quality,
or motion, it is cast upon the Membrane and Muscles adjoining.

The Difference of Pleurisies is taken from the part affected, and the Causes.

In respect of the place of the pain, it is divided by Hipp. 2. acutor. into an
ascending Pleurisy, namely, when the pain reaches more to the Throat; and a
descending Pleurisy, when it goes down to the Hypochondria. Sometimes it is
extended more toward the back, of which Hipp. 3. de morbis makes mention; and
sometimes it comes more forward.

In respect of the Cause and the Humor offending, it is called either
Sanguineous, coming of blood, Chollerick, Phlegmatic, or Melanchollick.

There is also another excellent Difference made by Hippocrates, 1. acut. where
a Pleurisy is divided into a dry and a moist Pleurisy. A dry one is that in
which there is little or no spitting, not only in the beginning, but
continuance of the Disease; of which there are diverse Causes, as the Crudity of
the matter, the thickness and slim^ness thereof, the weakness of the faculty,
the obstruction of the Bronchia, or the vehemence of pain. But a moist
Pleurisy is that in which there is abundance of spittle, from the beginning of
the disease.

The Diagnosis or knowledge of this Disease, is by the signs, as says Galen, 5.
de loc. aff. cap. 8. and elsewhere; who reckons Five.

1 A pricking pain of the side. 2 A continual sharp Fever. 3 Difficulty of
breathing. 4 A hard pulse like a saw. 5 An often troublesome Cough.
A pricking pain is chiefly in the Membranes, and comes from a Chollerick
matter, and this pain possessing the ^^de, stretches it self into the parts
adjacent, one while to the Throat, another while to the Hypochondria, by the
continuity of the Membrane, which covers the whole Cavity of the Breast. By this
sign a Pleuritis is distinguished from a Peripneumonia, in which there is no
pain, or very little of the side, except it be joined with a Pleurisy.

A continual sharp Fever has its original from a Fl^gmon or Sanguineous tumor
in some part near the Breast, and therefore is symptomatical: although sometimes
an essential Fever be joined with a Pleurisy; and gives it sometimes a being,
for it often happens in the beginning of continual Fevers, that the blood
boiling in the veins is expelled by Nature unto some part which is most fit to
receive it; as the sides, and there it breeds an inflammation. The sign of this
is, That the Fever first seizes upon the Patient, and the second or third day
after the pain is in the side. But when the Fever is symptomatical, then the
pain in the side comes first, but the Fever a little after.

Difficulty of breathing does necessarily follow in this disease, because the
parts inflamed cannot sufficiently distend themselves to draw in a great
quantity of Air, which is requisite for the cooling of an inflamed heart.

The Pulse is hard because the Membrane is affected, and stretched forth, which
also distendeth the Arteries, and they therefore make that difference of pulse,
called Serratilis, like a saw; for when you lay many fingers upon the Arteries
of the Pulse, one part seems to be more lifted up than the other, so that it
seems to represent a saw.

A troublesome Cough follows a Pleurisy, because Nature does continually strive
to expel that which is troublesome from the part affected: as also some of the
matter sweateth from thence into the Lungs, which moves the expulsive faculty,
whence the Cough comes.

There is also a spitting of blood as another sign, which is neither in all
Pleurisies, nor at al times of the Disease; therefore it is not reckoned as a
proper sign. They who say that the Lungs are always affected in a Pleurisy,
do affirm that the blood is spit from the Lungs, and they deny that it can pass
from the Membrane about the Ribs to the Lungs, because it is very thick; and
also the Membrane about the Lungs is of the same Nature, and cannot therefore
be pierced by that blood which is without the Vessels. But Galen does clearly
confute these, 5. de loc. aff. cap. 3. where he first, shows that the matter
contained in the Cavity of the Breast may be taken into the Lungs, and be sent
upwards, by two clear Examples. The one is those who have received a wound in
the Breast that pierces into its Cavity; for if an injection of Honey and Wine
be made into the wound, and it be presently closed at the orifice, in a little
time the injection will be coughed up and spit forth, and the Patient will have
the taste of it in his mouth. Another Example is taken from a Fracture of a
bone, when the skin is not broken; which while the Callus is growing, and the
broken bones begin to glutinate, that blood which flowed to the part affected
is carried forth to the skin, and goes through it, so that it moistneth and
fouleth all the rowlers and ligatures about the part. Galen also shows the
manner how blood, matter, or the like, being contained in the Cavity of the
Breast may be taken through the lungs, namely, by the extreme outward orifices
of the Bronchia or branches of the rough Artery, which are spread through the
Lungs, and end in the superficies of them.

Although the orifices of the Vein Arterial, and Artery Venal are also carried
to the superficies of the Lungs, yet the orifices of the Bronchia are more
large and open than they. For by how much greater the Body or Trunk of the
rough Artery is, than the Trunk of the Venal Artery, or ^rterial Vein, by so
much the greater are its branches than theirs; and its orifice than theirs;
because all these Vessels are equally divided and distributed into the whole
body of the Lungs. Moreover, the substance of the rough Artery, and its
Bronchia or branches, are Cartilaginous or grisly, from whence it is that they
cannot clo^e together so much as other Vessels; and their orifices are more
constantly open, by which they can better receive the matter from the Cavity of
the Breast.

But Galen teaches that the matter contained in the Breast is taken through at
the time of breathing, when the Thorax is straightened; for then the Thorax
does press those things that are in the Cavity of it, and drive them into the
Lungs, so that some part of them at least is carried into the orifice of the
Bronchia. Neither is the softness of the Lungs, which yield to a compression,
and therefore cannot be forced to receive the matter, any hinderance. For this
softness is the cause why all the matter is not received; yet it is no obstacle
but some part thereof may be received in, although the greatest remain in the
Cavity by reaon of the ^oftne^s afore^aid. Let us ad to this Doctrine of Galen,
the wonderful providence of Nature, which has found out ways, not only
manifest, but also unknown, and ^omtimes incomprehensible, by which she uses
to expel things hurtful; as we said of the matter in Fractures, which is purged
forth by the insensible pores of the Muscles, and of the Skin.

A bastard Pleuresie is distinguished from a true, in that the pain is
increased when the Patient lies on the contrary side, in a true Pleurisy; for
then the part inflamed is pulled, and more distended by its own weight* but in
the other, the Muscles external being inflamed, are compressed when the Patient
lies on the same side, and therefore he has then greater pain.

The times of this Disease, are known by these signs following:

In the beginning of it, all the symptoms are weaker, the pain and fever
small, there is a dry Cough, and very little and crude spittle: In the increase
of the Disease, the fever and pain increase, and there is more spittle. In the
state or height the symptoms are more vehement, want of rest, dotage, pain of
the Head; and if the disease will be cured, there is much concocted spittle
easily raised. In the declination, the spittle is perfectly concocted, a free
spitting, and decay of all symptoms.

The signs of the Causes, are generally taken from the temper of the Patient,
the time of the year, the Country, the Diet, and the like. But especially the^e
things show that a Pleurisy comes of pure blood, red and bloody spittle, a
stretching and pricking pain, the fullness of the Veins, especially about the
Forehead and Temples, redness of the whole face, a full Pulse, thick and red
urine, sometimes with a blew crown.

These signs show that it comes from Chollerick blood, yellow spittle, a
burning fever, great thirst, a hard and quick pulse, a more acute pricking
pain, greater watchings and restlesness, bitterness of the mouth, a thin and
very yellow urine.

These signs show that it comes from Phlegmatic blood, a white, viscous, or
frothy spittle, sweet and slow in coming forth, a remiss fever, little thirst,
much spittle, a le^s, but heavy pain, more sleep, a little pulse, and not so
hard, pase and thick urine.

These signs show that it comes of Melanchollick blood, black spittle, tough
and slow in coming forth, a less pain and fever, a red urine and dark, a dry
Cough, a black and rough tongue, a belly bound.

The Prognostic is taken first from the remission or vehemence of the
Symptoms. For if pain, difficulty of breathing, and a fever be not great,
they signify that the disease is gentle; but if the pain be great, and the
Cough, and there is nothing ra^^ed up, and if the fever be violent with great
difficulty of breathing, you must took upon it as a desperate Pleurisy.

A small pulse, quick, and hard, foreshew death in a Pleurisy. And Galen says
that none of this have been cured; Gal. 4. de praesag* ex pulls. cap. 5.

An exquisite Pleurisy in which nothing is raised by Cough, or when with the
spitting after it began, is restrained, having still the pain and weight in the
side, is most dangerous. For it signifies a very crude disease, which will
either shortly kill, or be long in cure.

If the spitting begin with the first, or within three days, it signifies the
disease will be short; but if it begin late it will be long. Hipp. Aph. 1.
Sect. 5.

Yellow Choler mixed with phlegm or a little blood, appearing in the beginning
of the disease with much spittle, is a sign of recovery.

Very bloody spittle is dangerous; for it signifies a ruption, either of a
Vein, or of the flesh; from whence we expect suppuration: For it is thought
that little blood does breath through.

White, glutinating, and round spittle, is evil, for the clamminess comes from
the siery heat which burne^h the matter.

Green and rustic spittle, is evil, but black worst of all: For it signifies
the greatest adustion or extinction of the Natural heat.

A plentiful spitting which does not abate the pain and other symptoms, is
evil: For it signifies great plenty of matter.

A Pleurisy in old men, women with child, and in them that are Asthmatical, or
have twice or thrice had the same disease, is dangerous.

Whosoever has the disease in the side called Pleurisy, and are not cleansed
of it in fourteen days, have an Empyema, or collection of matter; Aph. 8.
Sect. 5. Others do extend it to the twentieth day.

A Diarrhoea, or looseness coming upon a Pleurisy or Peripneumonia, is evil;
Aph, 16. Sect. 6. which we must understand of a Pleurisy, in which there is so
great an inflammation that the Liver and Stomach consent therewith, or when the
strength is so gone by the disease that the retentive faculty is almost spent.
But if the Pleurisy be not so great, and be in a body full of evil humors, the
flux of the belly uses then to be healthful, especially if any signs of
concoction went before.

A Chollerick and plentiful vomiting in the beginning of a Pleurisy signifies
health to come: For Nature being eased by that evacuation of Choler, does more
easily overcome the disease.

If a Peripneumonia comes from a Pleurisy, it is evil; Aph. 11. Sect. 7. For it
is the translation of the matter to a more noble part.

If the pain in the Pleurisy, and the Chollerick spitting, go away without
reason, the Patient falls mad. Hipp. 3. Prorrhet. For the Choler is carried
into the Head, and then the urine looks thin and white.

A Pleurisy which follows an old disease, or is in a body of evil habit, is
dangerous.

Thick bodies used to exercise, do soonest die of Pleurisies and
Peripneumonia's, as Hipp. in Coac.

And Experience teaches us that almost all the Diggers taken with Pleurisies,
do die thereof: Because such strong bodies fall not sick, but upon some great
cause, and by reason of their thickness they cannot easily sweat, so that the
disease cannot breath forth.

They who in a Pleurisy have much noise in their Breast from the spittle, and
their countenance dejected, with yellowness in their Eyes, and mists; in these
death is to be expected, Hipp. in Coac.

They who in Pleurisies have Chollerick tongues at the first, are judged in
seven days; but they who have not much Choler upon their tongue til the third
or fourth day, are judged about the ninth day.

For the Cure of a Pleuresie, first the humor causing it is to be revelled,
derived, and discussed, and if it cannot wholly be discussed, it must be
digested, maturated, and expectorated; as also the Fever which is commonly
essential to a Pleurisy, and not always symptomatical, is to be cured by
proper Medicines. All which may be done by the following Remedies.

And first you must (after a Clyster, if the disease be not very violent) open
the Basilica on the same ^^de; but if it be violent, give the Clyster
afterward.

You must bleed every day till the pain or fever grow less; nay, sometimes
twice in a day, if the Pleuresie be very violent.

Hippocrates in his 2. lib. deratione victus in acutis, Text. 10. gave an
excellent rule to posterity most profitable in practice, That blood be let till
the color of it change: For if at the first or second time, ^t appear crude,
flegmy, or watery, it is to be continued every day, sometimes twice a day till
it appear red or yellowish. But if it appear red in the beginning, you must
bleed so often till it become livid or black, for that will signify, that the
last blood came from the part affected, or the neighbor Veins, which is altered
by the part inflamed, and of crude is made red, or of red, black or blew by
adustion.

Although the observation of that Rule bring commonly good success, yet
sometimes you must not expect that change of color, but desist from bleeding;
namely, when the strength is little, or the Patient is of a thin habit of body
easily dissolved, or the weather very hot. And although blood-letting is
excellent in the beginning of the Disease, yet if it be omitted, or done
insufficiently, you may open a Vein after the seventh, ninth, or eleventh day,
according to the Example of Hippocrates, who in 3. Epidem. opened a vein for
Anaxion in the eighth day, either because he was not sent for sooner, or
because that it was a most crude Pleurisy, which will scarce concoct till the
eleventh day.

But when he expectorateth freely, then you must abstain from Phlebotomy, which
will stop his spitting, and bring him in danger of his life.

But blood-letting is so necessary in the beginning of this Disease, that it
must never be omitted, neither in old nor young, nor women with child, in
childbed, or having their terms; unto all which Experience has taught us that
Phlebotomy is good in this Disease. Yet you must observe some Rules in bleeding
of women in Childbed, or having their Terms, which you may find hereafter in
the Fifteenth Book, and the last Chapter, concerning the Cure of acute Diseases
in women that lie inn.

From the beginning of the disease twice or thrice in a day, you must give
cooling Juleps, which restrain the heat and boiling of the humor, and stop the
defluxion; thus made:

Take of Poppy Water four ounces: Syrup of Violets, or Poppies, one ounce: Sal
prunella one dram. Make a Julep.

After the first Phlebotomy let the side be anointed with this Liniment,
covering the part with greazy wool sewed into a linen cloth.

Take of Oil of Lillies, Chamomel, and sweet Almonds, of each one ounce: fresh
Butter, and Hens grease, of each one ounce and an half. Make a Liniment.

Many put Wax to these Liniments, which is not good, because it stops the
pores; but the mucilaginous bodies do not, because they cool and astringe.

In a malignant pestilential Pleurisy, you may ad to your Liniments, Oil of
Scorpions of Mathiolus, or a little Treacle.

After the second bleeding, you must apply this Fomen^ation, made thus:

Take of Althaea roots, and Lillies, of each two ounces: the Leaves of Mallows,
Violets, and Pellitory, of each one handful: Line and Fenugreek seeds, of each
one dram: the flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, Elder, and Violets, of each one
pugil: Boil them together, with which fomen^ the side that is pained in a Hogs
bladder.

After Fomentation apply the Liniment aforesaid, to which in the progress of
the Disease, you may ad more dissolving Oils; as of Dill and Flowerdeluce; as
also the powder of Flowerdeluce and Saffron. And to the Fomentation ad
discussing Herbs, as Origan, Calaminth, Hy^op, and the discussing seeds.

Many other Topics are very profitable against Pleurisies, which Authors
relate; as these:

First, anoint the part with Ointment of Marshmallows, then lay on the powder
of Cummin seed, or a Colewort Leaf heat at the fire, and anointed with the same.

Faventinus mixeth the Ointment of Althaea with Oil of sweet Almonds, and after
he has anointed, sprinkles on the powder of Cummin seeds, and lays on a
Colewort Leaf; and this he commends highly.

Also the Cataplasm following is very profitable.

Take the Residency or Ingredients of the Decoction above mentioned for a
Fomentation; beat them in a stone Mortar, adding of the Oil of sweet Almonds,
Lillies, and Chamomel, of each two ounces: Hens grease one ounce: Barley and
Bean flower, of each as much as is sufficient to make a Cataplasm.

Also a live Hen slit through the back, and sprinkled with the powder of
Flowerdeluce roots, being applied does very well.

The Paunch of a Sheep laid hot to the part is a very good Anodine: but the
Lungs are better.

The Chemical Oil of Wax being mixed with the Liniments, asswageth pain, and
powerfully discusseth the matter.

Hot Bread from the Oven, dipped in fresh Butter, and applied, does very much
dissolve the matter fixed to the side.

After he has taken twice or thrice of the Julep aforesaid, you may use
Pectoral Juleps thus made:

Take of Barley one pugil: Liquoris and Raisons stoned, of each one ounce:
Jujubes twenty: the four great cold Seeds, of each three drams: Bugloss and
Violet flowers, of each one pugil: boil them to a pint and a quarter. Dissolve
in the straining, Syrup of Violets and Jujubes, of each two ounces. Make a
Julep for four doses to be taken morning and evening.

Or if the Fever be very sharp, and much watching, you may make the Emulsions
following:

Take of Almonds blanched, and steeped in cold Water, one ounce: the four great
cold seeds, of each half an ounce: Lettice and white Poppy seeds, of each two
drams: beat them in a marb^^ mortar, pouring on by degrees, the Decoction of
Barley and Liquoris one pint and an half: strain it and dissolve in it Syrup of
Violets three ounces. Make an Emulsion for three doses to be taken morning and
evening.

Some Practitioners in want of sleep give Narcoticks; as Syrup of Poppies,
Philonium Romanum, and Laudanum, which are dangerous in this disease: for they
stop spitting, and astringe and strengthen the Breast. From whente often times
comes sudden death.

But this must be understood of the whole dose of Narcoticks: for given in a
very small quantity they do good in vehement pain, a thin defluxion which
causes a Cough, and in want of sleep. In which cases I have often given one
grain of Laudanum with good success, and sometimes often. But the use of this is
most proper in the beginning of the disease; for then the humor flowing to the
part may be restrained, and the increase of the Disease hindered.

When the Cough is violent, and Nature begins to evacuate by spirting, let the
Patient hold often in his mouth Sugar of Roses, Sugar candy or Penides, or the
Tablets of Diatragacanth frigid, Syrup of Violets and Jujubes. Or this Eclegma
following:

Take of Sugar candy, and Penides, of each one ounce: the powder of
Diatragacanth frigid two drams: Syrup of Violets and Jujubes, of each as much
as will make a Lohoch; which let him take often with a Liquoris stick, or make
it of Butter, Honey, and Sugar, of each equal parts: the Oil of Linseed, or of
sweet Almonds, being fresh drawn without fire, mixed with Sugar, does much help
the Cough and pain in the Pleurisy, especially if it be drunk in Broth, or any
other Decoction.

If the spittle be thick, you must mix some attenuating and cutting Medicines,
as Syrup of Coksfoot, Liquoris, Oxymel simple, powder of Diaireos, and the like.

You must take these lying with the face upwards, for so they better go to the
Lungs.

As the Disease increases, you may use this restoring Medicine to strengthen.

Take of Conserve of Violets one ounce: Conserve of Borrage flowers, and
Bugloss roots, of each half an ounce: Confection of Alkermes two drams: powder
of Diamargariton frigid, and Diatragacanth frigid, of each one dram: Sugar of
Roses as much as all the rest. Make a Composition covered with Gold to be taken
often with a spoon.

Purging is improper in a true Pleurisy, except it be in the declination; and
then you may appoint this:

Take of Senna half an ounce: Annis seeds one dram: Bugloss and Maidenhair, of
each half a handful: Liquoris and Raisons stoned, of each three drams: the
flowers of Bugloss and Violets, of each one Pugil. Boil them to two ounces: in
the straining, dissolve of Rhubarb infused in Scabious Water with a little
yellow Sanders, four scruples: the best Manna, and Syrup of Roses, of each one
ounce. Make of these a Potion.

In the whole time of the disease, let him take Barley Water for his ordinary
drink, made with Liquoris, Poppies, and Maidenhair; and let not his drink be
actually cold, for it would hurt the Breast. Wine in this Disease is Poison,
and also all sharp things which provoke Coughing, and by their astringency
hinder spitting.

In the declination of the Disease, after purging, and when the Fever is less,
if the pain continue, you may apply to the part, Cupping-glasses with
Scarrification two days together. They may also be applied before the
declination, after often bleeding: And if the pain still increase, and return,
you may again let blood, and after Cup with Scarrification.

Zacutus Lusitanus having taken off the Cupping-glasses, applied six
Horsleeches with good success, as he witnessed, observe. 104. lib. 1. Praxis
admirandae.

For the same purpose to discuss the relics of the matter, having first tried
Fomentations and Liniments, you may apply with benefit, the Emplaister of
Brimstone, and Bay Berries.

Besides vulgar Medicines, there are some proper and specifical, namely the
shavings of a Boars Tusk, the ashes of the Pizzle of a Bull or Deer, the
flowers of red Poppies, or Corral prepared.

Quercetan in his Dispensatory commends an Apple made hollow, and one dram of
Frankincense put therein and roasted, which the Patient must eat, and drink
three ounces of Carduus Water after, then cover himself warm, and sweat. He
will have this Medicine used after the third day, and affirms that many have
been restored therewith.

The flowers of Box-tree do so much purge the Blood, that if a dram of them in
powder be given with Poppy Water, and a Vein opened an hour after, the blood
will continue pure.

Hors-dung dissolved in Carduus Water, and strained, does powerfully disperse
the pain, and the humor in the Pleurisy.

White Hen-dung given in a dram of the same Water, does as much.

These Dungs have much Volotile Salt, which is very piercing and discussing.

You may make a Potion of them both thus:

Take of Hemp seed one ounce: bruise them, then put to them, of the white Dung
of a Hen, and of Horse Dung, of each half an ounce: dissolve them in five
ounces of Carduus Water; strain them, and drink it.

The Blood of a wild Goat given to ten drops with the aforesaid Water, does
powerfully discuss the Pleurisy: In the want thereof, you may give the blood
of a tame Goat. But because the strength of him is little, you may give thereof
to the quantity of one dram. You must prepare it thus:

Hang up the Goat by the Horns, and bend his hinder Legs backward to his Horns,
then cut out his Stones, and take the Blood in a broad Vessel; dry it in the
Sun in Summer, or at other times upon an Oven. It is far different from the
Goats Blood in the Shops.

The Soot of a Chimney given to a dram is very good, but much rather the spirit
of Soot, described by Hartman in his Practice of Physic.

In an Epidemical Pleurisy, Sudoroficks are to be given, such as are
prescribed in malignant Fevers, which also ought to be made as proper for this
Disease as may be.

A Diarrhoea coming upon a Pleurisy is dangerous: therefore you must give Syrup
of Myrtles, which does stay the Diarrhoea, and also expectorate: and this is to
be mixed with other Syrups. Let me Belly and Reins be anointed with
astringents, as uses to be done in all Diarrhoea's. Give Clysters made of
Barley Water, which, as Galen says, does cool and astringe if it be boiled
with red Roses, and also Yolks of Eggs be dissolved in it.

Chap. 3. Of Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs.
PEripneumonia has the same essence with a Pleurisy, and is distinguished
only by the part affected, because that is the inflammation of the Lungs, and
this of the Membrane that compasses the Ribs. They differ somewhat in the
matter, for a Pleurisy comes often of Choler, but a Peripneumonia of Phlegm;
although all humors (as we said of a Pleurisy) may produce this disease, I
mean humors which are like blood, and make up the mass of it. For as thick
humors do hardly penetrate the thick Membrane called Pleura, but thin and
Chollerick easily; so on the other side, thick phlegmatic humors do easily go
to the soft and thin substance of the Lungs, and stick close thereto; but thin
and Chollerick humors do easily pass by. But this hinders not, but the
Chollerick blood may sometimes cause the Inflammation of the Lungs, as
Hippocrates 1. de morbis, describes the Erysipelas, or Chollerick tumor of the
Lungs, which comes from Chollerick blood thrown into the Lungs from the right
Ventricle of the Heart by the Arterial Vein. But an oedematous Inflammation
comes from phlegmatic blood falling upon the Lungs by way of defluxion from the
Head. But only excrementitious phlegm, falling as a Catarrh from the Brain, can
make a Peripneumonia, because it putrifieth in the Lungs, and attracteth blood,
by the mixture whereof there is an Inflammation, and this often happens in old
folk. Mesue says that this Peripneumonia comes rather of Choler, because the
Lungs are nourished with Chollerick blood which comes in great plenty to them
by the Arterial Vein. To whom we answer, that fresh, thin, and steeming blood
made in the right Ventricle of the Heart is carried into the Lungs, which by
reason of its purity, is easily governed by Nature, and is sent by the Venal
Artery to the left Ventricle of the Heart, and it seldom is altered from its
Natural condition, which uses to make a Peripneumonia. But contrarily, a
defluxion from the Head cutting through the large passages into the Bronchia of
the Lungs, if it there putrify, will draw blood unto it, and make a
Peripneumonia.

This Peripneumonia is sometimes alone without another disease, sometimes it
follows other diseases, as Squinzy or Pleurisy. Galen in Com. 11. Sect. 7.
Aphor. teaches that a Peripneumonia does follow a Pleurisy two ways: Either
when a Pleurisy is turned into a Peripneumonia, or when an inflammation of the
Lungs follows a Pleurisy. This transmutation is when the former disease
cease, and the other comes; but it comes upon it when it is white, the former
remains.

Therefore the immediate internal cause of a Peripneumonia is blood, often
phlegmatic, seldom chollerick, and most seldom melanchollick, Which either
comes from the whole body being plethorick, or cachochymical, that is, full, or
of evil habit; or from some part which is replete or distempered.

The External Causes of Peripneumonia and Pleurisy are the same; namely
whatsoever defluxion can come to those parts: the chief whereof are: First
great exercise and violent motion of the Body, especially after long rest, and
high feeding. For then the humors abounding from high diet, and kept in by long
rest, by exercise are dispersed, attenuated, and heated, and are after sent to
the weaker parts, most fit to receive them, among which the Breast and Lungs
are chief, because by strong exercise, there is caused great and often
breathing, and so they become wearied, and the substance of the Lungs being
soft and loose can easily receive the humors coming to them.

Secondly, Among the external Causes the cold and Northernly Air is reckoned,
when it comes suddenly after a Southern and warm; for the pores are opened by
warm Air, and the humors are more fluid, which by the cold Air coming after,
are compressed, and the humors sent to the weak parts.

Lastly, From Hipp. lib. of Air, Places, and Waters, the drinking of standing
Pools and Lakes, begets the Peripneumonia; for says the Divine old man, we
observe diseases of the Lungs to be most in Marshy Countries.

Also the Signs of a Peripnumonia do agree with the signs of a Pleurisy. Two
are the same, as a sharp Fever, and a Cough; which sometimes is dry, sometimes
moist, or with more Phlegmatic spittle colored with Choler or Blood; and in
the progress of time, the spittle becomes Mattery when the matter of the
Disease grows ripe, and concocted by heat, which sometimes comes to pass when
the substance of the Lungs is not hurt; for if they ulcerate, a Consumption will
sollow.

So we may observe, That in sore Eyes that are Mattery, the humors are
converted into Matter when the substance of the Eye is neither suppurated, nor
ulcerated.

The other signs differ in respect of the part affected; the difficulty of
Breathing is greater than in a Pleurisy by reason of the narrowness of the
part inflamed, so that the Patient seems to be choked and cannot breath but
with the head upright: For the part cannot be compressed by reason of the
extention and repletion, nor be more dilated, although it be much dilated, yet
it takes in but little Air, therefore the respiration is quick and often, with
snorting: This is augmented by a Fever by which the breath is hotter, and the
desire of cold air is greater.

The Pulse is great, faint, and soft by reason of Phlegm and the looseness of
the Lungs: yet there is some hardness by the Choler and blood: it is unequal
from the compression of the Artery near the Heart, and in thick Humors most:
Sometimes it is intermitting, watery, vermicular, when the Lungs are rotten by
too much moisture.

There is a heavy pain that reaches from the Breast to the Back, sometimes it
is between the Shoulders, and sometimes under one only Shoulder, and from thence
communicated to the Throat and Pap: Especially in a Cough, sometimes they feel
no pain til they begin to Cough: sometimes there is also a pricking pain in the
side when it is joined with a Pleurisy as it often happens: Although the
Membrane that covers the Lungs be of the same nature with the Pleura, as Galen
taught 4. de loc. affect. cap. 5. Yet there is not so great pain in a
Peripneumonia as in a Pleurisy, for two Differences which are laid down by
Galen in the place afore-cited.

The First is, Because the Nerves that go to the Membrane of the Lungs, are few
and very little; but they which go to the Pleura, are many and great.

Th Other is, Because the Breast consists of Bones and Flesh, which will not be
stretched, from whence the pain is greater.

But the Lungs are soft and yiedling, and therefore their pain is less.

There is Redness in the Cheeks, by reason of the hot vapors which fly into the
head and carrying with them the thinner blood. And this Color is most in the
Cheeks, because their skin is thinnest.

There are besides these signs, Heaviness, Weakness, and a Tossing, with great
sense of Heat in the whole Body.

The Tongue is Yellow, and then it grows Red; a great thirst, swelling of the
Eyes, and of the veins of the Temples.

There is a Delirium, or Doting, when it comes from Choler; and a Coma, when
it comes from Phlegm.

If the Disease comes of Chollerick blood, the spittle will be yellow, the heat
and thirst greater, more difficulty of breathing with less Heaviness; the air
breathed forth is more hot: the Fever is very violent, the Pulse swift, the
Delirium great, the Water thin, yellow and clear, the age, time of the year,
the Country, and Diet before, do al attest for Choler.

If Phlegm (which is most ordinary) produce the Disease, the spittle will be
white, viscous, and froathy; the Fever, burning of the Breast, thirst, and
dryness of the tongue, will be less: the weight of the Brea^^ greater; the Pulse
slower, and softer; the Age, old; Habit of body, time of the Year, and the
Country, are cold and moist.

If the Disease come from pure Blood, the Spittle will be Red; the Urin Red and
Thick; the Face more Red; the Veins of the Temples more swollen; with heaviness
and distention of the whole body; and other things that declare abundance of
blood.

Lastly, If Melancholy blood be the Cause, the Spittle will be black or
bluish; the Tongue black, from the beginning dry and rough; there will be also
heaviness and great sighing between breathing; and all the signs of Melancholy
predominating in the whole body.

The Prognostic of this Disease is thus to be made.

A Peripneumonia is more dangerous than a Pleurisy; and for the most part
deadly by reason of the necessity of respiration, and the neerness of the Heart.

Celsus says, That this kind of Disease has more Danger than Pain; and for
the most part Kills.

But strength of Body, less vehemence of Symptoms, yellow Spittle, not mixed
with much Blood, raised in the beginning; a great flux of blood at the Nose in
the Critical day; or a flux of the Belly which is Chollerick and froathy; or a
flux of the Hemorrhoids or Terms, do show some hope of recovery.

Imposthumes about the Ears, or inferior parts, being well suppurated and kept
open, do foretell recovery, as Hipp. in proga.

If a Peripneumonia be turned into a Pleurisy, it is good, and though it
seldom happen, as Galen teaches, Comment. Aphor. 11. Sect. 7. because there is
a going from a Disease more dangerous, to one less dangerous. And this
transmutation is known by a pricking pain of the side coming thereupon, and by
abating the shortness of breath.

But the vehemence of the Disease and symptoms do declare a dangerous and
deadly Peripneumonia, as want of spittle, continual watching, a Delirium or
Coma, coldness of the extreme parts, snorting with great difficulty of
breathing, blewness and crookedness of the nails.

Moreover, A Peripneumoma coming upon a Pleurisy is most dangerous, as
Hippocrates teaches, Aph. 11. Sect. 7. because the translation of a humor from
an ignoble part, to a more noble, is evil; and the strength being spent by the
disease foregoing, can endure the force of a new, and wor^e.

When the urine is thick in the beginning of the Disease, and after before the
fourth day it becomes thin, death is at hand. Hipp. in Coacis.

The Cure of the Peripneumonia is very like that of the Pleurisy, and there
must be first bleeding as much as the strength will permit, once or twice in a
day till the disease abate: for since the Lungs are then full of blood, and
draw much from the heart, which is inflamed, you need not fear to let blood
thrice, four, five, or six times.

But if a Peripneumonia follow a Squinzy, or Pleurisy, you may let blood more
warily because the strength is abated by the former Disease.

You must let blood from the Basilica Vein of both arms, if the whole Lungs be
equally affected, or from either, on that side the pain is, or on which the
Patient sets more weight, or from which he supposes he raises most spittle.

You must bleed women in this disease, first in the Ancle Vein, and after
within six hours in the Arm; except it be so desperate that you are constrained
at the first to bleed in the Arm. In which case, all the time you bleed, and a
little before, you must apply Cupping-glasses to the Thighs.

But after, if the strength will not permit further phlebotomy, you must apply
Cupping-glasses to the Shoulders and ^ack, both dry, and with Scarrification,
as much as the Patient can suffer.

Also Emollient and loosening Clysters are good revulsives; but you must not
use too strong purging Medicines therein, lest you bring a flux of the Belly,
which is most dangerous in this Disease.

If a crude phlegmatic humor coming from the head cause this disease, or
nourish it, a Vesicatory laid to the hinder part of the Head, does very much
good.

In the mean while use the Juleps and Emulsons prescribed in the Cure of a
Pleurisy. Anoint the breast with Oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, or with fresh
Butter, or the like, or with this Liniment:

Take of Oil of Violets, and Water Lillies, of each one ounce and an half;
fresh Butter and Mucilage of Fleabane seeds, of each one ounce: Oil of Roses
half an ounce: the Troches of Camphire one dram. Make a Liniment. Or,

Take of Oil of Violets three ounces: the Oil of Pompion seeds, and
Breast-milk, of each one ounce: fresh Butter one ounce and an half: Mix them
and make a Liniment.

You may provoke spitting with Syrup of Violets and Ju^ubes, and the rest,
prescribed in the Cure of a Pleurine. As the Lohochs and Compositions there
mentioned, given with this Caution, In a thin matter give things that thicken,
and in a thick matter give things that attenuate.

Let his ordinary drink be Barley Water, with Liquoris, as in a Pleurisy.

Purging is not good in this Disease, except in the declining of it, and you
must make choice of such things then, as were prescribed in the Cure of a
Pleurisy.

Chap. 4. Of Empyema, or matter in the hollow of the Thorax.
ALthough the word Empyema signify all Suppuration, yet Custom has prevailed
so that it is taken only for a Collection of matter in the Cavity of the Thorax.

Now there is a Threefold Cause of the gathering of matter between the Lungs
and the Thorax.

The first is an Inflammation suppurated, which happens in a Pleurisy or
Peripneumonia; and when the Imposthume is broken, the matter falls into the
Cavity of the breast. The same may be in a Squinzy, as Hippocrates teaches,
Aph. 10. Sect. 5. in these words: Whosoever is freed from an Angina, they have
a Disease in the Lungs, and die within seven days; but if they live longer, it
comes to suppuration.

The second is blood falling into the Thorax, where by continuance it must
needs come to Suppuration. So Hippocrates, Aph. 20. Sect. 6. If blood be sent
into the Belly besides Nature, necessarily it is suppurated. But this
suppuration is not always true, and properly so called, a^ Hippocrates
teaches, but rather to be called a corruption, of which there is matter like
quittor produced. This Blood may come from a Vein wounded.

The third Cause is phlegm falling from the Head and other parts into the
Breast, and there putrefying. So Hippocrates, Aph. 38. Sect. 7. The
distillations into the upper Belly are suppurated in twenty dales. Galen in his
Commentaries, by the upper Belly understands the Breast. But the phlegm there
putrefying does not beget a true Pus, or matter, but something like it; as we
observe in phlegmatic Tumors, as Atheroma, Steatoma, Meliceris, which are kinds
of Imposthumes.

The Diagnostick signs are of two sorts: Some declare the disease to be in the
beginning; others that it is old, and confirmed.

Hippocrates lays down Three signs of this Suppuration, beginning 2. Progn.

The first is when the Fever grows stronger, because the Pleurisy, or
Peripneumonia is not purged, for while the matter is turning into Pu^ the
fever is increased, Hipp. Aph. 47. Sect. 1.

The Second is a quaking, which comes when the sharpness of the matter does
twitch the Membranous parts.

The Third is weight, and sense of heaviness in the part; for the humor being
contained in the Gavity does weigh heavier than when it is diffused. Galen
adds in 4. de loc. asf. cap. 9. fluctuation or routing: For (says he) if any
one is forced to turn in his bed, and perceive something to slow down at that
time, it is no doubt but that there is much matter contained there. And you may
often hear the fluctuation, unless the thickness or plenty of the matter, which
fills the whole Cavity of the Thorax, do hinder the sluctuation. To these you
may ad dissiculty of Breathing. For although after the Imposthume is broken,
the pain of the side cease, and the Diaphragma and Muscles of the Thorax move
more freely; yet because the Lungs are oppressed with matter round about them,
so that they cannot move freely, and some part of the matter is sucked into the
substance of the Lungs, from whence it is that the Lungs are so heavy, and the
Bronchia is obstructed, thence is short breathing. For the purulent spittle
comes from the filth sent into the Lungs and Bronchia, which shows an Empyema;
but this is not always a spitting of matter by reason of its thickness, which
keeps it from coming to the Bronchia.

But a long lingering Fever, partly putrid, partly Hectical, milder in the
day, and sharper at night, much sweat, especially at night, a constant
troublesome Cough, signify that the Disease is old and confirmed; as also when
the Cheeks grow red, and the Eyes hollow, the Nails crooked, the Legs swel, and
Pustuls break forth of the Breast by reason that the sharpest part of the
matter breaks out of the Skin; these signify the Disease confirmed.

You may know which side is affected from Hippocrates, 2. Progn. text. 21: If
(says he) an Empyema be only in one part, you must turn the Patient, and learn
whether he be pamed, or hotter in one side than the other, and to ask him if he
perceives any burden to hang on the side that is upward, and if it be so, in
which side soever the weight is, the suppuration is on the other; as if heat
and weight be in both sides, the Pus is contained in the whole Cavity of the
Breast. Also Avicen adds a Conjecture which he took from Hipp. 3. de morb.
Apply (says he) a linen cloth wet to both sides, and that will be dry s^onest
which lies upon the part where the matter is contained. We may lay down
another sign from our own Experience, which was not observed by Authers,
namely, In the side affected there will he an Oedematory Tumor, from a Potion
of the thinnest matter breathing through the Museles of the Thorax. And when,
in suspicion thereof there appears such a Tumor, and blowing up of the skin on
either side, you may certainly pronounce that the Empyema is there, and you may
safely open the side.

The chief Prognostic Signs are given by Hippocrates, 2. Progn. Text. 63. in
these words: In Suppurations they chiesly escape, whom the fever left the same
day they broke; and they who presently desire meat; and are freed from thirst,
and have smell, and laudible excrements: and if the Pus be white and even, and
of the same color, and when it is voided without pain or great Coughing. But
they die whom the fever leaves not, or to whom seeming to leave them it
returns again, and who are thirsty and have no appetite, have a loose Belly,
the Pus green, and livid, or srothy. They die who have all these signs: But
they who have but some of them, some die, and some lie long sick.

To these we will adjoyn these following Prognostics.

They who have an Empyema, and by reason of the abundance of matter, lift up
their whole Breast when they Breath, are quickly choked. Galen, 4. de Loc. Aff.
Cap. 7.

If an Empyema is not spit forth in forty days, it turns into a Consumption,
which brings death. Hipp. Aph. 15. Sect. 5.

A Suppuration on both sides of the Thorax, is more dangerous than in one; also
that on the l^f^ side is more dangerous than on the right: by reason of the
left Ventricle of the heart, which is more greivously affected with the matter
gathered on that side.

Whosoever are Burnt or Cut for a Suppuration, if the Matter comes forth pure
and white, they escape: but if it be bloody, foul, and stinking, they die.
Aphor. 44. Sect. 7.

If the Matter flow plentifully by Stool and Urine, and the Patient continue
strong, it is a sign o^ Recovery, although this Evacuation is very seldom: yet
is it spoken of by Galen, Aetius, and Paulus: As also the way declared by Galen
through which it passes, 3. de loc. affect. cap. 4. and com. in aphor. 30.
sect. 3. In the first place he speaks thus, This question does not a little
disturb the followers of Erasistratus, who think that there is nothing but
spirits in the Arteries. But we find no difficulty in it, because we know that
the smooth Artery in the Lungs, so much Pus as it received from an Imposthume
broken, can carry the same into the left Ventricle of the heart, which after
goe^ to the Re^ns by the great Artery. In the last place, he says, That the
matter* contained in the Lung^ does first come to the Ventricles of the Heart,
and then to the great Artery; or by the hollow Vei^ to the outside of the
Liver, from thence to the inside, and so to the Guts. From which you may easily
see the way by which an Empyema may be purged by stool and urine.

If the Patient grow better, and be almost cleansed, and then again raises
stinking Spittle, he dies of that which remains and returns. Hipp. in Coac.

For the Cure of this Disease: First, if you cannot hinder the Suppuration of
the matter in the Thorax, you must further it by convenient Cataplasms. As,

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots three ounces: fat Figs ten: Raisons stoned one
ounce: Chamomel and Melilot flowers, of each one pugil. Boil them all well,
then beat them and strain them* then ad the flower of Line, Foenugreek seed,
and Wheat, of each one ounce: Oil of Lillies, sweet Almonds, and fresh Butter,
and Turpentine, of each one ounce. Make a Cataplasm.

Also to help Concoction, and maturation within, you may give this following
Apozeme:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots, and of the greater Comphry, of each one ounce:
Agrimony, Colt^foot, Scabious, and Maidenhair, of each one handful: the four
great cold seeds, of each one ounc^* Annis seeds one dram: Liquoris and Raisons
of the Sun stoned, of each one ounce: the three Cordial Flowers, and Chamomel,
of each one pugil: Make a Decoction to one pint and an half; dissolve in the
straining, Syrup of Coltsfoot, Liquoris, and Sugar Candy, of each two ounces.
Ma^^ an Apozeme perfumed with the Powder of Flower deluce Root one dram; for
five mornings draughts.

This following Eclegma is good for the same purpose:

Take of the pulp of fat Figs one ounce: fresh Butter two ounces: Oil of sweet
Almonds newly drawn without fire, one ounce: Sugar candy two ounces: Starch two
drams. Make a Lohoch.

Venice Turpentine washed with Barley Water given to the quantity of three
drams with the powder of Liquoris, does much profit for Maturation, Discussion,
and Clensing.

But if the Empyema will not be spit up (as sometimes it will not) you must come
to opening of it, which you must do between the fourth and fifth Ribs,
beginning to count from below, with many Cautions, which are elegantly set down
by many Chyrurgions, especially by Hierom^ Fabricius ab Aquapendente, in his
Book of Manual Operations. But it is more profitable to open the Imposthume
which comes from a Pleurisy before it break, and the Pus flow into the Cavity
of the Breast, which is known by the Tumor which is against the place of
Suppuration, and by other signs of an Empyema. And then you must not open it
below, and between the fourth and fifth Rib, because if you make an orifice far
from the imposthume, there will no matter come forth; but you must open it in
the middle of the Tumor, first applying a Caustic. But if no Tumor appear, it
is hard to open it before the Imposthume be broken.

But if any will t^y, he must find out the place in which the Patient finds
weight, pain, and heat.

And it must be made between two Ribs upon the higher part of the Rib, because
there is a Vein and Artery near the Inferior; which you must observe in the
opening of every Empyema. While the matter is taken forth by degrees, let the
Patient take a Wound Drink twice a day, which will purge the blood, cleanse the
Ulcer, and hinder putrefaction: As

Take of Sanicle, Bugle, Scabious, Bettony, St. John's wort, Carduus, Mousear,
Burnet, Perewinkle, Agrimony, Plantane, of each one handful: the seeds of St.
John's wort, and Carduus benedictus, of each half a dram: Cordial Flowers one
pugil: Boil them in Hydromel to a pint and an half. Take six ounces every time.

With this same Decoction Injections may be made into the Cavity of the Breast.

For his Drink, let him take Hydromel, or Barley Water, or Spring Water with
Sugar.

If after the Breast is opened the matter do not flow freely, you must draw it
forth with the following Plaster, which does powerfully draw from all
Imposthumes.

Take of Rozin of the Pine Tree that is fresh, clear, and sweet, half a pound:
Oil of Bays and ^urpentine, of each one ounce: Gum Elemi two ounces. First let
the Rozin and the Gum be ^elted and mixed; then ad the Turpentine and the Oils,
and let them boil a little; then strain ^^em. Make a Plaster thereof for the
part: change it once a day in Winter, and twice in Sum^er; cut it in two or
three places that the matter may pass through.

Chap. 5. Of the Dropsy in the Breast.
THe Dropsy in the Breast is like to Empyema which comes from a serous humor
contained in the Cavity of the Breast. The common Practitioners do not describe
this Disease, although Hippocrates does it excellently, 2. Lib. of Diseases
called dropsies in the Lungs, thus: There is a Fever, and a Cough, quick
breathing, the feet swell, the Nails are contracted, and they suffer as ^^ey do
in an Empyema, but not so violently, and longer; and if you power any thing in,
or apply a ^omentation or fumigation the matter does not follow; and by this
you may know that it is not ^atter, but water that is within: and if you try a
long time to discover it by your Ear laid to his ^^de, it boyls inward like
Vinegar; after that it goes into the belly, and then he seems to be recovered;
But in progress of time, the belly is inslamed, and that endures the same, or
more: some swell in the ^elly, cods, and face. Thus Hippocrates.

This Disease seldom happens, it is more often than it is discovered, for it
is not ordinarily ^nown. Many relations of it are given by Schenkius, by which
it appears that he never see it till their bodies who died of it were opened by
him. Therefore we will describe it exactly that a Phy-^^tian may not be
deceived.

This serous humor, either may be bred in the Lungs, by the proper fault of
them, as when it does ^ot concoct its own nourishment, but turns it into
Water, which by degrees is sent to the Cavity ^f the Breast, or by bladders
breaking upon the Lungs, which are mentioned by Hippocrates in his ^ook of
Internal Diseases, and also by others. Or it is sent into the Breast from other
parts, as from ^he Hypochondria especially, when the Liver or the Spleen are
distempered with a Schirrus or other ^isease by which much water is produced.
This watery humor, is either sent by the Veins to the ^ungs which are weak, or
else from the Cavity of the Abdomen it is carried to the Breast by Insensi^le
Transpiration. Now Experience teaches that this serous humor may be sent from
one Belly to another, because the dropsy of the Breast turns into a dropsy of
the Belly, and a dropsy of the bel^y into the Breast, from whence they are
suddenly choked.

The Diagnosis of this Disease (as has been said) is very hard, for almost all
the signs are the ^ame with the signs of other Diseases of the Breast. But a
noise of Water in the breast, is only pe^uliar to this Disease, and to Empyema,
which may be heard within if the body be moved to and fro, ^r be taken upon a
strong man's shoulders and shaken.

But all the Signs which we mentioned from Hippocrates taken together, may make
a certain Diag^osis. To which you may ad this one, as being most evident to
show the Disease, and by which ^he Dropsy in the breast is only distinguished
from other difficulties of breathing: namely, When ^t every first beginning to
sleep this difficulty of breathing comes and hinders it, and by night
en^reaseth, and toward morning by degrees abateth.

To these you may ad sometimes, a pain of one Arm or Shoulder, which comes
either from the humor falling from the Head into the Breast, part whereof falls
into the Arm, being near, or from the water contained in the breast, and sent
to the Arms by the Axillary Veins of the Arm-holes; or from ^he Refrigeration
of the Intercostal Muscles, from which the Nerves are derived to the Arms, or
from ^ome other sympathy by way of vicinity: For Hippocrates in Coacis observed
this Sympathy of the ^reast and arms, If those parts or lobes of the Lungs
which hang toward the right and left side of ^he Chest, be vehemently
inflamed, so that they sway or rest upon one side of the Chest or Ribs, the
^atery matter breaks out on the same side of the Body where the Lungs lean or
rest.

This is a great Disease, and hard to be cured, for they who have it have their
Natural heat very ^eak, and their natural strength also, from some great
disease in the bowels: from whence it comes that when the humor collected in
the breast is evacuated by Medicines which is very difficult) there ^omes more
in the place of it; from whence the disease is not only nourished, but
increased; so that ^t length by abundance of water they fall into the Dropsy
called Ascites; yet in the beginning before the bowels are much hurt, it
sometimes may be cured.

For the Cure of this disease, you must observe two Indications; namely, That
the matter contai^ed in the breast be evacuated, and that the breeding thereof
again be hindered.

It is a hard thing to empty the water contained in the breast, because the
ways are not open by which it should be brought forth. Therefore Hippocrates
does advise to open the side, which because ^e never see practiced, and never
read in any Author that it was done with good success, we cannot absolutely
approve; and we may speak of it as we have of the Opening or Tapping for the
Dropsy, in its proper Chapter.

Therefore it is better to attempt this Evacuation with Medicines that expel
Water, for which purpose al those Medicines prescribed by us in the Cure of the
Dropsy, are good. Where we must observe diligently, That if when the Disease
is confirmed, and much serous humor is gathered in the Breast, you give a
violent Purge, those humors will be much moved, from whence there will come a
great Suffocation which will kill the Patient: therefore be wary, and give your
Medicine in a less Dose, though oftener, and mix them with strong Openers that
purge Urin, that both the passages may be unstopt, and the Matter carried to
the Uritories.

Among Water Purges the Minerals are best, as Mercurius Dulcis, and Mercurius
Vitae so corrected that it may work only downward.

Also Diuretics alone, or Medicines to provoke Urin often used are good,
because they turn away the matter coming to the breast, to the bladder, and by
way of Consequence they bring it also from the breast.

Also Sudorificks are profitable, to the carrying away of this serous matter;
and we saw a man of sixty years old, who by the use of a Sweating drink made of
Guaiacum and Sarsa taken fifteen days together, and by provoking sweat with the
vapor of the Spirit of Wine, was Cured.

Cauteries applied to make Issues in the Thighs and Legs, are also good to
take Water from the breast.

You may hinder the breeding of this Water, by amending the faults of those
parts which send this Matter.

So if the Lungs be in fault you must apply proper Medicines unto them: if the
Liver or Spleen be troubled with Distemper, Obstruction, Schirrus, or the like,
you must cure them by Medicines taken out of their several Chapters.

But those things which do strengthen the Vital and the Natural parts will
always agree, such as are prescribed in the Cure of Weakness, Dropsy and Flux
of the Liver.

Chap. 6. Of Haemoptysis, or Spetting of Blood.
ALthough usually the word Haemoptysis does signify al manner of Spetting of
blood from what part soever it does proceed whether from the Breast, Lungs,
Rough Artery, or from the Jaws, Gums, Pallat, Uvula, Brain, Stomach, Liver, and
Spleen. Yet Galen, lib. 1. decris. cap. 5. says, That Haemoptysis properly is
taken for that spetting of blood which comes from the Vital parts, as the
Breast, Lungs, and rough Artery.

It is a Symptom in the excretion of those things which are wholly besides
Nature.

But since every Symptom depends upon a Disease as its next and immediate
Cause: the Cause of this will be either an Organical, or a Common Disease: The
Organical is Twofold; the opening of the Vessels called in Greek Anastoriosis;
and Rarifaction called Diapedesis. Also the Common Disease is Twofold, namely
the breaking of the same Vessels called Rexis, and the Corrosion of them called
Diabrosis.

The Internal Cause immediately producing the Diseases is a great quantity of
blood.

Blood exceeding in quantity will either break the Veins or open their Orifices,
and so make either a Rexis, or Anastomosis.

The same blood offending in quality, as when it is too hot or too thin, it will
come forth by way of Anastomosis; but because heat will open the Orifices, and
the thinness causes it to flow more easily: Also the same qualities make a
Diapedesis or Rarifaction: for heat does make thin the Tunicles of the Vessels,
and the thinness of the blood causes it to flow more easily through the pores
of those Tunicles.

Lastly, The sharpness of the blood does gnaw the Tunicles of the Veins and
exulcerate them, and so cause a Diabrosis, or Erosion; this also is caused by
sharp or salt humors which distill from the head, or coming from other parts to
the Lungs.

Moreover, The External Causes do concur for the production of this Disease
either mediately or immediately: It is produced immediately by a stroke, fall,
wound, or the like; but they produce it mediately which increase blood, heat
and attenuate; as high and hot feeding, stoppage of Terms or Haemorrhoids, too
much exercise, great clamor, heat, long staying in the sun, and many others.

Moreover, External Cold may cause the Ruption of the Vessels, by making their
Tunicles harder and not so easily to be extended; but with this must be joined
strong Motion, or abundance of Humors.

The Diagnosis of this Disease is difficult in respect of the part from whence
it comes: yet Galen declares it in few words; 4. de loc. affect. cap. 6.
namely, blood coming from the Gullet and Stomach is put forth by vomit; when it
comes from the Vital parts, by Cough: from the Jaws and Weazand, by Hawking:
from the Mouth by simple spetting, which wants a more clear explication when
blood comes from the head to the inner parts of the Weazand and the Jaws, it
comes forth by Coughing, and so it does when it comes from the breast; and
therefore it is not distinguished by this sign.

Moreover, When blood coming from the Lungs or Breast is brought out by
Coughing: There are other necessary signs from which the parts affected may be
distinguished.

First therefore when blood comes from the head, although it sometimes cause
Coughing; yet the greatest part thereof is put forth by Hawking, and there is a
tickling in the Pallat as in a Catarrh: as also when you look into the Pallat
it appears to be foul, and bloody; and it is more confirmed to be from the
Head if at that time the Nose bleed.

When the blood comes from the Lungs, it is distinguished from that which comes
from the Breast by Galen in the place mentioned; for that which comes from the
Lungs is froathy, in greater plenty, and without pain: but from the Breast, it
is black, little, and with pain.

But it may be objected, That blood coming from the breast is carried by the
Lungs, and by consequence is froathy, because it is mixed with the air taken
in, as that which comes immediately from the Lungs.

And Avicen says, That blood from the breast is froathy: I Answer, That it is
one thing to spet some froath mixed with the blood; and another thing to spet
nothing but froath, which only comes from the substance of the Lungs.

Therefore you may observe* Three degrees of froath: for it is either wholly
froathy from the flesh of the Lungs, which it resembles, for the Lungs are but
a congealed froath; or it comes from the Vessels of the Lungs and is very
froathy: or it is mixed with froath and comes from the breast.

But the most certain sign that it comes from the Lungs is taken from the pain,
which is fixed and continues where the solution of continuity is.

And you must observe, That blood is sometimes sent from the Liver, Spleen,
Matrix, and other parts into the Lungs and spet forth: so that the Breast is
not primarily, but secondarily affected; which thing is hardly to be discovered.

But we may conjecture of it, namely if any of the aforesaid parts be troubled
with pain, inflammation, or any other distemper, and there neither is, nor has
been, any other fault in the breast.

You may find out the signs of the Causes from what has been said: For if
blood be brought by the Anastomosis of the Veins, there went before some Cause
that opened the mouth of the Vessels, then blood is thrown forth in a pretty
quantity and without pain. But if it come forth by Diapedesis or Rarefaction,
then is it waterish, little, and without pain.

When it breaks forth by Rixis, or Eruption, it is very much; if a Repletion
went before, or any External Cause that might break the Vessels.

Lastly, If it comes by Diabrosis, or Corrosion of the Vein, there went before
salt and sharp diffillations from the head: The blood is salt, and sharp, and
ill colored; and some Causes of sharp humors were formerly: in the beginning
there is but little blood, but after when the Corrosion is greater, then is
much blood spet forth, and at last there is a spetting of Matter.

Hippocrates, Aphor. 25. Sect. 4. does lay down the Prognostic of this
Disease, as what kind of blood soever is spet out of the mouth from any part
below, it is evil: for every opening of a vessel which lets blood come forth
so, is dangerous; especially in the Lungs; concerning which his Aphorism
chiefly speaks.

But sometimes such spetting of blood may be without hurt; namely, When Nature
by a critical Motion does purge the superfluous blood by those ways. And it is
observed, That Women which have had their Terms stopped have without harm at
certain times spet blood from their Lungs by the Anastomosis of the veins.

In respect of the Causes. Diapedesis or Rarifaction is less dangerous than
Anastomosis or Apertion and Eruption is most dangerous; for unless it be healed
within three or four days there comes an inflammation, which being suppurated
produces an Ulcer, from whence comes a Consumption: Whence Hippocrates says,
Aphor. 15, and 16. Sect. 7. That from spetting of blood there follows
spetting of Matter, and from spetting of Matter a Phthisis or Consumption.

But Diabrosis or Corrosion is most dangerous; and Galen says, That it is
incurable by reason the Ulcer that follows it is incurable.

The Cure of Haemoptoe or spetting blood, is wrought by Revulsion of blood from
the Lungs by correcting the evil quality thereof, and closing the vein that is
opened, by astringing and conglutinating means.

First therefore let blood from the Arm on the same side on which you find
heaviness or pricking, in a small quantity often, and at a distance for the
better Revulsion.

After that, open the vein in the Foot, and so you will make a Revulsion to a
further distance, and this will be more profitable if the disease come from
obstruction of the Terms. If the Patient be subject to the Hemorrhoids, you
must open them with Hors-leeches.

Also apply Cupping-glasses with Scarrification to the shoulders and back, or
without Scarrificaon to the Groins and under the Ribs. Rub and bind the extreme
parts, and in all the time of the Cure, at some distance apply often those
Cupping-glasses to the Hypochondria, or under the Ribs.

And let him take the following Julep thrice every day.

Take of Plantane and Poppy Water, of each two ounces: Syrup of dried Roses one
ounce: Lapis Prunellae one dram: Mix them for a Julep.

Lastly, You must often purge the serous and Chollerick humors which make the
blood more thin and fluid with Medicines that have an astringent Virtue: As,

Take of Rhubarb one dram: yellow Myrobolans half a dram: Tamarinds half an
ounce: Infuse them in Plantane Water; strain it and dissolve in it Powder of
Rhubarb half a dram: Syrup of dried Roses one ounce. Make a Potion.

Then give Medicines that close the Orifices of the Vessels by an astringent
quality, but such as will not retain the blood in the Breast by too much
astriction; therefore mix sometimes with them such as dissolve and expectorate
the congealed blood which is out of the Vessels.

Of all which these following are the best:

Take of Bole-Armenick, Terra Sigillata, both sorts of Coral, Boodstone, of
each half a dram: Sugar of Roses half an ounce. With one white of an Egg well
beaten with Rose Water, make a Lohoch.

Or you may make one more speedily, and more pleasant thus:

Take of the Water of the white of an Egg well beaten two drams: Sugar of Roses
one ounce: white Starch three drams. Mix them for a Lohoch. Or,

Take of Conserve of Roses, and the greater Comfry, of each one ounce:
Bole-Armenick and Terra Sigillata, of each one dram: With the Syrup of dried
Roses make an Opiate to be often held in the mouth, and swallowed by degrees.

Take of Conserve of dried Roses, Troches of Amber, and of sealed Earth, of
each half a dram: prepared Pearls one scruple: Sugar of Roses as much as of all
the rest. Mix them and let him take a spoonful thereof one hour before meat.

Take of the Juice of Purslain twelve ounces: Sugar eight ounces: Boil them to
a Syrup, of which let him often lick.

This is the best for spitting of blood. And if you want Purslain, you may take
Plantane.

The Syrup of Comfry according to Fernelius, prescribed by Bauderon, is good
for the same.

Take of Yarrow with the white Flower: and yellow Flower, of each two handfuls:
Green Roots of Tormentil, with the Leaves if they may be had, otherwise of the
dry, one ounce: the greater Burnet one handful: Conserve of red Roses half a
pound: spring Water sixteen pints: put them in a glassed pot covered and luted,
that the vapors may not come forth: then boil them in Balneo Mariae sixteen
hours; keep the straining in a glass, and take six ounces thereof every
morning, noon, and night.

Take of the Troches of Amber one dram: Plantane and Rose Water, of each one
ounce and an half: Syrup of Mirtles and dried Roses, of each half an ounce. Mix
them for a Julep.

Take of Spirit of Vitriol half a scruple: Plantane Water four ounces. Mix them
for a Potion.

This presently stops blood coming either by Cough or Vomiting.

Two spoonfuls of Syrup of Coral taken every day, is good against all manner of
bleeding. But the Tincture of Coral drawn with Juice of Lemmons, is more
powerful.

Quercetan in his Dispensatory, prescribes this following Water against
spitting of blood, which is very excellent.

Take of the Roots of Snakeweed, Comfry, and Tormentil, of each one ounce:
Knotgrass, Yarrow, Veronica, Winter-Green, Sanicle, Shepheards-purse with the
Roots, of each one handful: Bramble tops, and Mastich wood, of each half a
handful: Sumach and Myrtle berries, the seeds of Plantane, Barberries, and
white Poppies, of each six drams: the flowers of Water Lillies, Guords,
Quinces, and red Roses, of each two pugils. Bruise them and mix them; then
steep them four days at the fire in the Juyces of Plantane, Purslain, Sorrel,
and Agrimony, of each two pints: then strain them well, and put to them Acacia
and Hypocistis, or Conserve of sloes, of each two ounces: sealed Earth,
Bole-Armenick, of each half an ounce: the Electuary of Diatragacanth frigid,
two drams: then macerate them again four days, and distill them. Take two or
three spoonfuls of this Water alone, or with some proper Syrup.

The Chemical Oil of Amber does pierce, astringe, and dry powerfully, if you
give two drops thereof in Plantane Water: As Cesalpinus teaches in his
Speculum Artis Medicae.

Mercurialis in his consultations does highly comm^nd the seeds of white
Poppies, or white He^ane to be tak en every morning in the quantity of a dram,
with Sugar of Roses and Syrup of Pur^^ane: So you may also use the white
Diacodium or Syrup of Poppies prescribed in the Cure of the Phrenzy.

Amatus Lucitanus does highly commend the Juice of Nettles, in these words:
They which have vomited blood, after they have been given over by Physicians,
have been cured only by the juice of Nettles drunk five or six days fasting,
in the quantity of four ounces, and by Nettle Broth.

Sanguis Draconis does wonderfully conglutinate all inward Veins, if you give
half a dram thereof with Plantane Water, or other proper Liquor, or Medicine.

The usual Pills to hold under the Tongue, may be made thus:

Take of the Mucilage of Gum Arabic and Tragacanth, drawn with Plantane Water,
of each two drams: Mummy and Mastich, of each one dram: Sugar of Roses as much
as will make Pills, of which let him hold one continually in his mouth.

And take this following Powder in his Broths.

Take of red Coral and prepared Pearl, of each half a dram: Gum Arabic and
Tragacanth, of each two drams. Make a Powder.

Or boil white Poppy seeds and Sumach tied in a clout, in his Broth.

Narcoticks are good in this case, and you must use them thus:

Take of Syrup of Poppies, Jujubes, and dried Roses, of each one ounce: Mix
them, and take a spoonful every night. Or,

Take of Syrup of Poppies and Purslain, of each three drams: Terra Sigillata
half a dram: Purslain and Plantane Water, of each one ounce and an half. Make a
Potion to be taken at night. Or,

Take of Syrup of Myrtles and Poppies, of each one ounce: Bole-Armenick half a
dram: mix them to be taken at night.

Sometimes you may give Treacle of four months old, as Galen teaches, 5.
Method. cap. 13. or Philonium Romanum, or Laudanum.

Platerus reports that he cured one, only with the Troches of Winter Cherries,
with Opium dissolved in Goats milk, taken some days; and also that he cured a
Woman with one ounce and an half of Manna given in Broth, and with blood, and
the use of the Tablets following, morning and evening for many days.

Take of the Seeds of white Henbane poudered finely two scruples: red Coral
half a dram: Gum Arabic one scruple: new Violets ten: the Juice of Barberries
two drams: Sugar dissolved in Rose and Plantane Water, two ounces. Make Tablets.

Trallianus, lib. 7. cap. 1. does highly commend the Boodstone, by which he
says that he cured many, giving it to four scruples, with the Juice of
Pomegranate, or Knotgrass; but to them who bled not much, he gave it with warm
water. But he says you must sift it well, give it often, that it may better be
distributed, and in Wine.

Antony Valerius exercit. ad cap. 27. lib. 1. Hollerij de morb. internis,
reports, that he cured, when all means failed, by this Powder, which he had
from Julius Scaliger.

Take of Spodium, red Roses, Bole-Armenick, Terra Sigillata, and Boodstone,
of each half an ounce: red Coral, Amber, and Pearls not perforated, of each two
drams and an half: Gum Arabic and Tragacanth of each two drams: the seeds of
Purslain, Mallows, Ribwort, red Roses, burnt Hartshorn, and white Starch
burnt, of each three drams. Make thereof a fine powder, and give three drams
thereof with rain water.

This Powder Scaliger borrowed of Serapio, who mentioned it in his Book of
Spitting of blood; and which Valesus also commends. And you may make Tablets
thereof with Sugar dissolved in ^ose or Plantane Water.

The Electuary of Haelideus is like it, and easier made; which was wont to be
famous in Germany, ^^d so commended of Gesner, Erastus, and Crato, thus:

Take of the seeds of white Poppy and Henbane, of each ten drams: Terra
Sigillata, and red Coral, of each five drams: old Sugar of Roses, as much as
will make an Electuary. Give hereof ^e dram morning and evening, after
universal Medicines have been given.

But because that spitting is stopped by the use of Astringents, and thence
comes difficulty of ^eathing, you must at times use things that mollify the
Breast, and also stop bleeding, such as they which are compounded of Gum
Arabic, Tragacanth, Starch, and Syrup of dried Roses, Quinces, Mir^^s, and
Jujubes the Juice of Plantane and Purslain, while you use Astringents, if the
Belly be ^^und give a Clyster or Purge, that leaves some Astringency.

In the whole time of the Cure, if you suspect that there is any congealed blood
in the breast, you must dissolve it with Oxycrate thus made, according to
Galen, 5. Meth. that it may be pleasant and not provoke Coughing with the
V^negar; for so it dissolveth the blood and gently binds: Let him take six
ounces warm twice or thrice in one day: and if it provoke Coughing sweeten it
with Sugar: but you must use this when the bleeding begins to cease; for this
also Amber and Mummy mixed with glutinatours and astringents is good.

Also for the allaying the Heat of the Liver, use often a Cooling Epithem to
the right side.

Take of Rose, Plantane, and Succory Water, of each four ounces: Vinegar of
Roses two ounces: the Powder of the Electuary of the three Saunders one drani
and an half: Camphire one scruple: make an Epitheme to be applied warm to the
Liver.

After the use of the Epitheme anoint the same part with Ointment of Roses, or
the Cerat of Saunders, with a little Rose-Vinegar.

Anoint also the Reins of the Back with Oil of Roses and Water Lillies washed
with Vinegar; adding a little Camphire to allay the heat of the blood in the
hollow Vein: But you must beware of things that are too Astringent, lest they
drive the blood from the hollow Vein into the Lungs.

It is also very good to wash the stones with Oxycrate to stop the Flux and
allay the heat: for there is a great consent between these parts.

A Bath would also be good to allay the heat of the Bowels; but because they
relax and so open the Veins, you must avoid it.

Let him drink Syrup of My^tles, Purslain, and dried Roses; or Sugar of Roses
with Barley-water, or with the Water wherein Boodstone or sealed Earth has
been infused. Or mix Conserve of Roses with the Water, or with Water wherein
Coriander has been infused, made sharp with the Spirit of Vitriol: or with the
Tincture of Roses.

A weak Decoction of Yarrow drunk ordinarily is good against al bleeding.

If a sharp Defluxion from the Head upon the Lungs, be the Cause of this
Disease, besides what has been said, you may use those Remedies which are
prescribed in the Cure of a Hot Catarrh.

After the Blood is stopped, to keep it from returning you must first abstain
from al things that stir the Humors, as violent exercise, great heat, anger,
roaring, rich Wines, the meats mentioned which are either salt or spiced.

Conserve of dried Roses must be held in the mouth, especially at bed time.

Take of Conserve of Roses and of Comfry Roots, of each one ounce: the Troches
of Amber, and sealed Earth, of each half a dram: red Coral and prepared Pearls
of each one scruple: Sugar of Roses as much as all the rest: make a mixture, of
which let him take a spoonful sometimes one hour before meat.

Let him be purged four times in a year, or oftener if occasion be, with the
Potion of Rhubarb and Myrobalans above mentioned; to which, instead of Syrup ad
one ounce of Manna.

You may with good success give a scruple of torrefied Rhubarb every morning
one hour before meat, especially if the blood be very serous, as it is commonly
in Haemorrhages.

Also Rhubarb not torrefied given in the same quantity; for so the blood after
the serous watery Humor is carried away will grow thicker: Or, You may give a
dram of Rhubarb once every Week.

There is also a Magistral Syrup to cleanse the blood from thin serous Humors.
As,

Take of the Leaves of Bugloss, Fumitory, Hops, Succory, Endive, Agrimony,
Plantan^, Maidenhair, of each one handful: the Tops of Asparagus, Vervain, and
Eyebright, of each half an handful: the Seeds of Gourds and Mellons, of each
half an ounce: Endive and Dodde^ seed of each two drams: Liquoris scraped, and
Raisons, of each one ounce: sweet Prunes twelve: Senna four ounces: Polypody of
the Oak two ounces: Agarick tied in a thin Clout, six drams: Mace one dram: the
Three Cordial Flowers and red Pease or Pulse of each one pugil: boil these to a
pint and an half: dissolve in the straining of the juice of sweet Apples three
ounces: sine Sugar o^^ pound and a quarter: make a Syrup boiled well, and
sented with yellow Saunders: Then infuse in it one ounce of Rhubarb beaten and
tied in a Clout, let him take an ounce and an half, or two ounce^, with Broth
twice in a month.

Make an Issue in the right or lest Leg, as the Liver or Spleen are affected.

Lastly, Let him use for a whole Month Asses-Milk steeled, for prevention of
this Disease.

For his Drink, take Water boiled a little with Coriander seeds, or the
Decoction of Barley and Liquoris.

Chap. 7. Of Phthisis, or Consumption.
ALthough the word Phthisis signify every Consumption, yet it is most properly
taken for that extenuation of body which comes after an Ulcer in the Lungs.

For this Extenuation of body comes from a putrid lingering Fever, which
turns to an Hectic; and this Fever comes from the Ulcer in the Lungs, from
which by reason of their neerness to the Heart putrid Vapors are continually
sent thither and cause the Fever, which after is dispersed from the Heart into
the whole body; so all the parts being too cold and dry, and receiving the
intemperate putrefying heat, do not well concoct their nourishment, but are ill
nourished, from whence you may plainly perceive a Consumption of the substance
of the whole body: for that Fever by reason of its continuance from the
perseverance of the Cause turns Hectic: and its often joined with a putrid
Fever, which is known by the Urine, and by the Distempers extraordinary at
sometimes, in^omuch that in some Consumptions you may observe sits of an
intermitting Fever.

A sharp and Corroding Humor, either coming from other Parts, or breeding in
the Lungs, is the immediate Cause of an Ulcer in the Lungs.

First sharp and salt Rhewm falls from the brain, which being violent easily
ulcerateth the Lungs: Sometimes Phlegm that is not sharp nor salt will do the
same: namely, if it lie long in them and putrify, and from the putrefaction
arises an Acrimony, which Corroding Ulcerateth: yet this putrid phlegm in the
Lungs does not always ulcerate, as we may observe in a Catarrh when putrid
Matter is spet forth, and the Lungs are sound.

But there are two Conditions for the Causing of an Ulcer: one in respect of
the matter flowing; another in respect of the Lungs: In respect of the Matter
it is required that it should be so disposed, that when it is putrified it
begets a sharpness which may cause an Ulcer: In respect of the Lungs, they must
be extraordinary tender, and disposed to corruption, which in a word is called
a Vicious Constitution of the Lungs, coming from the Parents usually, of which
we will speak hereafter.

Now the Humors that Exulcerate and putrify the Lungs, come from the parts
adjoining, as the Pleura, Mediastinum, Diaphragma, rough Artery, and especially
from an inflammation in them, w^^^h comes to Suppuration and turns into an
Empyema: of which Hippocrates speaks, Aphor. 15. S^ c. 5. They who fall from a
Pleurisy into an Empyema, if the Empyema break in forty days and come away,
are Cured; but if not, they fall into a Consumption.

The Humor is in the Lungs when from some vessel broken, corroded, or opened by
a wound, the blood flowing does putrify; or when an Ulcer is left there from
the small pox.

Sometimes from the evil Constitution of the Lungs, evil Humors proceed; which
corrupt their substance and cause a Consumption: and this comes commonly from
the Parents, from whence a Con^mption is reckoned among the Haereditary
diseases, of which it is the chief, so that we may observe how many whole
Families are taken away with this disease.

This evil Constitution of the Lungs is not in the first qualities, but has
some malignant and venomous quality, by which it becomes infectious: Although
we deny not but a soft and loose substance of the Lungs, and therefore more fit
for Corruption, does much conduce to the breeding of this Disease.

This evil Constitution of the Lungs causes that some fall into Consumptions
without a Distillation, Inflammation, or any other evident Cause, but only from
the fault of the part that corrupts its own nourishment.

Sometimes it comes from a Pustulae bred in the Lungs and broken, which by
Hippocrates, 1. de morbis, is made twofold:

One by him is called, A Crude Pustule, because it never comes to Suppuration,
but growing by degrees stops the passage of the breath, and at length kills the
Patient.

The other is that which comes to Suppuration, and is called the Imposthume of
the Lungs, and these come two ways, either by Defluxion, or Congestion; and
the Matter gathered is either in a Bagg or without it in the very substance of
the part.

The thickness of the Bagg often causes that such an Imposthume is carried
many years in the Lungs undiscovered, and without any hurt to the body: From
whence Hippocrates says, Aph. 41. Sect. 6. They who have an Imposthume in the
body, and feel it not, it is by reason of the thickness of the Matter, or of
the place wherein it is that they feel it not: For this Cause many who seemed
to be in perfect health have suddenly died by an Imposthume broken within: of
which there are Examples in Ferne^ius, lib. 5. de morbis, de part. ^orb. and
sympt. c. 10. among which he mentions two Physicians who sore-^aw the danger
without signs.

If the matter which comes from the Imposthume broken, flow into the Ventricle
of the Heart, the sick presently die: but if it come to the Bronchia, or
passages in the Lungs, it may be spit up; if the body be strong, and the matter
little in quantity; but commonly there is an ulcer remaining in the Lungs which
causes a Consumption.

Moreover, There are external Causes, as contagion, which is the chiefest; for
this Disease is so infectious, that we may observe Women to be infected by
their Husbands, and Men by their Wives, and all their Children to die of the
same; not only from the infection of their Parents seed, but from the company
of him that was first affected.

And this Contagion is more easily communicated to them that are of kin,
wherefore it is not safe for a Brother or Sister to enter into the Chamber for
the Miasmaza, or vapors infective, which come from their Lungs, and infect the
whole Air of the Chamber, and being drawn in by others (especially if they are
any way disposed to the same Disease) beget the same disease in their Lungs.

There are other external Causes, especially very hot or cold Air; the hot Air
does melt down the sharp humors which are contained in the Brain, and sends
them to the Lungs. The too cold Air by astringing, compressing, and Squeezing
does cause the like defluxion: But the Air in Autumn is most dangerous, because
by its inequality in heat and cold, it causes sharp and salt distillations;
whence Hippocrates says, Aph. 10. Sect, 3. Autumn is the worst time for People
in Consumptions. Secondly, Sharp and salt meats and drinks do cause a
Consumption, which sill the Head with salt and sharp vapors. And lastly, all
those internal and external Causes which use to produce spitting of blood,
which uses to end in a Consumption, may be said to be Causes thereof.

Among the Antecedent Causes, evil humors throughout the whole body, are
accounted the chief, which being moved by external causes, are sent to the
brain, and from thence to the Lungs. Among which you may reckon the suppression
of the Terms, Hemorrhoids, or other usual evacuations, which does cause
Catarrhs and defluxions.

The aforesaid Causes do produce this Disease, especially among those whom
Hippocrates calls Phthirodeis, and Pterugodeis, that is, such as have a
straight and distressed breast, a long neck, and shoulder bones sticking forth,
who must of necessity fall into this disease, if they have tender Lungs, or any
hereditary inclination thereunto. Also they are inclined to a Consumption, who
have a weak Head, which is easily filled winh superfluous Humors, which are
sent to the Organs or Instruments of the Spirits.

There are no true and proper Differences of Consumptions, but such as come
from the variety of their Causes. Yet Hippocrates does lay down many kinds
which are worth the observing, which must be reduced, not to a true
Consumption, but to one in general, which is without ulcer of the Lungs. And
first lib. 6. epid. sect. 8. text. 47. he shows of a Consumption which came
from a running of the Reins, in this History: A Satyr called Grypalopex, being
twenty five years old, had Nocturnal Polutions, and daily loss of Seed; who
when he came to be thirty years of age, fell into a Consumption, and died. For
by the continual loss of Seed the nourishment of the body is taken away, by
which the solid patts are consumed and dried.

There is another kind in Hipp. 2. de morb. called the Consumption of the back,
which comes from too much Lechery, which destroys the whole habit of the Body,
and takes away the nourishment from the solid parts: this happens to new
married folks, who are unsatiable, and is the chiefest of the Consumptions of
the back; for Hippocrates lays down four kinds thereof: The first is that
mentioned, which comes from Lechery. The second is laid down lib. 2. de intern.
affect. text. 13. which comes from too much blood, and nourishment going to the
Spinal Marrow, by which the Natural heat, and all other faculties are stifled
and destroyed. Now Hipp. 5. epid. shows that the body may consume by too much
blood, in a story concerning one, who, when nothing would nourish him, but he
still grew leaner, was perfectly cured, when all other Medicines failed, by
bleeding in both Hands as long as the Veins would discharge. The third kind is
in the place mentioned, namely, when the marrow of the back is dried, by which
the whole body dries and consumes. Hippocrates mentions two Causes of this
dryness: one is the obstruction of the veins which go to the back with
nourishment; another is the flowing of Choler from the head upon the back,
which Hippocrates shows in his Book de locis in homine. The fourth is
described in the same Book, and it comes from a distillation upon the marrow of
the back, in these words: Moreover, when a defluxion falls upon the Back, this
kind of consumption comes with pain in the Loins, and seeming emptiness to the
Patient in the internal parts of the head. In the same Book, numb. 18. he says
thus: When there is a defluxion upon the Marrow, there is a secret
undiscernable Consumption. He calls it secret, because when the body decaies,
you cannot so easily find out the cause: he calls it undiscernable, because you
cannot perceive the inconveniences of the defluxion at the first. But it
cease to be secret and undiscernable, if the defluxion be not only upon the
marrow of the back, but also upon the Os Sacrum, and Hip: for then the
distillation is apparent, and there is pain and loss of motion, with dejection
of mind. These are more clear in Hippocrates, in his Tenth Book de glandulis,
in these words: There is another Disease which comes from a defluxion from the
Head by the Veins upon the Marrow of the Back, and from thence to the Os
Sacrum, and Hip, which is a Consumption also which destroys, for then the
Shoulders and both the feet are weak, and after the legs, and they always die
of it, though they have been formerly cured. This kind of Consumption is to be
observed, because it often happens, especially to such who have weak Nerves,
which will easily receive the desluxion.

To this kind you may refer that which comes of want and hunger; which Galen
mentions, libde Marasmo, when the Body decaies for want of nourishment. Now
Nourishment is wanting to the solid parts, not only for want or meat, which the
Stomach concocteth, and sends to the Liver to make blood for the whole Body: but
also when the Chylus which is sufficiently concocted in the stomach cannot pass
through the Meseraick Veins, by reason of their obstruction; as it happens to
them who have a Struma, whose Mesentery for the most part is full of Glandles;
by which the milky Veins called Venae Lacteae, are compressed, from whence the
whole Body grows lean, and they die of a Consumption.

But the solid parts are deprived of their necessary nourishment when salt
blood that is not sit for nourishment is gathered into the Veins, which, as
Galen shows, are incurable, 5. Meth. except by Epicrasis, or change of habit.
And finally, Galen, lib. de Marasmo, decimo meth. and in other places, speaks
of a Consumption from a manifest or hidden Inflammation, from the syncope of the
Heart or Stomach, and the like, which may be seen in their proper places.

The Diagnostick signs by which you may know a true Consumption, do some of
them, declare a Consumption beginning, or begun, or confirmed, which are very
well set down by Hipp. 1. de morbis.

The signs of a Consumption at hand, are in Hipp. Book, mentioned, Text 9. in
these words: There is also a Suppuration when phlegm flows from the Head upon
the Lungs; and first for the most part it flows privately, and causes a little
Cough, and the spittle to be bitter, and a little heat.

In this saying there are contained four signs of an eminent Consumption.

The first sign is, A defluxion from the beginning closely conveyed to the
Lungs, because then the matter is little, and because the thinner part of the
humor, which flows about the rough Artery, and does not vex the Lungs, which
otherwise would be more disturbed in the beginning, before they are weakened;
thence it is called a secret defluxion, because there is little hurt at the
first done thereby.

The second sign is, When the Humor flowing makes but a small Cough, being at
the first but little and thin.

The third sign is, When the spittle is more bitter than usually it was,
because the humor that must ulcerate the Lungs must be sweet, sharp, or salt;
which qualities being altered by a preternatural heat, do turn bitter: for it
is known that sweet and salt things overmuch boiled, do grow bitter. But in
regard that preternatural heat is not very great at the first, the spittle is
but a little bitter.

The fourth sign, is a little heat, as being feverish; for when the matter is
not much moved, but receives putrefaction from the heat of the place, wherein
it has been long contained, the Fever cannot be very violent, for the putrid
matter can many ways be refrigerated; therefore it is no wonder if the Fever
be small in the beginning.

To these signs of Hippocrates we may ad an evil formation of the Breast and
Youth, which meeting with the aforesaid signs, must needs declare a consumption
to be at hand.

The evil fashion of the Breast is when it is narrow, and the Shoulder-blades
stick up like wings, when the fore part of the Breast is narrow, and the hinder
part broad, for then the Breast is both small and evil proportioned. The
straightness of the Breast shows want of Natural heat, and the evil proportion
shows its weakness. For if the Natural heat were much and vigorous, the breast
would have thereby been extended. But such and so great is this disposition,
that Hippocrates calls it a Natural Consumption, coming from a principle in
Nature. Wherefore they who are thus made must of necessity fall into a
Consumption, except some other disease take them off. Which by the way is
observable, for if they have any acute disease, who are thus inclined, they
seldom escape, because the Natural heat is weak and little, and therefore will
easily be overcome by a strong disease. Therefore the most wary Physicians in
such kind of Natures and habits, do use to prognostic rather death and danger,
than health or recovery, when they fall into any disease.

In them who are inclinable to this Disease, Youth is most dangerous, according
to Hippocrates, Aph. 9. Sect. 5. especially from Eighteen to Thirty Five years,
in which time there is much blood for to break the vessels; as also it is then
thin and sharp, more proper to open and corrode the Vessels: In Children, the
Catarrh is made slow with much Moisture: in Old Men, it is allayed with Cold:
but in the Middle Age, for the Reasons aforesaid, it does often exulcerate.

Moreover, in Youth many distempers come by Diet, by which many ill humors are
produced and the blood infected^ as also by reason of violent exercise, as
running, wrestling, leaping, fencing, going in the sun, a vein may be broken in
the Lungs which may produce a Consumption.

The signs of a Consumption begun, are set down by Hippocrates in his Book of
Diseases before mentioned, Text 10. in these words, In progress of time the
Lungs are exasperated and ulcerated within by the Catarrh putrefying there,
whereby the breast seems ponderous, and there is a pain before and behind; and
there is more sharp heat in the body: and the Lungs by reason of their heat
draw moisture from the whole body and especially from the head, which also is
made hot from that body, and spetteth forth thick matter.

In these Words there are Six Signs contained of a Consumption begun.

The First sign is, That the Lungs are exasparated in progress of time: that
is, The Cough is more violent; for the Disease increasing the Distillation is
stronger, and the Lungs are peirced therewith, and provoked to Cough forth that
which hurts them: which Cough does not only come from the matter flowing
down, but from that which flowed formerly: for being not Coughed up it grows
foul by long continuance* by which means the Lungs are more forced to expulsion.

The Second sign is, The weight of the Breast which comes from the matter
gathered into the Lungs: For albeit the Lungs of themselves do feel little or
nothing, yet because they are tied to the Breast by Membranes, they perceive a
weight, when they are burdened.

A Third sign is, A sharp pain before, and behind: for the matter contained in
the Lungs does with its evil quality offend them, as well as with its quantity
and putrefaction, by which the Membranes are pricked, which cause great pain:
for the pain in the Membranes is always pricking. Now this pain is perceived
before and behind; because these Membranes are joined before to the Sternon,
and behind to the Back: and the cause of this pain is from a great Cough,
called by Hippocrates, A Malignant, or Cruel Cough.

The Fourth sign is When sharp Heat falls into the body, and there follows a
violent Fever: for when through progress of time the matter putrifieth more,
it is probable that the Fever will be greater; for although the matter from the
beginning do only putrify in the Lungs, yet by reason of the Suppuration made
in the Breast with an Ulcer, the filth is communicated to the humors contained
in the Veins; from which come diverse sorts or putrid Fevers, and these differ
from that Fever which comes only from the Ulcer in the Lungs, through the
filthy vapors which are carried from them into the Heart, which turns to an
Hectic; and therefore in a Consumption there is a Hectic Fever often joined
with a Putrid.

The Fifth sign is, When a great quantity of Phlegm falls from the Head to the
Lungs: which Hippocrates confirms, when he shows the Cause of that great
Defluxion; namely, The Lungs by their Heat drawing Phlegm from the whole body:
Hence it is that the humors contained in the whole body are the matter of a
continual and great Flux which does so trouble men in Consumptions. The Lungs
by the filth which they have contracted, grow hot; by which heat Phlegm is drawn
from the Brain, which the Brain fetches from the whole Body: And this is one of
the principal Causes of the extenuation or the whole body: for all the humors,
good and bad, are carried to those parts, and so the whole body decays.

The Sixth sign is, Spetting of thick rotten Phlegm: for when the Matter
putrifieth and there is an Ulcer, quittor or filth must needs come from thence,
and therefore the Spittle is Mattery: but it is between thick and thin: for
after that it has by long continuance in the Lungs grown thick, it is made
thinner by the addition of that which breaks from the Ulcer, and so it becomes
moderate, which Hippocrates calls Subcrassum, or Thickish.

To these mentioned Signs of Hippocrates you may ad this as most certain,
namely, The Extenuating the body with a lingering and constant Fever: For
besides the putrid Fevers above mentioned which come and go by fits, and grow
from the humors which putrify in the Veins: there is also always present a
lingering daily Fever coming from the vapors sent from the Ulcer to the Heart
which corrupts the nourishment of the whole body, and makes it dry and hot,
from whence the body must needs grow extenuated.

To there you may ad Sweatings at Night, with which men in Consumptions are
often troubled as soon as they begin to sleep: for by sleep the Heat is drawn
in which increases the Inflammation of the Lungs; and the heat inwardly
increased, causes abundance of vapors, which are thickened in the skin, and
turned into sweat.

Moreover, There is a continual rigor which comes from the sharpness of the
matter which pricketh the Membranes.

And Lastly, You may ad sweetness of spittle, which uses to come when it
begins to Suppurate, which is the original of Saltness.

Hippocrates shows also the signs of a Consumption confirmed, in his 11. Text
of the Book above mentioned in these words, The longer this Disease lasts,
the more absolute matter will be spet, and the Fevers be the sharper, the
Cough more frequent and strong. the body will more consume, and yet the body is
disturbed downward from Phlegm, and this comes from the Brain* when any man
comes to this he must perish.

In these Words we may observe that there are Five Signs of a Consumption
confirmed.

The First is, The Spittle being more Mattery, or rather Matter it self.

The Second is, A strong Fever, and sharp, more putrefying; and the Ulcer more
foul.

The Third is, An often and violent Cough more than formerly; often because of
the great provocation and little evacuation, therefore nature laboreth to do
that at diverse times which the cannot do at once: and it is a stronger Cough,
not only because the greater sharpness of the Water does more violently stir up
the expulsive faculty; but also because of the wearing away of the solid parts,
the breast is made more hollow, hence comes a hoars and sounding Cough, as from
a hollow place.

The Fourth sign is, Pining and want of Apetite, which makes them leaner; now
the want of Appetite comes from the distillation which does not only fall upon
the spirital members, but also upon the natural* especially the Stomach, whose
mouth is thence weakened to the loss of Appetite; as also from the putrid
vapors sent thither either from the Fever or the Ulcer.

The Last sign is, A loose belly which comes from Phlegm falling from the head,
by which in time the stomach and guts are weakened, and the retentive faculty
destroyed: and this kills the Patient as we shall show more at large in the
Prognostics.

To these signs of Hippocrates, we may ad some other:

The First is, A great Extenuation of the whole body, so that all the Musculous
flesh is consumed, and the bones appear only covered with skin: and hence it is
that the nayls are crooked, because the Flesh which was in the tops of the
Fingers to hold up the nayls, is consumed.

To this you may ad Difficulty of breathing, both because the Faculty is weak,
as also because the Bronchia of the Lungs are stopped with putrid matter; as also
because the part is for the most part putrified and consumed, and therefore
cannot take in sufficient air to cool the heart; so that what the Lungs cannot
do by one breathing, it must do by often.

And Lastly, We may ad, That in a confirmed Consumption that is desperate, the
Hair falls off, the Cheeks wax blue, except it be after meat, and then the
vapors sent up make the red Lice breed in abundance, and the Feet swel.

Neither need we so many signs, for if any ordinary man, says Areteus, shall
see a man pale, weak, and coughing, and very lean, he will conclude him to be in
a Consumption.

Yet we must observe diligently, That sometimes a violent Catarrh falling upon
the Lungs will resemble a Consumption so, that filth like Matter, shall be spit
forth, and thence may a Fever come through putrefaction and extenuation of
body: but they who are so are easily cured by diligence in means, therefore let
us distinguish this rightly from a Consumption, which is chiefly done by
discerning between putrid Phlegm and Matter. Thus;

Matter is of a dun Color, and less White than Phlegm; sometimes of diverse
Colors, and being put into hot Water it sinketh and dissolveth: but Phlegm
swims at the top and sticks together by reaof its s^^ininess, and will not
dissolve.

But if some of the Spittle dissolve and the rest not, it is made of Phlegm and
Matter, which often happens.

As for the Prognostic, it is very hard to Cure a new Ulcer in the Lungs; but
it is impossible to Cure an Old, because it is opened by the continual motion
of the Lungs and by Coughing, so that it will not be united: as also the force
of the Medicine is gone before it can come at it, and the lost substance of the
Lungs cannot be repaired.

Moreover, An Ulcer, Spittle, Fever, and Leanness, require contrary Remedies,
for those things which dry the Ulcer, do hinder Spittle, increase the Fever,
and Leanness: and Moist things which are good against the Fever and Leanness,
do make the Ulcer more foul.

Sometimes the Ulcer seems Cured, and there is a scab upon it, but with the
least motion it falls off, and the Disease returns.

A Consumption which comes from a small Ulcer of short continuance, although it
be difficult, yet is not uncurable if proper Medicines be timely used: And they
who have gathered Observations mention many so Cured; now there is most hope
when the Patient is strong, the spittle white, even of one color, and easily
raised; if the humor falling from the head pass through the Nose, and if
thereupon the Fever abate, if the Appetite be good, and there be no thirst,
and if the belly bound and in good order, if the Patient have a good habit of
body, young, and have his breast large and hairy.

They whose spittle stinketh, or have loose bellies, or cannot spet, are near
death, as Hippocrates teaches, 1. Prog. and Aph. 11. and 12. Sect. 5. And,
Aph. 16. Sect. 7.

A Consumption coming upon an acute Disease does kill speedily, but if it come
from other Causes it is Chronical, and lasts many years: And Avicen says,
That he knew a Woman that lived twenty three years in a Consumption. And
Matthew de Gradi says, That another Woman which was always about the fire,
lived in a Consumption twenty eight years.

The Cure of this Disease, as is said, is for the most part impossible, if the
Disease be Old; but if it be New it may sometimes, and easier when it is but
coming upon them who are disposed thereto by an hereditary disposition, but are
not yet fallen into it. Therefore we shall first lay down a Prophylactick or
preservative, and then show how to cure the disease.

Therefore for the amending of the evil disposition in a Consumption, use a
cooling diet, and moist, and all such things as correct the blood, and make it
mild, and correct its saltness and sharpness: as the Waters of sweet Baths, the
use of Milk and the like. As also China Roots boiled in small Beer; but the
Decoction of the Sanders is the best, which is not only good in a Consumption
at hand, or begun, but also in salt and thin distillations, and in old bleeding
from thence. The Decoction of Guajacum does wonders upon the same account with
the former, either given in distilled Waters, with a little white or red Wine,
as the disease will bear it. Now the Decoction of Guajacum, and of Sanders, are
made both alike, both for the first and second drink, and given the same way.
To these you may ad change of Air, which is good both to prevent and cure, And
lastly, those Remedies are good which we will lay down for the cure of the
disease confirmed, to be used first.

Now the whole Cure consists in the clesing and glutinating of the ulcer, by
taking away the Causes that produce and nourish it, by opposing the Hectic
Feavet, and restraining of the Consumption.

First therefore, because an ill habit of body may increase the Ulcer of the
Lungs, you must use gentle purges, at diverse distances, as long as the body is
not very low. And these must be made of Manna, Rhubarb, Cassia, or Syrup of
Roses, thus:

Take of Barley half a pugil: Liquoris scraped, and Raisons stoned, of each
three drams: Jujubes four: the flowers of Bugloss, and Violets, of each half a
pugil: boil them to three ounces: In the straining dissolve Rhubarb infused in
Scabious Water with yellow Sanders four scruples: Manna one ounce: Syrup of
Roses half an ounce. Make a Potion.

Or give two ounces of Manna with Chicken or ordinary Broth.

Or make a Bolus of Cassia one ounce, and one scruple of the powder of Liquoris.

In the beginning you may give stronger purges for to draw down the salt and
sharp Catarrh which is the chief Cause of the Ulcer, such as are prescribed in
a hot Catarrh.

Also before the body be too lean, at the first you may let blood to allay the
Fever, and the acrimony of the humor.

But in the beginning of the Cure you must stay and divert the Catarrh from the
Breast, otherwise all other things will be in vain. And all those things which
were prescribed for the Cure of a hot Catarrh are good in this case.

Besides a Seton to the Neck, is very good. And Fabricius Hildanus reports that
he cured many by this way.

At length you must come to the Cure of the Ulcer; for which, give things that
cleanse, knit, and expectorate. Many there are of this nature. But these
following are the best.

Milk does hit all intentions for Cure: It cleanses with its serous parts, it
conglutinateth with its coagulating part, and nourishes and refreshes with
its unctious part. But there are diverse kinds of Milk, and Woman's Milk is the
best, because it is more agreeable to our Natures, especially if it be sucked
from the breast. Platerus affirms that he knew many cured by the use thereof;
and that one of them did not only recover, but grew so strong, that least his
Nurse should want milk for him, he got her with child again.

But because many will not endure that sort, Asses Milk is commended, which
because it is very full of Whey, does easily pierce into the Veins, and
excellently cleanse the Ulcer: the next to this is Goats Milk. Let the Ass be
fed with Plantane, Vine Leaves, Brambles, Polyganon, Grass, Barley, and Rye.
Let him drink it new milked, warm, therefore let the Ass be brought near the
Chamber, and be milked into a warm Vessel. First let him take it in a small
quantity three or four ounces, that his Stomach may be used to it, increasing
the quantity by degrees to eight or ten ounces, or a pint, and least it should
grow sour or curdle in the Stomach: and that it may agree better with the
Lungs, put Sugar of Roses to it, one ounce thereof to eight of milk: let him
not sleep after his Milk immediately, but walk gently about the Chamber: let
him not eat before the Milk be concocted, and he find a stomach, and that it be
more effectual. You must not give it in a strong Fever, or when there is a
pain in the Head, or swelling in the Hypochondria, or a Chollerick flux,
according to Hippocrates, Aphor. 64. Sect. 5.

Commonly it is taken only once in a day; but it is better twice; and best if
the Patient live only upon it. For besides that it does work more powerfully in
a great quantity, there is a great profit by not mixing it with Broth and other
meats, for they will easily putrify. If therefore the Disease be very
desperate, give Milk after purging every six hours with Manus Christi of Pearl
and Coral. And least strength should fail, let him intermix a restoring
distilled Water.

Sugar of Roses is very profitable, as also the Conserve; by use whereof,
Avicen reports that he cured a Woman of a desperate Consumption, so that she
was not only sound, but very fat afterward.

Mesue also witnesses that many have been recovered by the same, and he
directs that the Conserve of Roses be new, not above a year old, taken in a
great quantity, and often, with Medicines, Meat, and drink, and also by it self
at any hour. But first give Clensers, because it will otherwise astringe and
retain the excrementitious matter in the Lungs. But when breath begins to fail,
and the Patient cannot raise phlegm, let him take expectorating things; as Syrup
of Hysop and Coltsfoot, and other Lohochs. And if heat arise from drying too
much, give Syrup of Violets, Jujubes, the Mucilage of Fleabane and Quinces, and
the like.

Montanus, Valeriola, and Forestus, say that they have seen some cured by
taking Sugar of Roses in great quantities. An Apothecary whom I knew in a
Consumption, made a great quantity of Sugar of Roses for himself, and eat it
constantly, by which he was cured.

An Infusion of Yarrow, Tormentil, Burnet, and Conserve of Roses made in Balneo
Mariae, is very good, as it is described in the Chapter of spitting of blood,
if it be used twenty days together.

The Decoction of Bugle in Mutton Broth, does excellent against a Consumption
and inward ulcers, it does a little gently loosen the belly against the Nature
of all the Consolidae.

Trallianus, lib. 7. cap. 1. boasts that he cured many with Boodstone. The
preparation and use whereof we have showed in the Cure of spitting blood.

The Syrup of the Juice of Ground Ivy is commended by Quercetan, thus made:

Take of the Juice of Ground Ivy two pound and an half: let it be digested in
Balneo Mariae. To this Juice well refined, put Sugar of Roses one pound;
Penides four ounces: Boil them to Syrup, to be taken now and then a spoonful.

He also adds the flower of Brimstone to it to make it into a Lohoch, of
which he gives four times in a day; and he boasts that he has therewith
cured many.

The Syrup of the flowers of St. John's wort, made by Infusion in Balneo Mariae,
is very good in this Disease, as also for all inward ulcers.

The Syrup of Comfry is excellent; for it cleanses, heals, and strengthens
by astringing; as also Comphry Roots boiled in Broth

It is affirmed that many have been cured by this Hydromel.

Take of China Roots sliced, six ounces: Coltsfoot Roots three ounces: Burdock
and Avens Roots, of each three ounces: Elicampane Roots two ounces: Lungwort
Leaves, and Scabious Leaves and Roots, both the Veronicaes, Vlmaria, and Herb
Twopence, of each two handfuls: all the Capillar Herbs, of each one handful:
the tops of Bugle, Bettony, Cowslip flowers, and red Veronica, of each four
pugils: Ground Ivy Leaves and Roots three handfuls: Jujubes, Dates, Sebestens,
and Raisons stoned, of each one ounce and an half: Spanish Liquoris one ounce
and an half. Let them all, being well sliced, boil in thirty two pints of
spring Water till half be consumed, with a little gentle fire: ad to the Liquor
being strained, of the best Honey four pound: Boil it again, and skim it; then
strain it through an Hippocras Bag, putting thereto half an ounce of Cinnamon,
six drams of Coriander seeds: Annis and sweet Fennel seeds, of each three
drams: put the Liquor in a large Vessel, and let it work in the Sun; for so it
will be done in forty days; otherwise it will be longer: but you must keep the
Vessel always full and open, that it may froath over: therefore you must make
more Hydromel than the Vessel will contain; and if the disease require it you
may use it fresh before it works till you make another in the Vessel; and you
may make this quantity twice or thrice at once, because it must be taken diverse
months together. Let him take a good draught hereof twice or thrice in a day.

This following Syrup is made more easily, and has great Virtue:

Take of the Juice of Ground Ivy, Veronica, and Carduus Benedictus refined, of
each eight ounces; in which, boil gently Maidenhair, Politrice, Scabious, and
Lettice, of each half a handful: Dissolve in the strained Liquor one pound and
an half of white Sugar. Make a Syrup well boiled, adding in the end three drams
of the Extract of Juniper; Juice of Liquoris and the Extract of Carduus, of
each four scruples. Let the Patient take one spoonful an hour before dinner,
and another before supper, and another at bedtime.

Cardanus says, that he cured many Consumptions with this course following:
namely, by giving no other nourishment than Barley Broth made without Flesh,
and Water with Sugar, and every morning four ounces of the Decoction of the
Tails and Legs of Cray-fish made in Barley Water with two drams of Sugar.

Arcaeus, Ingrassias, Fracastorius, and Erastus, say with admiration, That they
have cured many Consumptions by the use only of Guajacum for a long time
continued; yet this in respect of the antecedent cause, which is a hot and
sharp humor, seems to be an enemy.

Avenzoar reports that his Grandfather cured a Consumption, with well leavened
Bread, and Sallet Oil, and also that he did the same.

This Powder following is highly commended by Valescus de Taranta, and it is
reported to be invented by Haly Abbas, and he says, that he cured one with it.
And Forestus says that he cured his Brother with the same.

Take of white Poppy-seeds ten drams: Gum Arabic, Starch, and Gum Tragacanth,
of each three drams: Purslain-seed, and Mallows-seeds, of each five drams:
Pompion, Melons, Cowcumbers, Gourds, and Quince seeds, of each six drams:
Spodium, and Juice of Liquoris, of each three drams: Penides the weight of all
the rest: make a Powder: give every morning two drams thereof with the Syrup of
Poppies or Jujubes: Let him also take it in Barley, Cream, ar Almond Milk, and
with other meats.

Cappivaccius, and Claudinus do approve of Oil of Vitriol to dry the Ulcer,
giving two or three drops with Rose Water or Juice of Plantane, with a little
sugar.

Crollius also commends the Elixir Proprietatis which is made of the Spirit of
Sulphur; with the Spirit of Wine, Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron.

The Chemists do highly commend the Medicines made of Brimstone, as the Flower,
Milk, and Balsom thereof, as you may read in their Books: You may use them thus
very well.

Take of the Flower of Brimstone, and Powder of Frankincense, of each one
scruple: put them into a hollow Apple, then roast it, and let the Patient eat
it with sugar every morning for eight or ten days together. Or,

Take of Conserve of old Roses, Diamargariton frigid, and Diapenidion, of each
one ounce: Flower of Brimstone three drams: make it up with clarified Honey, of
which let him take the quantity of an Hazel-nut twice or thrice in a day. Or,

Take of Flor. Sulphuris three drams: Sugar dissolved in Rose Water three
ounces: make Lozenges* which let him hold in his mouth often. Or,

Take of Lac. Sulphuris half a dram: Magistery of Pearl, and Coral, of each
half a scruple: the Emulsion of Melon-seeds made with Coltsfoot or
Veronica-water, two ounces: the Julep of Roses six drams: Cinnamon Water, and
Manus Christi, with Pearl, of each two drams: Mix them, and let him take two or
three spoonful every morning.

Some Chemists commend Antimonium, Diaphoreticum well Calcined with thrice as
much Saltpeter, so that all the vomiting quality be gone, which must be given
every day in Lozenges made with Sugar of Roses, or mixed with Conserve of
Roses, or with the Medicines above mentioned.

The Balsom of Peru is good to heal Ulcers in the Lungs, if you give one drop
made into a Pill with Sugar, every day.

The Powder of Burnet, one dram given every day in Broth, is esteemed excellent.

Ruffi Pills are commended by some taken one scruple every day, but made as
follows they do wonders.

Take of the Mass of Ruffi-pills* one ounce: Antimonium* Diaphoreticum* and Gum
of Guajacum* of each half an ounce: Make a Mass with the Balsom of Peru: of
this let him take one scruple every day for one Month.

The Syrup of Coral, and Gelly of Quinces are good for the same.

Rodericus out of Fonseca commends the Decoction of yellow Saunders for a good
Medicine against Defluxions upon the Lungs; which he prepares thus:

Take of Succory and Sorrel Water, of each four pints: yellow Saunders sliced
three ounces: infuse them one day, then boil them in Balneo Mariae in a close
Vessel three hours: take three ounces of this every morning in Beer for forty
days together.

Also all the Medicines which we mentioned for the Cure of Spetting blood, are
here very good.

Fumigations may be well used to dry the Ulcer of the Lungs very well, and they
must be often taken in at the Mouth and Nose: You may make them thus:

Take of the Gum of Ivy one dram and an half: Frankincense one dram: Myrrh half
a dram: Amber one scruple: Benoimin and Storax, of each half a dram: Hypocistis
two scruples: Coriander seeds, red Roses, and red Saunders, of each one
scruple: Powder them, and mix them with the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth: make
Troches and cast them upon Coals.

Or, Make plain Fumes of Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastich, and Benjamin, always in
the Chamber that he may take in the dry and sweet scent of them.

You may make a stronger Fumigation, but it is not to be used but in strong
bodies. Thus,

Take of Gum Anime, or Gum of Guajacum, two drams: Tobacco half an ounce: dry
Coltsfoot one ounce: Hysop, white Horehound, Rosemary, and Orpiment, of each
three drams: make a Powder; put a little thereof into a Tobacco-pipe, take of
it twice a day fasting, and half an hour after a dra^ght of this Decoction.

Take of China and Sarsa of each half an ounce: Scabious, Coltsfoot, and ground
Ivy, Vlmaria, Maidenhair, and Avens Leaves and Roots, of each one handful:
whole Barley one pugil: Liquoris scraped, and Currens, of each one ounce: boil
them to two pints, and put to it being strained four ounces of sugar of Roses:
Let him take half a pint twice in a day as aforesaid.

For the Rich People you may use a moist Fumigation made of the Decoction of
Herbs, which is a good way to carry the strength of them directly to the Lungs:
You may use al such Herbs as are proper for the Lungs and to Cure Ulcers. Take
this following for an Example:

Take of green Coltsfoot eight handfuls: Hysop two handfuls: bruise them and
put them in a Pot with a little water, lute it close, then set it into the Oven
when the Bread is half baked, and then take it out with the Bread, and put a
Funnel into a hole made at the top, and so take in the smoke through the mouth
at the Lungs, and put it out at the Nose, and it wonderfully provokes spetting.

You must also Morning and Evening use a Cooling Liniment to the Breast. As,

Take of Gum Tragacanth and Arabic of each one dram: infuse them in Rose water
a day and a night: put then thereto of Oil of Violets one ounce and an half:
Fresh Butter half an ounce: Sal. Prunellae two drams: Camphire one scruple:
Breast-milk as much as will serve: Mix them in a Mortar to an Ointment.

To Repair a Consumption, or to Prevent or Hinder it besides Restoring Diets,
which are principally made of Barley, Almonds, Pine-nuts, Rice, Nuts, and the
like, which Authors declare; Milk commended at first is very good, and a Bath
of hot Water of Barley and Almonds bruised: but this is not good in a Catarrh,
nor while there is a putrid Fever, nor when the Lungs are full of Excrements.

Let his Drink be Water and Sugar, Barley Water, and Liquoris: an Infusion of
Liquoris, a thin Hydromel, or a weak Decoction of China.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Heart.
The PREFACE.
THE Heart has many Diseases, Similary, Organick, and Common: But because few
will submit to the Physician, in regard of the nobleness of the part, which
will endure long pain, but a man is suddenly gone, and there is no time for
Physic; we who intend to bring all our Labors into practice, will lay down
only three Diseases of the Heart, which are usual, and require many Medicines;
and we shall bring them into three Chapters. The first shall be of Swooning.
The second of Palpitation of the Heart. And the third of Weakness.

Chap. 1. Of Syncope, or Swooning.
Syncope is defined by Galen, 12. meth. c. 5. to be a sudden failing of all the
Strength: For although the Heart only suffer, and the Vital Spirits are only
intercepted; yet when it fails, the rest must suffer, because they have a
continual and necessary influence from it.

It is called a sudden failing of all the Strength, that it may be
distinguished from other Diseases, in which the strength goes by degrees, till
death come: nor is the Doctrine of Avicen against it, Fen. 1. Lib. 3. Tract. 2.
Cap. 2. where he propounds the sign of a Syncope that comes by degrees; for
although the Causes that dissolve the Spirits, do sometimes work by degrees, yet
when they grow great they make a sudden Syncope: and therefore Avicen rather
propounds the signs that go before a Syncope, than those that accompany it.

Moreover, This Definition may seem to agree with an Apoplexy, in which there
is a sudden failing of all the strength; but in an Apoplexy there is strength
in the Heart, and the Pulse is generally great and full. And also there is
great hinderance of breath, with snorting; but in a Syncope the breath is no
ways stopped.

The question is, Why? When the action of the heart cease, does the action of
the Brain also cease, since the Animal Spirit is made of the Vital by way of
Concoction, and must therefore stay some time in the Brain, although the Vital
do not constantly come to it? We answer, That the Brain as all other parts, for
the perfecting of its actions does always stand in need of adventitious heat,
which is brought to it by the Vital Spirits, and therefore when the Vital
Spirits come not, neither does heat come for the Brain to perform its functions.

There are other Diseases very like to Syncope, differing only in degrees from
it, namely, Eclusis, Leipothumia, and Asphuxia: Eclusis, is a light fainting:
Leipothumia, or Leipopsuchia, or Apopsuchia, is a very strong and great
fainting: Syncope is the greatest, which if it go so far that the pulse in the
whole Body cease to beat, it is called Asphyxia, which is next unto death.

The word Synchope, was not used by Hippocrates, and the Ancient Greeks; but
they called this Disease Leipothymia, Lipopsychia, and Asphyxia. But it was
invented a little before Galens time, and used for the greatest; so Galen, 1.
ad. Glauc. cap. 14. says, Leipothymia is an imperfect Syncope, and goes before
it.

By what has been said, it appears, that the part affected is the Heart, where
the Vital Spirits are all made; by whose influence the Natural heat and Spirits
in every part are made to act: therefore when that cease by stoppage of the
Influx of the Vital Spirits, it is necessary that the strength of all parts
should fail, and their actions cease.

The immediate Cause of this Disease, is the defect of the Vital Spirits, not
wholly, for then sudden death would come; but so great, that Nature is
constrained (lest the strength of the Heart should totally fail) to fetch the
Spirits from the other parts to the Heart, by which means the parts lose their
functions.

Now this defect of Spirits comes four ways: Either because they are Naturally
few; or because they are dissipated, and spent; or because they are
preternaturally altered and corrupted; or lastly, because they are suffocated
and destroyed: They are few by fault of the faculty making, or matter from
which they are made. The Faculty is hurt, either by a disease proper to the
Heart, or by consent from another part.

The proper Diseases of the Heart which are the chief, are great distempers,
which overthrow the Natural temper, or destroy the substance of the parts, or
of the Natural heat; as swooning Fevers, sharp, and malignant, Syntacticae, or
Colliquantes, or fainting, pestilential, hectical, or Marasmodes, which
consume; to this come organical diseases, as too much constriction and
dilatation, and constant solutions, which come to the Ventricles of the Heart.

The Faculty may be hurt by consent from other parts, which have great sympathy
with the Heart, as the Brain and Liver, and sometimes from the mouth of the
Stomach, by reason of its neerness and exquisite sense; from whence a Syncope
is divided into a Heart and Stomach Syncope. The Cardiaca or Heart Syncope, is
when the Heart is principally affected; but the Stomachia, or Stomach Syncope,
is that which comes by consent from the Stomach. Sometimes it comes from the
Mother, by filthy vapors sent from thence to the Heart, from whence comes the
Suffocation of the Matrix, Apnoea, or want of breath, and Hysterical Syncopes,
as those vapors do assault the Lungs, Diaphragma, or the Heart.

The fault is in the Matter, when the Air or Blood is defective, or corrupted;
from whence the Vital Spirits are generated. There is defect of Air when the
Respiration and Transpiration is hindered; but the defect of Blood, is when
Nutrition is hindered; there is a corruption of both, when their qualities are
changed: So when the Air is infected in time of Pestilence, it begets
Leipothymia and Syncope, as also stinking vapors, and sweet also do the same
with some Women; and the blood is corrupted from evil meats.

Too great Evacuations, whether sensible or insensible, do disperse the
Spirits. The sensible are chiefly of Blood, from the Mouth, Nose, Womb, Belly,
Hemorrhoids, Phlebotomy, and great Wounds* and next of other Humors, which
though they are Excrementitious, yet because of their great Evacuation the
Spirits are much dispersed, and cause a Syncope. These Humors are discharged by
Vomit, Stool, Urine, Sweat, the opening of a great Imposthume, especially if it
be inward, as an Empyema; or outward, as in a Dropsy when the Navil is tapped.

The insensible Evacuations are by the Rarifaction of the Skin, and by the
acrimony and thinness of the Humors, immoderate heat, hot Baths or Houses,
great Labors. Also long watchings, and fasting, Lechery, great anger, and joy,
long and violent sickness do dissipate the Spirits; as also great pain of the
Heart, Stomach, Guts, Reins, Ears, Teeth, and of all Nervous parts.

An evil disposition of the Bowels does alter and corrupt the Spirits, and
whatsoever does procure a malignant quality which is adverse to the Heart, as
Air, Stinks, venomous and pestilential, taken in by the Breath, or bred in the
Body from putrefaction of Humors; as also poison taken in, or applied outward,
or sent to the Heart by biting of venomous Creatures.

Lastly, The vehement returning of blood and Spirits to the Heart, and an
abundance of evil vapors gathered about the Heart and the parts adjacent, and
too much cold and thick blood gathered about the Heart and its Veins, Arteries,
and parts adjacent, do suffocate and destroy the Spirits.

We lately saw a Noble Lady, a Virgin, which from her Infancy was subject to
this Disease, that with every light passion of the mind she was taken therewith,
taken with a violent Syncope which ushered death in by a sudden return of blood
and Spirits to her heart; for when she should have been married to a fine young
man which loved her deerly, and her Parents, Friends, and Kindred were solemnly
met about it, they gave her a Pen to write her hand to the Contract; but she
having not fully written her name fell down dead upon the ground: Hence we
easily conjecture, that there was a great and sudden retraction of the Blood
and Spirits to the Heart by a vehement passion of the mind, which choked the
Natural heat, and the Spirits therein, of which she died suddenly.

Petrus Salius Diversus saw, as he reports, Lib. de aff part. cap. 4. a Girl
of fourteen years old fall into a Syncope from abundance of cold and thick blood
garhered about her heart and the great vessels: for having for a whole day a
heaviness of head with giddiness and disturbance. she died the next day after
suddenly: After being opened, the blood appeared so congealed in the great
Artay and Vena Cava or hollow Vein, that taking it by the end you might draw it
out like a Sword from a Scabbard.

Wherefore we judged, That the sudden death came from the interception and
stopping of the Veins by congealed blood.

This happens seldom, for you shall seldom see blood in dead bodies so
congealed: for the veins have such a property to retain blood, that even after
death they keep it thin, though without them it growth always thick.

But Salius gives the Reason of this Congealation by comparing it with blood
without the Vessels, which as soon as it is cold, is congealed; and the sooner
from the coldness, thickness and slyminess of the Melanchollick or Phlegmatic
humor therein contained.

Something like to this may be-sal blood constrained in the veins which
abounding with vicious juice thick and cold, does ^o sill the greater Veins,
that it stops the spirits, and so extinguisheth them: and then the blood grows
cold and thick, from those humors which otherwise would have been thin.

The Spagiricks refer this to a congealing Spirit, made of a peculiar and
extraordinary mixture of Humors, which since it seldom happens, the Disease
is very rare: And truly a simple Refrigeration cannot cause that concretion,
for then in dead bodies, especially in winter, the blood would always be thick
in the Veins, but we find it always thin; but we may suppose that this
Congealing Spirit is like that which causes a Catalepsis, or Congealation
which makes the parts inflexible.

The Chemists do acknowledge such kind of Congealing Spirits to be in many
Creatures, Vegetables, and Minerals; such as are reported to be raised out of
the Earth, in some Histories of Men and Beasts who have been Congealed by
filthy vapors coming from Earthquakes, or Dens; so, that their bodies became
presently stiff: And Cardanus says, That such spirits are in Thunderbolts,
in his History of the Eight Mowers, who Supping under an Oak were struck
stiff, and remained as at first, the one seeming to Eat, the other to reach
the Pot, and the other to Drink.

The Signs to this Disease by either are from the Subject which is more capable
to receive it, or from the Fit either coming or present, or from the Causes
that produce it.

The Subjects which are most fit to receive a Syncope are men who by some
Natural Debility or Weakness from some Disease, become faint-hearted. Women
rather than Men, especially in their Terms, or with Child: As also they who
have fine Constitutions, subject to the Jaundice, Spleen, or Melancholy.

These things signify that a Syncope is coming to them who are subject to it;
Anxiety and sudden disturbance of mind, heaviness in the head, giddiness, an
apprehension of diverse colors, green, and yellow, a sudden and often change of
the color in the face, and of the beating of the Pulse.

When Leipothymy is present the same signs are, but greater; and there is often
a cold sweat, as also the sick complain of their faintness.

But these signs show a Syncope, A sudden failing of al strength, a slow pulse,
low and at length stopping, a pale and bluish face, coldness of all the body,
especially externally; a cold sweat especially in the temples, neck, and
breast, from whence the Disease is named.

The signs of the Causes are commonly manifest, for Fevers malignant, acute,
syncopal or fainting, cause a proper Syncope or Swoonding, are easily known: As
also those external Causes which make a sudden Syncope, may be plainly seen, As
Anger extraordinary and Joy, a sudden Fright, stinking smells, great bleeding,
and other large evacuations, long watchings, and fasting, much lechery, and
grievous pain.

These things do signify that the Humors and the Body are thin, a sharp nose,
hollow eyes, temples fallen; and the gnawing of the mouth of the stomach,
trouble of mind, pricking, heat and great pain, do show abundance of Choler.

When there is abundance of crude Humors you may know by the enlarging of the
body, swelling about the breast, a pale color, black and blew, a small,
obscure, and unequal pulse.

A swoonding by way of Sympathy from other parts, is known by the sign of those
parts affected; so that if it come from the stomach, that has been distempered
with loathing vomiting, gnawing, the mouth has been bitter, and dry, and the
like. The same Judgment is to be taken in other parts: but if you see no sign
of any other part affected, you may conclude that it comes principally from the
heart.

Moreover, A Syncope is distinguished from other Diseases by its proper signs.
From an Epilepsy, because that has a Convulsion, but a Syncope not: From an
Apoplexy, because in that the breath is stopped, and there is often snorting, and
the pulse is not much abated, except when Death is at hand; but in a Syncope
the Pulse is almost gone, and the breath is free. It is distinguished from the
Mother, for in that the breathing parts are most affected, so that the Patient
is almost strangled, but the Pulse is not much altered, nor the color of the
face, but keeps its natural complexion, and sometimes is higher colored; but
in a Syncope the breath is not stopped, but the pulse is almost gone, and the
face is pale: But sometimes a Syncope is joined with the Suffocation of the
Mother, and then the Pulse is not perceived.

The Prognostic of this Disease is first taken from Hippocrates, Aph. 41.
Sect. 2. They who often and violently faint without a manifest Cause, do die
suddenly. For as it is said, a great Syncope does quite take away the strength
from the heart.

A Syncope from which a man is not recovered by Rose Water thrown in his face,
and Wine given to drink with sneezing-pouder put into the Nose is deadly.

When one is raised from a Syncope, health is not to be promised; for if his
Pulse return not, but his color be wan, and he still be cold, he will quickly
Relapse, in which is danger.

That Syncope which comes from immoderate Evacuations, fear, sorrow, or some
evident Cause, is of less danger than that which comes from an internal Cause.

As for the Cure, because it comes from diverse Causes, it must be various.

But of what Cause soever it come, in the time of the Fit these are good, Lying
upon the back, throwing of cold Water in the face, provoking to neez, putting
of strong Wine, Cinnamon, or imperial Water, Aqua vitae, Coelestis, and the
like into the mouth, holding of hot bread to the Nose, loud calling and
shaking, stopping of the Nostrils; wringing of the Fingers, pulling of the
Hair, rubbing, binding, and cupping.

But in respect of the Causes which are diverse, you must vary the Cure thus:

If it come from want of meat, he will be Cured with strong Wine, and a Toast,
or Sop: Also with nourishing broths, and Restoring distilled Waters among other
things, a dish of Eggs with sugar, Wine and Cinnamon described in the following
Chapter.

If it come from thinness of the Humors by which the spirits do easily fly
away, give him sweet things and meats of good juice, and thickning; let the
pores of the skin be stopped with Oil of Roses, and let the Patient stay in a
cold place.

If it come from the Mother, you must give Medicines for that.

If it come from some evil quality, give Cordials and Antidotes, such as are
prescribed in malignant Fevers.

If from poison, give things to expel it: First a Vomit, and then Treacle; and
then if he feel burning or gnawing in the Guts, let him take Milk of Butter, or
fat Broth, or cooling Cordial Potions.

If it come of immoderate Evacuation, let the Patient be refreshed with Scents,
Meat, Drink, sleep, and rest.

If from too great loss of Blood, lay him upon his bed, with his Head
backwards, dash his face with cold Water, give him a little Wine with cold
Water.

If it come of too much Purging, give him new Treacle, or old if you cannot get
new, with two grains of Opium dissolved in Wine, or three grains of Laudanum
which is better. And let the Belly be anointed all over with this following Oil:

Take of Oil of Myrtles, and Quinces, of each one ounce and an half: Oil of
Wormwood one ounce: With a little Rose Vinegar mix them and anoint often.

Give a Clyster of steeled Milk with three Yolks of Eggs, and two drams of
Philonium Romanum.

Use Frictions of the Arms and upper parts, give him a Sop in Wine, or Wine
alone.

And lastly, Every Evacuation whether it be of Blood from the Nose, or Womb, or
other parts, or of Humors by Vomit, or Stool, must be stopped with their proper
Medicines prescribed in their several Chapters.

That Syncope which comes from too much Sweat, is cured by Medicines that
restrain Sweat; as with Cold, or Rose Water alone, or with a little Vinegar
sprinkled upon the Face and Hands. Also let the Air be cooled with the same
Water, and with Fanning. Apply cold Epithems to the Heart made of Rose, Sorrel,
and Borrage Water, with Powder of Diamargariton frigid, with a little Wine to
make it pierce.

You must also give often cooling Juleps made of Syrup of Sorrel, Violets, and
Apples, or Lemmons, with cooling Waters, and Lapis Prunellae. Let the Pores be
closed with anointing the Skin with Oil of Roses, Myrtles, and Mastich. Let him
abstain from Wine. Let him not be rubbed, b^t let him move often gently, being
lightly covered.

Let his bed be perfumed with this Powder following:

Take of the flowers of Water Lillies, red Roses, of each three ounces: the
best Labdanum half an ounce: Storax two drams: Myrtles, and grains of Sumach,
of each two ounces. Make a Powder.

If it come from suffocation of the Spirits, you must call them forth by
Frictions* Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, and the like. And if this Suffocation
came of Repletion, you must bleed plentifully, but by degrees.

If it comes from terror and fear, you must also bleed, lest it cause an
Obstruction or Inflammation.

Chap. 2. Of the Palpitation, or Breathing of the Heart.
AS in a Synoope the motion of the Heart is diminished, so in this Disease it
is depraved. It i^ wrongly styled by some a trembling of the Heart, when
trembling is a passion of the Animal and voluntary motion, and is not proper to
any parts but such as have voluntary motion.

Galen in his Book of Trembling, Palpitation, and Convulsion, says, That
Palpitation comes only from the Disease that is from the Cause which lifts
up, and depresseth the part, without any help of the Faculty; but Trembling
comes partly from the Faculty, partly from the Disease. Hence it is that many
using the word Palpitation indifferently to any part, think it is in the Heart,
as in the Skin and Muscles, in which it comes from wind driven violently
thither: for if the Heart be moved as a Bladder by water or wind, they suppose
that to be a Palpitation. But the reason is different; for the Skin and Muscles
cannot naturally dilate and contract themselves, but by Diseases. But the Heart
has a Natural Faculty to contract and dilate it self, therefore a Palpitation
cannot be without its motion. And they do in vain muster up Galens Reasons, so
thought by them, to prove that the Palpitation of the Heart comes not by
Nature, but by a Di^ease, or cause of a Disease. For Galen in all those places
speaks of no other Palpitation than that which is in the Skin and other
external parts, and not of the palpitation of the Heart, which is of another
Nature; and Galen 2. de sympt. cause. cap. 2. says that the Palpitation of the
Heart and Arteries, is different from that of the other parts.

Therefore the Palpitation of the Heart is an immoderate and preternatural
shaking of the part, with a great Diastole or Dilatation, and a vehement
Systole or contraction which sometimes is so great that as Fernelius observes,
it has often broken the Ribs adjoining, and sometimes displaced them which are
over the Paps; and sometimes it has so dilated an Artery forth into an Aneurism
as big as ones fist, in which you might both see and feel the pulsation.

This immoderate shaking of the Heart comes from the Pulsative Faculty provoked.

But here may be objected, That in Fevers all these things are found, for this
is an immoderat^ Systole and Diastole, by the provocation of the Faculty
through some troublesome matter, or by increase of heat in the Heart.

To this we answer, That the motion of the Heart in Fevers is distinguished
from Palpitation, only by its degrees, and the depraved motion of the Heart
when it is vehement, is called Palpitation; but if it be not vehement, it is
called a quick, great, and swift Pulse, and is referred to the difference^ of
Pulses.

Now the Efficient Causes of this Palpitation may be referred to Three Heads:
Either it is somewhat which troubles and pricketh; or necessity of
Refrigeration; or defect of Spirits: which two latter may be referred to the
increase of Custom.

The Molesting Cause is most usual, so that many Authors knew no other, the
other are rare, and that is either a vapor or wind which troubles the Heart
either in quantity or quality, or both. The quality is either manifest or
occult*

A vapor troublesome in a manifest quality, is either in the Heart and its parts
adjoining; or it is sent from other parts; and this suddenly getting to the
inmost parts of the Heart, does stir up the Expul^ive Faculty, which being
Naturally very strong, arises powerfully with all its force to expel the enemy.

In the Heart, and thereabout, especially in the Pericardium, are gathered
sometimes cold and thick Humors, which send up vapors to the Ventricles of the
Heart, which cause Palpitation.

But from more remote parts, vapors and wind are sent to the Ventricles of the
Heart; as from the Stomach, Spleen, Mother, and the other parts of the lower
Belly.

Many times a Vapor that troubles the Heart by an occult quality, arises in
malignant Fevers, Plague, and after Poison, and sometimes from Worms putrified,
and the terms stopped from corrupt feed, or other putrid matter which do much
stir up the Expulsive Faculty thereof.

Diverse Humors do molest the Heart, either with their quantity or quality; so
too much Blood oppres^ing the Veins, Arteries, and Ventricles of the Heart, so
that they cannot move freely, makes a Palpitation by hindering motion, which
that the Faculty may oppose it moves more violently. So Water in the
Pericardium, being in great quantity, does compre^s the substance of the Heart
and its Ventricle, so that they cannot freely dilate themselves. The same do
Humors flowing in abundance to the Heart, as it happens sometimes in Wounds,
Fear, and Terror.

Humors offending in quality, hurt the Heart, if they be venomous, putrid,
corrupt, sharp, or too hot, especially burnt Choler coming to the Heart, and
provoking its Expulsion.

Also Tumors, though seldom, cause this Disease; as Inflammation of the Heart,
Imposthumes, or Swelling in the Arteries of the Lungs near the Heart; which
Galen says befell Antipater the Physician, 4. de* loc. aff. by which, after an
unequal Pulse, he fell into a Palpitation and an Asthma, and so died: so
Dodonaeus reports that he found a Callus in the great Artery next to the Heart,
which caused a Palpitation for many years. Also Tumors in the Pericardium,
whether they be without humors and scirrhus, or with humors in them, as the
Hydatides or watery Pustles, and little stones, bones, and pieces of flesh are
sometimes growing in the Heart, which cause Palpitation. So Platerus reports,
that in one who had a long Palpitation, and died thereof, there was found a
bone in his Heart. But Schenkius reports, that in a Priest who was from his
youth to the age of forty two troubled with a Palpitation, there was found in
the bottom of his Heart an Excrescens of flesh which weighed eight drams, and
resembled another Heart.

The Second Cause of Palpitation is necessity of refrigeration, which is, when
there is a pret^^natural heart in the Heart, by which the Spirits are inflamed
within, and therefore the motion of the Heart and Arteries is increased, that
what is spent, may be restored, and the heat cooled; and this comes sometimes
from an internal cause, which is rare, but oftener of an external, as anger,
vehement exercise, and the like. As Platerus observed in a young man, who being
hot and angry at Tennis, fell into a Palpitation of the Heart, and so died.

The third Cause, is the defect of Spirits which comes by hunger, watching,
anger, Joy, fear, shame, and great Di^eases, and other causes which do suddenly
dissipate the Spirits, which defect the Heart laboring to repair, that it may
beget more quick and plentiful* and send them into the whole Body sooner, it
does enlarge its motion, and make it quicker.

You must observe for conclusion that it is more ordinary to see a Palpitation
which comes by consent from other parts, than from the Heart it self: For it
has a consent with all parts by the Veins and Art^ries, by which, Vapors,
Wind, and Humors are sent. Which all shall be showed in the Diagnosis following:

The Diagnosis or knowledge of this Disease, is directed either to the Disease,
or the Causes which produce it.

The Disease is subject to sense; it may be felt with the hands, sometimes seen
and heard; for the Artery may be seen to leap especially in the Jugular. And
Forestus says it may be heard, by an Example of a young man, that they who
passed by might hear it by laying their Ear to the Window.

Also the Causes are distinguished by their Signs: A hot distemper is known by
the greatness of the Pulse and swiftness, by a Fever and heat of the Breast,
by great and often breathing, and desire of cold things.

If the Palpitation come of wind, it quickly comes and goes, and is presently
raised by little motion, and the Breath is difficult, with trembling sometimes
at the knees, mists in the Eyes, noise in the Ears, and sometimes pain of some
part, which quickly is gon^; but you must gather the Nature and quality of the
Vapor by the signs of the Humor which abounds in any part, because vapors do
always arise from Humors.

If the Palpitation come from Humors in the Heart, the Disease does not come so
suddenly, and continues longer, and you may know what kind of humor it is by
the signs of the Humor which abounds throughout the whole Body. And especially
if it be from Blood, from which it most often proceeds; and this is known by
a diverse and unequal Pulse, sometimes great, sometimes small, slow, and swift, to
which the Breathing answers in proportion; the Patients heart seems to be
bound and oppressed, as appears by the exceeding heat, distension of the Veins,
redness of Face, the time being Spring, the Age, Region, and Diet causing Blood
to abound*

That which comes by consent from other parts, is known by the proper signs of
the parts affected, so we know that it is from the stomach, when there is want
of Appetite, loathing, vomiting of base Humors, and gnawing at the Stomach. A
troublesome breathing about the Pancreas or Spleen, or any other disease of the
Spleen, shows that the matter lurketh there, from whence the vapors fly to
the Heart; so suppression of the Terms, and Hysterical fits, declare that it
comes from the Womb.

The Water abounding in the Pericardium is harder to be known, but we may
conjecture, if the Pulse be weak and faint, and the Patient bemoaneth himself,
that his heart as it were is sometimes in Water, and is suffocated, and if it be
constant, and he incline to an Atrophy or Hectic.

If malignant humors cause it, there will be great change in the Pulse, a loss
of strength, sometimes fainting, and other signs of malignity.

If it come from a Tumor there is remarkable variety in the Pulse, and the
motion of the Heart is different from the natural, very unequal and inordinate,
and if the humor be hot, there will be great inflammation in the Body, great
thirst, difficulty of breathing and fainting will follow with death: but if the
Tumor be hard, and in the Pericardium, the disease is constant, and the Patient
decays by degrees without any manifest cause: if flesh, or any more solid
thing grow to the heart, there will be a continual Palpitation from the
beginning of the Disease to the end of Life.

Lastly, You may know when it comes by want of Spirits, by the precedent
causes, which destroyed the Spirits, and by the quick and small pulse, and when
it comes from the least labor or motion. Sometimes the like befalls them that are
well from walking or other motion, with a change of Pulse, and a resembling
Palpitation.

The Prognostic is to be taken thus: It is dangerous from the hinderance of
the motion of the Heart, by which Life is preserved, and it brings Syncopes and
death: For it is a true Observation of Galen, Com. Aph. 41. Sect. 2. and 5. de
loc. aff. cap. 2. All that in youth, or in declining age are troubled with the
Palpitation of the Heart very much, die before they are old; for the often
Palpitation is a sign that the Vital faculty was very weak.

A Palpitation by Propriety is worse than by consent, and sometimes deadly. And
that which is of an internal, is worse than that which comes of an external
Cause, unless it be from poison, or some great wound.

If it come from a Tumor, or solution of Unity, it is incurable.

The Cure is various, according to the variety of the Causes: and first that
which comes from a peculiar distemper of the Heart and Pericardium, is
incurable; therefore we must look only at the Cure of that which is by consent,
which depends upon the diverse diseases of the parts, whose Cure must be sought
in their proper Chapters.

But besides those Remedies which take away the Cause, you must use those which
assuage the Symptoms by refreshing the Heart, and strengthening it, and which
discuss the vapors which arise from melancholy, or crude and waterish Humors;
as Cordial Juleps, Opiates, Epithems, and Perfumes, which are prescribed in
weakness, and these that follow.

Take of Conserve of Balm, Rosemary-flowers, Borrage-flowers, and
Clove-gilly-flowers, of each one ounce: Confection of Acorns and old Treacle,
of each one dram: the Powder of Diamber, and Diamoschi dulcis, of each one
scruple: with the Syrup of Citron Barks make an Opiate, which let him take
often.

Take of Bugloss, Rose, and Orenge-flower Water, of each two ounces: the syrup
of Clovegilly-flowers, one ounce and an half: Cinnamon Water half an ounce: the
spirit of Roses two drams: Confection of Acorns one dram: mix them and give two
spoonfuls now and then.

This following Liquor which immitateth the Juice of Hearts described in the
following Chapter, is good.

Take of Hogs or Sheeps Hearts three: Cinnamon and Cloves of each one dram:
Lettice and Sorrel seeds, of each one dram and an half: white Wine two ounces:
Borrage, Scabious, and Rose Water, of each one ounce and an half: Confection of
Alkermes, one dram: boil them all between Two Dishes, and let him take two
spoonfuls of the Liquor morning and evening.

Take of Red Roses and Rosemary-flowers of each two drams: Lavender flowers one
dram: Angelica seeds, Citron peels, Cloves, Cinnamon, and Mace, of each half a
dram: Saffron one scruple: Musk and Ambergris of each six grains: Make a Bag
with red Silk and sprinkle it with Rose water and white Wine, and apply it warm
to the Heart.

Take of Ointment of Roses half an ounce: Oil of Cinnamon and Cloves of each
six drops: Musk and Ambergris of each four grains: Mix it for a Liniment for
the heart.

Purging Clysters and Carminative to expel Wind are often to be given.

But in the Fit it is best to open a vein; And Galen witnesses 5. de loc. aff.
cap. 2. That he never did it without profit.

Some apply Cupping Glasses without Scarrification to the Breast, which they
say are excellent to discuss Wind there contained. Others to the Hypochondria,
when the matter of the Disease is there.

But Zacutus Lusitanus applied a Cupping Glass with Scarrification to the heart
with wonderful success, as you may read in prax. admir. obs. 133. lib. 1.

Others commend true Rhapontick given to two scruples in Wine, or Wine wherein
the same has been steeped.

Chap. 3. Of WEAKNESS.
ALthough Weakness of Strength does generally comprehend the hinderance of al
Actions, Animal, Vital, and Natural; yet more particularly it comprehends the
Vital which are known by a Weak Pulse: yet this Weakness uses to be found in all great Diseases, in which Nature does yield or resist the Cause.

Therefore as in Palpitation the Action of the Heart that is Pulsation is
depraved, so in Weakness it is diminished.

Which is the same with a Syncope, but it differs in this, In a Syncope it is
so little that it is hardly perceived; but in Weakness the Pulse is manifest
and not so little.

In this also the Animal Faculty is always offended: Hence comes weak motion
without hurt of the Brain, Nerves, or Muscles, but from the defect of Vital
Spirits which are not so sufficiently sent to the Head that they may be made
Animal.

The immediate Cause of Weakness is Defect of the natural heat and spirits from
which the life and strength of the parts do depend.

And this Defect is in every part from the Defect of Vital Spirits, and heat
flowing from the heart.

Now the Vital Spirits are Defective, either because they are not bred many; or
because they are dissipated after they are Bred, or Corrupted, or Suffocated,
as we said in a Syncope, where there is this difference, That in a Syncope the
Causes of Defect of Spirits, do suddenly produce their effect; but in Weakness
they operate by degrees. And therefore in Syncopes and Leipothymia all the Vital
Spirits almost, do suddenly fail, but in this there are fewer then ought to be
communicated to every part.

Moreover, When the Natural heat wants not only adventitious heat, but also
radical moisture to feed upon: if this moisture be wanting and diminished, the
natural heat must be less, and the strength abated.

Now the Causes which hinder the spirits from being Generated, or makes them
disperse themselves, or Corrupt, or Suffocate them, are propounded in the
Treatise of a Syncope.

The Diagnosis of this Disease needs no Explication because it is manifest, and
the Patients do complain of their Weakness. But the signs of the Causes were
Propounded in the Syncope.

The Prognostic depends upon the various disposition of Causes, for as they
are greater or less, there is more or less danger.

The Cure of this Disease is to be directed to two things, To the taking away
of the Cause, and the Restoration of the Heart and vital spirits.

The Causes are, almost al great Diseases, in which either Nature yields to, or
resists with difficulty, therefore the taking away of the Cause belongs to
the Cure of almost al Diseases: which you must take from their proper Chapters.

But the strengthening of the Heart, and restoring of the vital spirits are to
be here declared; sometimes to be preferred before the Cure of the Cause, when
death seems to be at hand: but we must always take heed least when we increase
the strength we increase the Cause of the Disease: and therefore in a hot
Disease you must use more temperate Cordials, but in a Cold Disease those that
are more hot.

First then mix Cordials in his nourishment, as Confectio Alkermes, or
Confectio de Hyacyntho in Broths, or with pleasant Wine or Cinnamon Water, if
there be great weakness.

Boil also between two Dishes a piece of a Leg of Mutton, after the skin and
fat is taken off, and after that let the Patient drink the Broth, being
strained, at one daught. Or,

Take the Flesh of a Capon after the skin and fat is taken away, cut it in
pieces, and put it in a glassed Pot well Luted, and set it in Balneo Martae to
boil for five hours, then let the Patient take two or three spoonfuls of the
Liquor in all his Broths.

Or you may make a distilled Water thus:

Take a Capon or an Hen, after the skin is taken off, and the fat, cut it in
pieces; then power upon it Water of Bugloss, Borrage, Sorrel, Roses, and Orange
Flowers, of each half a pound: the Powder of three Sanders, Aromaticum Rosatum,
and Cinnamen, of each half an ounce: yellow Sanders one ounce: Lemmons sliced,
three. Distill them according to art, which must be given every hour by the
spoonful.

The Juice of Legs of Mutton only is of much use.

Half roast a Leg of Mutton, and slash it upon the Spit; take the Juice and
boil it a little in the dish, and give it either alone, or with Broth, or with
Yolks of Eggs.

Valeriola does much commend the Juice taken out of Sheeps Hearts. And Zacutus
Lucitanus confirms it by his Experience, saying, That he with this only
Medicine a mouth continued, cured a rich man, who often swouned through
weakness of the Vital Faculty, and resolution of the Blood and Spirits, when
many other Medicines had been used in vain.

The Juice is thus taken forth:

Slit the Heart of a Sheep or Goat in the middle, then wash it well, and last
wash it with Rose Water; then cut it in slices and put it in a glassed Vassel
with a few Cloves, and no other Liquor. And after the Pot is well luted, put it
into the Oven after it is drawn, till the Juice come forth. Give this to the
Patient to drink.

The Italians use Caudles of Yolks of Eggs, Wine, Sugar, and Cinnamon, which is
very restorative.

Zacutus Lucitanus makes a fine dish of twenty Yolks of Eggs; as you may see in
the 107. Observation, Lib. 2. of his Admirable Practice.

You may make Cordial Juleps thus:

Take of the Water of Bugloss, Roses, and Orange flowers, of each one ounce:
Syrup of Apples and Lemmons, of each half an ounce: Confectio Alkermes one
dram: Cinnamon Water two drams. Make a Julep.

Or make this following mixture:

Take of white Sugar two ounces: moisten it well with the best Cinnamon Water;
then put to it as much Spirit of Vitriol as is sufficient to make it sharp;
then ad of the Essence of Cinnamon four drops; the Essence of Mace, Nutmegs,
and Annis seeds, of each three drops; the Essence of Cloves two drops. Mix
them, and take it either by it self, or in Broth.

You may also make a restoring Opiate thus:

Take of Conserve of Roses, Bugloss, Borrage, and Clove gilli-flowers, of each
one ounce: Citron Barks, and Nutmegs candied, of each three drams: one candied
Myrobalan; Confectio Alkermes half an ounce: the Spirit of Roses, and Essence
of Citrons, of each half a dram: the Essence of Cinnamon six drops: With the
Syrup of Apples make an Opiate; take it often.

This Water following is excellent:

Take of the Jelly of Hartshorn drawn with white Wine, four pints: the Blood
of a Lamb and a Calf cleansed with the hands from all fibers, of each two pints:
Muschadel, Canary, and Malago Wine, of each three pints: of Calves Hearts cut in
pieces four: Crumbs of new white Bread dipped in Milk two pound and an half; the
Juice of Balm one pint and an half: Rose and Orange Flower Water, of each one
pint: great Citrons sliced three: Cinnamon four ounces: Mace one ounce: Put
them in a large glass Still, and still them in Balneo Mariae.

You may make a most excellent and precious Cordial Water after this manner:

Take of Amber-greese two drams: Musk two scruples: Lignum Aloes one dram and
an half: the white part of Benjamin three drams: after they are bruised and
mixed, put them into Spirit of Wine, and setting them upon a gentle fire draw
out the Tincture fully; and then filter off the Liquor, and draw off half the
spirit with an Alembick upon the ashes with a very gentle fire; keep the Liquor
close stopped in a Glass, with a Cork waxed over, and a bladder; of which you
may give two, three, or four drops in Broth, or in Juleps, or in this following
Syrup.

Take of Cinnamon Water four ounces: the best Rose and Orange flower Water, of
each six ounces: Mix them, and dissolve therein as much Sugar candy as you can,
and make it into a Syrup without fire; with a spoonful whereof, mix four Drops
of the aforesaid Cordial Liquor.

Of the Ingredients remaining from the former Liquor, with as much of Damask
Roses, and four times as much Benjamin, you may make Cakes to perfume the
Chamber.

Apply both Liquid and Solid Epithems to the Heart, and young Pigeons slit and
sprinkled with Cordial Pouders.

Apply to the Stomach, bags of Spices dipped in Wine. Let the Stones and privy
Members be fomented with Confection of Alkermes dissolved in Wine.

Let the Arteries of the Temples, Hands and Feet be touched with Confectio
Alkermes, adding a little Cinnamon Water.

Apply this following to the Nose:

Take of the Leaves of Balm, Bazil, and Marjoram, of each two drams: Citron
peels, yellow Sanders, and Cloves, of each one dram: Saffron half a scruple:
Amber-greese six grains: Musk four grains: tie them in a clout and dip them in
Rose and Cinnamon Water, and smell thereto often.

Or make a Balsom to anoint the Nostrils with the Chemical Oils aforesaid of
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Cloves, with a little Wax.

The End of the Eighth Book.
THE NINTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Stomach.
The PREFACE.
AS there are diverse Actions of the Stomach, so there are diverse Hindrances of
those Actions which Cause variety of Diseases: For this part being ordained to
Concoct meat, and make the Chyle; for the performance thereof first it is
constrained to desire Meat and Drink by the Appetite which may be diminished,
abolished, or depraved. When it is abolished, it is called Anorexia, and
Apositia: When it is diminished, it is called Inappetentia, and Loathing: But
when it is depraved, it is called Doggshungs, or Pica, or Malacia: Too great
desire of Drink is called Sitis Morbosa: These Diseases mentioned do concern
the attractive Faculty, they which concern Concoction, as it is diminished,
abollished, or depraved, are comprehended under the name only of Concoction
hindered; if the Retentive and Expulsive Faculty be hurt, it consists in
Vomiting and Hickocks: There are diverse kinds of Vomitings according to the
diverse Condition and nature of the Matter Vomited forth. And because the
Stomach is of exquisite sense of Feeling by reason of the famous Nerve it has
from the sixth Conjugation, it is therefore as other sensible Parts, subject to
pains; and it has sometimes Tumors, (as other parts) and Inflammations,
Imposthumes, and Ulcers. That therefore we may in this Book explain all the
Ordinary Diseases of the Stomach, we will Comprehend it in Eleven Chapters. The
First, Of Inappetentia, or Loathing or meat. The Second, Of Fames Canina, or
Dogs Appetite. The Third, Of Pica and Malacia, or Green Sickness. The Fourth,
Of Sitis Morbosa, or diseased Thirst. The Fifth, Of Concoction hindered or
hurt. The Sixth, Of Hickocks. The Seventh, Of Vomiting. The Eighth, Of Vomiting
Blood. The Ninth, Of the Disease called Chollera. The Tenth, Of Pain in the
Stomach. The Eleventh, Of its Inflammation, Imposthume, and Vcer.

Chap. 1. Of Want of Appetite, or Loathing of Meat.
INappetentia, and Loathing, is either from the abolished or diminished Action
of the stomach: When it is Abolished it is called Anorexia, and Apositia: but
when it is Diminished it is called Dusorexia, but by Custom Anorexia, and
Apositia are used for both.

The Causes of this Disease are diverse, which that we may bring into Order, let
us consider the Natural Causes of Hunger or Appetite: These are called by
Galen, lib. 1. de symp. cause. cap. 7. Symptoms: and are Five, The First
whereof is emptiness of the parts. The Second is the Natural Appetite of those
parts so emptied. The Third is the Sucking and Attraction of the Mesaraick
Veins in the Stomach and Guts. The Fourth is the sense of their sucking in the
Stomach. The Fifth is the Animal Appetite which comes from the Nerve in the
mouth of the stomach which comes from the Brain, and is endued with great sense
and feeling. As also the Melanchollick Humor which comes from the Spleen to the
mouth of the stomach, which with its sharpness gnaws the inmost Tunicle of the
stomach, and is like sauce to stir up Appetite; which that it may be natural,
it is necessary that al those Causes be in Order; for if there be any fault in
either, then there is a hurt or hinderance of Appetite.

Therefore the First Cause which is Emptiness of Parts, if it be wanting there
is no Attraction made by them from other parts and the stomach, and so there is
no Appetite: now this Emptiness is wanting either when the parts are filled
with plenty of crude juyces, by reason of gluttony or drunkenness; or for want
of exercise, or usual evacuations, or when there is so much fat that it is
sufficient to nourish the parts: Also the great stoppage of the pores of the
skin, does hinder the emptiness or the parts: or great weakness of the natural
heat, so that it can disperse none or but little of the substance of the Parts:
or the calling of that heat to the concoction of the matter of a Disease whereby
the nourishment of Parts is neglected, as in Fevers.

The Second Cause is Natural Appetite, and the Attraction of nourishment to the
stomach; and this is depraved when the Parts though empty, will not draw by the
veins, by reason they have lost their strength, but languish and forget their
duty: As happens in acute, malignant, pestilential, syntectick, and hectic
Fevers: And in immoderate evacuations, as in Flux of the Liver, Womb,
Haemorrhoids, Bleeding at the Nose, Great Sweat, much Lechery, long Fasting,
and the like.

The Third Cause is, The Attraction of the stomach by the Mesaraick Veins,
which uses to be depraved by stoppage of those veins, by which means the empty
Parts cannot attract their Chylus, nor make the mouth of the stomach sensible:
so we may perceive in Children troubled with Struma, to consume by a long Flux
of Chyle, by reason all the Mesentery is full of Glandles which stop its Veins,
and hinder the passage of the Chyle to the Liver, by which means it is sent
half concocted forth by siege, and the Parts are deprived of their necessary
nourishment.

The Fourth and Fifth Causes, which are Sense of Sucking, and Animal Appetite,
do require a good disposition in the Stomach, brain, and nerves: Therefore
whatsoever can al^er their dispositions may also destroy Appetite; so every
great distemper of the belly, especially if it be hot and dry does hinder
Appetite. Great heat by dispersing the moist substance of the stomach, does
take away Appetite; as also great Cold not only positive as when the bowels are
so cold that they are stupefied by Air, Water, Frost, Snow, and the like; but
also privative, when the native heat is spent, which Galen calls Na^cosis or
Stupefaction, as by long bleeding, fevers, and the like, by which the strength
of the stomach and other Parts is consumed. Evil also and corrupt Humors;
whether hot or cold, do cause want of Appetite: The hot are chollerick, adust,
putrid, or virulent, whether they are bred in the stomach for want of
Concoction, or brought from other infirm Parts.

The Cold Humors are, Flegmy and Slimy, gathered in the stomach by evil
Concoction, or coming from the whole body, as in them who by often Vomitings
bring the corruption of other Parts into the stomach.

Or from the Brain by Catarrhs in which the stomalch uses to be troubled with
Phlegm: The suppression of the Terms and Haemorrhoids also, by choking and
smoothering the natural heat do also diminish the Appetite.

Moreover, The distemper of the Brain and Nerves Cause that the Sucking is not
flet in the stomach in them who have lost or depraved the Animal Faculty;
therefore they are ^ick in mind, as in an Apoplexy, Lethargy, Phrenzy, Madness,
and the like; as also in a Palsy by reason of the Obstruction of the Nerve of
the sixth Conjugation which comes to the Stomach, or by reason of the
stupefaction thereof, by the use of cold and narcotick things.

The knowledge of this Disease is manifest, for the Patient will complain of his
want of appetite, and loathing of Meat. But the signs of the Causes are partly
manifest, and partly to be discovered by art.

And first, they which cause the want of emptiness, are known by former high
feeding, repletion, want of exercise, or evacuation, long sleep, and other
Causes of crude Juyces; as also if the body be full, and the Veins swollen. Also
the thickness of the Skin signifies the same, for that hinders the dispersing
of the nourishment, as also some great disease in some particular part, by
which there is (...) dispersing of the Natural heat in the whole Body, so that
it is so weak that it cannot concoct the nourishment brought to the parts, and
supply its wants.

The signs of the second Cause are manifest, namely acute, malignant,
pestilential, and syntectick^ Fevers, strong evacuations, and other Causes, by
which there is a great decay of Natural heat in the parts, so that they cannot
attract necessary nourishment.

The signs of the third Cause are obstructions, whose signs are known in the
diseases of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery.

The signs of the fourth and fifth Cause, need a more curious search, and first
heat in the Praecordia, especially in the Stomach, thirst, dryness, and
bitterness of the Tongue and Jaws, and a Fever, do signify a hot distemper of
the stomach, and abundance of Choler. And if this hot humor do flow from other
parts, the disease of that part will show it, as inflammation of the Liver, or
other part. But if no other part seem to suffer, you must conjecture that the
fault is in the Stomach, or that evil meats have been received. To these are
joined Cardialgia, Heart-scalding, Nausea or loathing, Vomiting, and Purging,
the Nature of which humors are known by what is sent forth. A cold distemper
and much phlegm is known by cooling Causes before going, or such as disperse the
Natural heat, and extinguish it; as also from the sense of weight in the
Stomach, from sharp belching, or from a slimy thick humor sent out of the
mouth, or by stool.

The same is signified by a long Catarrh, and a disease in some part which may
send phlegm or melancholy to the Stomach, as of the Spleen, Womb, or the like.
Also the distempers of the Brain and Nerves are to be known by their proper
signs.

As to the Prognostic: As a good Appetite is good in all Diseases; as Hipp.
Aph. 33. Sect. 2. says, To be right in mind, and to be willing to take that
which is brought, is good: so want of Appetite uses to be an evil sign. For it
sgnifieth a great digression from the Natural state; and it comes, as Galen
teaches, Com. in 3. Epid. either from evil Humors in the Mouth of the Stomach,
o^ from the loss of the Faculty, whose duty it was to be sensible of the want
of nourishment, and consequently to desire it. So Hipp. in 1 Epid. says
concerning men in Consumptions that died in the time of an Epidemical disease,
they always abhorred meat and drink. And so Galen, Comment* in 3. Epid. says
that he has seen many in a Plague time which could take no sustenance, and
died: But some who were stronger, and took courage, and did eat, recovered. So
in Hipp. 3. Epid. Sect. 1. Aegr. 2. Hermocrates, who died the twenty seventh
day, abhorred meat all the time, and in the last days could not taste. And
Sect. 2. of the same Book, Aegr. 6. Euryanactis her daughter, abhorred meat all
the while, and drank nothing worth speaking of, died about twelve days after.

But we must observe, that loathing of meat is sad if it come from the
destruction of the Natural heat: but it is not so dangerous if it come from
abundance of evil humors, and Cacochymia; as you may see in Hipp. 7. Epid. by
the Son of Cleomenis, who without a Fever abhorred meat for two months,
through abundance of crude and viscid phlegm, which he at last vomited up. So in
the beginning of Diseases, and especially of Fevers, want of Appetite is not
so dangerous, because then Nature being busy about the concocting of filthy
humors, is called from her usual desire of meat. But after, when the Fever is
appeased, and the humors that caused the Disease being spent, she returns to
her old custom.

In Children, want of Appetite is worse than in others, because their substance
is moist, and easily dissipated, and requires more use of nourishment to
restore them.

In men recovered of a Disease, loathing threateneth a relapse, by reason the
relics of the Disease cause it.

In a continual Disease, loathing and sincere dejections are evil. Hipp. Aph.
6. Sect. 7. loathing is an evil sign in long diseases: but they who are like to
escape, have the contrary; that is, a good appetite. But sincere dejections
coming, do cause a worse Prognostic; because Hippocrates understands by
sincere dejections, such as have no humidity mixed with them, when the humor
alone without any Water, is cast forth, whether Choler or Melancholy; for
these stools do show that all the Natural humidity is burnt up by the heat of
the Fever.

In long Diseases of the Guts, loathing of meat is evil, and with a Fever
worse; Hipp. Aph. 3* Sect. 6. when there are deep and putrid Ulcers in a
dysentery, the Stomach suffering with the Guts

^oth not well concoct, which offense arising higher, affects the mouth of the
Stomach with loathing. There are some in Dysenteries, who abhor meat from the
beginning of the Disease, by reason of the will humors which come from the
Liver; for the superfluous part of them comes to the mouth of the Stomach,
which is not always dangerous. But in long Diseases when it is so, there is
either a putri^action about the Ulcer, or a great Inflammation, both which are
desperate.

The Cure of this Disease, if it come from the distemper of other parts, must
be by the Cure of it. But if it come only from a fault in the Stomach, it is to
be reduced to a hot or cold distemper joined with matter.

A hot distemper is to be cured first by purging of Choler gently and often.
And this may be made of Rhubarb, Myrobalans, Tamarinds, Syrup of Roses, or of
Succory with Rhubarb; Or if the Pati^nt be subject to vomiting, you must give
him a gentle one.

The same Humor is to be altered with Juleps or cooling Broths, in which you
must not omit the Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur; because all sharp things do not
only allay Choler, but provoke an ap^etite. Hence it is that we use Sallets in
Summer, to provoke appetite.

Or you may alter and purge this Humor at once with a convenient Apozeme, to
which, for the Stomach, ad half a handful of Sea Wormwood, and half an ounce of
Citron Myrobalans.

After Purging, Marmalad of Quinces is good to strengthen the Stomach; or the
Syrup mixed with Syrup of Wormwood, the Lozenges of Diamargariton frigid, or
Triasantalon, or Diarrhodon ^bbatis, if there be a suspicion of Obstruction. Or
this Opiate:

Take of Candied Lettice, and Guords, of each one ounce: Conserve of Sorrel,
Roses, Succory, and Bugloss, of each half an ounce: red Sanders, Coral, and
Pearl prepared, of each half a dram: ^he Troches of Spodium and Sorrel seeds,
of each one scruple. With Syrup of Lemmons make an Opiate, of which let him
take the quantity of a small Nut morning and evening, drinking after a little
Wine and Water.

Anoint the Stomach outwardly with this Ointment.

Take of Oil of Roses, Myrtles, and Quinces washed with Vinegar of Roses, of
each two ounces: all the Sanders, red Coral, Coriander seed prepared, and red
Roses, of each one dram: grana Ker^nes and Spodium, of each half a dram: white
Wax as much as is sufficient. Make a Liniment, with which anoint the Stomach
with your warm hand only twice or thrice in a day, putting in a little Rose
Vinegar at the same time.

Or lay on a Rose Cake sprinkled with Rose Vinegar, or steeped therein, which
you must remove before it grows hot.

Lastly, In the continuance of the Disease a Bath is good twice or thrice used,
by which many are brought to their former appetites.

Vinegar, and all sharp things are good with their meat.

A loathing comes from a cold distemper, when flegmy melanchollick humors are
gathered into the Stomach, and hinder its office; or being drawn from all other
parts of the Body, as in them who using to vomit, draw the impurity of other
parts to the Stomach, or from the Brain, Spleen, and Mother, and other parts.

In the Cure hereof, you must first look at the distemper of the parts from
whence they come, which must be amended with Remedies laid down in their proper
Chapters.

Then you must apply Medicines to the Stomach by Evacuation of the Humor
offending, and strengthening the parts.

Evacuation may be made by vomit or stool.

By Vomit, If the Patient be Nauseous, and easy to vomit, with Medicines for
that purpose.

But if the Humors be thick, and fastened upon the Tunicles of the Stomach, and
the Patient is not used to vomit, they must be purged, especially with Pills,
because they stay longest in the Stomach; as Galen shows cap. 7. lib. 4. de
sanit. tuenda. Who exceedingly commends Pills of Hiera; which may be given to
two scruples or a dram in the morning two hours before meat: and you may make
them fresh, thus:

Take of the best Aloes washed with the Juice of Wormwood one ounce: Agarick
trochiscated two drams: the powder of Rhubarb sprinkled with white Wine one
dram: Nutmeg and Spicknard of each half a dram: Salt of Tartar, Mastich, and
Cinnamon, of each one scruple: With Syrup of Wormwood make a Mass of Pills; of
a dram whereof make six Pills gilded. Let him take them in the morning if you
will purge much; or give half a dram two hours before dinner twice or ^hrice in
a week, They may be quickened with Diagridium, if you will have them stronger.

If you fear the Liver is too hot, you may mix cool things; as red Roses,
Sanders, Diamargariton: and make up the Mass with Compound Syrup of Succory.

Strong Pills are not good, because they will draw humors from other Parts to
the stomach.

If he cannot swallow Pills, you must give him Hiera to drink with a convenient
Liquor. Or,

If a Potion shall be unpleasant, make an infusion of Senna, Myrobalans, Rhubarb
and Agarick in Wormwood Wine, or the stomach Decoction, dissolving in it a
little of the Electuary of Citrons solutive, if you will make a stronger.

If this Disease comes from slow, slimy Phlegm, before Purging you must dissolve
it with Honey of Roses, and Oxymel, with syrup of Hysop and the like, with a
cutting and clensing Decoction.

Or, This following Apozeme will do both.

Take of the Roots of common Acorus* Cypress, and Calamus Aromaticus, of each
one ounce: dried Citron peels, and Sarsa, of each six drams: Wormwood, Mints,
Marjoram, Germander, and Chamaepitis, or Ground Pine, of each one handful:
Citron and Annis-seeds, of each two drams: Senna, two ounces: Carthamus-seeds
bruised, one ounce: Agarick trochiscated, three drams: Dodder of Thyme, or
Epithimum Flowers, Sage, Rosemary, and Lavender, of each one pugil: boil them
to a pint and an half: in which dissolve of the Syrup of Wormwood and candied
Citron-peels, of each two ounces: make a clear Apozeme, and scent it with a
little Cinnamon, and powder of Aromaticum Rosatum for four mornings draughts:
in the first and last whereof you may dissolve for the better Purging three
drams of the Solutive Electuary of Citrons, with one scruple of the powder of
Rhubarb.

The use of Turpentine is good, because it cleanses all the Bowels; especially
if you make it into Pills with Rhubarb.

It is not good to let blood in this Disease, except the Liver be very hot.

After sufficient Purging, you must come to Strengthening; both Internally, and
Externally: Thus,

Take of Syrup of Wormwood, one ounce: Let him Drink it Fasting many mornings:
or Wormwood-wine.

Take Conserve of Mints, Citron peels candied, and candied Mutmegs, of each
half an ounce: one candied Myrobalane: of Confectio Alkermes, three drams: the
inward skins of Hensmaws poudered, two drams: Cinnamon and Aromaticum Rosatum,
of each one dram: with syrup of Mints make an Opiate: or candy them with sugar
of Roses; use it in the morning, drinking after it a little Wine.

Salt of Wormwood is good to be put to the aforesaid Medicines, Or, Oil of
Mints Chemical.

Or, Salt of Wormwood with Orange peels, or either of them to half a dram in
Wine, or Broth.

This following Syrup is most excellent:

Take of the syrup of Quinces, and Citron Barks candied, of each two ounces:
Cinnamon water, one ounce: Oil of Sulphur twelve drops: mix them to be taken
now and then a spoonful.

Clarret Water is usual, and it is made thus:

Take of Cinnamon grossly poudered two ounces: steep them in one pint of Aqua
Vitae in a glass; in another glass put six ounces of sugar with half a pint of
Rose water: let these Glasses stand two or three days; every day shaking them
often; then mix them both together and strain them by filtration; keep the
Liquor in a Glass close stopped, and let the Patient take a spoonful or two
Fasting.

In Paris the Syrup of Wormwood made by Pena is highly esteemed; made thus,

Take half a pound of candied Citron barks sliced: boil them in equal parts of
the Waters of Succory and Agrimony, make a strong expression and put to it the
juice of Quinces, and Wormwood water, of each half a pint; in which infuse for
four days four ounces of Schoenanth in a close vessel well glassed and set
upon the Embers; dissolve in the straining as much sugar as is needful; then
boil them to a syrup, in which when it is hot dissolve one dram of ash-colored
Amber: keep it in a close Glass.

Cinnamon Water alone is excellent good in a Cold Stomach, or with other
Medicines, as Syrup of Wormwood, Mints, or Coral; to which you may also put
Ambergris.

The Syrup of Cinnamon made with Aqua Vitae, according to Quercitanus
Dispensatory is no less powerful.

And Cinnamon Water distilled with Juice of Quinces.

And also the Spirit of Mastich made thus,

Take three ounces of Mastich, one ounce of Galangal, half a pint of spirit of
Wine, digest them and distill them.

The Elixir Proprietatis, described by Crollius, is good, if you give twelve or
fifteen drops in Wine they wonderfully strengthen the Stomach.

You may make Tablets for the same purpose thus:

Take of the pulp of Rinds of fresh Oranges, and Aromaticum Rosatum, of each
two drams: white Sugar dissolved in Orange flower water four ounces. Make
Lozenges.

Tablets of Aromaticum Rosatum, Opiata Solomonis, and old Treacle are good for
the same.

A Decoction of Guajacum or Sassaphras taken many days together with a little
sweating, or without in weak people, is very good in this Disease, being o^
long continuance.

Also Sulphurous and Nitrous Baths, as our Bellilucanae being taken in great
quantity many days, do powerfully cleanse the Stomach and Gutts from al slimy
filth.

Take of Agrimony, Centaury the less, and common Wormwood, of each half an
handful: boil them to half a pint, and ad one ounce of sugar, drink it, either
in a cold or hot Cause.

Hartman exceedingly commends the use of Zeadoary in these words, The often use
of Zedoary does so strengthen the stomach, as nothing more, therefore we may
commend it having tried it often, and never missed; you must eat it often.

Costaeus Commends hot Wine thus, Hot Wine drunk ordinarily does am^nd the
imbecility of the stomach: It is usually observed that they who have been
continually vexed with Wind and Pain from an evil Concoction when they have
begun to drink warm drink, have been cured, and lived after a long time more
comfortably.

You must give him Wine in Water, wherein Coriander has been boiled, for his
ordinary Drink.

But observe, That if a hot distemper of the Liver meet with that of a cold
stomach, as often it does, you must give hot Medicines warily, and rather those
that are temperate.

Zechius Commends this Bolus following, in these words, That the stomach may be
warmed gently and not dried, you can use no Medicine inwardly more powerful.

Take of washed Turpentine two drams: Powder of Mastich half a dram: Aromaticum
rosatum ha^f a scruple: make a Bolus to be taken two hours before meat.

This digestive Powder is usual to help Concoction,

Take of Coriander seeds prepared half an ounce: sweet Fennel seed and Annis
seed of each two drams: Cinnamon and Cloves of each half a dram: Sugar twice as
much as the rest: make a Powder, of which let him take one spoonful after every
meal.

The Ballom of Peru is good if you give a few drops in Wine one hour before
meat.

Or in form of a Pill, one or two drops in sugar for many days.

There are some ordinary Medicines for this, Hippocras Wine, a Decoction of
Annis, Coriander and Cinnamon mixed with sugar for ordinary drink.

The Dukes Powder, commonly so called, made of two parts of Sugar and one of
Cinnamon, to sprinkle upon al meats.

A Salt to be eaten with meat, made of Coriander, Annis seeds, long Pepper,
Galangal, and Nutmegg, mixed with an equal proportion of Common salt.

Some Grains of Pepper whole or beaten, taken fasting.

Acrons stuck with Cloves and Cinnamon, and candied with Sugar, Citron, and
Orange peels candied together, Annis seeds, Fennel, Coriander and Cinnamon
infrosted with Sugar, al these men may use as they please.

Citron Peels are more pleasant than the rest, but because it will grow so dry
that it will hardly be chewed; we are often constrained to make it up in a
Mortar with Rose Water, in the form of an Opiate.

Candied Myrobalans and Nutmegs may be used for the same, and be made up as the
former, though they are not so apt to grow hard.

The Essences of Annis, Cinnamon, Citron peels, Nutmegs, and Olives, are
excellent to strengthen the stomach, and they must be used as above in the
Diseases of the Heart.

Of Meats, They which are Salt do most provoke Appetite, and Sharp things in a
small quantity; and mixed with other things lest they cool the Stomach.

Outwardly apply Liniments, Fomentations, and Emplaisters, thus made:

Take of Cypress Roots, Galangal, Flower-de-luce, and dried Citron peels, of
each two ounces: Mints, Hysop, Sage, Rosemary, and Marjoram, of each one
handful: Annis seeds, Bayberries, Nutmegs, Cloves, and Cinnamon, of each three
drams: the flowers of Stoechas, Schoenanth, and Rosemary, of each one pugil;
slice those that must be sliced; and bruise those that must ^e bruised,
according to art, and put them into two Bags with holes pricked through, and
steep them in strong Wine, and lay them warm to the stomach one after another.

Take of the Oil of Wormwood, Mints, and Spike, of each half an ounce: Oil of
Nutmegs, two drams: Wood of Aloes, Mace, and Cinnamon, of each one scruple;
with a little Wax make a Liniment, which will be better if you ad six drops of
Oil of Cloves, and of Musk and Ambergreece, of each eight grains.

Also there is a Liniment of Oil of Nutmegs, Balsom of Peru, or of Oil of
Wormwood, Mastich, and Balsom of Peru.

Take of the Emplaister of Mastich one ounce: Aromaticum Rosatum one dram: Oil
of Nutmegs as much as is fit to make a Plaster like a Buckler for the Stomach.

Crato does wonderfully commend this following Plaster:

Take of Labdanum two ounces: Wax four ounces: Oil of Nutmegs three drams. Make
an Emplaister.

Galen advises 7. meth. not to keep these Plasters long upon the part, for at
length they will dissolve the heat.

Many Practitioners do not only apply these Remedies before to the Cartilage
called Xiphoides, like a sword; but also behind upon the thirteenth Vertebra,
because the proper orifice of the Stomach inclines backward; but the thickness
of the Vertebra is such, and of the Muscles under them, that the strength of
the Medicine cannot pierce through to the Stomach.

Take of Galangal, and Calamus Aromaticus, of each three drams: Mastich, and
Cloves, of each two drams: one Nutmeg: dried Citron peels half an ounce: Annis
seeds one dram and an half. Make a bag of these being bruised and put into red
silk pricked through, and into musked Cotton, to be worn always upon the
Stomach.

The Skin of a Vultur dressed and worn upon the Stomach, is commended for the
same: in want of which a Hairs Skin, or a piece of Scarlet may be used.

Chap. 2. Of Dogs Appetite, called Fames canina.
HAving in the former Chapter spoken of Appetite diminished and abolished, now
we shall speak of it depraved. And this is done two ways: When it either
offends in quantity or quality. It offends in quantity when nourishment is
required in a greater quantity than Nature would; and this is called Boulimia,
or Dogs Appetite: It offends in quality when things are required which are
evil, or are not food, and this is called Pica or Kitta. Of the first we shall
speak in this Chapter, of the last in the Chapter following.

The word Boulimia comes apo tou bou kai limou, because the Particle Bou put to
other words, increase the signification, as if it were compared to the
greatness of an Ox. It is also called Phagedaina, which word is given to Ulcers
which eat the flesh and enlarge, and therefore called Vlcera Phagedaina, that
is, spreading Ulcers. Now it is called Fames Canina, or Dogs Appetite, because
they who have it are hungry as Dogs.

But you may observe that these two words, Boulimia, and Fames Canina, are
sometimes confounded, and used for the same thing: and sometimes distinguished,
so that it is called Fames Canina, when after much feeding they vomit like
Dogs. But some purge rather than vomit, when Nature throws down that which it
cannot concoct. In Boulimia, vomit does not follow, but sometimes Lipothymia.
There are some who feed unsatiably, and yet vomit not, nor purge, but concoct
all, and if they have not presently more, are sick. As Sennertus reports of a
Scholar, who was black colored, who eat not only in the day, but night, and
digested it without vomiting; he could not be satisfied with delicate meats,
but required gross, and therefore would eat no Bakers Bread, but such as the
Country people made, and would eat as many raw Parsnips in a Summer morning as
could be bought for six pence, without damage.

Hence it appears that this disease is a Symptom of an action depraved, in
respect of quantity, which action being increased, is called Dog-like, or an
Appetite beyond Natural Measure. The part affected is chiefly the mouth of the
Stomach. The cause containing, is sense of sucking, and vehement pulling, which
stirs up the Appetite.

Galen 2. de symp. cause. cap. 7. reduces the immediate causes of this Disease
to two Heads, in these words: Evil Appetites exceeding in quantity, which are
called by some Caninae, are then, when either some evil sharp Juice biteth the
Stomach, or when the whole Body immoderately concocting, wants nourishment; for
evil Juice which is cold, biteth like the Natural sucking, and produces
appetite by the resemblance of Nature. The immediate cause of a preternatural
Appetite, according to Galen, is first a vicious humor, and cold, sticking to
the Stomach: Secondly, want of Food by over much concoction.

Evil Humors sticking to the Stomach, cause immoderate Appetite, because they
by their too much coldness, sharpness, and sowrness, do constringe, wrinkle,
and pull the mouth of the Stomach, and so make a sense of feeling like a
natural sucking, and beget a false Appetite.

This Humor is either sour phlegm staying long in the Stomach, or many times
Melancholy sent from the Spleen into the Stomach, which in a natural state,
and a moderate quantity and quality begets a moderate and natural Appetite; but
if it be preternatural and exceed, it makes the Appetite too great.

The want of Food, by reason whereof the Veins do continually suck from the
Stomach, either it comes from too great Evacuation by bleeding, purging,
vomiting, sweating, and the like, or from too great a Consumption of the
alimentary substance, by reason of the immoderate heat of the parts, or the
thinness of the humors, and body, and looseness of the pores, watchings, baths,
immoderate exercise, much venery; all which do dissolve the substance, making
humidity; and by these emptiness being caused, and want of food, the meat is
carried from the Stomach sooner than it ought.

Also this Fames Canina, or Dogs Appetite, may come from Worms which devour the
Chylus; as Trallianus reports, lib. 7. cap. 4. of a Woman in this Disease,
which voided a worm twelve ^ubits long by the use of Hiera, and was cured.

The Hermetical Physicians do lay down another cause of this wonderful
Appetite, namely, a certain dissolving Spirit begot in the Body, which by an
inhaerent property does so readily consume whatsoever meat is taken, so that it
does not allow Nature a lawful and necessary bound of nourishment. This they
call a hungery devouring, salt, sharp, vitriol Spirit. For say they, as from
diverse Salts, Vitriol, Niter, common Salt, and Salt Armoniack, with the like,
Aqua fortis is made by Chemistry, which will dissolve the hardest Stones,
Metals, into Liquor in a short time; so that Gold which will not be dissolved
in a month by a strong fire, in a quarter of an hour will be dissolved in Aqua
regia, and be turned into a Liquor of the same color.

This Doctrine is diligently to be examined; for as the digestion of the
Stomach in its Natural condition has something to be admired by the curious
Searchers into Nature; so the same being made preternatural has something to be
wondered at.

This is wonderful in the Natural digestion of the Belly, that the hardest
meats are digested therein, and in three or four hours space are turned into a
Chylous Liquor, so thin that it may be strained through the narrowest branches
of the Venae lacteae; and that Dogs do turn the hardest bones into the same
Liquor, is not to be attributed to a stronger concocting heat, because meat in
a pot, although the fire be never so hot, cannot in twenty four hours, or many
days be converted into the same. The Galenists hold that this comes from the
faculty of the Stomach, which faculty works not without an Instrument, because
if there is an Idiosyncrasia, or a certain proportion of the first qualities,
as is commonly reported, its chief action must be from heat; for cold,
moisture, or dryness, do nothing to that great dissolving of food, and heat, as
it is said, has not that power. Therefore the Idiosyncrasia is somewhat more
unknown, and not to be expressed. Let us therefore search after it in the
Macrocosm or grater World, of which there is a great Analogy or resemblance in
the little World. And therefore the more witty Hermets say that there is a
certain Spirit or acide Liquor sent from the Spleen into the Stomach, which
dissolveth the solid nourishment, and shortly converteth it into Chylous
Liquor, and that is the principal Instrument of digestion. And some conjecture
that this may be made, because Birds who digest the hardest nourishment have a
Spleen round about their Maw; for the flesh which is found about their Stomachs
is like the substance of a Spleen; from whence there is a more noble use of the
Spleen than what is allowed by the Ancients, who said that it was only for the
purging of the grosser sort of Blood; because according to this opinion it
serves for concoction of meat. Therefore if the Spirit or sharp Liquor which
comes from the Spleen when it is in its Natural condition, makes a natural and
moderate digestion; the same spirit being altered from its natural condition
and defiled, or made sharper or more dissolving, it will sooner dissolve solid
nourishment; and when they are so dissolved and thrown from the Stomach, it
will make a new immoderate Appetite. We do not conclude that this new Doctrine
is certain and undoubted, but we only show it that solid wits may examine it.
And we will talk of it again when we speak of the causes of the hinderance of
Concoction.

The signs by which this disease is known are manifest; for it will appear to
them that eat, and to the standers by, that the Appetite is depraved which
causes such devouring of meat, which afterward is thrown up by vomit, and
then it is Fames Canina, and if Vomits follow not, then there is fainting, with
coldness of the extreme parts, and this is called Boulimia.

The signs of the Causes may be found by the Antecedents, Concomitants, and
Consequents. These are the signs of a cold distemper, and of sharp humors in
the Stomach, belching, and sharp vomiting, crude dejections, or stools, want of
thirst, and external Causes of refrigeration before going. If it come from
defect of Nourishment, the Patient is lean, and there are causes present or
foregoing of the dissolving of the Humidity; and lastly, the signs of Worms
shall be spoken of in their proper Chapter.

The Prognostic of this Disease, is thus: If it come only from External Causes
it is not dangerous if they be presently taken away: And if it come of Worms
there is little danger, for when they are taken away the Disease is cured.

But it is very dangerous if it follow great Evacuations and meltings of the
body; especially if after meat when the belly is yet full there come a fainting;
for when that which should most help, becomes unprofitable, it signifies a
great distemper of the Stomach.

So a Dog Appetite continuing with Vomiting and great Purging is dangerous, for
it uses to end in an evil habit, dropsy, lethargy, consumption and the like.

As for the Cure, because Fames Canina for the most part takes its Original
from Melanchollick and Phlegmatic Humors fastened in the Mouth of the Stomach;
therefore Medicines must principally be directed to them; such as do empty and
change the Humors and also strengthen the part affected.

You must Evacuate by Vomit or Stool with Medicines Prescribed in the Cure of
Want of Appetite from a Cold Cause; for although these Diseases are contrary,
yet come they from the same Humors, different in the degrees of Coldness, and
second Qualities, and such as diversely affect the Stomach.

Also the Remedies there Prescribed to heat the Stomach and strengthen it both
internally and externally are excellent, because they not only correct the Cold
Distemper, but dry and cause thirst; and thirst coming, hunger is diminished.

Moreover, Wine plentifully taken asswageth hunger, according to Hippocrates,
Aph. 21. Sect. 2 And especially the Spirit of Wine, or Aqua Vitae.

They do properly stay Hunger which do much moisten the Stomach, relax it, and
assuage the sharpness of humors. As al Fat things and Oils, as Villanovanus
reports, That one thus diseased did eat a hot Loaf dipped in Oil; and a Woman
drank the melted Sewet of an Ox with as much warm Oil at Twice, and both did so
Disdain Meat, That they eat nothing in Five Days, and were Cured.

Narcotick Medicines by Dulling the too exquisite sense of the Stomach, do
lessen this Disease; and new Treacle is most usual for it because besides its
stupifying quality it does correct the malignity of the Humors which is some
cause thereof.

But because these are to be used but seldom and not without urgent necessity,
sometimes you may use old Treacle, for the reason aforesaid, as also to
strengthen.

Five or Six Grains of Ambergris taken in a rear Eg does not only strengthen
the Stomach, but by a special quality cures this Disease.

Chap. 3. Of Pica and Malacia.
PIca and Malacia, are a depraved Appetite; by which, evil, unprofitable, and
hurtful things are desired.

It is called Kitta or Pica from the bird called a Pie, either in regard of the
variety of colors, or because it eats lumps of Earth, for Women in this
Disease use to eat Earth and Chalk, and the like: It is called Malacia by
Pliny, for these Women through Weakness of mind, and tenderness, want that
right and natural Appetite.

This Disease comes of evil corrupt Humors, which are gathered into the Stomach
by reason of its hurt Concoction, or else sent from other parts.

Phlegmatic and Melanchollick People are most disposed for the production of
these Humors, especially Women, to whom this Disease seems proper and peculiar;
although sometimes Boys and Men, though seldom have the same: Eating of evil
Diet does cause this, want of any natural Evacuation, especially of the Terms,
Sadness, Distemper of the Liver and Spleen, Obstructions and Weakness, diverse
diseases of the Womb, and the like.

These Vicious Humors according to the diverse degrees of distempers and other
dispositions have a diverse nature, from whence come diverse appetites of evil
things: For since some Humors are crude and inconcocted, others burnt, and
adust; some require sour things, sharp, bitter, and very cold, so that they are
delighted with the continual use of unripe Fruits, Vinegar, Juice of Lemons,
Pomegranats, and Orenges, cold Water, Snow, Ice, and the like. Others desire
Earthy, Dry, and Burnt things, as Gloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and other Spices,
Salt-Ashes, Chalk, and the like.

This Disease is Common to Women in the Chlorosis, or Green Sickness; to Women
great with Child; and such as have their Terms stopped; which staying in the
Body corrupt, and ascending do infect the Stomach, from whence its Actions are
depraved, and chiefly the Appetite is taken from its natural Condition.

Boys are sometimes troubled herewith, and especially if they are born of a
Woman that has the Chlorosis: Nor are men altogether free from it, although it
happen seldom; and they are e^pecially troubled therewith who are
Melanchollick, have Obstructions, or want their usual Flux of the Haemorrhoids.

It is Disputed much among Authors, Whether a Depraved Appetite require those
Things which are like to the Preternatural* State or Distemper of the Stomach,
or those that are Contrary? Galen raised the first Dispute, cap. 3. artis
parvae, where he teaches, That the Stomach being distempered, does desire
Contraries, and in its natural state and temper it desires things like to its
self. Which Doctrine Avicen following, Fen. 13. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10.
speaks thus, When there is an evil Humor gathered in the stomach, different in
quality from its own nature, then it does require things contrary to it;
therefore some desire Clay, Coals, Earth, Loam, Chalk and the like, by reason
of the quality that is in them, to dry up and cut that which is contrary to the
quality of the Humors: But they who are in health desire judicially rather
things like, than contraries; for since fancy is much employed in stirring up
of Appetite, and is much stirred up from the disposition of the body, it is
probable that the humor predominating should move the fancy to desire things
like unto it; For as chollerick men both in time of health and sickness, do
dream of Fire and Anger: and Phlegmatic men of Snow, Ice, and Waters: the
Apprehension of which things proceeds from the Humors predominating in the
body: So when the seat of Appetite the mouth of the Stomach is affected by foul
humors there long con^inuing, they do imprint their similitudes in the Fancy
which stirs up the Appetite to desire things like it though never so contrary
to reason, which is now overcome by the force of imagination.

Moreover, If things contrary to the disease or its cause were desired by the
continual use thereof, the disease would be cured; daily experience confirms
this.

By which we are taught, That Virgins in the Green Sickness, and Women with
Child, do for the most part desire those things which are agreeable to their
present Distemper and evil Habit, so that they who have Salt and Adust Humors
long for Coals, Salt, Spices, and the like: but they who have Melancholy or
Salt Phlegm predominating, desire Vinegar, green Fruits, and the like.

As for the Authority of Galen, some wholly reject it; saying, That if it were
true, That Diseased Dispositions should desire their Contraries, al sick men,
of evil Habit, would desire Meat of good nourishment; which is not true, for we
often see that sick men desire evil meats, and refuse good: and we see that
bodies inflamed, whether they are in a preternatural state, as in Fevers; or
in* a natural, as by violent exercise, require cooling.

Some desire to Reconcile this Opinion of Galens, saying, That in this Pica the
distemper upon the Stomach is habitual and connatural, and therefore does cause
an Appetite like to a natural, which is for things like it; which may be thus
explained, When we say that every natural temper does require the like, and
every preternatural the contrary; the last is to be understood of distempers
which come without overflowing moisture; for they which are with much moisture
when it is sucked up by the tunicles of the Stomach, do rather desire things
like the moisture with which they are wet, because the Humor which now pierces
all the Tunicles although it be noxious, yet it is not troublesome: On the
contrary, when the humor only possesses part only of the Stomach, or is only
in the bottom, the Stomach desires the contrary to that which is offensive unto
it; but if it possess the whole Stomach, and be soaked into its Tunicles, then
the natural Faculty is destroyed and so changed, that it does not desire any
thing but what is like to the Humor so soaked in, and so it may be rightly said
that the humors was become as it were connatural.

Platerus and Sennertus do easily free themselves from these difficulties, by
flying to an occult quality, and they take occasion from hence, if the Patients
so affected should require things like to the cause of the disease, then by the
plentiful use of them the disease would be exceedingly increased, but we see
that they will devour Chalk, Clay, Coals, and the like trash, and receive not
the least hurt thereby, by which men that are sound would be almost killed.

Moreover, They say that Women with Child will often void salt and sour humors,
and yet not require salt or sour things, but the contrary. And lastly they
affirm constantly that there is no agreement of Coals, Chalk, raw Flesh, and
the like with the Humors. And therefore they say that they must not rest in
manifest qualities, and that the Cause of this Symptom and wonderful Appetite
cannot be taken from them, but they must fly to some occult quality not to be
explained.

Yet Sennertus confesses that it is probable that this Appetite depraved,
should proceed rather from a like than a contrary quality: but what that
quality is cannot be explained, because the things which are desired have no
agreement with the humors either sweet, salt, or sour in manifest qualities.

We may Reconcile al these thus:

The desire of Trash is stirred up by humors of the like nature and temper, but
these humors besides their native temper have a certain peculiar fault from
corruption, which since it cannot be well explained, it may be called an Occult
Quality.

The Knowledge of this Disease is easy, for the Patient can relate it; it is
manifest that the part affected is the mouth of the Stomach, for that is the
Seat of Appetite. The Cause also may be found out by conjecture from the
supposed desire of things like. For if they desire Coals, Salt, and the like,
we may gather that the disease depends upon Salt and burnt humors, which will
more clearly appear, if any of those Humors be cast forth by vomit or stool, if
there be sharp belchings, or salt, a taste bitter, sour, or salt.

As to the Prognostic; This Disease is Chronical, of continuance, but not very
dangerous, if the Body by Nature or Art may be brought to its old condition,
which is not very difficult. For in time the Humor offending may be sent forth
by vomiting naturally, or by Medicines: and the Terms or Haemorrhoids stopped,
which caused this disease first, may in time be discharged; which if neglected,
and Nature sinks under the burden, great diseases follow: For when the first
Concoction is hurt, it is necessary that the second and third be corrupted,
from whence come great Obstructions, evil habits, and dropsies. Or if the Humor
be carried in greater plenty to the Stomach, and partake of greater Malignity,
sometimes it produces violent Cardialgiaes, or Heart diseases; from whence
fainting, swooning, and sometimes death does follow.

If Women in this disease begin to abstain from trash, and to eat good meat
with less disdain, it is a most certain sign of health at hand.

Women with Child use to be freed of this disease about the fourth month,
because then the Child is grown greater, and so consumes more of the humors,
and the mother has sent it forth by often vomitings; but if it last longer,
it is dangerous; for it signifies that the evil disposition of the Stomach has
taken deep root, which will hardly be plucked up.

It is better for people in this disease to desire sharp and sour things; it is
worse if they desire things contrary to Nature, as Avicen teaches, fen. 13.
lib. 2. tract. 2. cap. 20. for it signifies a greater distance from the Natural
state, which is harder to be cured.

The Cure of this disease is diverse, according to the variety of the Bodies
affected.

In Women with Child, few Medicines are to be used, by reason of the unfitness
of the subject, and danger of Misearriage, but you may give them gentle things,
and such as were prescribed in the Cure of want of Appetite to cleanse and
strengthen the Stomach. Nor must you omit blood-letting, which done sparingly
and often, is of great consequence.

But in Virgins of the Clorosis, or green sickness, this disease is cured with
the same Remedies, which shall be prescribed for the Cure of Clorosis in its
proper place.

But the Pica which is in men, is very seldom, because it comes from
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, you may use those things which shall be
prescribed for the Cure of them.

Chap. 4. Of the Thirsty Disease, called Sitis Morbosa.
THe Appetite of Drink, or Thirst, may be three ways hurt, as that of Meat, by
diminishing, abolishing, and depraving; it is diminished many times by a sweet
insipid humor, which moisteneth the Tunicle of the Stomach, or from too much
moisture in the whole Body, from whence it is that the parts do not draw the
drink from the Stomach. It is abolished by acute Diseases through interception
of the sense, when the mind is sick, or because the Natural Faculty is decayed
by the extinction of the Natural heat; from whence Hipp. says, It is evil not
to thirst, when a cause of thirst is taken: and since thirst diminished does
depend upon the same cause, from which want of Appetite is produced, and thirst
abolished, is only in acute Diseases, we shall not speak here of them
particularly. But we will only speak of thirst depraved, as being most usual:
and this is to be divided two ways, and Hunger. The one requiring diverse kinds
of Drinks; the other great quantities, and often. That which desires filthy
drink is to be referred to Pica, as when they desire Vinegar, Lemmons, and salt
Water. It remains that we speak of thirst increased, which is an usual Symptom
when the Appetite offends in the quantity of Liquor, and much drink is desired.

The immediate Cause is a want of moist nourishment, and dryness of the
Stomach, and of other parts which make the Stomach sensible of their wants.

This dryness and want of moisture, uses to come from all such things which
can consume the dewy moisture of the Stomach and the whole Body, and dry it up,
and they are hot and dry. The dry do principally suck up the Humor, and the hot
things secondarily.

Also this disease is either by Propriety, or by Sympathy. It is by Propriety
when the innate moisture of the Stomach is altered and drawn forth by an
unequal distemper, dry or hot, or both; sometimes by a simple distemper, but
often by that distemper which is joined with matter; as a salt, sharp, or
filthy humor fixed in the mouth of the Stomach, or contained in its Cavity. But
that which is by Sympathy, comes by consent from the whole Body, or some part
whose Veins having lost their moisture, do suck from the Stomach; as it is in
Fevers, Inflammations of the Liver, Lungs, and other parts, as also in hot and
dry distempers, especially of the Reins, as you may see in a Diabetes, or
invoiuntary pissing, which is called by the name of Dipsacus, by reason of the
great thirst which accompanies it.

The outward Causes are all such as extraordinarily heat or dry, as very hot
and dry Air, long continuance in the Sun, or at the fire, use of Salt meats,
sharp, and spiced, much use of old rich Wine, great watchings, too much
evacuation, especially by purging.

The Hermetical Physicians say, that immoderate preternatural thirst comes from
some thirsty spirits which are bred of Sulphurous excrements, which will not
be satisfied with simple cooling and moistening, but with other Spirits like
unto themselves; as we see in Fevers that a strong thirst is little allayed
with much Water, which with sharp Spirits of Vitriol, Sulphur, Salt, and the
like, will be satisfied with a less quantity of Water.

The knowledge is easy, for the Patients will complain. But the Causes are
known by their proper signs; as a hot and dry distemper cleaving to the Stomach
and other parts; as also sharp, salt, and bitter humors, some whereof are
sometimes cast forth, or they have their tastes in their mouths, if the humors
are in the Stomach; but if thirst come by consent from other parts, the signs
of those Diseases will be manifest.

As to the Prognostic: That thirst which comes from Primary Causes is safest,
for that is quenched presently with drink. But that which comes from internal
Causes, is more or less dangerous, according to their differences.

That thirst which comes with Fevers, and other easy cures, ends with them.
But if it come from great and dangerous Diseases, it is very dangerous; as in a
Dropsy in which thirst is not slacked, but rather increased with drink.

The Cure of this Disease is often in Fevers, and Inflammations of some parts;
which is described sufficiently in our Method of the Cure of Fevers, Sect. 2.
Cap. 2.

But if Thirst be contracted by immoderate Evacuations causing a dry distemper
of the Stomach, and other Causes, the Cure is by suppressing those Evacuations,
and by restoring the empty parts with moist Medicines.

Therefore first, having ordered a restoring Diet, as in a Hectic Fever,
Consumption, and Marasmus. Two Remedies prescribed by Galen are the best, 7.
meth. namely, Milk and Baths. Although Hippocrates, Aph. 64. Sect. 5. forbids
milk to thirsty people, that is to be understood of those who thirst from
abundance of Choler, and putrid Humors, in whom Milk is easily putrified; not
of those who thirst from dryness and Consumption. We showed the use of Milk in
the Cure of a Consumption.

Let the Bath be made of the Decoction of Althaea Roots, and Lilly Roots, with
Mallows, and Violet Leaves, and of a Decoction of the Heads, Feet, and Guts of
Sheep, or melt fresh Butter, or Oil in warm Water, to be changed often.

Going out of the Bath, let the Loins, Back, and Stomach be anointed with Oil
of Violets, the Marrow of a Veal Bone, and the like, with which let as much
Breast, or Goats Milk be mingled, as they will receive.

Let the Patient in the mean while use restoring Syrups and Lozenges, and other
Remedies which shall be laid down in the Cure of an Hectic Fever.

This following Opiate is excellent:

Take of Eryngus Roots candied, and Conserve of Bugloss, of each two ounces:
Conserve of Violets and Borrage flowers, of each one ounce: Confectio Alkermes
half an ounce: Diapenedion newly prepared without the Species, two drams: with
Syrup of sweet Apples make an Opiate, of which let him take the quantity of a
Chestnut at the time of thirst, drinking after it a little Borrage Water.

Chap. 5. Of the Hurt Concoction of the Stomach.
THe Concoction of the Stomach called Chylosis, as of all other parts, is hurt
three ways, either by diminishing, abolishing, or depraving. This Concoction
diminished is called Bradupepsia; the abolished Apepsia; the depraved is called
Dyspepsia; all which differences are comprehended in this one word Crudity. Now
this Crudity is twofold: either nidorous, stinking, and acidous, or sharp. The
nidorous Crudity is when the nourishment is turned into a stinking, burnt
matter, as when the stink of Eggs, or rotten fish, or fried Oil, is smelt by
belching, which happens often in hot Chollerick Bodies. But a sharp sour
Crudity is when meat turns sour, and the belchings are sour, and this comes
from a cold distemper. To these you may ad a third difference of Crudities,
when by reason of weak heat the matter is imperfectly concocted, and is turned
into phlegm without sowrness.

The Causes that hinder Concoction in the Stomach may be brought into three
Heads, namely, a fault in the Organ, Object, and things External and Internal.

The fault in the Organ comprehends all diseases in the Stomach, whether they
be Similar, or Organ call, or Common, all which may overthrow its actions, but
distemper is commonly the cause of hurt Concoction; for since Concoction is
made by a moderate heat according to Nature, if at any time it want its due
moderation, the Concoction is hurt. So a cold distemper of the Stomach which
diminishes the Heat, if it be gentle it only weakeneth the Concoction, and
make a Brylypepsia, or slow Concoction. If the cold distemper be greater, it
abolisheth Concoction, and makes Apepsia. But a hot distemper does deprave
Concoction, and make a Dyspepsia, which is a difficult Concoction. These
distempers are sometimes simple, and in such who have Naturally a weak Stomach,
and small Natural heat; or have a sharp and burning heat, but they are commonly
with matter: hence in Hypochondriack Melancholy, much phlegm and fermentation
of a black Humor use to cause Crudities, Winds, Swellings, Rumblings, and sour
Belchings.

The fault of the Object, that is, the nourishment which is the proper Object
of the Stomach, comes many ways, when it offends in Substance, Quantity,
Quality, time, or Order of being taken.

Nourishment is vicious in respect of its substance, when it is too hard and
difficult to be concocted, as Deers flesh, Hairs flesh, especially if old, and
made hard with Salt or Smoke, Bread full of Bran, Mushroms, Roots, Pulse, and
the like, which are called Dyspepta.

Meats offend in Quantity when too much is taken at once, and therefore cannot
be overcome by the heat, hence come Crudities, which are most usual among them
who do surfeit themselves. If there be less eaten than is required, it may seem
to be crude, because too little meat will be burnt and dried in a Chollerick
Stomach.

Meats offend in Quality which are too cold and moist, and windy, or they which
are too hot, whereby the thinner part of the Chyle is burnt, and turned into
nidorous vapors.

To this may be reduced the Art of Cookery, and Sawce-making; for the diverse
ways of roasting, boiling, and making of Sauce, do alter the disposition of
Meat, by which means they become more easy or hard of Concoction.

The time and order of eating being preposterous, may also spoil the
Concoction, as if any one should omit his usual time of eating, and fall to at
midnight, or a little before he goes to sleep, fill his Stomach; or if after
taking of solid and astringing things, as Cheese, Pears, Quinces, and the like,
they take liquid things which do soon corrupt.

Also external things may spoil the Concoction, if they be immoderate: so too
cold Air by dulling the natural near, if it be weak or too hot, by dissipating
the heat may hinder Concoction; as also immoderate exercise, especially after
meat, by drawing the natural heat forth from the Stomach to the external parts,
and so dispersing it extraordinarily; as also by throwing the Chylus yet
imperfect into the Guts. The stoppage of the Belly and other excrements, or an
immoderate flux, great watchings, sleep in the day time, great passions of the
mind, especialy sadness, and deep study presently after meat, and the like, do
not a little hinder the action of the Stomach.

Besides the Causes mentioned, the Hermeticks of late time mention one less
usual, and not noted by the Ancients, which also is not plainly demonstrated by
them; but it is confirmed by some conjectures, not to be contemned; of which we
made mention in the explaining of the Causes of Fames Canina. First therefore
they ashrm that the Natural Concoction of the Stomach is not made by heat only;
but that quick melting of solid meats by which it is converted into Chylus, is
from another cause; since Experience teaches that meat boiling in a pot at a
strong fire many days, will never be dissolved: and bones in a Dogs Stomach
are quickly dissolved, and turned into Chylous Liquor; and in the bellies of
Fishes which have no actual heat, all that is brought in is dissolved and
concocted the same way. Therefore they lay down the principal Cause of this
dissolving to be a certain Spirit or sharp Liquor sent from the Spleen into the
Stomach, which has great power to dissolve. And they take this opinion from
Galen, by whom it is confirmed that a Melanchollick Humor sent from the Spleen
into the Stomach, does cause appetite, and that either by astringing or
wrinkling the inner Tunicle of the Stomach, or pulling of it by its sharpness,
which may be opposed; for if it do it by astriction, then all astringent things
would do the same; and if by pulling, sharp things rather than sour would
provoke Appetite. Therefore they think it more probable, that that humor should
stir up Appetite by accident, by causing want of nourishment, by dissolving of
that which comes in. And therefore they allow a more noble use of the Spleen
than ever the Ancients thought of, namely, to be a chief instrument to serve
the Stomach in Concoction: This may be conjectured from Birds which dissolve
the hardest seeds, and have a Spleen round about their Stomach or Maw, that it
may more powerfully inspire that dissolving Spirit, or communicate unto it sour
Liquor. And Helmont from his own experience says, that that sour Spirit is
very strong in Birds; for he relates that when he was a Boy and kept a Sparrow,
he gave it his Tongue, which the Sparrow catching with his Bill disired to
swallow; and that touching the Throat of the Sparrow with the tip of his
Tongue, he sound it exceeding sharp. The dissolving Spirit inherent in the
Gizzards of Birds is proved from Physical Practice, in which the Gizzards of
Hens for to help Concoction are usually prescribed in digestive pouders, and it
is credible that they produce that effect by helping the dissolution of the
meat, and the same are prescribed in the Stone, and they do much dissolve them;
and that is more manifestly declared in that from the Gizzards of Birds, there
is a salt taken which is excellent to dissolve the Stone: out of which salt,
being in grea plenty in their gizzards, Nature being wi^e and provident knows
how to draw a spirit in a living Creature, by help whereof with the natural
heat she may dissolve solid nourishment: and it is ordinarily seen, that there
is a spirit made of dissolving salt, as of Vitriol, Niter, Armoniack, and
common salt, which is more powerful to dissolve.

Therefore the Spirit or sharp Liquor which is sent from the Spleen into the
Stomach while it is in its natural state makes a laudable Concoction, but if it
be changed it overthrows he actions of the Stomach as aforesaid, from these
Positions, That a Dog Appetite was stirred up, when that spirit or acid Liquor,
is too active and powerful to dissolve: So on the otherside, if the dissolving
power be too weak, or be detective, there follows a diminished or abolished
concoction. Hence Helmont says, That the 1. Aph. of Hipp. Sect. 6. which is
this: In long raging of the Guts, if sour belchings arise, which were not
formerly, it is a good sign; is thus to be interpreted, because that sour
belching signify that that fermentation which was lost by the disease begins
to return.

Let us hold up this new Doctrine by our own Experiment, for in the year past,
1648. we had a great Flegnatick and Melanchollick Flux for four months, and
were brought thereby to extreme leanness, by reason al our nourishment turned
into a Phlegmatic and slimy substance, from the debility of the Stomach which
could not well concoct the same, after many Medicines used al along that time,
the chief part whereof prosited little or nothing, at length by the often use of
very sharp Vinegar in a few days we were perfectly cured of that violent
disease; by the force of which Vinegar we may conjecture that the natural
sowrness which was almost lost was much restored: We used this Vinegar at our
meat with hard Eggs, which being cut in pieces we dipped therein, and for some
days we continued the use thereof in all our meats: And we manifestly
perceived that if the Vinegar was not very sharp it did our Stomach little good.

The Knowledge or Diagno is of this Disease, according to the differences of
hurt Concoction is diverse: And (...), Apepsia and Brady pepsia are known by the
same signs only differing in degrees: and these signs are sour belonings,
vomiting or purging forth of food either not, or but half concocted, some
causes of refrigeration went before, there is a weight, extention and
inflammation in the stomach, inconvenience by taking cold things; thin urine,
waterish, and pale; sometimes thick and red from that impure and silthy juice
which by reason of the imperfection of the first concoction could not be
separated from the Chylus, but being sent to the Reins with the serous humor,
makes the urin soul, such as meth to be voided by Melanchollick and Scorbutic
persons.

See the Explication of this Urine more at large in Sennertus, lib. 3.
practimed. part. 8. sect. 2 cap. 7. but the show Concoction depraved, or
Dyspepsia, Nidorous stinking belchings, the like taste or stink in the mouth,
sense of thirst and heat, inconvience by hot things.

If the Stomach is affected principal, there will be the proper signs of its
Disease; but if by consent, this sympathy is to be sound out from the proper
signs of the part affected: but if the symprome depends upon the fault of
external causes, or of the object, it will appear by the relation of the Patient
and those that stand by, from the present or foregoing Constitution of the same.

The Pregnostick is thus made; the fault of Concoction which comes from
external causes is easily helped, by taking away those causes is easily helped,
by taking away those causes, and by ordering a good diet.

Concoction hurt is more easily cured when it comes of humors which are brought
from other parts into the stomach, then when it is only from the stomach: for
as if those humors are purged before they fasten any disease in the stomach,
concoction is restored.

The Ab^^^shed Concoction of the Stomach is worst of al, because the whole
nourishment of the body is frustrated, from whence comes most deadly diseases,
as Lientery, Dropsy, Atrophy, and (...).

The Concoction Diminished brings its inconveniences, as Chollick, Cachexy, or
evil Habit, and so^^ume diverse sorcs of Drop^es.

The Concoction Deptaved is the Cause of many Evils; of Obstructions, Scabs,
Fevers, and the l^ke.

(...) ^ure is wrought by taking away Causes external, antecedent, and
conjunct, which do cause, (...), and preserve this disease.

And first observe, if the humors be brought from other parts into the stomach,
and in this cafe they must first be Evacuated and Revelled, the disease of the
part sending those humors is to be amended, and the stomach strengthened, the
cures of the diseases of other parts must be taken from their proper Chapters:
But the strengtnening of the stomach may be taken from the cure or the Want of
Appetite.

But the Hurt which comes to the Concoction from the proper fault of the
stomach, that chiefly takes its beg^nning from cold or hot humors; and therefore
requires the same cure, which was propounded for Want of Appetite coming of the
same Causes, which we will not repeat.

Lastly, If the proper Cause of the Hermeticks aforementioned be worth
observing, you must look to it; first correcting the Evil state of the Lwer,
and then restoring the Spirits dissolving, with some acid substance; of whith
kind is Spirit of Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt, juice of Lemons, Pomegranats,
Orenges, and Vinegar.

Chap. 6. Of Singultus, or Hiccough.
SIngultus or Hiccough, is a depraved Motion of the Stomach, by which it
desires to expel something that is hurtful.

It is distinguished from vomiting, because that which is so sent forth, is
contained in the Cavity of the Stomach; and it is wholly turned to throw it
out: But in Singultus the matter offending is fixed in the Tunicles of the
Stomach, therefore it does contract it self, and shakes its fibers, to exclude
it. And that we may comprehend loathing also in this Definition, we say that
the expulsive motion of the Stomach is three ways: For either Nature would
sometimes rise to expel, and cannot; or it is not sufficiently raised to this
motion, and then it is Nausea or loathing: sometimes it rises and expels,
and then it is Vomiting: or lastly, it rises to expel, and cannot, and that is
Singultus.

This is a Convulsive Motion, not a Convulsion, which is only in the Muscles,
and parts given to voluntary Motion.

The immediate Causes of Singultus are propounded by Hipp. Aph. 39. Sect. 6.
that is, Emptiness and Repletion, as of a Convulsion. But Galen and Avicen ad a
third Cause, namely, a provocation by a sharp matter. Some labor to bring the
matter provoking to a kind of repletion, that they may excuse Hippocrates. But
when the matter is plain, we need not confound and darken the evidences of
things for Authors words: For what is more clear, than that Singultus comes
from the expulsive faculty provoked? Therefore whatsoever can provoke is the
immediate cause of Singultus or Hiccough. But Humors and Vapors offending
either in quantity or quality may prov^ke the Stomach to expulsion, and so
repletion and acrimony are two distinct causes. But it is not ea^e to show how
emptiness makes a Singultus: For since its Essence is in defect, none will say
that Nature rises to expel a defect; but rather will be moved to refresh and
repair it, and so it does rather move the Attractive than the Expulsive
Faculty. But if Singultus follow great Evacuations, as in sharp Fevers, and
malignant, and purging with Hellebore, it is not simply to be attributed to the
Evacuation, but rather to a malignant quality in the Stomach, coming from the
Disease, or some Medicine taken.

The Matter causing Singultus is either gathered in the Stomach, or sent from
the Liver, Spleen Guts, or other parts; or from the whole Body. So sharp
Nourishment, or sharp Medicines, or sharp Humors, or gnawing Worms contained in
the Stomach, cause a Singultus by propriety: but inflammation of the parts
adjacent by water or vapors sent to the Stomach, make it by consent: as also
because the Tumor, especially when the Liver is inflamed, does compress the
Stomach by which the expulsive faculty is continually provoked. Finally, Humors
may be brought from the whole Body, or sharp humors to the Stomach, in diseases
of the whole Body, as appears in sharp and malignant Fevers.

The Diagnosis, or knowledge of this Disease, is manifest of it self. But the
signs of the Cause are thus to be distinguished, so that if it be by propriety,
the disease is more lasting, and there will appear signs of the Humors
contained in the Stomach, and the disease is a^^waged by Vomit. The Humor
contained in the Stomach is known by vomit, belching, taste in the mouth, and
by other signs. And finally, if it come from a disease in any other part, you
may take the signs thereof from their proper Chapters.

As to the Prognostic: Singultus that comes from any principal Cause as Meat,
Drink, or Cold, is not dangerous; as also that which goes before a Crisis by
Vomit, and then other signs must be healthful.

If any have the Hiccough in a great Fever, the Disease is very dangerous,
Hipp. in Coacis. For it comes from sharp Humors, and malignant, which pull the
Tunicle of the Stomach in wardly, and force its expulsive faculty. And
Vallesius says, that he never knew any extenuated persons taken with a hot and
malignant Fever* who had a Singultus, to escape: So it is in Hipp. 3. Epid.
Sect. 2. Aegr. 12. A woman living in the Market, had many Hiccoughs upon the
twelfth day, and died the fourteenth day of her sickness. Also Platerus
observed, that a Singultus coming upon burning Fevers, and continuing, is for
the most part a forerunner of death, and the same is deadly in a Dysentery, or
bloody flux.

After Vomiting, Singultus and redness of the Eyes is evil, Hipp. Aph. 3. Sect.
7. These two signs coming after Vomiting in acute Diseases, and continuing any
time, therefore are said to be deadly, because they declare an inflammation of
the Brain or Stomach; which inflammation is not only the cause of Hiccoughs and
redness of Eyes, but also of Vomiting. For if Vomiting come from sharp Humors
that gnaw the mouth of the Stomach, and its Tunicles, when those Humors are
thrown out by Vomit, the Singultus and vomiting would cease, nor would any
sharp vapor be sent to the Eyes, which should make them red: But when Vomiting
does not only not profit, but also brings after it Hiccoughs and redness of the
Eyes; it is most certain that these three, namely, Vomiting, Hiccoughs, and
Redness of the Eyes, do come from the Inflammation of the Brain or Stomach: for
the Brain being inflamed, does through abundance of blood send it to the Eyes,
and into their extreme Tunicles, whence comes redness; to which also the
Stomach consenting by the Nerves of the sixth Conjugation, is easily from the
Inflammation of the Brain brought to Vomit and Hiccough. Also the Stomach
inflamed by a concourse of hot blood to the Eyes by reason of the great consent
between those parts, brings Vomit, Hiccoughs, and redness of the Eyes, which
the beginning of suffocations do demonstrate, and the appearance of things
before the Eyes which are in the Stomach disordered; whence Hippocrates in his
Book del ocis in homine, affirms that the Eyes are chiefly hurt by Vomiting.

Singultus from Inflammation of the Liver is hurtful, Hipp. Aph. 17. Sect. 7.
which comes then, as Galen shows in his comment upon that Aphorism, when the
inflammation is greater and worse, for then it is so great in the Liver that it
lies upon the Stomach, and brings the Singultus: nay, sometimes by conflux of
matter, there is sometimes an inflammation or Erysipelas in the Stomach: or else
there comes gnawing from the same being sucked into the Tunicles of the Stomach.

The Cure of this disease is directed to the Causes, which as I said, do either
produce it by way of Sympathy, or Propriety. The Causes which produce it by
sympathy, are the diseases of other parts, which being cured, this is cured,
although these Medicines are to be administered then, which are good to allay
the Symptom, which shall be afterward declared.

This Disease by Propriety comes of Phlegm, Wind, Choler, or some sharp or
malignant Humor.

That which comes from Phlegm in the Tunicles of the Stomach is cured by
Medicines which cut the Humor, cleanse and purge it, and by strengtheners of the
part, such as were prescribed for the Cure of want of Appetite coming of a cold
Cause. To which we may ad these following, as more proper to this disease.

Take of Castor one dram: the juice of Mints four ounces: Mix them, let the
Patient take one spoonful or two every fit: and you may anoint the Stomach with
the same Medicine warm, twice or thrice in a day.

He may take Vinegar of Squils often to cut and dissolve the matter contained
in the Tunicles of the Stomach, or instead thereof, Oxymel of Squils.

Cloves held often in the mouth do not a little profit.

Also the Elixir Proprietatis of Crollius, is very profitable.

Take of Dill seeds, two or three drams: boil them a little in eight ounces of
the best Wine; of which let the Patient take one ounce first and last. Let the
same Seed be put into a cloth, and often smelled to.

When the Disease is violent, these Pills following are very good.

Take of Castor and Myrrh, of each three drams: Sal gem. half an ounce:
Diagridium, and Mastich, of each one dram: Agarick newly trochiscated three
drams: Aloes, as much as all the rest: make them with Juice of Mints into a
mass, of one dram whereof, make six Pills gilded. Let him take two or three in
the morning twice in a week, two hours before meat.

Plaine^ Pills, and almost as good, may be made of Hiera with Oxymel, of which
you may give a drama.

In the days between the taking of Pills, give this Powder:

Take of Dill seeds half an ounce: Zedoary, Lignum Aloes, Nutmegs, Cloves, and
powder of Diambra, of each one dram. Let him take two scruples in a morning
with a little sweet Wine, or put to them three ounces of Common Salt, and let
him eat it with all his Victuals.

Apply this Cataplasm following to the Stomach.

Take of Roots of Aristolochium, or long Birthwort, Flowerdeluce, Bay Berries,
dried Leaves of Ri^e and Mints, of each three drams: Castor and Myrrh, of each
two drams: Cloves, and Hypocisti^, of each one dram. Make a Cataplasm with
Honey of Rosemary.

At length, when the disease is stubborn, you must use the Decoction of
Guajacum and Baths of Brimstone, as the best Medicines.

That which comes from wind, is cured by the same Medicines, adding thereto
things to expel wind. Apply also Cupping-glasses to the region of the Stomach,
which miraculously do presently abate, and take away the windy diseases of the
Stomach.

That which comes from a sharp Chollerick Humor, besides those Remedies which
were prescribed in want of Appetite coming of a cold distemper, most proper
also to this Disease, must be cured by Phlebotomy (if there be Plethory or
fullness) by vomiting and gentle purging every third day, thus made:

Take of the powder of Rhubarb, sprinkled with Endive Water half an ounce: the
pulp of Tamarinds, two drams: the seeds of Endive and Purslain, and of Spodium,
of each one dram: yellow Saunders, and Diagridium, of each half a dram: with
syrup of Lemons make a Mass of Pills of half a dram; whereof make Four or Five
Pills to be given in the Morning as aforesaid.

Upon other days let him take Conserve of Roses and Borrage, mixed with a
little Triasantalon or the Opiate mentioned in the Cure of Want of Appetite.

Emulsions often used, made of the Cold Seeds, do powerfully assuage the
sharpness of the Humor; or in a disease not very hot, the milk of sweet Almonds.

Syrup of Apples, with Syrup of Quinces is to be given in a spoon.

He must take Broth often.

And must drink cold or warm Water or Ptisans often.

The Oil of sweet Almonds does assuage the sharpness of the humors.

Let the Stomach be Fomented with a spung dipped in Rose water.

Take of the Cerat of Saunders and Ointment of Roses, of each one ounce:
Mastich half an ounce: Citron peels and pulp of Quinces, of each one dram: with
Juice of Housleek and a little Turpentine, make two Emplaisters, of which lay
one to the fore part, another to the hinder part of the stomach.

Anoint the region of the Liver with Cooling Ointments, because the Humors use
to flow from thence to the stomach.

If you suspect any infection, you must give Treacle and other Antidotes, and
anoint the stomach with the Oil of Scorpions according to Matthiolus.

These Medicines following are good against the Hiccough of what cause soever.

First, Expel the Humor offending by Vomit, if the Patient can well endure it;
and Repeat it, if the Disease abate, and give stronger if necessity requires.

As Platerus shows in his Practice, of which he gives an example, in his
Observations in these words, A Surgeon being sick began to Hiccough day and
night so that he could neither sleep, speakwell, or take meat: at last being
thus weak and nothing profiting him, when he was in an agony, we gave him not
without fear but at his own entreaty, a strong Chemical Vomit at hand, by which
he vomited abundance of choler green and black, and so was cured.

If the Patient abhor Vomits, Purge him.

But prepare the Humors first or before you repeat it, with cutting and
clensing means; after use these following:
Apply Cupping Glasses to the Back against the Stomach or before. Bind the
Stomach that it may not be dilated. Use Ligatures to the remote parts. Take
Annis-seed, for they say that does specifically cure. And give often Clysters
to draw the Humors from the Stomach. Apply young Creatures to the Stomach. And,
Take Vinegar of Squils in a spoon.
Neezing does shake off the Matter which is compacted in the Tunicles of the
Stomach; as Chrysimachus the Physician in Plato cured Aristophanes by Neezing,
when he could not be cured by holding his breath, and gargling of cold water.

Galen, 8. de comp. med. sec. loc. mentiones the Medicine of Asclepiades, of
which he examineth every Simple, and approves them as if it had al Faculties
fit for this intention; namely, To discuss and Evacuate the Matter hurtful, by
Stool and Urin, to strengthen the stomach; and lastly to mitigate sharpness.

The Composition is thus:

Take of Costus or Galangal, Saffron, Spikenard, Roses, Mastich, of each four
scruples: Asarabacca and Aloes of each two scruples: Opium one scruple: with
the Juice of Fleabane make them into little Balls or Cakes, and let him take
one of a scruple in weight every morning.

In imitation of that you may quicklier prepare Pills for one Dose, of one dram
of Aloes two or three grains of Laudanum; And if you will Purge more, give three
or four grains of Diagridium.

Duretus testifies what excellent force Aloes has in this Disease, in these
words, Many when they have been almost dead with the Hiccough, have been cured
with Purging five days together with Hiera after they have voided black
glutinous humors.

Platerus reports in his Observations, That he Cured a Boy of ten years old,
that was troubled night and day for eight days together with the Hiccough,
with the Water of green Nuts, distilled with Rhadish first macerated in
Vinegar, which he gave as a Vomit; and though he vomited not, yet he was eased;
and taking a draught thereof at night, was presently Cured.

Forestus reports, That he Cured one with one draught of the Decoction of
Dill-seeds, Carva, Purslain, and white Poppy-seeds, made in small Ale.

Claudinus does highly commend Diaphoenicum with Philonium Romanum, when the
Cause and the Symptom are very violent.

Lastly, Narcoticks only do alone Cure this when al other things fail, by
stupifying of the sense of the part which is too exquisite.

Chap. 8. Of Nausea, and Vomiting.
NAusea and Vomiting differ only in degrees, and both are the motion of the
Stomach by which it either expels or labors to expel things contained
therein; therefore Nausea is a desire to Vomit with trouble, and only sending
and pewking forth a thin waterish Humor by Salivation: whatsoever troubles the
Stomach either in quantity or quality uses to stir that up, when it cannot be
voided by reason of the weakness of the Stomach, or the strength of the upper
Orifice, or thickness of the Matter, or sliminess.

But Vomiting, which is called in Greek Emetos, or Emesia, is a Depraved motion
of the Stomach, which shakes it, by which the Expulsive Faculty is stirred up
by Contraction of the Fibers of the lower part and loosening those in the
superior, does sensibly with a violent Motion throw upward the Matter contained
therein, which is troublesome unto it* it is called a Depraved Motion both in
respect of the Object troubling it, as also in respect of the Motion it self,
which is from the bottom of the Stomach to the Mouth of it, turning it, when
the natural Motion of the Stomach is Compulsive toward the Guts and the
Pylorus.

The Differences of Vomitings are taken from their Causes, which are either
External or Internal; therefore it is Divided first into Natural and
Artificial; the Natural again, is either without a Disease, or in the Disease;
from whence arises a Threefold Difference, one is called Periodical, another
Critical, and another Symptomatical.

Periodical is that which without a Disease, is used for preservation often,
from whence we read in Hippocrates, That the Ancients did Vomit Twice every
Month, either at distance, or together.

And there are many in our times, who use either every Month, or Week, or Day
to Vomit Choler, or Phlegm; by which they are Preserved from many Diseases: And
this is not properly a Symptom, because there is no Disease present; but it is
rather to be termed a Motion of Nature.

Critical Vomiting often happens in Diseases, and by that the Matter of the
Disease, if preparation be first made, is wholsomly Evacuated; either al, by
which it is Cured; or in part, by which it is Diminished.

Symptomatical Vomiting comes from Nature provoked and weakened and without ease
to the Patient, because it is not enough, or it is nourished continually with
the Matter that makes the Disease.

Other Differences of Vomitings are taken from the things vomited, for they are
either Nourishable or Excrementitious; the first is of Meat, Chylus, or pure or
mixed blood: the latter is of Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy, Water, Matter,
Worms, and the like.

Artificial Vomiting, generally is whatsoever is from an External Cause: The
External Causes, are chiefly Strokes, Falls, Compression of the lower Belly,
Southernly weather, or infectious Air, Poisonous Breath, Stinking Smells,
Violent Exercise, Riding, Sailing at Sea, especially in a Southernly wind,
beholding or conceiving of some filthy thing: And the like External Causes
which provoke Nature, or move the Humors; but especially things taken in have
great force, not only vomits called Emetica, and Poisons which we distaste; but
also Nourishment either hurtful in their Nature, or hated peculiarly of some;
as in Hippocrates, who speaks of one who with eating of Mushromes or
Toad-stooles, died Vomiting. The same happened to a Courtier of Antoninus the
Emperor, who by eating much moldy Cheese died Vomiting. The quality of Food
will do the same if it be Fat or Oily, as also a proposterous order in eating,
when moistning and loosning things are eat after astringents, and also too much
food taken, though never so good, as appears in Gluttons; for then Nature being
over charged, desires to throw out what she cannot concoct, to which she is
also stirred up by the evil quality which is brought to those meats by
corruption, or evil concoction.

The internal Causes are either Antecedent, or Conjunct.

The Antedent Causes either come from the whole Body, or from some proper
peculiar part into the Stomach. They come from the whole Body in a Plethory,
evil habit or Cathexy, Fevers, and other diseases of the whole Body. The Humors
are often derived from some peculiar part into the Stomach in the Inflammation
of the Liver, Spleen, or other Obstruction of the Mesentery, from the Terms
stopped, or Hemorrhoids, from a Catarrh, or the like. To this you may ad the
evil Conformation of the Porus Cholidochus when it is not placed into the
Duodenum, but into the Stomach, whence they are called Pichrocholi Ana, who are
often troubled with Chollerick Vomits, by reason of this evil Conformation.
Al^o this vomiting comes by the Peristaltick motion of the Guts, when they are
stopped in the Chollick, and the humors cannot well get forth, but come
upwards; also Worms coming up into the Stomach from the Guts, and pulling the
inward Tunicle thereof, do cause vomiting. And lastly, An Imposthume broken in
the Splee^, Mesentery, and other parts of the Abdomen, uses to cause a
vomiting of Matter.

The Conjunct Causes of Vomiting, are them before mentioned, when they come to
the Stomach; for while they were in other, they were antecedent Causes. These
are especially diverse Humors, some bred in the Stomach, especially Phlegm, of
which there is often much in the Stomach, by Crudities, and want of Concoction
when the Stomach is weak, and turns it into phlegm. So also is there sometimes
green Choler in the Stomach bred of corrupt Humors, as Galen teaches, Com. in
2. Progn. and this clearly appears in sucking Insants, who through corruption
of Milk in their Stomach use to avoid green stools like Leeches, or Verdegreese.

This green Choler which comes from corrupt nourishment in the Stomach, is not
the same with that which comes from yellow Choler by adustion and
torrefaction.

The Signs of Vomiting are manifest. But the Causes, as they are diverse, so
they have diverse signs.

First then, if Vomiting come from a fault in the Stomach, there are signs of
that part being affected, as loathing of meat, heaviness, extension, swelling
in the Region of the Stomach, slow and hand Concoction, sour and stinking
belchings, and other signs that show the distemper of that part. So if it come
from a Common and Organical Disease in the Stomach, as a Tumor, or Ulcer, the
signs of these Diseases will discover themselves. But if Vomiting come by
sympathy from the whole body or other parts, there will appear some Disease of
the whole body, or some part.

The whole Body is affected in Fevers, evil Habit, Jaundice, Atrophy or want of
nourishment. But the Principal parts from which the Humors are sent more
frequently to the Stomach, are the Brain, Liver, Guts, and Womb.

If the Humors flow from the Brain to the Stomach, there will appear signs of
distillations, frothy and flegmy vomitings, and a great loathing at meat time.

If the Humor come from the Liver, it is commonly Choler; and Vomiting before
meat, is worse than after; and there appears some* disease in the Liver, as
pain or tumor.

If the Matter come from the Guts, either there will be Chollick or Illiack
passion, or the signs of Worms.

Lastly, If it come from the Womb, there is Conception, suppression of Terms,
or other Symptoms.

We may also know by some signs whether the Humor be contained in the Cavity of
the Stomach, or stick to the Tunicles thereof. For if it be in the Cavity it is
easily cast forth, and there is stretching in the Stomach, and trouble after
Meat, which will not cease till the Humors are sent out by vomit, which are for
the most part thrown out alone, and the Meat retained. But if the Humors stick
to the Tunicles, vomiting is chiefly after Meat, and the Meat is cast forth
without the Humors, but when there is no Meat, there is a loathing, and that
which is cast forth, is thick and slimy, and with great straining.

The external Causes are known by relation of the Patient, as if he has eat or
drunk too much, or received a stroke, or eat any evil thing.

The signs of Vomiting to come are showed by Galen, lib. 3. de cris. cap. ult.
as Headache, dark giddiness, trembling of the lower Lip, gnawing at the mouth of
the Stomach, often and much spitting.

You must make the Prognostic thus:

Vomiting from Choler and Phlegm, which is neither very thick, nor very much,
and which has both those Humors exquisitely mingled, is good. For it is
commendable in substance, quantity, and quality. For of all excrementitious
Humors, Phlegm and Choler are the mildest: if then they be vomited well mixed,
and in a moderate quantity and consistence, it has all the laudable conditions.

Chollerick and Phlegmatic Vomitings on a critical day are very good: For not
only mixed are good, but vomiting of one single, if it cause the Disease. So in
Chollerick Fevers, when Choler comes forth critically, or Phlegm in Phlegmatic
Fevers, the Disease is at an end, or at least there is great hopes of recovery.

A Vomiting naturally after a long flux of the Belly, cures the disease, Aph.
15. Sect. 6. for there is a revulsion of the Matter to the contrary part. And
this shows that Nature is refreshed, and gets strength: For as the Physician
ought to labor for the retraction of those things that flow to any part. So
Nature, when she begins to prevail, makes a repulsion of the Humor, which flows
to the part affected, that the part may be refreshed and strengthened.

Little and violent vomiting in a sharp Fever, is evil; for it is not good to
void sparingly in a Crisis; for it signifies one of these two things: Either
abundance of Matter which Nature cannot bear, but must send some of it forth:
or the weakness of Nature, which striveth in vain to send for^h that which is
superfluous.

Vomitings of diverse colors are evil, it signisieth diverse Humors lurking in
the Body, and therefore Nature will be more put to it with diverse enemies; for
if it be troublesome to Nature to contend with diverse Nourishments, how much
more dangerous is it to strive to concoct and tame diverse preternatural Humors,
especially in acute Diseases, in which there is but short time to fight, which
should be long, that there might be more hope of Nature being a Conqueror.

Green Vomiting like Leeks, Verdugreese, as also blew, black, or stinking, is
deadly: For it signifies that there is abundance of Choler of those colors:
And all these kinds of Choler use to produce malignant and deadly diseases.
And if there be a stink, it shows a great corruption of Humors, with which
Nature cannot long consist.

In acute Fevers, Vomiting without mixture of Humors is evil, according to
Hipp. 1. Porrhet. For a pure Humor is not only crude, but incapable of
Concoction, because it excludes not only the act, but the power of Concoction.
Hippocrates calls every humor that is without mixture, and every Excrement that
is hot and crude, Acriton, because it is bred either by the defect of some
part, or by reason the watery, serous matter is exhausted by the heat of a
Fever. Therefore in sharp Fevers it shows that there is a great inward
inflammation, and for the most part such as Nature cannot conquer.

As for the Cure: If Vomiting come from a disease in some other part, it needs
no other Medicines than those which are agreeable to the disease from whence it
comes.

But if it come from Chollerick, Phlegmatic, or Melanchollick Humors which
stimulate and provoke the Stomach, either by their quantity or quality, you
must throw out those Humors by Vomitive Medicines.

But if they be thick and glutinous, or clammy, they are to be cut and cleansed,
as we showed in the Cure of want of Appetite.

The best Vomit in this case, is that which is indifferent gentle, and not too
weak, as warm Oil: nor must you give strong ones made of Antimony, which draw
violently from remote parts. But such as do cleanse and dissolve the glutinous
Humors, as Gylla Theophrasti, or white Vitriol prepar^d: but Salt of Vitriol
brought to a high redness by Calcination, is the stronger.

If Vomits are unpleasant, you must take away the Matter with often Clysters
and gentle Purgations with Rhubarb in them, which astringeth and strengthens
afterward.

In Chollerick Vomitings, these Pills following may be prescribed:

Take of Aloes washed with Rose Water three drams: the powder of Rhubarb
sprinkled with Borrage Water one dram: Mastich, red Sanders, and Coral
prepared, of each one scruple: With Syrup of Roses Solutive make a Mass of
Pills, of which take half a dram, or a dram every other day till the Vomiting
be ceased. Or,

Take of Rhubarb poudered one dram: yellow Myrobalans one scruple: Spodium, or
burnt Ivory, and Harts-born shaved, of each six grains. Make a powder, and give
it twice in a week, in a ^^ttle Broth.

Or make a Bolus of Hiera Picra, or three drams of Diacatholicon, with one dram
of poudered Rhubarb.

In a most violent Vomiting, give three grains of Laudanum, with two scruples
and an half of Cochie Pills the less, the Vomit will be stayed, and five hours
after they will work downwards. There i^ a good quantity of the purgung Pills
in this Receipt, because Laudanum does astringe, and therefore it must be given
with Medicines made of Diagridium, and Coloquintida. And if the Medicine do not
come away, you must give a sharp Clyster.

After su^f^c^ent purging, you must strengthen the Stomach with Syrup of
Quinces, sour Pomegrantes, old Conserve of Roses, or Comfry Roots, Conserve of
Quinces; or this following Julep, if it be very Chollerick and vehement.

Take of the juice of sour Pomegranats six ounces: the juice of ^lin^s
clarified two ounce^ Sorrel Water one pint: white Sugar half a pound: make a
^ulep, in which white it is clarifying boil gently in a clout of yellow
Saunders, red Roses, and Spodium, of each one dram: Let him take four ounces
first and last.

Take of Terra Sigillata, or sealed Earth, Bole Armonick red Coral, prepared
Pearl, Purslain, and Sorrel seed, of each one dram: shavings of Harts-born, and
of dried Mints, of (...) one scruple: red Roses half a pugil: Make a Powder to
be taken in B^oth, or the like; or in a spoonful of Chalybiate Water. Or,

Make Tablets thereof with Sugar dissolved in Plantane Water, or an Opiate with
Syrup of Quinces, Conserve of Roses, or Comfry Roots.

Some few Grains of the best Mastich, taken in the Morning, is good to stay
Vomitting.

Three Grains also of Balsom of Peru taken in a rear Egg, or in Sugar like a
Pill, do it better.

Also a Decoction of Beans, or Pease, after the first Water is cast away, with
a little Vinegar, is much Commended.

And the Crude Juice of Quinces, taken Two or Three spoonfuls at a time, does
Wonders.

Camphire often smelt to, or taken with a little Rose Water, and a little
Powder of Dia^oscum, is good for the same.

The Spirit of Vitriol mixed with Plantane or Spring Water, to make it sharp,
does also powerfully stay Vomiting.

If it be very violent, make the Water sharper with Spirit of Vitriol; or give
it in Sack, or rich Wine; if you want Spirit of Vitriol, use the strongest
Vinegar without mixture, one spoonful or two at a time.

One Scruple of Salt of Wormwood, mixed with a spoonful of the Juice of Lemons,
is a most Excellent Medicine; especially in those Vomitings which happen in
Malignant* Fevers.

If the Patient grow very Weak with Vomiting, give him Laudanum with Conserve
of Quinces, or Syrup of dried Roses; and then apply a Cupping Glass to the
Stomach, and a Cataplasm of Leaven, powder of Wormwood, and Orange peels, made
up with juice of Mints.

Apply also outwardly a Fomentation to the region of the Stomach, a new Sponge
dipped in Rosewater and Rose-vinegar; or let the Sponge boil in strong Vinegar,
and apply it hot to the Stomach.

Or make a Fomentation of the Decoction of the Roots of Snake-weed,
Plantan-leaves, Purslain, Mints, Bramble-tops, and Willow-tops, and then anoint
it with this Ointment.

Take of Acacia, Hypocistis, grains of Sumach and Myrtles, of each two drams:
Mastich and grains of Kermes, of each one dram: Oil of Myrtles two ounces: Wax
as much as is sufficient; make an Ointment: or apply this following Cataplasm.

Take of Quinces boiled in Rose water and Vinegar, or Marmalate thereof well
beaten, three ounces: the powder of Mastich, Grains of Kermes, and Myrtle
berries, and Plantane-seed, of each two drams: with the Juice of Mints, or
Quinces, or Syrup of Wormwood, make a Cataplasm.

Or, Steep a Crust of Bread in Rose Vinegar, and sprinkle it with this powder
following:

Take of red Roses, and Pomegranate flowers, and Coriander seeds prepared, of
each one dram and an half: Mastich, red Coral, Sorrel seeds, Spodium, of each
half a dram: yellow Saunders one scruple: mix them into a powder.

Or, Apply this following Emplaister:

Take of Mastich plaster, one ounce: the powder of Myrtles, and Bistort-Roots,
of each half a dram: with the Oil of Mastich make an Emplaister in the form of
a Buckler.

If the Vomiting be very violent, and bring a Fever Symptomatical, and the
Body very full, it is good sometimes to let blood to prevent inflammation which
may b^ in the internal parts by reason of the violent straining; and this must
be done warily, and but a little, least the strength be abated.

Moreover, It is good to apply Cupping Glasses to the Back and Navel, and to
rub and bind the extreme parts.

You may bind about the Neck Linen Clothes dipped in Oxycrate to repel the
humors: putting of the hands into cold Water, does stay al kinds of vomiting.

And Last, When other things avail not, use Narcoticks which do very quickly
stop al Evacuations.

In a Phlegmatic Vomiting (if it will not be staid with the aforesaid Vomits)
give Pills of Hiera, with Rhubarb and Agarick, or other fit Purges.

Then come to strengtheners for the Stomach, such as were prescribed for the
Cure of Want of Appetite: to which ad this following:

Take of Conserve of Roses and Comfry Roots, of each one ounce: confection of
Hyacinth, three drams: the powder of Diambra, and Aromaticum Rosatum, of each
half a dram: Troches of Spodium, terra Sigillata, and grana Kermes, of each one
scruple: with syrup of Quinces make an Opiate.

The Spirit of Vitriol with Wormwood water, or Juice of Mints, does mightily
stay Vomiting, and Strengthen the Stomach.

Or, One or two spoonfuls of Aqua Imperialis, given after Vomiting if the
Stomach be very Cold.

Apply these things following outwardly:

Take of Wormwood, Mints, and Balm, of each three handfuls: boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Vinegar and Wine, to the consumption of the third Part;
make a Fomentation for the stomach.

After apply the Plaster aforementioned, or the Cataplasm of Quinces, using
the Powder of Nutmegs and Cloves, instead of Myrtles and Plantane. Or,

Take of Wormwood and green Mints of each one pound: a Toast dipped in Rose Water
weighing half a pound: the Pulp of Quinces, or Marmalat of the same, two
ounces: Mastich half an ounce: Mace and Nutmegs, of each two drams: beat them
all well together with Oil of Quinces and make an Emplaister.

Or, Make a Cataplasm of Quinces boiled in strong Vinegar and then beaten with
a little Mustardseed and Powder of Cloves.

Or, Apply a Toast dipped in strong Wine and Juice of Mints, and sprinkled
with powder of Nutmeg, Cloves, Frankincense, Mastich, and Grains of Kermes.

Villanovanus much Commends sharp Leaven, which he applies to the Stomach
twice or thrice, being steept in strong Vinegar and juice of Mints: this does
most certainly stop Vomiting after convenient Evacuations, and Revulsions.

In a long Vomiting where the Stomach is very Weak, you must use strong
Astringents made thus.

Take of the Roots of Snakeweed and Tormentil, Pomegranate peels and flowers,
and Hypocistis, of each two drams: Leaves of Mints, and dried Wormwood, of each
half an handful: Sumach and Myrtle berries, of each one dram: red Roses one
pugil: Cinnamon, Cloves, and Mastich, of each half an ounce: green Galls, and
Cypress Nuts, of each two drams: boil them in Iron water and Red Wine, in which
dissolve a little Musk, for sweet things do much assuage Vomiting, of which let
the Patient take two ounces every morning, and Foment his stomach with the same.

After the Fomentation apply some Plaster or Cataplasm, made as aforesaid.

Chap. 8. Of Vomiting Blood.
THis Disease is a casting forth of Blood from the Stomach by the Mouth: And as
al other Bleeding, it comes from the Veins either by Anastomosis, or opening of
them by Diapedesis, or Rarefaction, by Rixis breaking, or by Diabrosis
corroding, which Diseases of the Veins were showed in the Cure of Spetting of
Blood, called Haemoptysis.

The Causes also are the same.

And First the Conjunct Cause; Excess of Blood in quantity or quality.

Blood offending in Quantity, will break or open the mouths of the Veins, and so
comes Rixis, or Anastomosis, which happens in full bodies.

If it offend in Quality, as when it is too hot, or thin, it may cause an
Anastomosis, because heat does open the Orifices, and thinness makes it flow
easily through; The same Qualities may Cause a Diapedesis; for heat does make
thin the Tunicles of the Vessels, and thinness Causes the Blood to pass
through their pores.

Lastly, Sharpness gnaweth and Ulcerateth the Tunicles of the Veins, and so
produces a Diabrosis.

The Antecedent Causes are the same with the Conjunct, but they differ in
place; for when blood offending either in Quantity or Quality, does immediately
open the Veins: it is called a Conjunct Cause; and the same being contained in
the Veins, is called an Antecedent Cause.

The parts sending, of which the chiefare, the Head, Liver, Spleen, and Womb,
are antecedent Causes.

Often times Blood is carried from the Head to the Stomach by the Pallat and
Gullet, or Oesophagus: and also a violent Catarrh of sharp and Salt phlegm, does
corrode the Stomach, and open the Veins thereof.

It is carried from the Liver and Spleen by the Veins that go to the Stomach
from the Womb, when blood by the stoppage of the Terms, runs back and opens the
Veins of the Stomach, so that some Women have had their Terms by vomiting blood
constantly at the time.

Vomiting of blood comes oftener from the Liver and Spleen, than from other
parts, and from the Spleen than the Liver, because it does more consent with
the Stomach. For it is evident by Anatomy, that the great branch of the Gate
Vein, or Porta, goes to the Spleen, from which many Veins are sent to the
Stomach both above and below; and these are so great that being distended with
wind or blood, they are as thick as the middle finger: this we have observed in
Dissection. Moreover, the Vas breve being wide, as in a natural state, it does
continually send Melancholy into the Stomach; so being in a Preternatural
state, it may send great plenty of blood. But observe here, that in this case,
that blood is voided by stool as well as vomit, both because a part thereof
which went to the Stomach, is sent downwards, and also because the Meseraick
Veins are open, and send blood into the Guts, which by its long passage through
the Guts grows black, and comes forth like Tar.

The external Causes are, all things that can wound or bruise, as also great
heat which causes boiling of the blood; hence it is that young men to the age
of thirty five, are very subject to vomit blood, and other bleeding, as also
great cold by too much astriction may endanger to break the Veins: the same
does unseasonable Motion and Labor, unusual Exercise, great hallowing, and the
like, which move the blood violently in the Veins.

And finally, All the Causes of Blood-spitting before mentioned. For Blood being
violently moved either in the Veins or Arteries, whether from an external, or
an internal Cause, goes soonest to that part which is weakest, and most fit to
receive it; and therefore if the Stomach, or the Veins going thither are so
disposed, there will be vomiting of Blood rather than any other way of bleeding.

The Diagnostick of this Disease lies chiefly in the discovery of the part
from which the blood comes.

If from the Stomach, the situation of the part, and the constant pain and
heaviness thereof will demonstrate, and there is less blood, for the Veins of
the Stomach are small, and it comes with loathing, and there is a biting when
they swallow, as also sometimes it comes forth mixed with Meat, Phlegm, or
Choler,

If it come from the Head, there will be tickling about the Jaws and Pallat;
and some blood will be blown out of the Nose with Snot; there went before it
some Headache or heaviness, which after bleeding cease.

If from the Liver or Spleen there is more plenty of blood, and sometimes a
tumor or dolor in the part. From the Liver the blood is red and frothy, from
the Spleen it is thick and black. Also Blood from the Liver goes most
downwards, because it commonly goes from thence to the Guts through the
Meseraicks, and must ascend from them into the Stomach to cause Vomiting, but
it does easier descend. Contrarily, that which comes from the Spleen, is rather
by vomit, because the Veins from the Spleen to the Stomach, are shorter and
narrower.

Lastly, If from the suppression of the Terms, you may know it from the Woman,
and it will come at those times which will be more probable, if there be no
disease in any other part.

As for the Prognostic: Vomiting of Blood, of what cause soever, is dangerous;
for it either threateneth death suddenly; or if it stay in the Stomach, and
putrify, it breeds faintings, swoonings, and suffocations.

Vomiting of blood from suppression of the Terms, is less dangerous than that
from the Liver or Spleen; for when they are brought down it is usually cured,
as Hippocrates taught, Aph. 34. Sect. 5. in these words: When a Woman vomiteth
Blood, if her courses breakdown, she is cured. And in this case only, the
opening of the inferior Veins does provoke the Terms, especially if she take
something besides for that purpose.

They who after Vomiting of Blood fall into the Dropsy called Ascites, do die
thereof. Dodonaeus does testify that he never knew any that escaped: and
Experience teaches that a Dropsy from any kind of bleeding is deadly; for it
comes from a great dissipation of Natural heat, which cannot be repaired.

For the Cure of this Disease use Medicines which revel the Blood from the
Stomach, and correct its distempers and the open Veins with astringents and
glutinatives. To which ad those things which concern the part chiefly affected,
from whence the Blood is sent into the Stomach, according to the diverse Nature,
and Disease of the part.

And because Diet is of chiefest concernment in this Disease, let us show some
Rules therefore.

Let his Nourishment be commonly astringent and Emplastick, and cold both
actually and potentially, as Barley, Almonds, Rice, Panadoes, Gellies, and
especially Starch made without Chalk, and boiled in Milk, which is good also in
spitting of Blood: to all these you may always add some Pomegranates, or
Vinegar of Roses. Also hard Eggs steeped in Vinegar are good; Bread crumbs
steeped in cold Water, and Chicken Broth, with Sorrel, Purslam, Plantane, and
unripe Grapes; the feet and hips of Sheep, Kids, and Calves, boiled to a Jelly,
for the first course, let him take that which is a stringent, as a Quince, or
sour Apple, or Pear roasted in the embers, Marmalat of Quinces, or Jelly of
sharp Cherries, Medlers, or Services.

Let him abstain from all sharp, salt, peppered, and fried Meats, as also from
things that breed much Blood, except he grow weak, and then you may give him
them sparingly. He must be but little nourished, for the less Blood is bred,
the Disease will be the less, and the empty parts by their attraction will stay
the flux.

Let him drink little, only a little Iron Water with a little Juice of
Pomegranates. He must drink no Wine except it be thick and sharp, which we call
Tortium, and it must be when there is no Fever.

Let the Air be cool, without Wind, Sun, or Moon shine; let him sleep little,
and not in the day; for although all fluxes are said to be stopped by sleep,
yet this by long keeping the heat in the Center may be increased. Let his Belly
be loose, and he kept free from passions.

After his Diet is thus ordered, we must go on to Chyrurgery and Medicine.

And first take away a little Blood, often, for the greater Revulsion: and that
out of the Liver Vein called Basilica, in the right Arm, if it come from the
Liver; in the left, if from the Spleen; or from the Ankle Vein, if from
stoppage of the Terms.

Use Frictions and Ligatures to the extreme parts, and give clensing Clysters.

Apply Cupping-glasses to the Buttocks, Thighs, and Loins, and to the
Hypochondria.

Give half a scruple of Camphire with four ounces of Oxycrate, or Plantane
Water. Which Rondeletius commends in his Counsels for excellent.

If you suspect there is congealed Blood, give him a glass of Vinegar and
Water, or Oxycrate, for it easily dissolveth blood, and sends it from the Veins
of the Stomach, and shuts them up.

And foment the Stomach cold with the same.

When Vomiting cease, to astringe the Veins, use these following:

Take the white of an Egg, Rose Water and Vinegar, of each one dram and an
half: Beat them well; then ad two drams of Chalk. Let the Patient take now and
then a spoonful. Or,

Take of prepared Coral, Terra Sigillata, Bole-Armenick, Boodstone, and
Troches of Amber, of each one dram: Plantane Water, and Syrup of Myrtles, of
each two ounces: mix them for to be used as the former, or the powder in
Broths. Or,

Take of the Juice of Plantane four ounces: give it cold morning and evening.
Galen says there is nothing better for to stop any kind of Bloody flux.

The Juice of Purslain and Polyganon, or Knot-grass taken with Sugar, is very
good for the same.

Take of Plantane and Purslain Water, of each one ounce and an half: the Syrup
of Myrtles half an ounce: the Syrup of Poppies two or three drams: Sal
Prunellae one dram: Mix them for a Julep often to be repeated. Or make a Julep
of the Decoction of the said Herbs.

Take of old Conserve of Roses, and of Comfry Roots, of each one ounce: of
Cydoniatum half an ounce: one candied Myrobalan: Troches of Carabe, and Terra
Lemnia, of each two drams: Coral prepared, and Crocus Martis, of each one dram:
With the Syrup of dried Roses, make an Oplate to be taken often.

The Troches of Carabe do not only astringe, but dissolve congealed blood,
therefore use them often.

The Syrup of Coral is good; but the Tincture drawn newly with the Juice of
Lemmons is better.

When Blood is vomited violently, and will not be cured by what has been said,
so that death threateneth; you must give Narcoticks, either at the Mouth, or by
Clysters.

Anoint the Stomach without with Oil of Roses, and Myrtles washed in Vinegar;
and after sprinkle on the powder of Coral, Bole-Armenick, and Terra Sigillata.

Or anoint with this:

Take of the Juice of Plantane, and Knot-grass, of each one ounce and an half:
Vinegar of Roses one ounce: Oil Olive six ounces: Boil them till the Juyces are
consumed: then ad os Sanguis Draconis, Mastich, Pomegranate peels, and Myrtles,
of each two drams: Camphire one scruple: as much red Wax as will serve to make
an Ointment.

Let him drink ordinary Water, wherein Iron has been quenched, with Syrup of
Quinces, and Spirit of Vitriol: also make all his Broths of Iron Water.

Let his Hypochondria and Loins be Fomented with the Decoction of Plantane and
Purslain mad in Oxycrate.

Let his hands be put into cold Water, for so al Vomiting is stayed.

After use the Ointment of Galen, called, Refrigerans; washed in Vinegar, to
the same parts.

After sufficient Phlebotomy, you must appoint an often and gentle Purge to
take away the (...), and destroy the Disease, by which the blood will be purged
from Waterish and Chollerick Humors which produce this Disease.

These kinds of Purges, given by a wise Physician, do Miracles; as we have
learnt by Experience.

They must be made of Rhubarb, Myrobalans, Tamarinds, and Tryphera Persica;
which Medicines do al astringe with their Purging, and do no ways stir the
Humors, so that you need not fear they will provoke Vomiting of blood; you may
give them in form of a Bole, with Syrup of Myrtles, ^^ of dried Roses; or in
form of a Potion, with the Decoction of Succory, Sorrel, Purslain, or the like.

In time of Purging, which may continue three or four days in a small Dose; at
night you may give the aforesaid Opiate or Syrup of Coral, or some of the
aforementioned Astringent and strengthening Medicines.

Finally, To prevent, you may give for a long time once in a Week, one dram of
the Powder of Rhubarb, or the Magistral Syrup prescribed for to prevent
Spetting of Blood; as also almost al other Medicines laid down in the Cure and
Prevention of that, are very good here.

Chap. 9. Of the Disease called Cholera.
THis Disease is a violent sending forth both by Stool, and vomiting corrupt,
sharp, and chollerick Humors.

It is called Cholera Apo tes Choles from Choler, as Galen shows from the
opinion of the Gnidian Physicians, 2. meth. c. 2. that it comes from yellow
Choler and evil humors like it which is sent upwards and down-wards. But
Alexander Trallianus, lib. 7. c. 14. will not have this Name to be derived from
a Chollerick humor, because Choler is not always vomited, but also often
times a serous and Phlegmatic Humor; but it comes rather Apo toon Cholastoon
from the Intestines which were c^lled Cholados by the Ancients; because these
Humors come from the Intestines and intrals: yet the first Etymology is more to
be approved, because it is used not only by Galen, but by Hippocrates 7. epid.
text. 19. by Celsus, lib. 4. cap. 11. and Aurelianus, lib. 3. acut. cap. 19.
And although a chollerick humor is not always sent forth, yet one like
Choler, sharp, biting, and corrupt, is always voided.

Some say the Stomach is the part affected, others the Guts, others both; but
we must be of Galen's mind, who says, 3. de sympt. cause. cap. 2. The part
which is principally affected is the Stomach, whose expulsive Faculty is
vehemently stirred up, so that it expels the noxious humors at both orifices.
But there is no doubt but the Gullet and Guts are secondarily affected.

Therefore this Affect is a Symptom of the expulsive Faculty being hurt, and
vehemently stirred up, for it cannot depend upon the retentive faculty
debilitated, for then the humors flow by degrees as in Lienteria and Coeliaca
Passio: but we must confess that the Disease is more violent if the Retentive
Faculty being weak do not resist the expulsive.

Moreover, The Concoction is hurt also, by which evil humors are bred in the
Stomach which stir up the expulsive Faculty: but this is an Antecedent Cause,
Hipp. 4. de victus ratione in acutis textu 104. lays down Two kinds of
Choler, the one Moist, and the other Dry; the Moist is that which hitherto
has been described, and which is meant only in this definition as being the
more usual* but the Dry is more rare, and it comes from a windy spirit going
from the Stomach and Guts, and griping those parts through which it passes.

These Winds are produced either from the fiery heat of the Stomach corrupting
the meat and making it stinck, or from windy rank meats, and Onyons, Radishes,
and the like. Sennertus adds another Cause, borrowed from the Hermetical
Doctrine, namely, Salt Humors, and Adust in the Hypochondria, which grow hot by
the mixture of another humor: For (says he) as Salts and the Spirits of Salts
mixed with sharp Spirits, make abundance of flatuous Spirits, as appears by the
mixing of Oil of Vitriol and Aqua fortis with Salt of Tartar. So does it fall
out in man's Body, by the Commixtion of a Salt and Adust Humor with other
Spirits, there are many windy Spirits produced.

The immediate Cause of this Disease is a Chollerick, Burnt, Sharp, Salt, or
rotten Humor in the Stomach, Guts, Spleen, Mesentery, or Prancreas, or some
nourishment of evil quality, some strong deadly Medicine, or poison taken.
Hipp. 7. Epid. Text. 90. does reckon up almost all the Causes of those evil
Humors, in these words: Chollerick Evacuations upwards and downwards, come from
eating too much flesh, especially Swines flesh not roasted: Also for meats not
formerly used, from drunkenness with old Wine, and sweet, from Pine Kernels,
Locusts, rotten Nuts, and from the use of Garlic, Leeks, Onions, especially
from boiled Lettice, Coleworts and the like crude things; also from Tarts, and
sweet meats, Honey meats, Fruits soon perishing, especially from Cucumers,
Pompions: and these Evacuations happen most in Summer, for then they are easily
corrupt, and are indigested.

It is worth the observation from whence so many Chollerick Humors should come,
which in this Disease are sent forth by Vomit and Stool? It is usually
answered, that they come from the Mesentery, and the places adjacent, and
sometimes from the whole Body, which though it be probable, yet we may say, That
Humors corrupted in the Stomach, and parts near thereto, do infect other Humors
with their Malignity, and that Nature is constrained to send to the Stomach and
Guts, as venomous Medicines, Antimony, Coloquintida, Elaterium, and the like,
by corrupting of the good Humors, do make an Hypercarthasis, or over-purging.

The signs of this Disease, are an often and plentiful sending forth of
Chollerick, sharp, and other corrupt Humors by vomiting and stool; a gnawing of
the Stomach and Guts; a swelling with wind, pains, thirst, with much heat and
disturbance; great Nauseousness, and loathing, which is somewhat appeased with
cold drink, but presently is cast forth with hot. The Pulse is sometimes small
and unequal; sometimes with great sweating, and Convulsion of the Thighs and
Arms, swooning, coldness of the extreme parts, and other grievous Symptoms.

The Causes of this Disease are easily known.

And first, the external are known by relation of the Patient, and those that
stand by. If he have taken too much, or food of an evil quality, or poison, or
some violent Medicine.

The internal Causes are known by the quality of those Humors which are sent
forth. We conjecture that it comes from the fault of the Stomach, if other
parts are not distempered, and when there is a continual loathing, gnawing, and
pain of the Stomach, the matter is sent forth green; but if it be bred in the
Veins, there is commonly a Malignant Fever adjoined.

You must make your Prognostics thus,

If it be very violent, it brings commonly sudden death. If it come from some
evil Food, it is less dangerous; for when that is sent forth, the Disease
cease.

By how much the greater the Symptoms are, as Swooning, Convulsion and
coldness of the extreme parts, by so much nearer at hand, is death.

Hippocrates in Coac. shows that this is sometimes Critical to Fevers called
Lipyriae, which can no other ways be cured (as he says) but by a great
casting forth of Choler both upwards and downwards; and these Crises or
Judgments happen seldom, and ought to be suspected, because they have not the
conditions of a good and Health bringing Crisis.

If vomiting begin to cease, and the wan and deadly color of the Face to be
restored, there is hope of Health.

In the Cure of this Disease, in the beginning thereof, some evacuation may be
allowed while the evil and corrupt Humors do flow forth. And you must help it
forward with drinking warm Water with Syrup of Vinegar, or with a great deal of
thin Chicken Broth; which if it provoke not Vomit, will allay the sharpness of
the Humors. Or you may evacuate them with Rhubarb brought into a Pill with
Syrup of Wormwood, and with clensing Clysters.

Also fat mollifying Clysters are to be given, made of Milk, Oil of Roses,
fresh Butter washed with Rose Water, or made of Chicken Broth, or Veal Broth
with Yolks of Eggs; with which, as the disease shall require, you may mix
Narcoticks.

Also Clysters of Oxycrate are good, or made of the Decoction of Lettice,
Plantane, with a little Vinegar, Syrup of Water Lillies, and Yolks of Eggs.

Also you must qualisie the Humors sharpness with internal Medicines; as with
the Decoction of Purslane and Plantane with Syrup of Quinces and dried Roses,
with Lapis Prunellae, if there be heat and thirst.

And you must stop Vomiting with those things both internal and external, which
were prescribed in the Cure of Chollerick Vomiting, Chap. 7.

Among which, the Narcoticks are best, and especially new Treacle, which given
in the quantity of a dram, does presently stop those violent Evacuations.
Laudanum does the same, if you give four grains thereof.

If there be great weakness (as often happens) it is not safe to give the
whole dose of Laudanum; but it is better to give one or two grains, and to give
it once or twice in a day, as necessity urges: for so the force of the Humors
will be restrained, and Nature will have time to tame and concoct hem.

After vomiting and purging are stayed by the Medicines aforesaid, and the
strength is restored by Cordial means, the Patient seems to be past danger;
which does not only sometimes deceive the standers by, but also the Physicians
themselves: for after a day or two of rest and intermission, the symptoms
return more strong and violent, and destroy the Patient who was made weak by
their former encounter; which danger you must prevent, not only with
Restauratives, and things that take away the heat of the Humors, as before
mentioned, which must be continued after they are appeased; but especicially
with Blood-letting, which does revel the burnt and boiling blood, and greatly
assuage it: and you must do it twice, or thrice, if the strength be not
impaired by the first, but rather seem to be refreshed. Some Practitioners
adventure in the time of the fit, when the strength is decayed, adventure to
open a Vein, because they say the strength is oppressed. But it cannot then be
done without danger: and sometimes the Patient presently after dies, to their
shame. For though we acknowledge that there is an oppression of the strength by
reason of the superfluous Humor, which is contained in the Veins, being an
Enemy to Nature; yet it cannot be denied but it is greatly decayed by those
grievous vomits and stools. It is better therefore first to allay the violence
of the Humors, and after the symptoms are assuaged to open a Vein.

And because in this Disease the strength quickly fails by strong evacuations,
you must be very careful in the restoring of it by that way which is showed in
the Cure of weakness in the eighth Book, and the third Chapter.

Chap. 10. Of Pain in the Stomach, called Dolor Ventriculi.
IT is a sad and troublesome sense in that part, from some things that gnaw and
stretch it till it break, or be wounded.

In the Stomach, you must consider three parts, which much differ one from the
other, namely, its upper Orifice, and its lower, called Pylorus, and the rest
of its Body which makes up the whole Cavity.

The upper Orifice is of exquisite sense, by reason of the great Nerve which it
has from the sixth Conjugation, and therefore pain therein is very sharp, and
makes the Heart which is the most noble part, and near unto it sensible of the
same; from thence it is called Cardialgia, and Cardiogmos: for there is such a
near consent between the mouth of the Stomach, and the Heart, that the Ancients
called it by the name of the Heart, Cardia.

But if the Membranes of the Cavity, or the Pylorus be pained, it is called
simply Dolor Ventriculi, and sometimes Colica Ventriculi, especially when it
comes of wind.

The immediate Cause of this pain, is solution of Continuity by things sharp
and distending, and they are chiefly Humors, or Wind; and sometimes Worms
gnawing the Tunicles.

Sharp and malignant Humors, as green Choler, or black, salt Phlegm, corrupt
Matter sent into the Stomach from an Imposthume broken in the Liver or Breast,
and all other sharp Humors which may cause pain.

Also sharp vapors coming from those Humors use to cause this pain.

The Wind contained in the Cavity of the Stomach does cause swelling and
painful distension, especially if it be restrained within its Tunicles, which
makes a very stubborn Disease, and cannot easily be sent out.

The Diseases both of the Stomach it self, and of the parts adjoining, use to
breed this pain, as any great distemper, either hot or cold, and especially an
Inflammation, and sometimes a Schirrus or other hard Tumor which makes a heavy
pain; as also Wounds and Ulcers of the same part, and swellings in parts
adjoining by wind or other ways, cause this pain by compression of the Stomach.

Now these Humors and Winds which cause pain in the Stomach, either come from
the whole Body, or some parts thereof. From the whole Body, in Fevers, or when
the Body is filled with evil Humors. And from other parts, especially the
Liver, Spleen, and Brain: from the Liver there comes Choler; from the Spleen,
Melancholy; and from the Head, salt Phlegm.

Also this pain may arise from other extraordinary Causes not usual; as
Schenkius observes from stones bred in the Stomach, lib. 3. observat. And
Fabricius Hildanus, observe. 33. lib. 4 reports that a Woman had a piece of Rind
or rusty Bacon two years in her Stomach, wherewith she was continually pained,
and which after by taking a Vomit, she threw up, and was cured.

The external Causes of this Disease, are either evil qualified, or of sharp
Nourishment, which of themselves produce it, or things apt to breed Wind; or
things taken in too great a quantity, which putrify and turn sharp; or things
that are too hot, and breed much Choler: As also strong, sharp, deadly
Medicines, either taken in too great a quantity, or not sufficiently corrected,
and poison.

The Diagnostick Signs are from the part affected, and the cause.

And first, when the pain is under the Cartilage Ensiformis or Xiphoides, it
shows that the upper Orifice of the Stomach is affected* but that it is a true
Cardialgia in the mouth of the Stomach, you may know more certainly when there
is a most sharp pain from the exquisite sense of the part with such trouble and
disturbance that the Patient cannot stay in a place, or in one posture, but
often swounds and faints by consent and sympathy of the Heart with the
Stomach, not only by neerness to it, but also by reason of the dissipation of
the Spirits by the pain. Sometimes the Brain consents, by Reason of the famous
Nerve which is in the Stomach, and the sharp vapors which are directly sent
into the Head from thence, from whence come Cephalalgia, Hemicrania, Vertigo,
and Epilepsie.

In other parts of the Stomach there are great pains, but they have not so
great Symptoms, and therefore they are like the Chollick, differing only in
place.

The Causes also are known by their proper signs. The most manifest are taken
from the Excrements; for Choler, Phlegm, Wind, or Worms, are voided at the
Mouth or Belly, it is easy to conjecture that the Disease depends upon these
Causes. But if no Humor be discharged we may know when Choler, Phlegm, or Wind
abounds by their proper signs; and the signs of Worms are to be taken out of
their proper Chapter: As also the proper diseases both of the Stomach and parts
adjoining which produce this Disease, are known by their proper signs. The
knowledge of the Humor causing this pain, is also taken from the time of its
coming, increase, and cessation. Some are troubled most violently before meat,
and this shows that Choler is predominant, which is stirred in time of
emptiness, and drawn to the Stomach, and made more sharp. Some are pained
presently after meat, because the raw biting Humors, which before were quiet,
and fixed to the Tunicles of the Stomach, are moved when Meat is taken, or they
which were in the bottom of the Stomach, are raised up, and disturb the mouth
of the Stomach. Others are pained in time of Concoction, because sharp gnawing
vapors arise from the Matter, causing the Disease from the heat increased in
the Stomach in time of Concoction. Others are pained four or five hours after
meat, because it is corrupted by evil concoction, and so gnaweth the Stomach.
Some are worst after sleep, and that comes from a Catarrh from the Head in the
time of sleeping, which being heaped up in the Stomach, produces pain
afterward. Sometimes the pain is appeased after Meat, because the sharpness of
the Humors is qualified by the sweetness of the Meat.

As for the Prognostic, it is most certain that Cardialgia is more dangerous
than any other disease of the Stomach by reason of the exquisite sense of the
Mouth of the Stomach, and its great consent with principal parts.

The danger is more or less, according to the malignity of the Cause, and the
vehemence of the symptoms.

A continual acute Fever joined with a great pain of the Stomach, threateneth
great danger; as Hippocrates says, Aph. 65. Sect. 5. In Fevers, if there be
great heat about the Stomach, and Cardiogmos, it is evil: for it signifies
that there is a great Inflammation of the Stomach, or abundance of bad Humors
contained therein.

The pain of the Stomach coming from Worms or Wind, is commonly least
dangerous, because the Cause is not so bad, and not fixed to the part. But
sometimes from Worms ghawing in the Stomach, great Symptoms happen, of which
the Patient suddenly dies.

So when the distemper which begets wind, is stubborn and habitual, it is not
without danger, for it turns to a dry dropsy; Hippocrates, Aphor. 11. Sect.
4. In a Cardialgia, coldness of the extreme parts signifies death at hand.

The Cure of this Disease is to be varied according to the diversity of the
Causes. If it come from the Diseases of other parts, you must cure them. But if
the Cause be in the Stomach alone, the pain comes either from wind, or sharp
Humors and Chollerick, or from Inflammation, Imposthume, or Ulcer.

That which comes from Wind is to be cured by Medicines that discuss and
evacuate that flatulent Matter, as also the phlegm from whence it comes.

And first you must give a gentle Emollient Laxative Clyster, and presently
after another Carminative, that is, expelling wind, and discussing, of the
Decoction of Origan, Calamints, Penyroyal, Rue, the lesser Centaury, Annis
seeds, Fennel seeds, Carrots, and Cummin seeds, and the like: In which dissolve
Benedicta Laxativa, Oil of Dil, Rue, and Honey of Rosemary.

If the pain continue, you must make a Clyster of equal parts of Sack, or
Hippocras, Oil of Rue, or of Nuts* with two ounces of Aqua vitae.

Or make a Clyster of white Wine with Oil of Juniper, or eight drops of the
Chemical Oil of Cinnamon or Cloves, which does Miracles.

Then foment the Stomach with this:

Take of Cypress Roots, Galangal, Calamus Aromaticus, of each one ounce: Mints,
Origan, Penyroyal, Marjoram, Hysop, Sage, of each one handful: Annis, Fennel,
Caraway, and Carrot seeds, and Bay berries, of each half an ounce: Chamomel,
Melilot, Rosemary and Lavender flowwers, of each one pugil: beat them, and
slice them: put them into two bags, and boil them in Sack; then squeeze them,
and apply them one after another to the Stomach and all the Belly.

When the Matter is not so cold, this Fomentation following may be prepared,
which is highly commended by Forestus, because it has presently cured when
other things failed.

Take of Althaea Roots half an ounce: red Roses, Chamomel Flowers, and tops of
Wormwood, of each one handful: Boil them in common Water, and Chamomel Water,
to one pint and an half, adding in the end a little Rhenish Wine, Rose Water,
and Vinegar. Make a Fomentation.

After Fomentation, anoint with Oil of Rue, and Dill mixed with Aqua vitae, and
a little Chemical Oil of Sage, or Cloves.

After the anointing, apply a Plaster of Bay Berries, or instead thereof a
Cataplasm of Honey and Cummin seed.

While these are doing, if there be loathing, you may provoke vomiting gently,
or give a Purge against phlegm.

After Purging give Oil of bitter Almonds newly drawn, mixed with white Wine,
or Hippocras mixed with Aqua Clareta, or Cinnamon Water.

This following Juleps is most admirable to assuage pain, discuss wind, and
strengthen the Stomach.

Take of Wormwood, Centuary the less, and Agrimony, of each half a handful:
boil them to five ounces, and ad to it being strained, one ounce of Sugar. Let
him take it two mornings together.

Amatus Lucitanus commends highly the distilled Water of Chamomel flowers as a
most excellent Remedy to assuage the pains of the Stomach and Entrals, of which
you must give three ounces warm. Or in the defect of that, you may make a
Decoction of Chamomel flowers, which is so much commended by Forestus, who
says that he cured a Merchant with this only Decoction, once only given, of
great pain of his Stomach, which made him to roar; which when he had drunk off,
he belched, and fell into a sweat, and all his pain vanished, as by an
Enchantment, so that he needed no other help. You may also make a Vomit at the
beginning of the disease, which by evacuation may abate the pain, of this
Decoction, made with Dill seeds, or Agarick, or the Roots of Asarabacca,
dissolving therein, Oxymel, Syrup of Vinegar, or of Roses Solutive.

Galen teaches that a Cupping glass applied to the Stomach does presently take
away pain. But you must use this Caution, That no crude Humor, or very little,
lie in the Stomach, otherwise the pain will be increased.

Also you may with good success apply Bread hot from the Oven, cut in the
middle, either by it self, or sprinkled with Spices.

Lastly, If the pain continue violent, you must use a bath of the Decoction of
mollifying Herbs that are hot, which is most safe and powerful, for it takes
away the pain by discussing the wind, and sending it forth by the open pores,
which it will better do, if you give some discussing Medicine to the Patient
while he is in the Bath; for both internal and external helps concurring, the
work will be done.

The Bath must be very hot that the wind may be the better discussed, and the
thick Humors melted.

If by reason of the vehement pain, Clysters can neither be given nor retained,
you must give a Purge in the Bath, and let him stay therein an hour, or half an
hour, till the power of the Medicine touch the Stomach.

Sometimes when the violence of the pain threateneth danger, you must give
Narcoticks, which being wisely given, bring wonderful effects.

Some mix Narcoticks with their Purges that the pain may be allayed, and the
Matter evacuated: such as the Medicine of Elidaeus commended by Forestus, made
thus:

Take of Diaphoenicon half an ounce: Philonium Romanum two scruples: with the
Water or Decoction of Chamomel make a Potion.

After the pain is gone, let them who are subject to this Disease, be purged
once or twice in a month, to take away the immediate cause of wind. And let
them use strengtheners, such as were prescribed in the Cure of Concoction hurt.

That pain which comes of Choler, is to be cured by the evacuation thereof,
with a gentle vomit or Purge, or with frequent Clysters that are emollient, not
sharp or hot.

Afterward, qualify the sharpness of the Humors with cooling Juleps that
thicken, with Emulsions of the great cold Seeds, new Milk, new Oil of sweet
Almonds, Yolks of Eggs, and the like.

In the mean while omit not Opiates, and other strengtheners prescribed in the
former Cures.

And at last, when need requires, use Narcoticks.

Apply outwardly a Cataplasm of Bread and Milk, with yolks of Eggs, and Saffron.

Or Bread from the Oven broken in the middle and dipped in Vinegar.

Or Foment the part with the Decoction of Chamomil-flowers, Violets, and Water
Lillies, or which is best, put the Patient in a warm Bath, for that is most
proper.

After the pain is gone lest it should return, let the Patient Purge twice
every month, and let the hot Distemper of his Belly be corrected with a Cooling
Diet and Convenient Remedies.

That Pain which comes from Inflammation, Imposthume, or Ulcer, may be Cured
with the Remedies Prescribed in the following Chapter.

Chap. 11. Of the Inflammation, Ulcer, and Imposthume in the Stomach.
ALthough al kinds of Tumors may arise in the Stomach as well as other parts,
yet we will speak here only of a Phlegmon or Inflammation, which is most usual;
the other happen seldom, and may be Cured by the same Method with the Tumors of
other internal parts.

The Inflammation of the Stomach is a preternatural Tumor coming of Blood which
is sent into the substance of the Stomach and its Membranes by the Veins
derived from the branches of the Vena Porta.

This Blood is either pure and makes a proper Phlegmon, or mixed with Choler,
Phlegm, or Melancholy, and makes a Phlegmon Erysipelatous, Oedematous, or
Schirrous.

The External Causes may be many, all that inflame the Blood, as hot meats,
wine, or all that can drive it to the part; as a blow upon the belly, especially
when it is full; to which you may ad things that are very sharp and very hot, as
Cantharides, sublimate.

The signs of this Disease, called Diagnostica, are a great Pain, burning,
pricking, distending and beating, reaching to the back; you may feel a Tumor,
and sometimes see it, the shoulders are drawn downwards; the breathing is
difficult, as also swelling and belching, sometimes blood is vomited; there is a
most burning Fever, with most grievous Symptoms.

If the Inflammation be pure only from blood, it is somewhat gentler; but if it
be with Choler called Erysipeals, there are grievous Symptoms, and the febris
called Lipyria in which the exterior parts are cold, and the internal burn, and
there is an unquenchable thirst; such a kind of Fever uses to be in an
Erysipetous inflammation of the intestines.

Like to this Inflammation of the Stomach, is that which is in the upper part of
the Liver by which the Stomach is covered or in that part of the belly which
lies upon it; which is only distinguished by the deadly Symptoms, for then
the Stomach has the most desperate.

From what has been said is easy to Prognostic and to pronounce this Disease
to be for the most part deadly.

But that is most Dangerous which is over the whole Stomach, or its upper part,
or which is like to an Erysipetas.

Galen 3. Prorrhet. shows, That much Loathing and Rumbling of the belly, is
evil: For it shows that evil Humors do stick close to the Tunicle of the
Stomach, and pull them to provoke Expulsion.

If the Inflammation do not kill, nor is dispersed, it turns to an Imposthume,
which is known by the mitigation of the Pain and the Fever, while the Tumor
remains.

After the Imposthume is broken there remains an Ulcer which is known by
voiding of Matter by Vomit and Stool.

But an Ulcer is produced in the Stomach, not only from an Imposthume, but from
other Causes which we shall here reckon up, least we seem defective in the
Theory.

The Causes of Ulcers in the Stomach, are either Internal or External.

The Internal are sharp Humors bred in the Stomach, or sent thither from other
parts, as yellow Choler, or black, or salt Phlegm.

The External are sharp Medicines that Corrode, or Poisons, and Wounds of the
Stomach not well Cured, which turn into Ulcers; as also the breach of some great
Veins which could not well grow together, after much Vomiting of blood.

An Ulcer bred in the Stomach is known chiefly by Matter which is cast forth by
Vomit or Stool, to which principal sign there are others to be added: First
there is perceived in the belly a pricking pain joined with burning, especially
when any thing is taken that is strong in quality, either sharp, salt, or sour,
or very hot, or cold: there is also no Appetite, stinking belching, and a
constant lingering Fever.

The Prognostic is always deadly, except the Ulcer be very little, and only
in the superficies, and without a Fever. For the Membrane of the Stomach being
ulcerated, being a Spermatick part, will hardly grow together again: the
Nourishment will not be well concocted in a Stomach ill affected, but will be
thrown out before concoction, and so rend the Ulcer. Moreover, Medicines do
little good because clensers which are required for cure of Ulcers increase
pain; and dryers which also are required, are continually hindered by the Meat
and Drink, and Chyle, and other Humors which continually are in a weak Stomach.

The Cure of the before said Diseases, is several.

And first, the Cure of Inflammation is to begin with Blood-letting often in
both Arms, as the strength will endure. And although by reason of swooning and
coldness of the extreme parts, the strength seem at first to be impaired, yet
because it comes from oppression, it requires evacuation, and therefore
blood-letting must not be denied.

Moreover, the opening of the Hemorrhoids, if the Patient be used to that
evacuation, does revel Blood from the Stomach. Also Cupping-glasses both dry,
and with Scarrification to the Shoulders, Back, and Buttocks, with Ligatures
and Frictions of the extreme parts, and heating of them (because they are
usually cold) with hot clothes, and anointing with Oil of Flowerdeluce, and
Spike, and other hot things are very good.

We disallow Purges in this case, because they trouble the Humors, and draw
them to the part affected.

But Avicen commends the Decoction of Tamarinds, or half an ounce of Cassia
dissolved in Whey, or Endive Water if it be given every day to the seventh day,
because they purge not by attraction, but by mollifying, mitigate sharpness,
and assuage pain. But it is better in the beginning to abstain from all Purges.
After the seventh day is past, when there appear some signs of Concoction and
declination, you may give a Purge of Rhubarb one dram, with one scruple of red
Sanders infused in Borrage Water, adding one ounce or two of Syrup of Roses,
that the filth which sticks to the part may be brought forth more powerfully.

In the mean while, you must every day give Emollient, Cooling, and Lenitive
Clysters, such as these:

Take of Chicken Broth, or the Decoction of Mallows and Violets, of each one
pint: Cassia new drawn, one ounce: Oil of Roses and Violets, of each two
ounces: Sugar one ounce and an half: With two Yolks of Eggs make a Clyster.

You must give altering and strengthening Medicines at the Mouth, they may be
the same which were propounded in the Cure of the Pain of the Stomach from a
Chollerick Humor.

But the Syrup of Water Lillies, and of the Juice of Purslain, are peculiarly
good, especially in the beginning, because they supply the place of Repelling
Medicines.

Also Emulsions made of the four great cold Seeds, and white Poppy Seeds are
good, for they assuage pain and heat. As also these following Juleps.

Take of Rose Water three ounces: Plantane Water two ounces: the Juice of
Sorrel and Pomegranate Wine, one ounce and an half: Sugar of Roses one ounce:
Boil them a little, and strain them. Let him take two ounces twice or thrice in
a day.

If the pain be great, you may give the Syrup of Poppy.

Let his Drink be barley Water with Syrup of Violets taken cold.

In the progress of the Disease, you must mix other Medicines with the
aforesaid, which may help to dissolve. To this end you may prescribe these
following Juleps:

Take of the Syrup of Water Lillies, Apples, and of the Juice of Purslain, of
each one ounce: Syrup of Sea Wormwood half an ounce: Lettice, Sorrel, and
Fennel Water, of each three ounces: the powder of Diamargariton frigid one
dram: Make a Julep for three Doses to be taken twice in a day.

To these you may adrestoring Opiates, Narcoticks, and the like, all which are
to be varied many ways, according to the Judgment and Wisdom of the Physician.

Turpentine washed with Wormwood Water, if it be given twice or thrice does
either dissolve or maturate the Imposthume of the Stomach.

Let this following Fomentation be applied in the beginning.

Take of Sorrel Roots two ounces: Endive, Succory, and Mallows, of each one
handful: Lettice, and white Poppy seeds, of each three drams: white and red
Sanders, of each half a dram: Violets, and Water Lillies, of each one pugil.
Make a Decoction, adding a little Rose Vinegar. Let the Stomach be fomented
warm therewith.

Or make one with the distilled Waters of Lettice, and Water Lillies with a
little Vinegar, and Powder of Triasantalon.

After fomenting, let the part be anointed with Oil of Roses and Violets mixed,
or with this following:

Take of Oil of Roses one ounce and an half: Oil of Violets, and Rose Vinegar,
and of the Juice of Sowthistle, of each half an ounce: Boil them to the
consumption of the Juyces; then ad of red Sanders one dram: red Roses half a
dram: Lavender and Camphire, of each half a scruple: as much Wax as will make
an Ointment.

Cataplasms in the beginning are not good, because they burden the part with
their weight, and by retaining the heat, increase the Inflammation.

In the declination, when the Tumor is resolved, which is chiefly to be
desired; you may apply a dissolving Fomentation, made thus:

Take of Flower deluce Roots two ounces: the Leaves of Mints, Marjoram,
Penyroyal, Sea Wormwood, of each one handful: Annis and Foenugreek seeds, of
each two drams: Grains of Kermes one dram: the flowers of Stoechas, Rosemary,
Chamomel, of each one pugil: Make a Decoction, adding in the end a little white
Wine. With this foneent the Stomach.

After fomenting, anoint the part with Oil of Wormwood, Nutineg, Spike, and the
like; of which you may make an Ointment with a little Wax and Powder, Orris
Root, or Cinnamon. But Emplasters and Cataplasms, because they burden the part
with their weight, are not here good.

But if the Tumor tend to Suppuration, foment the part with the Decoction of
the Flowers of Chamomel and red Roses: Then apply this following Cataplasm:

Take of Althoea Roots two ounces: Brank Vrsine, and Roses, of each one
handful: Boil them well, and beat them together: then ad of Barley meal,
Lin-seed, Foenugreek and powder of Chamomel, of each half an ounce: white and
red Sanders, of each two drams: with Oil of Roses, and Chamomel. With a little
Hens Grease make a Cataplasin, often to be renewed.

After the Imposthume is broken, let the Ulcer be cleansed with Hydromel, given
in a small quantity: To which you may ad the Manna of Frankincense, according to
Galens Precept. Or give it with Barley Water with Sugar of Roses in the
beginning, in time of heat.

When the Ulcer grows old, of what Cause soever it come, either from sharp
corroding Humors, or burning Medicines, or Poison, Broths of cool Herbs, and
drying of Barley, Almonds, and Sugar of Roses, or new Milk with Sugar, and a
little Honey, are very good. At length, Chalybeate Milk and Iron Water for
ordinary drink; or Water wherein a piece of Bole-Armenick, or Terra Sigillata
has been steeped, is very excellent. To which you may put a little sharp Wine,
if there be but little heat in the part.

Then give this Apozeme:

Take of Barley one pugil: Scabious, Agrimany, Burnet, and Maidenhair, of each
half a a handful: Melone seeds two drams: red Roses dried, one pugil: make a
Decoction to one pint, in which dissolve three ounces of Syrup of dried Roses.
Make an Apozeme for four doses to be reapted often.

Also the Decoction of China, is excellent for internal Ulcers, when there is
no Fever, taken twenty days, or more, sweating gently, for so the Ulcer will
be dried by degrees. But if you fear a consumption, boil the China Root
aforesaid in Chicken Broth, or Pidgeon Broth with the aforesaid Herbs, and
Barley made clean.

In an old Ulcer, the drinking of Mineral Waters, either of Vitriol, Iron, or
Alum, for a Month together, are very good.

In the whole time of the Disease to keep the Stomach clean, use gentle Purges,
as Rhubarb, Tamarinds, Myrobalans, Syrup of Roses, and Diacatholicon, taken
once in a week.

Lastly, To heal up the Wound, use these following:

Take of Bole-armenick, Terra Sigillata, red Coral, and Boodstone washed all
in Rose Water, of each one dram: Sanguis Draconis, Gum Arabic and Traganth, of
each half a dram: white Poppy seeds bruised and parched, Hypocistis,
Frankincense, and Sarcocol, of each one scruple: Sugar of Roses one ounce: Make
a Powder, of which take a dram in Plantane Water, or Conserve of Roses every
day.

Or make an Opiate of the same Powder with Conserve of Comphry and Roses, Syrup
of Quinces, and Myrtles. Or you may make Troches of the same Powder, with the
Mucilage of Fleabane seeds, or Gum Traganth. All which the Patient may use by
turns, lest he grow weary of the same.

Outwardly, to close the Ulcer, you may apply to the Stomach, a Fomentation of
the Decoction of Wormwood, Roses, Pomegranate peels, Galls, Pomegranate
Flowers, Myrtles, Frankincense, Mastich, or the like. And lastly, anoint the
part with an astringent Ointment, or apply an astringent Emplaster.

The End of the Ninth Book.
THE TENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Intestines,
or Guts.
The PREFACE.
THE Perfection of all Nourishment consists in these Three Operations, to
Ingest, Digest, and Egest; that is, To take in, Concoct, and send forth: The
first respects the Appetite: The second the Concoction, and belongs to the
Stomach: But the third respects the Intestines, whose office of Egestion or
sending forth being moderate, and according to the rules of Nature brings great
benefit to the whole Body: On the contrary, if it be defective as in the binding
of the Belly, or abound as in diverse Fluxes, there arise diverse grievous
Diseases: Moreover, the reteining of superfluous things does cause Chollicks,
Iliacks, and Hemorrhoids: And finally putrifactions in the Guts does not only
produce Fluxes, but Worms: That all these may be severally Explained, this Book
shall contain Eleven Chapters: The First is of the Chollick: The Second of the
Iliack Passion: The Third of binding of the Belly: The Fourth of Lienterla or
Coeliack Diseases: The Fifth of Diarrhoea: The Sixth of Dysentery: The Seventh
of Tenesmus: The Eight of the Hepatick Flux: The Ninth of the Worms: The Tenth
of the Flux of the Hemorrhoids: The Eleventh of the pain of the Hemorrhoids.

Chap. 1. Of the Chollick.
THe Chollick takes its Name from the part affected which is the Gut called
Colon: which is long and winding, and ordained for receiving the Excrements of
almost all the Body; these Excrements retained too long, use to cause this pain.

Therefore the Causes of the Chollick are excrementitious Matter, which by
distending, pricking or corroding can make a Solution of Continuity, and these
are either Winds or Humors.

Winds are bred of Crudities, or a cold Distemper of the Stomach or Intestines;
and if they be not sent forth by reason of the hard excrements or other things
that obstruct the Intestines, they are in great plenty shut up in the Guts,
especially the Colon; and make a very violent pain.

Also gross Humors, Cold and Phlegmatic, being fastened upon the Tunicles of
the Guts cause the same pain both by gnawing, if they are sharp or salt; as
also by cooling the part, which by con^equence must suffer Constriction and
Divulsion, as Galen speaks of himself, That having had a great Fit of the
Chollick did void glassy Phlegm that was actually cold; and by producing Wind
which is easily raised from a gross, slimy, and slow Humor, by a weak heat.

Lastly, Chollerick and sharp Humors; as also Melanchollick and sour by
pricking and twiching the Guts, make these pains: but we may doubt in the
action of these Causes how the Chollick should be sometimes more violent,
sometimes more remiss, since the same matter remains in the Intestines? To
which Doubt we thus Answer, That the matter does sometimes lie quiet, and then
it causes none or very little pain; but sometimes it is moved and stirred up by
diverse Fermentations which happen among the Humors, as in an Epilepsy, the sits
of the Mother and Agues.

But you must observe diligently that those Winds or Humors do not only remain
in the Cavity of the Guts, for then were they easily excluded by evacuating,
clensing, and carminative Medicines, but for the most part they are fixed to
the very Coats of the Guts, whence it comes that they are not so easily taken
off; but they make a long and a stubborn Disease which will not easily be cured:
So thick Phlegmatic and Melanchollick humors to flow by degrees through the
veins of the Cuts into their substance, and do not presently cause pain; but
til they so encrea^e that they provoke nature to expel them, and so being moved
they cause pain; or send out Vapors which being included in the Tunicles of the
Intestines, do stretch and extend them, and finding no passage, cause a long
pain. And Choler being after the same manner spread and sucked into the veins
of the Guts and the Tunicles thereof does stir up sharp pains which use to be
long, because the Choler is very hard to be pulled from the substance of the
Guts.

There is another kind of Chollerick Chollick, which turns into a Palsy, not
known to the Ancients, which comes of a Chollerick Humor, not in the Gut Colon
as the former, but suddenly sent into the Membranes of the Abdomen, and it is
carried thither from the Cystis, or bladder of Gall, or the Mesentery in the
Crisis of continual Fevers, or from great anger, or some other external Cause,
when by reason of Obstructions it cannot be sent by the common passages, but by
a preposterous motion it is presently sent to the aforesaid Membranes of the
Abdomen, hence comes a cruel pain like that of the Chollick, which neither by
Clysters, Formentations, or other Medicines can be Cured; but continues many
Months, by which means the body consumes, sometimes it is like an intermitting
Fever, sometimes and often like a continual lingering Fever: and at length when
the pain begins to cease, there is a Palsy, by reason the Humor gets by
degrees into the back by the Membranes of the Abdomen: This Palsy does trouble
the upper parts most; but the Thighs and Legs commonly are pained, in some they
are wholly resolved and made numb, because the Choler being light flies to
the upper parts: Sometimes it gets into the Brain, and begets Epileptick
Convulsions, from whence death commonly ensues.

There are other Causes of the Chollick, but less usual; namely, Stones bred in
the Guts, and knots of Worms which stop them: The compression of the Guts from
Tumors in the adjoining parts, or narrowness by reason of Inflammation, and
other Tumors of the Intestines, or Contorsion, or twisting of them by reason of
Wind which is the way to the Iliack Passion; sometimes also the Matter causing
the Chollick is Poisonous and Malignant, and makes a Pestilent Chollick; as
Paulus Aegineta reports, That a Pestilent Chollick in Italy infected most of
the Roman Provinces. Finally al hard Bodies by Obstructing and Distending the
Guts may make a Chollick, as stones bred there, many Cherry-stones swallowed,
hard Cheese, and the like: Platerus reports, That a certain Governor long
laboring of the Chollick with Convulsions, after the use of Clysters, voided a
great quantity of hard Cheese which had a long time stuck in his Guts, because
before his Sickness he had eaten immoderately thereof.

The External Causes are Cold Air, which constringe and indurate the Belly; or
too Hot Air, by which the Excrements grow hard, and loose their moisture; the
use of meat and drink not agreeing with the Constitution; as raw Fruits, and
binding; gross meats, and hard of digestion; too much rest, and immoderate
sleep; unseasonable exercises, immoderate venery; and other External Causes
which disturb the Concoction of the Stomach.

The Knowledge of this Disease generally is easy: For first the pain is very
sharp, for if it be light it cannot be called a true Chollick from the Opinion
of Galen, lib. 6. de loc. aff. cap. 2. And it is sometimes moveable, sometimes
more in one place than in another: sometimes in the region of the Liver,
sometimes of the Spleen, Stomach, Reins; sometimes above, sometimes beneath the
Navel, and oftentimes it is most upon the left side; in which, as Bauhinus
first observed, there is a little streightness; for when the Excrements in the
upper and widest part of the Colon grow into hard lumps according to its
Capacity great, and then by Wind are driven into a streighter part, they must
needs pass with much pain, in which Symptom the Chollick, and the Spleen, and
the Stone, are not distinguished but by comparison of other signs; for sometimes
the pain is like an Auger boring, or a Stick fastened, more fixed in some part.
When the Stomach consents, there is vomiting of Phlegm, Choler, that is green
or the like. After Meat the pain is greater, because the Stomach being filled
compresseth the Intestines. The Belly for the most part is bound, so that the
Patient cannot so much as break wind, and if any thing be voided either
naturally or by art, it is for the most part windy, and like Cowdung, with
water at the top, because it is most Phlegm which uses to be so. Sometimes the
Belly is so bound that in the height of Pain, Purging Medicines that are very
strong, will not work.

The Signs of the Causes are thus to be distinguished:

If the Pain come of Phlegm, it is not so great, unless it be mixed with wind
which cannot get forth of the places wherein it is contained: for then the pain
is very great; sometimes in one part, as if it were bored through with a wimble
or stick; sometimes in many, if the wind do remove, the Patient is better for
hot, and worse for cold things. He used a Diet formerly which bred phlegm, his
water is sometimes more crude and white, not always, which deceives young
unexperienced Physicians, and sometimes in a phlegmatic and flatulent Chollick,
the Urine will be yellow and reddish by reason of the extraordinary pain which
does inflame the Sp^ri^s and Humors contained in the Veins and Arteries. Which
Avicen wisely observed, Fen. 13. Lib. 3. Tract. 3. Cap. 11. Let no man be
deceived (says he) to think by the foulness, inflammation, and redness of the
Urine, that therefore the Disease is hot; for that is common to all Vrines.

If the Chollick proceed of wind, there will be a stretching pain, and a
swelling of the Belly: the Patient perceives a rumbling of the Belly, and much
wind, and he is better when he breaks it: he used a Diet to breed it, as
unreasonable drinking of cold water, often use of Pease, Rapes, Chestnuts,
Sallets, Fruits, and the like. And if the wind be contained in the Cavity of
the Guts, the pain is movable, not in one place, and is sometimes greater. But
if it be in the ^oats and Tunicles of the Guts, the pain is fixed because the
wind cannot move, and it is constant because it cannot get forth.

If the Chollick come from a sharp and Chollerick Humor, it is most grievous,
pulling, and pricking, there is heat, thirst, and often a Fever, the Urine is
very Chollerick. It is worse for hot Meats and Medicines, and better for cold.
By sending forth of Choler the disease is diminished, and there went before, a
Diet breeding Choler.

The pains of other parts under the Navil, are easily distinguished from the
Chollick by their proper signs, except the Stone, whose signs are so like with
those of the Chollick, that very skilful Physicians have been deceived by them:
As Galen himself was, as he confesses 2. de loc. aff. cap. 5. when he was
troubled with the Chollick, he thought that he had the Nephritis, and that a
stone was fastened in one of the Ureters till the Humor was purged away, and
the pain ceased; after which he found it to be the Chollick.

But by these following signs these two Diseases may be plainly distinguished,
if they be well observed.

First, The Nephritis* or pain of the stone, is fixed in the Reins, and comes
from thence to the Testicles, according to the length of the Ureter: But the
Chollick is movable, and girts about the middle of the Belly like a girdle.

Secondly, The Chollick increases after Meat by reason of the compression of
the Intestines from the full Belly: but the Nephritis increases not, but
rather decreaseth, because some of the Nourishment is carried to the Reins,
which does something assuage the pain.

Thirdly, In the Chollick, the vomiting is more vehement, and the Body is more
bound, because the Colon lies in the bottom of the Stomach, and the Intestines
being stretched, or much provoked, do constringe themselves that they may expel
what is noxious. But both the Symptoms are common to* both Diseases, so that
you can hardly know their intension and remission, because a strong Nephritick
pain, may cause a greater vomiting and astriction of the Belly, then a weak
Chollick.

Fourthly, In a Chollick there is more ease found after Evacuation than in a
Nephritis.

Fifthly, In a Nephritis or the stone, the Urine ^s^first clear and thin;
afterward there is a sediment, and at length sand and little stones are
voided. But in the Chollick the Urine is thick from the beginning.

As to the Prognostic: The Chollick for the most part, if it be gentle and
little, and not long, nor in one place constantly, but intermitting and not
binding the Belly, is curable, and without danger. But if the pain is very
great and fixed in one place, not intermitting, and if the Belly be bound that
nothing can get forth, with great watchings, and if vomiting follow, hiccoughs,
doting, and coldness of extreme parts, with cold sweats, it is deadly.

A stubborn Chollick coming of sharp and Chollerick Matter degenerateth into
other grievous Diseases, as Arthritis, Epilepsie, or Paralysis, which is most
usual.

An Epidemical Chollick, which is contagious and pestilent, is commonly deadly.

The Cure of this Diseale is diverse according to the variety of the Causes.

And first, there is the same Cure of a flatulent and pituitous Chollick, which
begins with an Emollient Clyster, after which follows one Carminative and
discussing, as was prescribed in the Dolor Ventriculi, from the like Cause,
which must be repeated twice, thrice, or four times in a day, till the pain be
gone; and if he go not to stool in one or two Clysters, as sometimes happens,
you must give a sharp Suppository. In one of the aforesaid Clysters, you may do
well to ad four ounces of the Aqua Benedicta Rulandi.

Or two or three drams of Coloquintida boiled in an Emollient and Carminative
Decoction.

If Clysters will not give ease, you must not stay too long upon them, but use
some gentle Medicine. It has been observed that when a sick man had taken
three Clysters without benefit, that another Physician came and gave but one
ounce and an half of Manna, with two ounces of the Oil of sweet Almonds in the
fat Broth of a Hen, and cured the Patient. But in a pain that comes from grofs
phlegm you must give stronger Medicines.

Afterward, Fomentations, Ointments, Baths, Emplaisters, and the like, are
good, which were declared in the Cure of the Dolor Ventriculi of the same
Cause, to which you may ad some specifical things, which are fit for this
Disease.

Wash the Guts of a Wolf in white Wine, then dry them in an Oven in an Earthen
pot, till they may be poundered. Let the Patient take a dram thereof in white
Wine, and he will be presently cured.

Boil fair Water, and ad to it the fourth part of Oil, and some gross Pepper;
let him take three or four spoonfuls as hot as he can endure it, and the pain
will be instantly gone.

Take of the best Aloes one dram: Laudanum four grains: Diagridium six grains:
Mix them and make six Pills gilded: Let him take them at a convenient time.
They take away the pain aster one hour, and then purge out the noxious humor.

Instead of these you may give Diaphoenicon, and Philonium Romanum, as is
prescribed in the Cure of the pain of the Stomach. Hipp. Lib. de intern. aff.
propounds a Purge of Purslain, and Juice of Poppies.

Six ounces of Oil of sweet or bitter Almonds, do assuage pain, and cast the
Matter cleaving to the Intestines downwards.

If you mix it with these things following, it will be better:

Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, or Sallat Oil for poor people, four ounces:
Spanish Wine one ounce and an half: Syrup of Poppies one ounce: Mix them for a
Potion.

Also Oil of sweet Almonds mixed with Manna in fat Broth as beforesaid, does
ease pain, and evacuate the Matter offending.

One dram of Annis seeds poudered and given in Wine, does first assuage, and
the second time it is given, quite take away the pain; applying at the same
time a Cataplasm of Turpentine three ounces, laid on with Stuphes sprinkled
with Pepper and Sanguis Draconis finely poudered, of each one dram.

Galbanetum Paracelsi is good to discuss the Humor if the whole Belly be
anointed therewith. The description is in Crato thus:

Take of Gum Elemi, lvy, Galbanum, Oly of Bays, of each equal parts: distill
them in Sand with a Retort; keep the Liquors asunder, first the Water, then the
clear Oly, then the thick Oil like Honey, which you must use first.

Take of Calamus Aromatious one ounce: Galangal three drams: the outward yellow
of the Orange peel four ounces: Cinnamon, Annis, and Fennel seeds, of each
three drams: Cummin seeds six drams: Juniper berries green half an ounce: Bay
berries three drams. Powder them finely, and infuse them in six pints of the
best Spanish Wine in a bot place six days; then distill them in Balneo Mariae.
The Dose is one ounce after Evacuations.

You may with good snccess apply to the Belly Gum Caragna, and Tacamahacha; but
first let a great Cupping-glass be applied to the Navil.

Although you apply not the Plasters, yet you must not forget to cup; which as
Galen, says, does discuss pain that comes of wind like an Enchantment.

If the Disease last long, you may cure it with a Decoction of Guajacum
continued for many days, Purging sometimes, and giving often Clysters. And if
it come of glassy phlegm, let Guajacum be boiled in Wine, as Amatus Lusitanus
used it with good success, Curat. 32. Cent. 1.

After the pain is allayed, use an Apozeme to purge phlegm for the carrying away
of the relics, or instead thereof, the Decoction of an old Cock made with
incising, attenuating, and purging things. Or that excellent Julep prescribed
in the Chollick of the Stomach.

A Chollerick Chollick is cured by Emollient Clysters, and such as temper the
acrimony of the Humors.

Let the Belly be Fomented with an Emollient Decoction, which is Anodine; or
which is better, make a Bath of the same.

Also Cataplasms made of Barley and Linseed Flower, boiled in Oil of Chamomil,
applied to the bottom of the Belly are good.

As also a Cooling Epithem to the Liver, made thus:

Take of the Juice of Endive and Succory, of each half a pint: the Juice of
Lettice, and Rose-Vinegar, of each two ounces: mix them and make and Epitheme.

Give Juleps of Poppy, Lettice, Endive, and Sorrel Water, with Syrup of
Violets, Apples, and Lemons.

If the Pain be urgent, come to Narcoticks.

When the pain is mitigated, give the infusion and expression of Rhubarb in
Succory Water with Syrup of Roses, often, til all the filth be evacuated.

If this be too gentle to eradicate the Disease, give Mercurius Dulcis, which
being sometimes given with some Purging Diagrediats, does finish the Cure.

They who are not to take Diagredium, may take Mercurius dulcis alone made into
a Pill with conserve of Roses, drinking after it the infusion of Senna with
Rhubarb, adding a little Manna and syrup of Roses.

After this you may give your sharp Vitriolated Waters.

When the pain is violent, fly to Baths and Laudanum, to which you may sometimes
mix Purgers, but in a great quantity; because their force will be hindered by
the Laudanum.

Galbanetum Paracelsi, although hot, is fit to discuss the Humor if all the
Belly be anointed therewith: it is described formerly.

Sometimes Blood-letting is good where there is fear of a Fever by the heat of
the blood: and if the Fever be begun, do it presently.

When there is a great Thirst, give cold Water. as Galen teaches, lib. 12.
meth. cap. 7. And Amatus Lusitanus says, That he Cured one presently with it:
And Septalius shows in Two Stories in the Seventh Book of his Practical
Animadversions, That he has given the same, and taken it with very good
success.

For the Cure of that Chollick which turns into a Palsy, after the Belly is
loosened with many Clysters, and the first ways being made open by a Purge,
put the Patient into a warm Bath made of an Emollient Decoction, twice, thrice,
four, or five times in a day, that the sharpness of the humors may be allaied,
and the pores of the Membranes opened.

The day after let the Humor be Purged with a fit Medicine; then let him be
bathed again, and if his strength will endure it, let him do it every other day,
til the humors are Purged and the pain gone, and the Patient Cured.

In the mean time let the Clysters be continued, especially those made of Milk
are best to assuage pain, to which you may put Cassia, Oil of Violets and
Lillies.

Let the Belly be often anointed with Oil of Chamomil, Dill, sweet Almonds,
Lillies, or with fresh butter,

Then let him use Whey and sharp Waters.

And Lastly, When the Disease is of long continuance, you may use those things
which were prescribed for the Cure of Hypochondriak Melancholy.

Nor must you omit Phlebotomy from the beginning of the Disease before Purging,
and it must be often repeated if the Blood be evil, or the pain come of a
Catarrh any ways.

Finally, All the Medicines mentioned in Chollerick Chollick may here be
applied, which if it avail not, some Physicians use this following Potion,
which though it be sorbid and not sit fot men well educated, yet they say it
Cures presently.

Take of Horse-dung one ounce: break it in pieces, and infuse it in one pint of
Poppy-Water with eight or ten drops of spirit of Vitriol: strain it gently, and
divide the Liquor into three Doses, for the time of the violent pain.

But if it turn into a Palsy, you must anoint the Spina or back Bone and the
Paralytike parts with a Resolving and a Nerve Corroborating Balsom if there be
no Fever; but if there be, bind Wool dipped in Oil, or some digesting Ointment,
to the Paralytike parts, taking heed of Cold, by which the humor will be fastened
to the parts, and the breathing forth of it hindered.

Galbanetum Paracelsi is best, if it be applied to the parts aforesaid, and the
Navel.

Chap. 2. Of the Iliack Passion.
ILEOS, or Iliack Passion, took its name (as some say) from the Gut Ileum,
which chiefly is Affected in this Disease; although the other thin and sometimes
thick Guts are capable of the same: Or, rather from Eilesthai, which signifies
to be rolled and girt about; therefore the Latins call it Volvulus, or
Convolvulus, because the Guts in this Disease seem manifestly to be rolled
about, and to be moved upwards: it is also called Rordapsos, because the Guts,
if you lay your hand on them, seem to be like a stretched or twisted cord.

The Barbarians call it Miserere mei, because it is a miserable Disease and
commonly deadly, and therefore needs divine Commiseration.

This Iliack Passion is a preposterous motion of the Intestines, in which the
Belly is always bound; and the Excrements which should be carried downwards,
are brought to the Stomach, and cast out by vomiting.

It is known that the Intestines have a natural motion by which the Chylus and
Faeces are by degrees carried downwards, which is called Peristalticus; this
motion is by the Orbicular and Transverse Fibers which contract the Intestines,
and is compared to the motion of Earthworms which move the parts of their
bodies successively. And this motion is sometimes inverted by preternatural
Causes, as when the Fibers of the Intestines which ought to be contracted from
above down-wards, are contracted upwards; and whatsoever is in the Guts is not
sent toward the Belly but toward the Stomach, and then is this Iliack
Passion: We observe something like this in Vomiting; for when the Fibers of the
Oesophagus contract themselves from the upper part toward the Stomach, the
meat is swallowed down; but when by an inverted order they contract themselves
from the part beneath up wards, there is vomiting. This Peristaltick inverted
motion comes from the vehement stirring up of the Expulsive Faculty of the
Guts, which when it cannot throw down-wards the superfluous Excrementitious
matter, does by a violent motion cast it upwards. This motion is sometimes so
violent, that not only Chyle, and Wind, and Excrementitious Humors, but the
Faeces also, and Excrements which should be sent out by the Anus are thrown
forth by vomiting; So that Clysters and Suppositories also are snatched up and
vomited out: So Matthew de Gradi reports of a Girl of twelve years old, who in
this Disease for three days together, did not only vomit up Dung and Clysters,
but also along Suppository a short time after it was administered unto her; and
when another Suppository was tied to her Thigh, that was presently broken off
and vomited up with a piece of the Thread at it: And when Thirdly, a Suppository
was tied with four strong Threads as before, that also was broken off and
Vomited up with part of the Threads: And at length when the Mother, as desired
by the Physician, to administer another, it was drawn upward with so much
violence, that she was constrained suddenly to draw it out least it should be
again Vomited up. There are the like stories in Authors, which for brevity sake
we omit.

This stirring up of the Expulsive Faculty of the Guts comes from diverse
Causes: The chief is Obstruction; therefore whatsoever does so violently
obstruct the Guts that nothing can descend, does beget this Disease: for after
the Faculty has long labored to throw out superfluities the ordinary way, and
is frustrate of her intention; desiring to satisfy the necessity of exclusion,
she takes another Course, and by a preposterous motion drives them upwards, and
vomiteth them out.

The Causes obstructing are hard Dung long retained, gross vapors gathered in
abundance into the Guts and violently distending them; Inflammation, and other
great Tumors, which wholly shut up the internal Cavities of the Gut, and the
circumvolution of it, so that it is as it were tied in a knot, which often
happens in a Hernia or rupture, and also in the Chollick, after which often
follows this Ileos, because the Intestines being stretched with wind, do roll
together, and sometimes knit a knot.

The more unusual causes which do so provoke the expulsive faculty that are
constrained to alter their motion, are great Ulcers, or sharp Humors which
twitch the Guts; for when the faeces or other Humors going downwards, do touch
the ulcerated part, they so prick it that the faculty is provoked not to suffer
so noxious a thing to pass, but drives it upwards with violence; which motion
the other Intestines stirred up by sympathy, do follow till the noxious Matter
goes to the Stomach, which following the same Motion, by the help of the
aforesaid faculty, drives it forth by vomit.

The Signs of the Iliack Passion are partly Common to those of the Chollick,
and partly proper.

The Common Signs are, pain in the Abdomen, swelling and pussing up of the
Belly, a bound Belly, loathing of Meat, Nausea, Vomiting, want of Rest,
difficulty of Breathing, and Pissing.

Those which are Proper and peculiar to this Disease, are a sharp pain and most
violent, pussing up and very violent distension, an eminent hard tumor in the
Hypogastrium, a total suppression of seege, so that nothing is voided that way.
In progress of the Disease, there is irregular vomiting, first of Choler, then
of Phlegm, and Chylous Matter, and at length of dung, or rather of a Matter like
it, of corrupt and stinking Meat, for the faeces are seldom sent upwards, when
they are near death, there is abundance of cold sweat, refrigeration of the
extreme parts, trembling of the Heart, disturbance and fainting.

Galen in Comment. Aph. 10. Sect. 7. affirms that the proper and inseparable
sign of this Disease is not to go to stool at all. But Hippocrates seems to
affirm the contrary, 3. Epid. Sect. 2. Text. 7. in an History of a Woman thus
affected, which dwelt at Tisamen, saying there were thin, few, and crude
dejections. To which difficulty we answer, That in the beginning of the
disease, some stools may be from the faeces contained beneath the Gut affected,
which by Nature or Art may be excluded before all the Intestines consent and
lose their proper and Natural faculty. But when the Disease is confirmed, and
the motion of all the Guts is peristal like and inverted wholly, there is
nothing more sent downward.

The signs of the Causes are these: If Ileos come from Inflammation (which often
happens) the Disease is most acute, and comes quickly to the height, there
is an intense fever, a most vehement pain, Chollerick Vomitings and phlegmatic
do soon appear, and faeces and dung do presently, and other deadly signs before
mentioned.

If it come from the faeces endurable there went before it a constriction of
the Belly for many days, and in the beginning there is no pain, but afterward
there is, the Disease is of longer continuance, nor is it so acute as that
which comes from Inflammation, neither is the pain so great, nor the Fever so
strong, and sometimes there is none.

If it come from wind or phlegm, it follows for the most part the Chollick,
and signs of the Chollick, of phlegm and wind went before, which are laid down
in the Chapter before going.

As for the Prognostic. Every Ileos is dangerous, but one more than another.
That is most deadly, in which first there is chollerick, then phlegmatic, and
after stinking vomiting; and Galen, 6. de loc. aff. cap. 2. says none of these
escape; but Experience teaches that some do, as when the disease comes from
retention of the faeces, or Hernia Intestinalis, or Rupture in the Guts.

They who have this Disease with the Strangury, die within seven days, except
a Fever coming, the Urine be more plentifully voided. Hipp. Aph. 44. Sect. 6.
if the Strangury come of thick and and phlegmatic Humors which are plentiful in
the Veins and Guts, a Fever coming thereupon, they may be concocted, melted,
and attenuated, and pissed forth, by which means the Ileos is cured. Although
Galen in his Comment upon this Aphorism, says that he is ignorant of what
Hippocrates says here, and that it cannot be confirmed by Reason and
Experience.

If Symptoms be remitted, and either Medicines or meat taken at the Mouth,
pass through, there is hope of recovery.

The Cure of this Disease, is to be varied according to the difference of the
Causes. And first, if the obstruction comes from the Faeces indurate, or from
gross and slimy phlegm, you must use Emollient and Laxative Medicines, both
internally and externally.

First then, give Clysters of the Decoction of Althaea, Mallows, Violets,
Chamomel, and Melilot, with Lin-seed and Foenugreek seed, or of common Oil to a
pint, in which you may dissolve the third part of Butter, or of the Broth of a
Sheeps Paunch, in which dissolve Butter, Honey, and Sal gem. To which
Decoction, if there be wind (as commonly there is) it is good to put
Carminatives and Discussers.

After the Matter is somewhat mollified with these Clysters, you must give first
some gentle Purges, then stronger, and last the strongest.

In the mean while you must apply Fomentations and Liniments that are
Emollient, to the whole Belly, and continue them long. The Paunch of a Gelding
warmed in hot Water, applied to the Belly, is good; but mollifying Baths are
better, especially if they be made of Air only.

Also you may give inwardly the Oil of sweet Almonds either alone with white
Wine. To which if the pain be great, you may ad the Syrup of Poppies, as was
showed in the Cure of the Chollick.

And lastly, If there be vehement pain, and much flatus, you may give those
other Medicines which are prescribed in the Cure of the Chollick, not omitting
Purges, which being opportunely given, take away the Cause.

That which comes from Inflaruation of the Intestines, is to be cured by often
Blood-letting, if strength permit, both in the Arm and Foot, and by applying of
Cupping-glasses with Scarrification to the Groins. Also Emollient Clysters and
cooling, are to be given, made thus:

Take of Althaea Roots two ounces: Mallows and Violets, of each one handful:
Guord seeds half an ounce: Line and Fleabane seeds, of each two drams: Water
Lillies and Roses, of each one pugil: Chamomel Flowers half a pugil: make a
Decoction, in a pint whereof dissolve two ounces of Oil of Roses; Cassia one
ounce: make a Clyster, and in progress of time ad Oil of Violets and Chamomel.

The aforesaid Emollients must be boiled in Oxycrate.

Or give new Milk with a little Sugar, and the white of an Egg, or the Mucilage
of Fleabane seeds one ounce, to assuage pain.

Or you may make a Clyster of Oil of sweet Almonds, Barley Cream, strained from
the Decoction of it, adding a little fresh Butter and Sugar.

A Clyster may be made of simple Oxycrate, and be every day given, which is
excellent against the Inflammation of the Guts.

Anoint with Oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, and Chamomel, with Mucilage of
Linseed, Faenugreek seed, and Quinces, with Axungia of Hens and Ducks, and
sweet Butter.

Also make a Fomentation of the Decoction of those Simples which were
prescribed for a Clyster.

Also Foment in the beginning with Oxycrate, and after let the Simples
aforesaid, be boiled in Oxycrate.

And make a Catataplasm of the residence of those things in the Decoction with
Barley Meal, Foenugreek, Lin-seed, and Butter, with Axungia's and Oils
aforesaid.

Also a Bath of warm Water, in which cold and Emollient things have been
boiled, is most convenient.

After bleeding, give two ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds to appease pain, and
if it be very great use Narcoticks.

If there be no vomiting, you must provoke it with a draught of warm Water with
Oil of Violets, for so the upper parts will be purged, and the Humors will be
revelled from the part affected. In the whole time of Cure, you must give Juleps
and Emulsions prescribed in the Inflammation of the Stomach.

Let his Drink be Barley Water: and in the beginning let him abstain from all
Nourishment for twenty four hours, that some of the Matter may be consumed;
then give him Chicken Broth. This Disease is to be attended with diligence, for
it is for the most part deadly.

The chief business in the Cure, is by abstinency; and this is taken from the
example of those that are wounded in the Guts, for they are almost famished for
forty days. Therefore let men in this disease for four or five days, take only
three spoonfuls of Broth every day, that vomit may be hindered which does
increase the Disease.

Moreover, Food brings no comfort to the sick, for it turns not to
nourishment, but is plainly corrupted, and the* Chyle which goes from the
Stomach into the Guts, is mingled with the excrements retained, and increases
vomiting.

He may drink more freely, because it goes more easily to the Liver, and it may
be fit to oppose the Disease, if it be well tempered Oxycrate, and in a small
quantity.

Lastly, It comes sometimes but seldom, from the circumvolution of the
Intestines; and this is either from Wind, which tottureth them; or from a
Hernia called Interocele, or Rupture.

That which comes from Wind, is cured by the same Medicines which Cure the
flatulent Chollick. But if after long use of these Medicines, the belly will
not be opened, but all things taken are vomited up, that there is little hope
of health, the last Remedy must be used, which Hippocrates propounds 3. de
morbis, namely, That a pair of Smiths Bellows be applied to the Anus, and that
they blow into his Belly. Then give an Emollient Clyster with Troches of
Alhandal to bring out the faeces. This is good not only against the Ileos from
contorsion of the Intestines, but in that which comes from a grievous
obstruction, for by dilating the Guts it takes away the obstruction. Amatus
Lusitanus, Curat. ult. Cent. 1. testifies that he cured one desperate by this
means: as also Epiphanius Ferdinandus in his Physical Histories, Hist. 74.
reports that the son of John Altimar of Naples, a most expert Physician, was
ready to die of this Disease, and taken as it were from the Graves mouth by
this means. But Aurelian disalloweth it, because the wind coming from the
Bellows may much hurt with its cold. But this may be avoided if the Bellows be
filled with wind by the fire.

Paraeus also propounds another unusual Medicine, by which he boasts that he
cured many at deaths door, namely, by drinking three pound of Quicksilver in
Water alone, for with its weight it does untie the Gut, and open, and sends
down the hard excrements, which Remedy is commended by others, who say that it
may be taken without harm.

But we may well fear so great a quantity, lest it extinguish the Native heat
with its coldness, and coagulate the Blood in the Veins; therefore in a
desperate case it is better to give a less quantity. Some give two ounces in a
rear Egg, and think good to repeat it if the first Dose do not succeed well,
but you may see in our Observations, that one ounce has done well.

But when the Illiack Passion comes from the Guts falling into the Cods, all
the care is to place them right, which must be done by the gentle hand of a
Surgeon, long fomenting the part affected, first with an Emollient
Decoction, and Relaxing Oils, giving often Emollient and Carminative Glysters,
so placing the Patient that his Head be low, and his Thighs high, for some
having been hung by the Heels, were quickly cured.

If the Hernia comes with Inflammation of the Intestine, it is cured with a
fomentation of cold water. If wind stretch the Gut, discuss with a Fomentation
of Spirit of Wine. See the examples of both Cures in our Observations.

Chap. 3. Of Astriction, or binding of the Belly.
BY Astriction of the Belly, we do not understand all kind of supression, by
which nothing is ^et forth downwards, as in the Ileos. But only a dull and slow
dejection, by which the faeces and relics of Meat are seldom and not
according to the quantity of Food thrown forth; therefore they are necessarily
indurated, because of their long continuance being dried with heat, and some
moisture is always drawn from them by the Meseraick, which reach not only to
the thin, but thick Guts. It is a Symptom of the Expulsive faculty diminished,
or the retentive increased, and it is the cause of many diseases; therefore the
Excreta and Retenta are reckoned among the six things not Natural, which not
keeping the Law of Nature, produce diverse Diseases, so it being bound, sends
vapors to the Head, and produces Catarrhs, and other Diseases of the Brain,
disturbs the Concoction of the Stomach, and the actions of other parts.

The Causes of this Symptom are many: And first, hardness of the faeces, and
dryness, are not only Effects, but also Causes of them, because being hard,
they are more difficult to be voided, and do less provoke the expulsive
Faculty. They become dryer and harder chiefly, and oftenest from the excessive
heat of the Liver, which powerfully draws away all the moisture contained in
the Intestines, and leaves the faeces dry. This is also caused by violent
motion, especially riding: also by few Excrements through want of food, or
because they have no actimony to prick the Intestines, as it happens in cold
Meats; and when the Choler does not go to the Guts, as we observe in the
Jaundice. And lastly, Many diseases of the Guts may cause this constriction, as
a cold and dry Distemper, Tumors, Obstructions, Numbness of the Anus, and
Palsy, and many others.

The Signs depend upon the knowledge of the Causes, which must be taken from
their proper Fountains.

The hot distemper of the Liver is to be taken out of its proper Chapter. Also
Tumors, and other Diseases of the Guts, have their proper Diagnosis, or signs,
and so the external Causes, as little Meat, or coldness thereof, riding, and
the like, are known by relation of the Patient.

As for the Prognostic: The Constriction of the Belly is more or less
dangerous, according as the Cause is greater o^less. For if it come of
Inflammation, or other Tumor of the Intestines, it is very dangerous: but from
other Causes less. It uses to be contumacious and long when it comes from the
faeces indurate; and thence come often Chollicks, which return after they have
been cured, by reason of the new dryness of the faeces; as also because though
the Belly seems to have been made sufficiently soluble by purging, and many
liquid Excrements are discharged, yet there remains sometimes many hard
Excrements in the Guts, which breed new pains, and cannot be taken out, but by
many Clysters given after Purging.

The Cure of this Disease depends upon taking away the Causes, which are to be
taken from their proper Chapters. But because it is commonly long, especially
when it depends upon a hot distemper of the Liver, and dryness of the Guts; and
in the mean time the Belly bound brings many inconveniences. We will speak of
its Cure by its self, which is generally done by Emollients, and Laxatives made
thus:

Take of Althaea, or Marsh-mallow, and Lilly Roots, of each two ounces:
Mallows, Marshmallows, Mercury, Violets, and Brank Vrsine, of each one handful:
Lin-seed and Foenugreek of each half an ounce: Annis seed one dram and an half:
sweet Prunes three pair: Chamomel and Meltlot flowers, of each one pugil: boil
them to a pint and an half. Dissolve in the straining Oil of Lillies and
Lin-seed, of each two ounces: fresh Butter one ounce and an half:
Diacatholicon, and Diaprunis simple, of each six drams. Make a Clyster to be
given as often as need requires.

Sometimes instead of this use the following:

Take of the Deco^tion of Sheeps entrals one pint: fresh Butter two ounces:
Cassia, Diacatholicon and Diaprunis simple, of each half an ounce: red Sugar
one ounce: Make a Clyster.

Also twice in a month, or thrice, you may give one pint of common Oil alone
for a Clyster.

And because Nature will grow dull by too much use of Clysters, and at length
will never officiate that way; but when she is provoked by one, you must
endeavor to mollify the Belly with other means.

For this end, sweet Prunes and roasted Apples with Sugar, may be taken one
hour before dinner, as Galen shows 2. defacult. alim. cap. 31. For if they be
taken immediately before dinner, they will not work. Or take Chicken Broth, or
other Broth, in which have been bovled, beets, Borrage, and some Apples, or one
spoonful of Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn without fire, with as much Syrup
of Maidenhair, or two spoonfuls of this Syrup following:

Take of the Mucilage of Fleabane seeds, and of Quinces drawn with Mallows
Water, one pound and an half: white Sugar one pound. Make a Syrup according to
art.

That the Prunes may work better, let him drink half a glass of Vinum
Lymphatum, or Wine and Water, before and after he takes them, fresh Butter
taken an hour before Dinner the bigness of a great ^ut, and drink Wine and
Water will do the same thing.

Once in a week let him use one of these following Medicines:

Take of Cassia new drawn one ounce: Cream of Tartar one dram: Make a Bolus.

Take of (...) one ounce, or an ounce and an half: Mix it with Broth, and take
it in the morning. Or,

Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, and Manna, of each one ounce: Dissolve them in
Broth to be taken two hours before dinner.

Take of pulp of Cassia two ounces: Tamarinds and Manna, of each one ounce: the
powder of Senna half an ounce: Cremor Tartari two drams: With Syrup of Roses
solutive make an Opiate. Let him take half an ounce or an ounce.

Or dissolve in the Decoction of Prunes half an ounce, or an ounce of Manna:
let him take it one hour before dinner as all the aforesaid, for so they will
work better.

Ptisans of Succory, Agrimony, and Sorrel, cast into Water that begins to warm,
and infused one night, either drunk alone, or with Wine, for ordinary Drink
does keep the Body loose.

This following Broth does most certainly loosen the Belly, and keeps it so.

Take of Beets and Mercury, of each one handful: Boil them in Broth, and take
it one hour before dinner. Or,

Take of Conserve of Damask Roses with Manna and Sugar, of each equal parts,
one ounce for adose.

Lastly, A Bath, or Tub with a Decoction of Emollient Herbs is very profitable
to moisten all the parts Natural and mollify the Belly.

Chap. 4. Of Lientery, and Coeliack Passion.
LIentery is a kind of Flux of the Belly, in which the Meat is quickly sent
through the Belly, as it was taken unchanged. But in the Coeliack Passion the
Meat comes forth crude, and imperfectly concocted, whence it appears that these
two Diseases differ only in degrees, so that Lientery is referred to the act
abolished, and Coeliack Passion to the act diminished. For although the Meat is
sent forth, either altogether unconcocted, or imperfectly concocted, yet these
Diseases are not to be referred to concoction hurt, but rather to the
retention; for they are either il concocted, or not at al, because they are
quickly sent forth, and are not long enough retained to be concocted. Hence it
is collected, that though this Disease bereckoned among the Diseases of the
Guts, yet the Stomach is much affected, and sometimes more than the Intestines:
Hence Galen 6. de loc. aff. cap. 2. says that a Lientery and Coeliack Passion
come both by fault of the Stomach and Guts.

Many Causes of these Diseases are propounded by Authors; all which we may
refer to three Heads; the cold distemper of the Stomach and Liver, the
provocation of those same parts; and a great debility of the retentive faculty
from some deadly disease.

The cold distemper generateth great plenty of phlegmatic and glutionous
humors, which covers and (...) over the wrinkles of the Stomach, so that it
cannot retain the food. Hence we may admire why Galen 6. Aph. 1. does speak
against the old Greeks, who called this Disease Lienteriam, or smoothness of
the Intestines therefore, because the internal superficies, or the Stomach
being made smoother, does not retain the Meat; whereas the Stomach does not
retain the Meat til a perfect concoction be made so much by the roughness of
the inward coat, as by an innate propriety of a^^ringing. For as we must
confess that the principal cause of retent on is the faculty; so also must we
acknowledge that the faculty does want instruments fitly disposed, without which
it cannot act: and therefore since the in ward Tunicle of the Stomach is made
rough and wrinkled, that the Meat may be retained in the Stomach, it is no
doubt but if that roughness be taken away while the wrinkles are filled up with
phlegm, the retention of the Stomach will be hurt, so that the Food will slip away
unconcocted. The like is in the Womb whole inward Tunicle is rough and
wrinkled, that it may the better retain the Seed for Conception; but if it be
covered with glutinous Humors, it does not retain, and the Seed presently comes
forth, whence many Women are barren.

But let us note, That if any will strictly exmine this word, he shall find that
this Symptom is rather to be called the Smoothness of the Stomach than of the
Intestines: neither does it comprehend al its sorts, but only that which comes
from Phlegm, which because it is most usual, the rest have their denomination
from it.

The provocation of the Stomach and Guts is by sharp Humors which by twiching
those parts (...) them to send them forth too soon, as it is in the Bladder,
which being pricked by Acrimony, does often piss: Hence comes the Strangury,
Galen 6. Aph. 1. says, That by those sharp humors there is an Ulcerous
Disposition in the Stomach, as the Aphthae, or Thrush is in the mouth of
Children.

The great imbecility of the Retentive Faculty in great and deadly Diseases
often causes a Lientery, as you may see in a Dysentery, which when nature is
conquered degenerateth into a Lientery; the Stomach being drawn to consent with
the Guts which are so grievously affected, and its Faculties being overthrown;
so also in Malignant Fevers there happens often a Lientery whereby the broth
as soon almost as taken is cast forth unconcocted; and the same is when
Poisonous and Hurtful things are taken.

There is also another Cause different from the former, which peculiarly makes
a Coeliake Passion, namely, The Obstruction of the Mesaraike Veins which hinder
the paslage of the Chylus to the Liver; whence it must needs be cast forth by
the Belly, but that this may be, it is necessary that all the Mesaraick Veins,
or the greatest part of them be stopped, as in Children who have the Struma, or
Kings Evil, whose Mesentery is found full of Glandles, by which the Mesaraike
Veins are stopped: and these continually have a Chylous and Coeliake Flux: They
eat much and grow leaner til they fall into a Marasmus.

Aetius and Celsus, and many of their followers, do propound another Cause of
the Lientery, namely, A Smooth and Thick Scar in the Guts remaining after a
long Dysentery, by which the mouths of the Veins being stopped, the
distribution of Nourishment is hindered, and thence comes a Lientery, which
Cause we cannot entertain for then all the Guts should have been Ulcerated, and
the Scar in them al should stop all the meseraiks which is not agreeable co
reason: because it is impossible that all the Guts should be ulcerated, and the
man not die.

The chief Signs of these Symptoms do appear by what is said, for if crude
meat and unchanged descend quickly and often through the Guts signifies a
Lientery; but if it be somewhat changed and seem like Chylus; it shows a
Coeliack Passion.

The Signs of the Causes are thus gathered,

If Lientery or Coeliake Passion come of a cold distemper and Phlegmatic
humors, there will be sour belchings, the excrements of the belly are
Phlegmatic, there will be thirst and want of pain: if the Phlegm come from the
Head, as it often does, the excrements are frothy, and the Flux is greater
after sleep; And there are other Causes which alter the Head, and other Signs
of a Catarrh.

If it come from Irritation, or provocation, there is sometimes a gnawing in the
Stomach, a heat in the Hypochondria, there is great thirst, sharp excrements
and chollerick.

As for the Prognostic, Thus,

Lientery and Coeliack Passion lasting long is dangerous, because it catches a
way the nourishment from the whole body, from whence comes an Atrophy, or a
Dropsy: and if it follow great and acute Diseases, it uses to be deadly.

The Cure of this Disease is to be altered according to the variety of the
Causes that produce it.

And First,

That which comes from Phlegm may be Cured by those Remedies which were
propounded for the Cure of Want of Appetite coming of a cold Cause; Choosing
those things which are most Astringent to stay the Fux of the Belly.

Therefore you must begin with Purging of the peccant humor with Medicines made
of Aloes, Rhubarb, and Myrobalans.

Clysters are here of little force, while the Stomach is chiefly distempered;
except an immoderate Flux do require them: and then they must be Astringent and
strengthening according to the Forms which shall be propounded in the following
Cures.

After Purging sufficiently you must strengthen the Stomach with Opiats,
Pouders, Fomentations, Plasters, and other Remedies mentioned in the place
above quoted, in which (as I said) you must not omit Astringents, as Mastich,
Citron peels, Coriander seeds, Snake-weed Roots, Tormentil, Coral, etc.

And besides others, the Opiate following which is greatly Commended by Amatus
Lusitanus is Convenient, by which he says he Cured an Old man, after many
other Medicines failed.

Take of Conserve of old Roses six ounces: of the best Treacle six drams: Syrup
of Quinces as much as will make an Opiate, of which let him take half an ounce
in the morning, not drinking presently after.

That which comes of Choler is to be cured by those Remedies which were laid
down against Chollerick Vomiting; as also by those which shall be described in
the Cure of a Chollerick Diarrhoea.

That which comes from the imbecility of the Retentive Faculty in a deadly, or
at least dangerous Disease, is to be cured first with Fomentations applied to
the Region of the Stomach, thus made:

Take of the Roots of Snakeweed, Tormentil, and dried Citron peels, of each two
ounces: the Leaves of Mints, Plantane, and Sea Wormwood, of each one handful:
Nu^meg, Cloves, and Cinnamon, of each three drams: red Roses four pugils, beat
them and cut them according to art, and fill two bags pinked therewith, and
steep them in equal parts of Iron Water, and red astringent Wine; or in Wine
alone, if there be no great Fever, and let them be applied to the Stomach warm
one after another.

After wards use this Ointment, or some Emplaister made of those which are
prescribed for Chollerick Vomiting.

Also anoint the whole Belly with Oils, or astringent Liniments.

Give Clysters of Broth in which red Roses have been boiled, dissolving therein
Sugar and Yolks of Eggs, and sometimes Confectio de Hyacintho, if the Patient be
very weak.

And finally, You may give at the Mouth, strengthening and astringent things,
as in the Cure of Vomiting before mentioned; as also thus, which shall be showed
for the flux of the Belly.

In a Coeliack Passion the Food is sent forth crude and imperfectly concocted.
It only differs from Lientery in degree, and is cured with the same Remedios.

But if the stools be altogether Chylous, this Disease does not depend upon the
fault of the Stomach, but upon the obstruction of the Meseraick Veins, which is
usual, especially in Children. And therefore it is to be cured by Remedies
which open obstructions and strengthen the Liver, because that is commonly also
weak; but you must use no astringents, least another kind of flux should
sollow. These Medicines are at large set down in the Cure of the Diseases of
the Liver.

Chap. 5. Of Diarrhoea.
Dlarrhoea is that kind of flux of the Belly, by which the excrementitious
Humors are sent forth without Blood or Food, and without the Ulceration of the
Intestines.

By the Conditions of Diarrhoea properly so called, is distinguished from other
kinds of fluxes, because in Lientery and Coeliack Passion, the Food is cast
forth unconcocted, or half concocted; in a Dysentery and Tenesmus, Blood is
mixed with the Excrements, as in the flux of the Liver, called Hepaticus, and
in the Haemorrhoidal.

Many are the Differences thereof; which that they may be clearly explained,
are to be referred to three Heads: The first whereof respects the Matter which
is voided; the second the place from whence it comes; the third, the Manner,
and efficient Cause which produces the flux of the Belly.

In respect of the Matter voided, this flux is divided into a Chollerick,
Phlegmatic, Melanchollick, and serous, or watery.

In respect of the place from whence it comes; either it comes from the whole
Body, or some peculiar Part, as the Brain, Stomach, Guts, Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery, Womb, and other Parts.

Thirdly, In respect of the Manner and Efficient Cause; one Diarrhoea is
Critical, another Symptomatical; one comes from an internal Cause, as a
distemper, or evil disposition of the internal parts; another from an external,
as from some Medicine or Poison.

These Differences are seldom found single, but they are often complicated in
one and the same flux. So a Chollerick flux is from the Liver or the whole Body,
a Phlegmatic from the Brain or Stomach, a Melanchollick from the Spleen, and a
Serous from the whole Body.

Also these Differences are complicated from a diverse mixture of Humors, so
that sometimes Choler, Phlegm, and Water, are sent forth by the same flux.

There is another kind of Diarrhoea different from the rest, which is called
Syntectice, or Colliquativa, coming from the melting away of the substance of
the Body, and Humors by the violent hot distemper of the solid parts: such as
happens sometimes in the Inflammation of the Bowels, in a strong burning
Fever, hectic, or pestilential; in which a fat Matter as it were mixed with
Oil or Grease is voided.

Lastly, Fluxus stercorosus, or a dungy flux, is another kind, in which much
liquid excrement is often voided, which comes from excrementitious Meats
corrupted in the Stomach, or a great plenty of Excrements heaped up in the
Intestines.

The Knowledge in general is manifest, namely, when more liquid Excrements are
voided, and oftener than usually Nature does allow.

The Signs of these Differences which are taken from the matter are manifest to
the Senses, namely, Whether they be Phlegmatic, Melanchollick, Chollerick, or
Serous.

The Parts Sending have a more difficult Diagnosis or way of Knowledge, yet they
are thus Distinguished:

If the Humors flow from the whole body, there either is, or has lately been, a
continual Fever, or some other disease of the whole body, as Cachexia, evil
Habit, or Leucophlegmatia, or white Dropsy; or there has been over-eating or
drinking, and there is no sign of any Disease of any peculiar part.

If it be Critical, it is a benefit to the Patient, and is easily endured; and
thence the Disease is either Cured, or Diminished.

Sometimes there happens a Critical Diarrhoea without a Disease in some bodies
which use to lay up evil Humors; and being strong, do throw them forth at times
when they abound and burden nature as Galen taught, 7. meth. Cap. 11. of which
Flux Celsus makes mention, lib. 4. cap. 19. in these words, It is healthful
for to go often to the Stool in one day, and in many days together if there be
a Fever, and if it cease before the seventh day; for the Body is purged, and
that which inwardly would have hurt, is now sent forth.

Among Critical Fluxes, the Serous is one; which comes without a Disease
aforegoing; in them who have much Water in their Veins, and that chiefly in the
Harvest time, or Autumn: namely, when the night and morning cold of Autumn,
finding the passages external and pores of the skin open, by reason of the heat
of Summer aforegoing does therefore insinuate it self deeper into the body,
pressing forth internally the Serous Humors contained in the Veins, which
Nature afterward being over-burdened with, sends by the Meseraick Veins into
the Intestines, and many times into the Uriters.

Hence it is that many in the beginning of Autumn, and in the first cold
weather, do make abundance of Urine for many days together.

But if a Diarrhoea be Symptomatical, it troubles the patient much, and
weakeneth him; and the Disease upon which it comes, is increased; or at least
is in the same state.

This Symptomatical Flux in burning Fevers and Malignant, is often melting;
and hence it is known, because the Excrements appear unctious, and the body
forthwith becomes lean, and consumed, and almost in a Marasmus.

If the Diarrhoea comes from the Brain, the Stools are frothy, as Hippocrates
taught, Aphor. 30. Sect. 7. which is not always so; For Phlegm may flow from
the brain without Wind, which is the only cause of froth: as also Wind may be
mixed with Humors that are bred or contained in the stomach or intestines, from
whence the Excrements may be frothy, though they come not from the Head.

Therefore we must join other Signs to this, namely, If the Brain have any
manifest Disease, as a Catarrh, Deafness, Lethargy, Apoplexy, or great
Heaviness, Pain, or Sleepiness; and if the Flux be more at night than day.

If it come from the fault of the Stomach, there will be the Signs of the
Concoction of the Stomach Hurt: As if the Food be corrupted, and have a sharp
and stinking quality, by which the Expulsive Faculty is stirred up to expel
them.

Also there will then be the Signs of a Hot Distemper of the Stomach: So, if the
Stools be Crude and Phlegmatic, and if Concoction be slow and diminished, we
argue that the Concoction of the Stomach is hurt by a cold Distemper: and
lastly we know that the fault is in the Stomach, if the Patient did before fill
himself with evil Food which would easily corrupt.

The Flux of the Belly comes from the Guts, when they are full of Worms, and
then there will be signs of Worms which you may take from their proper Chapters.

If from the Liver, The Stools will be Chollerick, because Choler is bred
there; and there will be Signs of a Hot Distemper, Inflammation, Obstruction, and
other Diseases of the Liver.

If from the Spleen, The Stools will be commonly black or blackish, a distention
in the left Hypochondrion, a heaviness also or pain there, and other signs of
the Spleen Distempered will appear.

If from the Mesentery, There will be extension, stretching, or pain in that
part: But Humors gathered in the Mesentery, come commonly from the Liver and
Spleen.

If from the Womb, There will be stoppage of the Courses, or the Symptoms of
the Womb affected, which use to be more violent, and the Flux also at that time
when the Terms ought to flow.

The Prognostic of a Diarrhoea is made thus,

A Flux of the Belly which is easily endured, and in which the Patient finds
refreshment, is good: On the contrary, that which is painful and weakneth, is
evil: The first is to be accounted Critical, the last Symptomatical.

When the Liquid Excrements grow thicker, it is good: For it signifies, That
the Faculty Works well by Concocting of evil Humors: which is done by making
them thick.

Thin Excrements with pain often voided are evil, for they signify great
sharpness of Humors which do violently pull, stimulate, prick, and gnaw the Guts.

Liquid Stools without Feeling when they are voided, are evil: For they either
signify Disturbance of Mind, or Doting, or Dissolution of the Natural Heat,
which is followed by the loss of Sense.

Liquid Stools beginning with an acute Disease, and continuing with the same,
is evil: for it signifies great plenty of Matter, or an evil quality therein,
which forces Nature to so sudden a flux.

If a strong Diarrhoea comes upon him who has the Leucophlegmatia, it causes
recovery, Hipp. Aph. 29. Sect. 7. For there is an Evacuation of the Matter,
which was in the whole Body. But this wants a limitation. The Aphorism is true,
if this flux happen in the beginning of a Disease while the strength is good;
otherwise it does not take away the disease, but the Patient.

If a Woman with Child have a flux of the Belly, she is in danger to miscarry;
Hipp. Aph. 34. Sect. 5. For the food which should nourish the Infant, is for
the most part carried away, and the strength is abated; as also the Ligaments
of the Womb are relaxed by a continual flux of Humors thither; as also the
Child and the Womb are infected by the vapor of those excrements which are
continually voided.

Yellow Stools like Yolks of Eggs; green, like Verdegreece; livid, black, of
diverse colors, or very stinking, are evil: For the reason which we gave in the
Chapter of Vomiting.

As to the Cure: Since a Symptomatical Diarrhoea comes commonly from corrupt
Humors, Chollerick, Phlegmatic, Melanchollick, or Serous, and especially from
Chollerick, which provoke the expulsive faculty of the Intestines by their
sharpness. You must begin the Cure by Evacuation of the Humor offending, which
must be done by a Medicine which does astringe by purging, lest that flux
should be increased by motion of the Humors; and you may make it thus:

Take of the best Rhubarb one dram: Citrine Myrobalans half a dram: Yellow
Sanders half a scruple: Infuse them in Plantane Water, dissolve in the Liquor
strained half a dram: the powder of Rhubarb, and one ounce of Syrup of Roses.
Make a Potion.

You may ad Diacatholicon, or other Medicines, according to the condition of
the Humor to be purged.

Also Vomiting is sometimes good, because it Revelleth and Evacuateth the Matter
of the Disease.

If there be signs of blood abounding, and strength, you must first let blood.
And if there be a Fever, you must open a Vein, though there appear no
Plethory, or fullness.

Before and after Purging, give clensing Clysters, such as these:

Take of whole Barley two pugils: Bran and red Roses, of each one pugil:
Liquoris scraped, and Raisons whole, of each one ounce: boil them to a pint:
Dissolve in the straining of white Sugar one ounce; Yolks of Eggs two. Make a
Clyster.

After the Body is sufficiently emptyed, you must give astringents, and
strengtheners, both at the Mouth, and by Clysters, as also to the Belly; the
Forms whereof you may take out of the Cure of Dysentery.

Besides, You may conveniently use these that follow:

Take of Chalybeat Vinegar one part: Chalybeat Water two parts: the Leaves and
Fruit of Myrtles, Quinces, Medlars, Cervices, of each two handfuls: Cypress
Nuts six pair, boil to halfs. Foment the Belly warm with the strained Liquor
often.

Take of Oil of Mastich, Quinces, and Myrtles, of each one ounce: Sanguis
Draconis, Frankincense, and Gum Traganth, of each one dram: Wax as much as will
make an Unguent to anoint after the Fomentation. Or,

Take Crumbs of toasted Bread infused in Chalybeat Water* and Quinces roasted in
the Embers, or Marmalade, of each three ounces: Frankincense, Mastich, Sanguis
Draconis, of each two drams: With Syrup of Quinces and Wormwood, make a
Cataplasm.

Take of Mastich two drams: Boil it in three pints of Water for ordinary drink,
Iron Water is also good; but in a hot Disease, it is good to use the Tincture
of Roses, or Conserve of Roses mixed with Spring Water, or Water wherein Gold
has been quenched, mixed with Syrup of Quinces.

Amatus Lusitanus reports of one that was cured of a Chollerick Diarrhoea by
taking much cold Water in the Summer time. We also once prescribed to a
Sanguine man who was troubled with a Chollerick Diarrhoea in the midst of
Summer with great thirst, Sal Prunella in his ordinary drink, and Juleps made
of Lettice and Purslain Water to be taken thrice in a day, and he was cured in
twenty four hours.

If the Humor be very sharp, and adust or burnt, the Patient must be purged
sparingly with mild Medicines, otherwise the Disease will increase, and he is
to be cooled and moistened; as also to be blooded a little.

In the same case a warm Bath is very good; the Example whereof is in our
Observations.

Plantane boiled in Broth, is excellent.

And least a Diarrhoea turn into a Dysentery, you must give Clysters of
Chalybeate Milk, and Emulsions of the cold Seeds, and of white Poppy Seeds, to
assuage the sharpness of the Humor.

As also this Syrup following.

Take of the Juice of Quinces six ounces: the Juice of Endive and Sorrel, of
each three ounces: Sorrel and Plantane Seeds, of each two drams: red Coral one
dram: Plantane Water four ounces: Boil them to the Consumption of half: strain
and press them well; put to it as much Sugar to make a Syrup to be taken two
drams first and last.

In all Diarrhoea's, after universal Medicines, this following Bolus is good.

Take of Conserve of old Roses half an ounce: Candied Quinces one dram: the
powder of Tormentil one scruple: With Sugar make a Bolus to be often repeated.
Or if the Disease be old you may make an Opiate of the same, or the like, in a
greater quantity to be taken at many times.

Or to astringe more powerfully give this Powder:

Take of Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, Mastich, Mummy, Terra Sigillata, Lapis
Haematitis, or Boodstone, Troches of Amber, of each one dram: true Bole three
drams: make a Powder, of which give two drams inconvenient Liquor.

Rhubarb twice infused, and then twice or thrice washed in Rose Water and
dried, is good.

The Lozenges of the three Sanders, with four times the quantity of Rhubarb
given twice in a day, the weight of two drams, do take away the Matter, and
strengthen the Bowels.

The Leaves of Fleabane laid upon fire so that the smoke may be taken through a
hollow Chair, do stop the flux of the Belly by a specifical quality. As also if
the same Herb be beaten with Vinegar, and applied to the Stomach.

Also the smoke of Mullin taken through a hollow Chair, is excellent; the
example of which is in our Observations.

Syrup of Coral is excellent, and much more the Tincture or Magistery of the
same.

The Conserve of the wild Rose, or sweet Bryar Rose, is good against a
Chollerick flux, especially if it be mixed in astringent Opiates.

But when there is danger of weakness through a long and often flux, you may
give Laudanum with Mastich and Terra Sigillata.

When it is very violent, a Clyster of Broth and new Treacle is excellent.

Pills of Bdellium taken twice or thrice in a week, or every other day, are good
against al old fluxes.

For the same is the often use of Medlars; as Forestus confirms by experience,
obs. 1. lib. 22. in these words: One that had a constant Flux, and spent all he
had upon Physicians, came to me for counsel, whom I advised to eat Medlars,
though green, as many as he could, by which he was speedily cured. As it was
with a Zeland Merchant that came to John Spirinchius, a Physician of Lovan, who
having been long sick, and of a Dysentery at last, and could not be cured by
any, was at length by his advice cured only with Medlars, and gave the
Physician three hundred Crowns for his advice. Thus Forestus.

But we must observe that the Body before the use of Medlars be cleansed from
Excrements.

In an old Diarrhoea, the following Medicines are excellent:

Take of the shavings of Ivory three drams: Confection Alkermes one dram: Sugar
dissolved in Rose Water four ounces. Make Lozenges.

Take of Crocus Martis six grains: Bezoard Mineral half a scruple: Conserve of
Roses two drams: Spirit of Vitriol three drops: Mix them in a Bolus to be given
twice a day, long after and before Meat.

Take of the Juice of Persicaria Maculata, and of the great Housleek, of each
three ounces: boil them till the third part be consumed, and give them in the
morning, they do certainly cure any flux though very old.

Mercurius Diaphoreticus given some days together, twelve grains at a time,
takes away all the impurities of the Body, which use to beget fluxes.

The Decoction of Juniper Berries in Wine given three days together, is good;
and also one dram of the Powder of Grasshoppers given in white Wine. These two
by deriving the Matter of the flux to the Ureters.

The Decoction of Juniper is thus made:

Take of Juniper Berries one handful: red Wine one pint and an half: boil them
to the consumption of two thirds. Let him take the straining three days
together.

The Water of Brimstone Mines cure an old Diarrhoea by purging the whole Body,
and by strengthening the Stomach. Of which there is an example in our
observations.

If a Diarrhoea come from a Catarrh, you must look to the Brain, as the part
that sends it, with the Medicines prescribed in the Cure of a Catarrh. But if
it depend upon the Obstruction or weakness of the Liver or Spleen, you must
cure them as shall be showed in their proper places; and then there is little or
no use of astringents. Platerus in the Cure of the Hemorrhoids, says that hot
blood given as a Clyster, does wonderfully cure a flux.

Chap. 6. Of Dysenteria, or Dysentery.
A Dysentery is an often and bloody looseness of the Belly, with pain and
torment depending upon the ulceration of the Intestines.

The word Dysenteria is taken commonly among the Ancients for every bloody flux
of the Belly: but strictly and properly it is taken only for the bloody flux,
which comes from an Ulcer in the Intestines.

Gal. 3. de symp. cause. cap. 2. names four kinds of bloody fluxes, which he
commonly calls Dysenteries.

The first is when any part of the Body is cut, or when any exercise is
omitted, or any bleeding is omitted, as usual bleeding at the Nose and
Haemorrhoids, that by reason whereof the blood abounding is sent by the
Meseraick Veins to the Intestines, and so evacuated by the Belly.

The second is, when by reason of the weakness of the Liver, Watery blood like
that water wherein flesh has been washed, is voided; as it is in the Hepatick
or flux of the Liver, of which we shall hereafter speak.

The third is when Melanchollick and shining blood is cast forth, which by
reason of the long continuance in the Liver or Spleen is burnt, and mixed with
Melancholy. Shining signifies burning, because blood which grows black by
cold does not shine, but loses that brightness or splendour which it had before.

The fourth Difference, is when the Patient at some short distance voids blood
with Humors or Excrements, with which sometimes there is mixed Pus or Matter,
and that with pain and torment, by which we may conclude that there is an Ulcer
of the Guts. And this is properly called a Dysentery, of which only we here
discourse.

The Internal Causes of a Dysentery, are sharp and ulcerating Humors, as yellow
Choler, green like Leeks or Verdegreece, and black; as also salt phlegm bred in
the Head from great heat, or in the Belly by putrefaction, and so brought to
the Intestines, where cleaving a long time, it does ulcerate.

Here is a great Doubt propounded by Authors; How yellow Choler in a short
time should cause a Dysentery? When green Choler in a long time makes only a
Diarrhoea, which never turns into a Dysentery, since the green is made of the
yellow by adustion, and has more sharpness.

Mercatus answers, That there must be a clamminess, by which it may remain
long in the Guts to corrode and gnaw them, as well as a sharpness. And therefore
if yellow Choler be such, it causes a Dysentery; on the contrary, if green
Choler be more fluid, and stay less while in the Guts, it makes but a simple
Diarrhoea.

Sennertus says that this answer is probable; but it does not satisfy,
because oftentimes there are fluxes, in which there is clamminess with
sharpness, and yet there is no Dysentery. And contrariwise, often times there
is no clamminess in Chollerick Humors which cause a Dysentery, and therefore he
thinks that the Humors which produce a Dysentery have a peculiar occult
quality, with which the Intestines are offended and ulcerated, as the Lungs are
with the fish Lepus, and the Bladder with Cantharides, and no other part. And
he proves that malignant quality in that a Dysentery is contagious for the
most part, so that the infections which come from the vapors rising from the
excrements of those that have a Dysentery, do only infect the Guts of them that
are infected, and not upon other parts. The same happens in other Epidemical
and infectious Diseases, in which the poison does go only to some peculiar
part; so their Pleuresies, Peripneumonia's, or Imposthumes in the Lungs, and
Squinzies which are infectious. So the Poison of a mad Dog does only infect the
Head. This is more clear to be seen in Purging Medicines, which have a peculiar
virtue to move the Humors in the Body, and bring them to the Guts, which will
not only, being taken at the Mouth, purge by stool, but laid to the Navil are
taken by vapor at the Nose; it is probable that they piercing into the Veins
and Arteries by the Pores of the Skin and extremities of the Vessels, do stir
up motion, and Fermentation or working in the Humors, because the bad Humors
are separated from the good, and by pricking or stimulating of Nature, they are
driven to the Intestines by the force of the Medicine, directing the expulsive
faculty to those parts. By the same reason, but after another manner, do
Sudorisicks, or Sweating Medicines, and Diuretics, or such as provoke Urine
work; the former forcing the Humors to the Skin, the latter to the Bladder.
From which we may collect that the insection of a Dysentery, by what manner or
part soever it is admitted into the Body, does cause a certain fermentation or
working in the Humors by giving them a Disposition like it self; which being an
enemy to the Guts, does provoke the flux of the Humors to them, by which they
are ulcerated; and they being infected with the like disposition, do infect the
Humors and Nourishment; from whence comes a true and proper Dysentery.

It is demanded of diverse Authors, What is that snotty and white Matter which
is voided in such great plenty in Dysenteries, mixed with Blood and other
Humors? Some think that it is the fat of the Guts; others that it is that with
which the Intestines are lined for the better passage of the excrements;
others, that it is phlegm from the Head or other parts; others, that it is Pus
or Matter from the Ulcers. But we conclude, That it is nothing else but a
preternatural excrement of the Guts; for they being decayed from their Natural
Constitution, cannot convert their proper Nourishment into their own substance,
but by an imperfect way change it into that Matter; which when it is unfit for
nourishment of those parts, is expelled forth, and then the parts wanting again
Nourishment, attracteth or draws new, which is changed as the former, and
there must needs be a great increase thereof, because the part affected
continually draws Blood from the Veins, which is changed into this slimy
substance, by which it is deceived of its expectation, and therefore again
draws new for its Nourishment, which it continually aims at, but cannot
turn into its own substance, but into the slimy Matter, of which there is so
great an increase. The same thing is done in other parts, and especially in
great and profound or deep Ulcers. For the part Ulcerated when by reason of its
evil disposition, it cannot be well nourished, draws blood continually from the
Veins, which is changed into Pus or Quittor, by which means the whole body by
degrees consumes. Nor does this befall only parts ulcerated, but others that
have no Ulcer or Imposthume; so that although the aforesaid Excrement be like
Quitt r, yet is not true Pus or Quittor; for that comes only from an Ulcer or
Imposthume. This chiefly appears in an Ophthalmy or Inflammation of the Eyes, in
which when there is no Ulcer or Imposthume, there is a continual Excrement like
Quittor, which comes only from the distemper of the part, and the depravation
of the Homiosis, or quality by which it makes Nourishment like it self. The
same befalls men in Asthma or Ptisick, and other Diseases of the Lungs, for
their Lungs being distempered, do il concoct their own Nourishment, but turn it
into an Excrement like Quittor, which is expelled by coughing, and yet they
have no Ulcer in their Lungs; as many learned Physicians will conclude when they
see the Matter.

The External Causes of a Dysentery, are al things that produce sharp and evil
Humors, or give them being produced, a disposition to cause a Dysentery. The
Principal are, sharp Meats, or very subject to putrefaction, as Fruits soon
rotten, and al unripe things, Waters that are drunk ordinarily, wherein there
is Crudity or a Mineral, and Medicines which are deadly qualified, and evil
Air, as Hipp. Aph. 11. Sect. 3. when the Winter is too cold or dry, the Spring
too wet, and too full of South winds, then there will be Dysenteries in the
Summer. And Aph. 12. Sect. 3. If the South wind blow much in Winter, and it
rain much: but if it be dry, and the North wind blow much, in the Spring, those
seasons produce Dysenteries.

But the proper Distemper of the Air to produce a Dysentery is known in a
contagious or Epidemical Dysentery, which sometimes is more dangerous then
others. As also there is an Infection in the Excrements of those that have this
Disease to them that smell them, and if they be cast into the Privy they infect
most of the Family that sit over them.

The Signs of a Dysentery are taken out of the Definition mentioned, an often
bloody Evacuation with pain and torments of the Belly, and sometimes a Fever,
watching, thirst, loathing of Meat and other Signs common to many Diseases.

But it is hard to know whether the thick or thin Guts are ulcerated. Usually
if the pain be above the Navil, they say it is in the thin Guts, and if below,
in the thick; but this is contrary to reason, because both the thin and thick
Guts are carried both to the superior and inferior parts. Therefore this sign
is rather to be taken from the quality of the pain, and the excrements. For if
the thin Guts are affected, there is vehement pain, like pins pricking, because
they are more Membranous, and of more exquisite sense. As also they go not to
stool presently after the pain, and there is blood in every stool; for because
the Blood and purulent Matter comes far before it be voided, it is more mixed
with the Dung; but if the thick Guts are affected, the pain is less vehement
and lasting, there is presently after a going to stool, the Blood and Matter
swim upon the excrement, or are very little mixed, and in a great Ulceration
there are as it were little pieces of flesh.

The Signs of the Causes are taken especially from the Color of the
Excrements, when they are yellow, green, white, or black, to which you may ad
the Signs of Humors abounding from the Age, Temperament, time of the year, and
course of Life.

The Prognostic is thus made,

If the Thin Guts are Ulcerated there is more danger, for they are more
Nervous, and being nearer the Liver they receive more pure Choler.

Dysenteries coming from black Choler, or Melancholy, are deadly;
Hippocrates, aph. 24. sect. 4. because the Ulcer grows Cancerous, which is
seldom Cured outwardly in the body. But if this Melancholy comes by Crisis, of
Judgment, it is not so dangerous. But you must beware least you take Congealed
blood for Melancholy.

A Dysentery from Choler or sharp Diet is easily Cured: from salt Phlegm it is
worse than from Choler, because by reason of the Clamminess it stays longer
in the Guts to ulcerate.

In long Diseases of the Guts, Loathing of Meat is evil, and worse with a
Fever: Hippocrates, Aph. 3. Sect. 6.

If in a Dysentery there be as it were little pieces of Flesh voided, it is
deadly: Aphor. 26. Sect. 4. for it signifies a deep Ulcer which takes away
pieces of the guts.

Much Watching, Stools without mixture of Humors, black, stinking, much blood,
a Lientery coming after, Hickets, Chollerick Vomits, pain of the Liver,
Midriff, great thirst, do commonly declare that it is deadly.

A Dysentery coming to those which have the Gout or a Disease in the Spleen, is
good: Hippocrates, 2. progn. and aph. 46. sect. 6. but this is rather a simple
Diarrhoea which sends forth the matter of those Diseases.

Old Men and Children more commonly in this Disease than Men of middle Age,
Hipp. 2. progn Children because of their tenderness, and their not observing
rules: Old Men because their strength is spent, and because there is a great
overthrow of their natural state thereby: for they do not easily produce
excrements that are fit to cause a Dysentery.

The Cure of this Disease is wrought by Medicines that assuage, cleanse, and
evacuate sharp humors that Consolidate and dry Ulcers and stop the flux.

At first you must evacuate the Humor offending least it do more mischief, and
you must Purge often; and it you think it not safe to purge every day or every
other day, do it every third or fourth day: Rhubarb is the best for purpose,
either given in substance with Broth, or made into a Potion, as in Diarrhoea,
Or thus,

Take of Plantane half an handful: Liquoris scraped, and whole Raisons, of each
three drams* Red Roses one pugil: Tamarinds six drams: yellow Myrobalans rubbed
with Oil of sweet Almonds, two drams: boil them to three ounces: Dissolve in
the straining, of Rhubarb infused with Lavender in Plantane Water one dram:
Syrup of Quinces one ounce: Make a Potion: Or,

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce: Citron Myrobalans, two drams: boil them in
Barley and Plantane Water, infuse in the straining, of Rhubarb one dram and an
half: yellow Saunders half a scruple: to four ounces of the straining ad one
ounce of the syrup of Roses solutive: make a Potion.

The Decoction of Myrobalans made thus, and given in many Draughts, is
Commended of many.

Take of the rinds of Myrobalans Chebs, ten drams: Citron Myrobalans five
drams: Currants two ounces: boil them in twenty six Pints of Water, to the
Consumption of the third part: strain them, and add ten drams of Sugar,
clarify it, and put to it half an ounce of Cinnamon.

Penotus Commends the following Potion as good against both Dysentery and
Diarrhoea.

Take of the Bark of Guajacum beaten two ounces: boil them to halfs in a
sufficient quantity of Water, adding of red Roses, Pomegranate Flowers, and
Plantane, of each two drams: boil them for an hour, and then add to the
straining of poudered Rhubarb one dram: Diacatholicon, three drams: make a
Potion.

Many give Parched or Torrified Rhubarb, that the Purging Quality may partly be
taken away: But Amatus Lusitanus takes the second Infusion of Rhubarb, and
says, That in the first Infusion al his sharpness is taken away, and it is
better so than Parched, for by so doing it is burnt.

The Preparation is thus made:

Take of Rhubarb one dram and an half: infuse it in three ounces of Plantane
Water some few hours, strain it, press it gently, and then infuse it again in
three ounces of new Plantane Water, and dissolve in the straining half an ounce
of Cassia: make a Potion.

If you desire, by reason of the abundance of crude Humors, to Purge more, then
you may make Syrup of Roses, or Diacatholicon, or other mild things, but beware
of strong.

Sometimes a Vomit is very good, if the Patient be inclinable, and the Humors
stand in the Stomach; for it makes a revulsion of the Humors from the part
affected. Which Amatus Lusitanus wisely mentioned, Curat. 44. Cent. 2. in these
words: If the Physician can draw upwards, and cast out by Vomit a Humor that is
Chollerick and sharp, flowing to the Guts to make a Dysentery, it would be
contrary to the Precepts of Galen, in his Book of Medicinal Art, and Method of
Cure, to carry the matter by the Guts which are full of Ulcers. But when the
Physician cannot do it, although he ought to try his best skill, he must then
use Purges, and especially Rhubarb. This Hippocrates taught, Aph. 15. Sect. 6.
After a long flux of the Belly, if Vomiting come of it self, the disease is
cured. But Galen in his Comment upon this Aphorism, says, That this is the
example of those things which are done rightly by Nature, which a Physician
ought to imitate. And Mercatus confirms the same in these words: Divert the
Humors another way by bleeding if thou can; also purge, and Vomit, especially
in salt phlegm, for thus we have seen old Dysenteries cured.

Angelus sala prescribes this following Vomit in a Dysentery:

Take of Salt of Vitriol half a dram, or a dram: Syrup of Quinces, and Bettony
Water, of each one ounce: Cinnamon Water ten drams: Mix them and drink it off.

There is great Dissension among Authors concerning Blood-letting in this
Disease. And it is the Opinion of the wisest, that in a Fever and Inflammation
of the Intestines (which is commonly joined with an Ulcer) that it ought to be
in the beginning of the Disease, before the strength be decayed by it: for so
there is a revulsion of Blood, and sharp Humors flowing to the Guts. And
Valescus de Taranta, and Amatus Lusitanus in an old Dysentery drew Blood.
Valescus says, That a very old man had a Dysentery three months; I being sent
for, when other Physicians opposed it, commanded a Vein to be opened, he
presently amended. And Amatus says thus; That an honest Physician went to a
man, who had a Dysentery thirty days with a great Fever, and after the use of
diverse Medicines was brought very low, and lean, his flux continuing with much
Blood, and drew Blood from the Liver Vein of his right Arm: and observe with
what success; Presently, miraculously the blood stopped, though his flux
continued. But by Clysters with Sugar, and astringent Medicines, both internal
and external, his belly was bound, and he cured.

In the mean while give many Clysters, first asswaging, mild, and clensing;
then glutinous and astringent; and sometimes in one Clyster all together, or
most of them.

Mild, gently, and anodine Clysters that assuage pain, are made of Milk, either
alone, or with two or three yolks of Eggs, or with the Mucilage of Fleabane
Seeds and Quinces, of each four ounces; with Sugar or Honey of Roses one ounce;
Goats Suet one ounce; or with Milk wherein Gold, Iron, or Flints have been
quenched, that the serous part may be consumed, and so it may be more glutinous.

In want of Milk, you may give Almond Milk, or Barley Cream, or Rice Milk,
alone or together; as also the Broth of Mutton, Chicken, Capon, or a Sheeps
Head, and mix the former things therewith. It is usual to boil Roses, and the
Herb Hors-tail with a Sheeps Head. Or this following:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce: cleansed Barley, or Rice one Pugil:
Lin-seed and Quince seed, of each one ounce: Fleabane seed half a dram:
Chamomel flowers one pugil: Boil them in Milk or Broth, adding the Suet and
Yolks of Eggs, and other things before mentioned.

Or you may make it of Milk alone, boiled with Marsh-mallow Roots at the first,
to cleanse and assuage the pain.

If the Pain be great, you must mix Narcoticks; as Philonium Persicum, one or
two drams: Pills of Hounds-tongue one or two scruples: Syrup of Poppies one
ounce and an half: Laudanum five or six grains, in your Clysters.

If there be an Inflammation in the Guts, which may be known by constant pain,
and increasing when it is touched, also by a Fever and dryness of the Tongue;
let blood again, give Clysters of Rose Water, with Salt of Lead, and foment the
Belly with Oxycrate, or Wine and Water.

Also you may give Salt of Lead at the Mouth to ten grains, with Conserve of
Roses.

Clensing Clysters are made of Barley Water, Bran, red Roses, Sugar or Honey of
Roses.

But for the greater clensing and glutinating the Ulcer, ad one dram of
Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg. When the Ulcer is more foul, you
must use greater clensers, as Beets, Pellitory of the wall in the aforesaid
Decoction. The strongest Clensers are, Centaury, Wormwood, Gentian, Brine or
Pickle, from Galen 12. Meth. Cap. 1. and the like; the use of which is now very
rare.

Zacutus Lucitanus durst use Arsenick, and yet with good success; as you may
see Obs. 18. Lib. 2. of his Admirable Practice of Physic.

Some Chymicks use of the Oil of Wax in Clysters one dram; and anoint the Belly
with the same.

To glutinate or heal up the Ulcer, first use gently Dryers in Clysters, and a
little astringent; then such as are more drying and binding. Therefore make
them first of Chalybeat Milk, in which Roses have been boiled, or of Barley
Water, or Water of parched Rice, and red Roses one pugil, adding to both
Clysters two Yolks of roasted Eggs, sometimes Honey of Roses; and when you will
have it work better, one ounce of the Juice of Plantane.

To bind and glutinate more, make it thus:

Take of the Roots of Com^bry and Mullein, of each one ounce: Plantane and
Com^bry leaves, of each one handful: red Roses, and parched Barley, of each one
pugil: Myrtles two drams: Make a Decoction in Cistern Water; in one pint of the
straining, dissolve of Honey of Roses one ounce; one white of an Egg, or one
ounce of the Mucilage of Gum Traganth, Goats Suet two ounces: the Juice of
Yarrow and Knot-grass one ounce. Make a Clyster.

Take of Snakeweed Roots, or Tormentil, one ounce and an half:
Shepheards-purse, Knot-grass, Horstail, and Mousear, of each one handful:
Pomegranate flowers, Acorn cups, Cypress Nuts, of each two drams: parched Rice
one pugil: make a Dcoction in Forge Water: in a pint of the straining dissolve
two ounces of the Juice of Plantane, and two Yolks of roasted Eggs. Make a
Clyster.

Angelus sala wonderfully commends the following Clyster:

Boil a Sheeps Head cloven in two, till the flesh come from the bones, add to
the Broth strained of the tops of St. John's Wort two or three handfuls;
Tormentil Roots grossly bruised two ounces: Infuse them three or four hours upon
the Embers. Let the straining be twice or thrice given as a Clyster.

The Juice of Plantane alone, or with the Milk or Barley Water, is good.

Gum Traganth two drams, or the Infusion of it in Rose or Plantane Water, is
good to put in Clysters; or it makes a very good one if it be mixed with Juice
of Plantane and Goats Suet instead of Gum Traganth. Or with it you may with
profit use Gum Arabic, Frankincense, Mastich, and Sarcocol. All which being
dissolved in the aforesaid Liquors, do work by glewing, neither do they
exasperate the Ulcer as the strong Astringents. Ama^us Lucitanus does much
approve Clysters made of them, because they do cover, as with a Plaster, the
internal Superficies of the Guts against the gnawing of the Matter; he makes
them thus:

Take of Barley Water ten ounces: one white of an Egg well beaten: Gum Arabic
and Goats Grease, of each half an ounce: Oil of Roses two ounces: Bole-Armenick
and Gum Traganth, of each one dram: mix them for a Clyster.

But lest those Emplastick Clysters should fasten the sharp Matter, and shut it
up by their clamminess, you must use clensing Clysters also, which must not be
long retained; and you must sometimes use clensing Clysters intermixed with
astringent.

In the astringent you may put Acacia, Hypocistis, or Conserve of Sloes,
Sanguis Draconis, Bloodstone, the Juice of Maddir taken out with Rose or
Plantane Water, Bole Armenick, Terra Sigillata, or sealed Earth, the Troches of
Amber, and the white Troches of Rhasis to one or two drams. Other Pouders are
hurtful, because they settle in the Liquor, and provoke the part to pain.

And it is better to infuse the aforesaid Pouders in Liquor, or in a Decoction,
and to give them strained.

While you give Clysters, you must give at the Mouth, Medicines of the same
Nature, and that oftener when the upper Guts are ulcerated, to which the
Clysters cannot reach.

If there be no Fever, you may profitably, when you intend to cleanse, give
Goats Milk; and when you intend to glurinate, Cows Milk, both with Sugar of
Roses. But Chalybeat Milk, that is, Steel infused, does knit or glutinate
better; three ounces thereof with Juice of Plantane, and Sugar of Roses, of
each one ounce, make an excellent Medicine. Or boil Comphry Roots in Steeled
Milk.

Or make Bread of the finest Barley with Yolks of Eggs, and set it into the
Oven after the Bread is drawn: Crum Milk and Sugar there with til it is as
thick as a Pultis; of which let him take five or six spoonfuls twice or thrice
in a day.

Veal broth boiled very long does assuage pain in the Ulcers.

And Cream of Rice does heal them up.

Lerius reports in his History, That many troubled with Dysenterles, in a long
voyage almost starved, and were cured with Rice boiled in Milk with Yolks of
Eggs, and Juice of Ground Ivy.

Also you may boil Rice in Almond Milk, in which Gold has been quenched.

Cream of Barley with Sugar does clese and cool.

Broth made of Burnet with Butter, given three days together morning and
evening, does much further the Cure, and the more if the Decoction of Burnet at
the same time be given for ordinary Drink.

The Rinds of two greenish Oranges boiled in eight pints of Water for ordinary
Drink, does half the Cure.

Of the Powder of a dead-mans Skul one dram twice or thrice given in Broth or
other convenient Liquor does quickly cure perfectly.

Two spoonfuls of the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth drawn with Rose Water or Gum
Arabic half a dram, may be dissolved in all his Broths; as also one spoonful of
the Gelly of Hartshorn is good.

After the Body is well Cleansed, give astringent Decoction to complete the Cure;
which must be made of the Roots of Snake-weed, Tormentil, Comfry, Plantane
Leaves, Yarrow, Shepherds-Purse, Horse-tail, Mouse-ear, Agrimony, Plantane and
Sorrel Seeds, Sumach, Grape-stones, Red Roses, etc. in Cystern Water;
dissolving therein the Syrup of Quinces, Myrtles, or of dried Roses, as also
sometimes Acacia Hypocistis, Conserve of Sloes, Bole Armenick, Spodium or burnt
Ivory.

The Juice of Quinces boiled to the consistence of a Syrup or Rob, without an
addition given a spoonful or two often is very profitable.

The like Juyces may be made of Pears, Cornel, or Dog-tree Berries, and other
sharp Fruits.

Take the Fat Guts of a Sheep, boil them till the Liquor come to half a
Porringer, then put a little sweet Oil thereto and let him drink it; if the
Dysentery be not very stubborn it cures it at the first or second draught.

Oil and Rose Water given in equal parts do the same.

Let two yolks of hard Eggs, and mixed with Rose Water, be taken with Sugar and
a little Nutmeg twice or thrice.

The Juice of Plantane only given, three or four ounces at a time, or mixed
with other proper things, is excellent; and if there be an inflammation it
allayeth it.

Hollerius says, That the Juice of Ground-lvy taken, has saved many a man's
life.

Juleps of Waters or Decoctions and Astringent Syrups are to be often given.

Syrup of Coral, as also the Tincture and Magistery thereof are very good,
which must be taken often in a spoon; Or these following,

Take of syrup of Grapes, Myriles, and of Juice of Plantane, Quinces, and dried
Roses, and syrup of the Juice of Purslain, of each one ounce: mix them for the
use aforesaid.

In the end of a Dysentery the suyce of Wormwood and Mints well purified, and
made into a Syrup with Sugar, is very available: For Mints mixed with Wormwood
has great force to strengthen the Stomach.

And it the Dysentery came by eating much Fruit, in the beginning Syrup of
Wormwood with Cinnamon or Treacle Water is excellent, if you at the same time
use Fomentations and Emplaisters to strengthen the Stomach.

A Quince made hollow and filled with the shavings of Virgins Wax, roasted
under the Embers, given for some few days together, is a most proper Remedy.

Quercetanus makes the same Medicine of pomum Curtipendulum made hollow and
filled with Gum Arabic and Wax, of each one dram, then roasted, and after'tis
eaten let him drink a draught of astringent Decoction.

Others roast a young Pidgeon stuffed with Wax, and give it for a dinner.

The use of Medlers, according to Forestus, cures old Dysenteries, lib. 22.
obs. 1. which we mentioned in Diarrhoca.

Bruyerinus, lib. 8. de recibaria, cap. 12. writes that he was Cured of a
desperate Dysentery by eating raw Service-berries, by the advice of an Old
Woman.

Nor let us omit the Oak Grape mentioned by Martin Ruland, which he says is
under the Earth upon the Roots of an Oak in Spring time, of a binding taste
outwardly like Purple, inwardly white and like Milk, which dies in Summer and
turns to a stick, and therefore must be dried in the shade, poudered in the
Spring: He says, That there is no more excellent Powder to stanch Blood and
Dysenteries than this. Also Encelius, Bauhinus, and Skenkius mention the same.

In every Flux of putrid Humors let the Guts be strengthened with bread twice
baked, first boiled in Vinegar and then dried; after it is twice or thrice thus
prepared, powder it, and thicken Broth therewith.

Also there are many Pouders for this: As,

Take of Snake-weea and Tormentil Roots, of each one dram: Red Coral and Pearl
prepared of each half a dram: make a Powder to be taken one dram at a time in
Broth, or the like: You may make it more Astringent with Red Roses, Myrtles,
Pomegranat Flowers, Harts-born burnt, or Ivory burnt, or Troches of Spodium: Or
for more Binding, with Sanguis Draconis, Acacia, Galls, Bole Armenick, sealed
Earth, Boodstone: And if you desire to glutinate, also ad Fleabane-seeds,
Starch, and Gum Tragacanth.

The Eastern Bole, given one dram in Broth, does cure the Dysentery if
sufficient Purging went before. Or,

Take Powder of Tragacanth one dram: Nutmegs, Coral prepared, of each half a
dram: mix them, and let it be given at twice or thrice with a rear Egg, or
Broth. Or,

Take of Gum Arabic one dram: Coral and Bole prepared, of each half a dram:
mix and use it as the former. Or,

Take of burnt Harts-born, Bole armonick, both Corals, all the Saunders and
Mastich, of each half a dram: Frankincense and Tragacanth, of each half a
scruple: mix them for a powder of which take half a dram often.

Forestus does highly Commend the following Powder,

Take of Citrin Myrobalans and Rhubarb a little parched, of each scruple: make
a Powder for one Dose.

Hercules Saxonia says, That al new Dysenteries are presently, and surely
Cured by this Powder:

Take of Cuttle-bone burnt two drams: sponge dipped in Pitch and burnt in a Pot,
and of Eggshels the inward skins taken away, of each one dram: make a Powder,
the Dose is one dram in a convenient Liquor.

The Powder of Elder-Berries is by Experience approved, it is prescribed by
Quercetanus in his Dispensatory, and there you may see the use of it.

You may give Opiates made after this manner,

Take of conserve of old Roses and Quinces, of each one ounce: conserve of
Comfry Roots half an ounce: Coral prepared one dram and an half: Crocus Martis,
Bole Armonick, sealed Earth and Plantane seeds, of each one dram: Spodium two
scruples: with syrup of dried Roses or Myrtles make an Opiate; of which give
the bigness of a Chessnut twice or thrice in a day; Or with an equal weight of
Sugar you may make a Compound to be used often.

Mycleta Nicolai is good for the same.

Crato wisely admonishes, That before the seventh day, before the Ulcers of
the Guts are well cleansed, you give no astringents at the mouth, nor externally,
but after the seventh day you may begin with gentle astringents.

Montanus does wholly forbid them, and uses only Clensers Asswagers of pain
and thickners: But when the matter of the Disease is well evacuated, the
weakness of the retentive Faculty by which the Flux is nourished, may be well
taken away with astringents.

Therefore it will be profitable, after sufficient Purging to give for many days
Bole, Terra Lemnia, powder of Elder-berries, or other astringents and dryers
with Sugar, till the patient be well: but if too much binding seem to hurt, you
must purge again, then bind and after purge; and you must observe that those
Earths do avail too ways, namely by Binding, and by Opposing the evil quality
which is in the Disease: And the Obstruction which is feared by their use is
taken away by Sugar mixed with them.

To allay Pain, and health the Ulcer, this Electuary is best.

Take of the mucilage of Quince-seeds, Comfry Roots, and Gum Tragacanth, all
extracted with Rose Water, of each one ounce: Starch one dram; Red Coral two
drams: Bole Armonick prepared one dram; Pomegranate Flowers half a dram: Rob,
or conserve of Services, or Quinces two ounces: Sugar of Roses one ounce: make
it like an Electuary: the Dose is two dram.

Narcoticks, or things that bring rest given at the mouth do wonders, for they
take away pain, stop the Flux, provoke sleep, and refresh the strength: but
they are better when they are mixed with Astringents and Strengthners. As,

Take of old conserve of Roses two drams: Laudarum three grains: Confectio
Alkermes, half a scruple: make a Bolus.

In a Malignant, and Epidemical, or Common Dysentery, Medicines of Bezoar and
Sudorifick, or Sweating Medicines, are powerful; for it is observed that by
these Remedies, that the matter has been discharged, and the Dysentery cured:
Therefore observe at first the nature of the Humor; for if it be Malignant, as
in a Common Epidemical Disease it is, you shall in vain try other Medicines,
except at the same time, and in the beginning you give Antidotes or Cordials.
Here you may use al things proper to a Malignant Fever: And besides those
things that provoke Sweat, as Bezoar and Aqua Theriacalis, or Treacle water;
Hartshorn, sealed Earth, Bole Armonick, Unicorns-horn, Coral, Amber, Scordium,
St. John's Wort, Plantane, Tormentil, Burnet, and many others are very good.

Outwardly to the whole Belly apply Oil of Quinces and Roses; or if you will have
it more astringent Oil of unripe Olives, or put the third part of Vinegar to
them, and boil them to the Consumption of the Vinegar: If the Stomach be
Affected also, add Oil of Mastich, and Wormwood.

After Anointing, Sprinkle the part with some Astringent powder, made of
Myrtles, Pomegranate peels, Galls, Cypress Nuts, Acron Cups, Red Roses,
Pomegranate flowers, Frankincense and Mastich; to which for the more binding,
ad Bole Armenick and Terra Sigillata, or Sealed Earth.

Of the same Pouders without the Oils, you may make an Ointment for the same
Use, with a little Wax: Or, You may use Unguentum Comitissae alone, or with
other Ointments.

The Cataplasm prescribed before for Diarrhoea, and this following, if you will
Bind strongly, may be used:

Take of Bole six drams: Frankincense six ounces: Sanguis Draconis, Mastich,
and Mummy, of each two drams: make a Powder, which you may apply to the Belly
beneath the Navel if you mix it with Vinegar and the white of an Egg and lay it
upon a Cloth. Or,

Take three ounces of Spiders Webs, and one white of an Egg well beaten: fry
them in a pan, and apply them hot to the Navil.

A Cataplasm of Treacle and sealed Earth to the Belly, is good in an Epidemical
or contagious Dysentery.

This following Cataplasm to strengthen the Liver, is much commended of
Solenander in every flux, both of the Liver, called Hepaticus, and in a
Dysentery, and old Diarrhoea. Nor must you fear Astringents, says he, because
they are tempered with things to strengthen the Liver.

Take of Liver-wort and Schaenanth, of each one handful: Indian Spike half a
pugil: Mastich, and Mace, of each half an ounce: Lignum Aloes three drams:
Myrobalans Chebs, and Emblicks parched, of each one ounce: Bole, sealed Earth,
and Boodstone, of each six drams: Coriander seeds prepared one ounce and an
haly: Spodium or burnt Ivory, two drams: Roses one ounce: the Species of three
Sanders without Camphire half an ounce: Rust of Iron prepared one ounce: Barley
flower two ounces: Oil of Mastich and Myrtles of each as much as is sufficient:
make an Emplaister to cover the whole Belly, from the Cartilage called
Ensiformis or Xiphoides, to the Os Pectinis, or the Bone at the bottom of the
Belly.

You may also make a Fomentation for the whole Belly of a Decoction of
astringent things made in Iron Water, with a little red Wine and Vinegar. Or,

Take of red Roses two handfuls: Wormwood and Mints, of each one handful:
Nutmeg and Cypress Roots, Mastich and Galangal* of each one dram: With a linen
cloth make a bag as big as the belly, which being warmed in red Wine, or
Vinegar, may be laid upon the belly. Or,

Take of Wormwood, Mints, Plantane, Oak Leaves, and tops of Brambles, Horstail,
and Knot-grass, of each one handful: Chamomel flowers two pugils: red Roses
half a handful: Myrtles one dram: Seeds of Sumach, Plantane, and Coriander, of
each six drams: Nutmegs three: make a Decoction in steeled Water, and red Wine
for to foment the Belly.

Rulandus does apply a bag of Bran boiled in Vinegar*

If the pain be great, apply a linen cloth wet in steeled Milk that is warm.

But if Fomentations will not Cure, you may use Waters to sit in called
Insessus. These are commended by Matthew de Gradi, Savanarola, and Jachinus,
who says that they are a great secret for the Cure of Children, for by their
actual heat they do drive the Humors somewhat toward the Skin; and by their
a^^ringent quality stop the flux. But you must not use them if the Body be very
full of evil Humors; or if the Dysentery be malignant, and joined with a
Fever. They are made of Oak buds, green Cypress Berries, green Pine-nuts, or
Leaves, Barks, and other such like boiled in Water, of the aforesaid Decoctions
for Fomentations.

You may make Fumigations that the Patient may receive the vapor of them
through a hollow Chair.

Especially a Decoction made of Mullein, and the Fume thereof received, is
commended in this Disease, and also for a Diarrhoea.

Faventinus commends a Fumigation made of Turpentine cast upon a hot Iron,
taken up into the Body twice a day.

And he commends also this Fomentation:

Take of Balm one pound: Mullein one handful: Put them in a long bag; boil it
well in red Wine and strong Vinegar, and apply it to the Fundament.

Rulandus uses a Decoction of Acorns in Vinegar for a Fomentation.

And Faventinus propounds this following Lotion as a secret to stop the
Dysentery:

Take of the dross of Iron, and filings of Steel, both prepared in Vinegar, of
each one pound: then boil them in two pints of very strong Vinegar to the
consumption of half. Let the Patient put his fee^ and his hands half an hour
every morning and evening therein.

In a long Disease, and when there are Ulcers in the Guts, Quicksilver is
good, if it be mixed with Ointment of Roses, and the belly anointed therewith.
As also the Clysters before mentioned for filthy Ulcers.

At the same time, you may give Milk, and Syrup of Myrtles.

Also one dram of true Balsom given in a Wafer does wonderfully heal al inward
Ulcers.

For asswaging pain, apply the Caul of a new killed Sheep to the belly, and
bind it on, especially to Children, and repeat it often.

If the Liver, Stomach, or Brain, cause this flux, you must use proper
Medicines to them, always making choice of those that do astringe and
strengthen.

For his ordinary Drink, give him Spring Water with Conserve of Roses, the
Tincture of Roses, a Decoction of Oaken Leaves, or Water wherein Terra
sigillata is infused, or wherein red hot Gold has been quenched with Syrup of
Quinces, Myrtles, or dried Roses. Or when there is no Fever use a weak
Decoction of Mastich with the Syrups aforesaid. According to Crato's Judgment,
you must not use any chaly beat or steeled Drink; for it does not astringe, as
commonly they suppose, but troubles the belly. Others commend the Decoction of
Gramen or Dogs Tooth, because* it is good to dry and divert by Urine.

Lastly, It Is worth the Observation, which Aetius speaks, Lib. 3. Cap. 8. and
Paulus, Lib. 1. Cap. 35. that old fluxes are dried up by Venery. Which
Hippocrates said formerly, 7. Epid* in the end: Excessive Venery does cure
fluxes of the belly. Amatus Lusitanus learned this Truth by Experience, Curat.
41. Cent* 2. One troubled with a Dysentery (says he) very violently, was
married, and the first night he lay with his Wife, was cured.

Let this be added for a Conclusion, which is related in the Cure of Diarrhoea,
out of Platerus in his Cure of the flux of the Hemorrhoids; Hot Blood of either
Man or Beast given in a Clyster, does wonderfully stop and cure the flux.

Chap. 7. Of Tenesmus.
TEnesmus, is a continual desire to go to stool, and voiding of nothing but
Slime or bloody Matter.

The immediate Cause of this Disease, is an Ulcer in the straight Gut called
Intestinum rectum; from which, Quittor or filthy Matter continually flows,
and stirs up the expulsive Faculty, by which means there is a continual
desire of going to stool. Moreover, there is voided a slimy Matter mixed with
blood, from the depravation of the Homoiosis (or quality that converts things
into its likeness) of the ulcerated part, because it cannot well concoct its
proper Nourishment, and make it like it self, but turns it into another slimy
substance; as we showed more at large in Dysenteries, and other Ulcers of the
Guts.

But in regard we said in the Chapter of Dysentery, That all the Intestines
might be ulcerated in that disease; thence it seems to follow, That the Ulcers
of the straight Gut called Rectum belong to a Dysentery. Yet Custom has so
prevailed, that when the Rectum is only hurt, it is called by the name of
Tenesmus: And because when other Guts are affected, if the Rectum suffer, there
is also Tenesmus or needing, although the disease be then called a Dysentery;
therefore Dysentery and Tenesmus are of the same Nature, and have the same
Cause, and differ only in respect of the part affected: And therefore we need
not repeat the Causes, because they are the same with those that produce a
Dysentery.

For the Knowledge of this Disease, there is no more required but to distinguish
it from a Dysentery, which you may learn from the definition. For in a
Tenesmus, there is a continual needing; but in a Dysentery it is by fits:
besides, in that, after great straining, there is voided only a little slime,
bloody or mattery; but in a Dysentery, both Excrements and Humors are
continually voided.

The Signs of the Causes are the same with a Dysentery.

As for the Prognostic, Celsus Lib. 4. Cap. 19. says that a Tenesmus is
easily cured, and that of it self it never kills any, yet Galen, 5. de usu
partium, cap. 4. reckons it among the chiefest Diseases of the Belly; and truly
it may very well be accounted grievous in respect of its troublesomness and long
continuance; yet it is not dangerous except it come of Melancholy, for then it
tends to a Cancer ulcerated: besides, it brings great inconveniences, as
Miscarriage or Abortion to Women. So Hipp. Aph. 27. Sect. 7. says, If a Woman
with Child have a Tenesmus, she will miscarry. For the continual straining at
stool does much disturb the Womb, which is so near to the straight Gut.
Besides, the same Muscles which serve to throw out the Excrements, are employed
for delivery; therefore when they daily compress the lower Belly, they cause
Abortion. Lastly, the Ulcers of the Rectum Intestinum being near the Anus or
Fundament, if they contitue long, turn to an incurable Fistula.

The Cure of a Tenesmus, little differs from the Cure of a Dysentery. And
therefore first, the sharp Humors that come from the Liver and other parts, are
to be purged with Medicines that leave an Astringent quality, as chiefly
Rhubarb, which must be so often given till the Humor seem to be spent.

If there be an Inflammation (which is chiefly known by a Fever) or if much
blood, you must open a Vein. And in case it continue after bleeding, and cause
a strangury or difficulty of Urine (as it often does) it is very good to open
the Hemorrhoids with Hors-leeches.

Also you must use asswaging Clysters when there is much pain; and clensing,
glutinating, and astringent, according as the Ulcer requires; the Forms
whereof are to be found in the Cure of Dysentery.

But in the use of Clysters, observe first, that you give them often, and in a
small quantity, only half a pint, because they will be hardly kept any time, by
reason of the continual needing. And the pipe must be warily conveyed in, lest
the pain be increased.

And you must diligently apply Fomentations, Insessions or Baths to sit in,
Fumigations, Suppositories, and Ointments.

You may make a Fomentation thus,

Take of Mullein and Wormwood, of each six handfuls: boil them in new Milk and
put them into two Bags, which apply to the Anus and whole belly one after
another very warm. Or,

Take of Chamomel Flowers, and Roses, of each one handful: Red Wine two Pints:
infuse them two hours upon hot Embers: Foment the Fundament as hot as can be
suffered with four times doubled clothes: After let the Patient sit upon a
sponge dipped and stra^ned from the same Liquor.

Or, Fill two Bags with Barley Bran and boil them in Vinegar: Let the Patient
sit one while upon one, another while upon another as hot as he can.

If he void much Blood, make the Fomentation thus,

Take of Mullein Leaves and Roots two handfuls: Red Roses one pugil:
Pomegranate peels, and Galls, of each half an ounce: boil them in two parts of
Iron-Water, and one of Red Wine for a Fomentation: which you may make stronger
if you ad half an ounce of Alum.

Insessus, or Baths to sit in to assuage Pain, are made of Emollients boiled in
Water, or Broth of Sheeps Heads and Feet, to which you may ad Violets,
Nightshade, Gourds, and Mellons sliced, but for healing of Ulcers you must make
them of Astringents aforementioned.

Fumigations are good to dry the Ulcer made of Frankincense burnt, or the
Decoction of Savin made in Oxycrate, or other things mentioned in the Cure of a
Dysentery, the Fume whereof must be taken sitting in a hollow Chair. But this
following is Commended by Forestus.

Take of Mastich one dram: Frankincense one scruple: Myrtles one dram and an
half: Red Roses two scruples: make a Powder for a Fumigation.

Suppositories are good in this Disease, they must be gentle and mild, least
they exasperate the part which is so sensible: They are fitly made of Goats
Suet cut into the form of a Suppository; for they appease the pain and heal the
Ulcer: but they will be better against Pain if you mix the seed finely poudered
of Poppies or Henbane, and tie them in a knot in Paper like a Suppository: But
far best if you instead of these things put three drops of the Oil pressed out
of these Seeds to every Suppository: or one grain of Opium dissolved in half a
scruple of Oil of sweet Almonds.

The Ulcer will be sooner healed, if you first dissolve the Suet, either alone,
or with white Starch, Gum Tragacanth beaten, and first steeped in Plantane
Water, or else with some Narcoticks: Or, thus,

Take of Gum Tragacanth as much as is sufficient, sprinkle it with Plantane
Water that it may only swel and not dissolve; then ad as much of the mucilage
of Fleabane seeds, or Quince seeds, and mix them with the white of an Egg
roasted; then with melted Wax make them into a Suppository: You may also ad
Narcoticks: as likewise to Cure the Vcer better, the Pouders of Ceruss, Tutty,
Bole, Pomegranate Flowers, and the like which dry without Acrimony, and
sharpness; And these must be very finely Poudered and sifted, least the Part be
Exasperated.

You may apply Oils and Ointments as in a Dysentery, to the Belly and
Fundament: As Ointment of Roses, Populeon, or of the Mucilages, of the whites
of Eggs, Oil of Roses, and the like, to take away Pain and Inflammation: and
other things that shall be mentioned in the Chapter of Haemorrhoids, or to Cure
the Ulcer, the white Ointment of Rhasis or Pompholygos, melted in Hydromel, or
in Honey and Water.

Lastly, In a more desperate Condition, use Narcoticks both inwardly and
outwardly; but three or four grains of Laudanum is best given with Mastich and
Terra Sigillata, or mixed in a Clyster made or a Decoction of the Flowers of
Chamomel.

Chap. 8. Of Fluxus Hepaticus, or Flux of the Liver.
A Flux of the Liver, is that in which serous and bloody Humors like water
wherein flesh has been washed, are voided

This Disease is produced from the Liver being weak and out of tune; by reason
whereof it cannot breed good blood, but turns the Chylous Matter into thin
and ferous blood, which because it is not fit to nourish, is sent by Nature
into the Intestines, from whence comes this flux of the Liver.

This weakness and disorder may come from any distemper: For by the excess of
any of the first qualities, the native heat, and its power to make blood, is
dejected. Yet this has a doubt rising from Experience, because we see often,
that great distempers of the Liver, and excess in the first qualities, do
produce other diseases, and not this. And again, this flux is many times
without the excess of the first qualities. That therefore the Nature of this
Disease may be declared, we must say with wise Varandaeus my Master, There is
something more than an ordinary distemper for producing of this disease. And it
is occult or hidden, consuming the radical moisture in the Liver, which also
destroys the Natural heat.

This evil disposition, and occult distemper may come by burning and swooning
Fevers by a hot distemper of the Bowels, which melts the Oily substance by
occult corruption, and corruption of Humors, by a great coldness from phlegm and
Melancholy abounding, which does oppress and corrupt the Natural heat; and it
may come by outward Causes, as great draughts of cold Water, Snow, or Ice,
extraordinary eating of raw Sallets, Poison, and Medicines that purge too
vehemently. By drinking of too much new Wine, salt, sharp, and peppered Meats,
and strong things which parch the substance of the Liver. To these you may add
al other Causes which by too much cooling or heating do dissolve the strength
and tone or order of the Liver.

Hitherto is declared a true and proper flux of the Liver which has this sign,
there are Liquid and ferous stools, like washings of flesh, from the weakness
of the Liver, which cannot sanguifie or make blood well, or from a malignant
distemper which spoileth the Natural heat and moisture.

There is also a bastard flux of the Liver, which comes of a simple distemper
without any fault of the radical moisture; by which distemper the faculty is
not hurt, but the work hindered, so that instead of pure blood, there comes
impure and corrupt, or the good turns into evil, when in a true of the Liver
there is never any good blood in the Liver.

The Blood is corrupted, either by the mixture of Choler, or Melancholy, or
some other impure Matter, or from its too long staying in the Liver, and the
parts adjacent, by which it is made thicker or burnt, or rotteth; or from the
fault of the Spleen, which does not suck away the drossie blood; and in this
bastard flux, sometimes thick, sometimes black, and sometimes blood is voided
mixed with Humors of diverse colors.

The signs of this Disease may be gathered from what has been said. For in a
true flux there appear moist stools like washings of flesh, which is not in
other bloody fluxes, if in a Dysentery at any time, it is seldom, and then
there is choler, phlegm, and excrements of diverse colors voided: and in a
Dysentery there is pain and torment of the belly, but in this none.

The Signs of the Causes are known by their proper Characters: For if the
weakness of the Liver come from a hot distemper, there went a burning and
consuming Fever before, or there is green vomits or stools, thirst, and a
Fever, foulness of Body, and want of appetite, and stinking Evacuations; but
if it come from a cold cause, the stools are less stinking, neither is there
thirst or consumption; the whole Body is colder and bluish.

Sometimes there comes a Fever from the putrefaction of Humors, which changes
the said symptoms; but you must examine the Causes before going, which will
declare both distempers. Also in this cold distemper the Patients desire much
strong Wine.

A moist and dry distemper are known by the contrary effects. A moist causes
more and oftener stools, very thin; but a dry, little and thicker stools, but
there is also great thirst.

Lastly, The external Causes are known by the relation of the Patient, and
those that are with him.

A bastard flux of the Liver has almost all signs of a Dysentery, only there
is no pain of the belly, nor pieces of flesh in the stools as in a Dysentery.

The Prognostic of this Disease uses to be evil and deadly; for when a
principal part is very ill, by consumption of the radical moisture, whose
reparation is scarce to be hoped for, we can expect for the most part nothing
but destruction, especially when the Disease comes of heat.

When this disease comes in Fevers, there presently follows a melting of the
Body, and great putrefaction, which presently kills the party: For in malignant
and pestilent Fevers the danger is increased according to the evil condition
of the Cause. But when this Disease comes of a cold distemper, it uses to last
longer, and turn into an incurable Dropsy.

Lastly, A bastard flux of the Liver, although it be dangerous, yet is it less
than a true, because it comes only from a simple distemper and evil disposition
of the Humors, the tone and strength of the Liver remaining sound, and may be
cured by taking away the Causes that defile the Blood*

The Cure of this Disease is wrought by Medicines that strengthen the Liver,
correct its distemper, and stay the flux. And because it comes oftenest of a
hot distemper, therefore we will first speak of the Cure of that distemper,
because it comes seldom of a cold Cause, and is to be cured as a Dropsy.

First therefore (although Evacuations seem to be needless by reason of the
greatn^ss of the flux) you may give Rhubarb either alone, or with Myrobalans,
as in the Cure of Dysentery, because it does strengthen the Liver, and the
rather if you sind any filth in the stools: for many Patients have been cured
by only one scruple of Rhubarb given many days together in Conserve of Roses.

Clysters are here of little worth, because the Liver is affected; yet sometimes
you may give one of chaly beat or steeled Milk, or of a gentle astringent
Decoction, lest the Guts should be too much relaxed.

But you may make Juleps to strengthen the Liver, and correct its distemper,
thus:

Take of Succory, Graminis (or Dogs Teeth) and Sorrel Roots, of each one ounce:
Endive, Succory, Plantane, and Dodder, of each one handful: Sea-wormwood half a
handful: red Sanders one dram and an half: the shavings of Ivory and Spodium,
of each two scruples: Cor^ander seeds prepared one dram: red Roses one pugil:
boil them to ^^e pint and an half; dissolve in the straining Syrup of Quinces,
and simple Syrup of Vinegar, of each two ounces: Make a Julep for four Doses to
be taken morning and evening. Or,

Take of Plantane Water four ounces: Syrup of dried Roses one ounce: Spirit of
Vitriol a^ much as will make it moderately sharp: make a Julep to be repeated
often.

He may also take of these Syrups following, often in a spoon:

Take of Syrup of Myrtles, Quinces, and dried Roses, of each one ounce: the
Syrup of Succ^^^ simple or compound with Rhubarb, one ounce and an half: mix
them.

There is an excellent Syrup made of the Tincture of Roses, made in Rose Water,
and with Sugar of Roses brought into a Syrup.

Also this following Powder given to the quantity of half a dram or a dram once
or twice in a day in a rear Egg, Broth, or other fit Liquor may be used with
profit.

Take of Plantane and So^rel seeds, of each one dram: Endive, Purslane, Dodder,
and Coriander seeds, of each one scruple: red Roses, and Troches of Spodium,
Gum Tragacanth torrefied, of each half a dram: the inward skins of Hens
Gizzards dried, half a scruple: make a very fine Powder.

Or the Lozenges made of the three Sanders, with a double quantity of Rhubarb
given to two drams at a time, are good to strengthen the Liver; as also this
following Opiate:

Take of Conserve of Succory Roots one ounce: Conserve of old Roses half an
ounce: the pulp of Currants six drams: Crocus Martis one dram: prepared Coral,
shavings of Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each one scruple: with the Syrup of dried
Roses make an Opiate, adding half a scruple of Spirit of Vitriol, of which let
him take the bigness of a Chestnut three hours before meat. You may also add the
Liver of a Wolf prepared, which is a specifical proper Medicine according to
diverse Authors.

Raisons of the Sun, because they are good for the Liver, are commended in this
disease, therefore you may eat them in great plenty with their stones: which
that they may be better taken, may be beaten first in a Marble Mortar.

Or make a Rob or Syrup of Raisons, boiling them in red Wine, if it be not too
hot, and then straining out the Juice, and boiling it again til it is thick:
which you may use alone, or in some of an Opiate, with these following:

Take of Currants half a pound, boil them to the thickness of a Pultis in old
Wine; pass them through a sieve, and mix with the straining, candied Citron
peels half an ounce: the powder of the three Sanders, and Diamargariton frigid,
of each one dram: Coral prepared, and red Roses of each four scruples: the
Liver of a Wolf prepared three drams: make an Opiate.

The Syrup of Coral is very excellent to strengthen the Liver, and stay the
flux thereof: but the Tincture thereof is far better: As also the Extract or
Magistery given in Plantane Water.

The Juice of young Nettle tops given either by it self to two ounces, or with
Water and Vinegar every morning for three days together, stops the flux, and
purifieth the corrupt blood.

But because in this Disease the Body is much consumed, a restoring distilled
Water that will also stay a flux, either must be given often by it self, or with
all other Drinks.

Take a fat Capon* and a Partridg, and pulling of the Feathers and the Guts
ou^* ^ill their Bellies with Succory, Agrimony, and Snails, of each one
handful: Conserve of Ro^es three ounces: Plantane and Coriander seeds prepared,
of each two drams: Citron Myrobalans one dram: Blood-wort half a handful: the
Troches of Amber and of Spodium, of each four scruples: the powder of the
Electuary de Gemmis (or precious Stones) the three Sanders, and D^amargariton
frigid, of each one dram: Sprinkle them all with astringent Wine, and putting
them into the bellies of the Fowls: boil them in a close vessel in four pints
of Water til half be consumed: then put them al into a glass Limbeck with three
ounces of good Wine; distill them in Balneo Mariae for the use aforesaid.

For Drink, let the Patient take the Tincture of Roses, or the Decoction of
Succory, and Dogstooth, with Syrup of Quinces, and some few drops of Spirit of
Vitriol.

Things made of Barley, Almonds, and Rice, are best in his Meats.

Outwardly to his Belly apply those things which were prescribed in the Cure of
Dysentery, with some things for the Liver, as Wormwood, Roses, all the Sanders,
Spodium or burnt Ivory, etc. Which anointings of the Belly must reach to the
region of the Liver.

You may al o apply the following Epitheme to the Liver:

Take of Endive and Succory, of each one handful: Dodder, and both sorts of
Wormwood, of each half a handful: red Roses one pugil: red Sanders one dram and
an half: Spodium two scruples: boil them to one pint and an half, and dissolve
in the straining two ounces of Rose Vinegar: boil them again gently, and make
an Epitheme.

Let the same part be anointed with the following Ointment:

Take of Cerat of Sanders two ounces: Oil of Quinces* and of Wormwood, of each
three drams. Mix them for a Liniment.

Lastly, If the Patient be troubled for want of sleep, as is usual, because
this kind of flux is most in the night, you must use Narcoticks, such as were
propounded for the former fluxes.

Chap. 9. Of the Worms.
ALthough Worms breed in diverse parts of the Body, yet because they are more
usual in the Gut than in other parts, therefore we will speak only of those.

By some it is questioned, to what kind of Disease that is preternatural the
Worms are to be referred? But we can take away al occasion of doubting, by
saying that after a diverse consideration they may refer to all kinds of
Diseases; for as they prick and pull the Guts, or obstruct them, and produce
other diseases, they may be said to be causes of diseases. But as they are
substances added to those which ought naturally to be contained in the Guts,
they are reckoned by Galen in the number of those Diseases which are in the
number increased wholly against Nature, as the stone also. And lastly, as they
are sent out preternaturally by the belly, or the mouth, they are to be
referred to the fault in Excretion, or sending forth.

Galen in his Comment upon the Aphorisms, Aph. 26. Sect. 3. propounds three
kinds of Worms: The round Worms, which are often bred in the Guts, and get
often up into the Stomach; the Ascarides, or little Worms like small thrids,
which use to lie in the inferior part of the thick Intestines, and over against
the Sphincter Muscle; and the broad Worms, called Fascia, because they are long
and broad like Childrens Swathing bands. This kind is more rare to be seen than
the rest, and a Physician shall scarce see them in his practice twice or thrice
in a year, yet there are great Controversies among Authors about them; some say
it is one Worm only; some that it is made of many united, which they call
Cucurbitinos, or Gourd Worms, and say that they are parts of the broad Worm;
others make a fourth kind, containing the Gourd Worms; but we do not intend
here to show their Reasons and several Experiences they have so much boasted
of: the curious Reader may search for his better satisfaction, Rondoletius,
Platerus, Sennertus, and many others.

Moreover, There is a great Controversy of the Causes of Worms: some say they
come of putrid heat, others from the Natural, others say that both concur for
the production of them.

The first say, That all Infects or Vermin come from corruption, according to
Aristotle. The second say, That putriu heat is strong, ^iery, and destructive,
and therefore is not fit to produce a live body. The third ^ort, to reconcile
the former, say that the Matter is disposed by the putrid heat to generate
Worms and the Natural heat does turn it so prepared into worms by way of
Concoction.

But this Reconciliation will not hold, because according to the axiom in
Physics it is the property of the same thing to dispose the matter and bring
in the form, and therefore the preparation of the matter, and the introduction
of the form, ought to be from the same agent; besides, Worms breed in Carcasses
where there is no native heat, we may say that the heat which is putrid, in
respect of the matter putrefying, is native in respect of the Worms, because
the natural and putredinal heat differ but in degree, but diverse degrees of
heat are required for the generation of diverse Creatures; and therefore heat
which is putrid in respect of us may be natural in respect of another Creature:
So the heat which is natural to a Lion, would cause Fevers in us; and by
consequence is putrefactive: Many fly to the heat of the Sun which is the
universal Cause of al generation; but we must always acknowledge a particular
Cause from whence the effect is immediately produced, by the Concurrence and
Cooperation of the universal Cause: but here is a greater difficulty, because
it is a common axiom or theoreme, That nothing can beget a thing more Noble
than it self; and therefore heat is not the chief agent in breeding of Worms
which are in the praedicament of substance, and heat is but an accident; and
whatsoever is spoken of the Sun, the form of a Worm is more Noble than the form
of the Sun, because it is the form of a living Creature; and that of the Sun is
Forma mixta, or the form of a mixed body only: This Doubt brings us into that
large and weighty Disputation of an Aequivocal Generation, in the Circuit
whereof very excellent Philosophers have Writ whole Volumns, to which we send
our Reade^, and chiefly to Fortunius Licetus his Book of the Spontaneous
Generation of Living Creatures: Let it ^uffice in this place to say that many
of their Opinions are brought to this, They believe Seeds of many things to be
in diverse Substances, which according to their diverse Changings, come to light;
even as the matter is more or less disposed by putrefaction, or other
alteration to receive this or that form: and the Seed which is more agreeable
to that Disposition is brought into act, and brings into the matter a form
proper to its self. This Opinion does not much differ from the old Philosophy,
which teaches, That Forms proceed from the power in the Matter: but they think
it safer to hide the Seeds of things in their Matter, which are truly
efficient, than to acknowledge only the power of the Matter, which has no
power to be an efficient, for we must find out some efficient with the power in
the ^atter which may raise a Form from it, or rather introduce, or bring a Form
into it.

The material Cause of Worms is commonly sweet Phlegm which grows putrid, by
which it gets a Disposition to be turned into Worms; but we think it no ways
necessary, that food which will breed Worms, should be first turned into Phlegm:
For Worms may breed of their immediately being putrified, as we see in Flesh,
^hee^e, Che^^nuts, Apples, Pears, Cherries, and other Fruits which bring forth
Worms by being putrified: So it is in our bodies, especially in Children which
are given to Glutt^ny and eat the aforesaid things, and take new commonly
before the old is Concocted. Hence is it that they putrify and breed Worms.

But let young Physicians observe this, It is daily observed in Practice, That
Sucking Children, that eat meat are most troubled with Worms, and because their
Stomachs are not able to digest it, therefore it is corruption and turned into
Worms; moreover, Milk is quickly digested in the Stomach, and presently sent to
the Guts; and if it has meat mixed with it which could not so suddenly be
digested, it will be sent into the intestines with the Milk, and therefore
corrupt and breed Worms. And observe, That Worms never breed of Milk only, so
that as often as you consider the Disease of an Infant, take notice, Whether it
have the Worms or no, which Women always proclaim and say al their Diseases
came from thence, as they ascribe all the Diseases of Women to the Mother; and
the Physician may certainly pronounce that the ^hild has not the Worms, if it
live only upon Milk, and have eat neither meat nor Broth: Galen ^^ his com.
aph. 26. sect. 3. taught this, saying, That in Children that Suck milk only no
Worms do breed; the Reason whereof is not plain. Many say, That in sucking
Children the Heat is not strong enough to breed Worms. And this is confirmed by
Galen in the place cited; where he says, That strong Heat is required for the
Generation of Worms; and thence he says it comes that Worms are more in Youth,
than Infancy; which also Hippocrates teaches in the Aphorism aforesaid; and
which he seems to gainsay in lib. 4. de morbis, where he says, That Worms
breed in Children before they are born; but these have not stronger heat than
they that suck: And Hippocrates gives another Reason why Children in the Womb
should have Worms, because their Excrements are retained; but when they are
born they do not breed Worms, because then their Excrements are not retained.
But this will not satisfy, because oftentimes in Children that Suck the
Excrements are retained, and yet they have no Worms while they live only upon
milk; therefore since the aforesaid Reasons do not content solid wits, we
expect the new Thoughts of Wise men touching this matter; and in the mean
while, we will briefly declare our Opinion, and leave to the Judgment of the
Learned: We say then, That Milk putrefying does grow sour, and then is unfit
for to breed Worms, but rather hinders them; for it is known that al sour
things do kill Worms: Hence it is that the Juice of Lemons is so ordinarily
given against them, and in ordinary drink a little Spirit of Vitriol to sharpen
it does wonders.

It is Commonly thought, That among the Material Causes of Worms, Sweet things
are the chief; which is to be doubted or, because it is confirmed by a Common
Axiom, That Sweet things do easily turn into Choler and Choler by its
bitterness does kill Worms: but we can easily answer this doubt thus; In
Chollerick Bodies, and such as are sharp with heat, sweet things do easily
breed Choler, because by over Concoction, they grow bitter, as we see daily in
artificial Concoction: but in other Constitutions that are not Chollerick,
sweet things do not breed Choler, but rather phlegm, when they are sent too
soon from the Stomach into the Guts, and so being crude, and only half
concocted, they putrify, and become a fit Matter to breed Worms.

But there is yet a difficulty concerning Sugar and Honey, which since they
have a substance not subject to Putrefaction, but rather that does preserve
other things from it, cannot breed Worms. This Reason convincing, we say that
Sugar and Honey will not breed Worms, because their substance is incorruptible;
but being once bred, they do feed and maintain them, because the Worms loving
sweet things, do stir themselves at the approach of Honey and Sugar, and get
into the Stomach, where they grow with speed; from whence those Symptoms do
arise which are proper to Worms.

The signs of Worms in the Guts are diverse; not all in all people alike. The
usual and most ordinary signs, A^^^inking Breath somewhat sour, as the women
call it, and stools like Cow dung, of a gray color like Potters Earth
dissolved. Other signs are less usual, as a continual Fever, which is often in
a day, more violent from the motion of the Worms, with heaviness, cold sweat
sometimes, and fainting, loathing, vomiting, and unquenchable thirst. The Pulse
is unequal, the Cheeks are by turns red or blew, the Eyes shine, the Nose
it^heth, the Teeth gnash, and sometimes chatter, there is a small dry Cough, much
Spittle: sometimes there is heaviness of head, and sleepiness; sometimes doting,
and Epileptick Convulsions. There is often a pain in the Belly, by gnawing,
sometimes by inflammation and distension or stretching forth like men in
dropsies: sometimes there is starting in the sleep, and some tremble, and rise
up, and fall asleep again; sometimes all the body pineth, and the Patient has a
Dogs Appetite, insatiable, which is most usual in the flat worms, which eat up
all the Food. Moreover, If Gourd Worms, called Cucurbitini, be voided, they are
a sign of flat. The Ascarides are known by the itching of the Anus, or
Fundament, and the Excrements are many times filled with them.

For a Conclusion, The consuming, putrefaction, and eating away of the Gums, is
to be reckoned among the signs of the Worms, which is confirmed by this
following Observation: A certain Boy was a long time troubled with eating away
of his Gums, many Medicines both internally and externally were applied, and
all in vain; at length he died:- The body being opened, there were found so
many Worms, that in some places the bowels were eaten through, and many were
found in the empty places of his Belly.

As for the Prognostic: Many Worms are worse than few, great than little. Many
times they are dangerous, and bring great Diseases; as a strong Fever by fits,
swooning, speechlessness, doting, epilepsie, chollick, and dogs appetite.

In the beginning of a disease, it is evil for Worms to come forth, either
alive or dead, especially if they come forth alone, and without dung; for when
they are alive, and come forth, they signify great crudity, or want of
nourishment; but dead, they signify great putrefaction, by which they are
killed.

Worms in the declining of a Disease, coming forth with the Excrements,
signify Health, if concoction appear; for it appears then, that Nature rules
and mastereth the Excrements.

The Cure of the Worms is by driving them out, because they are wholly against
Nature. And this is done by purging Medicines, which kill Worms, and evacuate
the Matter that breeds them.

Rhubarb is the best, which you may give in a Flux or Fever. But you must
first give things that kill them, or at least that drive them to the inferior
Intestines by things taken at the Mouth, or those things that draw them down by
Clysters.

The usual forms whereof, are these:

Take of Dogs-tooth, and Purslane Water, of each one ounce and an half: Syrup
of Lemmons one ounce: Confectio de Hyacintho one dram: the Powder against
Worms, one scruple. Make a Potion; give it presently, and then this Clyster:

Take of whole Barley, Bran, and red Roses, of each one pugil: Liquoris and
Raisons, scraped and stoned, of each half an ounce: Boil them to half a pint,
or three quarters of a pint: Dissolve in it strained, red Sugar one ounce, and
one Yolk of an Egg. Make a Clyster.

You may ad Cassia, or Diacatholicon, if you desire it stronger.

After those Medicines have been given once or twice, give this Potion:

Take of Rhubarb one dram: yellow Sanders half a scruple: infuse them in Water
of Dogstooth or Purslain, two or three ounces: strain them, and dissolve in it,
the powder of Rhubarb, and powder against the Worms, of each one scruple: Syrup
of Roses one ounce: Mix them for a Potion. Or,

Take of the powder of Rhubarb and Coralline, of each half a dram, more or
less, according to the age: Dogs-tooth Water two ounces: Syrup of Violets one
ounce. Make a Potion.

If the Fever be not great, two drams of Hiera Picra more or less, are to be
mixed in a Potion: for by its bitterness it kills and expeileth Worms
excellently.

If these things will not Cure them, use these following:

Take of Dogs-tooth, and Sorrel Water, of each one ounce: Endive, Succory,
Sorrel, and Purslane, of each one handful: the tops of St. John's Wort, Scordium
(or Water Germander) and Centaury the less, of each one pugi^^ Coralline three
drams: boil them to a pint; dissolve in the straining three ounces of Syrup of
Lemmons. Make a Julep for three or four Doses, to be taken twice in a day.

Take of the Ointment de Artanita, or (Soubread) three ounces: Quicksilver one
dram: mix them, and anoint the whole belly.

Then purge again, and often, till the body be cleansed.

And you may ad to the former Decoction, Senna, Agarick, Rhubarb, etc. and give
it but once in a day.

Rondoletius highly commends the Electuary Diacarthamum, as an excellent Remedy
to expel Worms, and to purge Phlegm and corrupted Chyle, of which worms breed
and are nourished; as also he commends the infusion of Agarick in Oxymel. Which
Remedies are proper, if there be no Fever.

But because often times the diseases of the worms in some Children cannot be
cured without much labor and time, there are many Remedies found out by
Authors, both internal and external.

Among the Internal, first we will treat of Pouders, whereof there are diverse
Forms in Authors.

The chief are these following; the dose whereof, is from one scruple to a
dram, according to the age of the Patient in some convenient Liquor.

Take of Worm-seed half an ounce, Coralline three drams: Hartshorn two drams.
Make a Powder. Or,

Take of Worm-seeds, Coralline, and Hartshorn burnt, of each equal parts. Or,

Take of Hiera simplex two drams: Worm-seed, Scordium, the lesser Centaury, and
Coralline, of each one dram. Make a Powder.

Take of Rhubarb and Agarick, of each one dram: Troches of Alhandal one
scruple: Diagridium half a scruple: Coralline and burnt Hartshorn, of each
half an ounce: Myrrh, Zedoary, and Tansie flowers, of each one scruple: Salt of
Wormwood and Tartar, of each half a dram. Make a fine Powder.

In the use of these Pouders, observe that they which are made of hot things,
are to be given seldom, and in small quantities to hot Natures, and in Fevers.

Women use to give to Children troubled with the worms, VVorm-seed made up
with Sugar, or mixed with Honey; which is an excellent Medicine, because the
worms desiring sweet things, take in the Honey, and withal the VVorm-seed,
whereby they are destroyed.

But because VVorm-seed is very hot, it may be made temperate by infusing it
two hours in Vinegar, and after mixing it with boiled Honey into the form of an
Opiate, which Amatus Lusitanus does praise as a principal Medicine against
Worms.

Burnt Hartshorn is commended by Forestus, given with Raisons, or otherwise,
and some have been cured with that alone. But it is chiefly good for them who
have the worms, and a flux withal. In which diseases coming together, he
commends also the Juice of Plantane, and the Decoction of Knot-grass given to
drink. To which may be added Topics applied to the Belly, partly astringent,
and partly having virtue to kill worms.

Women do use common Oil given with Wine, for that Oil stops the pores of the
Worms, and so choke them for want of breath, and Wine kills them by its
sharpness. But when there is a Fever, it is better to give Oil with the Juice
of Lemmons or Pomegranates; or which is better, Oil of bitter Almonds with the
said Juyces, or Orange flower water.

Stocherus in his Empirical Medicines, commends the Oil that is taken out of a
d^ied Hazel stick, if it be given but a drop or two at a time to a child; or to
a youth, three or four in a crum of Bread; For (says he) it does immediately
kill them, and cast them forth by stool; also by but touching of Worms or Lice
out of the Body, it kills them. The best Authors will have this Oil of Hazel
to be the Oleum Heraclinum, by which Martin Ruland did cure Children of the
Worms in a moment, by anointing only their Lips and Navils, as you may see in
his Centuries.

But we have found by Experience that the Oil of Juniper given but a drop at a
time in Broth, to be excellent for children so troubled, if they have not a
Fever.

But Quicksilver would exceed all, if we durst give it in wardly; which great
Doctors say may be done. Some of whom I will mention, so that they who please to
try it, may have Authority for it.

Mathiolus in his fourth Epistle to Stephanus Laureus, the Emperors Physician,
says, Because Quicksilver (as Dioscorides says) does no otherwise kill, but
by tearing the Guts with its great weight: we fear not that it will do it in a
small quantity, especially because its weight and roundness will easily carry it
through the Body. Therefore let us not wonder why Brassavolus that famous
Physician of our Age, has written that he gave Quicksilver to Children
without any inconvenience. And also a padua Physician used it with good
success, but never would tell us the way of giving and preparing of it. And I,
though I never gave it, have seen Midwives give a scruple, or half a dram to
Women that had hard labor, without inconvenience, and always with good
success. Thus Mathiolus.

Fallopius in his Tractate of the French Pox, Cap. 76. If (says he)
Quicksilver be drunk down, it does not so much as when it is used with an
Ointment; I have seen Women to cause Abortion take a pound thereof without
hurt. I give it to Children for the Worms, and it does bring no symptom, but
only kill the Worms.

Platerus in the Cure of the Worms, says the same; Give a drop or two, or half
a scruple of Quicksilver, and it kills the Worms, or makes them crawl out of
the Body, and it may be done without hurt, as we showed elsewhere.

Fabricius Hildanus in his 71. Observation, Cent. 2. says, of a woman troubled
with the Worms, sent to him by Gilbert Saracenus, thus: Having reckoned up many
Medicines to these (says he) I added the excellent Medicine of Quicksilver, a
dram and an half strained through Leather, and yet she was not freed of them.

John Baptista Zappata, in his Book of Women's Secrets, Chap. 5. tells many
famous Stories of the Cure of Worms by Quicksilver, when Aloes and Wormwood
would not do it. He shows two ways of giving it.

The first is this:

Take of Quicksilver one dram, but a scruple or two for little Children:
Benjamin half a scruple: four or five drops of Aqua vitae, mix them in a glass
mortar with a glass pestle; then put to it a little Conserve of Roses or
Violets for a Bolus, which let the Patient take in the morning by it self, or
with a little Bread.

The second way is this:

Take a little course Sugar, and three or four drops of Spring Water: mix them
in a glass mortar till they are like Honey: then put to it as much Quicksilver
as was aforesaid: mix them together, with six or seven drops of Oil of sweet
Almonds, which will keep the Quicksilver from coming again to its body: And
with a little Conserve of Roses, make a Bolus.

Baricellus in his Book called the Genial Garden, says thus: Quicksilver,
which some account poison, is safely given against worms, and it is accounted
so certain a Medicine in Spain, that the Women there give three grains thereof
to children which pewk up their milk. I cured a Widow which vomited nine days
together by reason of Worms, and scarce eat in three days, neither could
retain any thing she took; to whom I gave two scruples of Quicksilver, with a
little Conserve of Quinces, and she voided downwards above an hundred Worms,
and was cured the same day, and went about her business, to the great
admiration of her Parents, being formerly weak and lean. I have given it also
to others, and with good success always; and I keep continually at home,
Quicksilver infused Water, which Water I give to children for Worms; nor did I
ever receive any discredit thereby. Mathiolus used the same, Horatus Angenius,
and many other famous men, who all do extol the benefit of this Medicine. You
may give it to Children in substance, one scruple, and to youths two scruples
or a dram. It is mortified and corrected with red Sugar, in a glass, mortar,
wherein it must be so long stirred that it be invisible, and least it should
return to its former condition, you may add thereto two of the Oil of sweet
Almonds. Give it with Sugar of Roses Violets, or Quinces, fasting. Thus
Baricellus.

Sanctorius in meth. vitand. error. lib. 5. cap. 11. says, That except we use
strong Medicines to kill worms, as washed aloes, or a scruple of Quicksilver,
with a little Turpentine and Aloes made into a small Pill, we do nothing.

They who fear to use Quicksilver crude, may give it prepared, as Mercurius
dulcis, not only thrice, but six times calcined (for by often preparation the
malignity of it is abated) with some few grains of Diagridium, to carry it
sooner out of the Body, and expel both the Worms, and the Matter of which they
breed.

You must enlarge or diminish the quantity, according to the Age of the
Patient. As for example, to a Boy of eight or ten years old, it may be thus
given:

Take of Mercurius dulcis twelve grains: Diagridium six grains: Make Powder to
be given with a roasted Apple and Sugar, or the like.

For ordinary drink, the Water made of Quicksilver, which was formerly
mentioned, is very profitable, or that in which Quicksilver has been shaken
in a glass half full, for the space of one hour.

Also Water wherein melted Tin has been often quenched. But if you will
rather use Quick silver, it is better to let the Water boil with it, and so it
will be stronger.

Also Spring Water made sharp with some few drops of the Spirit of Virriol or
Sulphur, is of no less force. For sharp things do properly kill Worms, and the
Water is to be made more or less sharp according to the age of the Party.

The Decoction of Dog-tooth with Coriander seed prepared, is used vulgarly for
ordinary drink, mixed with Syrup of Lemons or of pomegranats; Or you may put
Sugar and a little Vinegar in the Decoction.

While the aforesaid Remedies are used, you must give Clysters often the whole
time of the Disease, first made of sweet things to attract and draw down the
Worms, as at first we said: which may be made not only of a Decoction of
Liquoris, Raisons, and Figs, but also of Chicken-broth and Sugar, and Honey of
Roses, or of Milk if there be no Fever, otherwise it will be easily Corrupted.

But if we conjecture that the Worms are already in the thick Guts, because
then they can scarcely ascend into thin Guts you may give Clysters to kill them,
made thus:

Take of Dog-Tooth Roots, one ounce: Beets, Mallows Pot Mercury, and Purslain,
of each half an handful: Coralline one pugil: Coriander seeds prepared. and
Wormseed, of each two drams: boil them in a Quart of Water, in one Pint of the
straining dissolve two ounces of Oil of Roses, Cassia newly drawn, six drams:
Hiera Picra, two drams: Honey of Violets one ounce: make a Clyster.

If you will have stronger,

Take of Gentian Roots one ounce: common Wormwood and Southernwood, of each one
handful: the lesser Centaury half an handful: Lup^nes half an ounce: Wormseed
two drams: make a Decoction: In as much of the straining as you think fit,
dissolve the Oil of Wormwood one ounce and an half: Salt one dram and an half:
^^ake a Clyster which must be repeated, and in the last that the Worms may be
brough forth after they are killed, d^ssolve of Benedicta Laxativa, and Hiera
Picra, of each three dram^, or half an ounce.

If there be a Flux of the Belly, give this following Clyster:

Take of Tormen^l Roots, and of Round Buth-wort, of each one ounce and and an
half: Pomegranate Peels and Myrcha ans, of each one ounce: Pease a small
handful: Myrtle berries one dram: Red Roses one pugil: make a Decoction and
dissolve in the straining of Oil of Mints or of Wormwood, one ounce: make a
Cryster.

Outwardly may diverse Topics be applied, not only those that were mentioned,
but these following.

Take of Gentian Roots one ounce: Birth-wort Roots six drams: Orange Peels one
ounce: Coloquintida one dram: burnt Hartshorn two drams: Saffron half a dram:
make a Powder, which mix with Oil of Wormwood, or Bitter Almonds, and with a
little Wax make an Unguent.

Also common Oil boiled with the Pulp of Coloquintida is powerful.

Also Oil of Wormwood, and St. John's Wort, must be applied to the whole Belly,
morning and evening.

Take of Oil of Wormwood, Mints, and bitter Almonds, of each half an ounce: the
Juice of Wormwood and Rue, of each two ounces: Tormentil, white Dittany, and
Zedoary, of each half a dram: Ox Gall three drams: Aloes one scruple: Powder
them, and with a little Wax make an Oynment: Or,

Take of Coloquintida six drams: Powder it, and with an Ox Gall lay it to the
Navel, by which both the Worms are killed, and the belly kept loose.

Take of Murrh seven drams: Mast ch eight ounces: Aloes eighteen ounces: common
Salt one pound: bruise them all and Distill them by a Retort with a gentle Fire,
and great diligence; first you will have a Water, than an Oil; with which if
you anoint the Navel of a Child, all putrefaction will be cleansed which is in
the Mysentery.

Also you may make a Cataplasm thus,

Take of the meal of Lupines two ounces: Myrrh and Aloes, of each two drams: Ox
Gall as much as is sitting: Oil of Wormwood two ounces: make a Cataplasm for
the Belly.

If a Looseness has Continued long, apply this following Cataplasm:

Take of Oil of Quinces and Wormwood, of each one ounce: the Juice of Purslain
extracted with Vinegar, one ounce and an half: Peaseflowr an ounce: Lupine
flowr half an ounce: Red Coral and burnt Hartshorn, of each three drams: mix
them together with as much Turpentine as will make a Cataplasm.

A Cataplasm also made of only Hiera Picra, is most powerful.

Sometimes you may use Fomentations, when there is a great stretching and
puffing up of the Belly.

Made thus:

Take of Wormwood, Southernwood, Tansie, Scordium, Mallows, and Violets, of
each one handful: beaten Lupines half an ounce: Centaury one pugil: boil them
in Vinegar and Water, and Foment the whole Belly hot therewith very often.

Finally, For Flat Worms and Ascarides, or Ars-Worms, Clysters made of bitter
things are good; to which you may ad the Purging things aforesaid, while the
filth of which they breed be purged away.

Chap.10. Of the Immoderate Flux of the Hoemorrhoids.
ALthough the moderate Flux of the Hoemorrhoids be healthful, and preserves a
man from many and grievous Diseases, as Hippocrates taught in epidemii, and in
his Aphorisms, as from a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs;
nephritis, or the Stone in the Kidneys; Madness, Melancholy, and innumerable
other: Yet the immoderate Flux is most dangerous, and brings other pernicious
Diseases, as Weakness of the whole Body, Coolness of the Bowels, and especially
of the Liver; an Atrophy or want of nourishment, an evil Habit, and Dropsy by
the loss of Natural Heat, by spending too much Blood which is the treasure of
Life, and the cheerisher of the whole Body.

And this Immoderate Flux has the same Causes which use to provoke other sorts
of Bleeding: namely, Blood offending in Quantity or Quality; when it offends
in Quantity, and is brought in great plenty to the Haemorrhoid Veins, it does
violently dilate them and open their Orifices, by the strength of the Expulsive
Faculty: but sometimes too much Blood coming thither, does oppress the Retentive
Faculty.

Hence it comes that she being Defective in her duty, there is a great Flux
which must be restrained by art.

But while Blood off ends in Quality, as sharpness, it stirs up the Expulsive
Faculty, to cast forth by those Veins not only the unprofitable but profitable
Blood, the Blood Causing this Flux is made sharper by a mixture of Choler, or
sharp Water.

This immoderate Flux is known by the loss of Strength, and a Sense of Weakness
coming from a long Flux and loss of Blood: As also from an evil yellowish
color of the whole Body, as if it were the Jaundice.

If the Disease come from Quantity of Blood, there went before Causes of
increase of Blood, and the Patient bears it well in the beginning, and is more
cheerful; but afterward the Flux continuing, he grows weak, and dejected.

But if it comes from sharpness and thinness of the Blood, there went before
Causes that breed cholet or sharp Water, the body is of a Chollerick
Constitution and burnt: the blood flows violently, and it is very red,
shining, and as it were flaming, when otherwise offending only in Quantity it
uses to be black and Melancholy.

The Prognostic is gathered easily from what has been said, when we reckon up
those grievous Diseases which come from this.

For the Cure, The Blood must be stanched, or moderated at least, which must be
done by Revulsives, Derivatives, Thickners, and Astringents.

And first, Phlebotomy is a Revulsive Remedy in every Flux of blood, therefore
in the Haemorrhoids thus flowing, draw blood from the Arm; and more plentifully
if there be signs of fullness and much has not been lost, otherwise take but
little, and at diverse times.

Also Frictions and Ligatures of the Superior parts do revel the blood, as also
Cupping Glasses applied to the Shoulders, Breasts, and Hypochondria, which for
the better Revulsion may have Scarrification in the Shoulders, but they must be
often applied to the places aforementioned.

Also a Gentle Purge does derive the Chollerick Humors which make the blood so
violent in the Guts; and this must be made of Purging things that have an
Astringent Quality, as Rhubarb, Myrobalans, and Tamarinds, such as were
prescribed against Vomiting of Blood: And Mercurialis teaches, That Tamarinds
have an especial power to stop this kind of bleeding, whether they be taken
boiled or in substance.

Also sharp French Pruens which are somewhat like Tamarinds being often eaten
before meat, are good: and their use is convenient to keep the body loose, and
if these will not suffice you may ad other things which were propounded for the
Cure of a Belly bound, because by use of Astringents the belly will be bound,
and by straining to discharge the Excrements that are hard, the Veins will be
more open and bleed more.

Afterward you must use those things that thicken the Blood, and astringe the
loose Veins, such as were prescribed for vomiting and spitting of blood, in
form of a Julep Powder, Opiate, and the rest; coming to Narcoticks, as is there
said, if great need require.

And besides those Remedies, the Pills of Bdellium are much commended by
Authors; which Rondeletius rejects, because the Apothecaries have not true
Bdellium, and use Mirrh instead thereof, which causes bleeding. But Solenander
opposes him, saying by Experience, that he has found these Pills make of
ordinary Bdellium, so clearly to produce their effect, that he will not doubt of
the composition. Except some should think that the Myrrh is made dull by drying
things, and astringents that are mixed therewith. To this we may add what
Bauderon in his Dispensatory, and other Modern Writers say, That we have true
Bdellium brought from India at this day, which is hard to be distinguished from
Myrrh.

The use of these Pills, is after this manner:

Take of Pills of Bdellium one dram: the Troches of Amber, and Terra sigillata,
of each one scruple* With the Mucilage of Quince seeds extracted with Rose
Water. Make a mass of Pills, of which let him take a scruple twice a day,
before Dinner and Supper.

At the same time you must use Topics made after diverse forms.

A Fomentation of Mullein boiled in Smiths Water, or astringent Wine, is
best; for that Plant is proper for the pain and bleeding of the Hemorrhoids.
But you must diligently observe in the use of Fomentations, that they be either
cold, or moderately hot.

A more compound Decoction may be made thus:

Take of Snakeweed Roots half a pound: Plantane, Mullein, Bramble and Oak buds,
of each two handfuls and an half: Sumach berries, Pomegranate flowers, green
Galls, and Pomegranate peels, of each one handful: Myrtles half a dram: red
Roses two pugils: Alum one ounce: boil these in three parts of Forge water,
and one of old red Wine, for a Fomentation.

Martin Ruland commends a Fomentation made of two bags, applied hot by times,
made of red cloth, and filled with beaten Acorns and Oak Leaves, and boiled
long in strong Vinegar.

Of the Decoction before mentioned, with a greater quantity of every Simple,
you may make a Bath to sit in, which the ^ick man must use somewhat cold, as is
said of a Fomentation.

Vnguentum Comitissae is very good, if you anoint the Back and Hemorrhoids
therewith: or you may make for the present this following:

Take of Oil of Roses, Olives, and Myrtles, of each two ounces: the Juice of
Plantane and Mullein, of each one ounce and an half: red Wine Vinegar one
ounce: boil them till the juyces are consumed: then add of Bole, Sanguis
Draconis, Frankincense, and dross of Iron finely poudered, of each one dram:
Wax as much as will make an Unguent.

Rondoletius approves rather of those Ointments which are made without Oil,
because they are more astringent* and they are thus made:

Take of the Juice of Plantane, Shepheards-purse, and Mullein, of each two
ounces: the simple Syrup of Vinegar three ounces: boil them gently; then add of
Bole, Terra sigillata, and Snakeweed Roots poudered, of each one dram and an
half: Sanguis Draconis one ounce: Ceruss washed two scruples: mix them into the
form of a Liniment.

If the Hemorrhoids be ulcerated, you may make this following:

Take of Oil of Roses two ounces: Frankincense and Aloes, of each one dram:
Sarcocol, Sanguis Draconis, and Bole, of each half a dram: Spodium, and Carabe,
of each one scruple: white Starch three drams: Juice of Plantane one ounce.
Make an Unguent.

The Fat of an Eel, which comes out when it is roasted, put to the Ointments,
makes them better by a proper Virtue.

Also you may with profit apply a Cataplasm to the said parts, made thus:

Take of Bole, Aloes, Mastich, Frankincense, and Sanguis Draconis, of each half
an ounce: the stones of Myrobalans, and Galls, of each one dram: mix them with
the white of an Egg, and Juice of Plantane. Make a Cataplasm.

Or the Hairs of an Hare burnt, and Spiders webs mixed with the white of an
Egg, will make a Cataplasm, which you must apply to the Vein where it is open,
if it appears, or put it gently in.

Suppositories are good for this use, because they are put up into the part.

The Form of them is,

Take of Colophony, and Frankincense, of each three drams. Bole half an ounce:
Ceruss and burnt Lead, of each one dram: Acacia half a dram: powder them
finely, and make them into a Suppository with Goats Suet.

Make Injections into the part by a Syringe of the Juice of Plantane, and other
things mentioned for a Fomentation. The blood of any Creature newly drawn, and
injected while it is hot, does wonderfully restrain any flux of blood from the
belly.

The Lungs of a Sheep being hot and bloody, being sat upon, have great power to
stop this Blood.

Also Fumigations made of the Decoctions of the Fomentations aforesaid, are
good for the same end. To which you may ad those things mentioned in a
Dysentery. As also this following:

Take of Frankincense, Aloes, Mastich, red Roses, Myrtles, and Wormwood, of
each half a dram: Troches of Carabe one dram and Make a grass Powder to be cast
upon the hot coals; and let the fume thereof be received in a large funnel by a
hollow chair, tying a wooden or silver pipe to the narrow hole, and putting it
into the Fundament.

A Fumigation made of Mullein is the best of all.

If you can apply Remedies to the Veins that bleed, it is best therefore that
they may appear And therefore let the Patient be laid upon a Table, and strain
as if he were at stool till they appear; using an Instrument if there be need.
And then apply the before mentioned Cataplasm of the Hair of an Hare and Spiders
Webs, or other very drying Remedies; Bole, Alum, or burnt Vitriol. Also to
touch the Vein with Oil of Vitriol, is good; or in extreme danger with Aqua
fortis.

Which things, if they prevail not, Hippocrates in his Book of Diet, in acute
Diseases, and of the Hemorrhoids, shows the way of tying, cutting, and burning
of them; which operation is out of fashion now, as being most painful and
perilous. Although Massaria says that he once saw it, the story whereof will
be prositable to be related; for by that you may learn the way of working, and
the event. The History is this: Frederick Corsicus of Vincentia, first had the
pain, then the immoderate flux of the Hemorrboids: And when he had in vain
tried many things, went to Padua; where the Physicians by a common consent,
concluded that the blood must be stopped. But when many means inwardly and
outwardly, were in vain used, in the end finding no Remedy, they concluded to
try this Manual Operation: But having no fit Chyrurgion, they sent for a
Neapolitan, who professed this Art, and he cut, tied, and burnt the Hemorrhoids
of Fabricius thus: First he bound him so that he could no ways move; then he
separates the Hemorrhoids from the Intestine; then with a Needle, he passes
throw, and seweth them, and tieth all about strongly: then cutting off the part
of the Vein which is above the sewing, he burns it with a hot Iron. It was a
painful Operation from the Ligature, Section, and Burning: So that Frederick
had a Fever, and great pain. But the Chyrurgion gave him a few Medicines by
which he was freed both from fever and pain in a few days to the admiration
of all men there, and recovered from bleeding. But it is not to be omitted, how
he being too confident, and neglecting bleeding and purging, which he stood
after in need of, keeping no orderly diet; the next year he was taken with a
pestilent Fever, and died. From whence we may observe the Precept of
Hippocrates, Aph. 12. Sect. 6. That one Hemorrhoid must be kept open. Except
the Patient, as Aetius observes, had rather prevent the danger that comes by
stopping of it by a good diet, exercise, bleeding, and purging.

But in an ordinary Cure by Medicines, you must consider the Liver and Spleen,
because the Meseraick Veins are inserted into them, especially if they be hot
or weak. And therefore not unprofitably do we apply Epithems, or cooling and
strengthening Ointments, such as we prescribed in the flux of the Liver, and
shall more at large be laid down in the hot distemper, and inflammation of those
parts. Sometimes the Obstruction of the Bowels, and Meseraick Veins do cause
this Disease; which are to be taken away for the Cure of the Patient. And we
have sometimes done it with Pills of Steel, which are prescribed in the
Obstruction of the Liver.

The whole time of Cure, let the Patient drink ordinarily Iron Water, or the
Decoction of Yarrow.

At the same time, above all things you must rectify the blood, which is the
chief cause of this flux. Therefore if it be sharp and Chollerick, it is often
to be corrected with the infusion of Rhubarb and Tamarinds. If it be hot and
thin, with thickening and cooling Medicines: if watery, with dryers: if much,
with a slender Diet. For it is vain to think of stopping of the blood, except
the original of the evil be first taken away. Which Solenander observed, Cons.
22. Sect. 4. in this following History. I remember (says he) that I had one
Ann, a Dukes Daughter, of a great flux of the Hemorrhoids; and because she was
far spent, I took much pains to stop the flux. But when I perceived that the
first day after they were stopped, she began to swel about the Heart. Being
sent for again, the seventh day I opened the Veins again; nor could I safely
stop them before I had given gentle Evacutions, and alte^^ng and strengthening
things for the Liver.

After you have cured the flux of the Hemorrhoids, you must prevent their
return: which is done by good Diet, and bleeding twice or thrice in a year, and
with an ordinary Purge of a Magistral Syrup, or other Medicine, with an issue
made in the Leg, and the like; which are to be altered according to the diverse
dispositions of Bodies. Moreover, Mineral Waters of Vitriol, Alum, and Iron,
are very convenient.

Fonseca commends the Decoction of the Mastich Tree, or the Infusion of it in
Wine, for a Prevention, thus made:

Take of the shavings of Mastich wood two ounces: infuse them in twelve Pints
of Wine twenty four hours in a warm place, then strain it and drink of it a
whole month for ordinary drink: for it has strength to stop the Haemorrhoids,
and strengthen the Stomach.

Chap. 11. Of the Pain of the Haemorrhoids.
THe Haemorrhoid Veins that are in the end of the Rectum Intestinum, or
straight Gut, sometimes do swel and cause very great pain.

This swelling comes of the same Cause with the Flux or bleeding of the
Haemorrhoids; namely, Of blood offending in Quantity or Quality, which if it
finds not away, and cannot open the ends of the Veins, there it settleth, and
by filling of the Veins causes a Tumor with Inflammation, and pain. The
principal Cause why Blood cannot get out of the Veins, is the thickness of it,
because it is Melancholy: for commonly the Hemorrhoid Veins, especially
internal, are said to receive Melancholy from the Spleen, and sometimes to
purge it forth.

Authors give many differences of Hemorrhoids, from their greatness, number,
figure, and place: whence some are called great, others little; some more, some
less; some are like Grapes, Mulberries, Warts, or Bladders; thence termed Uval,
Moral, Verrucal, or Vesical. Some are External, some Internal.

From these things the knowledge of them is easy; for from a Tumor in the
outside of the Fundament, from its greatness, color, and consistence, the
differences are known. And they are to be distinguished from other Diseases
which use to be in the Fundament, as Rhagades, Clefts; Condylomata, Swellings
with Inflammation; Thymi, Kernels; Fici, Piles, and the rest.

Rhagades are certain Ulcers like Clefts in the Hands and Lips, from vehement
cold. They have no likeness with the Hemorrhoids; but we will explain them with
the rest, although they are properly to be referred to external Diseases, that
you may with the knowledge of the Hemorrhoids know all diseases of the Fundament.

Condylomata are certain Tumors of the Skin, which being wrinkled, if it swel
by Humors, it is called Condyloma. It is distinguished from a Hemorrhoid,
because a Hemorrhoid is greater, black, and round in a Vein; but this is long,
of the same color, and not in the Veins.

Thymi are carnous swellings, which are not only in the Fundament, but
Privities of Men and Women, like Warts, and like the flowers of Thyme, from
whence they have their name. These are little, white, or reddish, without pain;
but the Hemorrhoids are greater, black, for the most part painful.

Fici are also fleshy Swellings, but greater than Thymi; also they are blew and
painful, and therefore more like Hemorrhoids: but they are distinguished from
them, because they are all flesh; but the Hemorrhoids show the Veins full, and
enlarged at the ends. Moreover, Fici for the most part ulcerate, and are
malignant, so that they are like a Cancer.

Those Caruncles, or pieces of flesh which grow in the Fundament, are like
these Fici, called Cristae, or Tufts, usual in Italy, but unusual among us,
because they come from an impure and unnatural Lechery: they look like the
Combs of Cocks, and thence they have their name: Because they are nothing like
the Hemorrhoids they need no distinction. But let this be for a Conclusion, All
the aforesaid Diseases are cured only by Chyrurgery, so that a peculiar way is
not to be laid down here.

As for the Prognostic, The Swelling Hemorrhoids, they are seldom dangerous;
but sometimes so inflamed, that you may fear a Gangrene; or else they extremely
torment the Patient.

Hemorrhoids, if they come to Suppuration, or an Ulcer, often times leave a
Fistula, which is many times incurable, by reason of the tenderness of the
part, and the great moisture which hinders the healing of it.

For the Cure hereof, first let blood in the Arm, and make a Revulsion from the
part affected. Which being sufficiently done, you may also open the Vein in the
Ancle for revulsion.

The same is done by Cupping of the Hypochondria for Revulsion, and the Hipps
for Derivation.

Strong Purges are not good in this case, because they draw the Humors to the
part, and increase the Tumor. But you must constantly keep the Body open,
because hard Excrements, and voided with straning, increase pain. An Infusion
of Cassia given morning and evening, is good for this, thus made:

Take of Lettice, Bugloss tops, Mallows, of each one handful: Liquoris scraped,
and Raisons sioned, of each half an ounce: Bugloss, Borrage, and Violet
flowers, of each one pugil. Boil them to eight ounces. In the straining infuse
Cassia new drawn one ounce; strain it, and clarify it; and then put thereto
one ounce of Syrup of Violets. Give it twice a day as aforesaid.

Sometimes to assuage the sharpness of the Humor you may give the Emulsions of
the cold Seeds, made with the aforesaid Decoction.

In the mean while, diverse Topics are to be used to appease pain, take away
Inflammation, and discuss the Humor. Or Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, and
which is better, the Oil of Peach Kernels, or Gourd Seeds, Poppy, or Henbane
Seeds.

Oil of Box-tree is best, because it is stupifying: And as it cures all
Toothache miraculously, so does it mitigate all other: and this, if you lay but
a drop with a little Lint upon the Hemorrhoids; or if you mix it with Lin-seed
Oil, in this proportion, that there be half an ounce of that, and one scruple
of Oil of Box.

Quercetan highly commends the Oil of Nuts in which Sows or Hog-lice have been
boiled. You may also boil Hog-lice in common Oil, and it will much assuage pain.

Plain Oil of Eggs, or made in a Leaden Mortar, does the same.

Diverse Liniments and Ointments may be prescribed for the same: Some whereof do
only appease pain; some discuss the Tumor, and dry; others heat the Ulcers. And
you may apply them with Lint.

Take one Yolk of an Egg; as much Oil of Roses, or Violets as will make a
Liniment: To which if you put Populeon, it will assuage pain better; and when
the pain is very violent, you may add a little Opium. Or,

Take of Hens Grease half an ounce: the pap of an Apple roasted in the Embers
one ounce: Saffron half a dram: Populeon half an ounce: With the Yolk of one
Egg make a Liniment. Or,

Take of Oil of Violets two ounces: Populeon half an ounce: With one whole Egg
make an Ointment: or let the white of an Egg be beaten with Breast-milk, and
applied to the part, with clouts dipped therein. Or,

Take of the Mucilage of Fleabane seeds two ounces: Oil of Violets three
ounces. Make a Liniment. Or,

Take of the Mucilage of Fleabane and Foenugreek seeds extracted with Wine, of
each two drams: Fresh Butter three ounces: Goats Suet one ounce. Mix them in a
Leaden Mortar for a Liniment.

Or Butter alone, set in a Leaden Mortar in the Sun till it wax black, is an
excellent Medicine.

Also fresh Pomatum is very Anodine.

Take of the Juice of Purslain and Honey, of each four ounces. Mix them in a
Leaden Mortar into the form of a Liniment.

Take of Unguent of Roses two ounces: Quicksilver two drams. Mix them into a
Liniment. Or,

Take of white Diachylon mollified with the Oil of Chamomel two ounces: Saffron
one scruple: Opium three grains. Make an Unguent.

Horstius much commends an Ointment made of wild Flax, with its flowers boiled
in Hogs grease. To which being strained, and a little cooled, you must add the
Yolk of an Egg, and apply it to the part with Lint. He says that it asswageth
these kind of pains miraculously, and that he had from John Wolf that famous
Physician of Hesse, who refused to discover it to his Prince, the Landgrave of
Hesse, till he promised him every year a fatted Ox.

These Liniments following are good to discuss the Tumor, and assuage pain.

Take Leeks and roast them in a wet cloth in the embers, and beat them with
fresh Butter, and they will take away pain and swelling.

A red Onion does the same boiled with the pap of a Lilly, and beaten with Oil
of Myrtles.

Take the Oil of Peach Kernels, and bitter Almonds, of each two ounces: Liquid
Storax and Bdellium, of each two drams. Dissolve them in Oleo, and mix them for
a Liniment.

The Balsom of Sulphur made of the Flower of Brimstone, and Spirit of
Turpentine, is good to assuage pain and swelling, and to cleanse the Ulcers of
those parts. And better, if instead of Oil of Turpentine you use the Oil of St,
John's Wort, and of Eggs. Also when there is great swelling with Inflammation,
you may use Oil of Roses, or of Violets instead of the Oils aforesaid.

Also Cataplasms are good for the same purpose. Of which the most common for
taking away all pains, is that of white Bread and Milk boiled, adding Oil of
Roses, and Yolks of Eggs.

Aquapendens commends a Cataplasm of Plantane, Pellitory of the wall, and
Mallows boiled in Water, and after with Oil of Roses; to which, when he would
have it more drying, he adds Barley Meal, and Millet Meal: And if the pain be
great, he makes it of Milk. He commends also the Cataplasm of Leek Heads,
boiled in Common Oil or Oil of Myrtles, or made of Pilewort boiled in Water.

Green Elder Leaves boiled to slime in Water, and then spread upon a cloth as
big as the Palm of your Hand, and applied hot to the Patient lying upon his
Belly; if it be often renewed for many hours, and the part first anointed with
common Oil, or the Decoction of the same, is very excellent.

The Leaves also of Elder stamped and applied cold, do take away the pain the
third dressing.

Also Purslain stamped and applied, asswageth pain and swelling, heats the
Ulcers, and consumes proud flesh.

A white Onion roasted in the Embers, and made with fresh Butter into a
Cataplasm, does assuage pain, and discuss the Tumor.

Let Fomentations be applied to the part to take away pain, made of the
Decoction of Mullein, Mallows, Holyhocks, Pellitory, Lin-seed, Foenugreek seed,
Marshmallows, Chamomel flowers, and Dill boiled in Milk, or in the want of
Milk, in Water and Oil, or Tripe Broth.

You may make a Bath with a greater quantity of the same Ingredients.

Cold Water alone, is a good Fomentation, and a Bath also. But in Winter warm
it.

Also foment in Rose Water in which Salt of Lead has been dissolved,
especially if the part be inflamed.

To take away swelling, it is good to foment with red Wine wherein Alum is
boiled.

Polypody of the Oak, and St. John's Wort boiled in equal parts of Wine and
Water, does sensibly abate the swelling of the Hemorrhoids, if the Decoction be
squeezed in by degrees with a sponge, the Waters of hot Baths applied with
Spunges, or to sit in, are also good.

Aquapendens applies a Sponge dipped in Time Water and squeezed, and after
bound upon the part; a Fumigation of the aforesaid Decoction while it is hot,
or of Mullein boiled in Milk with Rye Flower, does also appease pain. Or,

Take of Housleek two handfuls: boil them in white Wine, and let the Patient
receive the Fume through an hollow Chair.

To consume and dry up the Piles, a Fumigation made of the Powder of Darnel,
Mullein, Pilewort, cast upon hot coals, is good, and better if you mix
Brimstone therewith. Also it is made of Brimstone only, which taken in with a
Funnel, dries up the blind Hemorrhoids. Also a Fumigation made of a Fire-stone
quenched in Vinegar.

And this following Injection is marvelous good for the same, if often used.

Take of Juice of Plantane, and Oil of Violets, of each four ounces: Natural
Balsom half an ounce. Make an Injection into the Anus.

Amatus Lusitanus in the 91. Cure, Cent. 2. does praise this following
Suppository, in these words: A Roman Lady which lived at St. Angelo's Bridge,
having her Womb forth, complained also of the pain of the Hemorrhoids: And
after we had used many choice Medicines, by which she received no benefit, we
gave her a Suppository of Goats Suet and Opium, by which she was cured
perfectly. But we washed the part afterward with strengthening things warm, as
ought to be after stupefying Medicines have been applied.

The same Amatus, Curat. 6. Cent. 3. commends this following Topic in these
words: A Reverend man was grievously troubled with the Hemorrhoids; and after
diverse means used by Physicians, was cured by us with this Medicine immediately.

Take an Orange, and make it hollow, and fill it with Oil of Roses, and of
Spike: then roast it, and apply it hot, repeated often, it is wonderful.

The Lungs of a Goat are used commonly, applied hot to the part, or some slices
made hot between two Dishes with a little Water, to assuage pain.

Both the aforesaid Ealsom of Sulphur, and these following Ointments, are good
for the Piles ulcerated.

Take of new Oil of Eggs two ounces: Stir them in a Leaden Mortar, and apply
them.

Take four ounces of Oil of Roses, and one ounce of Ceruss: With half an ounce
of Litharge, and six drams of new Wax, and four grains of Opium. Make an
Ointment. Or,

Take of Frankincense, Myrrh, and Saffron, of each one dram: Opium two grains:
One Yolk of an Egg; Oil of Roses, and Mucilage of Fleabane seeds, of each as
much as will make an Ointment.

If they will not easily be dissolved, you must open them after convenient
Revulsions, rubbing them with a rough cloth dipped in the Juice of Onions, in
which there was dissolved one dram of Aloes. This is Hartmans Secret. But they
are soon opened, and with less pain, with a Penknife, or Hors-leeches.

Some special things are taken by the Mouth to assuage pain, and consume the
Hemorrhoids. The chief are these:

The Decoction of Yarrow taken three days as ordinary Drink, and the seed of
three Leaved Grass given many days together with the Yolk of an Egg, is also
excellent.

The Powder of Mullein given in Milk, or otherwise, is much approved against
the Swelling of the Piles.

The Powder of Yarrow and Tormentil, are commended to do the same.

The Juice of Mullein by its self, or mixed with Sugar of Roses, or Penedies;
or made into a Syrup with Sugar, is also excellent.

Finally, Pills of Bdellium taken often, do consume the Piles, and take away
the cause of them insensibly.

An Issue made in the Leg, is very good for them who are subject to this
Disease.

The End of the Tenth Book.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Liver.
The PREFACE.
THe Liver (as other parts) is subject to all kind of Diseases: For as it is
compounded of similarly parts it has diverse distempers, and as it is an
organical part, it is Affected with Tumors and stoppages, as also with solution
of Continuity, which is Wounds and Ulcers. And although the Dropsy be in the
whole Abdomen or Belly, as in an Ascites or Tympanites; or in the whole Body, as
in Anasarca: yet the Original thereof for the most part is from the Liver. We
intend here only to show the chief Diseases which are most ordinary, and we
shall Comprehend them in Six Chapters: The first whereof is concerning the Hot
distemper of the Liver: The second of the Inflammation, Ulcer, and Imposthume of
the Liver: The third of Obstruction of the Liver: The fourth of the Jaundice:
The fifth of Scirrhus: The sixth of the Dropsy.

Chap. 1. Of the Hot Distemper of the Liver.
MAny men have a Hot Distemper of their Liver, from their Birth; of which here
we shall not treat, but only of that preternatural Disease which manifestly
hinders the Actions of the Liver.

This Distemper is either Simple, or Compound; either with Matter, or without;
but for the most part it has Matter joined with it, because a Hot Distemper of
the Liver uses to produce Hot and Chollerick Humors.

The Causes of this Distemper are Hot Weather, immoderate Exercise, much Anger,
and other great Passions of the Mind, and especially hot nourishment, and
Physic, or things Spiced, a pure and strong Wine drunken plentifully: To these
you may ad the Heat of the Part adjacent as in strong Fevers, the Liver waxes
Hot from the heat of the Heart.

The Signs of a Hot Distemper of the Liver, are Loathing of Meat, especially
Flesh; Thirst, binding of the Belly, vehement heat in the whole body, especially
in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet; leanness of the whole body, the
Patient is worse for hot things, and better for cold: and if there be plenty of
hot Humors, there will sometimes be Vomiting and purging of Choler; there is a
bitterness in the mouth, and for the most part a Fever.

As to the Prognostic, A Hot Distemper of the Liver is not very dangerous,
because it is not much contrary to the Constitution of the Liver, but it uses
to be the Cause of many Diseases not only of the Liver, but also of other
parts: It is hard of Cure, especially when the Stomach is cold, as often it is;
for those things which are given to Cool the Liver hurt the Stomach and enlarge
its Distemper.

The Cure consists altogether in the correction of the Distemper by cooling
Medicines, and by the Evacuation of the Chollerick humors which comes from the
Liver, increasing the Distemper, and that Distemper it, and is the Cause of
other Diseases.

And first, Opening of a Vein does much cool the Liver, takes away some of the
Choler, and opens the Obstructions which comes from Choler; therefore you
must open the Liver Vein of the Right Arm, and let such a quantity of blood as
is agreeable to the fullness and strength of the Patient, either at once, or
diverse times, according to the greatness of the Disease and the continuance of
it, and that after a Clyster or Laxative Medicine has been administered.

Then you must give a Medicine which does gently Purge Choler, and Repeat it
often at distance; or an Apozem for diverse Doses; or the Magistral Syrup, or
Syrup of Succory, Compound with a fourfold proportion of Rhubarb which is most
convenient, because it does innocently purge the Chollerick Humors, cools the
Liver, strengthens it, and opens Obstructions.

The Forms of these Medicines, are these that follow:

Take of cleansed Senna and Tamarinds, of each half an ounce: Annis seeds one
dram: Succory and Sorrel, of each one handful: scraped Liquoris three drams:
the three Cordial Flowers, of each half a pugil: boil them to three ounces: and
dissolve in the straining, of Rhubarb infused with a little Lavender Spike in
Succory Water, one dram and an half: double Catholicon three drams: syrup of
Roses one ounce: make a Potion, give it in the morning with due custody.

For the finer sort of People you may make Clarified Potions which are lately
invented, which are in form of a Julep, but somewhat unpleasant to the taste,
and in them there is prescribed a double quantity of Purging Medicines because
the much strength of them is lost in the Clarifying, so that they do seldom
work upon strong bodies; especially in a dry Country where the Humors are less
flowing and not so obedient to purges; but in moist Countries, these kind of
Medicines work succesfully.

This following is an Example of Clarified Potions.

Take of clean Senna one ounce: Annis seeds one dram: Succory Leaves and
Maidenhair, of each one handful: scraped Liquoris half an ounce: boil them to
ten ounces, and infuse in the straining two drams of Rhubarb: Cassia new drawn,
and double Catholicon, of each one ounce: bruised Tamarinds half an ounce:
Coriander seeds prepared one dram: syrup of Roses one ounce: strain them and
clarify them according to art: make a Potion.

An Apozeme to Purge Choler is thus made:

Take of Sorrel, Dogs-tooth, Succory, and Dock Roots of each one ounce: Endive,
Succory, Dandelion, and Maidenhair, of each one handful: of the Four great
seeds, of each three drams: scraped Liquoris one ounce: Succory, Bugloss and
Violet flowers, of each one pugil: clean Senna two drams: Tamarinds one ounce:
Mace, and Cloves, of each one dram: boil them to a Pint and a Quarter: in the
straining dissolve half an ounce of Rhubarb infused in the aforesaid Decoction
with a little Cinnamon, of compound syrup of Succory, and Roses solutive, of
each two ounces: make an Apozeme, clarify it, and aromatize it with two drams
of yellow Saunders, for four mornings draughts*

A Magistral Syrup may be made of the ingredients of the former Apozeme, with a
treble quantity of Purgers, and adding an equal proportion of Sugar to the
Decoction.

A Syrup made of Juyces is most used amongst us, it is of great power in
Chronical Diseases, which come from a Hot Distemper of the Liver, and from
yellow and burnt Choler: And it is made thus:

Take of the new made Juyces from their Faeces, of Endive, Succory, Sorrel,
Fumatory, Burrage, and Bugloss, of each three Pints: the Juice of sweet Apples
newly drawn and purified two Pints: fresh Polypody of the Oak, half a pound:
clean Senna eight ounces: Dodder of Thyme three ounces: Agarick newly
Trochiscated half an ounce: Mace and Cloves of each half a dram: infuse them,
and boil them according to art while there remains one Pint and an half of the
straining, in which dissolve of Rhubarb infused with a little Lavender in the
aforesaid Juyces and strained, one ounce: white Sugar one pound and an half:
make a Syrup well boiled, clarified, and aromatized with two drams of
Triasantalon: keep this syrup in a Glass: give two ounces at a time, or three,
twice or thrice every month with Chicken Broth wherein Endivs, Succory, and
Sorrel have been boiled; or in Whey.

These things following are excellent to cool the Liver. And first for ordinary
Drink, use the common Ptisan made of Barley Water and Liquoris, or with
Dog-tooth and Sorrel Roots. Or mix such a Decoction with Syrup of Lemmons, or
Maidenhair. Or they who are more dainty may take only the simple Spring Water,
mixed with the aforesaid Syrups. And if you desire to cool more, you may put as
much Spirit of Sulphur, or of Vitriol, as will make it a little sharp. And when
the heat is very vehement, you may give a dram of Lapis Prunellae therewith.
There is also made a most pleasant Drink of Conserve of Roses mixed with Spring
Water and strained: to which you may ad some drops of Spirit of Sulphur or
Vitriol to make it sharp and red like Wine.

You may also make a Tincture of Roses thus:

Take of red Roses dried one ounce: warm Water three pints: Spirit of Sulphur
or Vitriol one dram and an half: Infuse them three or four hours: add to it
being strained, three quarters of a pound of white Sugar. Keep it for your use.

The Alexandrine Julep for this purpose, is made thus:

Take of Spring Water one pint: Rose Water, Juice of Lemmons, and white Sugar,
of each four ounces: Boil them with a gentle fire till they are skinned.

These two last Remedies are used two ways, either for ordinary Drink, or as a
Julep twice or thrice in a day.

Also diverse Juleps to cool the Liver use to be prescribed; of which, the Forms
following may be Examples.

Take of Sorrel, Succory, Dog-tooth, and Dock Roots, of each one ounce: Endive,
Succory, Sorrel, and Maidenhair, of each one handful: Succory, Bugloss, and
Borrage Flowers, of each one pugil: boil them to a pint. In the straining
dissolve Syrup of Lemmons three ounces: ^^ake a clear Julep for three Doses, to
be taken twice in a day. If you will make it cooler, add a little Spirit of
Sulphur or Vitriol to every Dose to make it sharp. And to make it colder yet,
add a dram of Sal prunellae.

When Herbs are wanting, you may make a Julep of stilled Waters thus:

Take of Endive, Succory, and Sorrel Water, of each three ounces: Syrup of
Lemmons, and Pomegrantes, of each one ounce and an half: Make a Julep for three
Doses.

You may also make Juleps that are good and pleasant, of Juyces: an Example of
all which, may be this that follows:

Take of the Juice of sweet Apples newly drawn, and taken from the faeces, four
ounces: the juice of Lemmons three ounces: Rose Water two ounces: the Juice of
Pomegranates one ounce: white Sugar half a pound. Make a Julep for three Doses.

Instead of Juleps, Physic Broth may be made for the dainty folk, of the Herbs
aforesaid boiled with a Chicken. To which you may add one dram of Lapis
Prunellae, that it may cool the better; or make it sharp with some drops of
Spirit of Vitriol.

Blood of Succory and Germander, brought into a Syrup as follows, are good to
cleanse the blood, open obstructions, and cool the Liver.

Take of Succory Water made in Balneo Mariae, as much as you please: the Leaves
of Succory two parts: Germander one part: Steep them together, and digest them
in Balneo Mariae three days: then strain them, and add to the Liquor, fresh
Succory, and Germander: then digest them again three days; then strain them:
and let this way of Infusion be repeated eight or ten times. The Liquor will
turn red like blood, to which you must put as much Sugar, and make it into a
Syrup.

Besides, You may make Opiates and Tablets to cool the Liver, and strengthen
it, thus:

Take of Conserve of the Flowers of Succory, Violets, Water Lillies, and
Bugloss, of each one ounce: the powder of the three Sanders one dram and an
half. With Syrup of Lemmons make an Opiate to be taken often.

Take of the Lozenges of the three Sanders, with a double quantity of Rhubarb,
four ounces. Let him take every morning two hours before meat, one of the
weight of two drams.

Conserve of Hips of the Canker Rose, well cleansed, and boiled with Sugar into
the Form of a Marmalade, does powerfully cool the Liver, if the Patient takes
it instead of the former Opiate.

The Tincture of Coral, made with Juice of Lemmons does cool and strenthen the
Liver, if you give two spoonfuls thereof every day, or twice in a week at the
least.

A Bath of warm Water used often, does more powerfully and profitably cool and
moisten the Body than any other Remedy, especially in lean folk.

VVhey is good for the same, if it be used fifteen days, or more, together. It
is made best by boiling the Milk, and pouring in a little Vinegar or Juice of
Lemmons, and afterward straining it.

Amatus Lusitanus prepares it thus:

Take of Whey one pint: very sharp Syrup of Vinegar three ounces: Mix them, and
after a little boiling let it be taken as Mineral Waters, twice or thrice, and
then walk upon it. The Ancients took it five pints at a time.

Quercetan prepares it thus:

Take of Whey two pints: Juice of Lemmons two ounces: the new made Juice of
sweet Apples three ounces. Clarify them all together at the fire with the
white of an Egg, and put to them a little Sugar. When it is strained, take six
or eight ounces every morning, for fifteen or twenty days together.

And if the Body be lean and consumed, you may give Milk alone, especially if
it be of an Ass, for many days.

The Decoction of China prepared with the Juice of Lemmons, is also good for
this purpose, especially if there be Obstructions. It is made thus:

Take of China Roots sliced one ounce: Spring Water six pints: the Juice of
Lemmons three ounces: Steep them twenty four hours: then boil them till the
third part be consumed; then strain them through a Hippocras Bag, and let him
take six ounces thereof morning and evening, and mix it with Wine when he
pleases.

Lastly, Mineral Waters that have Vitriol, are good, because they open and cool.

If the Disease continue after all this, open the Hemorrhoids with Hors-leeches
once or twice in a month.

And also use outwardly Epithems and cooling Ointments to the Region of the
Liver.

Make Epithems of Sorrel, Succory, Rose, or Plantane Water, or of Vinegar and
Camphire: to which for the strengthening of the part, add a little Powder of
the three Sanders.

The Ointments are, Galens cooling Ointment, and the Cerat of Sanders.

Chap. 2. Of the Inflammation, Imposthume, and Ulcer of the Liver.
THe Inflammation of the Liver, is a hot Tumor arising from Blood, which is out
of its Vessels, and sent into the substance thereof.

And as the Blood is either pure, or mixed with other Humors, so does it
produce diverse kinds of Tumors. For if it be pure, it makes a true Phlegmon;
but if it be mixed with Choler, Phlegm, or Melancholy, it produces an
Erysipelous, Oedematous, or Schirrous Phlegmon. And if the said Humors
predominate over the Blood, there is a Phlegmonous Erysipelas, oedema, and
schirrus.

There is another difference in respect of the place in which the Inflammation
is; it is either in the gibbous part, or Cavity of the Liver. Which is thus to
be understood according to Galen, 5. de locis, aff. cap. 7. An Inflammation
cannot be in either part of the Liver distinct, so that the other shall be free,
because the flesh in the part is contained in all parts, and therefore when one
part suffers, the other also suffers in some measure.

Moreover, That which Galen taught 13. Meth. Cap. 14. is worth observation:
When the hollow part of the Liver is offended, it is necessary that the
Inflammation reach to the Veins of the Mesentery, which come from the Gate Vein.
And Experience teaches that they who have died of this Inflammation have had,
not only an Imposthume in the Liver, but also in the Mesentery.

We must also observe from Hippocrates, Aph. 45. Sect. 7. That an Imposthume
sometimes is only in the Membrane which covers the Liver, and sometimes in the
substance, or Parenchyma of it: For (says he) they who have a hot Liver
suppurated, if pure white quittor or matter flow from thence, do escape; for it
is contained in the Tunicle: But if it be like Lees of Oil, they die. Galen in
his Comment, says thus: They who have matter in the Tunicle of their Liver,
and the substance not suffering, do all escape: but they who are corrupted in
the very fleshy substance of the Liver, die; and there is good reason to be
given why they do.

The immediate Causes of this Disease are, too much Blood, or the boiling heat,
thinness, and sharpness of the same; or the motion and stirring of it in the
Veins; from whence by the aforesaid Causes, it is easily thrown into those
parts which are most fit to receive it. The Liver is most sit to receive blood
abounding when it is too hot, or has any pain, for heat and pain do attract,
or if it have any Natural or adventitious weakness: For all parts that are
burdened with any Humor, do disburden themselves upon the weakest. Among these
Causes you may reckon the obstruction of the Liver, by which the thick Humors
are retained, and are inflamed by a Preternatural heat.

The External Causes may be many, as too much heat of the body from immoderate
Exercise, the Sun, or fire: but Meats sharp and spiced, immoderate taking of
two much strong Wine, too much Letchery, Fear, a Stroke or Fall upon the Liver
side, also hot Medicines applied without reason thereto; as Fabricius Hildanus
reports of one who having a cold distemper of the Stomach had Emplaisters and
hot Ointments of Pepper, Cardamons, Oil of Cloves, and the like applied to him,
by which means the Inflammation of the Liver was increased: for the Liver
covers the Stomach, and the Medicines which are applied to the Stomach, do
first touch the Liver with their Virtue.

Cupping Glasses applied to the Region of the Liver will do the same, of which
Fabricius Hildanus brings an Example concerning one who bled at the Nose, to
whom he applied great Cupping Glasses upon the Region of the Liver which stayed
the blood; but a great Inflammation of the Liver followed.

The Signs of this Disease are many according to Galen and other Authors, which
we shall lay down severally, because many errors are committed in the discovery
thereof.

The First Sign is Heaviness in the right Hypochondrion which comes from the
Repletion and Distention of the Liver; because being of its own nature large
and very compact, if it be filled with much Humor it will grow very heavy: which
the Patient apprehends when he tur^eth from one side to the other.

The Second Sign is Pain, which sometimes is perceived in one place, sometimes in
two or three: in the Region of the Liver there is a weighty Pain; sometimes it
is very extending in the lower Ribs when the Inflammation reaches to the
Ligaments of the Liver which are fastened to the Ribs: sometimes the Pain is
communicated to the Throat, by the continuation of the Membranes, which have
consent with the Membrane which covers the Liver.

The Third Sign is a Fever, which is commonly at night, and is more or less
sharp according to the Humor offending: for in a Chollerick Inflammation it is
most burning; but in a Phlegmatic, gentle; and in a Sanguine Inflammation,
moderate between both.

The Fourth Sign is Difficulty of Breathing, because the Liver is tied to the
Diaphragma, or Midriff; and therefore by its weight forces it downwards, as
also presses it with greatness and swelling; so that both ways the free
motion of the Diaphragma is hindered.

The aforesaid Signs are Universal or proper to declare the Disease: there are
many other equivocal Signs, which also do much avail to the knowledge of the
Disease: As a dry Cough, a hard Pulse unequal, and like a Saw: the color of
the Tongue first red, and then black: great Loathing of meat: unquenchable
Thirst: vomiting of Choler, and sometimes of Phlegm: a pale Color of the whole
Body tending to the Jaundice, yellowish: red and flaming Urin, which is sharp:
when the Patient lies with his face upwards, he is more at ease than when he
lies on either side; because when he lies upon the right side the Liver is
pressed upon by the Stomach; when he lies upon the left, it is extended by its
own weight, hanging down; the Belly is bound, by reason of the Heat which
consumes all the moisture of the Chylus matter: Sometimes it is loose, namely,
when a great weakness of the Liver is joined with the inflammation; for then the
Excrements are sent forth moist like the Water wherein Flesh has been washed.

The Signs of the Differences are these; If the Gibbous or Unequal part of the
Liver be affected, there is a Tumor to be felt in the right Hypochondrion, and
it makes the figure of the Liver like a half Moon: there is great pain in the
Breathing, and it reaches to the right side of the Throat, so that it seems
to be pulled down: There is a greater Cough and Difficulty of Breathing, and
greater weight.

But if the Hollow part of the Liver be affected, the Tumor is not so easily
felt; but because as I have said, one part of the Liver cannot be inflamed, but
the other must also suffer; when the part is touched and pressed down, some
pain is perceived.

Moreover, Because this part lies upon the Stomach, there is a greater
loathing of Meat, vomiting, thirst, and looseness of the Belly, from the food
corrupted in the Stomach which is distempered by the neerness of the Liver to
it.

The Signs of the Causes are these,

If the Inflammation come from pure Blood, there is either a perfect Red or
duskish color in the face; the Pulse is great, soft, and waterish; the Urin is
red and thick; the Body is full of flesh: there is sweetness in the mouth, the
party is young and has fed high.

If Choler predominate, the Face is yellow, the Pulse swift, hard, and
unequal, the Urin thin and very yellow, sometimes flaming: the Body is lean and
thin: the Eyes hollow: the Mouth bitter: there is vomiting of Choler, and
Causes that bred Choler went before.

But because the Inflammation of the Muscles of the Abdomen or Belly is very
like the Inflammation of the Liver, there we must distinguish them by their
proper Signs.

In the Inflammation of the Muscles of the Abdomen, the skin is so extended that
if you lay hold of it you cannot move it; the humors of the straight Muscles
are long and over the whole belly comprehending the Navel: and the inflammation
of other Muscles is in the form of them. On the contrary, the Inflammation of
the Liver is in the shape of the part affected; and if you lay hold on the
Muscles, they yield and the Tumor is somewhat deeper.

Moreover, The color of the whole Body is of much concernment for the
distinguishing of these Diseases; for in the Inflammation of the Muscles, it is
fresh, and almost in its Natural condition; but in the Inflammation of the
Liver, it is pale, yellow, and like the Jaundice.

There is a famous Example of this in Galen, 5. de loc. aff. cap. 7. of one
Stesianus, who when he was judged by other Physicians to have an Imposthume in
the Liver; Galen being sent for, at the first view of his face, presently said
that there was none, and searching his Belly* he found it in the Abdomen: He
judged upon this ground, Because the Patient had not his face so discolored, as
uses to be in the Inflammation and Imposthume of the Liver.

The like Example is in Valeriola, Lib. 4. Obs. Cap. 5. of a certain Woman
which was thought by another Physician to have a Phlegmonous Tumor in the
Liver. But says he, When she sent for me* I judged it not to be so, but in the
Muscles. And a little after he says, When I first came, I touched the place,
and I found a long swelling in the right Hypochondria, down to the very Navel;
the Face was red, fresh, and of a Rosy color, mixed with white, continuing all
the time of the Disease in the same state; the Urine was very good, both in
color, and in respect of the things contained: From all which it appeared, that
not the Liver, but the Muscles over it were affected; for when the Liver is
affected, there is always a discoloring of the face. For Galen says, that he
knew many diseased in their Livers by their colors, Lib. 5. de loc. aff. cap.
7. for the color in such is commonly yellowish, white, and inclining sometimes
to green.

Moreover, It is troublesome to distinguish a Pleurisy from an Inflammation of
the Liver: as you may observe in Galen, 5. de loc. aff. cap. 7. in his History
of S^c^ilus the Physician, who was deceived in himself, supposing that he had a
Pleurisy; because he had a Fever, little and frequent breathing, a small
Cough, and a pain near the lower Ribs: but Galen by his stools, which were like
water wherein flesh had been washed, knew that his Liver was inflamed, for such
a flux does show that the Liver is greatly disordered. But this sign cannot
always distinguish a Pleurisy from an Inflammation of the Liver. For as Galen
teaches in the place cited, such kind of moist and bloody stools come only
when the Liver is inflamed, when it is also very weak, otherwise one sign of
the Liver inflamed is (by Galen) costiveness. Therefore when the Liver is not
weak, you must look for other signs, by which you may distinguish them.

If then the Inflammation be in the Pleura toward the right Hypochondria, the
pain will be vehement and pricking, the breath more difficult, there will be no
change of color, the Cough will be greater, and not dry, but commonly
(especially in the increase of the Disease) with bloody Spittle, somewhat at
least discolored; and lastly, the Pulse will be hard, and like a Saw: But in
the Inflammation of the Liver, the pain is less, joined with heaviness, the
color is yellowish, there is a dry Cough now and then, the Pulse is not so
hard; and lastly, there is a Tumor in the right Hypochondrion.

And if the Inflammation be in the Mesentery, the Tumor will appear beneath the
Region of the Liver, there will be no change of color in the Face, the stools
will be moist, in which at first there will be thin and unconcocted Matter,
afterward concocted, in those of whom there is hope of recovery.

The Prognostic of this Disease, is thus made:

Every Inflammation of the Liver is very dangerous, and for the most part
deadly. And if it does not kill presently, it ends in a Dropsy, or Atrophy, or
Consumption. All the hope of recovery is from the strength, as Galen, 10. meth.
cap. 5.

An Inflammation of the Gibbous or bunchy part of the Liver, is more dangerous
than that which is in the hollow part, by reason it is nearer the Heart, the
Midriff, and hollow Vein.

An Inflammation coming from Choler, is more dangerous than that which comes
of pure Blood, because then the Fever is stronger, and other symptoms greater.

The Hiccoughs in an Inflammation of the Liver are evil, Hipp. Aph. 17. Sect. 7.
For it shows the increase of the Inflammation, and malignity, which does by
consent disturb the Stomach.

A Looseness joined with an Inflammation of the Liver, is deadly, except the
Matter voided be concocted, and the flux be Critical.

If the Inflammation of the Liver cannot be discussed, as it seldom can, and if
the Faculty be strong, it turns into an Imposthume; otherwise it turns into a
Gangrene or Sphacelus. The Suppuration for the most part will be within twenty
days. And this Imposthume is very dangerous, and few escape thereof. But if it
be little, and only in one part of the Liver, and the matter white and even
which comes forth by Urine or Stool, they escape. Also a Tumor in the Unequal,
or outward part of the Liver, which appears in the Skin as it were movable, may
be opened with an actual Cautery* and if the Matter coming forth be pure and
white, they escape, for the Matter is contained in the Tunicle; but if it be
like Lees of Oil, they die.

After the Imposthume is broken, if the Putient live, there remains an Ulcer,
which is very troublesome to cure; and if it be not superficial, it causes a
Dropsy or Marasmus.

Also an Ulcer may be in the Liver from sharp Humors that corrode it,
especially if they be chollerick, and spread through the substance of the
Liver, which putrefying by degrees, get a malig^^nt and venomous quality.

The knowledge of this Ulcer, which comes from the sharpness of the Humors
without Inflammation before going, is difficult. But it may be known by some
signs. And first, there is an ulcerous pain in the right Hypochondrion, and the
Patient waxes lean; and if it be in the hollow part of the Liver, there are
stools with Pus or Matter, and sometimes with Blood, and pain of the Guts by
reason of the sharpness of the Humors, like a Dysentery, which is distinguished
from this Disease in this, Because there is a weight and pricking about the
Liver. And sometimes Authors have observed that pieces of the Liver have been
voided by stool. But if the Ulcer be in the gibbous or outward part, the Water
is Mattery without any distemper of the Reins or Bladder. There is a small
Fever in the increase of the Disease, which turns into an Hectic. The color
is yellow, and sometimes there are small pustuls which come from the adustion of
Humors in the Face. There is a loathing of Meat, and especially of flesh, a
stinking breath, and often fainting.

Concerning the Prognostic, It brings a lingering Hectic Fever.

And if the Ulcer be not small, superficial, and cured betimes, it is deadly.

Those Exulcerations of the Liver which follow Inflammations and Imposthumes,
are more dangerous than those that arise without them.

The Cure of the Inflammation of the Liver, is the same with that of the
Inflammation of the Stomach before mentioned, and chiefly in respect of
Phlebotomy, Purges and altering Remedies are to be given in the beginning of
the Disease.

You must also give often Clysters, such as were prescribed in the Inflammation
of the Stomach.

But afterward, cooling, clensing, and opening Juleps, such as were described
in the Chapter aforementioned, bewaring that they be not too sweet, for by
sweet things, the Liver being inflamed, grows larger, as Trullian teaches,
Lib. 4. Cap. 10.

Let his Drink be the Decoction of Barley, Dog-tooth, with a little Liquoris,
Syrup of Violets, or Maidenhair.

In the Decoction you may ad to the former Juleps, the Roots of Smallage and
Parsley, the Leaves of Agrimony, Maidenhair, etc.

And afterward Turpentine, washed Agrimony, or Parsley Water given twice or
thrice, takes away the relics of the Disease.

But if the Disease be stubborn, and last long, you must prescribe an Apozeme
of opening and loosening things, thus:

Take of the Roots of Smallage and Parsley, of each two ounces: new Polypody of
the Oak three ounces: the Leaves of Agrimony, Burnet, Ceterach, Maidenhair of
each one handful: Annis, Fennel, and Parsley seeds, of each one dram: Chamomel
and Violet flowers, of each one pugil: clean Senna one ounce: Boil them to a
pint and a Quarter. Dissolve in the straining Rhubarb infused with a little
Lavender in Succory Water, two drams: simple Syrup of Vinegar four ounces. Make
an Apozeme for four Doses, to be taken every other day.

Outwardly, many Topics are good to be used the whole time of the Disease. And
in the beginning, Epithems, Liniments, and cooling Plasters, such as stop
Fluxes, made thus:

Take of Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Plantane, and Rose Water, of each three
ounces: Vinegar of Roses one ounce: the powder of the Electuary of the three
Sanders, one dram and an half: Camphire half a scruple. Make an Epithem to be
applied warm to the Region of the Liver. Or,

Take of the Leaves of both Endive, Succory, Plantane, Bugloss, Burrage, and
Water-lilly flowers, of each one handful: Roman Wormwood half a handful: red
Roses two pugils: red and yellow Sanders, of each two drams: boil them to one
pint and an half. Dissolve in the straining half a pint of Rose Water, Rose
Vinegar one ounce; Camphire one scruple. Make an Epithem.

If you desire to cool more, you may ad the Juyces of the aforesaid Herbs.

Take of Oil of Roses two ounces: Oil of Wormwood half an ounce: mix them and
wash them with Oxycrate, and anoint the place therewith after the use of the
Epithem. Or,

Take of Oil of Roses, and of Myrtles, of each two ounces: the Juice of Endive
and Succory, of each one ounce: Vinegar half an ounce: boil them to the
Consumption of the Juyces: then add the powder of red Sanders, and Roses, of
each one dram: as much Wax as will make an Unguent.

Or you may use the Ointment of Roses alone, or Galens cooling Ointment washed
with Oxycrate.

In the progress of the Disease, when the Fever and pain decrease, you must
mix Dissolvers with Coolers, either in equal, or unequal proportion, as the
Disease grows nearer to the state or declination, these must be wisely
composed. But that you may know what to make them of, we will show you some
Examples.

Take of Oil of Roses two ounces: Oil of Wormwood one ounce: Oil of Chamomel
half an ounce: Powder of the three Sanders one dram: Spicknard half a dram:
Wax, as much as will make a Liniment.

Take of clean Dates ten: whole Raisons three ounces: boil them in Oxycrate;
then beat them with Chamomel, Melilot, and red Rose Flowers, of each one pugil:
Spicknard and Schoenanth, of each one dram: Smallage and Parsley seeds, of each
half a dram: End^ve and Purslain, of each one dram and an half: Oil of Wormwood
and Roses, of each one ounce: Barley meal two ounces. Make a Cataplasm.

Or you may make one not so hot, thus:

Take of Barley meal three ounces: red Sanders two ounces: Oil of Roses three
ounces. Mix them with the Decoction of Endive and Succory, for a Cataplasm.

In the declination, when the Fever is gone, you must use Dissolvers, with
Emollients, lest any hardness should remain, and some Astringents to strengthen
the part.

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots three ounces: Cypress Roots, and Calamus
Aromaticus, of each half an ounce: Mallows, Violets, and Agrimony, of each one
handful: both the Wormwoods, of each half a handful: Foenugreek, Annis, Fennel,
and Line seed, of each half an ounce: Chamomel, Melilot, and Dill slowers, of
each one pugil: Spicknard, Schoenanth, and Mastich, of each one dram and an
half. Make a Decoction of them, and foment the part affected with it, somewhat
hot.

Take of Oil of Chamomel, Lillies, and sweet Almonds, of each one ounce: Oil of
Wormwood and Spike, of each half an ounce: the Powder of Schoenanth, Rosata
Novella, and Wormwood, of each one dram: Wax so much as will make a Liniment to
be used in the declination of the Disease.

If the hardness of the part continue, it will be good to add to the former
Liniment, Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar. Or this Plaster:

Take of the Emplaister of Melilot and Diachylon with Flowerdeluce, of each one
ounce. Mix them, and spread them upon Leather, cut like a half ^Moon, to be
laid to the part. Or,

Take of Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar one ounce: Labdanum and Mastich,
of each two drams: Oil of Wormwood and Wax, of each as much as will make a
Plaster.

If the Inflammation tend to suppuration, which is known by increase of the
Fever, and the pain, according to Hipp. Aph. 47. Lib. 2. there is great
danger, and few escape in this case. Yet you must further the Suppuration with
the aforesaid Emplaisters, which will dissolve the Matter which will be
dissolved, and suppurate that which will be suppurated or ripened; as also with
mollifying Cataplasms, and you must give inwardly Chicken Broth wherein
Mallows, Marshmallows, Figgs, and Prunes have been boiled.

After the Imposthume is broken, if white Matter flow by stool or urine, you
must cleanse with Barley Water, or Whey with Honey of Roses, or with those
Remedies which are prescribed for the Cure of the Ulcer of the Stomach. But if
the Suppuration tend outwardly, you must open it with a red hot Incision Knife,
according to Hippocrates. And if the Matter come forth white and concocted,
there is hope of Cure; but if red, filthy, and stinking, the Patient is near
death.

Chap. 3. Of the Stoppage, or Obstruction of the Liver.
THe Obstruction of the Liver is a preternatural closing or straightness of the
Branches of the Vena Porta, and Cava, that is, of the Gate and Hollow Vein, and
sometimes of the substance of the Liver, hindering the passage of Natural
Humors, and the distribution of the Nourishment, coming from some Matter which
fills their Cavities.

Hence it is that Obstruction is an Organical Disease, namely, in the way and
passage obstructed, which hinders the distribution of Blood for the Nourishment
of the parts. These ways or passages are not only the Veins which are
dispersed through the whole substance of the Liver; but also the Pores and
insensible Passages, with which the whole substance of the Liver, and also of
other parts, is very full; which being shut up by a preternatural Humor;
neither can the heat of the Liver be cooled, nor can the thin vaporous
Excrements be evacuated.

The Matter that Causes the Obstructions, commonly is a gross Excrement,
viscous and clammy, which being not able to pass freely, sticks in the passage,
and is more and more thickened by the heat of the part, so that the longer
Obstructions continue, the worse they are.

Sometimes plenty of Humors cause an Obstruction, as Galen shows, 10. meth.
cap. 2. in there words, Of Obstructions some come of abundance of Humors, and
some from the Quality, as when they are gross or clammy; Blood letting is the
best Remedy against those which come from plenty, and the use of attenuating
things is best against those that come of Quality.

This Obstruction which comes from plenty of Humors, happens chiefly in the
Vessels and their cavities when being too full, they are so distended, that
they cannot contract themselve for the sending forth of the Matter contained:
As we may observe by the Bladder when it is stretched ou^ by long retention of
too much Urin, that it cannot contract it self; from whence there comes a
stoppage of Urin, or difficulty of voiding thereof.

Not only Humors, but also sometimes many gross Vapors, which cannot easily be
discussed (because the way is not open, as in the Chollick) may be the Cause of
Obstruction, as Galen teaches, 3. de loc. aff. which Causes are very rare, and
absolutely denied of some.

The Humors which stops with its thickness is chiefly Phlegm, which will
easily grow gross and clammy. Melancholy is next, which by its coldness,
thickness, and drossiness, may cause Obstructions: Also Blood may do the same
by its quantity and thickness: And lastly, Choler staying long in the Liver
grows thick, and breeds dangerous Obstructions. The Antecedent and Princ^pal
Causes, are al things that produce thick and clammy Humors, and thick and
cloudy Air, Meats of gross Juice, viscous, hard of Concoction, and
distribution, astringent, cold, and not fit for to be eaten, as Pears, quinces,
Services, Medlars, Mushrooms, Cheese, Pulse, Pease or Beans, Beef and Pork,
slymy Fish, and dried in the smoke, Bread not well baked, Rapes, Chessnuts,
thick, red, and astringent Wine, and muddy Ale.

Also an evil Disposition of the Liver, especially a cold distemper, which may
also produce Obstructions from good Juice, as when it does not well Concoct, but
turns the meat into a salt tartarous and mucilagnous or slymy Matter.

Also the Distemper of the Stomach may be a Cause of Obstructions, when it
begets too crude a Chyle, which cannot after be well ordered by the Liver,
because the sault of the first Concoction is not amended by the second.

The Signs of this Disease are to be divided into diverse sorts, some signify
the kind of the Disease, others the part affected, and others the cause that
produce it.

The Signs that show the kind of the Disease are common to al natural parts
that are subject to Obstructions: for they show only Obstructions lying in the
lower Belly, and these therefore will serve for the knowledge of the Obstructions
of the Spleen, and Mesentery especially.

These Signs show that there are Obstructions in the said parts,

The Excrements of the Belly being out of their natural condition, especially
when they are moist, white, chylous, or bloody: white Urine, thin and watery,
and as it were strained, because the thicker parts cannot pass through by
reason of the Obstructions, but only the pure water comes through unmixed; and
it may be yellow if there be heat.

Difficulty of Breathing, especially when the Patient walks fast, or goes up
a hill, or pair of stairs, because the parts obstructed do draw the Midriff
down-wards, and hinder its free motion; the Face is pale; there is leanness and
dullness over the whole body; the Pulse is unequal; and lastly, there is such a
sense of weight in the Hypochondria as they who have been feeding very hard;
Therefore Hippocrates, 4. de victus ratione in acut. calls that heavines a
fullness of the Hypochondria, attributing that Disease to the Hypochondria,
which properly belongs to the Stomach: for as often as the Spleen and Liver are
filled with evil Humors, and swel, they are pressed and feel a heaviness, after
the least eating of the lightest meats, as they who have over-gorged
themselves. This Sign does so surely declare the Obstruction of the
Hypochondria, although there be neither pain nor apparent swelling, that
Prosper Martianus in his Comment upon the aforesaid Book of Hippocrates,
assirmeth, That he has concluded that the Bowels were obstructed, before ever
he handled the Hypochondria.

The stretching of the right Hypochondrion shows the part affected, together
with the other signs, and sometimes pain, that is heavy and dull, which
increases after meat, especially if exercise immediately follow; sometimes a
dry Cough; difficulty of Breathing by reason of the neerness of the Diaphragma,
and a greater weight of that part than of any other.

The Signs of the Causes are if it come from Humors, the pain is more heavy,
extending and fixed: if from Wind, it is sharper and more moveable: if from
cold Humors, there is more sense of weight in the right side, the Face is more
pale; there is no Fever nor thirst; there was a cold and thick diet without
exercise that preceded: if it comes from hot Humors, there is less weight, more
thirst, the Face is yellow by reason of Choler, or red by reason of Blood,
there is a Fever and a pricking pain sometimes, and hot diet went before.

The Prognostic of this Disease is to be made thus,

A New Obstruction is easily taken away, an Old hardly.

An Obstruction of the Liver, except it be speedily and wholly taken away,
uses to bring many Evils, namely, Putrefaction of Humors, Fevers,
Inflammations, diverse Fluxes of the Belly, constant and vehement, because the
nourishment can pass to the parts: the Chollick, Jaundice, Evil Habit of body,
Dropsy, Scirrhus, and other infinite Diseases, so that Avicenna calls
Obstructions the Mother of Diseases.

An Obstruction made by Humors, is worse than that which comes of Wine.

That which comes of Crude and Phlegmatic Humors, or of Wind, is sometimes cured
by a Fever; because the Heat does discuss the Flatus, or Wind; makes Phlegm
thin, and more apt to flow.

The Cure of an Obstruction is to be begun with an universal Evacuation of the
whole body; by a Potion agreeable to the nature of the Disease: Afterward if
there be signs of Plethory or sulness, and if the body be not very thin, you
must draw blood out of the Liver Vein in the Right Arm.

Then prescribe this Apozeme,

Take of Smallage, Parsley, and Fennel Roots, infused a whole night in white
Wine, of each one ounce: the Roots of the greater Celandine, two ounces: Fearn
Roots, Elicampane barks, the Roots of Capars, the inward bark of an Ash, and
Tamarisk, of each half an ounce: Wormix ood, Agrimony, Maidenhair, Germander,
the tops of Saint John's Wort, and the Lesser Centaury, of each one handful:
Smallage, Parsley, annis, and Fennel seeds, of each half an onnce: clean Senna,
Polypody of the Oak, and the Kernels of Carthamus seeds, of each two ounces:
Epythimum, or Dodder of thyme, one ounce: Ginger and Cloves, of each one dram:
the flowers of Tamarisk, Marigolds, and Red Fitches, of each one pugil: make a
Decoction to a Pint and a quarter, dissolve in the straining of the Syrup of
the Five Roots, and of Roses Solutive, of each two ounces: make an Apozeme,
clarified and aromatized with two drams of Cinnamon for four mornings draughts,
adding to every Dose one dram of Cream of Tartar, salt of Wormwood and Tamarsk,
of each half a scruple.

In the last Dose (if the first has not sufficiently purged) dissolve of the
Electuary of Citrons Solutive and Diacarthamum, of each one dram and an half.

Sometimes we put white Wine in the Decoction before mentioned. Sometimes a
little Vinegar, according to the nature of the Patient.

If the Patient be dainty, and will not take an Apozeme, instead thereof you
shall give these Broths,

Take of Smallage, Parsley, and Sparagus Roots, of each half an ounce:
Agrimony, Hysop, Maidenhair, of each one handful Cristal of Tartar one dram:
boil them with a Chicken or a neck of Mutton, make Broth for nine days
together every morning.

The Cristal of Tartat dissolved in new made Broth and strained is better, for
when the Decoction is cold, for the most part it congealeth again, and is
separated from it: and when you give it in the Broth, you must stir it about
well with a Silver Spoon before it be taken, or you will leave the greater part
in the bottom of the Dish.

Every other day, infuse in his Broth, half an ounce of Senna and one dram of
Annis seeds.

As long as he takes these Medicines, and after, as often as need requires,
let the Region of the Liver be somented every morning one hour before he takes
his Broth, and every evening one hour before Supper, with this following
Fomentation:

Take of Marsh-mallow, and Briony Roots, of each one ounce and an half: the
Roots of Danewort, Cypress, Eryngus, the Barks of the Roots of Capars, and the
middle rind of Tamarisk, of each one ounce: the Leaves of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Violets, Agrimony, Germander, Mints, and Wormwood, of each one
handful: Lin-seed, Foenugreek, and Juniper Berries, of each half an ounce:
Coriander seeds, and yellow Sanders, of each three drams: Broom, Elder,
Chamomel, and Melilot flowers, of each one pugil: boil them all in two parts of
Chalybeate Water, and one of white Wine, added in the end: and when it is
strained, add half a pint of Vinegar: Foment the part as aforesaid.

After the Fomentation, let the part be anointed with the following Ointment.

Take of Oil of Lillies and Capars, of each two ounces: the Juice of the Roots
of Briony and Smallage, of each three ounces: Boil them till the Juyces are
consumed, adding the Ointment of Marshmallows, and Gum Ammoniack dissolved in
Vinegar, and strained, of each one ounce: Carrot seeds and Spicknard, of each
one dram and an half: yellow Wax as much as will make an Unguent. Use it as
aforesaid, adding in the time of anointing, a little Vinegar of Roses.

After the use of these Remedies, this Opiate following is good to wear away
the relics of the Obstructions, and recover strength to the part.

Take of Conserve of Wormwood, Maidenhair, and the Flowers of Tamarisk, of
each one ounce: the Conserve of Elicampane Roots, and Citron peels candied, of
each half an ounce: one candied Myrobalan: candied Nutmegs three drams:
Confection Alkermes two drams: the Powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis, one dram: Salt
of Wormwood, and Tamarisk, of each two scruples: Saffron one scruple:
Ambergris half a scruple: with the Syrup of Citrons make an Opiate, of which
let him take the bigness of a Chestnut every morning two hours before meat, and
drinking after it, a little Hippocras.

Warm Baths are also very good, in which softening and opening things have
boiled.

If the Obstructions are very stubborn, these following Pills are very good.

Take of the best Aloes infused in the Joyce of Wormwood very well, half an
ounce: Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar and strained, three drams: Myrrh
dissolved in warm Wine, and strained, two drams: the powder of the three
Sanders, and Crystal of Tartar, of each one scruple: Agaricknewly made into
Troches, and of the best Rhubarb, of each two drams: the Salt of Wormwood and
Tamarisk, of each half a dram: Saffron half a scruple: With the Syrup of Roses
solutive, make a Moss of Pills, of which let him take half a dram two hours
before dinner twice in a week.

Instead of the Apozeme aforesaid, you may make an old Cock Broth, when the
Obstructions are old and stubborn.

Take of Polypody of the Oak, and Carthamus seeds, of each one ounce and an
half: the tops of Time and Epithimum, of each one pugil: Annis, Fennel, and
Caraway seeds, of each two drams: clean Senna two ounces: Crystal of Tartar
half an ounce: beat them, and fill the Belly of an old Cock therewith: boil
them in three parts of Water, and one of white Wine, till the flesh of the Cock
fall from the Bones. Make Broth, and let the Patient take it four mornings.

Or (which is better) make a Decoction for one draught every day of the fourth
part of the Ingredients.

To this Broth you may ad Herbs, and opening Roots in a small quantity.

Quercetan commends exceedingly in his Dispensatory, the Compound Powder of the
Root of Cuckoo-pintle, to open Obstructions; of which you may give two drams
for diverse days together, in a convenient Decoction.

But of all Remedies, to take away old Obstructions, Medicines made of Tartar,
Vitriol, and Steel, are the best.

Of Tartar there is made Crystal, Salt, and Spirit, which are to be given in
diverse forms.

The use of Crystal of Tartar is formerly mentioned in the Apozeme, and Physic
Broths, made either of a Chicken, or old Cock.

Concerning this Medicien, young Physicians are to be admonished, that it is of
more-force than it is commonly supposed to be, although we seldom observe it in
Practice, by reason of the negligence of Apothecaries, the deceit of false
Chemists, and vulgar Distillars, which still Chemical Medicines to the
Apothecaries, of which, few are good, but most adulterate.

The negligence of Apothecaries for the most part is, That they had rather buy
Crystal of Tartar of such fellows, than make it themselves (though it be the
easiest of all) because they sell it cheaper than they themselves can make it:
for those Impostors will sell a pound for seven pence, or eight pence, from
which alone the Apothecaries might argue deceit, perceiving that they would be
loosers in so selling, if it were rightly made.

The deceit lies here, Those Impostors put a little Tartar, and a great deal
of Alum into their Decoctions; not because Tartar is sold dearer, but because
it yields but a little Crystal; but Alum will run all into Crystal. Hence it
is that the Physicians are deceived of their intentions, because Alum is
astringent, which is contrary to the opening Faculty which they desire.

Moreover, There is another wrong done to this Medicine, when it is made in a
Brass Kettle, which leaves a malignant quality upon the Medicine; for it is a
known and vulgar saying among Apothecaries, You must not boil sharp things in
Brass Vessels, because they easily pierce, and attract a noxious Tincture from
them. But the Crystals of Tartar are most sharp, called by some Acidum Tartari,
or the sharpness of Tartar.

This Error is often made by Apothecaries; and almost all they who make this
Crystal themselves use Brass Vessels, so that I have seen some Tartar look
Skie-colored from the Verdugreece which it has taken from the Copper.
Therefore Physicians shall do conscienciously, honorably, and for the good of
their Patients, if they cause their Apothecaries to make Crystal of Tartar
themselves, and in Glass, Iron, or Earthen Vessels glassed.

The Salt of Tartar has great power to open Obstructions, and may well be
mixed with Apozems, Opiates, and opening Pills. But the chief use of it is in a
loosening Ptisan, or Barley Water, made of two drams of Senna, infused in eight
ounces of cold Water, with one scruple, or half a dram of Salt of Tartar, by
which the Tincture of the Senna will be powerfully extracted; so that this
Ptisan shall work better than any ordinary one; and continued many days it
takes away all Obstructions: we have seen Quartan Agues cured, by the use of it
fifteen days together. If you fear the sharpness of the Salt of Tartar, you
may correct it with the Spirit of Sulphur, or of Vitriol, putting fifteen drops
of Spirit, to half a dram of Salt.

You may find the use of the Spirit of Tartar in our Observations for the Cure
of the Dropsy, under the Title of a Diuretical Spirit.

Of Vitriol, only the Oil or Spirit is used in Apozemes, Syrups, and other
Forms of Medicines.

This following Syrup, which is good against all Obstructions of the Liver,
Mesentery, and Veins, may be for an Example, by which, many through continual
Fevers falling into evil Habits and Dropsies, have been perfectly cured.

Take of the Roots of Smallage, Elicampane, Sparagus, Eringus, of each one
ounce: Leaves of Agrimony, Ceterach, Maidenhair, Dodder, Carduus, of each one
handful: the tops of Sea Wormwood, and of the lesser Centaury: of each half a
handful: Winter Cherries one ounce: Spring Water six pints: boil them till two
pints of the straining remain; in which dissolve of the Juice of Succory, and
Burnet refined, of each one pint: the juice of Fumitory and Hops, of each six
ounces: Fennel and Parsley juice, of each three ounces: Vinegar of Squils one
pint and an half: white Sugar six pound: make a Syrup, to which add of the Oil
of Vitriol as much as will make it sharp; of which let the Patient take three
spoonfuls before Breakfast, and as much before Dinner and Supper.

The Natural sharp Baths show the Efficacy of Vitriol, the use whereof is
frequent and profitable in all Diseases coming of Obstructions.

But the Spirit of Vitriol mixed with the Salt or Spirit of Tartar, is much
commended by the Chemists, and of them they make Tartar Vitriolate, and that
rare mixture of Spirit of Vitriol, Tartar, and Treacle which may be mixed with
other openers.

Lastly, There are diverse Medicines made of Steel, both by Galenists, and
Paracelsians, which plainly opening Obstructions presently, compel al men to
use them, even those who reject all Medicines made of Metals, as Enemies to
our Natures.

These Medicines of Steel are made either in the Form of Wine, Syrups, Opiates,
Pills, or Lozenges.

Steeled Wine is made thus:

Take of the Filings of Steel four ounces: Eryngo Roots, and Elicampane, of
each one ounce and an half: yellow Sanders one ounce: red Coral and shavings of
Ivory, of each six drams: Cloves, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, of each two drams:
Flowers of Broom, Rosemary, and Epithimum, of each two pugils: the best white
Wine six pints: steep them eight days in Balneo Mariae, or behind an Oven:
then strain them through a Hippocras bag, and let the Patient take two or three
ounces every morning two hours before meat for fifteen days, or more if need
require. Or make it thus:

Take of Steel prepared with Sulphur, one ounce: Elicampane, and the middle
rind of Tamarisk, of each half an ounce: Senna three ounces: Epithimum one
ounce: Foecula Brioniae, and Cinnamon, of each two drams: Powder of the three
Sanders, one dram and an half: Agrimony Water, and white Wine, of each one
pint: Infuse them three days in Balneo Mariae. Let him take three or four
ounces when it is strained, three hours before meat.

Commonly they use the Infusion of Steel in white Wine, or Claret, for ordinary
Drink, with much Water for two or three months together.

You may make a Syrup of Steel thus:

Take of Filings of Steel steeped in Vinegar, two ounces: the inward rind of
Tamarisk half an ounce: Ceterach half a handful: Cinnamon three drams: Wormwood
and Agrimony Water, of each half a pint: white Wine one pint: Infuse them six
days in a warm place: add to the staining, Sugar one pound and an half: make a
Syrup. Let the Patient take every morning two or three ounces.

For the Preparation aforesaid of Steel, you must steep it in Vinegar in the
Sun, while the Vinegar is consumed three times, and then grind it upon a Marble.

This Syrup may be made Purging, and better, if you dissolve the Sugar with a
pint of Water wherein three ounces of Senna, and half an ounce of Rhubarb have
been steeped a whole night.

The Powder of Steel is made thus, taken out of Quercetan's Dispensatory.

Take of the shavings of Steel, either commonly prepared, or with Sulphur, one
ounce: the faecula of the Root of Cuckow-pintle one dram and an half:
Ambergris half a dram (for the Poor, a Cordial Species will serve instead of
Ambergreece) Coral and Pearl prepared, of each two drams: Amber prepared and
Cinnamon, of each four scruples: Sugar as much as is sufficient to make a
pleasant Powder, of which let him take half a spoonful, or two drams with Wine
for fifteen days.

Of the same Powder and Sugar dissolve in Turnep Water and Confection Alkermes,
may be made very pleasant Lozenges to be taken as the former: Or,

Take of Steel prepared with Brimstone half an ounce: confection Alkermes two
drams: Ambergreece one scruple: Sugar dissolved in Rose Water four ounces: make
Lozenges: Let him take two drams every morning.

Instead of the Powder the Extract of Steel may be used, made in white Wine for
those who are dainty.

Diverse Opiates are made also of Steel; these following are best.

Take of the conserve of the Flowers of Tamarisk and Maidenhair, of each one
ounce and an half: conserve of the Roots of Elicampane six drams: Steel
prepared either with Sulphur or Vinegar one dram: Salt of Tamarisk one dram:
Spirit of Vitriol half a scruple: with the syrup of candied Citrons make an
Opiate, of which let him take two or three drams every morning: Or,

Take of the filings of Steel half a pound: white Wine one Pint and an half:
mix them in a Glass, set it to the fire, let be boiled gently, stirring it up
and down, till a scum arise, then take the frothy and fat part of the Steel
which is separated by the heat, and put it with Wine into another Glass: do
thus four times, adding fresh Wine, heating, and separating them, set it on a
gentle fire, till it be hot and grow thick as Honey, keep it for your use,
which is this,

Take of Steel so prepared six drams: Parsley and Carrot seeds, the species of
Diacurcuma, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each one dram: Cinnamon half a dram:
with clarified Honey make an Opiate, of which take three drams or half an ounce
every morning. Or,

Take of Steel prepared with Brimstone one ounce: the best Senna, Rhubarb, and
Agarick, of each two drams: Diarrhodon Abbatis one dram: Saffron one scruple:
with syrup of Roses solutive, make an Opiate: of which let him take two drams
every morning for fifteen days, three hours after meat.

Pills of Steel are as good as the rest, and they may be made thus,

Take of Steel prepared with Brimstone half an ounce: the best Aloes, Senna,
Agarick and Rhubarb, of each one dram: Diarrhodon Abbatis half a dram: Saffron
half a scruple: with syrup of Roses solutive make a mass of Pills: of one dram
whereof make six gilded Pills, which give in the morning for fifteen days,
three hours before meat.

To these Pills you may ad according to the kind of the Disease and the
Patients occasion, of Gum Ammoniack, Sagapenum, Opopanax, Myrrh, Gentian,
Birth-wort, Mastich, Nutmeg, and the like.

In all Medicines made of Steel, this is always to be observed, That Exercise
be used after them, as Walking, to make the strength of the Medicine to go into
the parts obstructed: This Walking must before two hours after; after which give
a little Broth, in which opening Herbs and Roots have been boiled.

Besides al these Remedies, the Chemists commend Mercurial Purges, of Mercurius
dulcis, especially given with ordinary Pills, or Extracts, because Mercury does
violently penetrate, and open Obstructions.

The Bezoard Mineral is very much commended, and given with Mercurius dulcis:
You may give it thus made.

Take of Bezoard mineral twelve grains: Mercurius dulcis six grains: conserve
of Roses one or two drams: make a Bolus which must be given many days.

If there be an Obstruction of the Liver in a Chollerick body, with a hot and
dry distemper of the part, then must you give cooling or temperate Openers,
which shall be showed in the Cure of Flatus Hypochondriacus, mentioned among the
Diseases of the Spleen.

For his ordinary drink let him take Water and small Wine wherein Steel has
been infused: Or, a weak Decoction of Tamarisk, Agrimony, Ceterach,
Maidenhair, Burnet, all or some with Wine,

Some commend the Infusion of the Wood against the Stone called Lignum
Nephriticum for ordinary drink: Others the Decoction of Eglentine or
Sweet-bryer which opens very powerfully, and strengthens; and they say that
many have been Cured of desparate Diseases by that alone.

But the Infusion of the filings of Steel made in white Wine, or thin red Wine,
does open better mixed with the aforesaid Waters, or with ordinary Water: for
by this Medicine alone many Virgins have been Cured of the Green Sickness, and
this Wine will work better, if they take every morning two ounces of clear Wine,
besides the ordinary drink.

Chap. 4. Of the Jaundice.
THe Jaundice is a yellow color of the whole Body, coming of Choler, spread
over all the Skin.

It is therefore a Symptom of the Quality changed. And now presently, that
vulgar difficulty which is controverted by almost all Writers, offers it self;
namely, That the yellow color in the Cornea, does immediately hurt the Sight,
making all objects appear yellow. To which (that I may answer in a word,
without circumstances) I say, That it is a disease in the increase of Number;
for since the Cornea ought to be void of all color, that it may let the Species
of Objects pass through pure and unchanged, if it have any pre^ernatural color,
it has a Disease in the increase of Number, that is, more than what is
necessary to the Natural Constitution thereof.

Authors do make two sorts of Jaundice; Yellow, and Black. The Black proceeds
from the Spleen and is very rare: therefore here treating only of the Diseases
of the Liver, we will speak only of the Yellow Jaundice.

The spreading of Choler upon the Skin, comes from many Causes; which may be
reduced to three Heads: namely, An Evil Disposition of the Liver; An
Obstruction of the Bag that contains the Gall; And the malignity of the
Chollerick Humor.

The Evil Disposition of the Liver is diverse; as Dstemper, Inflammation,
Obstruction, Schirrus, and whatsoever may so weaken the part, that
Excrementitious Choler cannot be separated from the Blood, but is with it
distributed through the whole Body.

The Obstruction of the Bag or Cystis, which contains the Gall, hinders the
passage of it into the Guts, whereby it remains in the Liver, and goes from
thence with the Blood into the whole Body. This Obstruction is either from gross
Phlegm, or Choler abounding; sometimes from little stones which are often bred
in the Bag of Gall; which may also be made narrow in the Passage, by the
compression of some part nigh unto it, which is inflamed or schirrous.

The Evil of the Chollerick Humor consists, either in the great quantity
thereof, which cannot be regulated by Nature, nor be separated from the Mass of
Blood, or which so fills the Bag of the Gall, that it cannot contract it self
to expel it; or it consists in an evil quality, which by corrupting of the
Humors, does hinder their due Evacuation, or stirs up Nature suddenly to cast
it forth, as you may observe in a Critical or Symptomatical Jaundice. This
Corruption happens in continual Chollerick Fevers; as also after Poison is
taken, or from the biting of some venomous Creature, by which the whole Blood is
turned into Choler.

The Signs of the Yellow Jaundice are manifest; namely, a yellow color through
the whole Body, especially in the white of the Eyes. Also an itching, and
laziness, bitterness of the Tongue, sometimes Chollerick Vomitings, and
Hiccoughs.

The Signs of the Causes are to be taken from their proper Fountains; for if
the distemper of the Liver be hot, this Disease comes from Inflammation,
Obstruction, Schirrus, or the like: the knowledge of which is to be taken from
their proper Chapters.

These things properly show the Obstruction of the Bag of the Gall, white
Excrements, and a Belly bound through the want of Choler, which uses to make
the Excrements yellow, or red, and to stir up the Expulsive Faculty of the Guts
like a Clyster. The Urine is very yellow, inclining to red and if you put a
Linen clout therein, it will dye it yellow.

If it come from the malignity of the Chollerick Humor, the Excrements of the
Belly are high colored, and also the Urine, especially if it follow a putrid
Fever, when the Jaundice is a Symptom, and then after the coming of the
Jaundice the Fever remains: but if it be critical, the Fever cease, and the
Excrements with the Urine are well colored. The External Causes, as Poison, and
venomous bitings may be declared by the Patient, and those about him.

The Prognostic of the Jaundice is various, according to the variety of Causes.

That is more Curable which comes from the Obstruction of the Bag containing
the Gall, because its passages are nearer the Guts, and the Matter cleaving
thereto, is easily sent into them, provided that the Obstruction come not from
a stone, which because it cannot be dissolved, renders the Disease incurable.

The Jaundice coming from an Inflammation or Schirrus of the Liver, is most
dangerous; for one commonly ends in an Imposthume, the other in a Dropsy.

They who in a Fever, have the Jaundice before the seventh day, are desperate,
Hipp. Aph. 62. Sect. 4. against which Aphorism, there is another of,
Hippocrates opposed, which is in 4. de victus ratione in acutis, in these
words: In a Chollerick Fever, if the Jaundice come before the seventh day,
with chillness, the Disease is cured; but if it come without chillness, it is
deadly. There is Reason for what he says; for when in the third, fourth, and
fifth day, the Crisis (or ground of Judgment) is healthful, if it be by Sweat,
Urine, or Stool, why should not a Critical Jaundice fall upon those days? And
Experience from many allowed Authors does testify that the Jaundice does often
happen with safety before the seventh day. Now these Authors do interpret the
aforesaid Aphorism thus; namely, That Hippocrates by the seventh day,
understands any Critical day, and he mentions the seventh as the most noble
day, and to be taken for all the rest. But that is a true Critical Day of
Judgment, before which, a full Concoction of the Matter causing the Fever, did
appear.

The Cure of the Jauudice, is by taking away of the Causes: For if it come from
a hot distemper of the Liver, or a Tumor in that part, you must consult with
the Chapters before mentioned for the Cure of them.

But that which comes upon acute Fevers, if it be Critical needs no Cure. Yet
if it be Symptomatical, the Cure of it depends upon the Cure of the Disease
upon which it depends.

That which comes from the Obstruction of the Cystis, or Bag of the Gall, is
cured by taking away of the Obstruction, which may be conveniently done by the
Remedies mentioned in the former Chapter. To which we may add these as more
proper.

First take away part of the Humor with this following Bolus:

Take of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses, and Diaprunis solutive, of each
three drams: the powder of Rhubarb one dram: Saffron half a scruple: With Sugar
make a Bolus; which you may give once or twice, if the Body be of a very ill
habit.

As for Phlebotomy, though Galen denies it, as unprofitable, yet if you
perceive abundance of Blood, it is very good to abate it.

After general Medicines this following Infusion used six or seven days, does
commonly pluck this Disease up by the Roots, if it be but young.

Take of Madder Roots half an ounce: the greater Celandine one handful: the
tops of Sea Wormwood, and of the lesser Centaury, of each one pugil: Cinnamon
half a dram: Saffron half a scruple: Infuse them a whole night in eight ounces
of white Wine, and add to the straining half an ounce of white Sugar. Let him
take it in the morning three hours before dinner.

Or you may make this Decoction following:

Take of Celandine Roots and Leaves one handful: the Leaves and Flowers of St.
John's wort, of each half a handful: the shavings of Ivory and poudered Goose
dung, of each three drams: Saffron half a dram. Put the Powder of Goose dung
and the Saffron in a clout, and boil them all in equal parts of white Wine, and
Wormwood Water to one pint: and when it is strained, add one ounce of Sugar.
Give it for three morning draughts, and repeat it if you think sit.

Quercetan commends for this purpose, the Dung of a green Goose that eats Grass
in the Spring; and the dried white Dung of an Hen, given or diverse days to the
quantity of half a dram or a dram; and he says that the Dung of these Aerial
Creatures, is full of Nitre and Sulphur, and has a wonderful Faculty to cut,
attenuate, and dissolve.

Dioscorides commends the Juice of Horehound for this Disease, and since his
time, others, and especially Forestus, who reports that some were only cured by
the use of the Syrup of the Juice of Horehound, when other means failed.

Gesner commends the Nettle Root thus prepared:

Take of Nettle Roots one pound: Saffron one scruple: beat them well, and take
out their Juice with white Wine, and let the Patient take four ounces every
morning for four or five days, and cover himself to sweat after it.

While inward Medicines are given, let the Region of the Liver be anointed with
this following Ointment.

Take of the Juice of Smallage, Parsley, and Succory, of each one ounce: white
Wine Vinegar half an ounce: the Oil of Tamarisk two ounces: boil them til the
Juyces and Vinegar be consumed; then add of yellow Sanders and Spicknard, of
each one dram: Wax, as much as will make a Liniment.

After the Obstructions are taken away, the yellow color will presently vanish
by the strength of Natural Heat, which will discuss the Humor from the Skin.
But that it may sooner be gone, make a Bath of warm Water, and rub the Body
therein with a Bag of Earley and Bean Meal.

Chap. 5. Of the Scirrhus of the Liver.
THe Scirrhus of the Liver, is a hard Tumor without pain, bred of a thick
Humor, fastened and hardened upon the Liver.

This Scirrhus is Twofold; either it is Exquisite, or Perfect; or Imperfect.
That which is a perfect Scirrhus, is laid down in the Definition propounded,
which is without Pain or Sense.

That which is not exquisite or perfect, has some kind of pain, and comes from
a Matter less hardened; in a word, it is a Scirrhus beginning, and not
confirmed: but that which is exquisite is confirmed, so that they only differ
in Degrees.

A Scirrhus breeds in the Liver two ways; either from Defluxion, or Congestion
of a thick and glutinous Humor upon the part; or from Inflammation, which
dissolveth the thin Humors, and leaves the thick.

The Matter of the former, is Phlegm or Melancholy, either sent from other
parts, or bred in the substance of the Liver by an evil Concoction. For the
producing of this Humor, evil diet is a main cause, if it be of thick, cold,
and viscous, or clammy Nourishment; as also a Phlegmatic or Melanchollick
Constitution, and a Natural straightness of the Liver. From whence Galen says,
13. Meth. That a Scirrhus easily breeds in the Liver, Spleen, and Reins: In
the Liver, because the Passages are narrow, and it is nourished with thick
blood in the Spleen, because it receives the thick blood: and lastly, in the
Reins, because they are nourished with thick blood.

The Causes of the latter Scirrhus, which follows other Humors, is the
immoderate use of discussing Medicines, or of Repercussives, which by cooling
and binding, do thicken the Matter, and keep it from dissolving. Besides, the
Matter of the Disease, which is properly cold and thick, and will not be
dissolved; or the weakness of the part, which cannot help the breathing forth
of the Humors. And lastly, a cooling and thickening Diet.

The signs of a Scirrhus in the Liver are, a hardness in the right
Hypochondrion, and that more than in an Obstruction, next a heaviness in that
part, especially when there is violent breathing, no Fever, nor pain, by which
it is distinguished from an Inflammation, or there is but little pain, as when
the Schirrus is not exquisite or perfect: There is less repose upon the left
side, because the Liver being hard and heavy, does then lie upon the Stomach,
and burden it: the color of the Face is pale, and and greenish, because when
the Liver is Schirrus, there is no good Blood produced by it: The whoI Body
also, is fallen away, because there is neither Sanguification, nor distribution
of Nourishment as it ought to be.

The Prognostic of this Disease is given by Galen, 2. ad Glaucum, cap. 4. in
these words: An insensible Scirrus is incurable, but that which is a little
sensible is curable, though with much difficulty. Also Galen, cap. 5. of the
same Book, says, We have cured a Schirrus of the Liver often in the beginning
of it; but when it has been of long continuance, neither could I, nor any
other that I ever heard of, cure it.

An old inveterate Scirrhus turns to a Dropsy incurable, of which some die
sooner than others, if they have a looseness of the Belly therewith of long
continuance.

A Scirrhus which follows the Jaundice, or causes the same, is dangerous.
Whence Hippocrates, Aph. 42. Sect. 6. says, that if the Liver grow hard in
them who have the Jaundice, it is an evil sign.

The Cure of a Scirrhus, is first by the taking away of the Antecedent Cause,
by the Apozem which is prescribed in the Obstruction of the Liver. To which you
may add other Medicines proper to open Obstructions.

Afterward you must discuss the hard Matter with mollifying and opening
things. For this end the Steel Pills above mentioned, are excellent, especially
if you add thereto, Bdellium, Ammoniacum, and Sagapenum.

But if the hardness be very great, you must give these Pills following, many
days together.

Take of Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and strained, and again made
thick, two drams: Bdellium, and Storax, of each four scruples: mix them. Take
one dram every other day.

And in the days between, let him use the Opiate, or strengthening and opening
Lozenges prescribed in the Cure of Obstructions.

These following Pills have a wonderful Virtue to soften a Scirrhus, and
dissolve it.

Take of the best Aloes, and Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar, strained, and
again made thick, of each half an ounce: Mercurius dulcis two drams: Diagridium
one dram: With Oxymel of Squils make a Mass of Pills; of which let him take
half a dram four hours before Dinner, for twenty or thirty days together.

Zacutus Lusitanus, Obs. 41. Lib. 1. Praxis Admir. reports that there was a
strong Scirrhus cured by the use of Conserve of Horehound forty days together.

Some Practitioners commend the use of Turpentine thus prepared:

Take of Turpentine washed with white Wine one ounce and an half: Sugar half an
ounce: Give one dram every day, or every other day, for it is an opening
Medicine that provokes Urine, and looseneth the Belly.

All the time of Cure, let the Patient take white Wine, or thin Claret steeled,
for his ordinary Drink.

Also the other Preparations of Steel before mentioned, are very good.

Outwardly you must apply Fomentations, Ointments, and Plasters, thus made:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots, Briony and Lilly Roots, of each one ounce:
Mallows, Viole^^ Pellitory of the Wall, Wormwood, and Agrimony, of each one
handful: Linseed, Foenugreek and Dill seed, of each half a dram: Chamomel,
Melilot, and Rose flowers, of each one pugil: boil them in three parts of
Water, and one of white Wine, or in Water and Vinegar. With the straining, let
the Region of the Liver be fomented every morning and evening.

If the Scirrhus be very great, add to the Decoction, Flowerdeluce, wild
Cucumers, and Dwarf-Elder Roots, and make the Decoction in Tripe Broth, and
white Wine.

Take of Oil of Lillies, Chamomel, Melilot and sweet Almonds, of each one
ounce: Oil of Roses and Wormwood, of each half an ounce: Gum Ammoniack
dissolved in Vinegar three drams: Wax two drams: make a Liniment, with which
anoint the part aforesaid, after the Fomentation.

If you desire a stronger Liniment,

Take of the Juice of Briony and wild Cucumer, of each two ounces: the Oil of
Capars and Tamarisk, of each three ounces: white Wine one ounce: boil them till
the Juice and the Wine be consumed, then add two drams of Wormwood in powder,
Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar half an ounce: with a little Wax make a
Liniment.

Take of the Emplaister de Mucilaginibus one ounce: Melilot half an ounce: Gum
Ammoniack melted in the Juice of Wormwood three drams: soften them with a
little Oil of Wormwood (...) Lillies, and make a Plaster to be laid on after
the Liniment.

The Leaves of Henbane boiled in Vinegar are good to be outwardly applied to
the part, made ^^ to the form of a Cataplasm or Pultiss, with Oil of bitter
Almonds.

To these you may add Baths made of softening and digesting things, and of
strengtheners, such as we prescribed for Fomentations; and let the Patient use
them by turns.

And finally, Make an Issue in the right Leg, that part of the Matter offending
may be that way drawn forth.

Chap. 6. Of the Dropsy.
HIppocrates makes two kinds of Dropsies; namely, An Universal, and a
Particular. An Universal Dropsy, is that which is in the whole Body, or over
the whole Belly: a Particular, is that which is only in one part: hence there is
the Dropsy of the Head, Breast, and Womb; of which, here we shall not speak,
but only of the Universal.

Galen gives three kinds of this Universal Dropsy; namely, Ascites,
Tympanites, and Anasarca, or Leucophlegmasia.

Ascites is a swelling of the Belly, caused of a serous Humor; nor does the
Belly only swell, but many times the Feet, Legs, Thighs, and Cods. Nay, an
Ascites sometimes begins with a swelling in the Feet, which ascends after to the
Legs, and so to the Thighs and Belly.

This serous Humor, as it is of the Nature of Water, it is cold; but as it is
salt, it has in it heat, which then is increased by the neerness of the
Bowels, and more by the putrefaction which it gathers by long continuance:
hence comes a Fever and Thirst, namely, from the stinking salt vapors which do
infect the mouth of the Stomach.

It falls out sometimes, that this Watery Humor, is not contained in the Cavity
of the Belly, but in certain Bladders growing to the parts of the lower Belly.

An Example whereof is given by Schenkius, Lib. 3. Observation; and Mauritius
Cordaeus, Com. 5. in Hipp. Lib. 1. of Diseases in Women. Galen supposed (and
almost all Physicians, new and old, have followed him) that every Dropsy comes
of a cold Liver, which cannot Sanguisie or make Blood completely, but instead
thereof much Water, Phlegm, or Wind. Which Opinion, as it is most true in
Anasarca, and approved; so in Ascites and Tympanites it is much questioned by
many Modern Writers, because in the opening of many that died of Dropsies, the
Liver has been sound very sound, as is manisest by many relations in those
Authors mentioned. Moreover, Hippocrates 2. Prorrhet. wittily affirms that a
Dropsy may come either from the Liver, or from some empty part: by an empty
part, he means all that space from the Ribs to the Guts, and the parts
contemed in it. Also Hipp. 4. de morb. Mulierum, mentions a Dropsy coming from
the Spleen. To which places of Hippocrates they usually answer thus, That the
Liver is always affected either primarily or secondarily; so that there is
never a Dropsy before there is a hinderance of Sanguification, or breeding of
Blood. But two Reasons do strongly oppose this Doctrine: The first is from the
Experience before mentioned, namely, That if the Liver ought necessarily to
suffer in the producing of a Dropsy, it would never be found free and unknit
in the Dissection of a dead Body. The second is, That if the Liver should breed
watery Blood, it would be sent into the whole Body, as in Anasarca; nor can a
sufficient reason be given, why that serous Humor bred in the Liver should be
sent to the Belly, and not to other parts.

As for the cold distemper of the Liver, that is denied by Trallianus,
Avicenna, and others, who affirm that a Dropsy may arise from a hot distemper
of the Liver, and cannot be cured but by cooling means. And this may be
maintained by the Authority of Hippocrates, in 2. Progn. A Dropsy (says he)
coming after an acute disease, is evil, for it does not take away the Fever.
If therefore a Dropsy may come while the Fever is, it is clear that there is
still a hot distemper. Neither could that ever please me, which is usually
spoken by Galens Servants, That the Native heat is dissolved by a hot
distemper, and much diminished, and that diminished heat may be called cold.
For so in a Hectic Fever, and other constant Fevers, in which the Natural
Heat is much diminished, we should always blame a cold distemper, and the
Symptoms which follow should be impured to cold, and not to heat. From whence,
who does not perceive that there would arise a great consusion in the searching
into the Causes of Symptoms.

Among the late Writers, Carotus Piso, whom Sennertus followed, has dived most
deep into the true Causes of Ascites, which he affirms to come from a serous
Matter contained in the Meat and Drink, which by reason of some preternatural
Cause, is stayed too long in the Gate and Hollow Veins, not sent into the Body,
as in a Natural state and condition it uses to be, but into the capacity of
the Abdomen. This serous Humor is retained in the Veins, from the whole Body, by
reason the attractive faculty of the Parts, to which it should be carried, is
either hurt or hindered.

Now the chief parts which draw the serous Matter, are the Liver and the
Spleen. For they attract the Chylous Matter in which the moisture of Meat and
Drink is contained. As also the Spleen draws Drink to its self, pure and
without mixture; as Hippocrates taught, and Experience confirms, That they who
drink much after Meat, do presently avoid it by Urine; which learned Authors
say, is by reason the Spleen sucks the watery Matter before there is a perfect
Concoction made in the Stomach.

The Attraction or drawing quality of the Liver and Spleen, is lost chiefly by
defect and weakness of Natural Heat: the Natural heat is debilitated by a cold
or hot distemper, or by Suffocation.

A cold distemper coming either from too cold a Diet, from loss of too much
Blood and Spirits, or any other Cause, does destroy the Natural Heat of the
Liver and Spleen, and so hinder their Actions.

A hot Distemper does disperse the Native Heat; whence being made weaker, the
Liver and the Spleen become less Active. This comes from Fevers, much Wine, or
hot Meats.

Lastly, The Natural Heat is weakened by Suffocation, when there is too much
Blood in the Veins, especially if it be foul, as when the Terms of Hemorrhoids
are stopped, by which the blood was cleansed formerly, but now by stoppage
corrupted.

Also the Attraction or drawing virtue of those parts, is hindered by
Obstructions, which hinder the free passage of the serous Matter. So a Dropsy
follows a Scirrhus of the Liver and Spleen, not only because those parts
being weakened cannot produce good Blood, but especially because they are not
able to attract, and send to other parts whatsoever is drunk.

Here it may be objected, That in a Dropsy the whole Body is nourished by Blood
bred in the Liver of a Chylous Matter, which it draws to it self. We answer,
That the Liver does better attract that which is most familiar unto its self,
and most sit to be made blood; but it draws to it less than is sufficient, by
reason of the weakness of the attractive faculty. Hence it is that the Body
grows lean, because it draws some water along with the Chylus, and leaves the
rest in the Meseraick Veins, and the Veins of the lower Belly, which is by
degrees carried into the Capacity of the Abdomen.

We do not deny that Sanguisication or making of Blood, is hindered in a
Dropsy, especially when the distemper is very cold or very hot, or the
Obstruction or Scirrhus great, for then there cannot be a perfect making of
blood. But we deny that that is the next and immediate Cause of a Dropsy; but
rather an effect thereof, when the Water corrupted in the Abdomen, does also
corrupt the Bowels that swim therein.

Next to the Liver and the Spleen, the Reins do attract the watery Matter which
is in the hollow Vein, and free the whole body from the superfluity thereof, so
that if at any time they do not their office, there remains much matter in the
veins, which being sent to the Abdomen do quickly make an Ascites; now the
attraction of the Veins may cease for diverse Causes, because of a Cold
Distemper, Tumors, Ulcers, and Obstructions, which will Diminish, Abolish, and
intercept their Function.

Lastly, The distribution of Water is hindered from some external Cause, as
when much cold Water is drunk, which Nature cannot govern, nor sufficiently
distribute into the Veins: So Carolus Piso reports of a young man that had a
Tertian Ague, and drinking Water exceedingly in his Fit fell into an Ascites,
from which by the taking of one Lozenge of Diacarthamum he was Cured by
discharging the Water which was in the Abdomen, but if he had continued
drinking so much water any louger, he had not been so easily Cured, because it
would have brought great obstructions and a cold distemper of the Bowels, by
reason of the loss of natural heat.

But it is questioned of many by what ways that serous matter should be
carried by the Veins into the Capacity of the Abdomen, to whom we may plainly
answer, by saying from Hippocrates that in a living body al things are passing
to and fro, so that in time of necessity not only thin and serous Matter, but
also that which is very thick may be sent through the insensible passages: So
in a Pleurisy blood and matter will pierce through the thick substance of the
Pleura and Membrane which covers the Lungs, and be spit forth at the mouth: So
in a Fracture of the Leg or Thigh, which hapens without hurt to the Muscles and
Skin, the matter which flows from the broken bone, pierces through the
substance of the other parts and wets the boulsters and rowlers.

So also in a Dropsy often times a great quantity of Water is vented in one
day by giving of Quicksilver, which cannot be except the Water contained in the
Abdomen do pass through the Tunicles of the Guts.

Nor is the Objection of Fernelius of any force, when he says that Nature had
in vain made so many open ways, if the Humors can pass through those invisible
passages: For we Answer, That in an ordinary and natural motion of Humors
ordained for the nourishment of the whole body, those passages are necessary
through which they may easily flow, but in an extraordinary case, provident
Nature does find out extraordinary ways by which she may cast out hurtful
Matter, or at least send it to a place less dangerous.

Fernelius Objects again, That in them who have died by a stoppage of Urine for
twenty days together, it was never perceived that any Water went through those
blind passages: We Answer, That Nature does not always work the same way in
preternatural Causes, nor send hurtful Humors to the same places, but
especially to those parts which are more disposed to receive them through
weakness.

So in the Suppression or Stoppage of Urine, the Serous Humor flows openly
through the Veins and Arteries and fills them, and if it find any part weaker
than the rest it falls forceably upon it: hence it is that some die of the hurt
of one or other remarkable part. So nothing hinders (if the parts of the
Abdomen in which the Veins and Arteries end) be grown weak, but that the Watery
Humor may be sent into its capacity or hollowness.

Nor is that true which Fernelius would infer, namely, That a Dropsy never
comes from suppression of Urine, for Reason and Experience teaches the
contrary: as we showed before in the Discourse of the Loss of Attraction in the
Reins: but you must observe that the Stoppage of the Urine does make an
increase of Water rather in the branches of the hollow Vein, then of the Gate
Vein or Vena Porta, by which the watery Humor chiefly flows into the capacity
of the Abdomen as appears by what follows.

Therefore we may Answer this Question, by saying, That the water got into the
hollow of the Abdomen, by the insensible passages though there are also other
manifest ways by which it may pass.

Hippocrates, Aph. 55. Sect. 7. has showed them, for (says he) they who have
much Water about the Liver, if it get into the Omentum, or Kels, their belly
will be filled with Water, and then they die. The meaning of which Aphorism is
(though Galen did not plainly see it) that the Water from the Liver does flow
into the Branches of the Vena Porta which go to the Omentum, and when they are
filled, either by their Tunicles made thin by Diapedesis or Rarefaction, or by
the mouths of the Vessels being opened by Anastomosis, the Water gets into the
Cavity of the Abdomen: This happens often in the Spleen also, when it draws
Water in abundance from the Stomach, as appears by many sayings of Hippocrates;
and in lib. 4. de morbis, he says, That Water may press from the Spleen to the
Omentum or Kell, in these words, Drink is also carried into the Stomach with
which when it is filled the Spleen takes it from thence and sends it to the
Veins and the Omentum. From which we may perceive, That Water chiefly gets into
the Abdomen, by the Veins of the Omentum which are called Epiploicae, and
Gastrepiploicae, although it may pass also through their Veins.

Besides the aforesaid Causes of a Dropsy, which are more ordinary, there are
mentioned by Authors some less usual, confirmed by Observation: and these come
from the disorder of some peculiar part, not only of the Liver and Spleen, but
also of the Mesentery, Sweetbread Stomach, Guts, Reins, Bladder, and Womb,
namely, when the Homiosis, or faculty to convert nourishment into themselves is
hurt, from some great Disease, so that their proper nourishment is corrupted
and turned into Water. So Galen, Comment. Aph. 55. Sect. 7. says, that watery
Bladders are sometimes in the outside of the Liver, which being broken, send
Water downwards into the Cavity of the Abdomen, the increase whereof breeds a
Dropsy.

Fernelius supposes that the Liver being very dry, has clefts like the
parched Earth, and that through them there flows a constant Water which fills
the Cavity of the Abdomen. Others say that a Dropsy may come from the Guts, if
they be perforated or pierced through, and yet the Patient dies not presently
but a watery Humor still flows through them into the Cavity. It comes also from
the Kidneys, if they be much Ulcerated, and water flow from them. So Platerus
reports of one that in a Dropsy had many Ulcers in both Kidneys, from whence
both matter and water flowed into the Cavity. There is also a Story in
Sennertus, taken out of John Heinzius, of a certain Woman who had a Dropsy
from the distemper of the Womb, whose Bowels were all sound, except the
Testicles or Stones, which were found to be swollen as big as the Head of a
newborn Child, being blew, hollow, and full of Ulcers, from which there came a
serous Matter which caused the Dropsy.

The Dropsy called Tympanites, has its name from Tympanum, a Drum, because
the Abdomen is stretched out like a Drum, and if you strike it with your hand,
it sounds like it. This stretching comes from wind shut up in the Cavity of the
Abdomen. But sometimes this wind is in the Cavity of the Guts; which Platerus
observed, saying in some that have been thought to die of a Tympany, after they
were opened, have had no wind coming forth of the Cavity of the Belly; neither
did their Bellies, but their Guts sink, especially the thin Guts, which were so
stretched with wind that they came forth so rouled together that they could not
be again thrust into the Belly.

But we must observe that the wind which causes a Tympany, is seldom contained
in the Belly alone, but for the most part mixed with Water; as in an Ascites,
not only Water, but Wind also is contained; and both these Dropsies have their
name of that which predominateth: if there be more wind than water it is a
Tympany; but if more water than wind, an Ascites: but if they be equal, it is
between both; ^o that we may doubt whether that Dropsy be a Tympany, or an
Ascites.

The Material Cause of Wind, is a crude Humor and thick, whether it be Phlegm or
Melancholy, which being stirred and made thin by heat, sends forth thick
vapors, which are hard to be dissolved, and these are called Flatus.

This Crude and thick Humor, is partly in the Stomach and Guts, but especially
between the Membranes of the Midriff and Guts, from whence it is more hard to
be moved than from the Cavity of the parts aforesaid. The 11. Aph. Sect. 6. of
Hippocrates, makes this very probable; They who have pains and gripings about
the Navel and Loins, which cannot be removed, have a dry Dropsy. For because
the Mesentery is joined to the Guts by the fore part, and to the Loins by the
hinder part, we may easily perceive that the pains which reach from the Navil
to the Loins, come from the Mesentery. Besides, The greatness of the pain,
shows that the Cause is deep in the substance of the part, and cannot be
removed: For if it were in the Cavity of the Stomach and Guts, it would easily
be remedied.

Concerning the Efficient Cause, Authors differ; some say from a cold, some
from a hot distemper. They which accuse a cold distemper, think they have Galen
on their side, who says that wind is bred of a weak heat. To whom we answer,
That heat may be said to be weak in respect of the Matter which cannot be
discussed or dissolved thereby. But this is to be imputed to the Matter, which
is rather defective than the Heat, which is commonly too great and
Preternatural. And we must acknowledge with the Learned, That a burnt
Melanchollick Humor is most fit to breed a Tympany, which proceeds from the
parching heat of the Bowels; which heat does stir that Matter, and produces
from it thick vapors that are hard to be dissolved.

The Dropsy called Anasarca, comes of a Phlegmatic Humor spread through the
whole Body, and therefore the Body is swollen and white; from whence the Disease
is called Leucophlegmatia. This Phlegm comes from a cold Liver, which instead of
good Blood, produces crude and phlegmatic; which when it cannot be turned into
the substance of the parts, leaves the crude part that is unfit for
Nourishment upon them, and makes them swell; hence comes Anasarca, or
Leucophlegmatia.

This Disease beginning, is called Cachexia, or an evil Habit, and turns into
Leucophlegmatia, from which it differs but in degree.

The Anteced^nt Causes are, all things that cool the Liver too much, and hinder
its Concoction, as too much cold and moist Diet, the stopping of the Terms or
Hemorrhoids, Obstructions, cold Tumors, Scirrhus and large bleeding, and other
great Evacuations, by which the Native heat is diminished.

The Signs of a Dropsy, and every sort of it, may be known by what has been
said.

In an Ascites, you may know that there is water in the Abdomen by its
greatness, lost Swelling, and broad, and if you press the sides, you shall
easily hear a noise of Water, and when the Patient turns from one side to the
other, and then the whole Belly lies as it were on that side: then the Feet and
Cods swell, but the higher part grow less; the Urine is little and thick,
sometimes red, because there goes but little water to the Reins and Bladder, and
stays long there, by which means it becomes red and thick. In the progress or
increase of the Disease, there is difficulty of Breathing, by reason of the
abundance of water which lies upon the Diaphragma or Midriff, especially when
the Patient lies down, and therefore he is forced to stand or sit most
usually. There is a troublesome thirst from the saltness of the Humor, with
which the Stomach swimmeth. And lastly, there is a constant lingering Fever
from the corruption of the Water, which at length does corrupt all the Bowels
swimming therein.

In a Tympany, the Belly being struck, sounds like a Drum; the Bulk of the
Belly is less burdensome than in an Ascites: There were formerly pains about the
Navel and Reins, when the Patient lies with his face upwards, his Belly
remains hard and stretched forth, nor does it turn aside when he turns
himself.

Lastly, In an Anasarca, not only the Belly, Thighs, and Legs, but also the
Hands, Arms, Breast, Face, and whole Body swel; and wheresoever you thrust your
finger upon it, it will pit, and leave an impression. The color of the Skin is
pale and Earthy, the Flesh soft and loose, the Water thin and white, breathing
difficultly, and sometimes a lingering Fever.

As to the Prognostic: Every Dropsy is dangerous, and hard to be cured, and
the more hard by how much the elder, but Anasarca is least dangerous; but
Ascites and Tympany are sometimes one more dangerous than another, according to
their Causes. So if Ascites come from a Scirrhus of the Liver, or Ulcer of some
internal part, it is more dangerous than a Tympany; but if it come of drinking
too much Water, or new Obstructions, it is less dangerous.

A Dropsy is more easily cured in Servants than in Freemen, in Country men
than in Noble men; for they will be better constrained to abstain from Drink
and the like, and be more patient than they who have liberty.

A Dropsy from the hardness of the Spleen, is less dangerous, than from the
hardness of the Liver, because the Spleen is not so Noble a part.

A Dropsy coming upon an acute Disease, is evil; nor will it abate the Fever,
but cause pain and death. Hipp. 2. Prognost.

They whose Liver being full of water, discharge it into the Omentum or Caul,
their Belly is filled with Water, and they die. Hipp. Aph. 55. Sect. 7.

He who has Water between the Skin, or an Anasarca, if that water which is in
the Veins flows into the Belly, the disease is cured. Hipp. Aph. 14. Sect. 6.
This Aphorism seems coutrary to the former. But this contrariety is answered,
by saying that Hippocrates in the former, by Belly, understood the Cavity of
the Abdomen; but in this, Belly its self; for if the water flow through the
Belly, the Disease is at an end. Which Opinion is more clearly explained by
Hippocrates, in Coacis, in these words: In the beginning of a Dropsy, if there
come a flux of the belly, without want of Concoction, or Crudity, it is
prevented. You must mark that it is in the beginning; for if a flux come upon
an old Dropsy, it is not so safe, because commonly there is some fault in the
Bowels by continuance, as a Scitrhus, or corruption of substance, which begets
new matter, and death also. Henee Hipp. in Prorrh. says, that they who are to
be cured of the Dropsy, must be Euspiagchnous, that is, those that have sound
Bowels, free from the great Diseases mentioned. Otherwise, if a flux of the
Belly happen with a Scirrhus or corruption of the Liver, they die presently, as
Galen shows 2. ad Glau. cap. 5. And Avicen says thus: Straitness of breath,
and flux of the belly signify death within three days.

Little Urine in Dropsies, is evil; the less, the worse, because the Drink runs
into the Belly, and not into the Reins. Hence Hipp. in Coac. says, Little and
thick Urine, and a Dropsy that is Feverish, is deadly: but if the quantity of
Urine increase, we may hope well. Which is elegantly laid down by Celsus: And
then (says he) there is hope of Health, when they void more Urine than they
drink: Therefore it is good every day to measure the Urine, and the Drink, and
the Belly with a string, especially while Physic is given, to see whether it
grow less or not; for if it increase notwithstanding the Medicines, it is
desperate.

Imposthumes, or spots in the Legs or Hydropical men, are deadly. Hippocrates
confirms this 7. Epid. in the History of Bion and Ctesipthon; the one whereof
died presently after an imposthume which ran in his left Knee: the other after
he had a red and bluish gathering in his right Thigh.

Men that are cured by Medicines for Dropsies, if they fall again into the
same, are desperate, Hipp. in Coac. For it signifies that there is some
incurable fault lurking in the Bowels, which after the water is emptied,
renews it again.

If the Patient have sound Bowels, and strength, eat his meat, and concoct
well, and be not sick after; breath freely, have no pain, cough, or thirst, and
his tongue grow not rough, so much as in his sleep; if Medicines presently
purge him; and if without Medicines he be bound, and in a Natural order; and if
his Urine change according to his Diet, or if he be not faint. If all these
things be present, the Patient is recovered; if some of them, there is hopes of
amendment; if none, he is desperate.

In a dry Dropsy, to piss by drops is evil. Hipp. in Coacis.

A Tympany in a Melanchollick Body, is deadly, and Remedies are given in vain.

If in a Leucophlegmatia, a strong Diarrhoea follow, the Disease is cured.
Hipp. Aph. 29. Sect. 7. but this Diarrhoea must be at the beginning, or at
least before the Disease be old, or the strength of the Party weakened; but if
it happen when the Patient is weak, it is dangerous.

The Cure of the Dropsy consists in the Evacuation of the Matter, whether it
be in the whole Body, or in the Abdomen or Belly; in taking away the Cause that
produced that Matter, and in strengthening of the Bowels, especially the Liver.

The chief and most ordinary Causes are, great Obstructions, and Scirrhus or
hard Tumors, the Cure of which Diseases is to be taken out of their proper
Chapters. But if they will not suffice, you must use these following, which are
more proper in Dropsies, and vary them according to the variety of Causes, and
the Bodies sick.

And first, you must give an ordinary Purge, by an opening Apozeme that expels
slegm and water, made thus:

Take of the Roots of Eryngus, Madder, Smallage, Parsley, and Elicampane, of
each one ounce: Valerian, Asarabacca, Dwarf-Elder, and Flower deluce Roots, of
each half an ounce: the Bark of the Roots of Capars, and inward Bark of an Ash
and Tamarisk, of each six drams: the Leaves of Agrimony, Ceterach, Maidenhair,
Germander, St. John's Wort, Wormwood, and the lesser Centaury, of each one
handful: Sold anella, or wild Mercury half a handful: the seeds of Carrots,
Parsley, and Fennel, of each half an ounce: scraped Liquoris, and Raisons
stoned, of each one ounce: clean Senna one ounce and an half: Agarick tied in a
clout three drams: the seeds of Dwarf-Elder, and Jallap Roots, of each one dram
and an half: Ginger and Cloves, of each one dram: Broom, Elder, and Tamarisk
flowers, of each one pugil: Boil them in equal parts of steeled Water, and
white Wine added toward the end, to a pint and a quarter. When it is strained,
dissolve therein, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, four ounces. Make a clear
Apozeme, aromatized with three drams of Cinnamon, for four morning draughts.

After Universal Purging, let the Patient take this following Powder once a
week:

Take of Clean Senna, Gummy Turbith, Hermodacts, Dwarf-Elder seeds, Jallan, and
Mechoacan, of each one dram: Cream of Tartar two drams: Cambugia, half a dram:
the powder of Diamber, Diarrhodon Abbatis, and Fennel seeds, of each one
scruple: Sugar candy three drams: Make a Powder of them all, of which infuse
two drams, or two drams and an half all night in four ounces of white Wine. Let
him take the Wine and the Powder in the morning.

The Syrup of Rhamus solutivus, or Buckthorn, made of the Juice of its Fruit,
called Rhein Berries, with Sugar, given one ounce at a time, does wonderfully
purge water. It must be taken presently after Dinner.

Or give the Magistral Syrup made of the Decoction of the Apozeme before
mentioned, the dose of Purgers being increased; or this following:

Take of the Juice of Damask Roses two pints: the Juice of the Roots of
Danewort, Flowerdeluce, Succory Leaves, and Agrimony, of each half a pint: the
seeds of Danewort, Mechoacan Roots, and of the best Rhubarb, of each two
ounces: Spicknard three drams: yellow Sanders two drams: Crystal of Tartar one
dram and an half: infuse them a whole night, and after a little boiling strain
them; then put as much white Sugar as is of the Liquor: boil it into a Syrup;
and add to it of the salt of Wormwood half an ounce. Let him take two drams
with opening Broth once in a week.

Or instead of this Syrup, or at other times when it is not taken, you may give
these Pills, which purge the evil Humors, and also open Obstructions.

Take of the best Aloes, steeped in the Juice of Wormwood, half an ounce: Gum
Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar and strained, the best Myrrh, and Crocus Martis
prepared with Sulphur, of each three drams: Salt of Wormwood and Tamarisk, of
each two drams: Diagridium, and Troches of Albandal, of each one dram: Saffron,
Ginger, and Salgem, of each one scruple: With Oxymel of Squils make a Mass of
Pills, of which give half a dram twice in a week two hours before Dinner.

Also Purging Wines are much commended for the cure of the Dropsy, of which
there are diverse Forms. But these are best:

Take of the Roots of Asarabacca, and Mechoacan, of each two ounces: the French
Flowerdeluce, and Bark of the Roots of Danewort and Elder, of each one ounce:
Elicampane Roots half an ounce: dry Wormwood and Dodder of Time, of each one
pugil: clean Senna one ounce: Soldanella or Sea-foal-foot two drams: the
Troches of Rhubarb and Agrimony, of each one dram: Mace and Cinnamon, of each
half a dram: Scammony four scruples: white Wine two pints and an half: Infuse
them three days in Balneo Mariae; the vessel being well stopped, keep it
without straining. Let him take two or three ounces in the morning, twice or
thrice in a week.

Among Medicines for drawing forth of Water, the Juice of French Flowerdeluce
is very much commended, if it be drawn forth with white Wine, it may be given
to three ounces; it provokes stool and urine very powerfully. But because it
is very offensive to the mouth and stomach with its sharpness, it uses to be
mixed with Manna or Honey. Massaria gives it thus:

Take of Juice of Flowerdeluce newly drawn with white Wine, three ounces; the
best Manna one ounce and an half. Mix them for a Potion.

Platerus in his Observations; I gave (says he) to one in a Dropsy, of the
Juice of Flowerdeluce to drink with Honey two ounces, and he often pissed and
purged; and after he had taken it twice or thrice, his Belly ceased swelling,
and his Feet, and he was cured.

Rhubarb is commended of some, because it purges noxious Humors, and
strengthens the Liver. And Stocherus says that he cured many with the use of
Rhubarb given every third or fourth day, one or two drams in an opening
Decoction. Also in Scoltzius his Epistles, there is a famous Story of one who
was cured of a Dropsy, only by the use of Rhubarb, which he took every day in
such a quantity as was necessary to purge.

The Troches of Rhubarb are much commended by all Authors. And Mathaeus de
Gradi reports that a certain Duke of Orleans, was cured with them alone, taking
two drams twice in a week.

Michael Paschalius says that he cured a Dropsy with the same, making them
into Pills, by reason of their bitterness.

The Chemists commend the Extract of black Hellebore., Aquila Coeleftis, and
Mercurius vitae, and they mix them with other vulgar Medicines, from whence
follows a plentiful Evacuation of Water. But they had need of strong Bodies
who take them.

Mercurius dulcis works most gently, and Mercurius Diaphoreticus. But
Antimonium Diaphoreticum cures without manifest Evacuation, if it be calcined
with Saltpeter till it be white: but the Diaphoretick or Sweating Medicine
made of the Butter of Antimony, cures all kinds of Dropsies best.

But you must observe in the giving of all sorts of Purges, That they,
especially if strong, are not to be given often, as Galen teaches Lib. 9, Cata
Topous, because they weaken the body, and then there will more water be bred
afterward. Therefore you must prescribe strengtheners and openers oftener than
purgers. And Experience teaches us, That the Evacuation by Urine in this
Disease has better success than that by stool.

Instead of Purgers, you may give Clysters, which discuss wind, purge water,
and take down the belly, made thus:

Take of Mallows, Mercury, and red Coleworts, of each one handful: Soldanella
or wild Mercury half a handful: Annis, Caraway, and Dill seeds, of each three
drams: Chamomel, Melilot, French Lavender and Broom flowers, of each one pugil:
boil them to a pint. In the straining dissolve of Diacatholicon one ounce:
Hiera Picra half an ounce: Oil of Dill and Lillies, and of common Honey, of
each two ounces. Make a Clyster twice in a week. Or,

Take of very sour Leaven half an ounce: common Salt one pugil: Boil them in as
much Water as is sufficient: strain it, and add to it, the Urine of a Child
four ounces: Oil of Rue three ounces: Clarified Honey one ounce. Make a
Clyster. This Valeriola commends highly.

This following Clyster, brings forth Water in abundance:

Take of Coloquintida one dram, Infuse it for a night in three ounces of white
Wine: when it is strained add thereto, Tripe Broth one pint: common Oil two
ounces: Saltpeter melted one ounce: strong Vinegar one spoonful: make a
Clyster. Or,

Take of the Pulp of Coloquintida one dram: Clean Bran one handful: boil them
in white Wine for a Clyster. Or,

Take of Carthamus seeds one ounce: the best Agarick half an ounce: the pulp of
Coloquintida three drams: Centaury the less, Germander, and both the Wormwoods,
of each half a handful: boil them to a pint. In the straining dissolve of Oil
of Chamomel, Rue, and Capars, of each one ounce: Honey of Roses two ounces:
make a Clyster. Or,

Take of the Emollient Decoction one pint: thick vomiting Wine, the Infusion of
Crocus metallorum four ounces: Diaphoenicon one ounce: make a Clyster.

Blood-letting here, is for good Reason omitted, except the Disease come from
stoppage of the Terms or Hemorrhoids. And then you must not bleed except it be
in the beginning of the Disease, before the Liver be grown too cold.

Issues, Blisters and Scarrifications, use to cause Gangrenes, or
mortifications in a Dropsy, because the heat of the part being small, is
quickly extinguished: Therefore it is better wholly to abstain from these kind
of Remedies, although sometimes they have done some people good.

Paracentesis, or cutting of the Skin, is seldom to be used, because few are
cured thereby, especially because the Patients, or their kindered will not
yield to it before the Disease is confirmed, and the Bowels are so putrefied
that there is no hope. Therefore for the most part they die the second or third
day after they are cut. The wiser sort will have the Incision made in the
beginning or increase of the Disease, before the Bowels are corrupted. Neither
is it necessary at that time, because the disease being small may more safely be
cured with other Medicines.

Among emptying Medicines, Sweatings are accounted most profitable, which, as
they are always good in Anasarca, so in a Tympany, or Ascites, they sometimes
hurt, namely, when dryness of the Liver (which is usual) causes the Disease.
Moreover, it is commonly impossible to make men in Dropsies sweat. But if the
Liver be not dry, Sweats are good in all kinds of Dropsies, especially when
they decline, to discuss the relics of the watery Humor by the Habit of the
Body. So Valeriola reports that he cured an Ascites with a Decoction of
Guajacum given forty days together. It is good to make the Decoction with
steeled Water and Wine. The Chymicks commend Antimonium Diaphoreticum.

Martinus Rulandus makes a Sudorifick of Juniper Berries, which because they
are forceable to provoke Urine, may do good both ways. It is thus made:

Take of Juniper berries bruised three handfuls: Sack as much as is sufficient:
boil them to halfs and give two ounces every morning, covering warm after it.

Horatius Reserus in Scholtzius, boasts that he has cured many Boys, and
some Women of the Anasarca with Syrup of St. Ambrose, which is a Sudorifick:
Its description is in an old Dispensatory called Luminare majus, thus:

Take of Gromwel seeds husked two ounces: spring Water half a pint: boil them
till three or four ounces of water only remain; which being strained, mix it
with as much Sack, and give it warm; it will sweat him plentifully if he be
covered warm.

But those Medicines are best which purge by Urine, and the Cure is commonly
better this way.

One of the chief, is two ounces of the Juice of Chervil given every morning in
Wine for many days.

Opening Wines that purge by Urine are good in this case; as this,

Take of Elicampane, Smallage, Fennel, and Flowerdeluce Roots dried, of each
one ounce and an half: Roots of Valerian, Gentian, Asarabacca, and Squils or
Sea Onions, of each one dram: the middle Bark of an Elder, and Sassaphras, of
each six drams: dried Wormwood, Agrimony, Germander, and Maidenhair, of each
two drams: the tops of Centaury the less, and Broom flowers, of each one dram:
Parsley, Annis, and Dill seeds, of each one dram and an half: Cinnamon two
drams: Spicknard half a dram: bruise them together, and infuse them in white
Wine some few days, and let him drink thereof every morning.

The steeled compound Wine prescribed in the Obstruction of the Liver, is good
for the same.

The Decoction of Juniper mentioned, is to be reckoned among the Diuretics.
And if you fear it is too hot, you may make it in Water, and put a little
Spirit of Vitriol to it.

Fonseca commends the use of Turpentine washed with Barley Water, and he gives
half an ounce thereof twice in a week.

And lastly, The Spirit of Salt, Tartar, and Vitriol, given in a true quantity
with an Apozeme, or other opening Decoction for some days, do wonders: because
they being very thin, do run into all the parts of the Body, and open them.

The Salts of Wormwood, Juniper, Bean Stalks, and the like, given in white
Wine, do the same. Or in want of Salts you may make a Lee of the Ashes of the
same, which will be sufficient

Mathiolus upon the 87. Chap. Lib. 1. of Dioscorides, says, That a Lee made of
Juniper Ashes with white Wine, and four or five ounces thereof taken, does
powerfully provoke Urine, so that I have seen some men cured of a Dropsy with
it alone.

Moreover, In the whole time of the Cure, you must use strengtheners to the
Liver; for it is in vain to purge water, if you do not hinder the increase of
it: which you cannot do except you refresh the Liver, and bring it to its
former temper.

Among the chief Strengtheners is Cinnamon Water; of which you may give one
Spoonful every morning, and before Supper.

But Galen in his Eight Book Kata Topous commends the Electuary called
Cyphoides by the Arabians from the Wine whereof it is made, of which you may
give half an ounce in the morning, according to Hollerius it is thus made,

Take of Curans cleansed half a pound: boil them in old Sack to the consistence
of a Pultis, strain them after they are pounded, and then ad of the conserve of
Rosemary flowers, Citron barkcandied, and Cinnamon, of each one dram: the
Powder of Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamargariton calidum, and Diacinamom, of each
two scruples: Lignum Aloes half a dram* Saffron half a scruple: mix them for a
soft Electuary.

The Opiates prescribed for the Obstruction of the Liver are here very
profitable.

The Conserve of Sea Wormwood is very good, made of one part of the Leaves and
three of Sugar with which Matthiolus in his Chapter of Wormwood says some have
been Cured.

Poterius makes an Opiate of Conserve of Roses, Specificum, Somachium, and
Crocus Martis, and Oil of Vitriol, by which only Medicine he says he has
Cured Dropsies. The Specificum Stomachium, is Antimony fixed.

The Cure of men in Dropsies lies much in their drink: therefore there must be
care of that, that he drink sparingly, and endure thirst as much as may be: for
it is known that many have been Cured only with abstaining from drink and
eating of dry meats without other means: For Drink let him take Elicampane or
Wormwood, Juniper, or Steeled Wine, or let him use the aforesaid Steel
Medicines. Avicen forbids men in a Dropsy to see Waters. But if you fear too
much Heat or Dryness, or if the Patient be Abstemious, he may use the Decoction
of Juniper, of Guajacum, or Sassaphras, or of Madder, which provokes urin very
much, either alone, or with white Wine: But because he must abstain from Drink
(as we said) and yet there is great Thirst, it must be assuaged by Fits with
washing the mouth with steeled Water and Vinegar, or with often chewing Mastich
or the like; for it will draw water to the mouth, not only (as some think) out
of the head alone, but from the Stomach and Cavity of the Abdomen, and
therefore it will do much good.

Of Meats we say thus, That he must choose the Dryest and avoid Sweet meats as
the Plague.

While you use Internals, forget not Externals, for they are of great force to
discuss the Humor of the Belly; as Fomentations, ^ags, Ointments, Pultisses,
and Plasters: The Chief are made thus,

Take of Marsh-mallow and Lilly Roots, Cypress barks, Capar barks, middle barks
of Ash, Tamarisk, dwarf-Elder, and the greater Snakeweed of each three ounces:
Wormwood, Agrimony, Marjoram, Organ, Calamints, Peny-Royal, R^e, Ground Pine,
Southernwood, and Elder, of each one handful* Parsley, Dill, and Cummin seeds,
of each one ounce* Chamomel, Melilot, and Broom flowers, of each three pugils:
Spickenard, Schoenanth, Nutmegs, Cloves, and Cinnamon, of each half an ounce:
Salt and Alum, of each half a pound: boil them all in a Lee made of Oak Ashes,
or branches, with this Foment the whole Belly with Spunges dipped therein and
strained.

Or,

Take the Urine of a sound Boy, four Pints: Lapis Prunellae, three ounces: boil
them to the consuming of the third part for a Fomentation.

Aqua-pendens Commends Lime Water, in which he dips a new Sponge which will
compass the whole Abdomen; this he strains and binds on, by which he affirms,
That the Waters that Cause the Dropsy are consumed, the cold and moist
distemper of the Bowels are taken away, and the hardness of the Spleen
dissolved.

Claudinus quenches the Lime in a Salt Bath Water, that is either of Brimstone
or Saltpeter, and binds close the Spunges dipped therein and strained with
Rowlers to the Belly, and keeps them there long, and then changes them.

You may make Bags of the ingredients of the former Fomentation boiled in white
Wine, and applied warm to the belly.

After the Fomentation let the belly be anointed with Oil of Dill* Rue, or
Flower-de-luce, mixed with Powder of ammoniacum, Galangal, Dill, Bay Berries,
and the like.

It is also good to anoint with the Oil of Scorpions according to Matthiolus,
and with a little Oil of Rosemary.

Many do make Ointments and Liniments of strong Purgers, which draw Water
violently from the Dropsy, and assuage the Swelling of the belly, but they are
dangerous, for the Purging Quality getting between the Muscles and the
Membranes, does often stir up a deadly Looseness.

After Liniments, or if they be omitted you may apply Cataplasms or
Emplaisters: This following is the best,

Take of the Roots of wild Cowcumbers well bruised and steeped twenty four
hours in Vinegar of Squills, one pound: clarified Honey two Pints: mix them,
and boil them to the consistance of a Cerat, and ad in the (...) your ounces of
the Powder of Cumminseed, make an Emplaister for the belly to be renewed ev^^y
day: Or,

Take of dried Cow Dung one pound: Brimstone and Cummin seeds Poudered, of each
two drams: New Wine boiled called Sapa: or of the Urine of a Boy, as much as
will make a Cataplasm.

A Cataplasm of Rhadishes bruised and laid to the Navel and Reins, does provoke
Stools and Urine.

Galen Commends a Cataplasm of Snails bruised with their Shells, which must be
kept to the belly till it fall off of its own accord; it draws water forth
violently.

Valeriola makes it in form of a Plaster thus,

Take of Cow Dung one pound: Goats-dung half a pound: boil them in strong
Vinegar, and beat them in a Mortar with three ounces of Brimstone, and one
ounce of Alum: the Juice of Spurge and dwarf-Elder newly drawn, of each three
ounces: Lupine and Orobus meal, of each two ounces: the Powder of Soldanella,
Annis, Fennel, and Cummin, of each two drams: common parched Salt, three drams:
Turpentine, four ounces: Pitch, six ounces: make a Plaster.

It is worth the Observation which Wierus and Varignana say they have found by
Experience that a Toad found in the Woods, cut through the belly and tied to
the Reins, does provoke Urine violently; and when you will evacuate more, apply
another.

Petraeus also reports that the Powder of the same Toad dried and calcined in
an Oven, drunk half a dram in Wine or other Liquor, does wonderfully expel the
Dropsy by Urine.

The first Inventor of which Experience desiring thereby to destroy himself,
was cured thereby contrary to expectation.

Also this following Cerat made of a Toad is excellent,

Take of Toads two pound: the Juice of dwarf Elder three Pints: Oil one pint:
Wax half a pound: boil them in a luted Pot to the consumption of half, strain
them for a Cerat; spread this upon a Leather and lay it to the Spleen it
evacuateth all waters.

All the time of the Cure you must* strengthen the Liver and Stomach, if the
humor does begin to abate, or is not so great that it hinders the Virtue of
outward Medicines from coming to the part.

Take of the Oil of Orange flowers one ounce: the Oil of Spike three drams: the
Ointment of Roses, the stomach Cerot of Galen, of each two drams: distilled Oil
of Mastich two scruples: the distilled Oil of Wormwood one scruple: Oil of
Nutmegs one dram and an half: white Wax a little: mix them for a Liniment to be
applied to the stomach.

Take of Sea Wormwood three drams: Horehound and Rosemary, of each two drams:
Red Roses two pugills*: Ghamomil flowers and Bay Leaves, of each half an
handful: Orange peels and sweet wood, Aloes of each three drams: Cypress Roots,
Schoenanth, and Spikenard, of each half an ounce: with two parts of the best
Wine, and one part of Wormwood and Agrimony Water make a Decoction, with which
Foment the Region of the Liver with a sponge first washed in Wormwood Water.

Take of the Ointment of Roses and Cerot of Sanders, of each three ounces: Red
Roses, Endive and Sorrel seed, of each one dram: Spikenard, Schoenanth, dried
Wormwood, and Styrax Calamita, of each four scruples: Oil of Mastich or
Wormwood as much as will suffice to make a Liniment to be applied to the same
part after the Fomentation.

For the most part in a Dropsy the Thighs, Legs, and Feet have a cold
swelling, and for the discussing of it a Lie is good in which the Roots of
Dwarf Elder, and Elicampane, Rosemary Leaves, Marjoram, Thyme, Bays, Organ,
Salt and Alum have been boiled.

Although the things aforesaid are chiefly used, yet sometimes they are not
necessary, namely, when the Dropsy comes in a hot and dry Constitution from
hot causes which disperse the natural heat, as in vehement Chollerick Fevers,
for then cold things for the Liver mixed with warm Openers are best, such as
are used in continual Fevers: And the Magistral Syrup above mentioned made of
the Juice of Roses, Succory, and Agrimony.

For ordinary Drink give a Decoction of Succory Roots and Calcitrapa, or white
Chamelion, which is not unpleasant; or of other Openers, but in a greater
quantity than above, which may quench thirst, assuage the heat of the Liver,
and moisten the dryness thereof: It is not amiss to confirm this Doctrine by a
famous example (though it be allowed by Avicen, Trallian, and others) because
it seems strange to some* and is of great Consequence: Baptista Montanus
reports, Cons. 263. in these words; I saw (says he) in Venice a certain
Predicant Friar that was cured of an Ascites and Tympanites: there were* with
me many famous Physicians; namely, Papiensis, Eugubinus, Trincavella, and
others: He had (as I said) an Ascites with a Tympany, and a Consumption with a
Hectic Fever; therefore we were bound both to dry and moisten: therefore we
were in a great contention; I was willing that he should drink much, but things
that Open, because he had many obstructions* and that moisten because he had a
Consumption: I prescribed the Syrup of Vinegar with all things that provoke
Urine: Eugubinus would not allow him to drink, and told a story of one who was
cured by dry things: Papiensis to end the controversy, said, That he should
neither drink much, nor at all; we argued till night: the Noblemen brought
their Physicians to their Boats, and there Papiensis said to a Nobleman, what
he had concealed formerly, If you would have this man cured, there is nothing
to be done but what Baptista Montanus says.

In this case also Medicines of Steel, Tartar, and Vitriol are excellent,
because they strongly Open and provoke Urine without any great heat.

But the tart, Vitriol Mineral Waters are best, because they powerfully open
the Bowels, provoke Urine, and correct the Distemper of the Bowels, whence
experience shows us that many Dropsies are every year cured at the Spaw.

Avicen reports in the Chapter of the Cure of Ascites, of a Woman which had a
great Dropsy and eat an incredible number of Pomegranats, whereby she was
cured.

And Varignana reports out of Platearius, That an Old Woman boiled the Juice of
Plantane to the Consumption of half, and gave it to one that had a Dropsy from
a Hot Cause every day, and so Cured him.

By these Examples it is plain, That sometimes a Dropsy is Cured with Cold
things; and to these we may ad the testimony of Christopher a Vega, lib. 3.
art. med. sect. 8. cap. 12. who says there, We saw one that had a Tympany from
the Hot Distemper of the Liver whom we cured with cold things, laying upon the
Liver the Juice of Endive and Succory with a little Vinegar, and giving Endive
and Succory to be eaten.

The End of the Eleventh Book.
THE TWELEFTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Spleen.
The PREFACE.
ALthough the Spleen may be afflicted with all kinds of Diseases, both
Similary, Organick, and Common: yet we will only speak of those which are most
ordinary in practice; and we will contain them in six Chapters. The first shall
be of the Inflammation of the Spleen. The second of the Pain. The third of the
Obstruction and Tumor, or puffing up of the Spleen. The fourth of the Scirrhus,
or hard Tumor. The fifth of Hypochondriack Melancholy. The sixth of the Scurvy.

Chap. 1. Of the Inflammation of the Spleen.
THe Inflammation of the Spleen is of the same Nature with that of the Liver:
only it differs in this; That it seldom comes from pure, but from Melanchollick
Blood. It has the same Causes, both Conjunct, and Antecedent: but the
Diagnosis, or knowledge by signs, is different.

The signs of the Spleen inflamed, are swelling and pain in the left side under
the Ribs, which sometimes reaches to the Midriff, and the left Shoulder; also
heaviness, and beating in the same side, a constant Fever, loathing of Meat,
Thirst, blackness of the Tongue, trouble some lying on the right side, by reason
of the heavine^s of the part lying upon the Stomach then; sometimes troublesome
lying upon the left, if the Tumor be great, for then it is pressed both by the
Stomach, and the Liver; sometimes the Tumor is in the shape of the Spleen,
sometimes it fills the whole left Hypochondrion, sometimes it appears below the
Navel, when the matter is increased, and when the Inflammation reaches to the
parts adjacent, and especially to the Navel.

These signs are greater or lesser, according to the diverse mixtures of Humors.
For if Choler be mixed with Melanchollick Blood, the Urine is more red, the
Mouth bitter, the Thirst greater, the Fever stronger and worse every third
day; great watchings, and sometimes do^ing: if it be mixed with Phlegm, the Color
is pale, the Fever and Thirst is less, and the pain less: But if the Blood be
only Melanchollick, the hardness is greater, the color is black, and sometimes
the Urine, and there is other signs of Melancholy predominating.

The Prognostic is almost the same with that of the Liver inflamed, but less
dangerous, because the Liver is the nobler Part. If it kill not the party,
either it ends in a Crisis, or it is dissolved or suppurated, or grows hard and
turns into a Scirrhus. A good Crisis is when the left Nostril bleeds, or when
there is a purging by Stool or Urine.

The Cure of this Disease, is the same with that of the Liver: only observe
these Differences.

First, You must open the left Arm in this, and not so often as in the
Inflammation of the Liver, because the Liver being the Fountain of blood, wants
greater Evacuation. That which is reported of the Salvatella Vein to discharge
the Spleen so properly, is but a conceit, and is now out of use: you may better
take blood out of the Liver Vein* called Bastica.

Secondly, You must apply those Topics, or outward Medicines now to the left
side.

Thirdly, You must not take such care in the use of binding Medicines
outwardly, because the Spleen is not so noble a part, and needs less
strengthening.

Other things are to be taken out of the Cure of the Inflammation of the Liver.

Chap. 2. Of the Pain of the Spleen.
Sometimes the Spleen is pained without Fever or hardness; and this comes from
wind which does not only stretch the substance of the Spleen, which is almost
insensible, but the Membranes that covers it.

It is easily distinguished from the Inflammation by the Fever, and hardness
being absent, but hardly from the Chollick, because the Colon is just under and
over the Spleen: yet the pain of the Spleen is weighty, and in one place; but
the pain of the Colon is stretching, sharp, and movable, and runs about the
whole Belly.

The Cure of this Disease, is with Clysters that are Carminative, or that expel
wind with convenient purging, and with Emollient and Discussing Fomentations
mixed with Vinegar: As also with Liniments made of Oil of Lillies, Chamomel,
Capars, and Wormwood, with a little Spike and Vinegar.

If the pain remain after the use of these, apply a Cupping-glass to the left
Hypochondrion, if there be no suspicion of the Inflammation or Defluxion.

Chap. 3. Of Obstruction, Tumor, or Puffing up of the Spleen.
THe Spleen is no less subject to Obstructions than the Liver, but more,
because it receives thicker and fouler blood, which is more easily contained
in its Veins, or insensible Passages, by reason of the softness and looseness of
the part, which is more fit to receive thick Humors. And when thick Humors
stick in the substance of the Spleen, it makes a Tumor, and an Inflammation in
the part. And if the Humor by long continuance grow thick and hard, it breeds a
Scirrhus; but as long as it is moist with Phlegm, it is like an Oedema or
phlegmatic Tumor, which is most usual with them who live in Marshy moist
places, or who live upon cold Diet. But if this Tumor be soft and loose, it is
called simply an Inflammation, or puffing up, the cause whereof, is partly
phlegm, and partly wind. They are commonly called Splenitick people who are thus
afflicted.

The Causes of the Obstruction of the Spleen, are the same with them of the
Liver, and this or that part is, as it is more or less disposed to receive
them: Sometimes both Liver and Spleen are affected together; for a gross Humor
can hardly be in one part, but some of it must be carried to the other.

The Obstruction of the Spleen is distinguished from the Obstruction of the
Liver, from the Situation of the part; for there is a heaviness in the left
Hypochondrion, and sometimes pain, especially after running o^ great walking or
riding: and when you handle the Hypochondrion, there is a stretching and
resistance; Besides, the Face is bluish, and there are other Signs of
Melancholy.

This Disease is stubborn and of long continuance, by reason of the softness
and looseness of the part, which cannot therefore easily discharge the humor;
and if it last long and be not Cured speedily, it turns into a Scirrhus.

The Cure is the same with that of the Obstruction of the Liver, by adding some
things which do more properly respect the Spleen, and are fitter to prepare and
purge Melancholy.

The Pills of Ammoniacum which follow, are to be added as most excellent, and
to be used often,

Take of the best Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills one ounce: the
extract of Aloes half an ounce: Crystal of Tartar one dram: Myrrh and Saffron,
of each half a dram: Mastich, Benjamine, Salt of Ash, and Wormwood, of each one
scruple: with Oxymel of Squills make a mass of Pills. The Dose is half a dram
twice in a Week, with Purging between.

In Apozemes and other Opening Drinks, Oxymel simple, and of Squills, or Sea
Onyons may be very well dissolved, to cut and dissolve powerfully the gross and
earthy humors.

Of all other Medicines those which are made of Steel are the best to open the
Obstructions of the Spleen.

Also you may give Steeled or Ironed Waters for ordinary Drink, which are known
to lessen the Spleen (as Celsus says) by this, because Beasts that are brought
up at Smiths houses have little Spleens.

To the Fomentation put Vinegar instead of white Wine, which will make them
pierce better, which is requisite in a gross humor.

Moreover Galen Commends Vinegar exceedingly in the Diseases of the Spleen,
used both inwardly and outwardly.

Put Hemlock to the Cataplasms; as being most Powerful to Soften, and Discuss
Humors.

There is an Excellent Cataplasm made of Green Tobacco; boiled in Oil, and
White Wine.

Of which also boiled to the Consumption of the Wine, you may make a Rare
Liniment.

Amatus Lusitanus, curat. 6. cent. 5. mentions a Cure of an Obstruction of
the Spleen remaining after a Quartan Ague, That it was taken away with a
Decoction of China used twenty days after convenient Purging.

Chap. 4. Of the Scirrhus, or Hard Swelling of the Spleen.
THe matter of the Spleen causing obstruction by continuance grows thicker, and
makes a Scirrhus: And since the Scirrhus of the Liver and Spleen are both of
one Nature, whatsoever we have said of the Scirrhus of the Liver, may be here
also useful.

The Knowledge also of the Scirrhus of the Spleen is the same with that of the
Liver, but only the hardness is on the contrary side.

It is Distinguished from a Windy Tumor; because there is more Heaviness in a
Schirrhus, than in a Windy Tumor, which yeildeth to the Finger, and makes a
Noise; al which are not in a Scirrhus.

If it come only of Melancholy, there will be evident signs thereof; but if it
be mixed with Phlegm, there is apparent in the whole body a Phlegmatic evil
habit.

The Prognostic also is the same with that of the Liver; only this of the
Spleen is more easily Cured; because the less Noble the part is, the stronger
Medicines may be Applied without Danger.

And Lastly, The Cure is the same with that mentioned in the Scirrhus of the
Liver.

And because it is to be done by degrees, from mild to stronger Medicines:
first you must use those Remedies which we said were good for the Obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen: and among the Chalybeat Medicines there commended, the
Principle is the Pills of Steel, made with Amoniacum, and other things
mentioned in the Obstruction of the Liver.

Pills of Aloes, Ammoniacum, and Mercurius dulcis, are the best among the
Medicines for the Scirrhus of the Liver.

But this following Opiate is the Medicine will Cure, if it be not incurable:

Take of Gum Ammoniack, Opopanax, and Bdelium, of each two drams: dissolve them
in white Wine: strain and boil them, then ad of confectio Hamech, and
Diaphaenicon, of each two drams: double Catholicon half an ounce: Pilulae
foetidae two drams: make an Opiate, of which let him take half an ounce with
twenty grains of Mercurius dulcis for many days together, and so the Tumor and
hardness will vanish.

And besides what was said concerning the Liver, you must observe these
following Precepts in in this Disease.

First, Because Blood-letting is much questioned, we resolve that it may be
good in the beginning. But it is good for nothing when the Disease is old.

Secondly, The dead or blind Nettle called Galiopsis, or Pliny's Archangel, is
commended by Solenander and Fonseca, for a special Remedy; the Italians call it
the Spleen Herb: this is given boiled in Wine, the quantity of an ounce, or one
dram in Powder, with Wine or other convenient Liquor or Decoction, with most
admirable success.

Thirdly, Besides the Fomentations there mentioned, Aquapendens in his
Chyrurgery, commends the fomentation of the Belly, with a Sponge dipped in Time
Water, and squeezed; and with that he says he has cured the Scirrhus of the
Spleen and Dropsy.

Fourthly, Besides the Ointments before mentioned, Amatus Lusitanus commends
this following as admirable, by which he says he cured a Scirrhus of the
Spleen; and he says that he had it from the Physicians of Ferraria.

Take of Common Oil three pints: the Marrow of an Ox bone one pound: fresh
Butter half a pound: the Juyces of Briony and Sowbread, of each one pint: boil
them gently till the Juyces are almost consumed. Add to the straining, yellow
Wax eight ounces: the Powder of Ceterach or Spleenwort, Capar barks, Tamarisk,
and Agnus Castus seeds, of each three drams. Mix them into an Ointment.

Thus it is described by Amatus; but there is too much for one Patient,
therefore you may lessen it thus:

Take of Common Oil three ounces: Ox Marrow one ounce: fresh Butter half an
ounce: the juice of the Root of Briony and wild Cucumers, of each one ounce and
an half: boil them as before, and add one ounce of Wax, and of the powder of
Ceterach: Capar and Tamarisk Barks, and Agnus Castus seeds, of each two drams.

Fifthly, The Cataplasms following are excellent:

Take of the Roots of wild Cucumers one pound: Mallows and Violets, of each
three handfuls: boil them till they are soft, beat them and strain them: then
add of the Oil of Capars and Tamarisk, Vinegar of Squills a little: make a
Cataplasm.

Take of sour Leaven two pound: Boil it in equal parts of Oil and Wine to a
Pultiss.

Besides the Plasters mentioned in the Scirrhus of the Liver, these are very
good:

Take of Gum Ammonial ^our ounces: Dissolve them in strong Vinegar: then strain
them, and boil them till the Vinegar be consumed: then with a little Wax make a
Plaster.

Take of Hemlock four handfuls: Ammoniacum half a pound: Infuse them in Vinegar
eight days: then boil them til the Ammoniacum be dissolved: then strain them
through a linen cloth, and boil the Liquor again a little while, and with Wax
and Oil of Almonds, make a Plaster.

Take of the Juice of Mallows, Cressonis, the Stalks and Roots of Fern, of each
two ounces: Gum Ammoniack four ounces: With a little Vinegar, first dissolve
them with a gentle fire, then boil them, and strain them: then boil them again
to the consistence of a Syrup, and with one ounce of Oil of Capars, and a
little Wax, make a Sparadrap for the Spleen, to be renewed every third day.

Aquapendens in the place cited, says, that he cured many with this Plaster,
which is made of two parts of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and one of the
Juice of Tobacco; one of the Rozin of the Pine Tree, Turpentine, and Juice of
Danewort; one of Oil of Capars, and a little new Wax in the Form of a Cerat.

Chap. 5. Of Hypochondriack Melancholy.
ALthough all the parts beneath the Ribs, called Hypochondria, are affected in
this Disease, yet its thought the Spleen is most, because it receives the
Melancholy, and therefore it is fitly placed among the Diseases of the Spleen.

This Disease comes of Preternatural Melancholy, and other adust Humors,
especially Blood, or Choler, or Natural Melancholy.

This Melanchollick Humor is not pure by its self, but commonly mixed with
others, as Choler, Phlegm, and Water, from whence come the diversity of
Symptoms, which hereafter shall be mentioned. These Humors breed in the Spleen,
especially when it is distempered with heat, and also in the Liver: hence it is
that they draw meat and drink to themselves, which is not concocted, that which
is thin of the Chyle sooner than that which is thick: and then the thicker part
for want of something to carry it, stays in the Meseraick Veins, and the longer
it stays, the thicker it grows, and sometimes is burnt: and afterward coming
to those parts, it is not well concocted. Moreover, thine parts in their
Natural state should concoct by boiling, now do it by roasting; hence comes
this great ad^stion of Humors.

It may also be, that this Disease may be bred without the distemper of the^e
parts, from evil Nourishment that breed Melancholy blood; and also from good
blood retained too long in the ve^sels, and being too much, as in the stoppage
of the Terms and Hemorrhoids, which continuing long in the Vessels is burnt,
and turned into Melancholy.

It may also come from the Stomach not well concocting, but turning it into a
parched Crudity, from which those evil Juyces are bred in the Liver, and the
Spleen. And Galen, 3. de loc. affect. cap. 7. following Diocles, thought the
proper seat of it was in the Stomach, because in this Disease there are
commonly signs of an ill Stomach: But it is more probable that the Stomach
should be afflicted secondarily from the Liver or the Spleen, as we will
clearly show hereafter.

These evil Humors are gathered into the Veins and Arteries, which are in the
bottom of the Stomach, especially in the great branches of the Gate Vein, the
Spleen Veins, and those of the Mesentery, Caul, and Belly, in which they have
often great and grievous ferventations or workings; from whence stinking Vapors
are sent to the Brain, Heart, and Midriff, which cause those diverse Symptoms
in those parts, which we shall after mention.

Also the Humors are contained in the Bowels, especially in the Spleen and
Sweetbread, and the Glandles of the Mesentery, the substance of which parts is
foft, and like a Sponge, and therefore is more ready to receive them, and
harder to cast them forth. Besides, the Glandles which are d^^persed through
the Mesentery, to be a prop to Veins and Arteries, and to hinder least they
should be pressed by the Guts being full, or by any other thing: If these swell
much, they do press upon the Vessels, and hinder the passage of the Humors,
whence come Obstructions in those passages.

Boys and young men are little subject to this Disease, by reason of their
moist temper unfit to breed Melancholy: but men often, because the Humors are
burnt by heat in youth; and when that heat decaies, and the thin parts are
exhaled, there is a great increase of Melancholy.

The Antecedent and principal Causes of this Disease, are first Meats of evil
Juice, and hard of Concoction, which are fit to breed Melancholy; as brown
Bread, or unleavened, or crusty, Pulse, Cheese, hard Eggs, and fried Meats,
Water Fowl, Beef, Venison, Hairs, and all Salt and smoaked Meats, and many
other things of hard substance.

Secondly, Great Passions of long continuance, especially Sadness, are very
powerful to breed this Disease because they disperse the Spirits, by which
means the Concoction is weakened, and so there is great Crudity, which being
burnt by the hot Bowels turn into Melancholy.

Thirdly, Idleness, by which the Excrements are retained, especially if there
be much study and watching; hence it is that learned men, and such as ^it much
are very subject to this Disease.

Lastly, The stoppage of the Terms and Hemorrhoids, both in respect of their
quality and quantity produce it: For when Melanchollick, Salt and burnt Humors,
used to be discharged by those ways, if they are stopped they return to the
Hypochondria and cause this Disease.

The Knowledge of this is taken from the Symptoms which follow, and they are
many, because almost all parts of the Body suffer thereby when it is high: We
shall reckon them up, admonishing first, That all do not happen to all
Patients, but some to one, some to another, according to the diversity of the
Humor, and the part affected.

First therefore, the Stomach commonly suffers, not principally, as Galen from
Diocles supposed; but secondarily: When Blood coming from the Branches of the
Gate Vein, to nourish the Stomach is not good; from whence the Stomach being
ill nourished, does ill concoct, and turns its Meat into corruption. Hence
comes a circular Evil, when the Liver and Spleen send evil Blood to the
Stomach, and the Stomach breeds evil Chyle to return to them, of which they
make bad blood.

Therefore in this Disea^e the Stomach commonly concocteth ill, and turns the
chief part sometimes into Water, sometimes into sharp, sour, and clammy
substance; which being not drawn by the Guts and Meseraick Veins, because unfit
for nourishment, stays in the Stomach; and coming upwards sometimes fills the
Tongue with Spittle, so that the Patients (...) much, and sometimes vomit.

Sometimes the Matter in the Stomach boyleth, and fermenteth; from whence comes
wind, which does not only stretch the Stomach, but the parts adjacent, and make
the Heart so sick that sometimes the Patient swooneth. Sometimes the Wind is sent
out upwards and downwards, and by insensible transpirati^^, or the Matter
causing them is vomited forth.

Yet you must observe that all that is vomited out is not bred in the Stomach,
but is sent from the Spleen and other parts to it: for sometimes the humors
vomited are so sharp that they set the teeth on edg, and these are sent by the
short vessel from the Spleen to the Stomach.

In some there is blood so sent, with Melancholy and other evil Humors, which
is cast forth partly upward, and partly downward; as we showed at large in the
Vomiting of Blood.

In this Disease there is often belching and noise beneath the ribs, by reason
of the abundance of Wind made of those Crude Humors: hence it was wont to be
called the windy Disease. Now, how Wind is bred of Melancholy, we showed in
the Tympany.

Sometimes pains arise in the Stomach and Hypochondria, of the same Wind, which
reach to the Back and Loins, so that you would think it the Stone of the
Kidneyes, especially if the Urine be thick and red, as usually it is.

The Belly is often bound, because the Meat is turned into clammy Matter, which
sticks to the Guts, which the expulsive Faculty cannot cast out without help of
Medicines, and therefore the Patients are constrained to take Purges and
Clysters often.

Sometimes there is a Flux of the Belly, if the Humors grow sharp, and have in
them much Choler or burnt Melancholy.

There is a heat in the Hypochondria, and a certain Inflammation inward,
sometimes in one side, sometimes in another, from hot Humors contained therein,
especially when they are moved by inward or outward means; so that the Face
will grow hot and red from those vapors; and sometimes there is an Ephemeral, or
Fever, for a day, by those vapors sent through the whole Body.

The Urine is sometimes thick, sometimes thin. Thin, when thick Humors stop the
passages through which it is as it were strained, thick, red, and troubled, by
reason of the mixture of the thick Matter, which is very salt, and therefore is
called ( Materia Tartaria) and it lies at the bottom of the Urinal like a thick
Sediment. Or some part of it sticks like red Sand to the sides, which makes
many fear the Stone without cause, because this same is not bred in the Reins,
but in the Liver, from a burnt and salt Humor, and you may know this, because
it dissolves between the Fingers like Salt, which will not when it comes from
the Reins.

Sometimes there is a Palpitation, or beating of the Heart, by reason of the
vapors ascending, which while it labors to expel, make it move violently; and
then the Patient thinks himself in great danger.

Sometimes there is a beating in the left Hypochondrion, when hot Humors are
there; from whence vapors arise, and make the Pulse or Systole and Diastole of
the Arteries greater; so that both the Patient and the standers by may feel it,
which is chiefly after heat with Anger, motion, or drinking of much Wine. This
beating is chiefly in the Coeliack Artery, which is the chiefest in that part.
In an old Disease, it is sometimes constant; and this signifies an Habitual and
incurable Disease. An Aneurism sometimes follows this great breathing, from
the enlarging of the Coeliack, or some other Artery, and from the hot blood in
them, which being very thin and full of many hot Spirits, continually dilateth
and stretches the Arteries while there is an Aneurism, such as Fallopius
observed, Lib. de tum. preter naturam, cap. 14. in an old woman, who being
opened had an Aneurism in her Belly, into which he put his fist. From which,
mark by the way, the great providence of Nature, which fearing the breaking of
an Artery through too much enlarging, has made the coat of it as hard as a
bone, as Fallopius observed in the same place. Also Paraeus in his sixth Book,
Cap. 28. tells the like story of an Aneurism, found not in the Belly, but the
Breast, in the Venal Artery, which was so stretched that it could contain his
sist; and also the inward Tunicle thereof was like a bone. And we have seen the
like about two years agone, namely, an Aneurism in the Breast by the dilatation
of an Artery, which would hold the fist of a Boy of fifteen years old; and the
Tunicle thereof was grown like a Gristle.

The evil vapors that ascend from the Hypochondria, produce many Symptoms: for
being sent to the Pallat and Tongue they dry those parts, and cause a thirst:
when they go to the Lungs and Midriff, they cause shortness of breathing; when
to the Membranes of the Brain, Headache; when to the Brain, noise in the Ears,
dimness of Sight, Giddiness, Fear, and Sorrow, and diverse Melancholy Phansies.
And if they be malignant, and very sharp, they cause an Epilepsie, or
Falling Sickness: if they come to the Nerves, Convulsions: and if they be
stupifying they cause a Numbness, and bastard Palsy, Coma, and Apoplexy, if
they get into the Brain. But if these vapors be hot and dry, they dry the
Brain, and cause watchings, troublesome sleep, and frightful Dreams: and at
first, though they sleep well after Supper til midnight, afterward they wake,
some three or four hours, and some sleep again about three or four a clock,
others not at all. The reason whereof is this: Because while the Chyle is
carried to the parts that serve for the second Concoction, then the evil Humors
lying in the Vessels, are stirred, and send up vapors, which being sent by the
Veins and Arteries to the Head, cause watching, and if they be quickly
discussed, they sleep again; but if they continue long, they watch the other
part of the night.

We have formerly spoken of all these Symptoms, and we say again, That all are
not in all men, but more or sewer, according to the variety of the Humors, and
parts affected.

This also is to be marked; It is not Essential to Hypochondriack Melancholy,
that stretching, hardness, pain. and swelling, should be in the Hypochondria,
because the cause is for the most part in the Branches of the Gate Vein, and
Arteries adjoining, and sends from thence vapors to the Heart and Brain.
Oftentimes there is stretching in the Liver and Spleen, which signifies, That
the Humors stick in those parts: but if there be no stretchings, it is a sign
that the evil Humors lie in the Veins of the Mesentery, Caul, Sweetbread, and
Stomach. These proper Symptoms show that the Stomach is affected with sour
belchings, and stinking, or loathing, vomiting, want of concoction, and
sometimes flux of the belly.

As for the Prognostic: This Disease is not deadly for the most part, but of
long continuance, many times the whole life, therefore it is commonly called the
disgrace of Physicians, because they do seldom cure it; and if the Patient seem
to be cured, it returns again in a few months: it is also called the Scourge of
Physicians, because they who have it are continually asking new Med^c^nes, and
presently satisfied therewith, and daily complain to the Physician for others.

The Flux of the Hemorrhoids does good in this Disease, if it be moderate; but
if it continue long it is dangerous.

A thick Urine is better in this Disease, than a thin and watery, which shows
that the thick Humors are detained in the Body. Black Urine without a Fever,
does often Cure this Disease.

Its good in this Disease to have a loose Belly, and bad to be bound. Also
Vomiting, if the Patient be refreshed thereby, is profitable; but if it
continue long, it is dangerous.

A Giddiness, and continual pain in the Head in this Disease, ends in an
Epilepsie, Blindness, or Apoplexy.

The Cure of this Disease, is in three things chiefly: first in opening
Obstructions: secondly in amending the distempers of the Bowels: and in
discharging of the peccant humor, not omitting strengtheners: For which a wise
Physician may use these following.

First give a Clyster, then this Potion:

Take (...) Senna half an ounce: Annis seeds, and Cream of Tartar, of each one
dram: Borrage flowers, Fumitory, and Sorrel, of each half a handful: Liquoris
three drams: boil them to three ounces. Dissolve in the straining, Rhubarb
infused in Lavender Water one dram and an half: double Catholicon three drams:
Compound Syrup of Succory one ounce. Make a Potion; to which you may well add
in a strong Melancholy, one dram of Confectio Alkermes.

The day following, let Blood from the left side chiefly, or as the Liver or
Spleen are most affected.

Then give these Broths:

Take of Sparagus, Dog-tooth, and Succory Roots, of each half an ounce:
Agrimony, Ceterach, Maidenhair, Bugloss, and Succory, of each half a handful:
Cream of Tartar one dram: boil them with a Chicken, and make Broth ten or
twelve days, adding four drops of Spirit of Vitriol to cool and open more.

In old Obstructions, you may add to the former, China Roots, Sassaphras, white
Sanders, Smallage Roots, and ^^le Fern Roots, Bettony, Scabious, Coriander
prepared, Raisons, and the like.

If the Belly be bound, or the Body very foul, give in every third draught of
Broth, half an ounce of Senna, with Annis seeds.

Or this Apozeme instead of the Broth:

Take of Bugloss, Sparagus, Succory, and Sorrel Roots, of each one ounce: the
middle rind of Tamarisk and Ash, of each half an ounce: Agrimony, Ceterach,
Maidenhair, Dodder, Succory, Fumitory, Hops, Bugloss, and Borrage, of each one
handful: the four cold seeds, Annis and Fennel seeds, of each two drams:
Currance one ounce: Senna and Polipody of the Oak, of each two ounces: Dodder
of Time one ounce: the best Agarick and Rhubarb infused by themselves in
Cinnamon Water, of each two drams: Mace and Cloves, of each one dram: the three
Cordial Flowers, of each one pugil: Boil them to a pint, and dissolve in the
straining, Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, and of Roses solutive, of each two
ounces. Make an Apozeme clarified and aromatized with two drams of yellow
Sanders, for four morning draughts.

Or give Cock Broth thus made:

Take of Roots of Asparagus, Bruscus, and the bark of Capar Roots and Tamarisk,
of each half an ounce: Agrimony, Ceterach, and Maidenhair, of each one
handful: Annis, Citron, and Carduus seeds, of each one dram: Senna half an
ounce: Polipody of the Oak, and Epithimum, or Dodder of Time, of each three
drams: Cinnamon one scruple: Crystal of Tartar one dram. Boil them all with
half a Cock, which let him take four mornings.

After you have sufficiently purged, a Bath of warm Water is most convenient,
used many ^^ie^, in which cool Herbs have been boiled, and sweet Apples.
Sometimes it is made of Barley and Almo^^^ beaten, and put into a Bagg and
boiled in Water. It must be often repeated, if the season will permit; for
Galen, 8. de loc. aff. cap. 6. says that he cured many melancholhck men, only
with the use of hot baths, without any other Medicine. And if the Patient
cannot endure a whole bath, let him have one for half the body.

And least often washing should hurt the Stomach, when he enters into the Bath,
let it be per^^^^ with Oil of Nutmegs by Expression, or the like.

When he goes forth of the bath, let the Region of his Liver be anointed with
the Cerat of Sanders, or Ointment of Roses washed in Oxycrate.

After his last bath, let the Hemorrhoids be provoked with sharp Suppositories,
or with rubbing the Anus with Fig Leaves, or with a rough linen Cloth; and
with two or three Hors-leeches apphed to the most apparent places, take away
five or six ounces of blood. And this must be done every Spring and Fall, and
sometimes once a Month.

They who are used to have the Flux of the Hemorrhoids, if it has been long
stopped, so that they will not appear, must have a Cupping Glass applied.

If after the Leeches are fallen off, they bleed still, as sometimes they will,
stop them with Clay, or Powder of Coal, or with Spiders Webs, or with Powder of
Lime, or with astringent Pouders taken up with the white of an Egg and Pledgets.

And if you cannot conveniently open them, it is good to draw blood from the
inferior Veins, that the most impure may be voided.

An Issue burnt in the left Leg does purge the Spleen and other Bowels from
superfluous Humors, and therefore forget it not.

But because this Disease uses to be very stubborn, and after Purging, new
Humors return, you must purge by sits, that the Body may be freed from them by
degrees: which may be well done by a Magistral Syrup, made thus:

Take of new drawn purified Juyces, of the Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Endive,
Succory, Fumitory, and Sorrel three pints: the Juice of sweet Apples newly
drawn and cleansed two pints: fresh Polipody of the Oak half a pound: clean
Senna eight ounces: Dodder of Time three ounces: Agarick newly made into
Troches one ounce: Ginger and Cloves, of each one dram. Infuse them and strain
them according to art, till there remain five pints and a quarter of the
Liquor, in which dissolve the straining of an ounce of Rhubarb dissolved in the
said Juyces by themselves with a little Cinnamon, and one pound of Sugar. Make
of these a well boiled Syrup; clarify it, and a^^matize it with two drams of
the Pounder of the three Sanders, keep it in a Glass, and let him take into
ounces thereof, twice or thrice in a month, with a little Chicken Broth, boiled
with Endive, Sorrel, Borrage, and Burnet.

Or instead of the Syrup, you may give Pills, especially in Winter, such as were
mentioned in the Obstruction of the Liver; or if you fear they are too hot, you
may make these following:

Take of Polypody of the Oak half an ounce: Asarabacca Roots, and Broom buds,
of each one dram: Currance three drams: Crystal of Tartar one dram and an half:
Bugloss and Borrage flowers, of each half a pugil: Boil them in Spring Water.
Take half a pint of the straining being well clarified, and six ounces of the
Juice of sweet Apples also well clarified; and infuse therein one ounce of
clean Senna: Turbith and Agarick, of each three drams: Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon,
and Dodder of Time, of each one dram: digest them four days in Balneo Marioe:
then strain them, and add to the straining, one ounce of the Extract of Aloes
made in Endive and Sorrel Water; Myrrh dissolved in Wine and strained, two
drams: Salt of Tartar one dram. Evaporate them all, and inspissate and thicken
them at a gentle fire, adding toward the end when the matter is almost
evaporated, Diarrhodon Abbatis Loetisicans Galeni, and the Troches of Dialacca,
of each half a scruple: bring them into a mass for Pills; and let the Patient
take half a dram once in a week, two hours before meat.

Pereda witnesses, that the has cured many Melanchollick men with this
following Powder; and he calls it Blessed, and Divine.

Take of Dodder of Time half an ounce: Lapis Lazuli, and Agarick in new made
Troches, of each two drams: Scammony one dram: Cloves twenty: mix them into a
Powder, and give two drams twice or thrice in a month with, Whey or Borrage
Water.

If you cannot conveniently give often Purges, it is good every other day to
give a Clyster to revel vapors, and draw forth some part of the Humor: for if
they go deep into the Guts, they take away the greatest part of the filth from
the Meseraicks. We knew a Noble Man, who being long troubled with this Disease,
was cured by often Clysters, when other Medicines did nothing.

While you give intermitting Purges, let the Body at other times be moistened
with Baths, or half Baths, or Fomentations, by which both the violence of the
Humor is restrained, and the Body made moister.

Also at those times, you must use strengtheners, which will also open
Obstructions, and they use to be made often like Opiates, or a hard Electuary,
or Lozenges, thus:

Take of Conserve of Bugloss Roots half an ounce: Conserve of Borrage Flowers,
and Violets, of each one ounce: Conserve of Roses, and candied Citron peels, of
each half an ounce: one candied Myrobalan: Confection Alkermes three drams:
Powder of Ivory, Hartshorn, and Bezoar stone, of each one dram: Loetisicans
Galeni, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each two scruples: Coral and Pearl prepared,
of each half a dram: Ambergris half a scruple: the best Musk five grains:
Gold three Leaves: with Syrup of Apples, and of candied Citrons, make an
Opiate, of which give the quantity of a Chestnut two hours before meat, every
day drinking after it a little white Wine.

A plainer and better tasted Opiate, is made of one part of Confection
Alkermes, and four parts of Conserve of Borrage Flowers. And to open more
powerfully, if you fear no hurt by hot things, add Conserve of Tamarisk
flowers, Elicampane Roots, Wormwood, Maidenhair, and the Salts of Wormwood and
Tamarisk, etc.

You may make Lozenges thus:

Take of Diambra, Diamoschi dulce, and Loetisicans Galeni, of each one scruple:
Confectio Alkermes three drams: Sugar dissolved in Borrage and Rose Water, four
ounces: make Lozenges of two drams in weight, gilded. Let him take one every
day two hours before meat.

Or you may make them more pleasant thus:

Take of Confectio Alkermes two drams: Ambergris one scruple: Sugar
dissolved in Rose Water four ounces. Make Lozenges.

Ambergris alone, given five or six grains at a time every day with Wine or
Rose Water, does cheer the Spirits and the Natural Heat, and much rejoice the
Heart.

Some Authors do much commend the use of Bezoar stone against all Melanchollick
Disease, because it does much strengthen the Heart, and you may give five or
six grains in Rose Water, or other Liquor.

After the Body is well purged, if it be Spring or Summer, you may give Whey
for fifteen or twenty days, which will open the Obstructions of the Bowels,
and amend the hot distemper. Make it by boiling and clarifying it, and putting
into it every night two drams, or half an ounce of Epithimum.

You must proportion the quantity according to the strength of the Stomach. For
if it can easily pass through the Veins, being somewhat open, and be sent forth
by stool and urine, it is good to give it in great quantities, as Mineral
Waters prescribed in the hot distemper of the Liver, with this Caution, That
you strengthen the Stomach with Baggs, and other things hereafter mentioned,
and give every day at evening a Cordial strengthening Opiate. Instead of
Epithimum, you may mix with the Whey, the juice of Succory, Borrage, or of any
other proper cool Herb, thus:

Take of Goat Whey four or five pints: the juice of fresh Lemmons four ounces:
the new juice of sweet Apples six ounces: Conserve of Roses or Violets, or
white Sugar, one ounce. Clarify these with whites of Eggs. Let him take every
morning three or four more Cups thereof, if his Stomach will bear it.

In Bodies that are very lean, after the Obstructions are a little opened, you
may give Asses Milk with Sugar of Roses; and if there be rumbling in the
Hypochondria, a little Aromaticum Rosatum, or Diarrhodon Abbatis will do very
well.

But your sharp and Vitriol Mineral Waters, are beyond all Medicines, which by
correcting the distemper of the bowels, do powerfully open Obstructions,
especially the warmest, which do make the Humor thin, and cleanse it.

There is great dispute among Authors concerning drinking those Waters. Some
(with Sennertus) do allow it, because they receive Virtue from their Minerals,
and do thereby both cleanse the passages, and send forth the filthy Humors which
stick to them by stool and Urine: they warm the Stomach, and strengthen the
Liver and Spleen: And we may rather fear that these Waters will hurt by the use
of them external than internal, by heating and drying. Others (with Claudinus)
do altogether deny them, by reason of their drying quality. Others (with
Montanus) do neither altogether reject them, nor wholly approve of them; they
say they are good, by reason of the coldness of the Stomach, which is always
in this Disease, and by reason of Obstructions. But in regard the Liver and
Spleen are hot, they will have them defended with the cool Ointment of Galen.
And also the Loins, for then (says he) the water will not hurt, because it
stays longer in the Stomach, and cold places, but only passes through other
parts. We suppose that the use of them is convenient, if the Stomach being cold
have much thick and clammy phlegm in it, and if the heat of the Liver be not
very great. Which part is not like to suffer, if the aforesaid Ointment be not
only given, but also cool Broths after the Waters; and after they have been
used enough, cold and moistening baths for some days.

Medicines made of Steel, use to be of great Virtue to open these Obstructions,
such as are mentioned in the Obstruction of the Liver, and of the Spleen,
avoiding those which do heat and dry much. In hot bodies you may give Steel
prepared with Brimstone or Vinegar, with Conserve of Borrage and Succory, made
in the form of an Opiate.

For dainty folk, the Syrup of Steel before mentioned in the Obstruction of the
Liver and Spleen, is excellent; or the Froth which remains in the Glass after
the Evaporation of the Wine which has been often steeled, mixed with the
aforesaid Conserves.

But Salt or Vitriol of sron goes beyond all Medicines, because it opens
Obstructions, strengthens the Bowels, and qualifies their heat. The Dose is
from twelve to twenty grains, with a fit Liquor, Syrup, or Conserve. But
because it is displeasing to the taste, I use to make it into Pills with the
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth. You must use it long, and therefore get a great
quantity, which is not easy to be got after the way that Beguinus and others
make it. We will show you the easy way of making it, which few men know.

Take of the Oil of Vitriol, or of Sulphur, half a pint: the Spirit of Wine one
pint: Put them in a new Iron Pan that is clean, and cover them well; within
fifteen days of them there will be a Saltlike gathering, which you must set in
the Sun to dry it thoroughly, sometimes stirring it with an Iron Spatula: In
Winter you may dry it upon a gentle fire, or in a Hot-house. Let the Salt being
well dried, be kept in a close Glass; for if it be exposed to the Air, it
easily turns moist. Also the Pills that are made thereof, of Tragacanth, must
be hardened with the Powder of Tragacanth, and after put in a Glass, otherwise
they will grow moist. You may continue this Medicine for a month or two, not
only without hurt, but with great profit.

Fonseca commends these Pills following, which he calls Diatartarum, for opening
Obstructions by degrees, and purging Melancholy gently, and for allaying it.

Take of the Powder of Senna, and Salt of Tartar, of each one dram: Powder of
Cinnamon half a scruple: with Syrup of Lemmons make a Mass, of which give three
Pills made of half a dram one hour before Supper, to give him two or three
stools, for Salt of Tartar has great Virtue to allay black melanchollick
Humors; for it draws to it self by certain propriety sour things, as you may
perceive when it is mixed with Vinegar, or Spirit of Vitriol, whose sowrness it
takes away: For we must know, that Fonseca by Salt of Tartar, means Crystal
of Tartar. Yet you may as well infuse your Senna with the Salt of Tartar, and
some drops of Spirit of Vitriol in some convenient Liquor.

To open the same Obstructions, some commend the Decoction of China, as we said
in the Obstruction of the Spleen; which a wise Physician may do with good
success.

Some commend the Juice of Wormwood thickened into the form of a Pill, given
either by its self, or with Gum Ammoniacum; and after that presently, Oxymel
made of the Decoction of Asarum Roots and Liquoris.

Others say, That Hypochondriack Melancholy has been cured with the Decoction
or Wine of Wormwood taken thirty or forty days together.

The Juice of Bugloss is excellent, not to open Obstructions as Wormwood, but
to qualify the Melanchollick Humor. Therefore they give two ounces thereof
with two drams of Sugar, and as much Wine as of both, for ten or twelve days
every morning.

The principal thing for this Cure, is to keep the Body always soluble:
Therefore the Patient must have some familiar Medicines, which he may often use
before meat, sometimes one, sometimes another, lest he grow weary of them. For
this he may take the Magisterial Syrup, and the aforesaid Pills, and those which
were pre^cribed for a costive Belly. To which he may add (out of Montanus)
Venice Turpentine, which he orders to be swallowed in the quantity of an Acron,
three hours before dinner, once, twice, or thrice in a week: for besides that
it looseneth the belly, it also cleanses the Stomach, opens Obstructions,
provokes Urine, warms the Stomach, and does not heat the Liver, but does it
good by opening and clensing it.

For his ordinary Drink let him use Water wherein Gold has been quenched, or
the infusion of Tamarisk, Agrimony, Burnet in thin Wine, either alone, or made
Physical in Vintage time with the Roots of Bugloss, Borrage, with a little
white Sanders and Rosemary Flowers.

The Decoction of the Sweet Bryar Root, is commended for ordinary Drink; for it
opens and strengthens all natural parts.

The Decoction of Lignum Nephriticum does open the Obstructions of the Bowels
without any manifest alteration. But steeled Water is more usual. All which
Waters and Decoctions, you may also mix with Wine.

While in the internal Medicines mentioned or any of them are used, you must
apply External, as Fomentations, and Ointments to the Hypochondria, such as are
prescribed for the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, making Choice of the
Coolest.

You must also apply strengthners to the Stomach, because that part does
always suffer in this Disease; therefore you may use those Fomentations,
Ointments, and Emplaisters mentioned in the Diseases of the Stomach: Also those
Internal which will not inflame the Liver; and especially the Digestive Powder
to be taken after meat: in a Fit when the Vapors arising from the Hypochondria
do trouble the Heart, Brain, and other parts, and produce great Symptoms, as
Swoonings, Palpitations, Tremblings, Convulsions, Headache, and the like; you
may use those things which are given in Swooning, or the Mother; but among the
rest Laudanum used wisely, does wonders.

Chap. 6. Of the Scurvy.
THe Scurvy is usual in the North, in most places thereof Common, but almost
unknown in the South; so that al Writers that have Practiced in these Parts,
have never mentioned it: and we may well leave it out, because in our Preface to
this Book we promised to meddle only with the usual Diseases of the Spleen; but
Experience has taught us, That our Country is not altogether without it, for
though it be not in every Symptom the same with that of the North, yet it has
enough to confirm it to be the same: for the aforesaid Authors say that one
Symptom is sufficient to discover it; we have seen many Symptoms of it in
many people, but because it is not familiar here, and al our Physicians say we
have it not, we would not absolutely call it a Scurvy, but we thought it better
to call it a Scorbutical Disease, such an one as comes next to it, though it be
not a true Scurvy.

For the Scurvy is nothing else but an Hypochondriack Disease, having a
peculiar degree of Malignity from which more Symptoms arise than in the
Hypochondriack Disease: this malignity comes from the putrefaction of
Melancholy, not of every kind of melancholy, for it is often corrupted, from
which other Diseases arise and not the Scurvy, as a Quartan Ague ^^ Imposthume
in the Mesentery, and other parts; but of a peculiar and proper Melancholy
which is a^^^^able to that Malignity. This is known by the Infection which is
found in this Disease, because author^ hold it to be infectious. And because all the degrees of malignity which lie in the Humors and produce diverse Diseases
are unknown unto us and (...), therefore is this of the Scurvy obscure (...)
hidden; and it is wonderful that so many Diseases should arise from the variety
of malignity which is in the Humors, as malignant Pestilential Fevers, (...)
Measels, Cancers and Elephantiasis, the Pox, and many others. And especially
Elephantiasis comes from a peculiar malignity in a Melanchollick Humor, and so
does the Scurvy, and yet these two Diseares differ so much, that none can tell
their diverse degrees of malignity.

Diverse Symptoms common to both, do show a great likeness of the Scurvy and
Hypochondriack Melancholy: for all they which were mentioned in the former
Chapter, are found in this Disease, as crudities and want of Concoction in the
stomach, often spitting, phlegmatic, sharp, and stinking vomitings, noise in
the Hypochondria, belchings, breaking of Wind downwards, vomiting of blood, and
purging of blood, pains from wind under the ribs and in the stomach, sometimes
Costiveness, and sometimes Looseness, heat in the Hypochondria, beating of the
Left side, Urine now thin, than thick, heart beating, thirst, drought of the
mouth, short breath, headache, noise in the ears, dimness of sight, giddiness,
sorrow and sadness, and diverse dolings, convulsions, falling-sicknes, numbness,
coma, watchings, troubled sleep, and terrible dreams: The Reasons of al which
were showed in the Chapter above, and they may agree with this of the Scurvy.

But if any Symptoms appear besides these, which are not found in that, nor
mentioned by Authors, nor belong to another Disease; you may conjecture that it
is the Scurvy: The Chief are these, which are not al sound in one Patient; but
one of them is sufficient to show that the Disease is such.

The First most remarkable Sign is in the Gums, Mouth, and Teeth, in the Gums
redness, itching, and putrefaction, and sometimes bleeding and stink, which are
sometimes in the Palate, Jaws, and Teeth, which are loose and black.

The Second, which is an evident Sign also, is Spots in the Legs which at first
are Red, and after Purple, blue, and black: Sometimes there are in the Legs
broad spots, black or blue, or both; these come from the serous filthy part of
the blood which is unfit to nourish the body, and therefore is sent by nature
out of the Veins to the Skin, by the Nausiosis of the Veins, as Hippocrates
says of Fractures, and this happens often in the Shins and Legs, because
nature uses to send the worst Humors to the most ignoble and remotest parts;
sometimes when there is more plenty of matter you shall find them in the back,
arms, neck, and face.

The third sign is shortness of Breath, and straightness of the Breast, which
comes commonly from thick vapors, arising from the Hypochondria, that get to
the Midriff, as also from Tumors and swellings by wind of those parts that
press upon the Midriff, especially from the Twelling of the Sweetbread, which
commonly in this Disease is fulled with gross Melancholy: Hence the Patients
complain not of their Breast, but of the part affected, whereby they feel the
weight, and by reason whereof the Breath is short, as Eugalenus noted well, who
was much acquainted with this Disease, and many Observations therein: yet he
knew not the cause of this weight, namely, the swelling of the Sweetbread; nor
does any that write hereof make mention of it. Yet we observed it in My Lord
Audeyer, President of the Senate of Gratianopolis, whom we thought had the
Scurvy, as you may read in his History, at length, in our Observations, Cent.
3. Obs. 85. For being very lean, we did easily perceive with our fingers, a
hardness in the Sweetbread; and by handling of the part, he confessed that all
his shortness of Breath and straightness came from thence.

The fourth sign, is Laziness, and heavine^s of Body, especially in the Legs,
which comes from watery and foul Humors, which come through the Veins to the
Muscles, and the whole Body.

The fifth sign is in the Urine, which is diverse, as in Hypochondriack
Melancholy; but in this they sometimes differ, because they are clear and red
like a Lie, from the plenty of salt Humors. The redness is higher and inclining
to black, by how much the more salt humor there is. As in a Lixivium sometimes
the Urine is very thick, with a red thick sediment, like the Powder of Bricks,
and sometimes this Humor is so much, that it causes burning and pissing by
drops, especially in them who have this Disease from stoppage of the
Hemorrhoids; and after it is settled, the third or fourth part of the Urinal is
filled with thick and black filth, which makes some think it to be the Stone or
Ulcer of the Bladder.

Sometimes the Urine varieth without manifest cause; to day thick, to morrow
thin; now pale, then yellow, or red.

The sixth sign is from the Pulse, which is now weak and unequal, leaping, or
formicans, that you would wonder he should live with it; anon it is great and
hard, without Inflammation. And this is to be observed, That in time of fainting
and swooning, with which he is often troubled, his Pulse is greatest and
strongest. Which comes from the Heart contending to cast out those vapors with
which it is oppressed.

The seventh sign, is pain in diverse parts: in the Thighs heavy, and sometimes
stretching; sometimes Ostokopos, or at the bone; sometimes in the Shins, Ankles,
Soals of the Feet, in the taps of the Fingers, in the Hips, Knees, and other
Joints, or parts to which the Salt Humors flow; sometimes in the Belly, like the
Chollerick Chollick; and it comes from these Humors flowing upon the Caul:
these in the Arms, Thighs, and Legs, are like those of the Pox, and may well
deceive a Physician in France, where the Scurvy is rare, and the Pox common.

But they may be thus distinguished; The pains in the Pox are between the
Joints and if they stay long, make knots, and there are, or have been then also
other Symptoms of it, as running of the Reins, Ulcer of the Yard, Bubo, and
the like, or Uncleanness with Women. But the Scurvy pains seize upon al parts
indifferently; and then there are other signs of it, or at least a
Melanchollick Constitution; and the Matter is certainly known, if the Patient
will truly say that he has not been with unclean Women. Which caused our
suspicion in a Magistrate, who had a long time great pain in his Feet, Shins,
and Thighs, and was brought very lean, ^o that you would have thought that he
had the Marasmus, or Consumption: And when no Medicines for a long time would
do him good, we from his Melanchollick Complexion, and other signs, especially
because he le^ a ^ost chaste life, and because for many years his Gums did bleed
at certain times, conjectured that it was the Scurvy, and by using of things
against that Disease for some time, he was cured.

Sometimes those pains remain in the Hypochondria, sometimes in the Loins, so
that they are weak, and can scarcego. Hence this Disease is called Lumbago.

Sometimes the pains are like the Stone, and the Urine is very red or black; and
if you do not diligently observe, you will think they are bloody, and that it
comes from the Reins wounded by the Stone, when it is from a scurvy salt Matter
in the Spleen, and parts adjacent, sent into the Urine.

Some have Headache, and heat at nights, if they caught this Disease from
stoppage of the Hemorrhoids, by reason of the vapors which ascend, and all the
night after they are as in a Fever all over their Bodies, which the next
morning vanishes by sweating.

They have often the Toothache, without any evident reason or cause; and it is
not in one place, but movable from one Tooth to another, making them loose, and
they again fix of their own accord, the pain and tumor being discussed.

Sometimes the pain of the Scurvy is in the sides, imitating the Pleurisy; from
which it is easily distinguished, because it is without a Fever, at least a
strong one; the breath is not hindered, there is no Cough, no spitting, nor is
the pain constant, but coming by fits.

Also it will be in the Joints; and we must declare how it is distinguished
from a true Arthritis, or Joynt-gout. The pain of the Joints in the Scurvy, is
not fixed and constant in the same place, but runs from one Joint to another,
either on the same, or on the contrary side; sometimes it vanishes, and then
returns; so that he which now seems free, and in perfect health, is suddenly
taken with pain, sometimes with swelling, sometimes without. But a true
Joynt-gout seldom changes the place.

The Joint Scurvy has this peculiar distinction: It is for the most part
joined with a small Palsy, by reason whereof the Patient can hardly move the
part affected; and when the Passey seizes or returns, the pain does so also.

The eighth sign is from the diverse hindrances of Motion, they have a bastard
Palsy; the Examples whereof we laid down in our Observations: and it is
distinguished from a true Palsy, because this is constant; but in the Palsy
from the Scurvy, he that yesterday could scarce set one foot before another,
can now stand, and walk with a little help, and it may be presently after he
cannot move at all: and sometimes the motion is trembling, and with Convulsion,
which does not happen in a true Palsy. And this kind of Palsy comes from a
filthy kind of Matter or vapor, which gets into the Nerves and Muscles. And if
the Matter be sharp, it causes trembling and Convulsion by pulling the Nervous
parts.

And Convulsions are not only in some peculiar part, but sometimes in the whole
Body like an Epilepsie, by a windy or watery matter full of sharpness, and
malignity, which is sent to the Brain, which being discussed does give ease,
and gathered again, makes new Convulsions.

Also in this Disease there is a Contraction of the Members, sometimes of all;
so that the Patient cannot move one Joint; sometimes of one, and that
principally in the Leg, when the Tendons which are made to move the Leg grow
hard and stiff in the Hams. This contraction comes by reason of the salt Humor
that flows with much moisture to the Nerves and Tendons; and when the thin and
watery part, through continuance of time is consumed, the thick is dried and
made hard; from whence come these contractions of Nerves and Tendons.

Sometimes there is a contraction in the Gullet, so that the Patient can scarce
swallow, and is in fear of strangling. And this comes from astringent vapors,
which contract the Oesophagus, or Gullet.

The ninth sign, is the Flux of the Belly, either with, or without blood. The
simple Flux which is without blood, is distinguished from others, in that the
Excrements are thicker, and more than the quantity of meat that is taken; when
a common Flux is more thin, and of Humors only.

The Flux of blood in this Disease is distinguished from a Dysentery, because
it is without pain of the belly, and it is thick blood which is sent into the
Guts by the Meseraick Veins. Sometimes the Hemorrhoid Veins do receive that
filthy blood, and send it forth: but if this flux of the belly continues long,
the Vein^swell, and send forth not only much blood, but also other salt and
slimy Humors.

The tenth sign, is a stinking Breath, which is common to all in the Scurvy, as
Eugalenus witnesses, so that they which stand by cannot endure it, but must
turn aside their Nose.

The eleventh sign, is often shivering, with none or little heat following it.

The twelfth sign, is an intermitting Fever, which sometimes they have, which
are unlike the other ordinary Agues of Fevers: for in them the Pulse is weak,
slow, and unequal, especially in the declination; but in the height it is
commonly great and hard. Besides, at the first coming there is such a twitching
in diverse parts, especially the Legs, that they suppose their flesh to be torn;
and sometimes they have convulsive motions therewith. And though sometimes this
Ague is a Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan, yet sometimes the fits are disorderly,
coming once it may be, or twice in a month, without certainty.

The Thirteenth Sign is Tumors in diverse parts; sometimes hard, sometimes soft
like bladders, and sometimes like an Erysipelas, or red Tumor.

The Fourteenth Sign is Atrophy or Consumption; which is so great in this
Disease sometimes that they are nothing but skin and bones like a Sceleton or
Anatomy; especially after long sickness, which comes from the evil blood; so
changed from its natural Condition that it cannot be made like unto the parts
which should nourish.

Eugalenus propounds many other Signs of the Scurvy, and Sennertus with others:
some whereof are Common to many other Diseases, which we will Conceal, least
they breed Confusion.

And though (as we said before) the Scurvy is not ordinary in France, as in
Poland and other Northren parts, and almost unknown; yet if any in Practicing
Physic shall observe all the Symptoms of Melancholy he shall find some
inclining to the Scurvy, in whom some of the former Symptoms proper to the
Scurvy will appear.

As to the Prognostic: This Disease is hard to be Cured, as al other that come
of Melancholy, and here much more hard, because of the malignity in the
Melancholy which does more cruelly overthrow the body, and will not obey the
greatest part of Medicines.

It is also dangerous because it many times brings a Consumption or Dropsy,
and destroys others by sudden death, by an Apoplexy, Swooning, and other acute
Diseases.

Yet sometimes they who have seemed desperate have been Cured, and oftener in
this Disease than in any other: And we have seen some brought to a Consumption
by long pain, and bloody Flux (which by many circumstances we conclude to be
from the Scurvy) to have been perfectly Cured.

Moreover, The Pulse is deceitful, especially in the Fits; it will be so quick,
small, and unequal sometimes that the Patient seems to be at deaths door; yet
after his Fit he will rise from his bed, and is as formerly; As we peculiarly
observed in a Dutch Scholar, unto whom we being sent for in the time of his
Fit, thought that he would presently die; but the next day we saw him seemingly
in very good health; and when we had examined the Circumstances of the Disease,
we Concluded that he had the Scurvy, which he brought out of his own Country
where it is very usual.

The same Cure is to be used in this Disease as in Hypochondriack Melancholy:
because as we said at the first it comes from the same Humor more differing
from its natural state; therefore for the most part it needs stronger Medicines.

But because this is a general Rule in Physic, That we always begin with the
weakest Medicines, and so proceed to stronger, if the former will not cure: It
will be good in this Disease to appoint the whole course of Cure for
Hypochondriack Melancholy, because a stubborn disease requires a long course;
and if that will not root out the Disease, let us then use the Medicines more
specifically proper: And it will not be amiss to mix some such with the other
at the beginning.

These Specifical Medicines are called Antiscorbutica, or Medicin^^ proper for
the Scurvy, and there are many of them in Authors that have written of this
Disease; whose strength chiefly depends upon a Volatile or flying Salt, of
which they are very full, by which means they make thin and fluid, that thick,
earthy, and salt humor, and at length discuss it. Moreover, they have a certain
preservative and opposing Virtue against the poison of the Scurvy which is in
the Melanchollick Humor. Among these, the chief is Dutch Scurvy Grass, which is
not in France. Another is, Cresses of both sorts (but the Water-cress is best)
Brooklime, Hors-Rhadish, the lesser Celandine, Wo^mwood, and Fumitory. To which
may be added many others, but of less virtue, and all they are such which can
prepare, correct, and tame the Melanchollick Humor. Hence it is that we
directed the Cure against Hypochondriack Melancholy to be used here: Those
are, Carduus, Ceterach, all the Capillar Herbs, Hysop, Germander, Bettony,
Agrimony, Borrage, Bugloss, Elicampane, Asarum, Ditch Dock, Polypody of the
Oak, Capar, Ash, and Tamarisk barks, Flowers of Elder, Tamarisk, and Dodder of
Time.

In the choice of these Plants, you must always observe this, That you give
the least quantity of hot things, and that you always mix with them cold or
moderate things, and in a greater quantity, especially in hot Countries, in
which Melancholy is burnt. And besides the Capillar Herbs with Borrage,
Bugloss* and Agrimony before mentioned, when there is a Fever, or we fear
heat, you may ad Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Juice of Citrons, Lemmons, Orrenges,
and also Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitriol, or whey.

Of these former Plants you may make many sorts of Medicines, which are all
gathered by Sennertus out of all Authors, which every man may imitate as he
pleases. Yet this we must mark, which all Authors mention, That the aforesaid
Plants work more powerfully if you ^ake their Juice, or make them into
Conserves; because the flying salt wherein all their virtue remains is gone
by decoction, as also if the Plant be dried.

We have used these following forms with good success.

Take of c^eer Juyces, of Watercresses, and Brook-lime, of each one ounce: the
Juice of Fumitory two ounces: white Sugar two drams. Make a Potion.

Or,

Take of the Juice of Fumitory, and Watercresses, of each two ounces: mix them.

Or,

Take of the Juyces of Sorrel, Fumitory, and Watercresses, of each two ounces.
Mi^ them.

You may give more Juice of Sorrel, if you desire to cool more, or Juice of
Lemmons* o^ the like.

The power of the Medicines, will be more to dissolve that sticking clammy
Tartar, if you add one dram of Salt of Tartar with Spirit of Sulphur, or
Vitriol, one scruple or half a dram; and because in the use of these Medicines,
we purge often, it is good to infuse one dram or two of Senna all night in the
said Juyces, and give it every other day, or every third day.

It is worth your while to give sometimes also some steeled Medicines, such as
we prescribed in Hypochondriack Melancholy; as also the strengthening and
opening Opiates, and others, as in wisdom you shall think fit.

And last, Mineral Waters that are sharp, and of Vitriol, used in due season,
are very beneficial for the Cure of this Disease.

The End of the Twelfth Book.
THE THIRTEENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the
Mesentery, Sweetbread, and Caul.
The PREFACE.
MAny Authors are very short in the explaining of the Diseases of the
Mesentery, Sweetbread, and Caul; and the most of them have left them out,
because they are hard to be known, and for the most part only from Dissection
of dead Bodies; as appears by stories in Schenkius, Sennertus, and others. Yet
they are very ordinary and usual: from whence Fernelius says, That oftentimes
there are causes of many Diseases in the Mesentery: as of Choler, Melancholy,
Diarrhoea, Dysentery, evil Habit, Consumption, Faintness, of lingering Fevers,
Vomitings, Chollicks, Tumors, and Imposthumes. And Sylvius called the
Mesentery, the Mother of many Diseases: by others she is called the Physicians
Nurse. We may say the same of the Sweetbread and Caul; for they are ignoble
parts, and as it were sinks of the Body, to which the noble Members do send
their Excrements. And although these parts (as all other) are subject to all
kinds of Diseases, Similary, Organical, and Common, and many Symptoms arise
from them; yet we will only speak of those which are most in practice, and
comprehend this Book in five Chapters. The first shall be of the Obstruction of
the Mesentery. The second of the Inflammation of the Mesentery. The third of the
Imposthume, Scirrhus, and Ulcer of the Mesentery. The fourth of the Diseases of
the Sweetbread. The fifth of the Diseases of the Caul.

Chap. 1. Of the Obstruction of the Mesentery.
THese Obstructions in the Mesentery, come of the same Causes which are
mentioned in the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; but they happen more
easily, and more often, by reason of the straitness of the Meseraick Veins, and
especially of the Milky Veins, which carry the Chylous Matter to the place of
the second Concoction: and when that Chylous Matter is filled with crude and
thick juice it comes to pass that not having a free passage, it sticks in those
little Veins and makes Obstructions. Also the Meseraick Veins are stopped by
thick Humors sent from the Liver, Spleen, and other parts, and there continuing
till they grow thicker, so that sometimes they cause a Scirrhus. With these
Humors sometimes gross Vapors are mixed, which use to be the cause of great
Symptoms. To the Obstruction, or rather making narrow of these Veins, we refer
compression, which comes from the Glandles which are spread through the whole
substance of the Mesentery: for when these grow beyond measure, as in those who
have the Kings Evil, or Struma, they compress the Meseraick Veins, and hinder
both the passage of the Chylus, and of the Blood.

The Signs of these Obstructions are to be divided into three kinds, as we did
in the Obstructions of the Liver; namely, into such as show the Disease, the
Part affected, or the Cause.

The Signs of the Disease (that is) of the Obstructions lying in the
Hypochondria, and also the Signs of the Causes are the same with the
Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen, and are from that Chapter to be taken. But
those Signs which properly show the peculiar Disease of the Mesentery, are
stretching, and resistance in the middle of the Belly, and under the Stomach,
and about the Navel; a weight in the same parts, and sometimes a dull pain, and
sometimes a most sharp, when wind is contained in those parts; sometimes there is
pain in the back, because the Mesentery is tied to that part: there is rumbling
in the Belly, belching, and vapors flying to the Head, from whence come diverse
Symptoms: and lastly, all those which use to happen in Hypochondriack
Melancholy, signify Obstruction of the Mesentery, because that also proceeds,
and is maintained by the same Obstructions.

As for the Prognostic: This Disease of its self, is not dangerous, because an
ignoble part can endure great evils without danger of death: moreover, you may
apply strong Medicines for the Cure, which being well administered, do commonly
bring about the desired effect; except Hypochondriack Melancholy rise from
thence, which uses to be called the shame of Physicians, by reason of the
rebellious Nature of the Melanchollick Humor. But because this part has not
exquisite sense, and the Obstructions do not always greatly disturb the
Patient, they are often neglected, and become the causes of other most
dangerous diseases.

The Cure of this Disease is the same with that of the Obstruction of the
Liver, and you must fetch it from the Chapter treating thereof.

Chap. 2. Of the Inflammation of the Mesentery.
WHen the Mesentery, as I said, is as it were the sink into which the Noble
Parts do send their superfluous Excrements, which afterward are sent forth by
Nature, either by Vomit or Stool; as you may see in some who send abundance of
Humors forth at diverse times by Vomit and Stool: if those Evacuations be
hindered by stoppage of the ways by which they are made, or by any other
cause, those Humors which are there detained, staying long in the part, do get
a preternatural heat, from whence come putrefactions, inflammations, diverse
Fevers, and imposthumes. But an Inflammation is peculiarly made, when blood
heaped up in the Meseraick Veins, by the opening of some branch is sent into
the substance of the Mesentery: but because by reason of Obstructions it is
chiefly gathered in those Veins, therefore all the causes of Obstructions may
be referred to the Causes of Inflammation.

For the making of this Inflammation, that sharpness and gnawing of the Humors
gathered together, do much conduce, a fall or stroke upon the Belly, the
weakness of the attractive concoction, or retentive faculty of the Liver; too
much heat of the body, or inordinate use of cooling things; the critical motion
of Nature in malignant Diseases, or small Pox, by which it sends the peccant
Humors into this sink; a Diarrhoea, or Dysentery suddenly stopped.

The signs of the Inflammation of the Mesentery are, a lingering Fever without
Thirst, and great Symptoms, want of Appetite, a sense of stretching and
heaviness beneath the Stomach, without great hardness, and which is not felt
but by the hand pressing of it, and without pain, worth the speaking of,
because the part is of dull sense; Chollerick stools, which commonly has thin
matter, without pain, sometimes pure, sometimes mixed with Excrements.

If the Mesentery be only inflamed, all the aforesaid Symptoms are milder: But
if the Liver or Spleen, or Guts, are also inflamed, all the Symptoms are
stronger: And besides, the signs of the aforesaid parts affected will appear,
which are to be taken out of their proper Chapters.

And because the Inflammation and Imposthume of this part, are very hard to be
known if they be alone, by reason of the dull sense of the part, and because it
performs no action in the body, whose hinderance may be perceived; but only
serves for the distribution of the Chylus and the Blood: therefore they are
rather to be discovered by consequence, than directly, and according to
artificial conjecture; namely, when there is a Fever and other Symptoms, and
no sign of the Liver, Spleen, or Guts distempered. A half Tertian Ague shows
that the Guts are inflamed with the Mesentery; which Spigelius observed to come
commonly from the Inflammation of these parts. Also this Difease is
distinguished from the inflammation of the Muscles of the Belly, because the
Tumor and pain is enlarged according to their proportion, and they are commonly
long, or over the whole belly, and more in the outward parts, so that they are
perceived by the least touch, and they use to bring great pain, and a Fever.

Lastly, This Disease is to be distinguished from the Humors of the Midriff,
which have been, as yet, known to few Physicians: for in them there is always
great difficulty of breathing, removing of the Hypochondria, a Pulse hard and
small, without any sense of Tumor in the Hypochondria. And if the Tumor come of
a hot cause, a sharp Fever, great pain, doting, and Convulsions do follow*
which Symptoms never happen when the Mesentery is only inflamed.

As for the Prognostic: This Disease is very dangerous; for it either ends in
an imposthume, or there follows a rottenness, and corruption of the Mesentery.
Oftentimes the Matter of the Disease is sent by Nature another way, and yet is
not clean taken away, whence the Disease returns, and continues for many years,
sometimes till death, now with a Fever, then a Chollick, or Inflammation.

The Cure of the Inflammation of the Mesentery, is not unlike to that of the
Liver and Spleen, and therefore you must peruse that.

Chap. 3. Of the Imposthume, Ulcer, and Scirrhus of the Mesentery
THe Inflammation of the Mesentery often turns into an Imposthume, yet every
Imposthume thereof is not from Inflammation, but many times from vicious Humors
therein contained, which putrefie, so that these Imposthumes come by degrees
without a Fever before going, or other great Symptoms; as we see in other
parts, when Atheromata, Steatomata, and Melicerides, and other kinds of
Imposthumes are bred without Inflammation going before. And when they are
broken, the Matter being voided, there remains an Ulcer which is hard to be
cured. ^^t if those Humorsare very phlegmatic, or Melanchollick, and resist
putrefaction, they grow, and sometimes are hardened, and turn to a Scirrhus:
sometimes they are as hard as a stone, as many affirm who have fou^ ston^^ in
the Mesentery.

The Knowledge of the Imposthume in the Mesentery, is sometimes easy, sometimes
hard; for if it comes from an Inflammation of that part, that being perceived by
the ^igns in the former Chapter, it is a sign that the Inflammation could not be
discussed, but suppurated and turned into an Imposthume. But when an Imposthume
comes from evil Humors remaining long in the Mesentery, and at length
putrefying, it is hard to know it; so that many Authors who have written
Observations upon such kind of Imposthumes, say, that they never were known,
but after death, when the Bodies were opened. For although for the most part,
they may be known by the touch, yet sometimes they lie so deep, that they cannot
be touched, and the part being dull in sense, that they will not be discovered
by pain. But because they come diverse ways, they must be thus distinguished.

If the Imposthume of the Mesentery, has a visible Tumor, it is first to be
di^cerned from an Inflammation and a Scirrhus: It is distinguished from an
inflammation if it come not from it, when there is no Fever, or at least but
small, when none went before, nor any other signs that may s^ew an Inflammation;
but if it follow an Inflammation, it can no other ways be distinguished than by
hardness and continuance; for if the signs of Inflammation have continued twenty
or thirty days, it is a sign that it is turned into an Imposthume. It is
distinguished from a Scirrhus by hardness, which is great in a Scirrhus, but in
an Imposthume there is some kind of softness, as also by the want of pain
altogether; for in an Imposthume there is always some pain, especially if it
be pressed hard. Moreover, this Tumor is distinguished from the Tumor of other
parts, by the Situation thereof, as we said before of the Inflammation of the
Mesentery. But if the Imposthume lie in the Mesentery without any visible
Tumor, there can be no certain sign, but by an artificial conjecture we may
suspect, namely, if there be loathing of Meat, or vomiting without manifest
fault of the Stomach, and a great fullness after little Meat, weariness of the
whole Body, and fainting without manifest cause, if the Belly be unaccustomarily
bound, or loose, and void stinking Excrements, and sometimes bloody, without
suspicion of a Dysentery. To these you may add great watchings, and if they
sleep they faint, and have great Sweats. And though sometimes there appear
neither Fever nor pain, yet there is commonly an obscure one; of which, if
there appear no manifest cause, we must conjecture that it comes from this
Disease, especially if any of the aforesaid signs be joined there with; as also
if the Abdomen be violently pressed, the Patient will perceive some inward
pain: it is true, that by violent compression you may cause pain in sound
places; but if you perceive more pain in one part than in another, after all
parts have been pressed, and when that part is always most pained, and the
more by pressing, you may strongly conjecture that the imposthume is there.

If at length there come forth Matter, then the Imposthume will be manifest.
Commonly it is voided by stool of diverse sorts according to the disposition of
the part affected, and of those adjacent.

Hence one while the Matter is pure and white in great plenty, without sense of
pain, when it is sent by the Meseraick Veins into the Guts, sometimes when the
Imposthume is in the thick and lowest Guts, the Matter is mixed with the
Excre^ents, sometimes it is sent to the Reins, and cast forth by Urine; sometimes
being sent in great quantities between the Peritonaeum, and the Muscles of the
Abdomen, it falls into the Cavity of the Belly by breaking of the Peritonaeum,
or breaks outwardly by an Imposthume, so that a great quantity of Matter flows
from the Navel, and sometimes Worms therewith, through the corruption of the
Mesentery. And that which sent forth by stool (which is the usual) is sometimes
white and laudable, as was said; sometimes mixed with blood or water, sometimes
black blood, and stinking, sometimes other black Matter, or of diverse colors.
But whether this purulent Matter come from the Mesentery, Liver, Spleen, or
other part, it is known by the proper signs of every part affected.

When the Imposthume is broken, and the Matter flows, it is certain that
there is an Ulcer in the Mesentery, which sometimes is quickly cured, and
sometimes it is of long continuance, and brings rottenness upon the whole part,
and a Gangrene.

As for the Prognostic: The Imposthume of the Mesentery is dangerous; for if
it continue long in the part, as it often happens, it breeds filthy rottenness,
or a Gangrene, or brings the Patient into a Consumption or Dropsy. If it
break, and the Ulcer be not quickly cured, but gets an evil condition, it has
the like event, a Gangrene, Consumption, or Dropsy. Sometimes when the
Imposthume is broken, and very stinking Matter is sent into the Cavity of the
Belly, the Patient dies suddenly. The Scirrhus, or hard Tumor of the Mesentery
is lest dangerous, and if it be new will admit of a Cure; but if it be old, it
brings the Patient to a Dropsy.

The Cure of these Diseases, is to be varied according to the diversity of
them. And first, an Imposthume bred requires opening and evacuation, and it
must be softened with opening and purging Medicines, such as are laid down in
the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, not omitting outward Softeners and
Looseners, Fomentations, Cataplasms, and Liniments, which do make the Matter of
the Imposthume thin, and open the passages that the Matter may better be voided.

After the Imposthume is opened, you must cleanse the Ulcer and heal it; for
which purpose the Remedies mentioned in the Cure of the Ulcers of the Stomach,
Liver, Reins, and Womb, are very good; of which a wise Physician may take his
choice according to the diverse dispositions both of the Bodies, and the
Diseases.

And a Scirrhus of the Mesentery is cured with the same Medicines, which are
set down for the Cure of the Scirrhus or hard Swelling of the Liver and Spleen.

Chap. 4. Of the Diseases of the Pancreas, or Sweetbread.
THe Ancient Anatomists knew no action of the Pancreas, or Sweetbread, but the
use only* namely, to prop the Vessels, least they should be in danger of
breaking, and to be instead of a Pillow to the Stomach, least when it is full
it should be hurt by the hardness of the Vertebrae or Backbone. But the Modern
Anatomists have ascribed very great action unto it; namely, the first
preparation of the Chyle, and clensing of it, so that it may be brought to the
Liver more pure; which the milky Veins seem to confirm, because they are
dispersed through the Pancreas. Besides, in the middle of it there is an open
passage which goes to the Guts, by which it is probable that the Excrements of
the Chyle are purged; therefore the Pancreas has its Diseases, which hurt the
whole Body, especially Obstructions and Tumors, as the Mesentery has; namely,
when the Chylous Matter is crude and thick, and is brought to it from the
Stomach, not sufficiently digested, and when it does not freely flow from it.

Riolanus observed a Scirrhus of the Pancreas, in Augustine Thuanus, that wrote
the History of his Times most elegantly in Latin; who when he had for four
years, among other Symptoms, a heaviness continually in his Stomach,
especially when he walked or stood still, without Swelling or hardness in the
Hypochondria, had a Pancreas as big as his Liver, after he was dead, hard and
Scirrhus, full of knots like Pigeons Eggs.

But because the Pancreas is covered with the Stomach, its Tumors are scarce to
be felt; and this is the cause because there is no mention commonly of them,
and they have been found only after death: Yet you may make a handsome
Conjecture of them, from what Riolanus observed in Thuanus, namely, If there be
a sense of weight or heaviness in the Stomach, and no Tumor or hardness in the
Hypochondria; and other signs of Obstructions than are mentioned in the
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery. To which you may add pain,
and other Symptoms of the Stomach, by reason of its neerness, shortness of
breath, by reason of the compression of the Diaphragma; By which signs we
suppose that the Lord Audeyerius, President of the Senate of Gratianopolis, had
a Scirrhus of the Pancreas, and we could perceive it by touching, by putting
our hand deep to the sides of the Stomach about the middle, because he was
lean; and we found a hardness there, which being touched, pained him: the story
whereof, is at larger related in our 81. Observation, Cent. 3. And in the
knowledge of the Scurvy we observed (which none that ever wrote thereof did)
That in all Scurvyes there is a Tumor of the Pancreas, because you may find a
straightness, oppression, and weight in the Region of the Stomach: And this
Sign is laid down for a clear one by Eugalenus, Sennertus, and others.

There are some stories in Authors, of Imposthumes found in the Pancreas, which
were not discovered while the Patients lived. But by the Symptoms they had
they may be partly known; as some like those of the Scirrhus; to which you may
join these, a lingering Fever, which is the companion of almost all inward
Imposthumes, much watching, short sleep, and after it, pain, swooning, and cold
sweats.

The Cure of the Obstruction, Scirrhus, and Imposthume of the Pancreas, is the
same with those of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery. There you may fetch
Medicines from the Chapters concerning them.

Chap. 5. Of the Diseases of the Caul, or Omentum.
BEcause the Omentum is a soft part and fat, fit by reason of its looseness to
receive Humors that come from other parts: It is subject to diverse Diseases, as
the Mesentery and Pancreas: And these are not described by Authors, because
they can scare be seen in living men, but only by Anatomy, as you may see in
some Stories in our Observations. Vesalius says that he saw in a Body opened,
an Omentum so swollen that is weighed five pounds, when in its Natural condition
it would weigh scare half a pound. Roussetus in lib. de partu Caesareo, reports
that in Paris there was found a great Imposthume in the Omentum. Riolanus in
his Anthropographia, says that he saw an Omentum in a Noble Youth of ninteen
years of age, so full of kernels, by which it received abundance of filthy
Humors, the Mesentery and Pancreas being imposthumated, and the Spleen almost
consumed. We also saw a Scirrhus Omentum in a Friar of Montpelior all over the
lower part of the Belly, and four fingers thick; it was of the color of the
Spleen, so that it was probable that it was caused by Melancholy from thence,
because he was of a Melanchollick temper, and the passage is very open by the
branches of the Spleen Veins, to the Omentum; by which branches (as Hippocrates
teaches, the water in a Dropsy is brought from the Spleen to the Omentum,
from which by degrees it distills into the Cavity of the Abdomen.

But because the swelling of the Omentum can by no means be distinguished from
that of the Mesentery, therefore we cannot appoint a distinct knowledge. It is
true, that the Tumors of the Omentum are easier known at the first touch,
because it is immediately under the Peritonaeum; but the Mesentery is so united
to it, and the Muscles of the lower Belly, that they are sent forth by
suppuration through the Navel, or other external parts.

Yet this Difficulty of Knowledge, does not hinder the Cure, because the same
Medicines serve for all Tumors that are alike in all the parts of the belly:
but the Cure is worse to be made in the Omentum, because it has not fit way,
as other parts have for the purging of its self.

The End of the Thirteenth Book.
THE FOURTEENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of the Diseases of the Reins
and Bladder.
The PREFACE.
THE Reins and Bladder have diverse, and all sorts of Diseases, both Similary,
Organical, and Common; from which, diverse Symptoms arise, both in the actions
hurt, and also in the fault of the Evacuations. We will comprehend the chief in
Nine Chapters. The First shall be of the Stone in the Kidneys, and the pain of
the Reins, called Dolor Nephriticus. The Second of the Stone in the Bladder.
The Third of the Inflammation of the Reins and Bladder. The Fourth of Pissing of
Blood. The Fifth of the Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder. The Sixth of Diabetes,
or Involuntary pissing. The Seventh of the not holding of the Water. The Eighth
of Ischuria, or stoppage of the Water, and Strangury. The Ninth of Dysuria, or
scattering of the Urine.

Chap. 1. Of the Stone in the Kidneyes, and Pain in the Reins, called Dolor
Nephriticus.
THat is called Dolor Nephriticus which does afflict the Ureters or Reins; the
common people call it the Stone-Chollick, because of the great affinity it has
with the Chollick, so that it is hard to distinguish them, as you shall see in
the Diagnostick, or Signs.

The Cause of this Pain in manifold, but chiefly the stone or thick phlegm. A
stone continuing in the Reins, causes either little or no pain, because the
substance of the Reins has little Sense: but if it fall upon the Head of the
Ureters, or get into the passage, and distend it, and cannot be brought to the
Bladder by reason of its greatness, then it causes grievous pain. But gross
phlegm fastened upon the Ureters, does distend them, and causes the Nephritical
pain.

The less ordinary Causes are, thick blood fixed in the Ureters, or thick
Matter coming from the Kidneyes, or other parts; sometimes wind gets into the
Cavity, and causes great pain.

There are many Controversies in Authors about the stone, which is the chief
and usual cause of the pain of the Reins, which we shall not accurately
declare, but only touch those things which are necessary to declare its Nature
and Causes.

And first, they doubt under what kind of Disease they should reckon the stone;
Galen places it among the Diseases in number, of those things which are wholly
besides Nature, as also the Worms. For though a Disease in number properly does
respect living parts, whose number being increased or diminished, makes an
organical Disease; yet those things which are preternaturally added to the
number of those things of which the Body is compounded, ought to be referred to
the Diseases in number, so that sometimes the bare qualities are sometimes
referred to Diseases in number; when they do immediately hurt the actions, as
yellowness in the Eye of one that has the Jaundice, a noise in the Ears, and a
bitter taste upon the Tongue.

Oftentimes the stone is reckoned among Causes of Diseases, as it breeds
Obstruction or Distention.

It may also be placed among the Symptoms, those that are voided or retained:
for if it be retained in the Kidneys, Reins, or Bladder, when it should be
voided, it is to be reckoned among those things that are preternaturally
retained: but when it is voided, it is to be reckoned among those that are
voided wholly against Nature.

But there is more difficulty about the cause of the stone, both material and
efficient. Galen and his posterity, thought that phlegm was the material cause
of the stone, which is thick and slimy, fit to be hardened, and (as they say of
late) faeculent, slimy, and Tartarous, and heat the efficient, which dries and
hardens that matter, and at length turns it into a stone Which Doctrine is
opposed with strong Reasons.

First, If it should come of a slimy and thick phlegm, then it would often be
bred in the Brain and the Stomach, in which such phlegm does chiefly abound.
Neither will it suffice to say that there is not sufficient heat in those parts
to harden it; because according to the Doctrine of Hippocrates and Galen, a
gentle heat by a continual action is sufficint to congeal; and hence is the
reason why old men do more often breed the stone, when young men have hotter
Kidneys; because the matter of the stone lies longer in old men's Reins, by
reason of the weakness of the expulsive Faculty, and so it is longer concocted
by the heat, and at length hardened.

Secondly, From Aristotle, 2. meteor. cap. 4. they which grow together by heat,
are melted by moisture, as Clay. But the stone is never dissolved with water.
Neither does it hinder to say that a strong heat makes such a Concretion or
growing together, that it cannot be dissolved by moisture, as in Bricks. For
first, in Man there is not so great a heat; then the not dissolving of Bricks
with Water is not because of the strong heat they had, but rather from the
disposition of the Clay; for Clay made of common Earth, although it be baked in
a Furnace, will never be hard as a Brick, but always be dissolved with moisture.

Thirdly, From Aristotle in the place mentioned, the heat that makes concretion
must be dry. But there is a continual flowing of moisture into the Reins and
Bladder, therefore such a drying and hardening cannot be in those parts.

Fourthly, Stones bred in Rivers and Fountains, in which there is no heat, and
in some Dens and Holes that are very cold, the water that falls turns into a
stone; from whence strange shapes do arise. Therefore we must find another
cause besides heat, and another Matter besides clammy and glutinous Phlegm.

Fifthly, Phlegm made hard is like Chalk, and is brittle, as you may see in the
knots of the Joints. But some stones are like flints, which they cannot be from
Phlegm: nor is there so much heat in man's Body to make it so.

This slimy phlegm has deceived the Physicians of all Ages, which is found in
the Urine of many Patients, and they thought it to be the immediate Cause: But
they were out. For first, In the stone of the Kidneys such Urines are seldom
made, but often in the stone of the Bladder. But if this were the matter of the
stone it would be alike in both. Therefore this Matter depends especially upon
the proper Disease of the Bladder, for it is an Excrement of it distempered.
The disease of the Bladder is this: we have seen in the Bodies of them who have
died of the Stone in the Bladder, and who voided much of that matter, that the
bladder grew fleshy, as thick as ones finger or thumb, so that it filled the
whole Cavity, and lay next to the stone till by stopping the Urine it killed the
Patient. But in those who made thin clear Urine, their bladder was not altered.
The Reason of these accidents are taken out of Hipp. Aph. 66. Sect. 5. If there
be no Tumor in great and evil wounds, it is evil. And Galen gives the Reason
because there is a suspicion that the Humors which should come by reason of
pain to the wound, are gone to some noble part. Moreover, it is Natural to all
parts; as Galen, lib. de diff. febr. cap. 11. that they which are stronger,
send that which hurts them to the weaker, nor do they cease so doing till it
come to the weakest. So when the part wounded is very weak, and therefore fit
to receive Humors, if they come not thither, it is a sign that other parts are
very weak, which cannot send, and that others are weaker than the wounded, to
which the humors are carried. Not only the bad Humors are carried to the wound,
but also good blood, which Nature sends to refresh it. All these things are in
the bladder that has the stone. A great uneven stone, or sharp, hurts the
Tunicle of the Bladder; hence comes pain and weakness. And Nature to help it
sends more than usual blood, and the stronger parts send their superfluiteis.
These the bladder concocteth as much as may be into its self, and so grows
thicker. But when it cannot take in all, especially the evil Humors, hence come
many foul Excrements, which from the Nature of the part turn so phlegmatic. But
in them who have clear Urine, either the stone hurts not, which causes the
attraction, or some other parts are weaker than the bladder, to which the
humors flow.

But because this Doctrine does destroy an old Opinion, we will confirm it by a
clear Example of the Womb. The Womb is Membranous, as the bladder: but in Women
with Child it is rleshy and thick; so that in the last months it is two fingers
thick; because Nature all the time sends much blood to it to nourish the Child;
which when the Child does not wholly consume, some part of it is taken into the
Womb: and so it increases. The same is in the Bladder, though Preternaturally
(which in the Womb is Natural) that when much blood comes to it, it coverts it
into its self, and grows thicker. But if without being with Child, the Womb be
distempered and made weak, then Humors superfluous from other parts come to it,
which when they cannot be taken into its substance, turns to the Whites. And
that flux is a proper Excrement of the Womb, as the phlegm is of the bladder.
The same thing is in the Reins, though not so often; as when by a stone in them
there is pain and weakness, Nature sends much blood and humors to them, which
when they cannot be turned into the substance of the part, they are turned into
a slimy Excrement, which is voided in abundance; and this vulgar Physicians
take for Matter or Pus, which is only phlegm, or mixed with a little Pus, as
when by the grating of the stone there is an Ulcer.

Some Modern Writers being converted with the aforesaid Reasons, have made a
Juice, which will turn into a stone to be the material cause of the stone
called Succus Lapidescens; and the efficient to be Spiritus Lapidescens. They
call the former a certain Humor naturally proper to turn into a stone: And this
they desire to prove by the breeding of stones in the Earth, which are by many
Authors said to come of Waters and things cast there into to be hardened
presently; some Waters in Caves to be made Stones, and some part of the Wine
grows to the Vessel, called Tartar; and Urines that are clear, when they are
cold grow to the glass. And although the peculiar fitness of the Matter to be
thus turned, is not sufficiently known; yet some say they have found it out,
saying that it is of Salt mixed with Earth. Some Salts do grow hard in the Sun,
and are easily dissolved in Water; and if they be joined with Earth like
themselves, by the force of the efficient cause they may be stones. So we see
in Wines turned to Tartar: but Tartar calcined goes all into Salt, which shows
that it is chiefly made of Salt. So in Urines that have much Salt, especially
in those which have slimy matter, we see a tartarous Matter cleaving to the
glass. This Salt Matter, which is mixed with the Urine, comes from Meat and
Drink so affected, and they are cast forth in a sound Body, nor are they
retained in the Reins when the efficient Cause is absent.

We have called the efficient Cause, Spiritum Lapidisicum, or a Spirit that
makes a stone: Fernelius calls it a stony disposition, which is in the Reins
commonly Haereditarily. But we like the foremost Title best. For first, some
have stones which have them not Haereditarily if they eat or drink things that
breed them, because in them there is both the Material and Efficient Cause;
therefore the Hermets impute the Efficient Cause of stones to their proper
seeds, which in a Matter rightly disposed, produce their form.

Moreover, Many Histories show that Stones come from a Stone making Spirit, of
Men, Beasts, and other things turned into Stones by a Breath or Spirit out of
the Earth. So in Aventinus, lib. 7. Annal. Bavar. an. 1343. that more than
fifty Country men and their Cows, were turned into Stones. And so says
Ortellius in his Description of Russia, of whole Herds of Cattle. So also
Camerarius reports of a South wind that blows some times of the year, in the
Province of Chilo, in Armenia, by the blasts whereof, whole Troops of Horses are
suddenly turned into Statues of Stone, and stand in the same rank and file in
which they were.

This Stone making Spirit, is not only in the Reins of those which have this
Disease, but also in the Juice of those things that are eaten and drunk
separated from them; so that sometimes both come together: Hence it is that some
that eat but any Meats that incline to the breeding of the stone, do presently
produce it, because there is a Stone-breeding disposition, or Stone-making
Spirit in their Reins. But if their Reins be free from this Spirit, such meat
will not breed stones, because their stone-making force is not strong enough
without the assistance of the Reins to convert that matter into stone. On the
Contrary, if the stone-making power be greater in the meats that are taken, and
they are often eaten, stones will be bred, although the Kidneys have no such
disposition or stonemaking Spirit. So we see in diverse places, where the Water
or Wine are full of stone-making juice, the greatest part of the Inhabitants
are subject to the stone; as we may see in Ovid concerning the Thracians, in
these Verses:

The Thracian Waters, all things Marble make,
Their Guts turn Stone that inwardly them take.
And contrary, If there be that stone-making virtue in the Kidneys, it makes
stones of any nourishment, though never so wholesome. So about three years since,
I saw one who for three or four months voided more than twelve little stones
every day by Urine, when all that while he kept his bed, very sick, and fed
only upon Broth and Panadoes.

The Antecedent and Primary Causes, either respect the supply of Matter for the
stone, or the constitution of the Reins, by reason whereof the stones do more
easily grow.

The Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and Reins, do much cause the breeding and heaping
up of Matter for the stone; chiefly the Stomach, if it do not well concoct,
there is a crude Chyle brought to the Liver; and from thence impure and Earthy
Juyces are sent with the Serum or Water into the Reins. A hot liver does bake
the Chylous Matter, and makes it fit to breed a stone; as also being too cold
it makes crude blood most fit for the same purpose. A Spleen weak or stopped,
or otherwise disturbed, does not sufficiently purge the drossie part of the
blood, but sends part of it to the Reins, which will more easily be turned into
a stone. And lastly, the Reins besides their conjunct cause, which is a stony
disposition, are an Antecedent Cause in two respects; namely, in respect of
their Temper, and of their Form. In regard of their hot Temper, they more
violently draw the Stone-making Matter, and thicken it more: but in respect of
their Form, they are an Antecedent Cause, if the Emulgent Veins are more loose,
so that that thick and Tartarous Matter may be more easily received into the
Reins; or if the Ureters, and those Vessels that send the serous Matter to
them, be too narrow, so that the thick Matter has not a free passage, but is
retained in the Reins.

Thick and slimy Nourishment does chiefly afford Matter for the Stone, such as
are full of Salt, as Beef, Pork, Hairs, Geese, or things dried in the Smoke, or
poudered, as Salt-fish, Shel-fish, Eeles, Pulse, Chees, and all Milk meats,
hard Eggs, Chestnuts, Pears, Quinces, Medlars, unleavened Bread, and Rice; thick
Wine, sharp or black, or new Wine not purged, standing Waters, and such as are
full of stone-breeding Juice.

To these add very hot Meats, as Pepper, Ginger, Garlic, Onions, old strong
Wine, which makes the Liver and Reins too hot, too strong Diuretics, which
carry the Matter that will cause the Disease too violently to the Reins; thick
Garments, Down Beds, Baths, inordinate Lechery, which is a great Enemy to the
Reins, violent Exercue, especially after meat, too much feeding, or long
fasting, great anger, and other passions.

The Signs of the Stone taken by themselves, are equivocal, and common to other
Diseases: but if you consider them all together, you may have certain Knowledge
by them.

The First Sign, is a fixed pain about the Loins, sometimes heavy when the Stone
is fastened to the substance; which being of a dull sense, has a weighty pain;
but as often as the Stone gets into the Head of the Ureters, then it causes a
sharp and pricking pain, and this is called the Nephritical pain, or pain of
the Reins, and it continues while the stone is there; neither will it cease to
torment the Patient till the stone get into the Cavity of the Bladder, or turn
back into the hollow of the Kidneyes.

The Second Sign, is bloody Urine, which comes from the opening or corrosion of
the Veins which are dispersed into the substance of the Reins, which comes from
the rubbing of the Stone that sticks in the substance; but if there be but
little blood voided, being mixed with Urine it loses its color, so that the
Urine looks like a Lie. This Sign is not always, but sometimes depends upon
other causes. But when it does appear, it is one of the chief, which
distinguishes the Stone from the Chollick. It uses to be caused by riding,
much walking, and other violent exercise; for then the stone if it be rough and
snaggy, being removed from its place, does cut and tear the tender Flesh of the
Kidneyes.

The Third Sign, is thin Urine, water-like, and little, in the beginning of the
fit; after which sometimes follows a total stoppage, if both Ureters are
stopped: but when the fit is past, and the stone that was fixed in the Ureters
is fallen into the bladder, there comes forth much thick troubled Urine, with a
sandy Sediment.

The Fourth Sign, is often voiding of sand and stones. Concerning voiding of a
stone, it is evident, That if the Patient voided any formerly, though never so
small, when he had a fit, it is most certain that the Disease is the Stone. But
concerning Sand we cannot speak so infallible; for we may see many all their
lives time void Gravel, and never be troubled with the stone; for sand comes
often from adustion of Humors in the Liver and Veins, and it sticks to the
sides of the Urinal, and goes not to the bottom, as that which comes from the
Reins. Besides, if you rub it between your fingers, it dissolveth, and is like
Salt, when the other will not yield to the fingers, and will not dissolve. And
finally, because this Sand is salt, it is dissolved in hot Urine, nor will it
appear while the Urine is so; but when it is cold it grows together to the
sides of the Urinal, not unlike the Crystal of Tartar; which being dissolved in
warm water, when it grows cold, congealeth and sticks to the sides of the
Glass; so the Nature of them both is very like.

The Fifth Sign, is a stone voided, and this is most certain: For if any former
Sign, though equivocal do appear, and a stone be voided, you may be certain of
the Disease.

The Sixth Sign, is a numbness of the Thigh on the same side that the Back is
pained of: for the stone being great, does oppress the Nerve which is in erted
into the Muscles of the Loins, under the Reins, called by the Anatomists
Psenas, and those Muscles go to the Hip for its motion such a numbness is
perc^ived by sitting upon the Thigh, through the compression; or in the Arm by
long leaning thereon.

The Seventh Sign, is the drawing in of one stone, on that side where the pain
is: For the Kidneys and Ureters being provoked with the greatness of the pain,
do vehemently contract themselves, and then the Spermatical Vessels and all the
parts adjacent are also contracted, and these Vessels do raise up the stone
which is joined to them, so that it seems sometimes to be fixed to the Groyn.
And this retraction or drawing in of parts reaches to the bladder and Guts:
For in great pain the belly is bound, and Urine stopped; so that then Purges
will not work by reason they are hindered by that Contraction.

The Eighth Sign is, loathing and vomiting by the connection of the Kidneys with
the Stomach, by the Membrane that comes from the Peritonaeum, and by the Nerve
of the sixth Conjugation, two branches whereof reach from the Stomach to the
inward Tunicle of the Kidneys. Therefore when those sensible parts in the
Kidneys are pulled, the Stomach consenting, is stirred up to exclude that which
hurts; and first it sends out Phlegm, then yellow Choler, after green, if the
evil continue, because through long pain and watching the blood is altered in
the Veins, and that part which is most disposed for it, is turned into green
Choler.

Finally, The Nephritical pain is so like the Chollick, that Galen himself was
deceived in the distinguishing of them, as we showed in the Diagnosis or
Knowldg of the Chollick: where also we laid down signs by which we may
distinguish them, which we shall not need to repeat.

The Signs before mentioned are equivocal, and one of them can scarce give a
certain knowledge. Some Authors mention others, which are more equivocal and
uncertain, but joined with others they help the knowledge of the Disease,
therefore it will not be amiss to mention them.

Hipp. Aph. 34. Sect. 7. says, They who have bubbles in their Urine, have an
old Disease in the Reins. For these bubbles come from thick Humors full of
gross vapors, which are either bred in the Reins, or sent from other parts to
them, that matter is proper to breed the stone, and cannot be presently cured,
therefore the Disease is long. Galen in his Comment upon this Aporism, says
that the mouths of the Arteries which come to the Reins, are opened by the
sharpness of the Urine, and thence comes a Spirit which being mixed with the
Urine, makes bubbles. But it is not probable that such a gross Spirit that
will remain so long, should come from the Arteries, and Urine being cold may
long time so continue, as we see many bubbles many hours swimming thereupon.
And also when the Arteries are opened by the sharpness of the Urine, blood will
also come forth. And the mouths of the Veins having thin Skins, would be more
easily opened, and so there would be also blood mixed with the bubbles.

Hippocrates also Aph. 76. Sect. 4. says, They who void little bits of flesh,
and things like hairs, with a thick Urine, do it from the Reins. The bits of
flesh come from the Ulcer of the Reins, of which we shall speak hereafter: but
these thrids or hairs are said by Galen, in his Commentaries, to come from
thick and crude phlegm, made long and round by the extraordinary heat of the
Reins. Yet Galen confesses, 6. loc. aff. cap. 3. that after a long search he
was ignorant of the cause of their length. Avicen says that these thrids grow
long in the vessels of the Reins, or others; for in regard these are taken away
by Diuretics, and the Patients acknowledge pain in the Reins, it is credible
that they receive their form from thence. Actuarius does directly say they come
from the Ureters: For when the Reins abound with phlegm, it goes with the Urine
into the Ureters, and sticking to them and growing thick by heat, it gets a
long shape like a third or hair. But Fernelius writes that those hairs come
from the Parastatis or kernels, from his Observation, in which they grow long
like hairs from the matter of the seed, which by force of the Disease flowing
down by degrees, grows thick by heat, and that they appear much in those who
have lately had a filthy Gonorrhoea, and in those women who have the Whites, or
a foul Womb, and in that Urine which they make next after they have known a
man. Others suppose, that those thick Humors of which those filaments or hairs
are made, are first bred in the Veins, but take their form in the narrow
passages of the Reins, through which, as through a sieve, they turn small, and
after they descend into the Ureters, in which they grow dryer, till they are
sent into the bladder, neither can they be broken by reason of their toughness.
Whatsoever the cause is, since the best Authors do agree that these hairs breed
of thick phlegm in the Kidneys, or come to them from other parts, it is certain
that they may turn into a stone, if there be an efficient cause fit to produce
it. And therefore this may be a probable sign of the stone.

As for the Prognostic. The stone of the Kidneys is very dangerous, for it
uses to bring great evils; as Inflammation, Exulceration, great Pains,
Watchings, dejection of strength, Fevers, stoppings of Urine, and the like
dangerous Symptoms.

If this Disease be Haereditary coming from the Parents, it is incurable.

And because Hippocrates says that the Diseases of the Reins are hard to be
cured in oldmen, Aph. 6. Sect. 6. The Stone of the Kidneyes in old men is
difficult, if not incurable.

If the pain of the Kidneys continue many days, and cannot be cured with any
Medicines, there is danger of death, and it is near at hand when they are cold
externally, and have a cold sweat in the face. Urines that are first thin, and
after thick, and have sand at the bottom, do signify that the fit is toward
an end.

A Stone joined with an Ulcer in the Kidneys, is incurable: for those things
which break the Stone, do exasperate the Ulcer.

The Cure of the pain of the Kidneys, and stone sticking in them, or in the
Ureters, is by enlarging of the passages, and relaxing them by throwing forth
the stone, and any other thing that hurts them, by removing or taking away the
antecedent cause, and by taking away the pain. Which you may do with these
Medicines.

Take of Marsh-mallow and Lilly Roots, of each one ounce: Mallows, Violets,
Pellitory, Bearfoot, of each one handful: Lin-seed and Fenugreek seed, of each
half an ounce: fat Figgs, six: Chamomel and Melilot Flowers, of each one pugil:
boil them to a pint. Dissolve in the straining, Cassia, and Diacatholicon, of
each six drams: Oil of Lillies and Violets, of each one ounce and an half:
fresh Oil two ounces: make a Clyster to be given presently.

Afterward open the Liver Vein of the right or left Arm, and take away eight
or nine ounces of blood, according to the strength and fullness of the Patient.
Phlebotomy is very necessary to prevent Inslamation, which uses to come from
continuance of pain.

After blood-letting, give this Clyster.

Take of the flowers of Chamomel and Melilot, the tops of Dill, Pellitory of
the wall and Rue, of each half a bandful: Annis, Fennel, and Cummin seeds, of
each half an ounce: Make a decootion to one pint; in which dissolve
Diaphoenicon half an ounce: Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg one
ounce: Oil of Dill and Scorpions, of each three ounces. Make a Clyster.

To mollify more, and assuage the pain after your Laxative, you may make one
of Oil thus:

Take of Oil of Dill and of Chamomel, of each half a pound: Oil of sweet
Almonds two ounces: Oil of Rue one ounce: mix them for a Clyster.

At the same time appply a Fomentation to the part pained, made of the
Decoction of the first Clyster, with Annis seeds and Fennel seeds, Oil and
Water, with Spunges.

Take of Oil of Scorpions compounded two ounces: fresh Butter, Hens Grease, Oil
of Lillies, and of sweet Almonds, of each one ounce. Make a Liniment to be used
after the Fomentation.

Or this Cataplasin:

Take of Mallows and Pellitory, of each two handfuls: Parsley with the Roots
one handful: Rhadish Roots two ounces: boil them soft and beat them: then add
of Onions roasted, two: Oil of Lillies, bitter Almonds, and sweet Butter, of
each two ounces. Make a Cataplasin, which you must put between two thin linen
clothes, and apply warm to the Belly, according to the length of the Vreters,
and heat it as often as it grows cold.

You may also apply one either made of Pellitory alone, or with Eggs fried in a
Pan with Oil of Chamomel, bitter Almonds, Scorpions in a cloth.

Or make it of Onions shred and fried with Hogs Grease, or the Oils aforesaid,
with five or six warm Eggs applied.

And because in this Disease, there is abundance of crude Humors, after
Clysters (which must still be repeated as the pain comes) you may give a
purging Medicine, especially in form of a Bolus, lest it be easily vomited up,
because these Patients are commonly squeazy stomached.

Take of Cassia new drawn with Oil of sweet Almonds one ounce: Diaphoenicon
three drams: Powder of Rhubarb one dram: with the powder of Liquorin and
Tragacanth, make a Bolus.

If the Patient cannot swallow a Bolus, dissolve purging things in the
Decoction of Mallows.

But you must diligently observe that you must not give a Purging Medicine
before the pain be allayed. For when the pain is great, a strong Purge seldom
works, because then all the parts contract themselves, and refuse to help the
Medicine.

But at that time you may give a Vomit, by which the plenty of Humors may be
abated, and a revulsion is made from the part affected; and often Nature of the
self, when the pain is urgent, does endeavor the same, and after it finds ease.

A gentle Vomit which will also assuage pain, may be made thus:

Take of warm Water four ounces: Sallet Oil one ounce: simple Syrup of Vinegar
one ounce and an half: Make a Vomit.

If you will have a stronger, you must use Salt of Vitriol, or Mercurius vitae,
with which Angelus Sala says, that he has often cured this disease.

Before and after purging, you must give at the mouth, those things which open
the passages, and abate the pain: for which purpose the Syrup of Marshmallows
proscribed by Fernelius often given, is excellent. But because it is not
always ready in the Shops, you may make it simply thus:

Take of Marshmallows three ounces; boil them to a pint: dissolve in the
straining half a pound of Sugar. Let him take it often.

This following Julep given often, is good to mollify the Passages.

Take of Barley one pugil: gray Pease half a pugil: Mallow and Marsh-mallow
seeds, of each two drams: the four great cold seeds, of each one dram: fat
Figs, eight: Scbestens, six: Liquoris half an ounce: boil them to a pint and an
half. Dissolve in the straining, Syrup of Maidenhair four ounces. Give it at
four draughts, twice or thrice in a day.

Give for his ordinary drink, a decoction of Marsh-mallow Roots, one ounce and
an half: Barley two pugils: Liquoris six drams, in sive pints of water to a
pint.

Or make Broths of Mallows, Marshmallows, and gray Pease, with much butter,
and a little salt: or boil the same in fat broth.

Or give Emulsions made of the four great cold seeds.

But Oil of sweet Almonds above all Medicines, does mollify and relax the
Passages, and asswageth pain, if it be new drawn: give three or four ounces by
its self, or with white Wine, or a Decoction of Marshmallows, Liquoris, and
gray Pease; or make Potion of equal parts of Oil of sweet and bitter Almonds,
because bitter Almonds are good also to expel the Stone.

The day after you have opened the Arm, you may open the Ham or Ancle Vein on
the same side, for that will derive the Humor, and the Patients find much ease
thereby. Which Rule is given us by Hippocrates, 6. Epid. Part. I. Aph. 6. and
by Aetius, lib. 11. cap. 5.

And if the Disease last long, you may open the Hemorroids; according to Hipp.
Aph. 11. Sect. 6. who says, That it is good for Melanchollick men, and such as
have the stone, to have their Hemorrhoids bleed. From the same branch of the
Spleen there are Veins which go to the Reins, bladder, and Hemorrhoids.

If the pain be not assuaged by Fomentations, Liniments, and Cataplasms
aforesaid, put him into a Bath made of the Emollent Decoction, with white Wine
added, for it asswageth pain, at least while the Patient sits therein; but you
must not use it much least it take away strength.

And lastly, When the pain is very great with watching and weakness, you must
give Narcoticks, and put two drams of Philonium Romanum, or five or six grains
of Laudanum in a Clyster, or three or four grains at the mouth, or one ounce of
Syrup of Poppies in a convenient Julep.

After these Topics have been used, in a long pain, it is good to apply a
Plaster of Melilot, malaxed with Oil of Chamomel and Dill.

This pain uses to be bred with some of these Medicines, and with repeating
Purges (if they be needful) or giving Cassia often. But if after the use of
them it continue, it is most certain that they are great stones which stop the
Ureters, which must be sent out by Diuretics, which will break them. But you
must first begin with the mildest, lest by strong and sharp you inflame the
Blood and the Reins. And you must consider the habit of the Body: For a full
Body will endure things that do more pierce and make thin; but a slender, less.

There are abundance of this kind in Authors, that diminish, break, and expel
the stone, but we will give you only the most choice.

Take of Smallage, Parsley, Butchers Broom, Couch-grass, and Sparagus Roots, of
each one ounce: Mallow and Marsh-mallow Roots, of each half an ounce: Pellitory
of the wall two bandfuls: Annis, Fennel, Dill, Caraway, Carrot, Amye,
Carthamus, Cummin, Rue seeds, and Bay Berries, of each two drams: Chamomel,
Melilot, Dill, and French Lavender, of each one pugil: boil them in white Wine
to the consumption of half. Dissolve in the straining, being one pint, fresh
Butter four ounces; Honey of Roses two ounces; red Sugar one ounce; Benedicta
Laxativa half an ounce; one Yolk of an Egg; Oil of Nuts, Lin-seed, and Dill, of
each three ounces: mix them for a Clyster, which let him keep two hours, if he
can.

Take of Strawberry Water, and Saxifrage Water, of each two ounces: the best
white Wine six ounces: Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces: Spirit of Vitriol one
dram: mix them for three doses. Give the first as hot as may be endured; after
six hours give the second as the former, and if this will not do (as it seldom
misseth) let him take the third.

You may sooner make a Julep of Saxifrage Water, and Syrup of Violets, with
fifteen or twenty drops of Spirit of Vitriol.

Take of the Juice of Pellitory drawn without fire three ounces: Juice of
Lemmons, and Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without fire, of each one ounce and an
half. Mix them for a Julep to be given three or four times morning and evening.
Or,

Take of the Juice of Lemmons and white Wine, of each two ounces: Sugar candy
half a dram. Take it instead of the Julep.

Concerning Juice of Lemmons you must note, That it must be used warily, for
being given often and much, it makes Exulcerations in the Stomach, from whence
comes the Flux called Lienteria.

These Pills following are excellent:

Take of Sal prunella, Crystal of Tartar, Salt of Ivy Berries, and of
Watercresses, of each equal parts: with some proper Syrup or Turpentine, make
a Mass of Pills; of which give one dram every morning.

This following powder of Quercetan is much commended.

Take of the inward skin of Hens Gizzards, and their white Dung, of each half
an ounce: the inward skins of Egg-shels poudered, two ounces and an half:
Rupture and Cinnamon, of each four scruples: Medlar stones two drams: Annis and
Fennel seeds, of each one ounce: make them into very fine powder, and give half
a dram or a dram thereof in white Wine.

The Ashes of burnt Egg-shels from half a dram to an ounce given in white Wine,
does powerfully expel the Stone that sticks in the passages of the Ureters.

Goats blood prepared is commended of all Authors, old and modern, as the best
Medicine to dissolve the stone. The Dose is from half a dram to a dram.

The Water of Goats Blood distilled in a Glass in Balneo Mariae, does wonders.
But you must feed the Goat one month with Saxifrage, burnt Juniper berries,
Parsley, and other Diuretics, without Drink.

Hartman commends the Urine of a Goat in these words as a wonderful Remedy: In
the stoppage of the Reins by a greatstone, or when the Vreters and Bladder are
stopped by stones sent thither, so that one drop cannot be voided, it is
excellent if you take the Urine of a Goat taken out with his Bladder while he
is yet alive, and drink and apply his Paunch and Guts to the Belly and
Privities, for so the stone will be presently consumed without hurt to the
Vessels, and the Patient cured.

The Powder of Millepedum, or Sows, is excellent to dissolve the stone, and we
will teach the use thereof in the stone of the Bladder.

Also the infusion of the same in white Wine, and continued

There is a Wine of Winter Cherries commended of Arnoldus Villanovanus, and
they say it does so bring forth the matter of the stone that you may take it up
in your hand. And this is done by beating the Winter Cherries in white Wine,
and giving the strained Liquor.

These also following are good:

Take of Lapis Judaicus, or Jews stone, Pulvis Lithontribi Justini, of each one
dram: Peach Kernels, Gum Tragacanth, and Cherry-stone Kernels, of each half a
dram: bring them to Powder, and with Turpentine make a Bolus, which give in
three Doses morning and evening.

Take of Hors-Rhadish scraped two ounces: white Wine four ounces: steep them a
few hours; then strain them strongly. Let the Patient take the straining twice
or thrice, at convenient hours.

Savin Water given to an ounce or two, does purge stones and gravel.

Take of Mallow Roots cleansed in white Wine, six ounces: Burdock and
Couch-grass Roots, of each four ounces: Asarum, Pa^sley, Valerian, and Fennel
Roots bruised, of each two ounces: Maidenhair, Saxifrage, Burnet, Golden rod,
and Betony, of each four handfuls: Bazil, Burdock, Carduus, Mountain Osier
seeds, Medlar stones, and Peach stones, of each one ounce: Gromwel seeds two
ounces: Lapidis Lyncis, and Judaici, of each one ounce and an half: Turpentine
three ounces: Goats Blood prepared two ounces and an half: Saffron two drams:
white Wine four pints: bruise them that must, and mix them all; distill them in
Balneo Mariae. Take two ounces of this Water three hours before Supper,
drinking after four ounces of white Wine.

Take of the bark of the Roots of Carduus Asininus one ounce: Liquoris two
drams: boil them to six ounces: let him take the straining many days. It does
wonderfully cleanse Stone and Gravel.

Take four pounds of shred Onions that are white; two pound of Sugar; one pint
and an half of white Wine: distill them in Balneo Mariae till they are dry. Give
every morning two or three ounces for many days together.

The Ashes of a Scorpion is commended by Practitioners, if you take one scruple
at a time, with Wa^er of Couch-grass, Pellitory, or white Wine; but it is
seldom used.

Mathiolus his Oil of Scorpions is more in use; a dram taken at the Mouth with
the aforesaid Liquors.

The Chemists brag much of their Salts: among which the best is, Salt of Bean
Cods, or Stalks, half a dram whereof, with white Wine works very well. And also
Tartar vitriolate in the same quantity, They commend also Spirit of Salt,
Vitriol, Mercurius dulcis, with their proper Vehicles or Liquors.

Outwardly you may help the Stone, if you continually chafe the Reins and
Ureters with warm hands anointed with Oil of Scorpions.

Also many Cupping-glasses from the Kidney affected downwards, applied without
Scarrification.

Then anoint the Part with Mathiolus his Oil os Scorpions; to which add a
little powder os Cantharides. Or make a Liniment of Oil of Wax, Bricks, and
Scorpions, of each equal parts; it is very piercing and good, if you fear no
inflammation of the Reins.

You must observe in the use of Medicines to break and expel the stone, That
they must not be used twice or thrice, but often, till the passages stopped are
open; and while you give them, you must cherish the Reins and Bladder with
Baths, Fomentations, Ointments, and Cataplasms, that the other may work the
better. And you must give thin Liquor, as white Wine, often; and use inward
Emollients, Looseners, and Openers, to enlarge the Passages, and temper the
sharpness of other Medicines.

By these Remedies the pain of the Reins is cured, and stone dissolved and
expelled. But because they who are diposed to this Disease, and cured, do often
relapse: therefore we must appoint some Preservatives that we may hinder it as
much as may be.

And first, if there be a Plethora or fullness, or the Reins and Liver hot, it
is good to open a Vein, Spring and Fall, a Clyster or gentle Purge being first
given: And then to purge the Matter away which is proper to breed the stone
before it come to the Kidneys, which you may do by a Vomit twice or thrice in a
month, to those which easily vomit.

Or you may give a Purge by a Bolus of Cassia, Diaphoenicon, and Rhubarb,
prescribed in the Cure, or some other convenient Medicine every month; or two
or three, according to the habit of the Patient, and the plenty of Humors, and
that in the last quarter of the Moon.

Or if there be evil Humors, they must be purged Spring and Fall with a
convenient Apozeme: for by that, not only the Antecedent and remote cause will
be taken away; but also some part of the conjunct cause; as also the
Obstructions of the Bowels, which usually accompany this disease, will be taken
away, if you mix therein clensing and cutting Medicines.

Or instead of the Apozeme, you may use the Decoction of an old Cock made thus:

Take of Polypody of the Oak, Carthamus seeds, of each one ounce and an half:
Thyme and Epithimum, of each one pugil: Cummin, Annis, Dill, Fennel, Caraway,
and Carduus seeds, of each two drams: Senna one ounce and an half: Gummy
Turbith half an ounce: Cinnamon one dram: Crystal of Tartar two drams: beat
them and mix them together, and put them into the belly of an old Cock; and
then boil them till the flesh come from his bones. Let him take the Broth being
strained, at four mornings draughts.

Or you may give this following Powder commended of Solenander, by the use
whereof he testifies, that he cured many of the pain of the Reins, giving it
in the fit.

Take of Senna two ounces: the best Rhubarb half a dram: Turbith one dram and
an half: Hermodacts two scruples: Polypody half a dram: Cinnamon, Ginger,
Gromwel seeds, Saxifrage, Broom seeds, of each one dram; powder them finely.
Give one dram, or a dram and an half in white or thin red Wine, once in a month.

Carolus Piso does extol this following Powder:

Take of Annis, Fennel, Caraway, and Cummin seeds, of each one dram: Coriander
prepared half a dram: Liquoris and Burdock seeds, of each one dram and an half:
Cinnamon and Galangal, of each one scruple: Gromwel and Broom seeds, of each
half a dram: Diatragacanth frigid two drams: Diagridium one scruple: Senna as
much as all the rest: make a Powder. The Dose is one dram, with the Broth of
gray Pease.

Or you may make a Magistral Syrup thus:

Take of Sparagus, Couch-grass, Marsh-mallow, Knee-holm, and Parsley Roots, of
each one ounce: Bettony, Burnet, Saxifrage, and Pellitory of the Wall,
Maidenhair, of each one handful: Bazil, Parsley, Gromwel, Broom, and Burdock,
and Mountain Ofier seeds, of each two drams: Liquoris, Raisons, and Polypody of
the Oak, of each one ounce: Make a Decoction to one pint and an half. Infuse in
the straining, four ounces of Senna: white Agarick two ounces: Ginger two
scruples: boil them a little, and strain them: after dissolve in it one pound
of white Sugar. Boil it up to a Syrup, and give thereof two ounces once or
twice in a month, with the Decoction of Barley, Couch-grass, and Gray Pease.

Or if the Body be very foul, make Pills of Aloes and Agarick, and give two or
three of them every other day before Dinner.

After Purging, give Diuretics, to bring forth the slimy Matter, and Sand that
is about the Ureters.

For this end, make Decoctions of the Diuretics mentioned in the Magistral
Syrup, with Sugar, into the form of a Julep, or Apozeme. Or Chicken, Goat, or
Mutton Broth, to be taken many days together after general Evacuations.

Also after every Purge, take some of these following, once or twice in a week.

Take of the stalks and flowers of Beans three pound: Calcitrah one pound: beat
them, and add one pound of Sugar candy; the Juice of Lemmons one pint and an
half: the Juice of Oranges half a pound: the Decoction of Mallows, and
Marshmallows well strained two pound: Honey one pint: Distill them with a gentle
fire, and let them not be burnt, nor the Liquor wholly consumed. Let the
Patient take four ounces of this Water every morning.

Take of the stones of Medlars, and the powder of Diatragacanth frigid, of each
one ounce: dried Rest-harrow Roots, Liquoris, Melone and Gromwel seeds, of each
two drams: Saxifrage, Broom, Rhadish, Knee-holly, Calcitrap seeds, of each one
dram: Marsh-mallow and Sparagus seeds, of each one scruple: Sugar candy two
ounces: make a Powder. Of this let him take one spoonful thrice in a month in
the morning, about New moon, Fullmoon, and Wain, drinking after a little white
Wine, or red Pease broth, Sea-holly, and Liquoris, exercising after it.

Carolus Piso highly commends this following Powder, which he gave with his
purging Powder before mentioned, and took away many boxes of small stones from a
President of Lorrain.

Take of Marsh-mallow and Violet seeds, of each half a scruple: Gromwel seeds,
and Liquoris, of each one scruple: the Jews stone, and Sponge stone, of each
six grains: the powder of Dates, Medlar, and Cherry stones, of each two
scruples: Melone Seeds three drams: make a Powder. Give one dram with
unleavened bread dipped in white Wine three days together of the New moon, and
let him drink red Pease broth after it, wherein the Roots of Marshmallows,
Fennel, Sea-holly, Rest-harrow, and Parsley, and Juniper berries bruised have
been boiled, adding a little white Wine, Honey, Butter, and Juice of Lemmons.

This following Electuary prescribed by Zappata, is excellent.

Take of the Seeds of St. John's Wort dried, and finely poudered, three ounces:
Conserve of Roses of Violets one pound: mix them into an Electuary, of which
let the Patient take half an ounce every morning three hours before meat the
first two weeks two days together; and after for fifteen days once in a week;
and after that once in a month, or oftener, according as the Disease requires.

Conserve of Roses, is better than Violets, because it corrects the scent of
the Turpentine which comes forth of the Seeds of St. John's wort beaten. But
Violets agrees best with the Reins.

These following Lozenges are very safe, and most excellent.

Take of the four great cold seeds, and of Liquoris, all cleansed one scruple:
Burnet, Bazil, Parsley seeds, and Nutmeg, of each half a dram: Aromaticum
Rosatum two scruples: Sugar dissolved in Winter Cherry Water, four ounces: make
Lozenges of three drams in weight. Let him take one in the morning three hours
before meat, drinking after it four ounces of Rest-harrow, or Rupture-wort
Water, with two ounces of white Wine.

The Wine of Winter Cherries described in the Cure, if it be drunk sometimes,
does take away the Matter that breeds the Stone, says Villanovanus.

In the use of all Diuretics observe this, They must not be used too often
because they draw to the part affected; there once or twice in a month, or
sometimes seldomer, is sufficient, purging before, lest the Humors of other
parts should be carried to the Reins.

Turpentine may be used oftener: for Amatus Lusitanus in Curat. 68. Cent. 2.
reports of a Monk that had the Joynt-gout, and the Stone both, and could find
help by nothing; at length by the use of Turpentine he was cured within six
months of them both. Every morning he swallowed the quantity of a small Nut with
Sugar. And the reason why Turpentine often used does not hurt as other
Diuretics, in my Judgment is this; Because it looseneth the Belly withal; so
that those gross Humors, which by other Medicines would be carried to the
Reins, are sent out by stool.

But commonly Turpentine is used seldom, as other Diuretics, either alone, or
with other Medicines, thus:

Take of Turpentine ten times washed in Saxifrage or Pellitory Water, half an
ounce: With Sugar make a Bolus. Or,

Take of Cassia newly drawn six drams: Turpentine half an ounce: Powder of
Liquoris two drams: mix them for a Bolus. Or,

Take half an ounce of Turpentine, and one dram of poudered Rhubarb: mix them
for a Bolus. Or,

Take Four ounces of Turpentine, burn it upon a hot Iron that it may powder,
and give two drams with convenient Liquor. Or,

Take Turpentine half an ounce: Powder against the Stone, called Pulvis
Lithontribus, t^o drams: mix it for a Bolus.

Zacutus Lusitanus, Obser. 58. lib. 2. Praxis admir. does much commend Natural
Balsom for expelling stones, and that a man of three score years of age that
had his Water stopped eighteen days with stones, was cured thereby. First he
took some drops of it with Oil of sweet Almonds, increasing the quantity of
both till he came to half an ounce of Balsom, and three ounces of Oil of sweet
Almonds, within ten days he voided six stones; and afterward he was preserved
by the same Medicine, by taking in a morning half an ounce of Oil of sweet
Almonds, and six drops of Balsom, by which means he made a Sandy Urine, and
lived long. If you want Eastern Balsom, you may take that of Peru.

The same Zacutus in the same Observation, does commend Tobacco Water, in these
words: I remember (says he) that I took away many great stones fastened in the
hollow of the Reins, with distilled green Tobacco Water. If you want that, then
use the Decoction.

Most wi^e Varandaeus, my Master, commends the Waters of some Baths, Balervacan
or Bitumenous for Preservatives against the Stone, of which we have seen rare
effects. We (...) his words: There is (says he) no better Medicine after
Purging, than the drinking of Balervacan Waters; for by the heat which comes
from the Bitumen, they dissolve gross humors and stones, and by their Nitrous
quality they cleanse, and by their great quantity, do not only cleanse the Guts,
but Reins; so that it is incredible to tell what abundance of thick Water some
have made after it. But when we fear the Inflammation of the Guts, we ordered
them to abstain from Wine, and gave them Chicken Broth with cold Herbs and
Juleps. Therefore we put fat Phlegmatic men into them once a day in the
morning, having first anointed their Reins and Liver with some proper Ointment,
and bound them with doubled linen clothes, that the Excrements might be
received from the Pores opened. And if their Bewels grow hot, they may after
use sweet Water Baths that cool and moisten.

Sharp Mineral Waters, or Vitriol, are also good to prevent, for they do not
only dissolve the slimy Tartarous Matter that breeds the Stone, but correct the
hot distemper of the Liver and Reins, and therefore in hot distempers these are
best.

And because hot Bodies are hurt by hot things, we will prescribe more
temperate; as Bean and Rupture-wort Water, and Lemmon Water distilled. Slice
them and distill them in Balneo Mariae. And for their better cooling, still them
with Milk.

The Conserve of Hipps, is Diuretic and cooling, and is commended by Crato in
this case also.

The Conserve of Marsh-mallow and Mallow flowers, which by mollifying and
moistening helps the stones to come forth.

The inspissate Juice of Purslain made into Pills, and given one dram at a
time, does powerfully cleanse the Reins.

The dried Flowers of Pomegranates in one dram, does purge the Matter causing
the Stone.

And the like Quantity of the Dried Sponge of white Thistle, given in like
quantity, is excellent.

Fresh Butter with as much Sugar candy taken every morning fasting, does cleanse
the Passages of the Urine, and hinder the breeding of the Stone.

Bitter Almonds taken ten or twelve in a morning, do the same.

Filberts also taken before meat, are commended by Crato, who says that he
found by Experience, that many long affected with the pain of the Reins, were
cured by them. Which Amatus Lusitanus Curat. 78. Cent. 7. wisely confirms,
where he thus says: A man that had the pain of his back, and pissed often red
hairs, complained of his Loins and Guts, for which he had took many things in
vain; but contrary to all hope he was cured with eating of Filberts. For one
counseled him that if he would be cured, he should eat Filberts with their
inward Husks before Dinner and Supper. But he considering the Innocence of the
Medicine, eat them at meat, and after also: by which he was cured per^ectly,
and his pain never returned. Amatus Lusitanus in his Notes, adds this: That not
only that man, but many others have been cured thereby. These are those vulgar
Nuts that Avicen reckons among the Medicines that consume the Stone. But the
question is, by what faculty they work? whether by the dryness of the inward
skin? But some say that they work by their Oily quality.

The Chemists commend the Spirit of Salt, and give some drops thereof in a
morning with Broth, or other Liquor.

Zechius commends boiled Water given warm, the quantity of six or seven ounces,
once or twice in a day, before meat. For it cleanses the Reins, and
extinguisheth the heat, so that they cannot after breed stones.

Let his Drink be thin Wine, with the Decoction of Sea-holly. This Crato
commends. And we have seen excellent effects thereby.

Sour Wine called in French, Vnies, drunk often, does so much good, that some
have Vinyards of those Grapes on purpose.

To correct the hot distemper of the Reins, is the best Preservative, by such
things as are mentioned in the hot distemper of the Liver. For they help the
Reins and the Liver, from whence many times they are distempered.

Among the rest, Whey drunken in Summer, a whole month together, is the best.
And sharp Mineral and Vitriol Waters, to cool all the Bowels.

You may apply this following Epithem often to the Reins.

Take of Lettice, Water-lilly, and Rose Water, of each three ounces: Rose
Vinegar two ounces: Apply them very warm morning and evening.

This following Liniment is good, especially in Winter.

Take of the Oil of Roses, Water Lillies, and Violets, washed in Vinegar and
Rose Water, of each one ounce: the Mucilage of Marshmallows drawn in Pellitory
Water, six drams: Wax, a little. Make a Liniment for the Reins morning and
evening.

The extraordinary heat of the Reins, is allayed with a plate of Lead, always
warm.

And lastly, Because the Crudities of the Stomach do breed the Stone, you must
have an eye to that, and strengthen it with such things as are prescribed in
the Chapter of the Weakness thereof.

Chap. 2. Of the Stone in the Bladder.
ALthough we should speak of these Diseases of the Reins in order, yet because
the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder a^e of the same Nature, and what has been
said of the one, may agree with the other, we shall speak next of the Stone in
the Bladder.

The Material and Efficient Cause is the same of both: only this Difference
there is; That Children are most subject to the Stone in the Bladder, and Men
to that in the Kidneys. The Reason of which, is given by Galen, 6. Epid. Sect.
3. because thickness of Urine, which Children often have by Reason of their
gluttony, is dissolved by their gentle heat; neither does it stay in the Reins
by the help of the Expulsive Faculty of the Reins, which is stronger in that
age; but being fallen into the Bladder, there it stays longer, because
children given to play and sleep, piss more seldom. Moreover, their Urine is
not so sharp, neither does it provoke the expulsive faculty of the Bladder,
while the quantity is burdensome, and so the dregs remain because the Passage is
very narrow; besides, the bladder being stretched by the plenty of Urine cannot
so exactly contract it self to empty out all the Urine, but some remains in the
bottom, which is thick, and fit to breed the Stone. On the contrary, old men do
often piss forth that Matter which is in the bladder, and their passage is
larger; but the thick humor remains in the Reins, because it is clammy, and
cannot be dissolved by their weak heat, or strain through by reason of its
dryness. Hence Hippocrates in Coacis, says that the Stone in the bladder is
not bred after fourteen years of age, to three score, except it was there
before.

Fernelius mentioned a new Opinion of the Stone, breeding in the Bladder,
saying, That every stone in the bladder, had its beginning from the Kidneys,
and grows afterward in the bladder: For when in a fit of the stone, it falls
from the Reins, if it be great, it stays in the Bladder, and by getting new
Matter it increases by degrees. For he affirms that in grinding of some
stones taken out of the Bladder, he found as it were a Kernel which fell from
the Reins of another color and substance, and that he never knew any that had a
stone in the bladder, who was not formerly vexed with pains in the Reins. But
this Opinion is cast off by diverse very good Authors, who by their Experience
have found the contrary, and have taken many stones from the bladders of
children, which have been wholly of the same color and substance within. And
common Experience teaches us, that Children have the Stone in the Bladder, who
never had pain in the Reins, which would be otherwise if the stone came first
from the Reins. It is true, that in men many times stones fall from the Kidneys
into the Bladder, and increase by the addition of new Matter; but we deny that
it is always so, and we constantly affirm, that many stones have taken their
beginning in the bladder.

The knowledge of the stone in the bladder is difficult, especially in the
beginning, when it is little; but when it is great it is evident. But we shall
discover it as much as we can by Art.

The First Sign is, pain in the neck of the bladder, which is worse toward the
end of pissing, and reaches to the end of the Yard, like that which is in
difficulty of Urine from Inflammation, called Dysuria, and it is scarcely at
first distinguished from it, but when other signs appear.

The Second Sign is, Itching in the Yard, which makes the Patient scratch it
often.

The Third Sign is, Weight in the Peritonaeum, or inward covering of the Guts,
and all about the Pecten where the Hair grows, with a heavy pain, when the
stone is great.

The Fourth Sign is, When there is a great stone there is great stoppage of
Urine, with pain like women in travel, and dropping of water, and often
endeavoring to pills.

The Fifth Sign is, Stoppage suddenly in time of pissing, by reason of the
stone falling to the Orifice of the Bladder.

The Sixth Sign is, Easier making Water lying upon the back, because it puts
the stone from the Orifice to the bottom of the bladder.

The Seventh Sign is, Often standing of the Yard, which comes from stoppage of
Urine, and of the Inflammation of the bladder by the stone rubbing against it.

The Eighth is, An often desire to go to stool, which follows the desire of
pissing, by reason of the consent of the Sphincter Muscles of the Anus and
Bladder; for when one is provoked, the other is provoked, because they have
branches from the same Nerve.

The Ninth is, The Patient cannot rest in a place, but shakes his Legs, and if
the stone be great he can scarce stand upright, ride, or walk in rough places;
for then the mouth of the bladder is much afflicted with the stone.

The Tenth is, That the Patient is helped by no Remedy, but worse commonly; for
all Medicines that go through the passages of the Urine, either do bring new
matter, and increase the evil, or carry away the phlegm, which being about the
stone made it less offensive, but being bare, does grate the inward Tunicle of
the bladder.

The Eleventh Sign is, When the Patient is in pain of the Reins, and after a
fit uses to void stones which caused it, but now voideth none as formerly, it
is a sign that the stone causing the pain is sent to the bladder, and there
remains, where by degrees it increases, and causes the aforesaid Symptoms.
Therefore if any after such pain, voids no stone, and after a time begins to be
stopped from making urine, it is very probable that there is a stone in the
bladder.

The Twelfth Sign is from Hippocrates, Aph. 79. Sect. 4. They who make a sandy
Urine have a stone in the Bladder. Which Aphorism has troubled many Wits.
Galen in his Commentary thereupon, says, that it is manifestly lame, and
defective, because Hippocrates left out half of it; for whether the stone be in
the Kidneys or Bladder always the Urin is sandy. And Hippocrates himself
contradicts this Aphorism, Lib. de internis Affectionibus, where he reproves
the old Physicians that supposed sand in the Urine to be the sign of the Stone
in the Bladder. Cardanus in his Comment upon the same Aphorism, says, That he
voided for thirty years, first red, then white sand, every day in abundance
without any suspicion of the stone either of the Kidneys or Bladder; and he
further says, that there are scarce one in ten who does not void Gravel, yet
few there are that are troubled with the stone in the Kidneys, and fewer with
that in the bladder. The Spaniards void much Gravel, and yet are not subject to
the stone.

We distinguished of sand in the former Chapter, which may signify the stone:
But we said it was an equivocal sign. For that sand is sometimes sent forth by
the strength of the expulsive faculty, and is not kept in the Kidneys and
Bladder any while. And if this sand did show the stone more surely, yet it
would never declare that of the Bladder only. And therefore that Aphorism, as
the words are is false.

Beverovitius and Salmasius, have greatly contended about this Aphorism (both
Learned men) and good to open dark Sentences) and they have written both whole
Volums of the same. It is not our intention to stay long upon it, determining
this one thing for an end of all Controversies; That the Opinions of Authors,
which at first seem contrary to Truth and daily Experience, are always to be
taken in that sense which is most conformable to Truth, although the words will
not bear it, which in such a case are to be thought to be added by simple
fellows in the Translation, or the whole Sentence to be put in by them; as Galen
says often of some of Hippocrates his Sayings, That they are thrust in by
others, when they carry not the weight and Majesty of Hippocrates. And the
Opinion of Beverovitius concerning sand in the Urine, seems not to be according
to the mind of Hippocrates, nor to be of great use in Practice. First, it seems
not to agree with Hippocrates, who in his foregoing Aphorisms, takes signs from
things contained in the Urine; and following his matter in hand, says, That
Sand in the Urine, signifies the stone of the Bladder. But Beverovitius
inverts the Sense, and says that Hippocrates is to be understood of Sand,
which formerly used to be voided, that if they subsist, that is, be retained in
the Bladder, and be no more sent forth, it is a sign that the Sand so retained
is turned to a stone in the bladder. This Interpretation, as I said, does agree
with Hippocrates his Intention, and it nothing avails for Practice: for they
who use to void gravel, have some time of intermission, in which there is not a
stone bred in the Bladder. Nor has it much weight that Beverovitius observes,
That Hippocrates in his other Aphorisms, where he lays down the signs to be
taken from the things contained in the Urine, does not use the word
Subsidentia, or set^ing* or falling down; but the Word Excretion, or voiding.
As for example, they who piss matter or blood, with thick and branny Urine,
etc. But here he uses the word that signifies settling, to show that he
means something else. But we bringing all things to Practice, say that
Hippocrates in this Aphorism, could not use a word which signifies only
sending forth, or Excretion because he ought to distinguishe that sand which
signifies the Stone, from that which does not. This Sand as we said in the
former Chapter, settles in the bottom of the Urinal; but other Sand does only
stick to the sides; and therefore Hippocrates, that he might distinguish them,
said well. They whose sandy matter settleth; for others which do not settle,
are not a sign of the stone in the bladder.

But that we may bring this Aphorism to Truth, and Practical use, we suppose
that the Opinion of Johannes Zechius, is the best; who makes it a proper sign
of the stone of the bladder, and there is great use of the Aphorism in Physical
Practice, when by all other Interpreters, it is made unprofitable. And that
Zechius may be honored by them who have not his Works, we think it work our
labor to repeat his words, which are in his Book of Consultation, 58. Consult.
Hippocrates (says he) Aph. 79. Sect. 4. said thus, which was never understood
yet, either by Galen, or any other. They whose Urine has a sandy settling or
sediment, have the stone in the bladder. Which Sentence, if we should take it
according to Galen, woudl be false, because we observe that many men do piss
sand all their lives (whereof I am one) without any suspicion of the stone in
the bladder. From whence I cannot but wonder at Galen, and all the rest after
him, that they should either not understand so useful an Aphorism (which I can
scarce believe) or by reason of its ambiguity pass it by. The whole difficulty
is in the signification of the word [Sabulosa] in Greek called Psammodea:
Hippocrates would have nothing understood thereby but thick gravel mixed as it
were with fat Earth like Clay or snot in the bottom of the Vrinal; a certain
sign of a great stone in the bladder. But because there is nothing constant in
man, it is not to be admired that some that have this Disease have not this
sign; as when the stone is small, as we observed m Cardinal Paleotus. Now the
cause of this muddy Excrement has showed in another place. So far Zechius; but
where he showed the cause of it we could never find. But we plainly showed it
in former Chapter, when we said that this snot-like matter is the proper
Excrement of the bladder distempered, when it cannot concoct the great quantity
of blood, and superfluous humors which are sent thither, and turn them into its
self, but turns them into that consistence like snot; and this evil disposition
of the bladder comes from the stone therein. Let that be perused, for it makes
much for the understanding of what has been said.

But there still remains one difficulty, for some have daily phlegmatic,
slimy matter in their Urine, and yet are free from the stone in the bladder.
And Cardanus reports of an Augustine Monk called Leo, that showed him often so
much congealed phlegm in the bottom of the Chamber pot as was bigger than a
Goose Egg, and yet he had not the Stone. To this doubt we answer, That the
slimy matter that comes from the bladder, is to be distinguished from that
which comes from other parts, because that which comes from the bladder, is
more clammy and glutinous, so that it sticks fast to the bottom of the Pot or
Urinal, and cannot be shaken off when the Urine is powered forth; but that which
is from other parts does so cleave, but comes presently forth with the Urine;
Experience has taught me this, which hiterto no Author ever yet observed. This
clamminess comes from the Nature of the Bladder, which is a Membrane, and apt
to produce this glewiness, as you may see Glue is made of Membranous Skins of
Beasts.

This tough glutinous Matter, I say, comes from the evil disposition of the
bladder, which is caused by the stone there, and we can thus prove it besides
what has been said; Because we have known a Child twelve years old, that had a
stone in the Bladder, and pissed continually a glutinous matter that cleaved to
the bottom of the Glass. And after the stone was cut forth, he voided the same
for a month, but afterward none at all. Which clearly shows that that Matter
comes from the evil disposition of the Bladder, which could not presently be
cured after the Bladder was cured, that matter appeared no more, which shows
that it came from no other part but the bladder.

For a Conclusion of this, let us take notice, That whenever this slimy
matter appears with all the aforesaid conditions, there is a stone in the
Bladder; but when it does not appear, it does not follow that there is no
stone, for it often happens that the stone is smooth, or little, and so does
not hurt the bladder, and then the Urine is always clear. This is a true sign,
that there is a stone when it appears; but when it is absent, it is not a sign
of no stone.

Nor would this Objection, or rather Cavil, become a wise man, because from our
Observation before mentioned, we proved that such matter might be voided by
Urine, and yet no stone in the bladder, for it was cut forth. It is sufficient
that either a Stone was lately there, which was the cause of this Disease; and
so this kind of Matter signifies, either a Stone there now, or lately has
been there.

The last sign is by trial with the Catheter, and putting the finger into the
Anus, which operation must be used to take away all doubt; for the most part it
does: for sometimes the Stone is covered with slimy matter, so that the Cutters
themselves are deceived thereby. But the Catheter is more uncertain than the
finger, by which you may not be certain of the Stones being there, but of the
form and bigness of it.

As for the Prognostic of this Disease: It is always painful and dangerous;
painful, because only very small stones can pass through the Neck of the Bladder.

The great ones, if like flint, cannot be dissolved; if soft like Chalk, or
brittle, they may be dissolved with long use of powerful Medicines, which for
the most part the Patients will not stick to, and therefore they are seldom
cured; therefore there is often cutting, which how terrible it is, daily
Experience will declare, because many die under the Operation. Hence Hippocrates
in his Oath, commands his Disciples that they use it not, but leave it to men
of that Profession only. But in Women, the Operation is less dangerous, because
their Passage for Urine is wider, and it may be done without cutting, only by
enlarging the part.

The way of Cure is the same with that of the Kidneys, first Evacuation of the
antecedent matter, Revulsion, and hindering of the breeding of it: and let the
Matter conjunct, or the Stone it self, be diminished, worn away, or dissolved;
for which there are good Medicines in the Chapter aforegoing.

Of which, the distilled Water of Onions is most excellent, by which continued
twenty days we saw a stone bigger than a Bean thrown out of the Bladder.

But the best Authors and Experience teach, That things taken at the mouth
cannot dissolve the Stone in the Bladder. Hence it is that we commonly refer
them to the Cutter. But because there are many stories of men cured by such
Medicines, we will speak of the chief, that every one may try them, if he
please, before he go to the terrible Chyrurgion. Sometimes the Stone is so soft
and newly congealed that it is not impossible to dissolve it; but hard flinty
stones cannot.

Horatius Augenius, Tom. 2. Epist. Med. Lib. 9. Epist. 8. I (says he) have
twice seen the stone broken in the Bladder. Once by chance I had the same of
one Janetus a Printer at Rome in cure, whom I purged that he might be cut with
more safety. For he had tried all the Venetian and Florentine Physicians. But
when nothing did him good, be sent for the Priest to consult about his soul,
and resolved to be cut. The Priest being a Jesuit, and hearing his Confession,
and the condition of his Disease, told him a Medicine, of which he had made
trial in himself and others. He tried, and was cured in the space of nine
days. The Medicine was this:

Take of the Powder of Hog-lice or Sows, one dram, or four scruples at the
most: Aqua vitae half an ounce: red Pease Broth, nine or ten ounces. Let him
take it five hours before dinner.

I cured one of eighteen years of age, of a hot and dry complexion, by taking
away some part of the Aqua vitae, and gave it him but every other day, and at
other days of Bean and Strawberry Water, of each five ounces, with six drops
of Oil of Vitriol, and one ounce of the Julep of Violets to cool him, thus:

Take of the powder of Sows prepared, one scruple: Aqua vitae two scruples: red
Pease Broth eight ounces. Mix them, and give it six hours before meat. Thus
Augenius.

Sennertus in his Chapter of the Stone in the Bladder, tells a famous story of
William Lauremberg, Professor of Rostoch, who being old, and troubled with the
stone, was unwilling to be cut, and therefore sought for other Remedies. First
he tried the famous Water against the Stone, which is so much prized by
Princes, which is thus made:

Take of Salt of white Tartar one ounce: Parsley Water one pint: Mix them, and
strain them with a brown Paper; and with Orange peels make it yellow. He used
also the Indian Jewel, called in Spanish, Igiada, which is most famous for
breaking the Stone; but both to no purpose. Therefore be desired to make trial
of the Medicine of Sows, which Horatius Augenius says, cured two young men.

In imitation of whom, after general Physic, and good Diet, he took of Sows
one scruple; the Spirit of Juniper two scruples; red Pease Broth ten ounces:
which he took in the morning; but the first and second time he found a
straightness in his Breast, and a fainting, so that he was constrained to take
one dram of Treacle with the Potion; and so used it fifteen days: but all this
while he voided no gravel. And then he added other things, and made it thus:

Take of prepared Sows two ounces: a Hares and Goats Blood prepared, wild Rose
Flowers, and purple Violet seeds, of each one ounce: Species Lithontribi, two
scruples: mix them for an Antidote, of which take two scruples: the Diuretic
Decoction ten ounces: the Spirit of Juniper two scruples.

Which Medicine after he had taken it the second time at five a clock in the
morning, four hours after he felt a great pain under the Os Publis, about the
Neck of the Bladder: A little after he made a little Water, and therewith some
thin red things like scales of fishes; which though they seemed to be slimy,
yet when they were touched turned to sand. So that it plainly appeared that
they were the outside of the Stone.

By the continuance of this Medicine, every fourth or fifth day he voided the
like scales, and sometimes bigger pieces, especially when he used a sweet bath.
But when the neck of the bladder was wounded by the fragments and the stone, he
used Medicines to assuage pain; and by the use of these Medicines, was in
seventeen months cured. The Decoction was.

Take of Liquoris four scruples: Roots of Marshmallows, Couch-grass,
Rest-harrow, of each half an ounce: Winter Cherries twenty: red Pease six
ounces: Raisons one ounce: the four great cold Seeds, of each one scruple:
Barley two handfuls. Boil them in Winter Cherry Water, Rest-harrow, Strawberry,
and Bean Flower Water, of each one pint and an half: to the straining add of
the Syrup of Marshmallows four ounces.

The Sows are thus prepared:

Take of live Sows two pound; wash them in Rest-harrow Water: then drown them
in Spanish Wine; then power the Wine out, and put them in Glasses, the more
Glasses the better, because then they will dry better: Put these Glasses well
stopped into the Oven when the Bread is drawn, that they may dry gently till they
will powder: then put some Spanish Wine upon this Powder, as much as it will
take in, and dry it again; do so thrice: and fourthly wash it with this Liquor:

Take of Straw-berry Water three ounces: Spirit of Vitriol half a dram: mix
them Then dry it, and make it fine, and keep it in a Glass for your use.

Besides the aforesaid, the use of the distilled Water of Goats blood, or of
the Urin of a Goat newly slain, which was formerly mentioned in the Stone of
the Kidneys.

If the Stone cannot be broken with Medicines, necessity requires the manual
operation, though it be dangerous, lest the Patient die with lingering pain.
This requires a skilful and well exercised Artist, and that it may have good
success, as we have observed.

It is the Duty of the Physician, before the operation to prepare the body by
bleeding, purging, and diet, as the state of the business requires. And
observe, that the taking away of a stone from a Woman has no danger, because
it is done only by enlarging the Passage of the Urine, which in them is very
short.

If the Patient fear cutting, or want a good Chyrurgion, he may use asswaging
Medicines least the Stone should cut and ulcerate the neck of the bladder, such
as are prescribed for heat of Urine.

But if a stone fastened in the neck of the bladder stop the Urine, it must be
shaken back with lying upon the back with the leg up, and the body shaked; and
then by a good somentation or bath, and with a Catheter, let the stone be sent
back into the bladder.

Chap. 3. Of the Inflammation of the Reins and Bladder.
BEcause the Inflammation of the Reins and Bladder are cured with the same
Medicines, therefore we will put them in the same Chapter, although the Signs
are different, as shall be showed.

This Inflammation is a Tumor of those Parts, from the flowing of Blood or
Choler unto them.

This is not very ordinary, because the substance of those parts is solid and
thick; but sometimes it happens, because the Kidneys are fleshy and apt to
receive blood: but the Bladder, though it be without blood, and spermatick,
because it receives blood for its Nourishment through the small Veins, is
without question subject to Inflammation by too much blood; as other Membranes
of the Brain, or Meninges, the Pleura, Mediastinum, and the like.

We said that these Inflammations come from Blood or Choler, as when Phlegm or
Melancholy in the Blood make the parts thicker, because they cannot pierce
into their thick substance.

The Causes of this Disease, are either from things Natural, not Natural, or
Pretematural.

From Natural things, when there is a Natural Infirmity of those parts from the
Parents, or a great looseness of them, a great heat originally in them, by which
they draw plenty of Humors: In Youth these conduce much to an Inflammation.

From things not Natural, as much Venery, which weakeneth those parts, and
draws much blood or other Humors to them; Gluttony, Drunkenness, and eating of
Salt and Spiced Meats; great Passions of the Mind, lying upon the back in a
soft bed, great Exercise, stoppage of some great E^acuations, as of the Months
and Hemorrhoids, or usual bleeding at the Nose, those things which cause
repletion and evil concoction, and drive the humors to the inward bowels.

From Preternatural things, as a stroke or wound upon the Reins, or about the
Bladder; a pressing or bruise of those parts; constant Fevers, foulness of the
Vessels, or other parts that purge themselves by Urine, as in a Pleurisy,
Empyema or imposthume in the side, Obstruction of the Spleen, breaking of the
Mesentery, and the like. And lastly, Disease of those parts do cause
Inflammation, as the stone, great pain, exulceration, heat of Urine, and
stoppage thereof, or the like.

The Signs of the Inflammation of the Reins, are a weighty pain in the Reins,
sometimes beating, if the place be affected where the Arteries are: And this
pain extends to the parts adjacent, so that the Patient can neither lift
himself up, not stand upon his feet, and scarce turn himself, and neither lie
upon his side, nor his Belly, because then the part inflamed will hang down;
therefore he lies always upon his back, and if he either neeze, or otherwise
move his Body, the pain is increased. He has a numbness or pain in the Leg on
the same side, by reason of the Nerve that goes from thence to it. He has
difficulty of pissing by reason of the heat which is sent to the Urine, and
filth mixed with it coming from the inflamed part. The Urine is first thin and
yellow but after red and thick; ^e has a constant sharp Fever, which is
attended often with watchings, dotings, and other great Symptoms; also
loathing and vomiting, by which he voids Choler, Phlegm, and other Humors.

Sometimes the Gut Colon is inflamed, and if it be that part which is near the
Liver, it brings the like Symptoms: but here is the difference; In the
Inflammation of the Reins, the pain reaches to the short Ribs, the Back, and
Bladder; but that of the Colon tends more to the Belly, and there is a greater
change of Excrements of the Belly, than in the Inflammation of the Kidneys.

But in the Inflammation of the Kidneys, there is a pain about the Pubis and
Perinaeum, in which there is heat, and sometimes redness. There is constant heat
of Urine, but that is stopped when the part swells, and stops the passage.

The straight Gut suffers by reason of its neerness; hence it is that there is
often desire to go to stool with burning, sometimes the belly is bound, when the
Gut is stopped by the inflamed Bladder. There are also other common Symptoms
mentioned in the Inflammation of the Reins, as a Fever, watching, doting,
thirst, and the like.

There can be no good Prognostic in this Disease: For the inward Inflammation
of the noble inward parts, do threaten continual danger of death. It is most
deadly when a Convulsion or dotage follows, or the like great Symptom: and
if there be a cold sweat, death is at hand.

In the Inflammation of the Reins, if the Hemorrhoids follow, it is good.

If the Inflammation Suppurate, and the Imposthume break, and go into the
passage of the Urine, there is hope; but if it go by the Emulgent Veins into
the Liver, and labor to get way through the Guts, it is dangerous.

A final Inflammation of the Bladder with a Sediment in the Urine that is white
and equal, promises health.

An Inflammation of the bladder, is sometimes cured by an Erysipelas, or
Chollerick Humor arising in the Skin suddenly, and by making much Urine.

The Cure of both Inflammations of the Reins and Bladder, is made by revelling,
deriving, cooling, and moderately repelling, by Anodines, Resolvers or
Ripeners, if need be, and the like: whose Matter and way of using, shall be as
follows:

And first, Phlebotomy is very necessary in the Liver Vein, on the same side
the pain is, twice, thrice, or four times, or oftener, if the strength will
bear it, til the defluxion cease, which you may know by the abating of the
pain. But in the Inflammation of the bladder, the right side is to be chosen by
reason of the Liver, from whence, as from a Fountain, the blood flows to the
part.

After much blood is taken away, and revulsion is made by the upper Vein, you
must also open the inferior for derivation sake, in the Ham or Ancle; as also
the Hemorrhoids are to be opened, especially if they be swelled.

Cupping-glasses with Scarrification, are also good for Revulsion, both above
and beneath, and Frictions with strong Ligatures of the extreme parts, to draw
the humors outward.

After, and before blood-letting, give a mollifying and cooling Clyster that is
a little loosening, and let it be of a small quantity, lest it oppress the
Tumor, thus made:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce: Mallows, Violets, Lettice, of each one
handful: sweet Prunes four pair: Barley and Violet Leaves, of each one pugil:
make a Decoction to eight or ten ounces. In the straining dissolve of Cassia,
or Diaprunes simple, one ounce: Oil of Violets four ounces: two Yolks of Eggs:
Make a Clyster.

Allay the heat of the blood with Juleps and Emulsions made thus:

Take of Endive, Littice, and Purslain Water, of each four ounces: Syrup of
Pomegranates two ounces: Syrup of Water Lillies one ounce. Make a Julep for
three draughts, morning and evening. Or,

Take of Sorrel Roots two ounces: Mallows, Plantane, Purslain, and Endive, of
each one handful: the tops of white Poppies half a handful: Annis and Lettice
seed, of each one dram: Borrage, Violets, and Water-lilly Flowers, of each one
pugil: boil them to a pint and an half: then add four ounces of the juice of
Pomegranates. Or,

Take of sweet Almonds blanched one ounce: fresh Pine-nuts half on ounce:
Lettice, Sorrel, Purslain, and Poppy seeds, of each three drams: beat them
according to art, powering on by degrees, of Barley, Lettice, and Purslain
Water* one pint and an half. Dissolve in the straining, Sugar of Roses one
ounce. Make an Emulsion for three Doses, in which we leave out the great cold
Seeds, because being Diuretic they may draw something to those parts,
especially in the time of the defluxion, but in the declination they may be
useful. You may profitably add to the Emulsion, the Syrup of Poppies to stop
the flux more violently.

Also the parts inflamed may be cooled by Clysters, made of the Decoction of
the Julep aforesaid, with Oil of Roses or Violets two ounces.

In the beginning of these Inflammations, purging is not proper; for it is to be
feared lest the Humors being moved, should flow to the parts affected; so that
if there then be a great flux of the Belly, it is to be stopped for that cause.
But when the Inflammation is a little allayed, and the disease declineth, a
Purge made of gentle things may be good, as of Manna, Cassia, Rhubarb,
Tamarinds, Diaprunes simple, Catholicon and Syrup of Roses with a Decoction of
Lettice, Purslain, and other cooling things prescribed in the Juleps. Or you
may make a Bolus of some of them.

Out wardly, All the time of the Disease, you must apply cooling things that
gently repel, as moist Epithems of the Water and Juice of Plantane, Sorrel,
Endive, Nightshade, Roses, with a little Vinegar, red Sanders, and Camphire.
Liniments also of Oil of Roses and Olives, Violets, Cerat of Sanders, white
Ointment, or Populeon alone, or mixed with a little Vinegar, which you must
apply to the parts aforesaid, every hour cold.

Or you may make a Liniment of an Egg well beaten, with a little Oil and Rose
Vinegar.

Or you may make that which is excellent, of Oil of Roses, with Vinegar and
Juice of Knot-grass, or Purslain; to which add, if you please, a new Yolk of an
Egg. Let these be applied cold upon a Cloth.

If the pain be very violent, it is not amiss in these Epithems and Liniments,
to mix a little Opium or Saffron.

Also you may make a Cataplasm of Barley Meal, with Juice of Endive, Purslain,
and Nightshade, with Oil of Roses and Populeon. But this must be often changed
lest it grow hot.

Three things are to be diligently observed:

First, That you use not Coolers too long, lest the Matter be kept from
breathing forth, and the Tumor grow hard or scirrhus.

Secondly, In the Inflammation of the Bladder, you must use less astringents and
coolers, lest you stop the Urine, which Symptom alone, is very usual and
dangerous in this case.

Thirdly, Cataplasms in the Inflammation of the Bladder, are less necessary than
Ointments and Liniments, because they burden the part, so that it is more hard
to dilate it self.

After you have used Coolers a short space, and often bleeding, when the
defluxion is somewhat stopped, you must use Softeners and Dissolvers; such are,
Fomentations of the Decoction of Marshmallow Roots, Mallows, Violets,
Pellitory, Lin-seed, Foenugreek, Mallows, Cotton-weed, with Mehlot, Chamomel,
Rosemary flowers, and Rose Leaves to strengthen the part.

Then apply a Liniment of Oil of Lillies, with a little Oil of Chamomel.

Among the Dissolvers and Anodines together, there is none better than the
Cataplasm made of Crumbs of Bread, made thus:

Take of white Bread Crumbs one pound; boil it in Goats Milk to a Pultiss: then
add three Yolks of Eggs; four ounces of Oil of Roses: half a scruple of
Saffron: make a Cataplasm, change it often. You may add a little Opium and
Campbire if the pain be very great.

In the Inflammation of the Bladder, if you fear a Gangrene, you may make a
strengthening Cataplasm of Bean Meal, and Orobus Meal, or Lupines boiled in
Wine.

When the greatest part of the Inflammation is abated, then you must use
Decoctions and Liniments which do only dissolve, that the relics may be
consumed.

In the whole time of the Cure, you must have a special care of great Symptoms,
as the Fever, pain, watching, stoppage of Urine, and belly; of the stomach and
other parts.

And as for the Fever, pain, and watchings, it is most certain that the things
mentioned to evacuate and alter, do much for the mitigation of them. But to
them you may add Epithems, Liniments, and Rose Vinegar, such as use to be
applied to the Region of the Liver, Heart, and Brain; and in time of necessity,
Narcoticks both by mouth and Clyster.

There are special Anodine Suppositories to take away the pain of the Bladder,
or knots, made with Yolks of Eggs, and a little Opium, and juice of Henbane, or
the like.

If the Strangury or stoppage of Urine follow this Inflammation, you must cure
them with Medicines taken from their proper Chapters.

If the Inflammation of the Reins cannot be cured by what has been prescribed,
but it tends to suppuration, which you may know by the increase of the
fever, pain, and other Symptoms; as also by trembling and vomiting, by
greater weight about the part, especially when the Patient lies on his sound
side; you must help Nature with Cataplasms of Roots and mollifying Herbs,
Lineseed, Chamomel flowers: To which being boiled and beaten, you must add
Meal, Butter, Grease, or Oils of the same virtues With which, if the Imposthume
break not presently, and come forth by Urine, the Matter will get into the
Cavity of the Abdomen, whence will proceed either sudden death, or a Hectic
Fever. Sometimes the Tumor appears outwardly, and then you must open it either
with a Potential Cautery, or an Incision Knife.

Sometimes those Tumors grow hard, and scirrhus, when the Fever is gone, and
the pain remains with a greater sense of weight, and a kind of numbness of the
subject parts: And this is commonly incurable, and brings an evil habit, or a
Dropsy. Yet you may try with mollifying, cutting, and digesting Medicines,
such as were mentioned in the Scirrhus of the Liver.

Chap. 4. Of Pissing of Blood.
BLood may come from diverse parts to the passages of the Urine, and be mixed
with it, and make it look like blood: but because this happens but seldom,
and we here treat only of the Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, we shall speak
only of that bloody Urine which is made so from the defect of the Reins and
Bladder. Blood flows from these parts, as from all the rest (as we said in
Haemorrhagy, Haemoptysis, vomiting of blood, and Haemorrhoids) either by
Anastomosis, or opening of the mouths of the Veins, by Rixis, or Rupture, by
Diabrosis or Corrosion, and seldom by Diapedesis, or Rarefaction.

The usual causes are much or sharp blood, or a stone fastened in the Reins:
the Veins are often broken with plenty of blood; but Corrosion, or Anastomosis,
or opening comes from sharpness: also corrosion or tearing may come from the
stone, when being fixed in the Reins or Kidneys through violent riding, or
other exercise, it is moved so that it hurts the parts with its roughness.

Also other causes may break the Vessels besides repletion, as a fall or stroke,
lifting, carrying, vehement motion, and the like.

That Blood which is brought forth by Urine from Plethory, is not always a
Disease or Symptom, but sometimes for the good of the Patient, when Nature
lays that which is burdensome unto her by that means, as Aret^us reports that
some piss blood at several times, and when they do not, they have the Headache,
mists before their Eyes, and giddiness.

Also the Bladder may bleed if it be wounded by a stone, or corroded by a sharp
humor; but it is but little, because it is membranous, and without blood; but
if the Sphincter Muscle be hurt, or the passage of the Yard, there will be much
blood, as in extraordinary Venery is seen often, especially when the Prostates
are inflamed by a Gonorrhoea, or running of the Reins.

The Signs of this Disease are from the Kind of it, from the Part affected, and
from the Cause.

The Kind of this Disease is apparent to the Senses, for it is easy to know
when blood is mixed with Urine, for it is like the washings of flesh, with small
clodders at the bottom; sometimes the Urine is like a Lie, when it stays too
long it the Bladder, by which means it grows black.

The place of the pain shows the part affected, for if it be in the Loins, it
signifies that the Kidneys are affected; but if it be in the belly below the
Navel, the bladder is the part suffering. Moreover, if the blood comes from the
Reins, it is mixed perfectly with the Urine; but if from the bladder, it is not
mixed. Hippocrates shows this Sign in two Aphorisms, namely, in Aph. 78.
Sect. 4. They who suddenly piss blood without force, have a Vein broken in
their Reins; and Aph. 80. of the same Section; If men piss blood, or there be
clots or drops in the Urine, and pain in the lower part of the Belly, the
Pecten, or Perinaeum, these have their disease from the Bladder.

If it come from the stone, the signs thereof which are mentioned in its proper
Chapter, will appear; if they do not, you must conclude that it comes from too
much blood or sharpness thereof. The abundance of blood will be known by the
signs of repletion, and sharpness by the signs of Choler or Melancholy
predominating; also salt phlegm in the Urine will make a great stoppage of Urine,
and pissing of blood; this happens often in old men that are very apt to be
troubled with salt phlegm. And the pissing of blood from sharp humors, is
distinguished from that in the stone, that in which there were first pains of
the Reins, and voiding of stones; but not in the other whose Urine is clear,
with no strange things therein, And the Disease proceeds not only from
immoderate Exercise, which is ordinary to both causes, but also from the
passions of the mind, when it comes from sharp humors which are much stirred up
by passions; so that they who are subject to this Disease after Anger and
Sadness, or great disturbance of the mind, use commonly to piss blood.

As for the Prognostic. A plentiful and often pissing of blood is very
dangerous; for it will bring either a Consumption or a Dropsy: And if it
continue long, it may cause an Ulcer in that part from whence the blood
flows; if much blood flow at one time, it will cause a great stoppage of Urine
in the Bladder, or some other evil Symptoms, as it increases therein, and
grows evil qualified.

The Cure of this Disease is diverse, according to the variety of the cause.

And first, if it come from blood abounding, or from sharpness, it must be
first cured with Phlebotomy on the same side, often and little for the better
revulsion: And by Cupping, Friction, and Ligatures in the upper parts; and if
blood flow violently, Cupping-glasses must be applied to the Hypochondria.

For derivation, let the Vein of the Ancle be opened, and the Hemorrhoids.

When watery Chollerick Humors cause it, let them be purged with Medicines
mentioned in spitting of blood, often repeated at distance. To which also you
may add these following, at your discretion.

Take of the Powder of torrefied Rhubarb one dram: prepared Coral half a
scruple: Goats Whey, or Plantane Water three ounces. Make a Potion.

Take of Cassia newly drawn half an ounce: the Pulp of Tamarinds six drams:
Eastern Bolearmenick half a scruple. With Sugar make a Bolus.

After due Evacuations and Revulsions, or at that time, if need require* you
may use things to stop blood, and knit the Veins. And these are not presently
to be used at the first, left being stopped too suddenly it should grow cloddy
in some part. For this purpose the Juice of Plantane newly drawn, is much
commended, given four or five ounces in a morning and evening, which is good
for any kind of bleeding. But if you fear it will cool the Stomach too much,
you may boil it a little with Sugar.

Sheeps Milk is much commended by Forestus, Lib. 24. Observe. 13. Often (says
he) I have cured pissing of blood with only Sheeps Milk six ounces, and one
dram of Bole-armenick. The same is an Experience of Gatinaria; who also
commands that none do sleep presently, or exercise after it. Also Hollerius and
Duretus, from Avicen and Hippocrates, commend the same.

Also Decoctions of Knot-grass, Horstail, Purslain, and Bramble tops, are good
for this, adding the third part of the Juice of sharp Pomegranates or Quinces.

Or to allay the heat of the Blood, let him take the Apozeme following many
times, morning and evening.

Take of Lettice, Purslain, Plantane, and Comphry, of each one handful: all the
cold seeds, of each one dram: Jujubes three pair: Liquoris half an ounce:
Water Lillies, Violets, and Roses, of each one pugil: boil them to a pint and
an half. In the straining dissolve of Gum Traganth one dram and an half: Syrup
of Violets and dried Roses, of each one ounce and an half: Lapis prunellae half
an ounce: the Troches of Winter-cherries without Opium, half a dram. Make a
Julep for four Doses.

To thicken and stop the blood more, put one ounce of Syrup of Poppies thereto.

Also you may give the Pouders that stop blood, as of red Coral, Boodstone,
Bole-armenick, fealed Earth, either with the Apozeme, or with Rose or Plantane
Water.

If the Disease continue, give this Opiate:

Take of Conserve of Roses, and Comphry Roots, of each two ounces: Sealed
Earth, Bole-armenick, Sanguis Draconis, red Coral, Boodstone, and Troches of
Amber, of each one dram: Hypocystis, or Conserve of Sloes, Kermes berries, and
Plantane seeds, of each one scruple: with Syrup of Poppies and Myrtles, of each
equal parts: make an Opiate, of which let him take the bigness of a Chestnut
morning and evening, drinking after a little Plantane Water.

If it yet continue, it is good to give at distance the Decoction of Myrobalans
in Whey, or the like.

Hollerius affirms, and Du^etus, that the Troches of Gordonius are the best for
it.

Christopher Vega commends the Troches of Amber given with Plantane Water, and
says that he cured this Disease with giving them only once at night.

For ordinary Drink, give the Infusion of Mastich wood in Wine, made thus:

Take of sliced Mastich wood one ounce: spring Water four ounces: Infuse them
in Balneo Mariae very warm in a close Vessel. Keep the straining for your use.

But because clods of blood are often retained in the bladder, which beget
grievous Symptoms, give warm Water and Vinegar, or Mallow Water and sharp
Vinegar warm. Let the Vinegar be so little that it is scarce tasted.

Apply Topics to the Loins that cool and astringe.

Take of Snakeweed and Comphry Roots, of each one ounce: Plantane, Purslain,
Hors-tail, Knot-grass, and Sbepheards-purse, of each one handful: Pomegranate
peels half an ounce: Sumach, and Myrtle berries, and Hypocystis, of each two
drams: Acron Cups, red and yellow Sanders, of each one dram: red Roses three
pugils: boil them in Smiths Water, and a little Vinegar. With the straining,
let the Reins be fomented hot.

Of the same Decoction you may make a Bath to sit in, adding more simples.

Take of Vnguentum Comitissae, and refrigerans Galeni, of each one ounce and an
half: wash it with Oxycrate, and anoint the Loins therewith. Or to bind more,

Take of the Juice of Plantane and Blood-wort, of each two ounces: Vinegar half
an ounce: Oil Olive six ounces: boil them till the Juyces be consumed: then add
of Sanguis Draconis, Mastich, and Pomegranate peels, of each two drams:
Camphire half a dram: Vnguentum Comitissae four drams: Wax as much as will make
a Liniment: put a little Vinegar to it when you use it.

Also a Plate of Lead full of holes worn about the Reins, is good.

You must guard the Liver when it comes from sharp Humors, with Epithems, and
Ointments.

When it comes from the Stone and Gravel; after Purging, Revulsion, and things
that allay sharpness, mentioned; you must use those things that may gently
cleanse, as these that follow:

Take of Pills of Turpentine, with Rhubarb one ounce: give half a dram in a
morning, with two spoonfuls of Syrup of Scurvy Grass every other day.

But when he takes them not, give this Powder and Confection following:

Take of Liquoris two drams: the four cold Seeds, of each one dram: Purslain
and Lettice seed, of each half a dram: the Troches of Amber and burnt
Hartshorn prepared, of each one scruple: Sugar as much as all the rest; make a
fine Powder: give one dram with Mallows Water in which Quince seeds have been
infused.

Take of blanched Almonds, and Pine seeds cleansed, of each half a dram:
Marsh-mallow seeds, and Winter Cherries, of each one scruple: Lettice and white
Poppy seeds, of each half a scruple: Starch and Tragacanth, of each half a
dram: Liquoris two drams: Sugar six ounces: With Pellitory Water make a
Confection in Morsels. Take it morning and evening half an ounce.

Stronger Diuretics are not convenient, for they will provoke the flux.

And lastly, Vitriol Waters are good to stop blood, cool the Reins, and expel
stones.

Chap. 5. Of the Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder.
THe Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder, comes of three Causes; from an Imposthume
broken after Suppuration; from the sharpness of Humors, such as causes pissing
of blood, which being violent and continual, does ulcerate the parts, or from a
sharp stone that corrodeth them; the last is most usual, the former seldom.

Among the Signs, the chief is voiding of Matter with Urine, which lasting
long, does show that there is an Ulcer certainly in the Ureters. But whether
the Reins, or the Bladder be affected, is known by the place of pain, whether
it be in the Loins, or near the Privities. Moreover, If Matter come from the
Reins, it is better concocted, white, thin, and not stinking, because the body
of the Kidneys being fleshy does better concoct; besides, the Matter is more
abundant, and more mixed with the Urine, which is voided like Milk, till after
long standing it settle to the bottom. That Matter which comes from the
Bladder, is little, and not much mixed with the Urine, not so well concocted,
but crude, of diverse colors, and stinking; for that part being without blood,
and having little heat, cannot concoct sufficiently. But often pure Matter is
voided without Urine, from the neck of the Bladder, and then there is a
continual difficulty of Urine, and pain in that part, which is not in an Ulcer
of the Reins but by fits.

When the Ulcer is in the Reins, sometimes much Blood is voided, which is hard
to be stopped, and sometimes pieces of flesh and matter, or blood, sometimes so
big as they hardly pass, and cause pain; but from the bladder come scales, or
skins, or bran.

And from an old Ulcer of the Bladder that is callous or hard, there flows that
snotty phlegm which we spoke of in the stone of the Bladder.

As for the Prognostic: All inward Ulcers are dangerous, but these most,
because of the constant flux of Humors to these parts; for although the serous
humor has a clensing quality; yet here being mixed with other qualities, it
does not as in its Natural condition; and if evil, salt, and sharp humors are
mixed therewith, they will make and nourish an Ulcer.

New Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder are curable, old not.

They are incurable in old men, sometimes incurable in young men, with much
difficulty.

Ulcers that come from the Stone, and are maintained by it, cannot be cured
before it be taken out.

The pain and Symptoms which accompany the aforesaid Ulcers, cause watchings,
and consume the Body.

The Cure is by clensing drying, and heating, as al other. For this purpose use
these following.

First, If there be a repletion, or inflammation in the part affected, let
blood, first in the Arm, then in the Hand.

Then purge often, to take away the vicious humors that flow to the part
affected, but with gentle things, as Cassia, Manna, Syrup of Roses, Agarick,
Rhubarb, made into a Bolus; because in a moist form being drunk, they quickly
go to the Ureters, and increase pain.

You may give this Opiate following:

Take of Polypody of the Oak, and Liquoris, of each half an ounce: the four
great cold seeds, of each one dram: Borrage and Violet flowers, of each half a
pugil: Jujubes six pair, Damask Prunes three pair: small Raisons half an ounce:
Senna one ounce and an half: Infuse them all night in Barley Water; then boil
and strain them: then dissolve of Manna one ounce and an half; Cassia three
ounces: boil them to an Opiate, adding in the end half an ounce of Rhubarb in
powder. Give one ounce at a time, once in a week, two hours before meat. Or,

Take of Cassia two ounces: Manna one ounce and an half: the Mucilage of
Fleabane seeds six drams: the four great cold seeds, of each one dram: the
Juice of Liquoris two drams: With Syrup of Roses solutive make an Opiate.

These Opiates will be better if you put Mercurius dulcis to them, because
Mercury does cleanse and heal al Ulcers both internal and external.

Turpentine is purging, and excellent in this Disease, because it cleanses the
Ulcer. And you must give half an ounce thereof washed at once, with Powder of
Liquoris. But it is chiefly good when the Urine is thick.

Avicen commends Vomiting for this Disease, Cap. de Ulcer. Renum, A Vomit
(says he) is the best way to cure an Ulcer in the Reins, because it cleanses
and emptieth, and draws the Humors from the part. But Aetius in his Chapter
de suppuratis Renibus; If (says he) any man will take a strong Vomit every
month, he will happily cure the Ulcer of the Reins, or any other evil that
arises from them. Many Modern Physicians follow these; some gave warm Oil and
Water one hour before meat: which only Medicine being often repeated has cured
this Disease, as they say. But Rondeletius will have them vomit after meat,
because then men vomit most easily; and he gives warm Water and Oil, and
anoints the Stomach with Oil of Lillies. But you must never give a Vomit, but
to them that are easy to vomit; for otherwise it would Inflame the Ulcer.

After due Evacuations and Revulsions, you must use Clensers. The chief is,
Whey taken every morning in abundance; or thin Hydromel, six or eight ounces in
a morning in ordinary drink, or the Decoction of Barley and Liquoris with
Sugar, and give Water and Sugar for ordinary Drink. You may boil in Hydromel,
if you fear heat, the cold Seeds, Liquoris, and Mallows. Asses Milk does not
only clese with its Wheyie part, but heal with its cheezy part, but you must
not give it in a Fever, or you may make this following Decoction to cleanse and
ease pain.

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots half an ounce: Plantane, Agrimony, Maidenhair, and
Mallows, of each one handful: Mallows and Melone Seeds with their Husks beaten,
of each half an ounce: Winter Cherries six drams: scraped Liquoris one ounce:
Barley one pugil: boil them to two pints. Dissolve in the straining three
ounces of Honey, and two ounces of Sugar candy: make a Julep. Take eight ounces
every morning for ten days.

Those Medicines you give for the Reins or Womb, must be given in great
quantities least they lose their virtue before they come there.

Instead of them al, you may use Mineral Waters of Alum and Iron, by the
constant use thereof the heat is corrected, and the Ulcer mundified and healed.

Some commend the Decoction of China, Sarsa, or Sassaphras, or of Guajacum
given thirty days or more together, with a second Decoction thereof for
ordinary Drink, and a thin drying Diet; and least the Bowels should thereby be
too much inflamed, they give cool Broths at night, and anoint the Reins with
cold Ointments. And this course is taken to dry up the matter, to purge and
cleanse, especially in them that are phlegmatic, or have the French Pox, and
have neither Fever, nor Flux of Blood.

But in any case you may use with more safety this following:

Take of Sarsaparilla three ounces: Shavings of Mastich Tree two ounces:
Sassaphras one ounce: Shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each six drams:
Jujubes and Sebestens, of each half an ounce: Lignum Nephriticum four ounces:
Barley two ounces. Infuse them twelve hours in five pints of spring Water: boil
them to three pints, for six draughts, to be taken twice in a day; aromatize
them with two drams of Cinnamon.

After the use of Clensers, when you see by the decrease of the quantity of
Matter in the Urine, that the Ulcer is cleansed, as when it is white, and even,
and not filthy, give drying, astringing, glutinating, and heating things; as
these Troches following:

Take of Bole-armenick, sealed Earth, and red Coral, of each three drams: Gum
Arabic and Tragacanth, of each half an ounce: with Agrimony Water make Troches
of two drams apiece. Let him take one every morning with boiled Milk, or the
Decoction of Comphry.

The Troches of Gordonius are best of all, because they assuage pain and heat.
Their Dose is two or three drams, with Hydromel, or Barley Water, when you will
cleanse more; or with Goats o^ Sheeps Milk, when you will glutinate more.

For the same, use this following Opiate:

Take of Conserve of old Roses three ounces: Purslain and Plantane seeds,
Myrtle Berries, Bole, sealed Earth, Sanguis Draconis, of each one dram: the
shavings of Ivory, and Troches of Winter Cherries, of each half a dram: with
Syrup of dried Roses make an Opiate, of which give the quantity of a
Chesnutiwice in a day.

You may make knitting Juleps thus:

Take of Comphry Roots two ounces: Plantane and Mous-ear, of each one handful:
the tops of Mallows and Maidenhair, of each half a handful: Liquoris half an
ounce: Starch and Gum Arabic, Tragacanth and Bole, of each one dram: Lettice
and Purslain seeds, of each one dram and an half: red Roses one pugi^^ boil
them in Rain Water to one pint and an half. In the straining, dissolve four
ounces of Sugar of Penides two ounces: make a Julep. Give eight ounces in a
morning for ten or twelve days.

Also the following Pills are good:

Take of Turpentine washed in Plantane Water one dram: Juice of Liquoris and
Gum Tragacanth, of each two scruples: Bole and Troches of Winter Cherries, of
each half a scruplr: With the Juice of Hors-tail make Pills. Let him take half
a dram morning and evening.

They are stronger made thus:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots and Comphry dried, of each two drams: Gum Arabic,
Cherry and Plum-tree, of each one dram: Oli^am^^ and Myrrh, of each four
scruples: white Poppy seeds, and Winter Cherries, of each one dram and an h^lf:
Camphire two scruples: beat them finely (...) of the third part of them all of
Antimonium Diaphoreticum; and with (...) make a Mass. Give one dram morning and
evening long from meat, and after it a little ^^ his ordinary drink.

If Turpentine cause pain, give instead thereof Juice of Liquoris dissolved in
Pellitory Water.

And above all, new Milk from the Cow with one dram of Bole-armenick that is
true, every morning, is excellent, as Forestus says: And it is a secret of his
Master Helidaeus, because it cleanses and heals the Ulcer.

Quercetan in his Dispensatory, commends the Water that is given for the
Gonorrhoea, as good for the same, as well as other Ulcers.

Hartmannus commends an Opiate made of Conserve of Roses two parts; and the
Powder of the Seeds of St. John's wort one part, given in the end of the Cure
many evenings together. And also two or three grains of Mercurius Dulcis given
every day in Plantane Water.

But Mercurius Diaphoreticus is better, if well made, and as it were fixed: this
cures al internal ulcers miraculously.

In old Ulcers, the Decoction of round Birthwort in white Wine with Sugar, is
very good.

Also observe what Garcias ab Horto says, That in Goa they give Aloes and Milk
for Ulcers in the Reins and Bladder, or to such as piss filth, and it presently
cures.

Outwardly to knit give this Ointment:

Take of Juice of Plantane and Nightshade, of each four ounces: Oil of Roses
three ounces: Vinegar one ounce: Litharge finely poudered one ounce and an
half: washed Ceruss half an ounce: fine Powder of Tutty two drams: Sanguis
Draconis one dram. Make them into an Ointment.

Also you may use this following when there is no Inflammation.

Take of Oil of Roses and Mastich, of each two ounces: Myrrh, Aloes, Sarcocol,
Sanguis Draconis, of each one dram: Starch and Gum Tragacanth, of each four
scruples: Styrax Calamita one dram: white Wax as much as will make an Ointment.

In the Ulcer of the Bladder it is proper to make Injection twice in a day;
first with Hydromel, or Whey, or the Decoction of Barley with Honey of Roses to
cleanse; then with Astringers and Binders made of Iron Water, in which Comphry
Roots, Myrrh, Alum, and Sarcocol with Tragacanth have been boiled. But
especially with the Troches of Gordonius dissolved in Milk.

Fabricius Hildanus cured a great Ulcer in the Bladder with this following
Injection, and some few other Medicines, Obs. 69. Cent. 3.

Take of the Roots of Comphry one ounce: Agrimony, Paul's Bettony, Water
Germander, Ladies Mantle, Sanicle, of each half a handsul: boil them to a pint.
In the straining disso^ve two dram^ of Honey of Roses: mix them for an
Injection.

And you must observe that these Injections are not only to be made with a
Syringe, because they will not enter into the Cavity of the Cavity of the
Bladder, the Sphincter Muscle being shut, but you must conveigh it in with a
Catheter.

And because in these Ulcers the pains are usually great, you must through the
whole Cure abate them with Anodines inwardly and outwardly. Inwardly with Syrup
of Poppies* Laudanum, and the Troches of Alkekengi made for this purpose; as
also with Emulsions made of the cold Seeds, and white Poppy Seeds, with a
little Syrup of Poppies, or with the often giving of Conserve of Marshmallow
flowers.

Outwardly you may apply this Fomentation following, to the Reins.

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots two ounces: Mallows, Pellitory of the wall,
Violets, of each one handful: Lin-seed, Foenugreek, and Winter Cherries, of
each three drams: Chamomel, Melilot flowers, and Water Lillies, of each one
pugil: make a Decoction, with which foment the part, not with Spunges, because
they have a saltness in them from the Sea.

After the Fomentation you may apply this Liniment:

Take of the Oil of Violets, and of sweet Almonds, of each one ounce and an
half: Oil of Roses one ounce: Mucilage of Marsh-mallow seeds, and Foenugreek,
of each two ounces: Saffron one scruple: make a Liniment.

Make this following Injection against the pain of the Bladder.

Take of Foenugreek and Quince seeds, of each one scruple: steep them one hour
in one pint and an half of Barley Water: after strain them, and make a moist
Mucilage; to which add of Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces: Honey of Roses
strained one ounce: mix them for an Injection.

And if you inject warm Milk, it is excellent for the same purpose. In which if
you dissolve the Troches of Gordonius, you will completely ease pain, and cure
the Ulcer.

Chap. 6. Of Diabetes, or extraordinary Pissing.
DIabetes is a quick and plentiful sending forth of Drink by Urine; after which
there comes a violent Thirst, and consuming of the whole Body.

It is called Diabetes apo tou diabainein, from passing through, as Water
through a Conduit pipe, which is called Diabetes. This Disease is also called
Dipsacos, from the unquenchable Thirst, and the Piss-pot Dropsy, from the
continual making of Water. It is seldom seen, for Galen in 6. de loc. aff. cap.
3. says that he saw it but twice.

The next and immediate Cause of this Disease, from Galen, and al his
followers, is held to be a hot distemper of the Reins, which makes them draw
Water violently from the Veins, and send it to the Bladder being not able to
contain it themselves; the Veins being drawn dry, suck from the Liver; the
Liver from the Guts and Stomach; hence comes a continual Thirst after drink,
which as soon as it is taken, it is forthwith carried from the Liver and Veins
into the Reins* where by its quantity it sti^reth up the Expulsive Faculty, and
burdening the Retentive Faculty, it is sent to the Bladder.

Some suppose that this cause is insufficient, because the hot distemper of the
Reins is an usual disease, but Diabetes is very rare; therefore there must be
something else that is less usual, namely, a sharp or salt Matter in the
Kidneys, either of ^holler or of Phlegm, which does continually provoke the
attractive virtue of them; as in Chollerick Fevers there is a Thirst which
cannot be quenched, from the Chollerick Humor which is fixed to the coat or
Tunicle of the Stomach, or from Chollerick Vapors sent from some adjacent part
into the Stomach, by the motion of some putrid Choler which lodges there.
This Opinion is probable; but we think good to add thus much to it, That the
Kidneys alone are not affected in this Disease, because Choler and other burnt
Humors are first bred in the Liver; and therefore they cannot be in any
quantity in the Kidneys, but the Liver must participate of them. And if we may
reason where Nature seems to be ^ilent, we can say that there is a venomous
quality concurring for the producing of this Disease. For that kind of Serpent
called Dipsacos, found in Lybia, when it bites any man, does send into him such
a poison as begets an unquenchable Thirst. The like kind of venom may be bred
in our Bodies, by a peculiar corruption of some humors, which may cause such a
Thirst; for Galen testifies that diverse kinds of poisons may breed in our
Bodies. And if such a kind of poison may be bred in our Bodies as may cause a
detestation of Drink, as in Hydrophobia, in which the Patient cannot endure the
sight of Water, or any Drink, why may not then there be produced another
poison, which has the contrary quality, to cause a great and unquenchable
Thirst? And hence may be the reason why this Disease is so rare; because this
kind of poison is seldom bred, but Choler and Salt Phlegm, and the Diseases
from thence, are ordinary. And as the Disease called Dogs Appetite, which is
compared to this for the unsatiable desire of meat, is ascribed by the wisest
Physicians to an occult quality; so this unquenchable thirst may be said to
come from a peculiar and hidden quality.

The Signs of this Disease are clear from what has been said; as an
extraordinary making of Water, an unquenchable Thirst, and a sudden pissing
forth of what is drunk, a decay of the whole Body; for the moisture which would
nourish the Body, is pissed forth with the drink. And though there be often a
large Evacuation of Urine in sharp Fevers, and other cases, yet that is not to
be called Diabetes, because the aforesaid Symptoms, as great Thirst and
Consumption of the Body are not joined therewith.

The Prognostic of this Disease is deadly, for it is incurable, except it be
in the beginning thereof; for it presently brings a Consumption. In old men it
is more dangerous; and when it comes after inordinate Lechery, or Agues.

The Cure is wrought by allaying the hot distemper of the Kidneys, and by
strengthening them by thickening the Humors that flow unto them, and by
opposing the malignant quality thereof; all which may be done with these
Medicines following:

In the beginning of the Disease while there is strength, you may open a Vein,
for to revel or pluck back, and cool the Humors; but it must be done diverse
times, and but a small quantity of blood taken away. But if the strength be
decayed, or if this follow another Disease, Phlebotomy must not be.

You must give Mollifying and Asswaging Clysters to draw forth the Excrements,
made thus:

Take of Lettice, Purslain, Mallows, and Plantane, of each one handful: cleansed
Barley, and red Roses, of each one pugil: make a Decoction to one pint and an
half. In the straining dissolve of Diaprunes simple six drams: Honey of Roses,
and Sallet Oil of each two ounces: make a Clyster, and use it often.

You may also give a gentle Purge with Cassia, and Pulp of Tamarinds, or the
Decoction of Plantane, Purslain, Lettice, Tamarinds, and Myrobalans, with Syrup
of Roses.

Some commend Vomits made of the Decoction of Rhadish Seed, and Dwarf-Elder
with Oxymel, which does Evacuate and draw from the Ureters.

To correct the distemper of the said parts, and to thicken the Humors, Juleps
made of the Waters or Decoctions of Lettice, Purslain, and Plantane, with Syrup
of Myrtles, Quinces, and the like, and Syrup of Poppies, in a small quantity,
adding the Powder of Diatragacanth frigid, and the Troches of Sealed Earth, and
the like.

Or to astringe more, make them thus:

Take of Comphry and Plantane Roots, of each one ounce: Plantane Leaves one
handful: Pomegranate Flowers, and yellow Myrobalans, of each one dram: Plantane
and Purslain seed, of each half a dram: red Roses one pugil: boil them to a
pint. In the straining dissolve of Syrup of Quinces three ounces: make a Julep
for three Doses.

For the same end you may make a Powder, or an Opiate thus:

Take of Plantane, Purslain, and Coriander seeds prepared, and red Roses, of
each one ounce: prepared Coral, Bole-armenick, prepared Pearl, and Tormentil
Roots, of each one scruple: Nutmeg half a dram: mix them into Powder.

Take of old Conserve of Roses, four ounces: Bole, prepared Coral, and burnt
Harts-born, of each one scruple: with Syrup of Quinces make an Opiate.

Erastus highly commends the Syrup of Comphry Roots and Sloes, which he says
he used with good success in these Diseases.

Also Narcoticks, or Stupefactives used wisely, are very good, as new Treacle,
Syrup of Poppies, and Laudanum.

If it continue long, Sheeps Milk, Cow, or Asses Milk, are excellent, if you
first consume the Whey thereof, with often quenching Flints therein, and he may
use it in the morning, as we showed in other Cures.

Sweating is commended by Authors, by which means the serous Humor is drawn
outward. But it is to be mistrusted, because it is very like to purge by Urine,
and increase the distemper of the Bowels. But if it be used at any time, it
must be of the mildest sort, as of Roots of China, Sarsa, Endive, Borrage,
Sorrel boiled in Water, or for those who are consumed, in Chicken Broth; but we
think it safer to provoke sweat by outward means; as by a vapor from some
convenient Decoction in a wooden Instrument.

Such Sudorificks as are prescribed in malignant Fevers, are excellent,
especially if Spirit of Vitriol be in them, to quench Thirst, stay the flux,
and resist the malignity.

For Drink, let the Patient use Iron'd Water with sharp and astringent Syrups,
or a Decoction of Sloes, and the inward Bark of an Oak; by which Medicine even
alone, Erastus says that he cured this Disease in a Boy.

Outwardly, Apply a Fomentation to the Loins made of Sorrel Roots, Plantane,
Pomegranate peels, Sumach Seeds, and the like, with a little Vinegar; or, which
is most proper, make a Bath of the same Decoction to sit in.

And anoint the part with Ungu^nt of Roses, Sanders, and Comitissa mixed
together, or this following:

Take of Oil of Roses and Myrtles, of each one ounce: red Sanders, red Roses,
and red Coral, of each one scruple: Juice of Plantane one ounce: Wax, as much
as will make an Ointment.

Then you must allay the Symptoms that accompany this Disease, as thirst,
watching, consumption, and the like, by their Remedies mentioned in their
proper Chapters.

Chap. 7. Of Pissing the Bed, of Involuntary Pissing, or not containing of
Urine.
THe not holding of the Urine consists in the hurting of the Retentive action
of the Bladder, as Diabetes, or extraordinary pissing, comes from the hurt done
to the attractive faculty, and Dysuria from the distemper in the Expulsive: so
this comes from the disorder in the Retentive Faculty of the Bladder. This
comes sometimes to people awake, and then the Disease is worse; sometimes to them
asleep, and then it is less, because then the animal Functions are exercised
less freely. And this in time of sleep comes two ways, either from weakness
and looseness of the Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder, as in sucking Children,
weak people, and sometimes in them of years, or from the hurt of the
Imagination: for many do piss their Beds, either from too much drink, or from
the exquisite sense of the Bladder, and the Urines sharpness, with some consent
of their will, when they dream they are pissing against a wall, or other place;
and they are so accustomed to it, that it is done without any distemper either
of the Bladder, or its Sphincter; nor are they to be cured with Medicines, but
by change of their foolish Imagination, as Children by whipping; or in those of
years, by adorning those places which they dream they piss upon, with some
costly things, and showing them often.

The true cause of this is in the Sphincter Muscle, which suffers either from
its self, or by consent from other parts.

It comes diverse ways by consent, as when the whole Body is weak, and the vital
heat spent, as in dying men, or when the whole Body, or half of it is taken with
the Palsy, or those branches of Nerves which come from the Os Sacrum to the
Bladder: sometimes the looseness of the Muscle comes from the pain only, and
neerness to other parts affected, as in Women with Child, from the swelling and
pain of the Womb, and in the great Disease of the straight Gut.

The Sphincter Muscle suffers diverse ways by its self, as when it is wounded,
as in cutting for the Stone, or in deep Ulcers which hinder its contraction and
shutting. But the chief and usual cause is, a cold and moist distemper, which
is most fit to weaken and make loose the part. Which is produced of a cold and
moist Native temper, Youth, old Age, Women, and the Diseases of the whole Body,
or some parts thereof, coming of a moist and cold distemper: to these you may
add external causes, often mentioned.

But here we may dispute how contrary Effects may be produced of the same
Cause: for Hippocrates in Coac. says that stoppage of the Urine comes of a
cold cause, in these words; A stoppage of Urine coming of cold is worst of all;
now not holding, and stopping, are contrary. We must answer that when a cold
distemper does only hurt or abolish the sense of the Bladder, there may be a
suppression of Urine, because the Bladder cannot be sensible of provocation to
expel Urine: but if the motive faculty which is in the Sphincter Muscle be
hurt, by reason of the looseness of it, the Urine cannot be retained.

The Signs of this Disease, either show this Disease to be by consent, and
these must be taken from the Diseases before mentioned, which are apt to
produce this not holding the Urine, which if you find, you may conclude that
the disease comes from them: but if they be absent, then you must bethink
yourself of the propriety of the Disease to the part, which will be easily
discovered if it come from a wound and Ulcer, or the like Disease of the
Sphincter: but if neither of these appear, you must consider of the cold and
moist distemper of the part; and this is known by the causes both internal and
external, and by the effects which depend upon them, as softness of the whole
Body, whiteness, looseness of the Nerves and Privities, Childhood, Age, evil
Phlegmatic Concoction, and the like.

As for the Prognostic.

This Disease is incurable in old men, by reason of their great moistness, and
the loss of Vital heat, which cannot be repaired.

In an acute Fever, involuntary Pissing is very dangerous; for it comes either
of a Delirium, or from a great destruction of all the Faculties, which follows
the extinction of the Natural hear.

In Children it is cured when they grow elder, and the superfluous humidity is
by degrees consumed, and the parts that were loose, are more knit: But if they
be not cured before twenty five years of age, they are incurable.

The Cure is wrought by amending the cold and moist distemper, and looseness of
the Sphincter Muscle; but that which comes by sympathy from other diseases,
must be cured by the removing of them: as also that which comes from Wounds,
Ulcers, and other manifest Disease^, depends upon the Cure of them. Therefore
we shall lay down a way of Cure proper both for Children and men, provided that
the Physician be skilful in the choice of his Medicines, to give the gentlest
to Children, and that he increase and diminish the quantity according to the
Patients age.

First, Here is little use of Phlebotomy, because it comes from a cold
distemper, and phlegm; except there be a general Plethory in the whole Body,
being youthful.

But Purging is always necessary in this Disease, made of things that purge
phlegm, mixed with some astringents that are not only Alterers, but Purgers, as
Rhubarb, and Myrobalans, and the like.

After, to dry up the Matter that is slegmatick, and to knit the part, you may
use Pouders, Opiates, and Physic Wines, and the like, made thus:

Take of Cypress Nuts, and Myrtles dried at the fire, shavings of Ivory,
Coriander seeds prepared, red Coral, and Amber, of each two drams: Spodium, or
burnt Ivory one dram, Cypress Roots* and Galangal, of each half a dram: With
the Syrup of Citrons make an Opiate, of which let him take the quantity of a
Chestnut morning and evening. Drink after it a little red Wine.

Or you may give the aforesaid Powder from half a dram to a dram, with red Wine
twice in a day, long after, and before meat.

Take of Comfry Roots half an ounce: Cypress Roots, and Galangal, of each one
dram: Plantane, Hors-tail, and Five-leaved Grass, with the Roots, of each one
handful: Cypress Nuts, Acron Cups, of each four scruples: Rue seed, Agnus
Castus, Frankincense, and Ivory shavings, of each half a scruple: red Roses one
pugil: red Wine four pints. Infuse them twenty four hours, strain them through
an Hippocras Bag, adding of Cinnamon half an ounce: Sugar as much as is
sufficient to make a Claret, of which let him take three or four ounces twice
in a day.

Many proper things are propounded by Authors, which do conduce to the Cure of
this Disease. Galen in his Book of Local Medicines, and of things easy to be
prepared, commends the Brain and Stones of a Hair burnt. Also a Snail burnt,
with its shell given to Drink. The Modern Physicians give Hares dung, powder of
burnt Mice, the Hoofs of Hogs burnt, the ashes of Date stones, roasted Hazel
Nuts, powder of Egg shells. But above all are commended the Powder of Agrimony,
and the inward Skins of Hens Gizzards dried, given either by themselves, or
mixed together with red Wine.

Solenander witnesses that he saw happy success in a Medicine invented by one
Gilbert Holland, a Roman Physician: He took the Throat of a Cock, and dried it
at the fire til it would powder. He gave it before supper in red Wine, or with
Oxycrate, for some days together.

In people of years, sweating Decoctions used twenty days together, are good
to dry the Body, made of Guajacum, and Sassaphras; or Stuphs, Hot-houses,
Brimstone Baths, and those of Niter.

For his Drink, let him take sharp red Wine without mixture, or with a little
Ironed Water.

They who can drink only Water, may take Ironed Water, or that in which
Coriander seed, or a little Mastich has been boiled. Or lastly, for the better
astringing, let them take Water in which new Tiles have been quenched, and boil
their meat with the same. But they must drink but little, especially at Supper.
And let the Patient make water when he goes to bed, and be raised again at
midnight, and in the morning for the same purpose, and this will alter custom.

Outwardly to the Privities, apply warm, strengthening, and drying things, thus
made:

Take of Elicampane Roots, Calamus Aromaticus, Acorus and Cypress Roots, of
each half an ounce: Mints, Sage, Organ, Calamints, and Wormwood of each half a
handful: Cypress Nuts, Myrtles, Galls, and Pomegranate flowers, of each one
dram: red Roses one pugil: boil them in equal parts of Smiths Water, and red
Wine to two pints. In the straining, dissolve of Salt and Alum, of each one
ounce. Foment the Privities and Perinaeum warm, morning and evening.

Or you may make a Bath of the same things in larger quantities.

After the Fomentation, anoint the same parts with an Ointment of Oil of Foxes,
Rue, Flowerdeluce, Unguentum Martiatum, Aregon, with Powder of Mastich,
Cypress, and Myrtles.

Or you may use Storax Liquid, or Indian Balsom, dissolved with a little Wine;
or for rich folks Musk and Civet dissolved in Muskadel.

Or apply this Plaster to the parts aforesaid.

Take of Labdanum, Mastich, of each two drams: Wood of Aloes, Styrax Calamita,
Cinnamon, Turpentine, of each one dram: Myrtles, and Cypress Roots, of each
half a dram: Juice of Mints, and Hors-tail drawn with red Wine, as much as will
make a Plaster.

Lastly, If there be a defluxion from the head, which causes the weakness; you
must divert by Errhines, Masticatories, and Causticks to the Neck or Arm, and
other Remedies, mentioned in the Cure of the Catarrh.

Chap. 8. Of stoppage of the Urine, and Strangury.
THe stoppage of Urine is called by Authors Ischouria; but when little is
voided, it is called Strangouria: although this word be larger, and comprehends
all dropping of Urine; but if it be without pain, and the Urine come by drops,
with straining, it is a small sschuria; but if it be with pain, it must be
referred to Dysuria, or scalding of Urine.

Therefore Ischuria, or a whole suppression of Urine, is twofold, namely true,
when the bladder is full; or Spurious, when the Bladder is empty, and not thing
comes to it from the Reins.

A true Ischuria comes of three Causes: The first is when the sense is lost in
the Bladder, by reason of the Palsy, and obstruction of the Nerve that comes
to it, or by the eversion of the Spirits, by whose defect it comes, so that the
Bladder feels no pricking to expel, as in doting, and sleepy diseases.

The second cause is a distemper of the Bladder, coming from internal or
external cold causes, which dull the sense of the Bladder, and weaken its
expulsion.

The third Cause is the narrowness of the Neck of the Bladder, which will not
suffer the Urine to pass. Galen gives three causes of this, 1. de loc. affect.
cap. 1. either the Muscle is swollen by an Inflammation, Scirrhus, or
Imposthume, or the like; or there is a little flesh grown in the passage, by
reason of a former Ulcer; or there is a hardness from some thick Humor of long
continuance. Also the Passage is stopped by the Stone, by a Crude and Thick
Humor, by a Clod of Blood or Matter.

Besides, The Urine may be stopped by a Tumor in some part nigh to the neck of
the Bladder, from the swelling of the Womb, from the Excrements in the straight
Gut, or from the Hemorrhoids growing big.

Sometimes it comes from the long holding of the Water, by which the Bladder is
so stretched that it cannot contract it self to expel Urine, by which
stretching, the passage is stopped and contracted. Now the Bladder is filled by
Urine too long detained, two ways. First, when a sound man by urgent occasions
in the Market, Senate, Church Banquet, Running, and the like, holds his Urine
for want of opportunity to void it, which stretches it so that it cannot again
contract it self; and the pricking of the Urine is not perceived by reason of
its dull sense from the distemper of the Nerves which come thither, when those
Nerves which are for the contracting of the Muscle, are well and sound, which
Galen says befell one 6. de loc. aff. cap. 4. when his Back bone was strained.

That is called a bastard Ischuria, in which the Urine is stopped, and the
bladder empty, because no Water descends into it. There is a twofold Cause why
no Urine comes to the Bladder, either because the Kidneys do not draw that
whereof the Urin is made, and send it down, or because the Ureters will not
receive it, therefore either the attractive or expulsive Faculty of the Reins is
hurt. The attractive or drawing Faculty is hurt by the Error of the Object, or
in its self. This is from a strong distemper, especially cold, or from some
stoppage in the Reins, or in the Emulgent Veins. These Obstructions proceed
from the Stone, thick phlegm, or Matter that falls down thither. The obstruction
of the Emulgents comes sometimes from too much blood, or serous Matter; a Story
whereof we have in our Observations, Observe. I. Cent. I.

By the fault of the Object, the attraction of the Reins is hindered, when the
serum or water is spent, as in burning Fevers; or sent to other parts, as in a
Dropsy.

The Expulsive Faculty is hurt by the same Causes, namely, distemper, the
stone, clods of blood, matter, or gross phlegm, or Inflammation.

The Ureters do not receive the Serum, nor send it to the Bladder, by reason of
Inflammations, or Obstruction by the Stone, a clod of Blood, Matter, or thick
phlegm, or by a compression from some humor in a part adjacent.

We must observe that both Kidneyes or Ureters are affected, for the total
stoppage of Urine; for if one be open, the Urine may pass.

The aforesaid Causes, if they be violent, may make a total Obstruction of
Urine, which is called Ischuria; but if they be small, or remiss, they make only
an evacuation in part, which is called a Strangury; and both Diseases come from
the same cause, different in degrees.

A true Ischuria is known by the weight and enlarging of the lower part of the
belly, and by a Tumor in form like the bladder.

The Causes are known by things aforegoing, or that accompany it: For if it
come from too great a quantity of Urine, which hinders the Contraction of the
Bladder, the Patient will tell you how that he forbore to piss by reason of long
riding, or the presence of some people of Honor, and that before he never had
any distemper in those parts. But if he has had a Delirium, a Palsy, or the
like, you may refer the stoppage to them.

The Stoppage which comes from Tumors of those, or the adjacent parts, or other
Causes before mentioned, will be known by their proper Signs.

The stopping of the passage of the Bladder is known by a searing Candle put
in, or a Catheter; which if they cannot pierce, but are stopped by the way,
show that there is a either stone, or a Caruncle, or a little Excrescens of
flesh, or the like in the passage.

And these are to be distinguished; for if it be a Stone, there was formerly a
pain of the Reins, whether it came from the Bladder or Reins. If a Caruncle,
there was a stinking Gonorrhoea, or running of the Reins, or an Ulcer in the
passage of the Yard that did long run.

And lastly, If there be a Clod of Blood, or Matter, or Phlegm, you shall see
some part of it come out of the Yard, or it will stick to the Catheter.

A Bastard Ischuria is hence known, There is neither extension, nor Tumor, nor
weight about the Privities, but rather a kind of emptiness thereabout; there is
no desire to piss, no tickling in the bladder, and no Urine made, there went
before the signs of the Stone in the Kidneys, or Ureters, or of Inflammation, or
great fullness, or much drink was taken, which was not plentifully pissed forth:
whence the Veins might be swollen, or else there is a burning Fever, or a
Dropsy, which signify the revulsion, and turning away of the Water or serous
Matter.

As to the Prognostic. The stoppage of Urine is very dangerous, and if it
continue above seven days, it is deadly: for the Serum being retained in the
Veins, does oppress the Liver, infect the blood, and runs into the whole body,
it brings danger of choking, and being carried to the brain, produces a Coma,
or kind of Lethargy.

The stoppage of Urine which comes from the back, being wounded, or by a fall,
or straining of the Vertebrae, or backbone, is incurable.

If the Patient stink of Piss at his mouth or nose, it is deadly.

If a Tenasmus or Needing follow a suppression of Urine, it is death in seven
days. And also if the Hiccough follow upon it.

The Cure of the stoppage of Urine, whether it be total or partial, must be by
aiming at the Causes. And first, that supprestion which is called spurious, and
depends upon the Diseases of the Reins or Ureters, is to be found in the Cure
of the Inflammation, pain, or stone of the Kidneys; that which comes from the
fullness of the Emulgent Veins, is to be cured by large bleeding, and Medicines
that purge Water. A true Ischuria is cured by things that take away the cause:
and first, if it come from Inflammation of the bladder, or parts adjoining, you
may find Medicines for it in the Cure of the Inflammation of the bladder.

But if it come from a stone in the neck of the bladder, you must use these
Remedies following.

First, you must lay the Patient upon his Back with his Thighs lifted up, and
then shake him soundly to make the stone return into the Bladder: And if this
will not do it, use the Catheter. But if the stone be in the passage of the
Yard, and you must labor to get it out with your fingers, gently stroaking it
to the end of the Yard; and you must put the Yard into warm Water or Milk, or
the Patient into a Bath to open the Passage. But if you can neither get it out
nor in, Practitioners say that you may bind the Yard on both sides of it, and
take it out by Incision.

The Obstruction of the neck of the bladder, which comes from Inflammation, will
be cured with the proper Medicines against Inflammation. But in the mean while,
if the Urine be there long detained, you may gently conveigh in a searing
Candle dipped in a little Oil of sweet Almonds, avoiding the Catheter, left it
cause pain, and so increase the Inflammation.

If the stoppage of Urine comes from a Caruncle, you must take that away. This
is done by proper Medicines conveyed thither with a Wax Candle, which must be
done by a skilful hand. And if the Caruncle swel and stop the Passage necessity
will constrain you to use the Catheter to draw away the Urine, although there be
danger lest the part disturbed should swel more. But you must first make use of
Revulsions, by bleeding, vomiting, and Repellers to the Privities, to take away
the Inflammation of the Caruncle, that way may be made for the Urine.

If suppression of the Urine come from thick phlegm, first it is good to purge
with a Bolus made of Diaphoenicon and Rhubarb, and then to give Turpentine
often with Powder of Liquoris; afterward a Decoction of opening Roots, with
Oxymel, or Syrupus Bizantinus; not omitting in the mean while, Clysters,
Fomentations, and Baths, that mollify and open. And all those things will be
proper which were propounded for the dissolving and expelling of the Stone.

And among the r^st, Experience has taught us that these following are
excellent.

Take of Benedict a Laxativa half an ounce: the Troches of Myrrh two scruples:
the Decoction of Savin three ounces. Mix them for a Potion. By this a woman was
presently cured of the stoppage of Urine.

If there be abundance of Phlegm in the whole Body, or in the Head, after
blood-letting, from the beginning of the Cure, you must purge with an Apozeme
three or four days together.

Also the Julep mentioned in the Cure of the Stone of the Kidneys, made of the
juice of Pellitory of the wall, Sea-fennel, and Lemmons, with Oil of sweet
Almonds.

The Syrup of Rhadishes, of Fernelius his Prescription, given two ounces at a
time, is very excellent.

Dodonaeus in Observat. Cap. 48. reports of one of fourscore years of age, that
was cured of a stoppage of Urine with dropping, by a Lixivium or Lie made with
ashes of Egg-shels, and Rhenish Wine, once taken.

Arnaldus Villanovanus commends the Wine of Winter Cherries in this following
History, mentioned in his Book of Wines. There was in my time a Cardinal, who
had not pissed for four days, who was desperately swollen, and cured by the
advice of a weak Physician, with Winter-Cherry Wine, and he voided as much
Urine as would fill a Basin. By that only Experiment, that Physician being
poor, and of small parts, became a great rich man. Many God bestows his
Blessings upon, his ways are unsearchable. This kind of Wine, as Arnaldus
shows, is made by taking five, or seven, or more Winter Cherries, and beating
them with good white Wine, and then straining them, and giving them to be drunk

Hog-lice also beaten with white Wine, and given to be drunk, are good for the
same.

The Oil of Scorpions, as Mathiolus prescribed it, given five or six drops in
Broth or other Liquor, does powerfully provoke Urine.

The often use of the Crystal Mineral, does provoke Ur^^^ especially when you
fear inflammation, which is often caused in the inward Skin of the Bladder, by
^^^ stoppage of Urine.

The Spirit of Salt does it better.

The Vulgar Medicine of the Juice of Pellitory of the wall ^efined, four ounces
with half an ounce of Sugar, does very much good. You may mix therewith Sal
Prunellae, or Spirit of Salt.

If these stoppings from Phlegm, do often return, there is nothing better than
Brimstone, and Niter Bath-Waters; which both by drinking and bathing, do easily
dissolve, cleanse, and consume that slimy matter.

A certain Noble man having his Urine suppressed many days, after other
Medicines taken in vain, by this following Clyster kept two hours in his Body,
was cured.

Take of the Roots of Smallage, Parsley, Butchers Broom, Dogs-tooth, Sparagus,
Mallows, and Marshmallows, of each two drams: Pellitory of the wall two
handfuls: Annis, Fennel, Dill, Caraway, Carrot, Ameos, Carthamus, Rue, and
Cummin seeds, with Bay Berries, of each half an ounce: Chamomel, Melilot, Dill,
and French Lavender flowers, of each two pugils: boil them in white Wine to
halfs. In a pint of the straining, dissolve of fresh Butter four ounces: Honey
of Roses two ounces: red Sugar one dram: Benedicta Laxariva half an ounce: one
Egg: the Oil of Nuts, Dill, Lin-seed, of each two ounces. Make a Clyster.

The Chemists brag of their Medicines against this Disease; namely, Spirit of
Salt, Vitriol, Sulphur, and Turpentine, which they give to half a scruple in
convenient Liquors, or Chicken Broth. They Commend also the Salt of Tartar and
of Bean Stalks, given from half a dram to a dram.

And for Revulsion of the Humor from the part affected, they give Vomits, and
they boast that very many have been cured thereby.

You must all the time of the Cure, use Liniments, Fomentations, Cataplasms,
and Baths, and other external things which must be the same that were before
mentioned for the pain in the Kidneyes: Among the rest a Cataplasm made of
Pellitory of the wall, fried in Butter or Oil of Scorpions, is excellent. Also
a Bladder half full of Oil; which will be of more force, if you boil Spanish
Flies, called Cantharides therein.

Commonly they apply a Cataplasm of fiyed Onions with Hogs Grease to the Loins
and Privities, with some Eggs.

But raw white Onions beaten with Oil into the form of a Cataplasin, do far
better, if they be applied to the Kidneys, Ureters, and Privities.

A Cataplasm made of beaten Rhadishes, is good for the same.

When the Ischuria comes of clotted blood, you must dissolve it. For this
purpose use Troches of Amber, the Rennet of a Kid or Hair, Mummy, simple
Oxymel, and Oxymel of Squils, Syrup of Vinegar, and the like. Outwardly, a
Cow-turd does wonders, according to the Judgment of Learned Aetius, Tetr. 3.
Sermon. 2. Cap. 27.

Lastly, When the Urine is stopped by Matter, or comes only dropping, you must
use Clensers and Cutters, such as were set down in the Cure of the Ulcer of the
Reins and Bladder.

Chap. 9. Of Dysuria, or Scalding of the Urine.
BY the word Dysuria, we understand all painful pissing, which the Modern
Writers call Scalding of the Urine. Many Authors make it all one with the
Strangury, because there is painful pissing; but they will have it differ from
Dysuria in this only, but because in Dysuria there is a greater quantity of
Urine made, than in Strangury, which is therefore called pissing by drops. But
we had rather for Instruction sake, call that Strangury which is pissing
little, without pain, and put them in one Chapter, because they must be cured
both the same way, and to treat here of all painful pisling under the name of
Dysuria, being they come all of the same Causes, and are cured by the same
Medicines.

The immediate Cause of painful pissing, is a solution of continuity in the
Sphincter Muscle, or the passage of the Bladder: and therefore whatsoever can
cause a wound in those parts, may cause heat of Urine.

The most usual Cause is sharpness of Urine, sometimes without mixture of other
Humors, which is caused by a hot distemper of the Bowels, or of the whole Body,
or by eating of hot and sharp Meats; but it often comes by mixture of hot and
sharp Humors, as Choler and salt Phlegm. Sometimes matter coming from the Reins
or Bladder, being ulcerated, may cause such a sharpness of Urine. Sometimes a
white Humor like Milk comes plentifully forth with the Urine, and causes
scalding, which is commonly thought to be Matter from the Reins; but Sennertus
denies it for this Reason, For if all the Reins were turned into Matter, they
could not afford so much as is many times voided at once, every day for a week
together. And he supposes that it comes from an evil Concoction, first of the
Stomach, then of the Liver, because the error of the first Concoction cannot be
mended in the second, hence the Chylus, and then the Blood remains crude, not
freed from its Salt and Tartar-like parts, which ought to be separated in the
first Concoction, and they being after sucked into the Reins and sent to the
Bladder, cause pain in pissing. He says that he was brought to be of this
Judgment, because a Learned man, who was troubled some weeks with heat of
Urine, which he voided plentifully with half an Urinal full of such white
Matter, was (when nothing else could assuage his violent pains) cured only with
drinking of Sack.

Also a stone in the Bladder, if it strike against the Neck of it in time of
pissing, causes pain; and also large Gravel which grates upon the passage of
the Urine.

Also Inflammation, or Ulcer of those parts, causes heat of Urine, because the
sense is more quick at that time, and though the Urine be well tempered, it is
troublesome; as we see externally how the least touch is offensive to a sore
place. So in a Gonorrhoea, as long as the Parastates are inflamed, there is a
continual heat of Urine.

The Knowledge of this Disease is evident, for the Patient is forced to roar
sometimes with pain. But you must distinguish the Signs of the Causes thus:

If it come from sharpness of Urine, it will be thin and high colored, sometimes
like fire, or there will be a visible mixture of Choler, Phlegm, or Matter; the
Bowels will be distempered, or the Patient has eaten hot and sharp meats, and
endured great heat.

The Stone and Inflammation of those parts are known by their proper Signs.

As for the Prognostic. This Disease of it self, is not dangerous, but very
painful: and according to the cause, it is sometimes hard to be cured,
especially in old men, which if they be decrepit, die thereof; and in all ages,
if it continue long, it ulcerateth the neck of the Bladder.

The Cure is, first by taking away the Cause. And therefore if it come from the
Stone, Inflammation, or Ulcer, you must cure them according to the Rules in
their proper Chapters. But these things after mentioned, will be good to allay
the Symptom.

They who have it from the sharpness of Urine mixed with hot Humors, are to be
cured by the Medicines following.

And first, Phlebotomy is good to correct the distemper of the Liver and other
parts. This must be often, according to the Plethory and Inflammation; first
from the right Arm, to evacuate and revel the Matter; and after in the lower
Veins, to derive it from the part affected; for which cause, Hippocrates, and
Galen who followed him, do command the lower Veins to be opened in Diseases of
all parts beneath the Reins.

Purging also is good, of mild and gentle things, that cool, lest the heat be
increased. Therefore do not give any thing but a Bolus of Cassia alone, and
indeed that is best. But you may make it cooler if you add the Pulp of
Tamarinds. Or you may mix it with the Decoction of Lettice, Purslain, and
Mallow Tops, and give it many days together, that the sharp Humors may be
brought back from the part by stool. But if you desire to purge more by reason
of the plenty of Humors, use this following:

Take Lettice, Purslain, Plantane, and Mallow tops, of each half a handful:
Tamarinds half an ounce: yellow Myrobalans one dram: boil them to six ounces,
and add to it strained, one ounce of Cassia: strain it again, and then add one
dram and an half of Rhubarb infused in Lettice Water, with yellow Sanders,
Manna, and Syrup of Roses, of each one ounce. Make a Potion.

In an old Dysury, the purging Opiate prescribed in the Ulcer of the Bladder,
is very good.

A gentle Vomit is excellent, for it revelleth from that part affected, and
hinders those inconveniences which use to come by purging: Therefore give it
once or twice in a week to them that can vomit easily.

By often Clysters, the sharp Humors are not only brought to the Guts, and sent
out by degrees, but the distemper of the parts is qualified.

They are made thus:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce: Mallows, Violets, and Lettice, of each
one handful: Water Lillies, and cleansed Barley, of each one pugil: boil them to
a pint: Dissolve in the straining, Cassia new drawn one ounce: one Egg: and two
ounces of Oil of Violets. Make a Clyster.

The Mucilages of Seeds of Marshmallows, Quinces, and Foenugreek, may be mixed
with Clysters to assuage pain.

But Clysters of Milk only, or mixed with the aforesaid things, use to be so
powerful to allay heat and pain, that we have known some of long continuance
cured by them alone, and a Bath, whereof we will speak hereafter.

Experience has found out many things good to be taken at the mouth, to allay
heat, and to correct the distemper of the parts. The chief are these following:

Take of Water Purslain, Lettice, Roses, and Water Lillies, of each one ounce:
Syrup of Violets and Water Lillies, of each six drams: Sal prunellae one dram.
Mix them for a Julep, repeat it often.

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce: Lettice, Endive, Purslain, and Mallow
tops, of each one handful: Melone, Guord, Mallows, Lettice, and white Poppy
seeds, of each three drams: Jujubes and Sebestens, of each six pair: Violets,
Roses, and Water Lillies, of each one pugil: boil them in a pint and an half.
Dissolve in the straining, Syrup of Violets, Jujubes, and Poppies, of each one
ounce and an half: Sal prunellae half an ounce: make a Julep for four Doses to
be taken twice in a day.

Emulsions also may be used although they be Diuretic, because they cool and
cleanse the passage of the Bladder. Make them thus:

Take of the four great cold Seeds, and white Poppy Seeds, of each three drams:
sweet Almonds blanched and infused in cold Water half an ounce: beat them in a
stone Mortar, pouring on by degrees the Decoction of Barley, Liquoris,
Purslain, and Mallow tops one pint and an half: make an Emulsion for three
Doses, adding to each Dose one ounce of the Syrup of Violets, and one dram of
Lapis prunellae, and if the pain be great add a little Syrup of Poppies, and
one dram of Gum Arabic in powder, or the Syrup of Marshmallows, according to
Fernelius, or of Mucilages.

You may make Broths thus:

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots half an ounce: Mallows one handful: Liquoris half
an ounce: Quince seeds one dram: boil them with Chicken Broth: make it often.

The Whey of Goats Milk is very good given in great draughts, as we said in the
hot distemper of the Liver.

And if there be no Fever, you may with more profit give Milk by it self,
because it does not only cleanse, but allay pain, and temper the sharpness of
the Humors.

In an old Disease, it is good to give Mineral Waters that cool, especially
Alum, Iron, and Vitriol Waters; for by Experience we find that they have cured
this Disease when it has been inveterate.

Instead of the aforesaid Juleps, the simple Decoction of Mallows, with Syrup
of Violets, may be used; by which Forestus says, Obs. 4. Lib. 25. he cured a
grievous Dysury many times, and that there is nothing like it.

Forestus also Obs. 3. of the same Book, that an Apothecary cured himself and
others, with the white of an Egg beaten with Rose Water.

He also reports that a woman cured an old man of Delf, with Chamomel flowers
boiled in Milk.

Amatus Lusitanus, 58. Curat. Cent. 6. says that a Woman was cured when all
means failed, with Conserve of Mallow flowers; she took one ounce morning and
evening, and drunk after it three ounces of Mallows Water. And Curat. 59. he
says that one who had a Dysury, after he had voided a stone was cured by the
same in three days. The Conserve of Marsh-mallow slowers, is of the same or
greater Virtue.

Some commend the Troches of Winter Cherries given with convenient Liquor, the
quantity of a dram because they are Diuretic, abate sharpness and pain.

When the pain is very great, it is good to put the Yard when you piss, into
warm Milk, or a Decoction of Mallows and white Poppy seeds, or warm Water only.

A small Decoction of Mallows with Syrup of Violets and Conserve of Roses, is
good for ordinary Drink.

You may also make Injections into the passage of the Bladder, of Milk, or of
an Emulsion of cold Seeds, Plantane Water, or Whey, with the Water of a white
of an Egg beaten, or one scruple of the Troches of Winter Cherries.

External Medicines are also good, as Baths, half Baths, Fomentations to the
Privities made of cool Herbs, Liniments of Oil of Roses, Water Lillies, Unguent
of Roses, Galens cooling Ointment, Populeon with Camphire, and the Mucilage of
Fleabane made with Plantane Water. Also you must apply Epithems that cool to
the Reins and Liver, and the aforesaid Liniments, and the things mentioned
formerly for the same.

When sharp and chollerick Humors flow from the Liver, you may derive by an
Issue in the right Leg, or by opening the Hemorrhoids, which is very good in all
diseases of the Reins and Bladder; according to that of Hippocrates, Aph. 11.
Sect. 6. because from the Spleen Vein called Ramus Splenicus, there are
branches go to the Reins, Bladder, and Hemorrhoids.

The End of the Fourteenth Book.
THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of WOMEN'S Diseases.
The PREFACE.
THose are called Women's Diseases which are proper to them only, and come from
the defect of that part which is distinct in them from men, viz. the Womb; of
which Democritus in his Letter to Hippocrates said that it was the cause of six
hundred miseries, and innumerable Calamities. But we to lay down those Diseases
of the Womb which are most usual, will divide them thus: Some come from the
Vessels, and some from the Body of the Womb, or Cavity; others are in respect
of its chief and noblest act of Generation. From the distemper of the Vessels
of the Womb, and the preternatural causes, come Chlorosis, or green Sickness,
stoppage of the Terms, immoderate Flux, the Whites, Rage of the Womb, and the
Mother. In the Cavity of the Womb are, Inflammations, Ulcers, Scirrhus, Cancer,
Gangrene, Dropsy, coming forth, and shutting up thereof: these may hinder
Generation but by accident. The Diseases which are in respect of Conception,
Breeding, and Bringing forth, are, Barrenness acute and Chronical Diseases of
Women with Child, Abortion, difficult bringing forth, dead Child, Secundine
retained, immoderate flux, or suppression of blood, and the acute Diseases of
women in Childbed. All which Diseases we will speak of in as few words as the
dignity of the Matter will permit.

Chap. 1. Of the Green Sickness, called Chlorosis.
THis Disease by Hippocrates, is called Chlorosis; by the Modern Physicians,
the white Fever, the Virgins Disease, the Pale color of Virgins, the white
Jaundice, but vulgarly the Greensickness.

It may be defined thus: An evil habit of Body from the Obstruction of the
Veins of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, and especially of those which are
about the Womb, which is accompanied with a heaviness or unwildiness of the
whole Body, beating of the heart, difficulty of breathing, a desire of evil
Food, and the like.

This Disease depends immediately upon the Obstruction of the parts in the
lower Belly, especially of those Veins which are about the Womb, whereby the
free passage of Blood to the Womb is hindered, which abounding in Virgins when
they begin to have their Terms, and being hindered of its Natural course by
those Obstructions, runs to the upper parts, and oppresses the Heart, Liver,
Spleen, Diaphragma, or Midriff, and other parts, destroys their Natural heat,
stops the Vessels; hence is there an evil Concoction in the Bowels, and from
thence their Body is full of Crudities, which being carried forth, make an evil
Habit. In other parts they produce diverse Symptoms in the Hypochondria, a
swelling of the Bowels, by which the Midriff is oppressed, which causes
shortness of breath. And because gross blood and wind are carried by the
Branches of the hollow Vein, and great Artery into the Heart, which contend
against them for fear of Suffocation, by often moving of its Arteries, there is
a palpitation of the Heart, and often a beating in the Temples. Besides, they
have in this Disease a loathing of meat, because the Stomach is filled with
crude Excrements by reason of its evil Concoction and distribution: which
excrements having gotten an evil quality by a peculiar kind of corruption,
cause a desire of evil meats, and things not ordained for nourishment, as Salt,
Spices, Chalk, Coals, Ashes, and the like, which Disease is called Pica
Malacia, or strange Longing, which we have at large spoken of in its proper
place, among the Diseases of the Stomach.

The Causes of the Obstructions in the Veins of the Womb, and the Hypochondria,
are thick, slimy, and crude Humors, coming commonly from evil Diet: for these
Virgins drink great draughts of Water at bedtime, or in the morning fasting;
or eat Vinegar, Herbs, unripe Fruits, Snow, or Ice; hence it is that they lose
their Natural heat, and there is abundance of crude Excrements. Others sleep
too much, or are very idle, as Seamsters, which by sitting still al day are very
cold. Others watch too much, and use unseasonable exercise, as dancing
presently after meat, and so continuing with their Sweet-hearts all night.
Moreover, they have great cares and disturbances of mind by which the
Concoction is destroyed, and the Body filled with evil Juice.

The Knowledge of this Disease is easy from the Symptoms following:

First, The Face and all the Body is pale and white, sometimes of a Lead color,
blew, or green; for crude, phlegmatic, and ^erous Humors abounding, and being
carried to the habit of the body, do discolor it; and if Choler or Melancholy
be mixed with that phlegm, the color will be yellowish, greenish or blew.

The Second is, Swelling in the Face and Eyelids, especially after sleep,
because the motive heat being closed and contracted at night, raised more
vapors than it could discuss. The Legs also and Feet, especially about the
Ankles, and the whole Body is loose and soft by reason of the abundance of phlegm.

Thirdly, Heaviness and Idleness in the whole Body, a lazy stretching forth of
the Legs from the Humors being fallen down.

Fourthly, There is difficult breathing, especially when they move themselves,
or go up Hills or steep places, then the thick blood grows warm, and thence
arise many vapors, which cause shortness of breathing.

Fifthly, There is Palpitation of the Heart and beating of the Arteries in the
Temples when the Body is exercised, by reason of the same evaporation, which is
raised from thick Humors heated by Exercise.

Sixthly, There is often a great Headache, and sometimes in the hinder part of
the Head, when the Womb suffers; but in the Forehead when the vapors arise most
from the Hypochondria.

Seventhly, The Pulse is swift and quick, as if they were in a Fever, and
therefore this Disease is called the white Fever, by reason of the quickness
of the Pulse, which is so for this reason; The vital faculty being weak, makes
the Pul^e little, therefore Nature supplies the smalness of it with often
beating.

Eighthly, The sleep is very sound, they sleep til midnight, except they be
forcibly awaked; and this is from many thick vapors which arise from the filthy
phlegm.

Ninthly, There is a great loathing of wholesome meat, by reason of the great
collection of Crudities in the Stomach and parts adjacent; and these Humors
when they grow worse, cause the Pica, or longing for things that are not to be
eaten.

Lastly, When the evil increases, and the Obstructions are multiplied, the
Terms stop, which shows the Disease to be at the height, and confirmed.

As for the Prognostic: That Disease commonly is not dangerous, and continues
a long time.

But if it be too much neglected* and suffered to take root, so that the
Nourishment is hindered, there follow great Diseases of the Natural parts, as
Scirrhous and other Tumors, and corruption of the substance of them, which
cause death, by Dropsies, long Fevers, and the like.

When the Disease is less, and comes only from the Obstruction of the Veins of
the Womb, in young women it is cured by Marriage.

Women that have long been in this Disease, either are barren, or their
Children are diseased, and weak.

There is great hope of recovery when the Terms keep their ordinary course, and
their due quantity and quality.

The Cure of this Disease is by opening Obstructions, by emptying of the filthy
Humors from the whole Body, and correcting the distemper of the Bowels, and
strengthening of them.

The Obstructions are taken away by the Medicines which were mentioned in the
Cure of the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, adding some things which
respect the Womb, and that are more proper to open those Veins.

First then, give a purging Medicine agreeable to the Patients temper, made of
gentle things, to cleanse the first Region only, and a Clyster before it, if the
Body be bound.

Then open a Vein, if the Disease be not very old, and the Maid very much
without blood, and inclining to an evil habit. Let the Vein of the Arm be
opened first, although the Terms be stopped; for if then you draw blood from
the Foot, the Obstructions of the Veins of the Womb will be greater by their
fullness. And if the Liver be most stopped, take blood from the right Arm; if
the Spleen from the left.

After you have bled sufficiently, you must give an ordinary Purge, by way of
an Apozeme, such as was prescribed in the Cure of the Obstructions of the
Liver. To which you may add some Herbs that are proper to the Womb, as Mugwort,
Feaverfew, Peny-royal; and if the Spleen be stopped you may add proper things
for that, as Capar barks, Ceterach, or Spleenwort, Hart's-tongue. It the temper
be Chollerick, and there be signs of a hot and dry Liver, you must take all the
hot simples out of the Apozeme, and put in cold openers instead thereof.

For the more delicate Virgins, instead of Apozemes, you may give the Broths
prescribed in the aforesaid Cure of the Liver, and change the simples as we
said of the Apozeme.

In the mean while you may use Fomentations and Liniments prescribed in the
same Chapter, not only to the Liver, but to the Spleen and Womb.

After Purging (...) this Bath following, to open and loosen the Vessels, and
to dissolve and digest the Matter (...) Obstructions, which are of such force
that we have known sometimes the Terms to begin to flow at the third or fourth
bathing, when they have formerly been long stopped.

Take of Marsh-mallow Roots, Lilly Roots, Elicampane, Briony, wild Cucumer, of
each two pound: Mallows, Violets, Mercury, Penyroyal, Feaverfew, Balm, of each
four handfuls: Linseed and Fenugreek beaten, of two ounces: boil them in spring
Water for a Bath. Let her go into it warm twice in a day, not sweating, long
before and after meat, for two days, renewing each day the Decoction.

The day after the last Bath, if the Terms be stopped, let the lower Veins be
opened, and take away three ounces of blood: and this may be done twice or
thrice at that time, in which the Terms used to flow. Or if they never did
appear at that time in which the Patient is most asslicted.

After these Medicines to strengthen the Bowels, and to wear away the relics
of the Obstructions, an opening and strengthening Opiate will do very well,
described in the place mentioned; to which you may add two drams of Foecula
Brioniae, and as much of Salt of Mugwort.

But because sometimes the Obstructions are so great that they will not presently
be cured, you must make a Magistral Syrup of the Ingredients to the Apozeme
before mentioned, with an increase of the purging Medicines in quantity, and
let the Patient take it twice or thrice in a month.

The ordinary Pills mentioned in the Cure of the stoppage of the Liver, are most
excellent; to which you may add the Medicines there mentioned, of Tartar,
Vitriol, and Steel.

Zacutus Lusitanus, Observe. 99. Lib. 2. reports of a certain Woman which had
the Green Sickness ten years with stoppage of her Terms, and could not be cured
with diverse opening and purging Medicines, and some made of Steel, that he
cured her with nothing but Conserve of Mugwort, given thirty days together,
drinking after it the distilled Water of Savin, in which Rhubarb had been a
whole night insused.

The same Zacutus, Observe. 117. Lib. 3. tells of a Virgin, which eating much
Salt every day, felinto a Diarrhoea of Choler, mixed with a Consumption, which
he cured after general Medicines, with Goats Milk steeled and cold things
applied to the Liver.

In the greatest Obstructions, an Issue made in the right or left Leg, as the
Liver or Spleen is affected, is very good.

After the Obstructions are opened, you must diseuss the phlegm like serous
humors that remain in the Veins, and in the habit of the Body by sweats; for
which you must use the Decoction of Guajacum in cold Constitutions, or of China
and Sarsa in those that are hot, for fifteen or twenty days; with this
Caution, That every fourth or fifth day, you give a Purge to cleanse the Bowels
of Humors which cannot be sent forth by sweat; and which if they continue will
grow hard and putrefie, and be the occasion of Fevers, and other Diseases. For
this Purpose you may use Brimstone Baths, both for drink and bathing: for by
the drinking thereof, when the passages are first open by the Medicines
aforesaid, the Humor that is contained in the first and second Region of the
Body, is cleansed and sent forth by the belly and urine; and the third Region is
cleansed by sweating in them.

And lastly, Copulation, if it may be legally done, after the use of opening
Medicines, is very good; for thereby the Natural heat is stirred up in parts
Natural, by which the Vessels of the Womb are much enlarged. And Experience
teaches, that sometimes these Women have their Terms the first night after
Marriage, and that others who in good health, have them before their accustomed
time.

Chap. 2. Of the stoppage of the Terms.
THe Terms are said to be stopped, when in a Woman ripe of Age, which gives not
suck, and is not with Child, there is a seldom, small, or no evacuation of blood
by the Womb, which used to be every month.

The cause of this stoppage is either in the Womb, or in its Vessels, or in the
blood which comes, or ought to come that way.

Diverse Diseases of the Womb may cause this Disease; namely, a cold Distemper,
and dry, which thickeneth and binds the Body of the Womb; or a hot and dry
distemper by drying the part, or burning up the nourishment thereof, from
whence come evil humors, which being fastened in the part, hinder the Terms
from flowing. Also the Organical Diseases of those parts, as inflammation, or
scirrhus, the turning of the inward mouth thereof, or compression from the
Tumors of the parts adjacent, or the Omentum or Caul growing too thick. The
thickness of the Womb it self, Ulcer, or Scars, which they leave, or from the
tearing of the Cotyledones, or Mouths of the Vessels, in a great Abortion.

The Vessels of the Womb do often suffer Obstruction, which is the chief cause
of stopping of the Terms, and they come from cold and thick Humors: sometimes
there is a suppression of those Veins by binding of them, and that is from the
parts adjacent being stretched and swollen, as we said in the binding or closing
of the Womb.

The blood offending either in quantity, quality, or motion, may be cause of
the obstruction of the Courses. It offends in quantity, when it is too much or
too little; too much, when it stretches out the Veins, so that they cannot
contract themselves to expel it; as in the bladder when it is too full of
Urine, it cannot contract it self to send it forth; too little, when the Body
has not blood enough to nourish it.

The blood offends in quality, when it is thicker, and more slimy of its own
Nature, by reason of the cold distemper of the Liver, and other parts, or from
the mixture of thick and phlegmatic or melanchollick humors, from whence
commonly Obstructions come.

The blood offends in motion, when it passes other ways, as by the Nose,
vomiting, spittle, urine, hemorrhoids, and many other parts. I saw a Maid who
had a Sore in her head, which opened every month, and bled plentifully; and we
have seen many that have sent forth blood at fixed times by their Lungs; and
this evacuation was instead of a Menstrual flux.

The external Causes, are cold and dry Air, Northern winds, often going into
cold water, especially in the time of their flux; too little or two much meat,
either too thick and cold, or too astringent; also hot things, as too much Salt
and Spice by drying of the substance of the Liver, and other parts, and by
drying up the blood, by which it grows thick, and fit to stop; violent
exercise and watchings, which do consume the blood; long sleep, and idleness,
which do weaken the Natural heat, and cause Crudities; too long retaining of
Excrements; by usual bleeding at the Nose, Hemorrhoids, Diarrhoea, and other
evacuations by vomit, urine, or sweat; and lastly, great passions of the mind,
anger, sudden fear, sorrow, jealousy, and the like.

The Knowledge of this is to be taken from the Patients relation; but because
it comes either from Natural or Preternatural Causes, we shall lay down some
distinguishing signs, left the Physician be deceived by Women that would
dissemble their being with Child, and left he should rashly prescribe Medicines
to provoke Terms to Women with Child.

First, If they be with Child, they have commonly their Natural Complexion; but
others are pale and ill colored.

Secondly, The Symptoms which Women with Child have at the first, do daily
decrease; but in others stoppage of the Terms, by how much the longer the Terms
stop, by so much the more the Symptoms increase.

Thirdly, In Women with Child, after the third Month, you may perceive the
Situation and Motion of the Infant, by laying your hand upon the inferior
Belly; in others there is a Tumor to be felt, but it is oedematous or
phlegmatic, not hard; neither is it proportionable to the Womb.

Fourthly, If a wise Midwife touch the inward Mouth of the Womb, it will not be
so close shut as in women with Child, but rather hard, and contracted, and full
of pain.

Fifthly, Women with Child are commonly merry, and little disturbed; but when
the Terms are otherwise stopped, they are sad and sorrowful.

The Signs of the Causes are these:

The faults of the Womb which use to cause stoppage of the Terms, shall be laid
down in the following Chapters; but the greatest part of them is found out by
touching, seeing, and relation of the Patients.

The Obstruction and straightness of the Vessels of the Womb are known by pain
in the Loins, and parts adjacent, especially in the time the Terms should flow,
and if any thing flow at that time, it is slimy, white, and blackish. Now the
Diseases of the adjacent parts, which may shut the mouth of the Womb, or the
Veins, will appear by their proper signs.

You may know the abounding of blood in the Veins, by the swelling of the Veins
in the Thighs and Arms, especially if the Woman be fleshy and red, and have fed
high. You may suppose there is want of blood, if the Woman be fat, if she have
had a long Fever went before, or loathing of meat. The evil quality of the
blood is known by the evil habit of the Body, by the distemper of the Liver,
and other parts, and especially by the blood it self, if you can see some of
it. The preposterous motion of the blood, when it flows another way, is
manifest of it self.

As to the Prognostic. The stoppage of the Terms is very dangerous, and many
great diseases come thereof, and some in the Womb it self, as swellings,
imposthumes, and Ulcers; others in the whole Body, and diverse parts thereof, as
Fevers, Obstructions, evil Habits, Loathing, Dropsy, Heartach, Cough, short
Breathing, Fainting, sore Eyes, Madness, Melancholy, Headache, Joynt-gout, and
the like. Hippocrates, Lib. 1. of Women's Diseases, has showed the increase of
Diseases from the stopping of the Terms, in these words. The third month after
the stoppage of the Terms, they begin to feel suffocations, or shortness of
breath, with horrors, heaviness of the Loins, and sometimes a Fever. But if it
last long, the Belly grows hard, they piss much, they loath meat, and watch
much, they grate their Teeth in sleep; and if they continue longer stopped, the
pains will be greater; but in the sixth month, that Disease which was formerly
curable, will be then incurable: then she will be troubled in mind, and faint,
vomit phlegm, thirsty, the Belly about the Privities will be pained, there will
be a Fever, and the Body bound, and the Urine stopped, the Back will ach, and
she will stammer. Afterward the Legs, Feet, and Belly will swell, and the
Urine be red, bloody, and pain over all the Body, especially the Neck and
Backbone, and Groyns, and so they die of a Dropsy. Thus far Hippocrates. But
here is a doubt, because the Author says, That in the sixth month the Disease
is incurable, when Experience teaches the contrary: and Hippocrates himself,
4. Epid. reports that a Maid who had her Terms stopped for seven Years, was
restored to health by the return of them. Hippocrates may be reconciled to
himself, by saying, That after six months the Disease is incurable, when the
Terms are in the Body or Cavity of the Womb, because there they putrefie, and
come to suppuration, as in the Afterbirth, or Blood retained. But this is not
to be understood of every Suppuration.

That Stoppage is least dangerous which comes from plenty of good Blood, or
fat, bleeding, or other Evacuations, because those Causes may easily be removed.

That is harder to be cured which comes from heaviness of Humors, Obstruction
of Vessels, or straitness, because that stubborn Humor, getting into the
innermost passages, cannot be got forth but by long pains and Medicines, which
Women are very unwilling to receive.

That stoppage which comes from the distemper only of the Womb, is worst,
because the part being hurt by propriety is hard to be cured by reason of the
continual flux of Humors, which the part is disposed to receive, and therefore
is called the Jakes of the whole Body.

The Cure of this Disease is diverse, according to the variety of the Causes.
And first, if it come from too much blood, you must abate the quantity by
Phlebotomy in the Arm; for if the lower veins should be first opened, the blood
would be drawn more to the Womb, where it would make greater obstruction and
distention of Vessels, and break them, or cause Inflammation of the Womb.

After the Plethory, or abundance of blood is taken away, you must draw the
blood down by opening the lower Veins about the time that the Patient used
before to be cleansed, as also by Frictions, Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, dry,
and with Scarrification.

These things done, you must relax and soften the parts of the Womb with
Fomentations, and Baths, and moistening Unguents; which if they cannot master
the Disease, you may give Hysterical Purges, and such as do properly provoke
the Terms, which we shall after descrhibe, cusing the mildest.

If want of Blood be the cause, as after long Fevers, great Evacuations, and
Extenuation of the Body, you must not provoke them till you have used
Restoratives, and blood be renewed, and whatsoever is the cause of extenuation
be removed; which things being done, the Terms do commonly flow of themselves;
which if they do not, but Nature forgets her office, you must open the inferior
Veins, and use the Medicines before mentioned, so that you take not away too
much blood, because the strength is little, and lest the Patient fall into a
Consumption. But here you must diligently mark, That every extenuation of the
body does not signify want of blood, but only after great evacuations and
consuming Causes; for it comes to pass sometimes, that the Terms stopped in the
Veins get an evil quality, which makes the blood unfit to nourish: hence comes
leanness, although the Veins be filled with much bad blood, and then large
bleeding is very good, as Galen confirms, Comment. 3. in Lib. 6. Epid. I (says
he) cured a Woman that had her Courses stopped eight months, when she was lean
by drawing much blood; as also others. But what happened to that famous Woman
was remarkable; I opened a Vein when other Physicians feared the success, and
were against me, saying that it must hurt her, not only because she was lean,
but also because she had no stomach to eat. But these young Physicians had a
more Sophistical way, to observe what happened to the Patients, and to neglect
the affects and Causes, which are the ground of Cure. I took (to my best
remembrance) the first day, a pint and an half of blood from the woman; the
next day one pint; the third, not above half a pint, or eight ounces. Thus
Galen. By which it is manifest, That from lean women, of this disease, you may
take a great quantity of blood, although the women of our Age will not endure
it.

The stoppage of the Courses comes from a preposterous motion of the blood,
when it is sent forth by the Nose, Vomiting, spitting, or Hemorrhoids, and the
like: The Cure is by repelling it from those parts, and bringing it to the
passage of the Womb. First (while they bleed) you must wash Arms, Head, and
Face, with cold Water, and keep them from the use of those parts, especially
loud speaking; then you must open a Vein beneath. Two or three days before
they bleed, apply Cupping-glasses to the Thighs and Calves of the Legs,
sometimes dry, sometimes with scarrification; by provoking the Hemorrhoids, by
Frictions, Ligatures, Walking, Fomentations, Baths of opening Herbs, Ointments,
Pessaries, Clysters for the Womb, and the like, which shall be described
hereafter. The use of a Natural Bath is principally commended, if it be of
brimstone or Bitumen; into which let the Patient go often, long before, and
after meat, not above the Wast, and at the same time, let the upper parts be
cooled with a Fan, lest by the heat of the Bath, they also wax warm.

If Blood flow from the Hemorrhoids being diverted from the Womb, it is hard to
be cured; for if you use Attractions to the lower parts, they will go by stool,
and if you use Astringents below, they will repel from the womb by the neerness
of parts. Therefore there is no way of Cure but this, That after you have used
Attractive things beneath, you apply Topical Medicines to the Womb, which may
draw the Humor now in motion, more unto the Womb.

But that Suppression of the Courses is of all other most frequent, which is
caused by obstruction of the Veins of the Womb. The Cure whereof, is in a
manner the same which has been propounded in the Case of Pale and discolored
Virgins, some things only being added, which do more specifically respect the
Womb.

In the first place therefore, All those things may be used in their order one
after another, which have been prescribed for the Cure of the Green Sickness.
And for the most part it falls out that the Obstructions of the Bowels being
opened, the Courses flow of their own accord: whose Eruption may yet be
furthered by the use of such things as cause the Humors to work downwards; as
opening of the Inferior Veins, about that time when the Courses have been wont
to come down; or instead of Blood-letting, Cupping-Glasses fastened unto the
Hips and Ankles, both without and with Scarrification, frictions of the same
parts, and painful bindings.

If the Disease be so rebellious as not to give way to the former Remedies, we
must proceed to such as by a proper and specifical virtue, do move the Courses,
which are wont to be used under diverse forms. And in the first place, most
effectual Pouders, and grateful to the Taste, are thus made:

Take Cinnamon and Amber, of each one scruple: Saffron half a scruple. Mix all,
and make them into a Powder, to be taken diverse mornings one after another. Or,

Take Powder of the Roots of Madder, such as Diers use, and Sugar Poudered, of
each one ounce. Mix them, divide all into three parts; of which, give one at
the time in which the Courses should flow, early in the morning in hot Wine,
while the Patient is yet in her bed; wherein let her continue five hours, well
covered with clothes. If her courses shall not flow the next course of the
Moon, at the wonted time, give her the second part: If yet they come not, give
her the third part at the third return of the time of her Courses. Or,

Take Roots of round Birthwort half a dram: Savin Leaves dried one dram and an
half: Dictamnus Cretensis, and Troches of Mirrh, without Assafoetida, because
of the strong smell, of each one dram: Elect Cinnamon two drams: white Sugar
two ounces. Make all into a most fine Powder, of which let her take two drams
in the morning for certain days together, with broth of red Vetches, wherein
two drams of Cinnamon, and half a dram of Saffron have been boiled.

Most excellent Pills are made after this manner:

Take Troches of Mirrh one dram: Castorium half a scruple. With Juice of
Mugwort make small Pills.

Among familiar Medicines easily provided, are accounted the flowers of
Lavender eaten with Honey many days together, or Conserve of Mary-gold
flowers, given to the quantity of two drams at a time.

The Blood of a wild Goat, and likewise of a tame one, has mighty virtue to
bring down the stopped Courses according to that preparation and dose
propounded in our Cure of the Pleurisy.

In hot Constitutions, Cream of Tartar used many days together in Broth, or
some Melanchollydriving Decoction, does further the Courses stopped.

But the Pills of Montagnana are mightily praised, being thus compounded:

Take Troches of Mirrh one dram and an half: Parsley seed, Castorium, Cinnamon,
of each one scruple: Musk ten grains. With Juice of Smallage form all (being
poudered) into twenty two Pills, gilt with Gold. Let her take two in the
morning, or at her entrance into bed, for some days together. Or,

Take Madder Roots, and round Aristolochia, or Birthwort, of each three drams:
Agarick and Cinnamon, of each one dram: Saffron one scruple: With Juice of
Mugwort, make a Mass of Pills; whose dose is one dram.

Old Leven is commended by many, the quantity of a Chestnut, with the same
quantity of Sugar, given three days together. Yet it will do more good, if
powder of the Troches of Mirrh, Dictamnus, or some such like be mixed therewith.

The most usual and profitable Decoctions are made in this manner:

Take Roots of Parsley, and great Madder, of each two ounces: red Vetches four
pugils: boil them to a pint and an half. In the strained Liquor boil Cinnamon
Powder one dram: Saffron half a dram: Honey as much as shall suffice: mix them.
Let her take six ounces warm, in the mornings twice a day, before her Courses
break forth, or when they begin to flow, if they flow but sparingly. Or,

Take Roots of Smallage, Asparagus, Fennel, of each one ounce: Feaverfew,
Maidenhair, Nep, Peny-royal, of each one handful: Boil all to a quart. To four
ounces of the straining, ad one ounce of Syrup of Mugwort. Let her drink it hot
twice a day as before. Or,

Take Cyperus Roots, Angelica, Valerian, and Madder of the Diers, of each half
a dram: Leaves of Mugwort Peny-royal, Savin, of each half a handful: Seeds of
Carrots and Seseleos, of each one dram: Dictamnus Cretensis one dram and an
half: Choice Cinnamon four scruples: Saffron one scruple; make a Decoction to
four ounces. In the straining add Syrup of Mugwort and Hysop, of each ha^f an
ounce: make a Julep for one dose. Let her take it every other day.

Quercetanus in his Pharmacopoeia, does exceedingly commend two Decoctions: the
first of which is thus made:

Take Gromwelseed, Annis seed, Misselto of the Oak, of each three drams:
Dictamnus Cretensis one dram: Saffron one scruple. Beat what is to be beaten,
and steep all in rich white Wine twenty four hours: afterward let them boil a
little. Of this Decoction give the Patient four ounces.

The other Decoction is thus described:

Take the whole Spleen or Milt of an Ox: cut it in bits, and put it in a
capacious Glass, so as it may fill the Glass half full, adding of Cinnamon
grossly poudered, one ounce: Cloves half an ounce: Saffron two drams: of the
best white Wine as much as shall suffice only to moisten all that is in the
Glass. Let the Glass closely stopped, be put into a Balneum Mariae exceeding
hot, so that it boil twenty four hours together, until the Spleen shall be
boiled and consumed into little crumbs, and there remains a great quantity of
Broth excellently well boiled, and of a very fragrant smell; of which let the
Patient take in the marning four ounces, continuing the same for four or five
days, when her Courses ought to flow.

Distilled Waters ought to be preferred before other Liquors, as being more
pleasant to the taste: and because of their subtle thinness of parts, they
pierce more easily to the obstructed Vessels of the Womb.

The Pre-eminence above all the rest, is by Mercatus, Rodericus a Castro, and
Sennertus, given to this following:

Take a Loaf almost as sour as Leaven, indifferently baked, and hot; take away
the Crust, and add thereto, of Honey twelve ounces, Pounder of Nettle seeds,
Carrot seeds, Amy, Annis and Fennel seeds, of each one dram: Troches of Gallia
Moschata, red Mirrh, of each one scruple: Cotula foetida, or stinking Fennel,
half a dram. Infuse all in three pints of the Decoction below described, which
is made of red French Beans, and red Vetches, of each half a pugil: Juniper
berries one ounce: Roots of Madder, Butchers Broom, wild Rhadish, Asparagus,
Smallage, and Parsley, of each two ounces: Green Germander one handful: Seeds
of Amy, Annis, and Fennel, of each two ounces: Boil all according to Art. Then
still the liquor out in Balneo Mariae; of which give to the Patient two ounces
early in the morning. Also there may be added Syrup of Maidenhair, of Opening
roots, of Mugwort. Also the Dose may be augmented, the following days, if the
Stomach be not offended.

A Decoction of Guajacum or Sassafras is good in phlegmatic bodies, also
Dictamnus Creticus may be added; taking the same twelve or fifteen days
without sweating. Jacchinus relates an Experiment thereof, writing upon the
ninth of Rhasis, Chap. 66. I boiled (says he) the Indian wood, and added
Dictamnus thereto. By which I procured both her Courses, and Childbearing to a
Woman which had wanted her Courses five years, and had been Barren.

The Chemists commend Tartarum, Vitriolatum, Spirit of Tartar, M^xtura
Spirital^s, Salts of Mugwort, Bawm, Celondine roots, and Valerian.

This Treacle-Water following is mervailously effectual to this intent.

Take old Venice-Treacle five ounces, Red Alexandrian, Mirrh two ounces and an
half, Elect Cinnamon, Oriental Saffron, of each half a dram; Camphire two
drachms. Pour upon them of the best Spirit of Wine, till it stand three singers
breadth above the Ingredients, and draw out the Tincture with a gentle heat,
whereunto being poured off without straining, add a sixth part of the Spirit of
Tartar; The Dose is one spoonful with some appropriate Water, or Wine.

Whilst the aforesaid Remedies are in Use, Clysters frequently injected are
exceeding good, because the Womb does rest upon the straight Gut, or Intestinum
Rectum; and they may thus be compounded.

Take roots of Lillies one ounces, of Orice and Valerian, half an ounce of
each, of Mercury leaves two handfuls, Mugwort and Savine of each one handful,
Chamomel flowers and Lavender, of each one pugil, Seeds of Caraway and Nigella
of each one dram; boil al to one pint. In the strained Liquor dissolve of Hiera
simplex, and Benedicta Laxativa, of each half an ounce, Oleum Che^rinum two
ounces, Electuarium de Baccis Lauri half an ounce. Mix al into a Clyster,

Yea, And the truth is Purgations repeated at certain convenient seasons will
be very good, which may be in diverse manners prepared.

And in the first place Galen exceedingly commends the Pills of Hiera, simple
and compound; because over and above their purging of superfluous humors, they
have a faculty of opening the narrow passages, and of clensing the Womb. Or,

Take Aloes three drachms: Mass of Cochie pills one dram, with juice of
Savine form twenty pills; of which give the Patient three before dinner, every
third day. Or,

Take Aloes one dram: Choice Rhubarb one dram and an half: Diagrydium one
scruple: Mirrh and Asarum roots of each half a dram: Spicknard one scruple.
With Syrup of Mugwort make a Mass of Pil-Paste. The dose is from two scruples,
to a dram, made into pills. Or,

Take of the Mass of Chochie-pil-paste half a dram: Mercurius dulcis twenty
grains, with Syrup of Roses solutive form eight pills, or six, Let her swallow
them early in the morning.

Also outwardly, the Courses suppressed, are wont to be helped with these Topic
Medicaments following, which must be outwardly applied, to widen the passages,
make thin the humors, and to rouse and awake the Expulsive faculty.

Take roots of Briony, Lillies, Cyperus, Valerian, Angelica, Asarum, Orice, and
of Parsley, of each an ounce Leaves of Mugwort, Baies. Rue, Savine, Time,
Rosemary, Penyroyal, Nep, Mallows, Mercury, of each one handful: Flowers of
Elder, Cheiri, Chamomel, of each two pugils: Juniper berries two ounces: Boil
all in Water and white Wine, with the strainings, let the Patients belly and
the parts about the Privities be fomented with a sponge.

With the same Decoction, the Quantity of Ingredients being augmented, may be
made a Bath to ^it in; wherein the Patient may sit up to her Navil, and the
boiled Herbs being put into a bag must be applied to her belly. But let her
take heed of sweating, which does stop the Courses.

Take Oil of Lillies, Dill and Rue, of each one ounce and an half: Generous
Wine three ounces: Squinanth, roots of Bindweed, Angelica, the two Birthworts
and Savin leaves of each half an ounce. Let them boil till the Wine be
consumed. Let them be strained and the Oil pressed out; wherewith warmed, let
the share and parts about the Privities be anointed, after fomentation, or
sitting in the Bath.

Moist suffumigations are made of the Vapor of the Decoction for the
Fomentation, and for the sitting-Bath, which being moderatly heated, must be
covered with a cover that has a hole in it, whereunto must be fastened a long
pipe, which must reach into the neck of the Womb, through which let her receive
the smoke morning and evening, being covered with clothes*

A dry Suff^^migation may be thus made.

Take Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, of each two drachms: Juniper berries half an
ounce: Nigella seeds one dram: Storax two drachms. Make all into a gross
powder, which being laid on Coals, let her receive the smoke into the Womb,
after her manner aforesaid. Or,

Take Storax two drachms: Frankincense one dram: Benjamin, Alipta Moschata,
of each half an ounce: Cloves, Lignum Aloes, Cinnamon of each two scruples:
With the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, extracted with Cinnamon Water, make little
Cakes for to burn as aforesaid.

Pessaries may be made after this manner.

Take of leaves of Mercury bruised one handful: Powder of Hiera picra, and
Benedicta Laxativa, of each two drachms: Powder of long Birthwort one dram:
Honey and juice of Mercury, as much as shall suffice, make all into a Pessary,
Or,

Take of Agarick, Mirrh, of each two drachms: Galbanum half a dram: Saffron
one scruple: With clarified Honey make all into a Pessarie, which put into a
warm thin rag, and conveigh into the Womb; but let it not abide long there for
fear of inflammation.

Pilulae Cochiae minores, brought into the form of a Pessarie, does excellently
move the Courses.

Also injections are wont to be made into the Womb, which are wont to be called
Womb-Clysters; for they wash away the filth which cleaves to the sides of the
Womb, and they open the internal Orifices of the Veins. Now they are made of
the Decoction of the Fomentation aforesaid, ^leaving out the more sharp things;
or with a Decoction of fat Figs, with Mugwort, Penyroyal, and Mercury; or of
the juice of Mercury alone, purified, in which a little Benedicta Laxativa is
dissolved. For we must by no means use more sharp Ingredients for fear of
Inflammation. Yea, and after the use of the aforesaid Injections, which ought to
be retained but an hour; it will be good to Inject a Decoction of Mallows,
Barley, and Violet leaves, or a little Hydromel tempered with Whey of
Goats-Milk*

In an old inveterate Disease, Issues made in the Legs may do very much good.
For although Sennertus approves not of them, because they rather derive from
the Womb, and teach the humors which were wont to flow unto the Womb, to come
rather that way, and hinder their inclinations to the Womb: Yet have they been
found to do much good by the frequent experiences of Mercurialis, Varandaeus,
and others. For by those Issues the superfluous humors are continually
evacuated, and the Course of the humors is guided into the inferior parts. And
the derivation of superfluous humors from the Womb, is so far from hindering the
Flux of Courses to the Womb; that it rather furthers the same, by making the
Blood more pure, and more obedient to the command of Nature, which with the
Humors aforesaid, is not drawn unto the Issues. And hereunto, that these
Humors, if they be not by these ways evacuated, being retained inthe Veins,
they double the Obstructions, and so do augment the suppression of Courses.
Howbeit, We are of opinion, that the menstrual purgations being restored to
their due Course, the Issues ought to be closed up, that Nature may accustom
her self to exclude superfluous Humors by the Womb.

In the Use of the Remedies aforesaid, some precepts are to be observed worthy
of Note.

First, That we must never use Medicines that move the Courses, but after
Universal Purgations; least the Humors being plentifully carried to the Veins
of the Womb should increase Obstructions; or being much attenuated, should
reach into other parts of the Body, and produce grievous Diseases. As Schenkius
relates in his Observations, that a Physician of Venice gave a Woman that
wanted her Courses a certain Apozeme to move them, not having first purged her
Body of Phlegm; and a little after she had taken her Apozeme, she fell into a
Palsy.

Secondly, That in giving such things as bring down the Courses, we must begin
with the gentler, proceeding by little and little to such as are stronger.

Thirdly, That Medicaments procuring the Flux of the Courses, must be given in
greater quantity than ordinary, because their virtue is abated in their long
passage from the Stomach unto the Womb.

Fourthly, That the Medicaments aforesaid, are to be given either in the
morning, when the Patient is fasting, or sometimes at her going into, or coming
out of the Bath: For so the Medicine slipping into a warm and opened Body, does
powerfully exercise it is strength; and this it does yet more effectually, if it
be given a little before the inferior Veins be opened.

Fifthly, That Pessaries, and Womb-Clysters, or Injections, are only to be
prescribed to married Women, and such as have been carnally embraced by Men;
but to Virgins we must prescribe Nascalia (viz. Wool dipped in the Medicament)
Fomentations, Baths to sit in, and Suffumagations.

Sixthly, In Choleric or Melanchollick Constitutions, all hot Medicaments are
to be avoided, and only the gentler and milder sort are to be used; and with
them temperate Aperitines, or openers, as also moistning and softning
Medicaments are to be mixed.

Chap. 3. Of the Immoderate Flux of the Courses.
Women's monthly Courses, being moderate in quantity, and flowing in due season,
are Natural: But if they exceed in quantity, or come too often, or stay too
long: They are to be accounted Immoderate, and besides the intent of Nature.

The Causes of this Immoderate coming down of the Courses, are the same which
(we in it is proper place have showed) do concur to Cause spitting of Blood;
viz. An opening of the ends of the Veins, a soaking of the blood through the
Coats of the Veins, a forcible rending of the Veins, and heir being eaten
through by sharp humors; all which are caused by the bloods over great
abundance, Heat, Thinness, or Sharpness: By some blow, fall, or wound: Which we
have at large declared in our Speculations touching spitting of blood, so that
it is needless here to repeat the same. Let the reader be pleased to peruse
that Chapter.

The Signs of this Infirmity, are either of the Disease it self, or of it is
Cause. Immoderate Flux of the Courses is known by the il-bearing of the
Patient, decay of strength, want of appetite to meat, indigestion of Humors,
ill Habit of the whole Body, color of face like a dead Corpse, swelling of the
Legs, and other more grievous maladies, caused by decay of Natural heat past
away in the Blood.

To know the Causes, observe these signs following: A thin Habit of Body, and
softness of the Flesh, with such a diet as tends to increase the wheyish, and
thinner parts of the Blood; and especially the Blood it self appearing thin and
watery, in the clothes coming from the Patient, does show that the Blood has
soaked through the Veins.

That the Immoderate Flux is caused by an opening of the ends of the Veins, or
a breaking of their Coats, is known by the Foregoing of Wounds, Falls, or
Bruises; by the use of dancings, long outcries, carrying unusual weights by a
Person corpulent and full of Blood: By some foregoing great heat, extreme Cold,
Immoderate carnal embraces, great Anger, and the like. The same may also happen
after fore labor in Childbirth, or by the unskilful handling of a Midwife;
after a miscarriage, or after a long stoppage of the monthly Blood, which makes
the same being collected in too a great quantity, breaks out on a sudden with
violence.

That there is an Exulceration in the Womb, whereby the Veins are eaten
through, appears by the Bloods dropping out by little and little with a sense
of pain and sharpness; and by the Bodies being replenished with salt and sharp
Humors. Also the blood which comes away, is at first Matterish, Wheyish,
Blackish, or Yellow; and afterward if the Exulceration increase, some bits of
the parts affected are eaten off, whereupon follows a great effusion of Blood,
hard to be stopped. Also there have proceeded such things as are wont to breed
bad Blood, such as are the use of sharp things in Diet, the use of Salt meats,
of meats putrefied, and such like.

As for the Predictions belonging to this infirmity, we are to know that, all
large and long-lasting Issues of Blood are dangerous; especially those from the
Womb, which hurts not only her that suffers them, but hinders posterity.

That which comes by a soaking of the Blood through the Veins, is of al others
the least dangerous, as causing less expense of heat and Spirits, yet it
continues longer, by reason of the continual supply of raw and Wheyish Blood.

The breaking of Veins, and the opening of their mouths, cause greater danger,
because they do suddenly Issue forth great quantities of Blood; yet are they
sooner cured, as happening for the most part, only in Bodies over full of Blood,
and otherwise healthy.

But of all others, that which Springs from Exulceration is most hard to cure,
because where the Ulcer is, there some part of the substance of the Veins is
perished, which hinders the growing together again of that breach, whence the
Blood Issues.

If the sick party grow daily weaker and weaker, and the Disease stronger and
stronger, it portends her death.

In an elderly Woman, over great Flux of her Courses, is commonly incurable,
and deadly.

The Cure of Immoderate Flux of Courses, must be in a manner the same, which we
have prescribed to cure the immoderate running of the Hemorroids.

For in the first place, to draw the Blood from the part affected, the Patient
must bleed in her Arm, not all at once, but by degrees, now and then stopping
the Orifice with your singer, and then letting it bleed again. She must bleed
plentifully, as much as her strength can bear. For Hollerius in his Comment
upon the 50. Aphor. of the 5. Sect. does testify that he has seen many Women
cured by large Blood-letting, when the Issue of their Blood, could by no other
remedies be stopped.

Rubbings, Bindings, and Cupping-glasses, ate good to cause revulsion, as in
the cure aforesaid we have showed, especially if the Cupping-Glasses be
fastened upon her Dugs, according to that Sentence of Hippocrates; If you would
stop a Woman's Courses, fasten a very large Cupping-Glass unto her Dugs:
Howbeit, if upon the setting on of the Cupping-glass, she grow short breathed,
you must quickly take it off again.

Likewise the same Purgation may serve which we propounded in the Cure of the
Hemorrhoids; and it must be reiterated once or twice in a week, until the
impurity of the Bowels, and the Veins be taken away. For when the Chollerick
and Wheyish Humors are taken away, which make the blood thin and sharp it
leaves running of it self. If the Wheyish parts seem most to abound, Mechoacan
with Rhubarb will be a good Purge.

A Vomit likewise does powerfully draw the Blood upwards, and is commended by
Hippocrates, in his Second Book of Women's Infirmities. But the Vomit must be
gentle, and often repeated. Also it may suffice for the Patient to put her
finger into her Throat, and so procure Vomit: Yea, and the Truth is, it may
serve the turn, and will be very profitable for her to provoke her self to
Vomit before her Dinners, but so as not to vomit, only to use some forcing
thereunto. Unto which Remedies, these which follow may profitably be added, as
being tried by very learned Physicians.

Take the Shells of two new laid Eggs burnt, Frankincense, Mastich, of each half
an ounce: Pearls prepared, red Coral prepared, and Amber, of each two drains:
Boodstone and Smaragd prepared, of each half a scruple: Barley made without
Bran, two pugils: four whites of Eggs, and if need be, add a little Water, in
which red hot Steel has been quenched, and make two Cakes, which must be baked
so hard in an Oven, that they may be beaten to Powder. Of which Powder give
from half a dram to a dram early in the morning, in a draught or mess of Broth
made of Sheeps Trotters.

John Michael Paschalius does witness that many Women long troubled with this
Infirmity, have been cured with this Powder.

Also the Powder of Egg-shels alone is commended, a dram there of being given
diverse mornings together; and it is accounted by some for a Secret.

Forest^^ commends the following Powder, which he says was one of the Secrets
of his Doctor or Instructor, Helidaeus.

Take a Turtle Dove moderately fat, draw it, and wash it with astringent red
Wine, and Rose Water ming^^d together, and put an ounce of Mastich in the Belly
of it, and sow up the belly that none of the Mastich may fall out: Then roast
it upon a Spit, and instead of Butter, bast it with Vinegar of Roses, and save
the fat which shall drop from it for your use. When it is excellently well
roasted, put it into a new glazed pot or pipkin, closed up with such Materials
as the Chemists use to close their Vessels with, that nothing may vapor out.
Then let it be set into the Oven, till it be so dry that it may be bea^^n into
a Powder, Of which Powder, let the Patient take one spoonful every morning in
Plan^ane Water, or in some astringent Decoction. And with the fat which was
reserved at the roasting, let the Reins of her back, her groins, and
Privy-part, with the share, be anointed.

Our Country-women have an ordinary Medicine of the flowers of the long-stalked
common Thistle, wherewith they use to curdle their Milk when they would make
Cheese. They administer these Flowers in Broth, or other convenient Liquor.
Others use of the Runnet of a Kid or an Hare, to ^^e quantity of ten grains,
which both stops the flowing of the Blood, and dissolves that which is clotted
together in the Womb.

^alen accounts Juice of Plantane newly made, to be the best Medicine in the
world, being given to the quantity of three or four ounces.

Solenander adds to the aforesaid Juice, a quantity of Colophony, and avouches
it to be remedy that never fails; his words are these: To stop an old flux of
the Courses, take two ounces of the Juice of Plantane, and mingle therewith a
dram of Colophony poudered, and give it the Patient to drink. Let her take it
four times, and she shall be undoubtedly healed, with Gods Blessing.

The Juice of Yarrow is very convenient in this case, if two or three ounces
thereof be given with Syrup of Coral, or some other convenient Syrup.

The Juice of Nettles is no whit inferior to, or rather exceeds the former in
efficacy: It may be given alone, or in mixture with others of little faculty:
Or a Syrup may be made of Nettles, to be ever in a readiness.

A Water drawn out of the most tender Oak Leaves, which are of a reddish color,
stops the aforesaid flux.

Mercatus makes up a very effectual Water, after this manner:

Take a Loaf made of Wheat Flower, Barley Meal, and Rice: break it in pieces,
and power upon it seven pints of Water in which red hot Steel has been
quenched: Whereunto add, red Rose Leaves dried, three pugils: juice of Plantane
a pound: the Roots of the larger Comfry, being green and braised, two ounces:
the Herb Hors-tail, or Shave-grass, one handful: the pulp Choak-^ears, and
Quinces, of each two ounces: Purslain two handfuls: Bole Armonick one ounce:
Balaustians, and the three sorts of Sanders, of each half an ounce. Let all
these be distilled in an Alembick. Let Patient take of this Water three ounces
mixed with half an ounce of Syrup of Purslain, or of dried Roses.

For the more tender sort of Women, Broths may be made of Calves feet, with
Plantane Leaves, or Bloodwort. Or to thicken the Blood, a Broth may be made of
red Rose Water alone, and the Yolks of new laid Eggs. Likewise Conserve of
Bramble Roses is good for them, being often used, especially if their Liver be
distempered with heat.

In all Fluxes of Blood, Practitioners do use to administer Water and Vinegar
in a large quantity to be drunk down. But in this Flux of the Courses it is to
be feared as an Enemy to the Womb, which is a Menbranous Part.

Among the Specific or appropriated Medicines, are reckoned, Filipendula
Roots, with the outer Rind of the Mulberry-tree Root, whose Pouders are
administered to the quantity of a dram, in some convenient Liquor.

The Flowers of the Nut-trees are gathered when they are ripe and ready to
fall, and poudered, and adram given in a Cup of Wine warmed in the mornings,
for diverse days together. Solenander witnesses that all are cured with this
Medicament. Also it has a peculiar propriety to help fits of the Mother.

Spicknard in very fine Powder, and taken to a dram in some convenient Liquor,
stops the Courses: Also being conveyed into the Womb in Lint, Wool, Cotton,
rude Silk, etc.

Milk in which red hot Steel has been quenched, being drunk many days
together, is very effectu^lin an old flux of the Courses; for it the sharpness
of the Humors, and thickens them; it nourishes the Body, and stops the Flux.
Avicenna, Rhasis, and the rest of the Arabian Physicians, extol this Medicine
to the Skies: and so does Horatius Augenius, a noted Italian Phylitian. Yet it
is not to be used, if we suspect the Body is not yet clear of the vicious
Humors.

The Acid Mineral Springs, whether they have their Tincture from Vitriol, Iron,
or Alum Mines, do much conduce to the stoppage of immoderate Courses, both by
removing the Causes, and by strengthening the Bowels affected.

The Chemists do much commend the Tincture of Coral, and Vitriolum Martis
[Vitriolated Steel] and many other Medicines, which you shall find in their
Books.

Let the Patient use to drink the Decoction of Mastich, Yarrow, or of the dried
Lentisch, or Mastich tree. Also the Lentisch or Mastich Wood, may be steeped in
black harsh Wine, which does very much strengthen the Bowels, and stop
defluxions.

It must be diligently remembered, That in an old Flux, very astringent and
thickening Medicaments, are not to be used long together. For it is to be
feared, lest they should fill, straighten, and shut up the secret passages of
the Body, and so breed Obstructions, and very much hurt the principal Bowels,
which are wont to suffer very much in this Disease. But it is much better to
persist in the use of such things as strengthen the Liver, which have some
astriction, but so moderate as can do no harm.

Ludovicus Septalius in his Medicinal Animadversions, in the 144. Article,
gives such commendations of the Decoction of Orange Peels, as of a Medicine
that never fails, that it will worth our while to transcribe his very words.
When such Medicines as these (quoth he) have been judiciously administered; in
the next place, such Medicines as havea thickening and astringing quality are
to be used; among which there is one which I cannot omit to set down, wherewith
I have cured almost an infinite Number of Women troubled with this Infirmity;
which I kept long as a Secret, and afterward communicated to some young
Students, whom I did inform in the Art of practicing Physic, and now publish
the same to the whole World for the good of Mankind: which Medicine has scarce
ever failed me, when there was no Vessel of the Womb exulcerated, that fed the
Flux. It is a Medicine, easily gotten, and easily made, thus:

Take Seven pints of Water; boil therein the rinds of three sour Orrenges not
thoroughly ripe, being cut into little thin bits or chips, and boil them till
two parts of the Water be consumed. Give eight or nine ounces of the strained
Liquor to the Patient in the morning to drink. If you would have it more
effectual, put an handful of Mous-ear into it, when it is almost boiled. And it
will be yet more powerful, if you boil it in Tunbridg water, or the like
Medicinal Spring water: or if you boil the aforesaid Ingredients in eight pints
of water, till two third parts be consumed, and then strain it, and quench red
hot Steel diverse times therein.

Externally this flux may be stopped by Medicaments applied to the outward
parts of the Patients Body.

And in the first place, Fomentations may be thus made:

Take the Roots of Bistort [Adder-wort] Tormentil, and the peels of
Pomegranates, of each one ounce: The Leaves of Plantane, Knot-grass,
Shepheards-purse, and Hors-tail, of each one handful; Cypress Nuts,
Balaustians, Myrtle-berries, Sumach, of each one ounce: Boil them in Water that
has had Iron quenched in it, and in red harsh Wine mixed together. Strain out
the liquor, and Bath therewith, the whole Share and Privy-parts, warmish, but
not hot.

Also, Boil a piece of Sea-sponge in strong Vinegar, and lay it upon the
Patients Share, and Privities, and it will powerfully stop the immoderate Flux
of Courses.

A Bath made of the aforesaid Decoction, the Dose Being augmented, will be good
for the Patient to sit in: But care must be taken that it be not hot, but only
warmish; otherwise it will by it is heat, the more open the Veins of the Womb. A
Bath made of the Decoction of Alum is very effectual; but it causes
barrenness.

After Fomenting and Bathing, the Patient must be anointed upon her Loins, her
Share, and Privities, and between the Watergate, and the Dung-gate (which
space is called Perinoeum, and wants an English name) with an Ointment made as
follows.

Take Oil of Mirtles, of Mastich, and of Quinces, of each one ounce:
Bole-Armoniack, Dragons-blood, and Carabe, of each one dram: Vinegar one
spoonful. Make all into an Ointment.

Vnguentum Comitissa may also be used, or Vnguentum de bolo newly made, or this
following Cerate, which is very effectual.

Take Ship-pitch half anounce: Male Frankincense one ounce: Mastich half an
ounce: Turpentine one ounce: Dragons-blood, Red Roses, of each two drams. Make
thereof a Cerate to be applied to the Reins of the Back.

Plasters are also profitably applied unto the Navil, and Loins, made of the
Mass of Plaster against Ruptures, the Plaster against the Mother, and of
Mastich Plaster, either alone, or mingled together: Or of the Plaster of Vigo
for Fractures, which is most excellent; and works it is effect without heating
the Part.

The following Cataplasmes, are much more effectual, and very prevalent in a
large Flux of Blood, causing danger of Death.

They are made, either of Bole-armoniack, incorporated with juice of Plantane
and a little Vinegar, and so applied.

O^ of Plaster of Paris, lib. 1. incorporated with ten drachms of Gum-Arabick
one pound toasted at the fire, and laid upon the Parts aforesaid in
Cotton-Wool: The Whites of four Eggs being first mingled with it. Solenander
says, that this Cataplasm stops al Women's Fluxes in one day.

A Cataplasm, or Pultis made of Nettles, fried in a Pan, and laid upon the
Share and Privities, works more kindly than the former; rather by a specifical
property, then by it is astringency.

Injections made of juy ce of Plantane alone, are likewise conveyed into the
Womb by an Instument for that purpose; which is very effectual, and much cried
up by Practitioners. Juice of Knot-grass may be used to the same intent. And
sometimes we are wont to add to the aforesaid Juyces, of the Mucilage, of Gum
Tragacanth one ounce: Starch one dram: Water of Rose-stalks, and Seeds three
ounces, which are mixed, and Injected into the Womb. Or,

Take of the leaves of Knot-grass, Plantane, Yarrow, Shepherds-purse,
Hors-tail, of each half a handful: Boil all in Water sufficient to half a pint.
In the strained liquor dissolve three drams of Acacia, Dragons-blood,
Bole-Armoniack, and Boodstone, of each one ounce: Mix all, and make thereof a
Clyster for the Womb.

A Fume made with Vinegar, poured upon a red hot Iron Plate, and received by
the Patient sitting over a Close-stool, is very profitable; or a Fume may be
compounded after this manner.

Take of Frankincense, and Mastich, of each two ounces: Mirtles and Labdanum,
of each one ounce: Amber, Red Roses, Balaustians, of each half a dram: With
the infusion of Gum Tragacanth in Red-Rose Water, make Cakes to burn under a
stool as before.

John Michael Paschalius does test me that he cured a Woman troubled near seven
months with this Disease, with the smoke of burnt Frogs: and he affirms that
the smoke of a Mules Hoof, is an experimented Remedy, wonderfully effectual in
this Case.

Astringent Pessarles, are likewise usual in this Cure. Howbeit, they profit
little, seeing they can hardly reach unto the Orifice of those Veins, which are
opened in this Disease. But if the Veins of the Neck of the Wombare opened,
they may be useful; and are thus Compounded.

Take of Juice of Plantane, or Knot-grass two ounces: Troches of Carabe in
powder, and Acacia, of each one arachm* *Mix them with the White of an Egg,
roll them in silk, and make a Pessary. Or*

Take of the powder of Hyposistis, Acacia, Bole-Armoniack, Dragons-blood,
Comfry roots, Lambs-tongue, Plantane, Galls, of each half a dram: Juice of
Purslain, or Plantane, or Syrup of Red Roses, or Myrtles, as much as shall
suffice, and with Cotton Wool make a Pessary.

Pessaries are likewise made of the leaves of Purslain, Plantane, or
Knot-grass, or some other convenient Herb bruised, and rouled in a piece of
fine Linen; or the Countesses Ointment wrapped in Wool, and put into the Womb.

Neither are we to neglect the washing of the Patients Legs with cold Water, or
some astringent Decoction, which is commonly used by Practitioners, and does
not a little further the stoppage of the immoderate Courses.

Touching the administration of Topical Medicaments, it is to be observed, That
astringent Medicines, especially the stronger sort of them, are not to be
applied before sufficient Revulsions have been made, especially by
Blood-letting: for it is to be feared least they cause Tumors, or other worse
Diseases in the Womb. Wherefore always, as far as the Disease will allow time,
the Cure must be begun with internal Medicines of a thickening and astringent
Nature, before we make use of the Topical Medicines aforesaid.

This Method of Cure aforesaid may with Judgment be accommodated to the Flux of
Courses, arising either from an opening of the mouths of the Veins, or from a
dreining of the blood through their Coats, or from a breaking of the Coats of
the Veins: But if it arise from an eating or exulceration of the Coats of the
Veins, it ought to be cured after the same manner, as an Ulcer of the Womb is
cured, of which hereafter.

In the whole Course of the Disease, while the foresaid Medicaments are used,
care must be had to strengthen the Bowels, and to correct the vicious quality
of the Blood, as we showed in our Cure of the Hemorrhoids.

And to conclude, When the Flux is allaid, the same Rules of Prevention are to
be used in this disease, which we prescribed concerning the Hemorrhoids.

Chap. 4. Of the Whites.
A Woman is said to have the Whites, the Woman's Flux, the Flux of the Womb, or
the White Menstruals; when Excrementitious Humors do flow from her Womb, either
continually, or at least without any certain order, or course of time observed
in their flowing.

And the said Excrementitious Humors are sometimes white and phlegmatic, very
like to Whey, or Barley Cream; sometime they are pale, or yellow, or green by
the mixture of Choler; sometimes watery by the admixture of serous Humors:
sometimes blackish, by the admixture of Melancholy; sometimes sharp and
Corrosive, so as to eat into, and exulcerate some parts of the Womb; sometimes
they are of a strong and beastly smell, and other whiles again, not at all
offensive in that kind.

This Disease is wont to seize upon grown Women for the most part, and such as
are of riper Age; yet are not Virgins always free from the same: so that some
have done ill in daring to affirm, That such Maids as are troubled with this
disease, have parted from their Virginity, taking their Ground from the
straightness of those Passages Naturally: For if Virgins have the Veins of
their Wombs so large, that their wonted Courses can flow through them, why may
not the Whites likewise drop out by the same passages, seeing they are many
times more thin and fluxive than the Blood it self, as being wheyish and
chollerick. The same is confirmed by the produced Experience of most learned
Physicians, and daily Practice teaches me as much, viz. That the most chaste
and perfect Virgins in the World have had this Infirmity, of whom there could
be no suspicion that they had been corrupted. And Fernelius does witness, That
he saw a Girl eight years old which had this Disease, and was afterward a long
time grievously troubled therewith.

The Excrementitious Humors aforesaid, are bred either in the whole Body, or in
some principal Part of the Body, or in the Womb it self.

If the Humors flow from the whole Body, they proceed either from bad Diet, or
from a vicious habitual distemper of the whole Body, and they take their course
unto the Womb as unto a Sink, or Common-shoar, whereinto the rest of the parts
of the Body disburden themselves.

The particular parts, by whose consent the Womb suffers in this Disease, are
chiefly, the Brain, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and the Bladder, which
dispatch their Excrements unto such parts as are more weakly, and so more
disposed to receive them.

These Excrementitious Humors are bred in the Womb, because when it is unable
to digest its proper nourishment, by means of the weakness of its Retentive or
Concoctive Faculty, the greater part of its Aliment is turned into Excrements,
being imperfectly digested, or corrupted rather. It is imperfectly digested in
cold distempers of the Womb; and it is corrupted in hot distempers thereof. And
seeing the Womb by want of Digestion, is defrauded of its Nutriment, it
presently draws new Aliment, which being turned into Excrements, is by the Womb
expelled as unprofitable; and new Aliment is continually drawn, whereby this
flux of evil Humors from the Womb, becomes both plentiful and continual. The
Womb is weakened and more disposed to the Reception of these Excrements by
Childbearing, traveling in Childbirth, Abortion, and Contusion, Inflammation,
Imposthumes, or Ulcers.

The Signs of this Disease, are referred to the Infirmity it self, to the part
affected, or to the cause producing the Disease.

The Disease it self is easily known by relation of the sick party, and it is
often times attended with diverse Symptoms, viz. Paleness of Face, want of
Appetite, sickness of Stomach, short breathing, weakness, swelling of the Eyes,
fullness, pensiveness and sadness, thick Urines, turbulent, and many other
accidents, which differ according to the diversity of the Humors offending, as
we shall declare more distinctly by and by.

The part affected, and the place in which these Excrementitious Humors causing
the flux are bred, may beknown by these following tokens.

If the matter of the Flux is bred in the whole Body, these signs do show it;
viz. Weariness and heaviness not proceeding from any work, of which the Patient
is eased, having disburdened her self by the flux plentifully; and then again,
when new matter is collected, she begins to be weary and heavy as before; her
Veins are full; her Feet, Hands, and Thighs, are apt to be numbed. And these
signs do especially discover only a plenitude of Humors. But that corrupt
Humors do abound in the whole Body, is known by an evil habit in the whole Body
[that is, an ugly sickly appearance in the looks, and whole outward state of the
Body] a puffing up of the Hands and Feet, an itching and stinging in the whole
Body, if the Humor be sharp, and many such signs as these.

If the matter offending reside in some peculiar part; the Symptoms and
Excrements proper to that part, discover the same; as for example: A pain,
heat, and swelling of the Liver, with Chollerick Excrements, do show the Liver
to be affected; and the same Symptoms happening on the left side, with
Excrements of a Melanchollick appearance, do argue the flux to spring from the
Spleen: Phlegmatic Excrements, Stomach-sickness, want of Appetite, and sometimes
extreme Appetite, frequent corruption of the meat, and sour belchings, or fatty
(as of the Dripping-pan, or over-scorched flesh) are sure tokens of the
Stomachs faultiness.

Pain of the Head, Froathy Excrements, some usual evacuation by the mouth or
nostrils being stopped, do witness that flux springs from the Head. If none of
the aforesaid signs of some part affected appear, then we may conjecture that
the flux proceeds primarily from the womb. Also the Woman (in such a case) is
well colored, the matter flowing is but little in quantity, being the excrement
of the womb alone. There have preceded such causes as weaken the Womb, as are
hard Travel, Abortion, a Fall upon the Belly or Back, immoderate Carnal
Embraces, especially if the woman have been too young married, Tumors, Ulcers,
and other Infirmities of the Womb, whose signs are propounded in their proper
Chapters.

The Humor causing the Flux is known chiefly by the colors of that which comes
away, which were a little before declared, and which appear in the clothes
wherewith it is received, if, as Hippocrates teaches in his second Book of
Women's Infirmities, the said clothes being dried, shall be after washed in
Water alone, and dried in the shadow: for so they manifestly declare the color
of that Humor which most abounds in the Excrements. Hereunto may be added the
signs of an Humor abounding in the whole Body, usually delivered in that part of
the Institution of Physic, which treats of Signs.

In the last place, We are to propound such Signs as distinguish this Disease
from others like unto it; as namely, Excretion of Purulent matter proceeding
from an Ulcer of the Womb, and the Gonorrhoea, or flux of Seed.

It is distinguished from purulent Matter by the signs of an Ulcer in the Womb,
which shall be set down in their proper Chapter; as likewise, because the
Purulent Matter or Quittor, is much thicker, whitish, and lesser in quantity,
if it be digested rightly; but if it be of a goary, sanious, and fleshy
appearance, like blood and water mingled, there is then blood amongst the
matter, and it is wont sometimes to come away with strings from the Womb, and
with exceeding pain; also the Women that have Ulcers in the Womb or its Neck,
admit not of Copulation but with pain, which exasperates their Disease; but
those which are troubled only with the Whites, do willingly and patiently
suffer themselves to be embraced by their Husbands.

In the Gonorrhoea, the matter which comes away is not so much in quantity, is
thicker, of a more shining whiteness, holds up longer from flowing, and seldom
or never stinks. But if it be a virulent or venomous Gonorrhoea (such as
accompanies the Letchers Pocks) it is known by sharpness of Urine, Ulcers of
the Privy parts, and other Signs that argue Malignity.

The Predictions or Prognostics of this Disease, are as follows:

This Disease in one respect may be called good, in another respect bad: Good,
forasmuch as commonly it is not attended with any danger of death; and bad,
because it is a stubborn Disease, long lasting, and most exceeding hard to be
cured; forasmuch as the flux of evil Humors having once taken this course, is
very hardly turned out of its Channel, because the Womb (as we said before) is
the Draught of the whole Body, whereby even in time of Health, the superfluous
Humors of the whole Body are monthly evacuated.

If this Infirmity get head, it may bring many other Evils upon the Patient, as
Barrenness, falling down of the Womb, Exulceration, Cachexia, Dropsy, and
Consumption.

A Flux of Whites, bluish, bloody, stinking, is worse than the white, pale,
not stinking.

The longer this Disease has lasted, the harder it is to cure.

It attends old Women to the grave for the most part, because of their
abounding with phlegm, and the weakness of their Concoctive Faculty.

The Cure of this Disease is to be begun by a convenient purging of the Peccant
Humor And because ^legmatick and wheyish Humors do most commonly oftend, such
things as purge those Humors, must chiefly be used, and with them Purgers of
Choler, or Expellers of Melancholy must be mingled, according as Choler or
Melancholy is adjoined to the Humor offending. An Apozeme therefore may be
appointed both altering and purging for four or five days by way of a solemn
purgation, always remembering that to the purging Medicaments, some astringent
and corroborating things are to be added, lest the Humors of the Body being
stirred, should fall more abundantly into the Womb.

Touching Blood-letting, it is a question, whether it be convenient in this
Disease or not: For seeing this Flux is caused by ill Humors in the Body, which
by Blood-letting are drawn into the Veins and so may corrupt the Mass of Blood;
it seems there is in this case no place for bleeding. Also, since in this
lingering Disease, the Patients strength is much abated, and the Body often
brought into a Consumption, it seems unsit to weaken it yet more by
blood-letting, and so defrauding it of its nourishment. Which Controversy is
thus decided; That if the flux be not pure and simple, but in some measure
mingled with Blood, and it appear reddish, that then a Vein may be opened; as
also if the Liver be very much heated, and the sharpness of Choler be joined
with the flux. In other Cases, especially if the flux have endured long, it is
better to abstain from Blood-letting.

Bindings of the upper parts of the Body, and Cupping-glasses applied to the
shoulder-blades, and to the back, will be very useful to draw the Humors upward;
also rubbings of those parts will be specially profitable, first with finer and
softer clothes, than with rougher and courser, which Galen daily practiced upon
the Wife of Boethius, whom he cured in the space of thirteen days, as himself
relates in his Book of Prognostics dedicated to Posthumus, Chap. 8.

And besides the Universal Purgation already propounded, ordinary Purgations
are also to be administered, and frequently reiterated, that the superfluity of
Excrements may be the better evacuated by little and little, and that Nature
may get a custom to void those Humors by stool, which formerly had their
recourse unto the Womb. To this intent, Magisterial Syrups, Pills, and usual
Opiates may be compounded, suitable to the temper of the Patient, and the
Humors offending. In this Disease caused by ^legm, Mercatus commends a Syrup of
the Decoction of Lignum vitae, with Senna, Turbith, and Agarick; as also the
following Pills:

Take of the Mass of Pills of Hiera picra, one dram: Agarick trochiscated one
dram and an half: with Honey of Roses make them into Pills, of which let the
Patient take early in the morning six or seven every third day: afterward, only
three of them every fifth or sixth day.

Or for the greater Astriction, as well as purging, they may be thus compounded,
in whatever Complexion.

Take Choice Rhubarb oft-times sprinkled with the Juice of Roses, two drams:
Citrine colored, white and black Myrobalans steeped in the Juice of Roses, of
each one dram: Mastich one scruple: Spicknard half a scruple: With Syrup of
Roses make all into a Mass of Pills. Let the Dose be one dram twice in a week.

For a Flux arising of Serosity, or Wheyish Excrements, Jallap is most
excellent, which may be thus used:

Take Jallap finely poudered one dram: Cinnamon finely poudered half a scruple.
Mix them, and with a draught of Chicken Broth, give it the Patient in the
morning.

A Laxative Ptisan daily taken for a month together, has cured a stubborn Flux
of Whites, when nothing else could, as is to be seen in our Book of Medicinal
Observations.

Vomiting is likewise much commended in this Disease, especially in such as are
easy to vomit, because such indigested humors as are wont to be gathered about
the Stomach, are hereby both evacuated, and powerfully revelled or drawn back
from the Womb. Among convenient Vomits, Diasarum of Fernelius his Invention is
commended, half an ounce whereof, given in Water and Honey, or with one ounce
of Oxymel, and warm Chicken Broth, twice or thrice in a month, moves three or
four Vomits, without any trouble.

After sufficient Purgations, sweat may be procured to expel the remnants of
the Excrementitious Humor; and also to cause a further Revulsion of the Humors
falling into the Womb.

To this intent, a Decoction of Lignum vitae, and Sassaphras, will be good in
such as are phlegmatic; and of China and Sarsaparilla in such as are Chollerick
and Melanchollick, cooling and temperate Herbs being added, lest the evil
Humors be more exasperated, and become more sharp.

Or Sweat may be provoked by a Decoction of hot Herbs, as Nep, Calaminth,
Fennel, Hysop, Elicampane, Chamomel, Dill, and such like, the evaporation of
which Herbs being artificially received upon the Patients Body, will procure
sweat. A Bath may also be made of the same Decoction, by which sweat may be
provoked. But in hotter Constitutions, a Bath of fresh fair Water blood-warm,
will be sufficient, in which moderate and gentle sweats only may be procured.

Sulphurous Baths do also powerfully cause sweat, and consume the relics of
this Disease: and by help of such Baths we have known some Women cured, that no
other means could help.

As touching Piss-driving Medicines, its a weighty question whether or no they
are fit to be administered in this Disease? For they do not only provoke Urine,
but the Courses likewise, by heating and attenuating the Humors contained in
the Veins. Yet are they allowed by all Authors, and by Galen himself, who used
them in the Cure of the Wife of Boethius: And the reason is, Because Pissdrivers
do provoke Urine Primarily, and the Courses Secondarily, and as it were by
accident or chance. Again, the Kidneys do perpetually draw Wheyish Humors unto
themselves, whereas the Womb does only receive them; whereupon it is credible
that the greatest part of such Humors, will have recourse into the ways of
Urine.

Now the Piss-driver which Galen used in the foresaid Woman, is a Decoction of
Asarum and Smallage in fair Water; howbeit, it will be better tempered, if it
be made in Succhory Water.

A more compounded Piss-driving Broth, may be thus made:

Take the Roots of Asarum, and of Smallage, of each one ounce: Leaves of
Calaminth, and Soldanella, of each one handful: Elder flowers half a handful:
Polypody, and Carthamus seeds, of each half an ounce: boil all to a pint. Give
five ounces of the Liquor or Broth strained, in the morning. If you would make
it purgative, add a little Agarick, and a little Turbith boiled with the rest,
in a Rag.

It Is questioned whether Issues in the Legs are good for this Disease; for by
drawing the Humors downwards, they may decrease the Flux. Howbeit, experience
has showed that they do good in old Fluxes, because by such passages, some
part of the Excrementitious Humor is voided.

If Chollerick and sharp Humors cause this Disease; not only purgers of Choler
are to be given, but likewise Alteratives which cool and thicken, and are
moderately Astringent; such as these Juleps following.

Take of the leaves of Succory with the roots, of Endive, Borrage, Lettice, and
Purslain, of each half an handful: of new Sebestens and Jujubes, of each seven
in number: of the four greater cool Seeds, and white Poppy Seeds, of each half
a dram: of red Rose-leaves a pugil. Boil al in Water sufficient, unto a pint,
and in the strained liquor dissolve Syrup of Quinces, or of dried Red Roses
three ounces, and make a Julep, for three Doses.

But if Melanchollick humors abound, they are to be altered and Purged away, by
Medicines proper to that intent.

The use of Chalybeate milk taken forty days together, the quantity of four or
five ounces is very proper for either of the aforesaid Humors; whereunto may be
added toward the end, a little Bolearmoniack, or Terra Sigillata.

In the whole Course of Curing, it is to be considered, whether any part of the
Body be misaffected, and so may send the matter of the Flux into the Womb; and
if so, then care must be taken for the use of that part.

For if Humors flowing from the Brain, do cause this Disease, Remedies are to
be applied to that part; especially such as revel and divert the Fluxion, viz.
Cupping-glasses frequently fastened upon the shoulders and Back, Medicines snuft
up into the Nostrils, Masticatories, Vesicatories, and Issues made in the
hinder part of the Head, or in the nape of the Neck; instead where of Setous
may be used, which are more effectual. And Febritius Hildanus in the forty one
Cure of his first Century, relates that he cured a Woman long troubled with the
Whites, and thereby Barren, by a Seton.

If the Humors flow from the Stomach, Liver, or any other part, suitable
Remedies must be applied to that part.

The Body being prepared, and the offending Humor for the most part evacuated,
or derived another way: We must proceed to corroborating and Astringent
Medicaments. But they must never be used until the Antecedent matter be well
evacuated, and diverted. Otherwise, those Humors retained, do rush into the
more noble parts, and stir up more grievous Symptoms. As Galen in the
afore-cited place relates to have befallen the Wife of Boethius, Whose Belly,
swelled, by means of the unseasonable use of Astringents, by which the Wheyish
Humors were retained in her Body, which were wont to pass away in the Flux. It
is likewise to be remembered, that whilst we are in the use of Astringent
Remedies, we do then divert the Antecedent Matter, and hinder the same from
increasing, by the Remedies aforesaid. Amongst these principal corroborating
Medicines, Treacle is reckoned, which is to be used in phlegmatic
Constitutions. Conserve of Roses, and of Wormwood, may be mingled with the
Treacle; Or the following Opiate may be compounded,

Take Conserve of Rosemary flowers one ounce: Conserve of Calamus Aromaticus
two drachms: Species of Diarrhodon Abbatis, and of Aromaticum Rosatum, of each
one dram: Red Coral prepared half a dram: Treacle two drachms; with Syrup
of preserved Citron peeles Make all into an Electuary. Or,

Take old Conserve of Red Roses, Roots of Comfry, Bugloss, and Citron peeles,
of each one ounce: Red Coral burnt, shavings of Ivory, Bole-armoniack, Terra
Sigillata, Dragons-blood, of each one dram; with Syrup of Red Roses dried:
make all into an Opiate.

The powder of Sage, Salsa-parilla, and Baula stians taken every morning in
broth, is the Court-Ladies Medicine.

Zecheus commends this following Electuary, which he had often used with happy
Success.

Take Gum Arabic, and Gum Tragacanth, of each two drachms: white and red
Coral, burnt Eg-shels, Hartshorn, Dill seeds, Amber, of each four Scruples:
Honey of Roses, as much, as will make all into an Electuary. Of which give half
an ounce two hours before meat. Let the Patient swallow it down, and drink
after it four ounces of Plantane Water, mingled with two drachms of red Wine.

Juleps may be made of Rose Water, Knotgrass, and Plantane waters, with the
Syrup of Myrtles, dried Roses, and the like: Some of the aforesaid pouders
being added.

Mercurialis says he frequently used a Decoction of Oak-leaves, with the
Runnet of an Hare; wherewith he cured many Women of this Disease. His manner of
making his Medicine was thus.

Take of the Decoction of Oak-leaves five or six ounces: of the Runnet of an
Hare, one dram:

Let her take this Medicine eight or then days.

When the Disease comes from Choler, the following Syrup may be prepared,
which is strengthening, Astringent, and cooling. Thus,

Take red Rose Water four pints: Spirit of Vitriol, so much as will make the
Water a little sharp; but so as scarce to be perceived by taste: red Roses
dried three pugils: Steep them in the Water cold, two days, S^ain it, and add
thereto so much Sugar of Roses, as will make a Syrup.

And Finally, Those Astringent remedies mustred up in the former Chapter,
touching the Immoderate Flux of Courses, may be likewise useful in this Cure.

The Patient may use instead of ordinary drink, a Diet drink of China-roots, or
Mastich wood, with Astringent Wine mingled.

The same time that the Patient takes in such things as are Astringent, and do
strengthen the Womb, she must likewise use outward Remedies applied to the
place affected, viz. Fomentations, Baths to sit, it, Ointments, Plasters,
Injections, Fumigations, and Pessaries; such as have been prescribed against
Immoderate Courses.

But before these external Astringents are applied, the Womb must be well
cleansed. Otherwise such impurities would be therein retained, as returning back
into the Body, may cause more grievous Diseases. And in our clensing, we must
regard the Humor offending; for one sort of Clensers are fit for Phlegmatic,
another for Chollerick Humors.

If the Humor be Chollerick, let the Clensing Injections be made of
Barley-Water, Whey, Water sweetened with Sugar. If it be Phlegmatic, let them
be made of Hydromel, or of the Decoction of Wormwood, Fever-few, and the like.

Also a Detergent Pessary may be made of Treacle, and Turpentine; or of Mercury
leaves bruised, and wrapped up in a fine Linen rag very thin worn.

Let the Patient use these Clensers, before the Astringents be applied, until
her Womb be well purified; which may be known, if little or no Humors come
therefrom.

After the Use of the Clensers, the Fumes are first to be received over a
Close-stool, because they dry and strengehen the Womb; and they may fitly be
made of Frankincense, Ladanum, Mastich, Sanders, Nutmeg, and Red-Rose leaves.
And afterward we must proceed to other Astringent Remedies.

Chap. 5. Madness from the Womb.
WOmb-Furie is a sort of Madness, arising from a vehement and unbridled desire
of Carnal Imbracement, which desire disthrones the Rational Faculy so far, that
the Patient utters wanton and lascivious Speeches, in all places, and
companies, and having cast off all Modesty, madly seeks after Carnal
Copulation, and invites men to have to do with her in that way.

This Immoderate desire of Carnal Conjunction, springs from the abundance of
Seed, from it is Acrimony, and heat transcending the bounds of Nature, whereby
it is made to heave and work in the Seminal vessels, as Yest works, whereby the
parts made for generation, are vehemently stirred up, and Inflamed with lustful
desires. And from the same Seminal matter so affected, Vapors ascend unto the
Brain, which disturb the Rational Faculty, and depose it from its throne.
Howbeit, The Immoderate appetite of carnal Conjunction alone, without the help
of any such vapors, is able of it self to master the Rational faculty, as also
al other Immoderate passions; but especially Immoderate Love, which is called
Eroticus affectus, or Love-Melancholly.

Now the Seed acquires the aforesaid qualities, when it is over long retained
in Bodies prone to lust, and full of heat; and therefore this Disease is
incident to Virgins, and young Widows peculiarly; although it may also betide
married Women, that have impotent Husbands, or such as they do not much affect,
whereby their Seminary Vessels are not sufficiently disburthened, or their
amorous affections duly satisfied.

Some hold, That the Seed being corrupted, acquires a malignant quality, which
causes these grievous Symptoms. But they are not well able, so holding, to show
any difference between this Disease, and fits of the Mother, which arise from
the Seed being corrupted, and thereby infected with a malignant quality. For
although several degrees of putrefaction do produce different degrees of
malignity, from whence a great variety of Symptoms are wont to arise; yet these
manifest qualities aforesaid, viz. great plenty of Seed, it is heat, Acrimony,
and Fermentation in excess, together with the great heat of the genital parts;
are sufficient to produce this Disease we treat of.

Now the Causes producing so hot, plentiful, and sharp stinging Seed, are
youthful age, Sanguine complexion, and Choleric, or melancholy adust; meats
that nourish much, a plentiful table, especially if the meats be spiced; the
frequent smell of Spices, Musk, Ambergris, and such like: large sleeping, and
upon soft beds filled with Feathers, or down; amorous Courtings, reading of
lascivious Books, Dancings, and other pleasures usual in the meetings of
youthful persons.

The Signs of this Disease may easily be gathered out of what has been
already said. But because it is wont to discover it self gradually, by little
and little; it is sit to relate it is progress. In the beginning, whilst the
sick persons do yet enjoy their understanding, they are more sad, and silent
than ordinary, but with a wanton rolling of their Eyes, and a ruddyness of
countenance; which ruddiness, is sometime more then at others? especially when
mention is made of matters belonging to bodily lust, for then their breathing
is changed, and their Pulse too, by Sympathy of the Heart, which made Galen
boast that he knew the furious lusts of Women by their Pulse; because such
Lovers, do of a sudden undergo diverse* changes of their Pulse, when desirable
objects are presented unto them, or brought into their remembrance. Afterward
when the Disease is exasperated, they begin to scold, and to weep, and ever and
anon they fall a laughing, they speak many things without rhyme, or reason
unadvisedly, out of which no certain sense can be gathered; a while after, they
repent of this their folly, until another fit take them, by reason of the
inordinate motion of the peccant matter, which observes no certain period in
it is Fermentations. Women possessed with this kind of dotage, when the Disease
is come to it is height, do openly before all the world ask men to lie with them
expressing the actions of Generation in the most proper, and broadest language,
their mother tongue affords.

As for the Prognostics of this Disease. It is a curable sickness, if means
be used in time. But if it continue long, and take firm rooting, it turns into
a true and perfect Madness.

There is a great hope of Recovery, when the distances between the fits begin
to be longer than ordinary, or when the Patients Body, being grown lean
becomes fat again, and when mention of matters pertaining to Generation, does
no longer affect or disturb them.

The Cure of this Disease tends to correct the hot distemper of the Bowels;
especially of the Womb, and the Blood, and Seed; likewise to evacuate the sharp
Humors, and Seminal matter offending. All which may be done by the following
Remedies.

And in the first place, Blood must be often drawn, as far as the Patients
strength can bear: that so the whole Mass of Blood, and the Womb it self may be
cooled, and the fervent Blood may be withdrawn from the Veins of the Womb.

And if the Patients monthly Courses be stopped, the inferior Veins are
afterward to be opened, that they may by that means be brought down.

But if the Blood seems to have recourse to the Hemorrhoid Veins, which is
known by their swelling and redness; the said Veins are to be opened by
Application of Leeches

Afterward a Purgation is to be given, made of the gentler sort of Medicines
purging Choler or Melancholy, according as the one or other Humor shall seem
to abound.

This purgation is to be followed by Juleps that prepare the matter offending,
Viz. such as cool and gently open; which must be given three days together.

Then a more strong purgation is to be administered, which may wholly extirpate
the foresaid humors.

To which intent these Purging Medicaments may be used, which was set down in
our Cure of Madness, which must be now and then repeated.

After iterated Purgations, the following Bath being frequently used in the
whole course of the disease, will be very useful to cool the whole Body, and
temper the fervor of the peccant Humor.

Take Leaves of Lettice, Willow-tree, Water Lillies, Vine-tree, Purslain,
Penny-wort, of each a handful: Flowers of Violet, Water-lilly and Roses, of
each two handfulls. Boil all for a Bath, into which Blood-warm let the Patient
enter, twice in a day, without sweating, far from meal-tide.

And forasmuch as a complete, and entire* Bathing cannot conveniently be
continued for so many days together; at least the Patient may Bath her lower
parts frequently in a part of the aforesaid Decoction, yea or of mere Water,
and the liquor must be only warmish: For the prime intention of this Cure is,
that the Womb may be cooled to the purpose: which is confirmed by a remarkable
Experiment propounded by Dr. Harvey, in his Treatise of the Childbearing of a
noble Lady, who had been more than ten years beside her self, by reason of this
Womb-fury; whose Womb (after all things had been tried to reduce her to her
wits, in vain) fell out, which they did not put up til the coldness of the
external Air had healed its distemper; the event was, as the Doctor imagined,
and she grew quickly well, and her Womb was at last restored to its proper
place.

For the greater cooling of the Body, it may be convenient to give the Patient
Whey to drink many days together.

And to be brief, Whatever has been prescribed in our Cures of Madness and
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, will be good in this Disease, according as it shall
be caused either by Choler or Melancholy.

Unto all which may be added such things, which by a peculiar property,
diminish and cool the Seed: Among which take these that follow for example.

Take Leaves of Water-lilly, Willow, Agnus Castus, of each four handfuls:
Lettice, Purslain, Penny-wort, or Two-penny Grass, of each a handful: the four
larger cooling Seeds, Lettice, and white Poppy seeds, of each half an ounce:
Dill seeds two drams: the flowers of Water-lilly, and Violets, of each one
handful. Let all be stamped, being fresh, and let them be sprinkled with Juice
of Lemmons, and distilled in Balneo Mariae, and to every pint of the Water, add
a dram of Camphire. Let the Patient take an ounce diverse times.

Or of all, or some of the Simples aforesaid, a Decoction may be made, and
sweetened with Sugar, and a little Camphire put to it, to be taken diverse times
one after another.

Or an Emulsion may be made of the greater cool Seeds, Lettice seeds, and white
Poppy seeds, extracted with the Waters of Lettice, Willow and Water Lillies,
and sweetened with Syrup of Violets.

An Electuary may be prescribed after this manner:

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Water Lillies, Violets, and Agnus Castus, of
each half an ounce: Conserve of Roses half an ounce: Lettice Stalks preserved
one ounce: Coral and Smaragd prepared, of each one dram: with Syrup of Violets,
and water lillies, make an Opiate.

In the greatest extremity of the Patients raving, such things as procure
sleep, are very profitable, both inward and outward Medicaments, as they are
set down in the Cure of Phrenzy and Madness.

In the whole course of the Disease, Clysters which cool and gently purge, are
to be used, taking heed of sharp Clysters, and such as vehemently purge, which
do exagitate the Humor contained in the Womb, or its Vessels, whereby the
Symptoms are wont to become more fiery.

Also Injections may be made into the Womb, of the Decoction of such Herbs as
have formerly been set down for Baths and other* Remedies, whereunto Sal
Saturni may profitably be added.

Frequent Clysters may likewise be good to the same intent, being made of
Vinegar allaied with Water.

Also cooling Ointments are to be applied to the Loins, Privity, the Share, and
between the Watergate, and the Dung-gate, made of Oil of Water Lillies,
Ointment of Roses, Vnguentum Album Camphoratum, with the Juyces of Nightshade,
Henbane, and Water Lillies, melted together, adding a little Camphire.

Also a Plate of Lead is good to be worn continually upon the Reins.

In regard of the immediate Cause, seeing the evacuation of the sharp and
corrupted Seed, may cure the Disease; it is very good Advice in the Beginning
of the Disease, before the Patient begins manifestly to rave, or in the space
between her fits, when she is pretty well, to marry her to a lusty young man.
For so the Womb being satisfied, and the offensive Matter contained in its
Vessels being* emptied, the Patient may peradventure be cured.

But if the Patient cannot so conveniently be married, or the condition of her
life will not bear that estate, some advise that the Genital Parts should be by
a cunning Midwise so handled and rubbed, as to cause an Evacuation of the
over-abounding Sperm. But that being a thing not so allowable, it may fuffice
whilst the Patient is in the Bath, to rub gently her Belly on the Region of the
Womb, not coming near the Privy parts, that the lukewarm temper of the Water
may moderate the hotness of the Womb, and that it may by the moisture be so
relaxed, as of its own accord to expel the Seminal Excrement, and that nothing
else be done with the hand, save a little to open the Womb, so as the Water may
pass into its more inward parts; forasmuch as the water will operate as much as
any of those Medicines which are used to extinguish the seed withal.

Pessaries may be compounded to the same intent of the Leaves of Mercury
bruised, with a little Mirrh, or the Powder of Aristolochia or Birthwort; which
must be put up, when the Patient is in the Bath, lest otherwise the Womb
should be overheated; and after an hour, it must be taken away. And afterward,
let an Injection be made into the Womb of VVhey, or Barley water, with a
little Juice of Nightshade, Housleek, or Hemlock, which is specially commended
in this Disease.

To purge out the Seed, the following Bolus or Morsel will be very profitable.

Take of Venice Turpentine three drams: Agaricktrochiscated one dram: Carrot
seed, Hempseed, and Lignum Aloes poudered, of each eight grains: With Sugar
make all into a Bolus or Morsel to be swallowed.

If the Disease do yet continue, let Issues be made in her Thighs; for nothing
is better than by such means to draw the matter downward, from the Womb, to
those inferior parts.

And if swellings of the Spleen shall arise, and Obstructions, during this
Cure, as it often times happens; they must be carefully cured with their proper
Medicaments.

Finally, Because in this Disease the Brain and Heart, are grievously affected,
by reason of Vaporsarising from the Womb, they are both of them diligently to
be provided for; the Brain being secured by rubbing and chafing the lower
parts, and by Cupping-glasses frequently fastened upon the Hipps, and Groins;
and the heart defended by Cordial things out wardly applied, both Liquid and
Solid, such as are described in our Chapter, touching decay of strength.

Chap. 6. Of the Mother-Fits, or Womb-sickness.
WHen Seed and Menstrual Blood, are retained in Women besides the intent of
Nature, they putrefie and are corrupted, and attain a malignant and venomous
quality: from whence venomous Vapors are elevated and carried to diverse parts
of the Body, from whence diverse Symptoms do arise, and those so diverse, that
Democri^us might justly say in his Letter to Hippocrates, That the Womb is
Author of a thousand sad Sorrows, and innumerable Calamities. And Hippocrates
himself says in his Book of Virgins Diseases, That miserable VVoman-kind is
commonly laded with incomprehensible and manifold Diseases. All which
Infirmities we intend to explain in this Chapter, under the name of
Mother-Fits: herein imitating Galen, who in his sixth Book of Parts Affected,
and the fifth Chapter, says that the Mother, or Hysterical Passion, is but one
name indeed, yet comprehending under it diverse and innumerable Accidents.
Notwithstanding all late Writers in a manner, do handle ^he Suffocation of the
Womb, under the Title of Hysterical Passion, calling a particular Symptom by
such a name as is common to many others, because it, of all the rest, is most
frequent, and most troublesome. But herein the very best Authors seem to have
been superfluous in their Treatises of Women's Diseases, while in different
Chapters they describe several Diseases springing from the Womb, viz.
Suffocation of the Womb, Headache, Epileptical fits, Palpitations of the Heart,
Pulsation of the Arteries about the short Ribs, and in the Back, the Diseases
of the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen arising from the Womb, and diverse pains in
sundry parts of the Body arising therefrom; seeing all these Infirmities do
arise from one and the same cause, and are to be cured by the self same
Medicines; so that the aforesaid Authors, are fain to repeat the same things
over and over, in several Chapters, not without much weariness to the Reader.

We therefore, That we may more briefly, and methodically set down the Nature
of all these infirmities, think it worth our labor, first to set down the
universal Causes of them all; and afterward to declare how those Diseases
arise from the said Causes.

We have showed in the beginning of this Chapter, that there are two special
Causes of all these Symptoms, viz. the Woman's Seed, and the Menstrual Blood,
being retained beside the intent of Nature, and corrupted, and possessed of a
malignant, and venomous quality; out of which malignant Vapors, do arise, and
afflict diverse parts of the Body. Unto which Doctrine generally propounded, two
other things of greatest moment must be added, viz. First, That not only the
Seed and menstrual Blood, do produce Hysterical, or Womb-sicknesses; but diverse
Humors also of an excrementitious Nature flowing into the Womb, and by a long
abiding, growing putrefied, and sending out filthy Vapors. This is verfied by
many Ancient Women, who being destitute of menstrual Blood and of Seed, are
yet very much subject to these VVomb-sicknesses or Hysterical passions.
Secondly, that not only vapors arising out of the aforesaid substances, are
causes of these distempers, but the very Humors themselves are a cause, which
finding no free vent by the Veins of the Womb (into which as a Common-shore
Nature disburthens superfluous Humors) by reason of the stoppage of the Monthly
Courses or of the Whites; they flow back again into the superior parts of the
Body, and do infect the said parts with that vicious quality, which they have
contracted by their long abiding in the Vessels of the Womb, or by their
mixture with Seed, or Menstrual Blood corrupted.

These Foundations being thus laid down, let us see how Hysterical Symptoms
are stirred up by the Causes aforesaid, beginning with the Suffocation, or
strangling fits of the Mother, which is the most frequent and principal
Sickness of these kind of Women, being accompanied with very many, and those
most grievous Symptoms. For besides their breathing impaired, and sometimes
abolished, their whole Body becomes cold, their Speech and Pulse is intercepted,
so that they lie like dead Women; and some have been accounted dead, and laid
out for Burial, and yet afterward Revived.

Now this Sickness comes by fits, which makes their returns sometimes sooner,
sometimes later; and endure sometimes a longer, sometimes a shorter time,
according to the quantity of the Humor offending, which is sometimes quickly
collected, and sometimes long in gathering; sometimes soon discussed, and
sometimes long before it can be discust: For such like Causes of Diseases in the
Body of Man, have their times of digestion and exaltation; which having arrived
unto, they do suddenly, and as it were in a moment, break forth into action.
Yea, and such Humors being already collected in the Body, may for a season lie
hid, until being stirred by some internal or external Cause, they shed forth
their poisonous blasts and vapors into other parts of the Body. Now the most
frequent and noted Caused of this Commotion and Agitation of these Humors, are
sweet smelling things coming near the Patients Nose, or sweet Meats taken in,
which quickly bring Women subject to this Insirmity, into their fits; also
vehement Anger, Terror, and other grievous Passions of the Mind.

Now there are diverse Degrees of this Sickness, according as the Matter
offending differs in Quantity, or Malignity. For sometimes the Choaking-fits,
with want of breathing, are light and soon go over; sometimes it is extreme, so
that the Patient breaths not at all, and is attended with other Hysterical or
Womb-sicknesses, such as Vomitings, Ravings, Convulsions, and Swoonings, or
Faintings away.

And for the most part, more grievous Symptoms do arise from corrupted Seed,
than from Menstrual Blood, or other corrupted Humors. For look how much Seed
retaining its Natural Disposition, is of a more excellent Nature than Menstrual
Blood, by so much does it degenerate when corrupted, into a greater or worser
kind of Venom or Poison.

There are likewise other Differences of this Choking Mother-sickness, to be
observed, viz. That sometimes the Patients have their Breath stopped as it were,
sometimes they complain that they are choked, as it were with a Rope that
strangled them; and sometimes their breathing is much abated, or abolished,
without any pain or sense of strangling. The Reason of which diversity is this;
That the simple Suffocation, and difficulty of breathing, do arise from
abundance of Vapors, which do sometimes very much abound in Hysterical or
Womb-sick Women, especially when the Hysterical Passion, and Hypochondriacal
Melancholy are joined together. Which Vapors or Winds, do compress the Midrif
and Lungs, as it is wont to fall out in the windy Asthma; but the sense of
choking, in which the Patient feels her self as it were strangled in her
Throat, depends upon a special property of the venomous Vapor; as there are
other Poisons in the greater World, which have such a property of throatleing
and choking, as is known of one sort of Mushroms. And, that the venomous
qualities bred in Hysterical Women are diverse, Galen does sufficiently hint in
his sixth Book of the parts affected, Chap. 5. where he compares the malignity
of this Vapor, to the venom of the Fish Torpedo, and to the sting of a
Sco^pion; which Poisons, though in quantity they are small, in operation they
are mighty, and being received into man's Body, they do in a short space of
time, grievously afflict the same, and produce therein most vehement Symptoms.
As for Respiration diminished or abolished, it is caused by the said Vapors
being endued with a Narcotick or Stupefactive power, which being mighty
contrary unto the Heart and Vital Spirits, their action is thereby hindered,
whence follows a cooling of the whole Body through defect of that Spirit which
should flow from the Heart, and a cessation of Respiration, because there is
now no need thereof. For seeing that drawing of Breath is necessary to cool our
Hearts, when the Heart is extremely cooled by the venomous Vapors aforesaid, it
needs none of that cooling which is caused by drawing in the Air, and so
breathing ceases, because there is no use thereof. We may also say, That the
said venomous and stupefying vapor, does assault the Brain, and hinder the
Influx of the Animal Spirits, whereby the motion of the Midrif, and the Muscles
serving for respiration, is hindered; ad hereunto, That the Vital Spirits being
destroyed, the Animal Spirits, which are made of the Vital, must needs be
destroyed likewise.

In the place before alleged, Galen resolves a Doubt, which is this: That
seeing it is generally held that a man cannot live without breathing, therefore
it is impossible that Hysterical persons should in their fits be quite deprived
of breathing. To which he answers, That in an extreme cooling of the Heart
there is no need of respiration, which if it were stopped, and the Heart
vigorous and hot, present death would follow; but that little warmth which is
yet remaining in the Heart, is cherished only by transpiration, or ventilation
through the Pores of the Body; even as Creatures lying all the Winter in holes
do live only by transpiration, because they are exceeding cold, and that little
heat they have, needs no ventilation by way of drawing in Air into their mouths.

Besides, The fore mentioned cause of Womb-suffocation, viz. A malignant and
venomous vapor, some ad another, namely, The ascending or rising of the Womb
into the superior parts of the Body, whereby the Stomach and Midrif are
compressed; from whence, not only Hysterical Suffocations, but other sicknesses
also do arise. This ascending of the Womb, Hippocrates propounded in his Book
of the Nature of Women, in these words: The Wombs of Women being turned from
their Natural posture, do strive toward the Liver, and bear violently upon the
Midrif; for they are carried upwards, seeking moisture to refresh them, being
over dried with Labor; and the Liver is the fountain of pleasing moisture. And
Fernelius in his sixth Book of Pathology, that is, of Diseases and their causes,
Chap. 16. says, he had often felt the Womb thus ascending, bearing up against
the Stomach like a round Globe, and grievously oppressing the same, from whence
it has been often thrust down by force of hand, and manifestly driven back
into its own proper place. Eustachius Rudius in the Second Book of his
Practice, in the 51. Chapter, says the same thing, viz. That he with his own
hands has selt the Womb raised as high as the Navel, and sometimes above the
same, and has by little and little thrust the same down into its proper place.
But Galen in his sixth Book of Parts affected, Chap. 5. opposes this Opinion,
and teaches that although the Womb may in some sort be moved, and ascend, yet
that motion and ascension is very little, neither is it any ways possible,
That the Womb should ascend unto the Stomach, so far is it from being able to
transcend the same so far as to reach unto the Midrif. A very strong Reason
hereof is brought from Anatomy, seeing the Womb is so fastened in its proper
place by four very strong Ligaments, that cannot be lifted up so high.
Whereunto the Defenders of this Opinion do make answer, That in the falling
out of the Womb, those Ligaments are so relaxed that it is wont to come
without the VVarer-gate, and therefore it may ascend as far up as it can go
down, when those Ligaments are relaxed or slackened. To this we reply, That the
falling out of the Womb comes to pass by little and little through length of
time, by the moistening and softening of the Ligaments, caused by a defluxion
of Phlegm thereupon; but that which they call the Ascent or Rising of the Womb
or Mother, happens in a moment, and is as soon restored; and it is requisite
that the Ligaments should have been first relaxed, and consequently all Women
should be troubled with the falling out of their VVombs, who are subject to
this Ascent or rising we speak of, because the occasions of this Ascent being
ceased, the Womb would of its own accord, and by its own proper weight fall
down wards, and lie continually without the Body.

It is harder to make Answer to the Experience of Fernelius, Rudius, and
others; of which they testify themselves eye witnesses, who profess they have
with their own proper hands perceived the Womb to ascend like a Globe or Bowl
to the Navel and higher, being after wards by them thrust down into its own
proper, place. Sennertus makes answer to this, that the round body which was by
them so felt, was not the Womb, but the Stones, with that blind Vessel, which
from Fallopius the finder or first Observer thereof is called Fallopious his
Trumpet, because he likened the same to the broad end of a Trumpet. For the
Stones appertaining to the Womb being pendulous (that is, Hang dangling movable
as on strings) and the Body of the Trumpet aforesaid being hollow as a pipe,
lax and apt to move this way, and that way; when they are filled with corrupt
Seed, with vicious Humoes, and with windy Vapors, and swell and strout again,
they may move this way and that way in the lower Region of the Belly, and
ascend as high as the Navel. And that such a round swelling may happen in the
Stones and Trumpet, as is sometimes felt in hystericall Women. The observations
of Riolanus may teach (propounded in his Book called Anthropographia, where he
relates) that in hysterical Virgins such as have had the Womb-sickness, He had
found their Stones greater than his Fist, strouting with wheyish seed; also the
Trumpet of the womb amplefied or enlarged and very much widened. And salius
observed some such thing in a certain noble young Damsel troubled with
suffocations or strangling of the womb, in whom one stone was swelled to the
greatness of a large hand-bal, being filled with a saffron-color'd humor, very
stinking, and sending forth a filthy and poysonsom kind of vapor: Which humor
dyed the adjacent parts yellow, just as we see the Gut Colon where it is
carried under the Liver, is by the Bladder of Gall rendered of a clay-like
yellowish Color

Yet is not Sennertus very far from the judgment of the Authors aforesaid; for
granting, as he says, that the Stones and Trumpet of the Womb, being filled
with corrupt sperm, vicious Humors, and vaporous winds, do strout again, move
to and fro in the lower Region of the Belly, and can ascend as high as the
Navel; seeing those parts are contiguous with the Womb, they cannot be moved in
the Region of the lower Belly, nor ascend unto the Navel, unless the Womb be
moved with them: so that this motion may be ascribed to the whole Womb very
well, as it consists of its own perfect parts together with such parts as are
knit there unto. Again if the Stones and Trumpet being filled with vicious
Seed, Humors or vapors, may be diversely moved to and fro: Why may not the Womb
being filled with like Humors and vapors, be moved with the same motion.
Thereason indeed of Sennertus, which he borrowed from Galen does convince, that
the Womb tied with four ligaments, cannot ascend so high as the Midrif, no not
as high as the Stomach; but it must not be denied, that it may be carried as
high as the Navel, where the Authors aforesaid perceived that Globe, both
because those Ligaments may be somewhat stretched by matter working in them like
yest, and like-wise because the womb whiles it is blown up, sils a greater
space, and may be perceived toward the Navel; so that whether the whole womb,
or the parts fastened there unto. viz. The Stones and the Trumpet be moved
upwards, we may still call it the Rising of the Womb or Mother and cleave to
the Doctrine of Hippocrates.

Headache from the womb, comes diverse ways; for sometime it possesses the whole
Head, otherwhiles the forepart, and then again the hinder part thereof, and
sometimes it is felt about the Eyes, in such manner as if the Patients Eyes
would leap out of her Head.

Now these pains are caused by the aforesaid sharp and malignant Vapors
mounting into the Head, and twitching as it were, or grating upon these
Membranous parts: Also evil humors brought from the womb to the Head, may cause
the said pains. For vicious Blood; especially the more thin and wheyish part
thereof, ascends from the womb into the Head, and being shed into the
Membranous parts, bre^ds those pains. Which pains are sometimes, pricking,
smarting, and sore as an Ulcer, by reason of the sharpness of the Vapors, or
Humors ascending: Sometimes they are stretching, as it were, and swelling,
because of the plenty and multiplicity which descend and stretch: Sometimes they
are pulsatory pain, beating like the Pulse; when the Vapors or Humors are
carried thither in the Arteries, or when the Arteries of some peculiar part of
the Head are filled with over hot Blood.

The Falling Sickness springs from the womb, being caused by the aforesaid
sharp and malignant Vapors, which being possessed with a very great Acrimony
and malignity, do vehemently, and sharply smite the Nervous parts, whereby they
come to be contracted, and whilst they endeavor to expel what offends them,
they draw themselves together, and express these convulsive mocions.

Palpitation of the Heart, is often caused by the said Vapors, being carried
from the womb to the Heart. and provoking the expulsive faculty to the Heart.

Also a Pulsation is caused in the Arteries of the Back, and about the short
Ribs, by reason of an over hot Blood, carried from the womb into those
Arteries, and distending them, whereby their Pulsation becomes greater, which
smiting the adjacent parts, causes a feeling of the said Pulsation in them:
Yet, sometimes such Pulsations are caused in Hypochondriacal melancholy, which
when we come to the Signs of this Disease, we shall distinguish.

Diverse disorders are likewise raised from the womb in the stomach, liver, and
splee^; from the stomach disorders arise, as appetite lost, or more than is
fit, or desirous of absurd things; or Hiccoughs, Vomitings, Belchings, and
Heart-burnings: al which Symptoms do spring from the aforesaid vapors sent into
the stomach by the Hypogastrick, and Caeliack arteries, or other blind
passages; and those vapors do stir up this variety of Symptoms, according to
the diversity of their Nature, and the different degrees of their putrefaction,
and malignity. For by their heat they cause want of appetite, and thirst; but
if they be cold they hurt digestion. And the coveting of absurd things (as
Chalk, Oat-meal, Smalcoles, Linsey-Wol^ey cloth, etc.) is caused by the
malignant quality of the Humors, and Vapors; as we have showed in our Discouse
touching that Symptom: and according to the different kind of malignity it
comes to pass that the Patients appetite inclines her too long, for this, or
that od thing; as some for Coals, others for Clay, or Mortar, Salt, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, etc. And from a certain kind of malignity springs likewise, the
loathing of some certain meats; and which is more wonderful, in some has been
observed an universal loathing of al kind of Drink; as Ludovicus Mercatus
relates concerning a noble Gentlewoman, which would not away with any Drink,
and of another, who though she desired Drink, yet did she Vomit it al up again,
being likewise vexed with other grievous Symptoms. Where we may conjecture,
that the evil Humors in that Gentlewoman, had attained such a kind of
malignity, as that is which causes Water-Fear in such as have been bitten with
a Mad-dog. It is, notwithstanding, undeniable, that the diversity of parts into
which these Humors, and malignant Vapors are carried, conduce not a little to
the variety of the Symptoms. For, If they are carried unto the mouth of the
Stomach, they stir up Belchings, and Vomitings; if they stick to the Coats of
the Stomach, they induce perpetual inclinations to Vomit; if they are endued
with any singular Acrimony, they cause Hiccoughs, or pains of the Stomach;
which pains may also arise from the plenty of Humors, weighing heavy upon, and
stretching the parts containing.

The Liver is easily offended by menstrual Blood retained, and by the Veins
^lowing back thereinto; hence springs the Green Sickness, by reason of bad
Blood flowing from the Womb into the Liver, and from the Liver shed abroad into
the whole Body. Hence come Swellings, Fevers, and other Diseases very many, in
the whole Body, and several parts thereof, forasmuch as all of them are
nourished by the Liver.

But if the vicious Blood aforesaid do flow back from the Womb unto the Spleen,
Swellings, Stoppings, and melanchollick, and Hypochondriacal Diseases are wont
to be raised.

And, To conclude, Women feel diverse kinds of pains in their Loins, Thighs, and
other parts, which arise from filthy Humors, and Vapors conveyed from the
Womb into the said parts: Al which Symptoms, taking rise from the Womb, shall be
distinguished from others which arise from other parts, and are like them, but
produced from different causes; in our following Description of the Signs of
this Disease.

In the first place therefore, Womb-sickness is known for the most part by what
has already been said of it. For the fore recited Symptoms do appear therein,
not al in every one, but some in one Patient, some in another, according to the
differing condition of the Causes. Now these Symtoms are, Breathing, depraved
so, as, sometimes the Patient seems to be choked; other whiles her breathing
is lessened* or wholly taken away, without any trouble or Sense of Suffocation;
Refrigeration, or cooling of the whole Body, and stopping or Interception of the
Pulse; sometimes also a taking away of Sense and motion; sometimes Ravings,
Convulsions, Swoonings, Vomitings, and Hiccoughs are joined together.

But for a more clear Discovery of this Disease, those Signs are first to be
propounded, which show the Disease approaching, such as have a noise in their
lower Belly (first from the Navel downwards) with belching or inclination to
Vomit; Wearinesses, Yawnings, and stretchings, proceeding from a flatulent
matter, which begins to mount from the Womb into diverse parts of the Body; a
sad Look pale Face* caused by the drawing back of the Natural heat, from those
Parts, to it is Fountains.

When the Disease gathers strength, a sense of strangling begins to trouble the
Patient, as if they had swallowed some great morsel which stuck in their
Throat. Afterward their breathing stops, and their Suffocation is increased.
And in conclusion al* their Vital, and Animal actions, are depraved,
diminished, or abolished. Hence spring Ravings, Convulsions, and other grievous
Symptoms. In some the Womb is sensibly tossed and tumbled, and gathered round
like a Foot-bal; and felt after that manner in diverse parts of the lower part
of the Body. And when the Hysterical, or Womb-Fit begins to go over, a certain
moisture flows out of the Watergate, their Guts rumble, they lift up their
Eyes, redness springs up in their Cheeks, Sense and motion is restored, their
Body grows warm, they fetch deep Sighs, and so the Sick-Party by little and
little, is freed from her Fit.

By the Signs propounded, Womb-sickness may easily be distinguished from such
infirmities as are of kin, or otherwise like the same, viz. the Syncope
(Swooning-sickness) Apoplexy (blasting Plane^-striking)) and the
Falling Sickness: howbeit the difference between Womb-sickness, and those
diseases aforesaid is peculiarly to be noted.

And in the first place, by three general Signs we may conjecture that these
Symptoms which are common to Womb-sickness, and the aforesaid maladies, do
proceed rather from the Womb, than from any primary misaffection of the Heart
or Brain. The first whereof is, that if the sick Patient be subject to
Womb-sickness, and has been often anoyed with aforesaid Symptoms; when they
come afresh, we may conclude the Disease to be no other than Womb-sickness. The
second is, That when Women begin to feel those Symptoms, they complain that
their Womb is out of order. A third is, That in Womb-sickness Women do feel
great ease when stinking things are put to their Noses, and sweet smelling
things are put in by the Watergate, which in those other infirmities falls not
out.

And the Hysterical, or womb-sickness is more peculiarly distinguished from
that which we call Syncope, or the Swooning-Fits, because in the Syncope, the
breathing and Pulse do wholly cease; but in the VVomb-sickness, it remains in
a small measure, til they come into the very height of the Fit, wherein is most
danger. Secondly, The Swooning Fits come more quickly, and seize upon the
Patient, as it were on a sudden. But in the VVomb-Fit, there proceed evident
tokens of the approaching Fit. Thirdly, The Patients Face is paler in the
Swooning-fits, than in the Womb-fits; yea verily, some Women have a ruddy
countenance in their Fits of the Mother, and than the Disease is sufficiently
known by that Sign alone. Fourthly, In the Swooning Fits, we find commonly
cold, and Diaphoretick Sweats, which in the Womb-fits appear not. Fifthly, The
Swooning Fits a^e shorter, and the Patient is soon either well or dead; but the
strangling Fits of the Mother last longer, continuing a whole day, or diverse
days together sometimes. But it is to be remembered, that the
Swooning-sickness, and the Womb-fits are sometimes joined together, when the
Heart is more grievously afflicted than ordinary, or when the Patients strength
has been much weakened by protraction of the Disease; and then the Symptoms of
both Diseases may be mixed one with another.

The Womb-Fit is distinguished from the Apoplexy; First because that in the
Wombs-Choaking-Fits, the Joints are not so loosened, neither is the Sense of
feeling wholly gone, as in the Apoplexy; but if they be pricked, or have their
hairs pulled off, they give a sufficient Sign with their Hands that they feel the
pain. Secondly, In persons Apoplectical, Planet-struck (as the simpler sort do
phrase it) there is a perpetual snorting of the Patient, but in the
Womb-stranglings, not. Thirdly, Womb-strangled Patients when their Fit is over,
remember what was done and said, during their extremity; but in the Apoplexy
it is not so.

It is distinguished from the Falling Sickness; First, Because convulsive
motions are not always ^^yned with Hysterical Suffocations; and those that do
accompany the womb-Fits, are not so Universal as in the Falling sickness, but
molest only one or two members. Secondly. The Pulse is greater in the Fits of
the Falling Sickness, than it uses to be when the Patient is well; but in the
Mother-Fits it is quite contrary. Thirdly, In the Falling Sickness, the Patient
fomes at the mouth, but in the Mother-Fits there is no such foming. Fourthly,
In the Falling Sickness, the Patient remembers not what was done to her during
the Fit, but in the Mother-sickness she remembers al, as we showed before.
Fifthly, Those that have Fits of the Mother, do in the end of the Fit come to
themselves like persons awaked from sleep, with a noise in the lower part of
the Belly, the Womb as it were becoming quiet, and returning to it is Natural
place, and sometime much humor flows from the Womb, which does not befall such
as have the Falling Sickness.

We must also enquire how such as are in the Fits of the Mother, may be
distinguished from those that are quite dead; seeing many Histories relate that
some Women in that Case have been accounted dead, appointed to buryal; yea, and
some buried. The ways which Authors prescribe to make this trial, are diverse:
For either they lay teazed wool, or light Feathers upon the Patients mouth, and
if they stir not she is given over for dead; or they apply a bright looking
Glass to her mouth, which will be dulled with her breath, if she be yet alive;
or they set a cup full of water upon her breast, and if the water stir not,
they account the party dead. These Signs do for the most part hold good, but
they are not perpetual, neither do they put the matter past dispute; seeing as
was said before, some Women in these Fits do live only by Transpiration, as
those live-wights which live in holes all the winter, and fetch no breath at al
by their mouths. Which though it very seldom falls out, yet it is a very good
Caution, not to suffer women which die of this Disease, to be buried til the
third day after their death, or at least til they begin to stink.

The Signs of the Causes are likewise to be declared; which Causes we have
showed to be three, viz. Seed retained and corrupted; Menstrual Blood in like
manner retained and corrupted; and vile humors contained in the vessels, or in
the Cavitie of the womb.

If this Disease arise from Seed retained, or corrupted, there have preceeded
al those Causes, which might increase, gather together, and corrupt the Seed in
the vessels; as flourishing age, ripe for Generation, or formerly accustomed to
the actions thereof, which of late it has left off; Sanguine complexion, an
idle life, and given to pleasures; a rich and plentiful table, with the use of
such meats as are easily corrupted. In such persons if the womb-Fits happen,
they having their Courses well, we may guess they come from Seed retained.

If these womb-Fits depend upon the Menstrual Blood retained and corrupted, as
their cause; the Patients Courses are either wholly stopped, or flow very little,
and to no purpose; and she her self is not to seek for carnal Embracements: but
well provided; And some Symptoms do attend this suppression, as Melancholy,
Waspishness, Sluggishness, Drowsiness, Headache, swelling of the Dugs heaviness
of the Loins and Thighs.

That this Disease comes from evil Humors is known, by the Patient having her
Courses well, being exercised sufficiently with actions of Generation, by her
being stepped into years, or being very sull of evil Humors, or being troubled
with some other Disease in her womb.

We must also set down these Signs of those other Symptoms which we formerly
described, as springing from the womb.

Headache coming from the womb is known, because the Patient has not her
Courses right, the pain does chiefly trouble her, or is most increased, at, or
near the time of her Courses flowing, and her womb is out of order. Also we may
distinguish whether an Humor, or a Vapor cause this pain; for if the pain be
not great, heavy, and pressing, and come by fits; it comes certainly from a
Vapor: but if the pain be continual, joined with heaviness, it shows an Humor
contained in the part; which if it be Chollerick, the pain is biting, pricking,
and acute or sharp; if it be Phlegmatic, it causes sleepiness; if Melancholy,
Sadness.

Pantings of the Heart, and beatings of the Arteries about the short Ribs and
Back; Diseases of the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen; and diverse pains may be
conceived to arise from the womb, if these other Signs and Symptoms of the womb
affected, before recited, be likewise present. As also, if by putting sweet
smelling things to the watergate, and stinking things to the Nose, the Patient
do find some kind of ease.

What concerns the Prognostic, or Predictions of this Disease; It it is a
malady which seldom kiils the Patients, but use; to stick a long time by them.
But sometimes they are in danger of death by reason of swooning fits that
happen, or by some extraordinary Convulsion. Likewise if the fits are frequent
and hard to be removed, it is to be feared, lest Respiration being so often
hurt, the Native heat should be suffocated, and the Patient come to die.

The Womb-paision is worst, in which more parts are drawn into consent; and
that is bad which springs from corrupted Seed, or from a long suppression of
the monthly Courses.

In Elderly persons, this Disease is hardly curable, because of that plenty of
Corruption wherewith they are wont to abound. In younger Women, it commonly
ceases when they begin to bring forth Children.

In Women with Child, and that lie in Childbed, it is a dangerous Disease; in
the former, for fear of Miscarriage; in the latter, because of their weakness
after Childbearing.

For a Woman troubled with these VVomb-fits, to sneeze is good, for it
signifies strength of Brain; and by the motion of sneezing, the Malignant
Vapors which besiege the Brain, are discussed; and likewise the vicious Humors
contained in the Womb evacuated.

A twofold Cure belongs to this Infirmity: one in the fit, another out of the
fit. In the fit, those vapors which cause it are to be discussed and drawn back
from the part affected; the Humors contained in the Womb which send up those
Vapors, must be voided; and the Womb when it is removed out of its proper
place (which often happens according to Hippocrates) must be restored to the
same again.

First therefore, The sick party must be laid upon a bed in such a posture,
that her Neck and Shoulders lie high and sloaping, but her Thighs and Privy
parts lie low and shooting downwards, for so the Womb is more easily reduced.

Then must her lower parts be tied very hard, so as to cause pain; likewise
they must be well rubbed and chased; also Cupping-glasses are to be set upon
her Hips; and a very large Cupping-glass set upon her Share is very profitable.
But take heed that you do not apply a Cupping-glass upon the Patients Navel,
which many ignorantly are wont to do, for by that means the Womb is drawn
upwards again. When Convulsions happen, or swooning fits, hard rubbings with
course clothes are good upon the soals of the Feet, also with Vinegar and Salt;
it is good likewise to pluck off some Hairs from the Head and Share, to cramp
the fingers or the Patient, whoop aloud in her ears, and such like.

It is also good to lay unto the soals of her Feet, this Epispastick, or
drawing Cataplasm or Pultis.

Take Leaves of Artemisia (Mugwort) Feaverfew, Rhue, of each a handful: Sage,
half a handful: Pigeons dung poudered three ounces: Black Soap an ounce and an
half: Amber, Frankincense, Masticb poudered, of each a dram and an half: Juice
of Rue, and Vinegar, allayed with Water, as much as suffices to make all into
a Cataplasm.

At the same time, stinking and strong smelling things are to be put unto her
Nose; as Partridg feathers burnt, old Leather burnt, and Brimstone fired, Jeat
or Agate Oil, a Pomander of Assafoetida, Castoreum, Galbanum, Rue, moistened
with Syrup of Artemisia, or with Vinegar; Garlands of Rue, Tanzy, Wormwood. But
if the Woman be Epileptick, or subject to the Falling Sickness, we must
abstain from the stronger things before mentioned, because the Brain being
therewith offended, is put into a Commotion, by which means the Humors are
tumbled suddenly into the Ventricles thereof, and the Syptomes are made more
grievous.

The smoke of Tobacco blown into the Mouth and Nostrils of the Patient, does
quickly free her from the fit.

Contrariwise, sweet smelling things must be put unto the Womb, as some grains
of Musk or Civet wrapped in Cotton-wool.

The following Powder may be blown up her Nostrils.

Take white Pepper, Mustard seed, Pellitory, Castoreum, of each one scruple;
make it into a very fine Powder.

If the Patient be very much oppressed with her fit, let her be provoked to
sneeze, according to that Aphorism of Hippocrates, his 5. Section, 35. To a
Woman troubled with Womb-fits, or hard Labor, if she happen to neeze it is
good. Neezing is many times provoked by the foresaid Powder; and if that alone
will not do it, a little white Hellebore, or Euphorbium may be added.

Also Oil of Amber or Agates, may be anointed upon her Nostrils.

But laxative and wind-expelling Clysters do exceed all other Medicaments, in
discussing such filthy Vapors as cause the fit: which may be made after this
manner:

Take Mercury Leaves, Pellitory of the wall, Mugwort, Penyroyal, Rue,
Calaminth, of each one handful: Caraway seeds, Cummin seeds, and Bayberries, of
each two drams: Boil all to a pint and an half. In the straining dissolve Hiera
Picra, and Benedicta laxativa, of each six drams: Oil of Rue three ounces:
Camphire half a scruple. Mix all into a Clyster.

If the first Clyster be not sufficient, another must be given of the same or
such like Decoction, dissolving therein, Diaphoenicon ten drams: Turpentine
dissolved with the white of an Egg one ounce: the aforesaid Oil, and half a
scruple of Camphire dissolved in Oil of Water lillies.

And in a word, The Disease continuing, a third Clyster must be given merely
Hysterical and discussing, but not purging, which will be very effectual,
compounded after this manner:

Take Oil of Rue four ounces: Aqua vitae one ounce: Canary Sack three quarters
of a pint: Galbanum two drams: Mix all, and make a Clyster, and administer the
same after a Laxative Clyster.

A Clyster of Vinegar, tempered with Water, does presently assuage the
Mother-sit, by compressing and coagulating the vapors, which cause the same.

The same does a draught of Vinegar allaied with water, being taken in at the
mouth. Authors do likewise counsel that the Patients belly above the Navel, be
strongly girt with a swathband, that the womb may be thereby reduced, and the
vapors hindered from ascending.

Concerning letting blood, it is a great question, Whether it be convenient in
the sit, or no? For seeing there is at that time a great weakness in the
Patient and sometimes despair of life, and the body is cooled all over by
malignant vapors which infest the Brain and Heart, which can no ways be
expelled by blood-letting; no question the use thereof is very dangerous during
the fits. And of this Opinion are Varandaeus and Sennertus. But Mercatus and
Rodericus a Castro, do determine contrarily, That a Vein ought to be opened in
the Patients Ankle or Instep, when the Disease springs from an abundance of
Menstrual blood retained; and that the Patients strength oppressed with the
burden, the passages obstructed with too much blood, and the danger of
suffocation hence arising, can be remedied by no other means but bleeding;
seeing in this case, neither stinking smells, nor sweet smells, nor
Cupping-Glasses, can bring the Patient out of her fit. Philippus Hoechstetterus
in the second part of his Observations, makes it appear by certain Histories,
that bleeding in the Foot has done much good: Insomuch, as a certain Nun,
which had been speechless, and in Convulsion fits for two days together, two
hours after she had bled began to speak, and to eat and drink. Iam of Opinion,
a Vein may be opened, if the Pulse be strong, and there be evident tokens that
blood does super-abound: But if the Pulse be weak, we must forbear, and stay
till the fit is over for a more convenient season, in which blood may be safely
taken away.

Plasters are profitably applied under the Navel of the Mass of Emplastrum
Ceroneum, which mollifies and discusseth, and so is better than the vulgar
Womb-Plaister, which does somewhat bind, and therefore may retain the vapors and
malignant humors. Plasters are likewise made of Galbanum and Assafoetida, or
of Caranna, and Tacamahaca, either alone, or with some Spices mingled with
them. As for Example:

Take Gum Caranna half an ounce: Powder of Nutmegs, and Cloves, of each half a
dram: Oil of Amber four drops: Turpentine two drams. Make all into a Plaster.
Such Plasters are to be in fashion of a Shield or Scutcheon. and in the
pointed part of the Plaster, which must be laid toward the Watergate, some
of Musk or Civet are to be put, that they may send forth a sweet smell, and
thereby allure the Womb back again. Three grains of Musk may be put in a little
Cotton, moistened with Oil, and thrust into the hole of the Navel: then lay on
a sinal Plaster of dissolved Galbanum. This some Women for a Secret.

Or four grains of Camphire may be dissolved in Oil of sweet Almonds, and put
into the Navel, and a Diapalma Plaster laid over it.

If the Disease seem to be fostered by plenty of wind and vapors, Fomentations
and Baths will be good, of the Decoction of Rue, Mugwort, Time, and Calaminth,
Fennel seed, Annis seed Cummin seed, Bay Berries, Chamomel Flowers, Dill
flowers, etc.

Also little bags may be prepared with Cummin seed, Annis seed, Carrot seed,
Salt, Rue, Bran, in them, and applied very hot, and often renewed Or,

Take Oil of Rue four ounces: Spirit of Turpentine half an ounce: Mingle them,
and dip therein a piece of Bread hot out of the Oven, and lay it upon the Navel.

Also it will be good to anoint the lower part of the belly, the Region of the
womb, Share, and Loins; because such anointings do dilate the Passages,
attenuate the Vapors, and discuss them. They may be made of Nard Oil, Spike
Oil, Oil of Dill, Sesamine, Saffron, Lillies, and Sweet Almonds.

Authors do very much commend a fume of the warts which grow upon Horses Legs;
which being dried in an Oven, and beaten to Powder, they are burnt under the
Noses of women in these fits as a present Remedy, whereby women are wont to be
in an instant delivered of their fits, to the admiration of the bystanders.

If the Disease spring from Retention of Seed, nothing is better than carnal
Conjunction, as soon as the Patient is out of her fit, if she be married.

Instead of carnal Conjunction, where that cannot he had, many advise that the
Patient be rubbed and tickled by a Midwife in the Neck of her womb, into which
the Midwife must put her fingers anointed with Oils of Spices, that so the
offensive Sperm may be voided. But seeing that cannot be done without
wickedness (understand by a silly superstitious Papist, that counts it a
meritorious good work to burn Mother and Child in her womb alive, as at Jersey,
and a wickedness to free a sick body of a little offensive humor) a Christian
Physician must never prescribe the same.

To Discuss those malignant Vapors which cause the womb-fit, many Medicines are
wont to be given down the Throat, among which is a dram of old Venice Treacle,
with water of Mugwort, Penyroyal, and Balm; Troches of myrrh, to the quantity
of two scruples: or Oil of Amber to five or six drops, with the said Liquors.

Pills are frequently used; the best are made after this manner.

Take Castorium, Myrrh, Assa-foetida, of each one scruple: faecula Brioniae
half a scruple: seeds of Rue and Saffron, of each seven grains: with Syrup of
Mugwo^t make twelve pills. Let her take three or four; if she cannot swallow
them, let them be dissolved in Water of Mugwort.

These following Pills are good in a violent fit, which they are wont to remedy
without fail.

Take Assafaetida one scruple: Castoreum six grains: Laudanum three grains;
make all into three or four Pills. Let her take them presently.

Pilulae Faetidae majores, although they be purging, yet are they given to good
purpose in the Fit, to half a dram. For they gently evacuate, and are not wont
to work till the fit be over; so that there is no danger in their working.

Also many waters are wont to be given in the fit, viz. Aqua vitae, Cinnamon
water, or Treacle water.

Or a specifical water may be made after this manner.

Take Zedoary roots, Carrot seeds* Lovage roots, of each two ounces: red Myrrh,
Castoreum of each half an ounce: Piony roots four ounces: Misleto of the Oak
gathered at the wain of the Moon, three ounces: power upon all these being
prepared, four pints and an half of Feaver-fewwater. Spirit of Wine half a
pint; let them digest three days, and afterward still them. The dose is a
spoonful, by it self, or with some other convenient liquor.

A more easy water to make, more pleasant to taste, and no less effectual is
this following.

Take of the juyces of Bawm, and Borrage clarified, of each two pints* the best
Saffron one dram. Let them be infused, and distilled in Balneo. The Dose is a
spoonful with Broth. This following potion is vulgarly used.

Take of Cinnamon Water half an ounce: Turnep Water four ounces: Castoreum four
grains. Make all into a potion, or draught.

Oil of Amber given to three or four drops, in Orenge-flower-water, or some
other specifical, does quickly rid away the womb-fit.

The following potion is wont to do very much good, as it is to be seen in our
observations.

Take Water of Mugwort, Roses, and Orenge-flowers, of each one ounce: ^^nnamon
Water three drams: Conjection of Hyacinth stone one dram: Diamargaritum
frigidum (that is the cooler perled powder) half a scruple: Saffron four
grains. Make them all into a potion.

Orange flower water does good alone, given three or four ounces; but mingled
with Musk, and Dragons blood, it does wonders: witness Solenander in these
words. A certain Woman was vexed with ^nost cruel Symptoms, Headache,
Belchings, contraction of the Body, pain ^^her Groin, grinding of her Teeth;
sometimes falling to the ground speechless, with her mouth shut, so as she could
not open it; and all this through disorder of her Womb. Many remedies being
used in vain, a certain old Woman comes, and gives her thirteen grains of Musk,
and as many of common Dragons blood, in four ounces of Orenge-flower Water; she
was cured, and never felt the like griefs any more. I have in the like case
given the same Medicine diverse times, and always with good effect.

An Elks Claw is also very good in these fits, according to the experiment of
Appollonius Menabeus in his Treatise of the Elk, Chap. 10* in these words. I
confess I have both heard from others, and found by my own Experience, that an
Elks Claw is a present remedy for the Suffocation of the Mother. For being
called to help a Woman in those Fits, I gave her the raspings of the Elks Claw
with Zedoary, with which, and with other remedies administered according to the
rule of Art, I did the Cure with Honor. And when I understood, that she was
wont to be troubled with those Fits oftentimes, I enjoined her to wear a piece
of Elks Claw continually about her Neck: Which when she diligently observed,
for the space of three months that I was in the place, she was ever free from
those Fits, and gave me often times thanks for my advice.

Camphire fired, and cast into the water, and there abiding till it be
quenched, is an excellent Remedy, given to the quantity of a dram.

The Cats-tails of the walnut, in the Epistles collected by Laurence
Scholtzius, in the Letter written from Thomas Mouset to Peter Monavius, are
extolled with this Commedation. In Srangulation* of the Womb, the Cats-tails of
the Walnut tree, are a singular Medicine being dried, and poudered. You may
give two scruples with two drops of Oil of Amber. I never knew any thing more
excellent in that Disease.

Two most excellent Remedies may be made in the form of Pouders, which I have
oftentimes tried.

The one is of the Afterbirth of a woman that lies in of her first Child,
dried in the Chimney, and beaten to powder. The Dose is a dram in some
convenient liquor. It presently takes away the fit.

The other is made of two parts of Brimstone, and one of Nutmeg. Powder them
and give a dram.

Powder of Jeat given to half a dram, or one dram, will do much.

The Powder of Elder-berries of Quercetanus taken a dram in Wine, cures the
Eplilepsie, or Falling Sickness, by consent of the Womb, and being taken the
second time, makes that the fits return not.

Where that Powder cannot be had, the same quantity of Soot from the Chimney,
may be given in an Egg soft boiled.

And because the Womb is oftentimes filled with evil, and Excrementious Humors,
from whence ugly Vapors are raised up; we must be careful to purge the same,
which may be most conveniently done by this following Pessarie.

Take Diaphoenicon one dram: powder of Hiera picra half a dram: Turpentine
three drams: mix all, and with Tow make a Pessary.

For her ordinary drink let the Patient drink a thin weak Decoction of
Cinnamon, Caraway, or Annis seeds.

Touching Wine, It is a question whether it may be given a Woman in these fits.
Hippocrates in his first Book of the Nature of Women seems to commend the same:
and there is much reason to back his opinion. For an extreme refrigeration of
the Body, and Languishment of natural strength, cannot be better helped, than
by giving the Patient a Cup of rich Canary. But Avicenna wholly forbids it. And
indeed, Because this Disease depends for the most part upon Seed retained, or
of Blood and foul Vapors carried up from the Womb: Wine by it is thinness, and
exceeding piercing faculty, does more exagitate and vex the morbifical matter.
Whence we see by common Experience, that Women troubled with this Disease, are
worse if Wine be given in their fits. To Compose this Contention, we say; that
Wine ordinarily is not to be given during the fit, but upon extraordinary
occasion: Namely when the Patients strength is extremely decai'd, she has
Swooning fits joined with the Mother fits, or seems to be at the last gasp: all
other Remedies tried in vain, we make use of Wine as our last Refuge, and
present help.

In this Cure we must be very careful, if the Patient be with Child, and
prudent in our administration of Medicaments; neither must we use those more
vehement and stinking ones, least we cause miscarriage; and we must perform the
Cure rather by outward than inward Medicaments.

In the Course of the Cure, care must be taken of the Heart and Brain, and if
they seem much oppressed, they must be releived by such Medicines as are proper
unto them. To the Heart, Wine, and Orange-flower-water, or Imperial water, or
Treacle of Andromachus dissolved in Wine, must be applied by wetting things
therein, and laying them upon the Region thereof; or hot living Creatures are
to be applied thereunto. For to strengthen the Head, those Remedies must be
used, which are set down in our Chapter of sleepy Diseases.

When the fit is over, Care must be taken to prevent the return thereof, either
wholly, or at least for a long time: which is done by a removal of the Causes,
and by strengthening the Womb.

In the first place therefore at a convenient season; but especially in the
Spring and Fall, the Patient must be yearly evacuated, beginning with a purging
Potion, or some other Medicament suitable to the nature of the Patient; always
adding Hysterical things.

And then, If Blood seem superfluous, it must be drawn first out of the Arm,
and then out of the Foot; choosing as near as possibly the middle space between
the Patients monthly purgations.

Afterward, That the redundancy of evil Humors may be sufficiently prepared
and purged out, an Apozeme must be compounded, altering, opening, and purging,
to be given at four or five times.

If Nature seem to incline to the opening of the Hemorrhoids, they must be
opened by application of Leeches. And Mercatus does witness in his 13. and 14.
Counsel, that they have much profited in these fits.

After general purgation, to discuss the remainders of the morbifical matter, a
sweating Decoction will be good to give diverse days together; made of
Sassafras, Guajacum, with seeds of Fennel, Rue, and Agnus Castus.

To the same intent Sulphurous, and Bitumenous Baths will be very good, such as
we have at Baleruca, by whose use many are helped, as daily experience shows.

In this Disease being of long continuance, besides the remedies aforesaid, it
will be good to purg the Patient frequently, by usual Pills, Syrups or Potions.
Which may be made after this manner.

Take Troches of Agarick one dram and an half: Hiera of Coloquintida one dram:
Carrot seed, Agnus Castus seed of each one scruple: mirrh, Costoreum,
Diagrydium of each half a scruple: Turpentine, as much as shall suffice to make
all into a Mass. Let her take hereof half a dram, or two scruples twice or
thrice in a month.

The following Syrup is mightily extolled by Mercatus, as a wonderful Syrup,
and very prositable for all womb-sick women. in his 13. Counsel.

Take Juice of Herb Mercury and the Cream of Carthamus seeds of each six
ounces: Scorzonera water seven ounces Sugar as much as shall suffice to make it
into a Syrup. Add hereunto while it boyls, Confection of the Hyacinth stone,
Confection of Rermes Berries, and Powder of the Electuary de Gemmis [ that is,
made of precious Stones] of each two drams: Let the Dose be two or three ounces.

Take Briony Roots three drams, Senna Leaves half an ounce: Agarick two
scruples: Ginger one scruple: Cinnamon one dram: Let them steep all night in
Fountain water. In the straining mix one ounce: of syrup of Damask Roses. Make
hereof a potion to be taken twice or thrice in a month.

Pilulae foetidae majores [that is strong smelling Pills made of Gums] taken
twice in a month to half a dram, are very profitable.

In such as easily vomit, it is good to provok to cast, once or twice in a
month, after this manner:

Take Agarick cakes [troches of Agarick] one dram and an half: Oxymel one
ounce: Bawm water, and Mugwort water, of each three ounces: Mix all into a
vomiting Potion.

Chemists give salt of Vitriol in some appropriate water, from half a dram to
one dram, and cry it up for a specific remedy in womb-fits.

After all particular evacuations are ended (that is after each evacuation)
some strengtheners are to be administered, such as this following Electuary.

Take Conserve of Rosemary flowers Betony, and Bawm, of each one ounce and an
half: Species of the musked Electuary, and of Electuary of Calaminth of each
half a dram: With syrup of Mugwort Make all into an Electuary.

Treacle by it self is very proper for this occasion, which for hotter
constitutions may be tempered by the mixture of Conserve of water Lillies,
Maiden-haire etc.

But the following powder is far more effectual, which heales old and stubborn
womb-fits, if it be frequently taken one dram at a time, in Wine, in a bolus or
morsel made up with syrup of Mugwort.

Take Gentian Roots, white Dictamnus, tormentill, pellitorie, Rhaponticum,
Bistort, Aristolochia, or Birthwort the rounder, Chamelion thistle,
Bay Berries, Angelica, Master-wort, Coriander seeds prepared, annis seed,
juniper berries, Mastich, Bole armoniack, Terra Sigillata, of each two drams
and an half: Oriental Saffron three ounces and an half. Make all into a fine
powder, and keep it in a close vessel.

Neither must we omit such Medicaments, which are wont to help these fits by a
peculiar property thought to be in them: An Example whereof may be this that
follows, made in Pills, because of the ungrateful taste of the Simples.

Take Assafoetida half a scruple: Castoreum, Mirrh, Galbanum, Sagapenum, of
each one scruple. With Honey of Mercury make a Mass; of which give the Patient
half a scruple, or a scruple frequently.

Platerus makes Pills of extremely odoriferous Ingredients, after this manner:

Take of Musk six grains: Benjamin half a dram: Sugar one dram: With Cinnamon
Water make them into a Mass for Pills. The Dose is half a scruple.

Those Hysterical Waters before set down to be given in the fits, may likewise
be profitably used out of the fits, a spoonful or two in a morning, when the
Patient is free, by way of prevention.

Mathiolus extremely commends the Briony Root, in these words: Briony does
wonderfully help Women subject to strangulations of the Womb, so as to free
them from their choking fits, and cure them. Truly I knew a Woman, daily
almost vexed with these fits for a year together, who being at last taught by
an ordinary Herb-man, to drink white Wine, wherein an ounce of Briony Root had
been boiled, once in a week, when she was going to bed: when she had used this
Medicine for a year together, she was perfectly recovered of that Disease.

The Liver of a Wolf dried, and one dram taken, may prevent the fits of the
Falling Sickness proceeding from the Mother, if it be given three or four times
after an ordinary Purgation.

The Chemists do commend Vitriolum Martis [that is, Vitriolated Steel, or
chalybeated Vitriol, or Salt of Steel] whereof they give a grain or two, with a
double quantity of Sugar, many days together, in Wine or other fitting Liquor.

And the Truth is, it may be given to twelve, fifteen, and twenty grains in
some convenient Conserve; or it may be made into Pills, with Mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth.

Cream of Tartar frequently taken, is also very good in the Cure of this
Disease.

These two Medicines do good, not only by opening, but also by cooling; for
oftentimes an hot distemper is rooted in the womb of Women subject to this
Disease, arising from Blood retained within its Veins, and overheated; as
Galen says in Hypochondriacal Melancholy, That there is a burning distemper
in the Parts under the short Ribs, by reason of blood retained in them by
obstructions, and there overheated. Those things therefore which have power to
cool the Womb, are very proper in this case, such as are Baths to sit in,
Vinegar and Water mingled and drunk down, or injected, and such like. Unto
which we may add the History related by Dr. Harvey, touching the Childing of a
woman long afflicted with womb-fits, not curable by all that could be done; who
at length, after many years, was cured by means of the falling out of her womb:
Because her Womb exposed to the Air was cooled, and so its Inflammation and hot
distemper was repressed.

Also the use of Steel it self is much commended by some Practitioners, as very
convenient for all Infirmities of the Womb. Whose Preparations look for in
our Cure of Obstructions of the Liver.

Issues made in the Thighs, are likewise very good. For they derive and turn
aside evil Humors from the womb, by reason of those Veins which are common to
the womb and Thighs.

Neither are Amulets to be neglected, fastened about the Patients Neck, and
hanging down upon her Navel, as we formerly mentioned touching the Elks Claw,
good in this case.

Some commend Peucedanum, or Hog-fennel root, hung in a string about the Neck.
And our women do with good success, wear a piece of Assafoetida in a thin rag
of cloth. I have known some that have worn a Foxes Pizzle and Stones dried,
tied about their Neck in a string, and resting upon their Navel, and by that
means preserved themselves from the womb-fits.

Some wear a piece of Wolfs flesh dried, or of the Liver of a Wolf, not without
profit.

As for external Remedies after every Purge, or at least once in a month, eight
or ten days before the monthly Purgations of blood, Fomentations or Baths to
sit in will be good, that the Humor causing this Disease being resolved, may
more easily find its way by the opened Passages of the Courses, and flow out
with them. They may be made of the Roots of Marshmallows, Briony Roots, Orris
Roots, Madder, Valerian, Angelica, Mugwort Leaves, Nep, Feverfew, Bawm,
Bayberries, and such like.

To discuss the remainders of the Matter causing the Disease, and to strengthen
the Womb after Fomentation, or fitting in a Bath, as aforesaid, the following
Plaster may be said on under the Navel.

Take Gum Tacamahacca and Caranna, of each two drams: Alipta Moschata half an
ounce: Agnus Castus seeds, one dram and an half: of each of the Sanders half a
dram: Turpentine, Labdanum, Wax, of each as much as shall suffice to make a
Plaster.

If this Disease arise from the Seed retained, use those Remedies which we have
formerly set down to quench and discuss Seed in our Cure of Womb-Fury.

Chap. 7. Of Inflammation of the Womb.
Inflammation of the Womb, is a Tumor or swelling of that Part, springing from
blood that is shed into the substance thereof.

And the said Inflammation possesses either the whole Womb, or some part thereof;
and it is produced either by pure blood, and is called merely Phlegmont, an
Inflammation; or it comes from blood mingled with Choler, and it is called
Phlegmone erysipelatodes, a chollerick Inflammation of kin to the Rose, or St.
Anthonies fire; or it has its original from blood mingled with phlegm, and is
called Phlegmone oedematodes, a phlegmatic Inflammation; or it comes from blood
mingled with Melancholy, and is called Phlegmone Scirrhodes, which is a
Melanchollick Inflammation or Swelling.

The Causes which produce or increase this Disease, may be diverse; viz. A
Sanguine Constitution over loaded with blood, or infected with choler; a
natural looseness of the womb with wideness of the passages, air extreme hot,
inflaming the humors, or very cold compacting and knitting them together, and
so stopping the monthly Courses flowing, or ready to flow; vehement Exercise,
immoderate carnal Conjunctions, a blow or fall lighting upon the Wombs
Quarters; Perturbations of Mind more violent than ordinary, especially wrath;
acrimonious or sharp vehement meats, of a hot nature, and whatever else is
taken in of a fretting and vehement operation, as Authors report of
Cantharides, That they are very hurtful as well to the womb as the bladder;
sharp Pessaries long time used, or purging Medicines, or strong alteratives,
such as barren women are wont to take and rend from all quarters; Retention of
the Courses increasing the over fullness of blood; or over great flux of Courses
relaxing the Passages, and bringing the Humors from all the parts of the Body
to the Womb; likewise Cupping-glas^es fastened about the privy parts, may
violently draw the blood and humors unto the Region of the Womb, and there
detain them. Laborsom Childbirth may cause as much; Abortion, a violent
handling of the parts of Generation by an unskilful Midwise; and a troublesome
inconvenien^ bearing of a Child in the Womb.

The Signs to know the Disease by, are, Swelling, Heat, and Pain in the Region
of the Womb, with a continual Fever. But because the strait Gut (that is, that
which is united to the Dunggate) and the Bladder, do lodge in the same quarters
with the Womb, therefore must we distinguish this Disease by other signs: such
are, Suppression or diminution of the Courses, and their paleness or yellowish
citrine color, with pain in their coming forth; and in the absence of the
Courses certain stinking and rotten stuff sweats through the Vessels of the
Womb, and bedews the VVater-Gate. Whereinto if search be made, it will plainly
discover the Disease; for the inner mouth of the womb will be sound to swell,
to be drawn inwards, and subject to pain if touched; the neck of the womb will
appear red and inflamed, the Veins dispersed there-through, strutting with
blood.

If the whole Womb be inflamed, all Symptoms will be more vehement. If the
Inflammation be rather in the neck of the womb, the heat and pain is spread most
toward the Groyns and the Watergate. If the former side of the womb do
suffer, the Bladders fellow-seeing will be the greater: If the hinder side of
the Womb be inflamed, the strait Gut will be more compassionate, and the pain
will stretch itself toward the Loins. If the right or left side of the womb be
inflamed, the heat and pain will appear most about the one Groyn; and the Thigh
of the same side will be heavy, and as it were in a sort burdened.

The Signs of the Causes are these. If the Inflammation spring from pure blood,
all the Symptoms are milder; but if there be Choler mingled therewith, the
Fever is more burning, and all the Symptoms are more vehement; but if the
blood be Phlegmatic or Melanchollick, the Fever will be less acute, but the
Disease more lasting, and more stubborn. And here we are to consider such Signs
as may inform us what Humor is most predominant in the whole Body.

If the Inflammation turn to an Imposthume and gather Matter, the pain and
Fever are increased, and shaking sits come without any certain course, yet
commonly they take their turn about Evening. And all the other Symptoms are
heightened. When Suppression is accomplished, all the Symptoms are mitigated,
and Swelling rises higher, whereby sometimes the Excrement of the Guts, or Urine
is stopped. But if the Inflammation be discussed without Suppuration, the
Swelling lessens, and the Symptoms becomes gentler.

If it turn to a Scirrhus (that is, hard swelling) the Fever, Pain, and other
Symptoms are diminished; the Swelling abides, becomes harder; likewise the
weight and heaviness remain, both in the womb, and the adjacent parts, so that
the Patient can hardly stir her self.

A good Prognostic cannot be made of this Disease because it is very
dangerous, and for the most part deadly. But more or less danger is threatened
according to the greatness of the Disease, its Causes and Symptoms, as thus:

If the Inflammation possess the whole Womb, its a desperate Disease; but if only
a part be inflamed, there is some hope of help.

If a Woman with Child have a Chollerick swelling in her womb, its deadly.
Hipp. Aphor. 43. Sect. 5. For the Child dies by reason of the greatness of the
Inflammation, whereupon follows Abortion, which coming upon the back of a
grievous disease, kills the Mother. Galen in his Comments upon this Aphorism,
doubts if this be not true of every Inflammation of the womb as well as of the
Chollerick, and whether it be possible that a Child in such a case can live.

Inflammation of the womb easily degenerates into a Gangrene, Because the womb,
as it were the Bodies Close-stool, receives a mighty charge of nasty
Excrements, by which the inbred heat is easily suffocated.

Ravings, turning of the womb, Hiccoughs, Coldness of the Hands and Feet,
Diaphoretick sweat seizing on a woman in this Disease, do portend sudden death.

If an Inflammation of the womb come to Suppuration, its hopeful that it may be
cured; but a foul Ulcer will follow, which will make the Patient to pine away
with a lingering Fever, or to fall into the Dropsy.

If the Inflammation turn into a Scirrhus, the evil becomes lasting, and often
brings a Dropsy.

To cure this Infirmity, the Course of the Blood to the Womb is to be drawn
back, it is to be driven from the womb, it is to be diverted another way: that
which is flown in and contained in the part, is to be resolved. And if the
swelling tend to suppuration, it is to be furthered, and when it is broken, the
Matter or Quittor must be voided out; Which may be done by the following
Remedies.

An Emollient and cooling Clyster being premised, let Blood be drawn from the
Basilick Vein of the Arm, on that side on which the Womb is most affected; or
from both Arms, if the swelling be in the whole Womb; and let the Blood-letting
be repeated twice, thrice, or four times, according to the strength of the
Patient, and the greatness of the Inflammation.

After sufficient Revulsion, the Disease being come to its height, when there
is no longer suspicion of any present flux into the Womb, the lower Veins are
to be opened, to derive from the part affected. In which sense we must
understand, Galen in his Book of Blood-letting, and in his 13. Book of the
Method of Healing, where he teaches, That in the Inflammation of the Womb, we
must open the Veins about the Knees and Anckles. But so long as there remains
any Indication of Revulsion, it is better to open the Veins of the Arm.

Also to revel or draw back the Humors, Frictions are good, and Ligatures or
bindings of the uper parts, and Cupping-Glasses set upon the Shoulders, Loins,
and Back.

If vicious Humors (especially Chollerick) do abound in the Body, which are as
it were the Coach of the other Humors to hurry them about the Body; they are to
be evacuated with gentle Medicaments, as Syrup of Roses, and Syrup of Violets
solutive, Manna, Rhubarb, Catholicon, or Electuary Lenitive; for stronger
Medicaments by stirring the Humors over much, would excite the Flux of Humors
more abundantly to the part affected.

And vomiting Medicaments, though prescribed by Avicenna, seem no way
convenient in this case: For if they be mild and gentle, they evacuate nothing
to speak of: If they be stronger, they cause a great Agitation in the Body, by
which means the Humors being in a Commotion, may flow more plentifully unto the
part diseased.

In regard of the greatness of the Fever, cooling Medicaments are to be used,
as Juleps and Emulsions; whereunto, if very great wakings, pain, and tumblings
and tossings do disquiet the Patient, some Narcoticks may be added, which may
likewise be given by themselves.

After the First Evacuations, let outward Medicines be applied to the lower
part of the Belly, between the Navel and the Share, and about the Kidneys;
first of all repelling and cooling things, in the form of a Liniment, an
Epithem, and Cataplasm.

The Liniment may be made of Oil of Roses washed in Vinegar, or of Ointment of
Roses, Ceratum Santalinum, or Galens cooling Ointment, with a little Vinegar
added.

The Epitheme may be made of the Waters or Decoction of Plantane, Sorrel,
Nightshade, the tops of white Poppies and Roses, adding a little
Bole-Armoniack, Dragons Blood, and Terra Sigillata.

The Cataplasm or Pultiss may be made of the Crumbs of fine Manchet boiled with
Milk, to which a little Oil of Roses may be added, with Juice of Henbane.
Nightshade, and the whites of Eggs; or of Barley Meal, Linseed, Fenugreek seed,
with Oil of Roses; whereunto likewise the aforesaid Plants being bruised may be
added.

Injections must be made into the Womb, compounded after this manner:

Take Plantane Leaves, Water-lilly Leaves, Nightshade, and Endive, of each one
handful: red Roses two pugils. Boil all till a third part of the Water be
consumed: and add to the strainings Oil of Mirtles one ounce: Vinegar half an
ounce. Make an Injection.

Of the same Herbs bruised with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, Pessaries may be
made, and put into the Womb.

Neither must Repelling, and Refrigerating Medicaments be long used, lest the
Swelling harden and degenerate into a Scirrhus. Wherefore softening and
discussing things are to be mingled with the repelling Simples; with this
Proviso, That the longer the Inflammation is from its Infancy, the greater must
be the quantity of Digestives. So that to the foresaid Medicaments may be
added, Mallows, Marshmallows, Mugwort, Fenugreek, Chamomel Melilot; their Dose
being augmented or diminished, as the case shall require.

In the mean while, if the Patient be costive, she must be helped by gentle
Purgatives. Yea, and the truth is, frequent Clysters may do a great deal of
good to temper the Inflammation, seeing the Womb rests upon the straight Gut,
called Intestinum reotum. But let them be little in quantity, that they may be
kept the longer, and that they may not compress the Womb; of which this may be
an Example.

Take Marsh-mallow Roots, the Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Lettice, of each one
handful: Nightshade half a handful: Violet flowers, red Roses, of each a pugil:
sour Prunes, ten: boil them in Barley Water. In six ounces of the strained
Broth mix three ounces of Oil of Roses, and make all into a Clyster.

If the Patient be in great pain, to the aforesaid Clysters may be added, the
Yolks of Eggs, the fat of an Hen, Breast-milk, Mucilage of the seeds of
Fenugreek, Lin-seed, or Mallows; yea, and a little quantity of Opium, with some
Saffron.

In such a case, Injections into the Womb may likewise be made, of Goats or
Sheeps Milk, with Opium and Saffron, of each three or four grains, and a little
Rose Water.

Or unto Pessaries may be added a little Opium with a little Saffron, the
whites of Eggs, and Oil of Roses. Or Pessaries may be made of Philonium Romanum
with Cotton. Or a Fomentation to ease pain, may be prepared on this manner:

Take Marshmallows Branch and Root, Violet Leaves, of each a handful:
Chamomel, Melilot, Roses, of each a pugil. Boil all for a Fomentation.

When the Disease begins to decline, Purgation is to be iterated with gentle
Purgatives. And when the Disease tends to a Resolution or Conclusion (which is
known by remission of the Symptoms, and because the part is not so oppressed
with any Heaviness) Discussives must be used in greater quantity than any of
the foregoing Medicaments. Or this Cataplasm may be made.

Take Powder of Marsh-mallow Roots one ounce: Chamomel and Melilot flowers, of
each two drams: Mugwort Leaves poudered, Barley and Bean meal, of each half an
ounce: boil them a little in harsh red Wine; add new Hogs Grease, Oil of
Chamomel and Lillies, of each one ounce. Make a Pultiss or Cataplasm.

Fomentations and Baths to sit in, may likewise do good in this case.

If the swelling cannot be discussed, but seem to tend to suppuration, it is to
be furthered by the following Cataplasm:

Take Marsh-mallow Roots poudered, Chamomel flowers, Melilot, Meal of Lin-seed,
Fenugreek, of each one ounce: fat Figs, eight: boil all to the consistence of a
Pultiss. Then add the yolks of four Eggs: Saffron half a scruple: Oil of
Lillies and fresh Butter, of each an ounce. Make of all a Cataplasm.

When Matter or Quittor is made, which may be known by the abatement of heat
and pain, and by a certain inundation perceivable by the touch, the Matter
quaking like a quagmire, endeavor must be used to break the Imposthume by
moving of the Body, by coughing, by neezing, by fastening Cupping-glasses, by
clensing and attenuating Injections, or by Pessaries that will draw and break.
As for Example.

Take Goose-Grease half an ounce: Turpentine two drams: Rue seeds poudered,
Nitre, Orice Roots, of each half a dram. Mix all, and with Wool make a Pessary.

When the Imposthume is broke, we must endeavor to purge out the Quittor or
Matter, and to cleanse and consolidate or close up the Ulcer, as shall be showed
in the Cure of an Ulcer of the Womb, in the Chapter immediately following.

Chap. 8. Of an Ulcer of the Womb.
AFter a suppurated Inflammation of the Womb, follows an Ulcer, which likewise
depends upon other Causes, namely, so many as may cause an Erosion, fretting,
or gnawing the substance of the Womb.

The Causes therefore hereof are, An Imposthume breaking, Sharp Humors flowing
into the Womb, Sharp and Corrosive Medicines conveyed into the Womb, or taken
at the Mouth, as was said before touching Cantharides or Spanish Flies.

The Antecedent Causes are all such things, which we have formerly showed* have
power to cause an Inflammation, as difficult Childbirth, violent and unbridled
Carnal Conjunction, a long flux of Sharp Humors from the Womb, wounds, falls,
and bruises, and especially a venomous Gonorrhea, and the Lechers Pocks, the
infection whereof is soon communicated to the Womb, and its Neck.

The Differences of this Disease, are taken from the place, the magnitude, the
figure and complication with other Infirmities.

In respect of the place, that is to say, the several parts of the Womb; the
Ulcer is sometimes possessed of the Neck of the Womb, and its inner Orifice;
sometimes it is in the bottom, though but seldom. Sometimes, and that most
frequently, it seizes the inner surface of the Womb; sometimes, but seldom, it
assaults the outer surface; whence it comes to pass, that sometimes the Quittor
of these Ulcers comes out by the Bladder or Guts, or if it settle in the Cavity
of the Abdomen, Imposthumes arise about the Patients Groyns, of which
Hippocrates speaks in his 47. Aphor. Sect. 5.

In respect of Quantity, some are great, others small Ulcers, according as they
take up more or less space in the Womb; which if they be little and
superficial, they differ little from the Scab and Itch; but if they be great,
grievous, and as it were devouring, they are called by Hippocrates, Nomae, that
is, eating Ulcers.

In regard of their Figure, Ulcers are called Round, Long, Hollow, or
Fistulous, that is, like a Pipe.

In regard of Complication with other Infirmities, they are called Phlegmonous,
Cancerous, Scirrhous, Painful, VVater-bloodish, Poisonous, and Infectious.

The Signs of an Ulcer bred in the Womb, are, Pain and biting in the womb or
its neck, voiding* of snotty Matter or Quittor out of the Womb, which Diagnosis
will be more illustrated, if the Causes producing the Ulcer, such as we have
mustered up, have preceded.

If the Ulcer possess the neck of the womb, it is discerned by the sight, by
help of the Womb perspective Instrument; also by the Midwi^es hand or in the
genial Embracement, in which the Patient feels a troublesome pain, But if the
Ulcer be in the bottom of the Womb, the pain is felt about the Share, and the
Excrements flow more abundantly.

If the Ulcer pierce to the outward surface, the Patients Urines or Stools
appear Matterish, or a Fluctuation is perceived in the Paunch, or a Swelling
toward the Groyns, where it threatens to Imposthumate.

If the Ulcer be single and benign, the Quittor is little, white, and not
stinking. But if it be malignant and eating, the Quittor will be greenish, Lead
colored, and party-colored, coming away with great pain and stink.

If it shall arise of the Lechers Pox, Gonorrhoea will usher it in, or attend
upon it, and other tokens of the Whore-masters Pox will appear.

For the Prognostics of this Infirmity, Hippocrates in the first Book of
Women's Sicknesses, says, That no Ulcer in the Womb ought to be slighted,
because it is in a part of exquisite feeling, which has a fellow feeling with
the principal parts of the Body, and is very much disposed to receive a flood
of Excrements from them.

If the Ulcers of the Womb prove Cancerous, Phagedenick, or VVolf-ish [such as
we simple people call the VVoolf, and tell strange tales about, how it eats
flesh, etc.] hollow, or fistulous, they are for the most part incurable, and do
vex the poor Patients miserably, all their life long.

Ulcers in the Neck of the Womb are more easily cured, because Medicaments may
be applied to them immediately.

In women that are recovering of this Disease, it is a token of perfect health,
if they begin to conceive, and conveniently to receive the Man's Sperm, or if
they have their monthly Courses orderly and without pain.

The Cure of a womb Ulcer, must tend to hinder the flowing in of such Humors as
either beget or cherish the Ulcer, and to cleanse the Ulcer, and cause it to
come to a coalition. To which purpose the following Remedies may be used.

And first of all, If the Patient be over full of blood, or the Ulcer have an
Inflammation joined therewith, a Vein in the Arm must be opened, and repeated so
often as there seems danger of a new Fluxion; which is especially to be done
when the Patient has her Courses, that they may flow the less, because they
are wont to supply Matter to the Ulcer, and to cause other Humors to flow unto
the womb.

Also Purgation is very necessary, that the Body may be freed from evil Humors;
and it ought to be procured by the gentler sort of Purgatives, as Senna,
Rhubarb, Tamarinds, Myrobalans, Catholicum, and such like; and Purgation is
often to be repeated, that evil Humors may be diverted from the womb, and it is
in this case of such moment, that Forestus witnesses in the 48. Observation of
his 28. Book, That John Tiengius, a Physician of Amsterdam, cured a Gentlewoman
of Amsterdam of an Ulcer in her womb, to whom he gave every fourth day, five
ounces of the Decoction of Senna, Epithimum, red Roses, and Indian Myrobalans
sweetened with Sugar, using to cast clensing Decoctions, as Injections into her
womb.

For to be ever in a readiness, This following Magisterial Syrup may be
compounded.

Take of the greater Comfry Roots, and new Polypody of the Oak, of each one
ounce: Citron peels dried, six drams: Leaves of Plantane, Vinca pervinca,
Ladies mantle, Sorrel, Maidenhair, of each a handful: Liquoris scraped and
split, and Raisons stoned, of each one ounce: Senna cleansed six ounces:
Carthamus seeds bruised two ounces: Agarick newly made into Cakes and bound in
a Cloth, ten drams: Musk-melone seeds, and Annis seeds, of each three drams:
the Cordial Flowers, Rosemary Flowers, and Epithimum, of each one pugil. Make
of all a Decoction in Barley Water, in part whereof infuse of choice Rhubarb
half an ounce: Cinnamon one dram. In a pint and half of the strained Liquor,
dissolve three ounces of the Syrup of Damask Roses, and as much Sugar as shall
be requisite to make it into a Syrup perfectly boiled. Of this let her take two
or three ounces, twice or thrice in a month with some Decoction of Agrimony and
Plantane, or the Infusion of Rhubarb in Endive Water.

If the Patient be easy to vomit, a purge upwards by Vomit, is to be preferred
before the other, because it draws back the Humors from the womb.

In the spaces between purging, a Vulnerary Decoction is long to be used, which
may be made after this manner:

Take Leaves of Agrimony, Burnet, Knotgrass, Plantane, of each half a handful:
China Roots three drams: Coriander seeds one dram: Currence half a dram: red
Sanders one scruple. Boil all in the Broth of a Chicken. Let the Patient take
of the strained Liquor morning and evening* Or,

Take Leaves of Mugwort, Plantane, Yarrow, of each one handful: Rhaponticum
half an ounce: Agnus Castus seed one dram. Boil all in a sufficient quantity of
white Wine. Sweeten the strained Liquor with Sugar; and give her two or three
ounces in a morning,

If a Fever urge, and great quantity of bloodyish Quittor be voided, Whey and
Milk will be very good; let her take eight ounces or more in a morning, adding
a little Honey of Roses, or Sugar.

If her flesh begin to fall a way, with tokens of an Hectic Fever, Milk,
especially Asses Milk, must be given with Sugar of Roses for a whole month.

Sweat-provoking Medicines may likewise do good where there is no Inflammation,
nor hot distemper, to dry the Ulcer, and to revel the serous humors toward the
habit of the Body.

Turpentine washed in some convenient water for the womb, as of Mugwort or
Feaverfew; or in some water respecting the Ulcer, as of Plantane, and red
Roses, taken now and then with Sugar of Roses, does cleanse and consolidate or
fill up the Ulcer.

Pills of Bdellium given to a dram at a time, or every day, or once in two days
one scruple, do very much good, and stop the blood in case it flow.

Or new Pills may be made on purpose, to be used after the same manner, thus:

Take Bdellium three drams: Mirrh, Frankincense, of each one dram: Sarcocella,
Storax, Amber, Cheb-Myrobalans, of each half a dram: red Coral two scruples.
With Syrup of Poppies make a Mass fit for Pills, whereunto, in case of extreme
pain, a little Opium may be added.

Trochisci Alkekengi [Cakes compounded with Winter-Cherries, of which consult
my London Dispensatory] with Opium, are likewise (being poudered) given to
drink down, where the Patient is troubled with great pain.

Also to mitigate pain, the same Remedies may be used, which we prescribed for
that intent, in our discourse of the Inflammation of the womb.

This following Powder is very effectual to dry up the Ulcer:

Take Acacia, Juice of Hypocistis, of each one dram: Dragons blood, fine
Starch, Plantane Roots, Birthwort, or round Aristolochia Roots, of each half a
dram: Bole Armoniack one dram: Mastich, Sarcocolla, of each half a dram. Make
all into a most sine Powder, whose Dose let be one dram, with Plantane water,
red Rose water, or water wherein Steel has been often quenched.

Zacutus Lusitanus in the 87. Observation, and the 88. of his second Book,
propounds an Electuary and a Water, wherewith he witnesses that he had cured
Ulcers of the womb judged incurable.

Any one may find the Description of them in the places above cited.

To cleanse, dry, and fill up the Ulcer, diverse sorts of Injections are usually
made; which are nevertheless, not to be used, until the Inflammation be first
taken away, which is oftentimes attendant upon these kind of Ulcers; and until
the pain be assuaged, which is not only very troublesome, but also by vexing the
part, it is wont to increase the flux of Humors.

In regard therefore of that same Inflammation and sharpness of Humors, let
Emulsions of the cooling Seeds, VVhey of Goats Milk, or Milk it self, either
alone, or mingled with the Juice of Plantane and Shepheards-purse; or if need
be, a Decoction of Poppy heads, and the tops of Mallows be first of al
injected. Some Practitioners are of Opinion, that lukewarm water alone, does
very much good in these cases, if it be often injected. And there is reason for
it, seeing by that means the heat and Inflammation of the womb is tempered, the
pain is assuaged, and the filth adhering to the Ulcer is washed off. Valescus
de Taranta, does approve of cold water likewise, in these words: I have known
(says he) some women, who perceiving they had Ulcers in their wombs, did wash
them with cold Water, and then wipe them clean, and dry them with linen
clothes, which they did often pr^^ in at the Watergate. And by these means
often renewed, they came many times to be perfectly cured.

The hot distemper taken away, and the pain assuaged, or for the most part
diminished, we must proceed to Clensers, first using the more light and easy
Clensers, and after the more strong.

The gentle Clensers are, VVhey taken with Sugar, Barley water sweetened with
Sugar, or Honey of Roses, to make it more clensing; or Hydromel simple (see my
Dispensatory, a mixture of water and honey boiled a while together.)

For a more strong Clenser, use the Decoction of Barley, Lintels, shaled Beans,
and the Leaves of Smallage, Pellitory of the wall, Plantane, boiled together, a
little Honey of Roses being added to the straining.

When the Ulcer is very foul, the wound-decoction commonly called Aqua
Catapultarum, is the best thing that can be used, whose Composition is thus:

Take the Roots of Gentian, Rhapontick: Zedoary, and round Aristolochia or
Birthwort, of each one ounce: white Wine six pints: boil all till a third part
of the Liquor be consumed. In the straining dissolve half a pound of white
Sugar. Let it be kept for use as occasion requires.

Or the following Decoction may be provided:

Take of whole Barley, course Bran, and red Roses, of each one pugil: Leaves of
Agrimony, Wormwood, Woodbind, and Smallage, of each one handful: Beans and
Lentils, of each three drams: scraped Liquoris, Orice Roots of Florence, and
Zedoary, of each two ounces. Boil all in water, adding toward the end, a
little white Wine.

If the Ulcers be very stinking and full of rotten Quittor, there may be added
to the Decoction, a little Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, Collyrium Lanfranci, or the
Powder of dulcified Mercury.

When the Ulcer shall be well scoured and cleansed, we must use drying and
solidating things, made after this manner.

Take the greater Comfry Roots, Bistort Roots, of each one ounce: Leaves of
Plantane, Horstail, Shepheards-purse, Ladies Mantle, Mous-ear, Yarrow, of each
one handful: red Rose Leaves half a handful: Boil all in water, and make thereof
an Injection.

With the which or like Injection, this following flesh-creating Powder may be
mingled.

Take the Roots of Orice, Birthwort, great Comfry, of each half an ounce: Mirrh
one ounce: Aloes three drams. Make all into Powder, of which half an ounce may
be mingled with every Injection.

Turpentine washed in Plantane Water to the quantity of two drams, dissolved
with Honey and the Yolk of an Egg, will do very much good, mingled with the
Injection; and the more if the flesh-creating Powder be also added.

The Ointment Pompholygos, de Cerusa, de Plumbo, of each six drams for a Dose,
mixed together, are likewise used in Injections. But the Egg-yolk Oil, rubbed
about with a Pestle in a Leaden Mortar, is better than all the rest.

Fumes received through a close stool, do pierce to the deep Ulcers which are
about the bottom of the Womb, and dry them: Which may be thus prepared:

Take Frankincense, Mirrh, Mastich, Storax, Juniper, Gum, Labdanum, of each one
ounce: Turpentine as much as shall be requisite. Make all into little Cakes for
to be burnt under a close stool.

In a most stubborn Ulcer, Cinnabarus or Minium being added to the Fume-Cakes,
bears away the Bell from al other Medicaments.

Also Baths that are drying, Sulphurous, and Allumish, are used in long Ulcers:
and Physicians are wont to send their desperate Patients to those Baths, as the
last Remedy.

It will not likewise be unprofitable to apply convenient Plasters to the
Region of the Womb, seeing their virtue can pass to the innermost parts of the
womb, by the invisible pores of the Body.

If an Ulcer be in the neck of the womb, it must be smeared with scouring and
drying Liniments, or Ointments. The Scourers may be made after this manner:

Take of the Juice of Smallage two ounces: Honey of Roses one ounce and an
half: Turpentine half an ounce: Barley Meal as much as shall seem convenient.
Boil them all gently, and make them into the form of a Liniment or Ointment. Or,

Take the round Birthwort half an ounce: Horehound, Centaury the smaller,
Agrimony, of each half a handful. Boil them in a sit quantity of Hydromel. To
the strained Liquor add the powder Florentine Orice Root two drams: Barley
meal, and clarified Honey, of each as much as shall suffice. Make all into a
Liniment or Ointment.

And sometimes the Ointment Pompholygos is used, adding thereto, Frankincense,
Mastich, Mirrh, Aloes, as the Nature of the Ulcer shall require.

When the Ulcer is sufficiently cleansed, a drying and scar-contracting Ointment
is to be laid on, which may be thus made:

Take Tutty Powder washed half an ounce: Litharge of Gold and Silver, Ceruss,
Sareocolla, of each two drams: Oil and Wax as much as will suffice. Make all
into an Ointment.

It falls out sometimes, That Ulcers of the Womb do penetrate unto the straight
Gut, and sometimes unto the Bladder; which is known by the Quittor issuing
through the Watergate, or the Dung-Gate.

If the Quittor or Matter come out by stool, Lenitive, Scouring, and Drying
Clysters are to be used; such as we propounded in our Cure of the Bloody Flux.

But if the Quittor come away by Urine, gentle Piss-drivers and cooling will be
requisite, which may purge out the filth sent into the Bladder, and further the
Cure of the Ulcer; such as are, Emulsions of the greater cold Seeds, after
which, Turpentine must be used, and other Medicines prescribed for an Ulcer of
the Bladder.

If the Ulcer degenerate into a Fistula, which chiesly falls out when it opens
outwardly toward the Hip, though it may likewise happen in the Womb it self,
and its Neck; it is to be considered, which is better for the Patient, to leave
that Passage free and open, to which Nature has been accustomed, and by which
she endeavors to disburden her self of manifold Excrements, or to stop the
same. If it be judged best to keep it open, a palliative Cure must at least be
made, by Purges frequently repeated, and Sweat-provokers are to be administered
twice in a year,; also scouring Injections, and strengthening must be used, and
Emplastrum D^apalma Divinum* and ^uch like Plasters, are to be laid upon it.
But if there be hopes to make a perfect Cure, and heal up the Fistula, such
Medicines must be applied, as are wont to be used for the cure of other
Fistulaes.

If Ulcers happen in the Watergate, or in the Cavity of the Womb, by reason of
the Lechers Pox, they cannot be Cured without the General Cure of the said Pox.
In the performance of which Cure, of many ways, there is none better than
Fumigations of Cinnabaris or Minium; for they do not only help to rid the whole
Body of that Infection, but being received into the Cavity of the Womb, they do
in a peculiar manner hasten the Cure of these kind of Ulcers. Likewise in the
Cure of this Disease, by Quick-silver'd Ointments, the said Ointments must be
conveyed into the inner parts of the Womb.

In whatsoever Ulcers of the Womb, if the Neck thereof be molested with an
itch, as it often falls out, by reason of a deflux of a sharp and salt Humor
into that part; to pacify the said Itch, a Pessary will be good, dipped in
Vnguentum Enulatum cum Mercurio; or in Aegyptiacum dissolved in Seawater, or
in Alum water; or in new Butter wherein Quicksilver has been killed, with
some Brimstone mingled.

Chap. 9. Of a Scirrhus, or a Painless hard Swelling of the Womb.
THe Nature, Sorts, and Causes of a Scirrhus, or hard Swelling in the Womb, are
the same which have been set down in our Chapter of the like Swelling in the
Liver, and need not in this place be vainly repeated, but must be sought for in
the said Chapter.

Howbeit among the Antecedent Causes, this is proper to an Hard-Swelling of the
Womb, and is very frequent, namely, for women when the flux of their Courses or
Childbed purgations are upon them, undiscreetly to expose themselves to the
cold Air, or to drink cold water; whereby the flux is stayed, and the retained
blood grows thick, and is condensed, and at length produces a Scirrhus or
stony hard Swelling in the Womb.

The Signs of such a Swelling bred in the Womb, are, An hardness selt in the
Region of the Womb, such as resists the touch, which hardness represents the
compass of the Womb; an heaviness in the same place, and a sense of some weight
bearing down, especially when the sick woman stands, as though the womb would
fall down into the Watergate; but when they sit or lie, it bears upon the
straight Gut with its weight. There is no Fever nor pain; wherein it differs
from an Inflammation, or at most there is but very little pain in an imperfect
Scirrhus, but in the Womb there is none. If it follow an Inflammation the Fever
and pain ceases, the hardness and resistance abiding. If it be in the Body of
the Womb, it is easily discerned by handling the parts about the Share; but if
it be in the Neck of the womb, it may be perceived by ones finger. It is
distinguished from a Mole by the preceding Causes; and because in a Mole, if
the Courses flow, they flow disorderly, but in this Hard Swelling they keep
their order; and in a Mole, the woman's Dugs strout with Milk, but in the Hard
Swelling they are extenuated.

As for the Prognostic Signs, Every Scirrhus or hard stony Swelling, is very
exceeding hard to cure; for an extreme Hardness once contracted can hardly be
softened; also Natural heat is so very weak in that part where there is such a
Swelling, that it can very hardly discuss an hard and almost stony substance.

A great and unvanquishable Scirrhus, or stony Swelling, does at length bring
the Dropsy to keep him company.

A Scirrhus, or stony hard Swelling of the womb, if it be tampered withal with
over hot and moist Medicaments, it turns into a Cancer.

The Cure of this Disease aims at two things, the Antecedent Cause, and the
conjoined or concomitant Cause.

In respect of the Antecedent Cause* a Vein must be opened, first in the Arms,
if the Disease be of no very long continuance; afterward in the lower parts,
especially when the Patients Courses are stopped.

The opening of the Hemorrhoid Veins, is also very profitable in this case: For
they do both evacuate dreggy blood, and they turn the Humor from the womb,
because of the communion which the Veins have with the womb.

Purging is likewise necessary, by fits repeated, procured by such Medicines as
purge Melancholy, using first the gentler, and then the stronger sort by
degrees.

And before the Purges, such things must be given as prepare the Melancholy
Humor, and open the narrow passages of the Excrements, in the form of Apozems,
Juleps, or Broths, according to the disposition of the sick party.

And besides the ordinary Openers, Medicines with Steel, must be likewise used,
whereby those strongest Obstructions caused by thick and rebellious Humors in
the Womb and other parts, may be dissolved.

And that superfluous humors may be derived from the womb, Issues may
profitably be made in the Thighs, which are to be kept open until the Patients
monthly Courses (which are commonly stopped in this Disease) shall return unto
their ordinary form, in respect of time, quantity, and quality.

In respect of the conjoined Cause, Emollient and Resolving Medicaments are to
be applied outwardly, compounded after this manner:

Take the Roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, of each two ounces: the leaves of
Mallows, Violets, Marshmallows, Bears-foot, of each one handful: Leaves of
Mugwo^t, Nep, of each half a handful: Seeds of Line and Fenugreek, of each one
ounce: Flowers of Chamomel and Melilot, of each a pugil. Make a Decoction of
all, wherewith the Region of the Share, and the Groins must be fomented, a warm
sponge being first dipped therein, and then squeez^d out, and so laid on, and
held to the parts aforesaid.

For the greater mollifying, the Decoction may be made in Water and sweet Oil,
or in the Broth made of a Wethers Guts.

There may also be added to the Decoction, that it may become more powerful,
the Roots of Briony and wild Cucumers; for we must begin with the milder, and
proceed to the stronger by Degrees.

Of the same Decoction (augmenting the quantity of the Simples) may a Bath be
made for the Patient to sit in, which is very effectual in this Case, and more
powerful than a Fomentation.

^lso frequent Clysters and Injections into the Womb* are to be made of the
same Decoction* whereunto the Oils of Lillies, Chamomel, or sweet Almonds may
be added.

Take of the Oil o^ Lillies, and sweet Almonds, of each three ounces: Mucilage
of Fenugreek seed extra^ted with white Wine one ounce: Hens, Gooses, and Ducks
Fat, of each one ounce and an half: new Butter and Hogs Grease, of each two
ounces: Wax and Turpentine as much a^ shall suffice* Make all into an Ointment.

This which follows, is approved in all hard Swellings, being described by
Rhasis in his Seventh Book, dedicated to King Almansor.

Take Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of each equal quantities: Beat them in a
Mortar with Oil of Ben, and of Lillies; then add the Mucilages of Fenugreek
Seed, Lin-seed, and Figs, in equal quantities. Make all into an Ointment.

Of the same Materials, adding Wax, may a most effectual Plaster be made, to
be applied to the Region of the Womb, both before and behind. Or a Plaster may
be applied made of Emplastrum Diachylum ireatum.

A Cataplasm or Pultiss may be made of what remains after the Decoction
aforesaid, being beaten and forced through an Hair Searce, adding of the meal
of Lin-seed and Fenugreek seed, of each an ounce: six Figs: two drams of Orice
Root: half a dram of Saffron: Hens Grease, and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each a
sufficient quantity. Make of al a Pultiss.

The Bitumenous clay taken out of Brimstone Baths, and such as are Bitumenous,
is profitably applied as a Cataplasm.

The Fume of the Stone called Pyrites [that is, the Marchasite, or Fire-stone]
being made red hot, and quenched in Vinegar, is by Galen wonderfully extolled
for dissolving all stony hard Swellings, so that it works like a Charm. In the
said Vinegar, Savory and Pellitory may be boiled: but care must be had, lest
your Lapis Pyrites prove to be the Stone called Plumbarius, or the Leadstone,
which would do very much hurt.

Finally, All the Medicines, as well internal as external, which were before
described in our Cure of the hard Swellings of the Liver and Spleen, may also
be useful in this case.

Yet must the^e ^edicaments in the whole course of the Cure be moderated and
accommodated with the greatest judgment and discretion imaginable, left the
hard Swelling become harder; or (which is much wor^e) degenerate into a Cancer,
Which al Practitioners fear, when Medicaments are unwarily administered for a
long time together: so that it is better sometimes to pause, and give or apply
nothing, that we may mark what good is done by the former applications. For it
is vain striving, when the Swelling (having lost al sense of feeling) has put
on the Nature of a stone.

Chap. 10. Of a Cancer of the Womb.
A Cancer is a hard Swelling of the Body or Neck of the Womb, which resists the
touch, and causes a most vehement pain, as it were pricking and cutting the
part affected.

It is caused by black Choler gathered in that part, or by reason of a
Scirrhus, or senceless hard tumor il cured, which easily turns into a Cancer,
especially in this part of the Body, by reason of the copious afflux of blood,
which being retained in those Veins which are nigh unto the Scirrhus, and not
sufficiently evacuated by the monthly purgations, it becomes adust or burned,
and acquires a malignant disposition.

It is ordinarily reckoned to be of two sorts, Ulcerate, and not Ulcerate.

So long as the Morbifick matter is of lesser Acrimony and Malignity, it
causes a Cancer not ulcerated* but when it grows more sharp by putrefaction or
adustion, it does exulcerate the tumor, and produce an ulcerated Cancer.

The Disease may easily be known by the definition propounded; for if an hard
Tumor resisting the touch, be felt in the Body of the Womb, or its Neck,
causing a pricking and cutting pain, we may pronounce boldly that it is a
Cancer, Yet it is more evidently distinguished by the eyesight, when it may be
seen as in the Neck of the Womb it may be, with help of a Womb-perspective
Instrument; for we shall see an uneven and bunching swelling, Lead-colored or
black, compassed about with certain branches of Veins, as it were with roots;
but if it be ulcerated, it sends forth a certain bloodwatry quittor or matter,
which is yellow or black, and stinking, and sometimes blood, by corrosion of the
Veins which pass through that part, sometimes in such quantity that the Patient
incurs danger of death. Hereunto is added a small Fever, unquietness,
Stomach-sickness, an heat in, and about the Watergate, etc.

By way of Prognostication, we can only say thus much, That a Cancer is
incurable, be it ulcerated or not ulcerated. Which as it is true of al Cancers,
not excepting those in the outer parts of the Body, much more is it of a Cancer
in the Womb, by reason of that perpetual Common-shore of Excrements which flows
into the part.

Seeing then a perfect Cure cannot be hoped for, we must content our selves
with such a Cure as is called Palliative. The scope whereof is, to hinder a not
ulcerated Cancer from ulcerating, and an exulcerated Cancer from becoming more
exulcerate: and in both to allay and temper the extremity of the pain. Which
must be done, first by universal Purgations of the whole Body, and by other
Medicines which may qualify and evacuate the black Chollerick, and
Melanchollick blood, and hinder the further generation thereof. In the number
of which are, bleeding in the Arm, Anckle, and Hemorrhoid Veins; Potions,
Apozems, Juleps, Broths, Milk, Whey, cold Mineral Waters, and such like
Remedies as these usually prescribed by Practitioners for the Cure of al
Cancers in what part of the Body soever. And especially Purgations must be
frequently reiterated, that the antecedent matter of a Cancer may be abated.

And then outward Remedies are to be used, such as are moderately cool and
astringent, without any corrosive or biting quality; they are commonly applied
in form of Liniments or Ointments. The best are made after this manner:

Take Oil of Myrtles and Roses, of each two ounces: Juice of Nightshade and
Housleek, of each one ounce. Stir all together in a Leaden Mortar, with a
Leaden Pestle, until they grow black: then add Litharge of Silver, and Ceruss,
both washed in Scabious Water, of each two drams: Camphire ten grains. Make all
into an Ointment, with which let the part affected, be smeared three or four
times a day. Or,

Take Oil of Egg-yolks, and of Roses, of each one ounce and an half: Sugar of
Lead one dram. Stir them together in a Leaden mortar till their color change.

This following puts down all the rest, wherewith Swellings of the Dugs which
have been accounted Cancerous, have been perfectly cured.

Take Egg-yolks Oil two ounces: Juice of Nightshade and Veronica or Housleek,
of each half an ounce: Quicksilver not killed two drams. Stir them lustily
together in a leaden mortar, with a leaden pestle, till they become thick as an
Ointment.

The foresaid Ointments are to be conveyed into the womb upon long tents, or
upon wax Candles, wound in Linen. But Injections may much more easily be
conveyed into the Womb. They are compounded on this manner:

Take Barley Water half a pint: Nightshade and Plantane Water, of each two
ounces: Water of Housleek one ounce: white Troches of Rhasis two drams: Sugar
of Lead one dram. Make of (...) In section.

(...) in be very vehement, add to four ounces of the Injection, one ounce of
Syrup of Poppies.

Also let the part affected be fomented with the waters of Plantane and
Nightshade, or their Decoctions; whereunto may be added the Leaves of
Water-lilly, white Poppy, red Roses, and Camphire. Which Decoction may also
frequently be injected into the womb, and it will become much more effectual, if
it shall be well wrought about in a Leaden mortar, or a dram of the Sugar of Lead
be added to it.

Among Specific Remedies, Frogs are commended, being washed and boiled, and
laid on as a Pultiss, or their Broth being used as an Injection. Also the
Decoction, or juice of River Crabs, i^^ected into the womb. As also Herb Robert
used inwardly or outwardly.

If the Cancer be ulcerated, the Dose of Minerals must be augmented in the
foresaid Liniments, and to them the ashes of River Crabs may profitably be
added. And with the Injections, the white Troches of Rhasis may be mingled, and
Barley Water with the Materials of the foresaid Injection.

If pain be very urgent, Fomentations of Mallows, Marshmallows, Water Lillies,
Poppy, Henbane, Green Coriander, Dil, Fleawort seeds, Milk, Saffron, and the
like, are to be used at convenient seasons; or Pultisses made of them are to be
applied. And of their Decoctions, Injections, and Baths to sit in, may be
provided.

Yet will not al these Medicaments sometimes serve turn to pacify a most cruel
pain, which sometimes gives the Patient neither rest nor sleep. Which compels us
many times to make use of Narcotick or stupefactive Medicines, which in this
Disease, by reason of the exceeding Heat of the Humors, do less hurt. And I
have seen a woman, having a Cancer in her Dug, that took every night for four
months together, two or three grains of Laudanum, and had no hurt, but very
great comfort thereby.

If from an ulcerated Cancer much blood do proceed, as it often falls out, let
Juice of Plantane with a little Frankincense be injected into the womb.

Chap. 11. Of Mortification, or Gangrenation, and Sphacelation, or Blasting of
the Womb.
A Gangrene is the corruption or mortification of a part beginning; but when it
is wholly corrupted, and dead, it is said to be Sphacelated, or blasted.

In the Genital parts of Women, this Disease is easily bred, because those
parts are moister and softer than ordinary, and do easily receive the
Excrements of the whole Body.

It often follows an Inflammation, Imposthume, Ulcer, or Cancer il cured, when
the vital heat of the part, is choked or destroyed. It is choked in great
Inflammations, when more blood flows in than the Natural heat of the part can
digest, or turn into Matter. It is destroyed, either by a cold distemper
extinguishing it, or by an hot one, dissipating and resolving the same.

A beginning Gangrene is known by an unusual heat felt in the part, a horror
and trembling seizes upon the Patient, with a languishing and quick-beating
pulse, and with fainting away, or swooning. And seeing this Disease does for
the most part happen to the Neck of the Womb, so that the part affected may be
perceived by the Eye; it is discovered to be soft, Lead-colored, black and
carrion like, and may be pricked or cut, and the Patient never feel it; and it
sends forth besides, a stinking and carrion-like smell.

As for the Prognostic or Predictions belonging to this Disease. It is a most
grievous, most dangerous Disease, and for the most part deadly: yet it has
been observed by very many Authors, That the Womb being putrefied and
Gangrenated, has either fallen away of it self, or been cut away, the women's
lives being saved: which Observations of Authors, Schenkius has collected to a
great number, in the fourth Book of his Observations.

The Cure is performed with the same Remedies which are wont to be applied to
other parts being Gangrenated, if it be in the Neck of the Womb, or tend toward
the outward parts; as namely, with Scarrifications, and washings or bathings
with a Decoction of Wormwood, Mirrh, and such like, with the Ointment called
Aegyptiacum, the Cataplasm called De Tribus farmis, which is thus made:

Take Barley meal, Bean meal, and Orobus meal, of each two ounces: Oxymel one
pound: Boil them to the thickness of a Pultiss or Cataplasm. Whereunto if there
be added, meal of Lupines, Mirrh, Aloes, and Wormwood, it will be more
effectual.

If any part of the Womb be wholly corrupt and dead, it must be cut off; or if
the Womb fall down, it must be separated, by binding the Ligature every day
faster and closer. Of which kind of Operations, there be many Examples
collected by Schenkius in the fourth Book of his Observations.

Wierus also relates in his Observations, That he cured a woman of twenty five
years of age, who in the hottest of the Dog-daies, had a certain little bunch
growing in her Watergate. Whereunto an unskilful Chyrurgion applying Pultisses
that were not proper, within a few days, all that part began to putrefie, grow
black and dead, and the Disease past on with incredible swiftness toward the
Dung-Gate. And Wierus undertook the Cure after this Method: First, he squirted
good store of the Juice of Nightshade and Plantane with a Syringe into both the
Passages three or four times a day; between which times, he applied a bolster
wet with the foresaid Juyces, Vinegar being mixed therewith; which growing dry
was wet again with the same Liquor. And in this course of reiterated
Application he continued til the fervent heat was quenched, and the
putrefaction began to cease. She took in the mean while, thrice every day a
Potion, of the Decoction of Sorrel, Scabious, Burnet, Damask Prunes, the tops
of Borrage and Bugloss, Marigold flowers, with Water, Sugar, and Vinegar, made
in the manner of a long, acid, or sharp Syrup. Her Diet was spare, but cooling
and tart, to prevent putrefaction. On the third day, the fury of the burning
heat, and of the putrefaction, was abated. Whereupon he commanded the black and
dead flesh to be drawn or plucked out with a little Forceps [Chyrurgions
Instrument, like Tongs or Pincers] and separated round about from the live
flesh, without any pain, and so to be cut off. Then he consumed the relics
even to the live flesh with the Ointment called Aegyptiacum. And proceeded to
cicatrize, or bring it to a Scar, after the same manner which is used in other
Ulcers.

In the whole course of the Cure, care must be had to strengthen the Heart, both
by things given in, and applied outwardly: Likewise Emollient, Clensing, and
Refrigerating Clysters, are frequently to be given, which do much help the part
affected, by reason of Neighbor-hood.

Chap. 12. Of the Wombs Wind-and-Water Swelling, or Dropsy.
THe Inflation or blowing up of the Womb with Wind, and its Dropsy, are by
Writers confounded or jumbled together; so that they call the Inflation, a
Dropsy coming of wind; whereas the Dropsy properly so called is ingendered by
a watery Humor, Yet are they distinguished, and there is a certain puffing up
of the Womb with wind, suddenly rushing in, and stretching the same, and
causing vehement pain, as in the Chollick; which because it continues not, but
is soon discussed, it deserves not the name of a Dropsy; and such a puffing up
is often seen in Hysterical women which have the Womb-fits.

There is therefore to be reckoned a twofold Dropsy of the Womb; one from
Wind, which is like that sort of Belly-dropsie which is termed Tympanitis, or
the Drum-belly Dropsy: another arising from a wheyish Humor, answering to the
Dropsy of the Belly, called Ascites, that is, the Bottle-belly Dropsy: Some
add a third sort, answering to the third sort of Belly-Dropsies, called from
its cause, Leucophlegmatia, that is, white-flegm Dropsy, which is seldom seen
in the course of Practice. Yet I have seen a Gentlewoman, which in one day
voided such plenty of thick phlegm out of her womb, as might weigh probably six
or seven pound weight: which phlegm long retained, might doubtless have caused
in her, a Dropsy of the womb.

Wind and water causing a Dropsy of the Womb, are contained either within the
Cavity of the Womb, or in its Membranes, or in certain Bladders. Touching the
Cavity of the Womb, it is somewhat doubted how Wind and Humors can be contained
therein, seeing there is so easy a Passage through the Neck and Mouth of the
Womb. We answer, The inner Orifice or Mouth of the Womb, may be closed up
diverse ways; either by thick phlegm sticking fast thereunto, and growing hard,
or by a Scirrhus, or some other cause. Mercatus conceives, That a snotty kind
of phlegm is voided by the mouths of those Veins which are ordained for the
monthly Purgations, and that of the said snotty phlegm a skin is framed, which
covers all the inner surface of the Womb, within which thin skin, the wheyish
and windy Matter is contained. But Fernelius thinks, That water may be
contained in the womb, without any thing amiss in its mouth, but barely by its
constriction or pursing of it self together. All these sorts are to be allowed
of, and may be confirmed by diverse Examples.

And first of all, Examples of Winds contained in the VVomb-Cavity, are
recited by Sennertus, in the Fourth Book of his Practice, Part 1. Sect. 2.
Chap. 10. The first is taken out of Valescus de Taranta, touching a certain
Jewish woman of Lisbon, who taking her self to be with Child, when she expected
to be delivered, a great quantity of wind came away, and so her womb was
brought down again. The Second is taken out of Mathiolus de Gradi, who relates
the same thing to have befallen his own wife. And other Examples taken out of
Dodonaeus, Thadaeus Dunus, and other VVriters, do testify the like Cases; and
we see the same often in the course of our Practice. Whereunto may be added a
History, which we shall in the Cure relate out of Solenander, of a woman who by
means of a Fumigation made of Nutmegs, let wind fly out of her Womb, which gave
a report like a Pistol.

And Examples of Water contained in the Womb are propounded by the said
Sennertus, out of Rhasis, who saw a woman out of whose Womb there flowed twenty
five Cotila's of water, which is a Measure not used with us, containing about
half an Ale Pint. Also out of Jacobus de Partibus, and Dodonaeus, who relate
such a like Story. And Vesalius Dissected or Anatomized a woman, in the
hollowness of whose womb, were found above sixty Ausburg Measures of water,
each Measure containing three pints, and the mouth of her womb was grown to a
wonderful hardness.

And that water is sometimes contained in the womb in bladders, many Authors do
testify, who have seen examples thereof in some women, who voided such
bladders full of water from their wombs; among the rest Aetius, Valeriola,
Christopherus a Vega, Mercatus, Platerus, and Fabricius Hildanus.

Sometimes also women with Child have a Dropsy at the same time in their wombs,
as Fabricius Hildanus relates of his own wife, whose Belly was swelled to a
monstrous greatness; and at the time of her delivery, she voided first of all,
eighteen pints of water, and half an hour after, nine pints more; and at last
she was delivered of a Boy, strong and healthy. The like case we find in
Skenkius, but with a contrary event, concerning a woman, who being delivered of
a living Child, continued still big-bellied, and her belly growing still greater
and greater, she died of it, and her womb being opened, a great quantity of
water was found therein.

Finally, Fernelius has an Example, in the sixth Book of Diseases, Chap. 15.
of water retained in the womb, only by reason of the close shutting of the
mouth of the womb, without any other fault therein. The story is of a woman
that had a Dropsy in her womb, who as often as she had her monthly Purgations,
voided al her watery Excrements out of her womb, filling six or eight Basins
with a very hot yellowish water, til the swelling of her belly was wholly
abated. The next month the like redundancy of watery Excrements being collected,
was in like manner evacuated.

The immediate Cause of the windy and watery Swelling of the womb, is the
weakness of Natural heat, residing in the Liver or Spleen; and from those
parts, wind, phlegm, or wheyish humors are transmitted into the womb; or the
weakness is in the womb it self, whereby the said Excrements are therein
collected and heaped together.

And the Causes which weaken Natural heat, either directly, or by accident, are
very many, and the chief are, of those things which are collected by
Physicians, Res non Naturales, things not Natural. So, cold air, especially
after Childbirth, heedlessly received into the womb, is a most effectual cause
of this infirmity. Also cold Air unseasonably received when the Courses flow,
and going frequently into cold water, or padling in the same, especially during
the said flux, is a cause thereof. So is much use of cold Meats, or windy, as
fruits, Herbs, Beans, and Pease, and likewise of Vinegar: Cold water
plentifully and unseasonably drunk down, long and deep sleep, painful childing
and abortion especially if it often happen, immoderate flux of the Courses,
exhausting the Natural heat, or their suppression choking the same. Add to
these, the proper Diseases of the womb, as swellings, ulcers, and such like,
which do resolve the heat of the part; or else shut the mouth of the womb, and
hinder the egress of Menstrual blood, and excrementitious humors.

In the Discovery of this Disease, many things are to be considered:

First, How this particular Dropsy of the womb, may be known and distinguished
from that of the whole Body?

Secondly, How the several sorts of this Womb-Dropsie may be discerned, as
whether it come from wind, from wheyish Humors, or from phlegm?

Thirdly, Whether it proceed primarily from some infirmity of the womb, or by
fault of some other parts of the Body?

Fourthly, Whether the Matter offending be contained in the Cavity of the womb,
or between its Membranes, or in certain Bladders?

Fifthly, How to distinguish it from other Tumors of the womb?

Sixthly, How from being great with Child?

Seventhly, How it may be known from a Mole?

As for the First Question. It is distinguished from an Universal Dropsy of
the Belly, in that the Womb-Dropsie swells chiefly the lower part of the Belly;
whereas the universal Dropsy distends equally the whole Belly in all the parts
thereof. Again, In the Womb-Dropsie, paleness and falling away of the flesh of
the whole body, are not so soon discerned as in the universal Dropsy, in which
also for the most part, there is evident thirst and dryness of the tongue,
which are not found in the womb-Dropsie, in which al other Symptoms are
likewise far more gentle, than is usual in the universal Dropsy. In a word, In
the Womb-dropsie, some wind breaks out of the womb by fits; or a little water
comes away, which evidently declare, that wind or water are contained in the
womb.

To the second Question we Answer thus. That the sorts of Womb-Dropsies may be
known from one another after this manner. If it arise from wind, the lower part
of the belly being struck gives a sound; the belly is afflicted with pricking
pains, which reach sometimes as far as the Midrif, Stomach, Loins, and other
parts; sometimes wind breaks evidently out of the neck of the Womb. Likewise,
women often feel their Wombs riseing like a Globe toward their stomachs.
Sometimes their breath is short and the sick woman when she awakes out of sleep,
oftentimes is much troubled to fetch her wind. After all meat and drink
whatever, they are worse. They often belch, and their belchings give them ease.
They are often troubled with Womb fits or suffocation of the Mother. Sometimes
they are pained below the navel, so as they cannot endure to be touched. Those
Signs do also appear in the Inflation or Blowing up of the Womb with wind,
which differs from this Disease (as was said before) only in this, that the
Inflation is of less durance, but a Dropsy of wind continues a far longer time.

But if the Wombs Dropsy arise from a wheyish Humor, the Region thereof
appears soft and flaggy; whereas wind stretches it stif: there is a greater
heaviness in the part and a noise as of water flowing this way and that way:
some water now and then drops from the Privity. And finally if it arise from
phlegm, the softness and flagginess of the part will be yet greater, and
increase daily more and more; and the bordering parts, as all under the Navel,
the Privy parts, the space between the Privity and Fundament; with the Loins,
will be seen to swell with a Phlematick kind of Swelling.

To the Third Question we answer thus. If there be apparent tokens of the whole
Bodies being misaffected, as by acute or long fevers, immoderate fluxes of
blood, grievous distillations from the Head, Weaknesses of the stomach:
swellings of the Spleen or Liver and other stubborn Diseases of those parts,
with which the Wombes Dropsy began, increasing as they increased; it will be
more than an even lay, that the Womb receives the matter of it is Dropsy from
those parts by way of a flux of Rhewm. But if this Womb-swelling happen, when
the whole Body is in good health, and do succeed particular diseases of the
Womb, such as are hard Travels in Childbirth, Suppressions of the monthly
courses, or over great flux thereof, Ulcers, Chollerick, or Melancholic, or
hard Tumors, we may conjecture, that the Wombes-Dropsie does depend upon those
particular dispositions, and that the matter causing the said Tumor, is
gathered together in the Womb it self, by means of its inability perfectly to
digest and assimilate its nutriments.

To the fourth Question, we may Answer by saying, That the Matter which is
contained in the cavity of the Womb, does make a much larger Swelling, than
when it is contained in bladders. Again, when it proceeds from a wheyish humor,
a greater fluctuation of the water is perceived than when it is contained in
bladders. And if so be, little bladders full of water be voided out of the
Womb, it is a most certain sign, that the Humor is contained in the little
bladders.

To the first Question we must Answer; that the Wombs-Dropsie is Differenced
from Tumors of blood or Choler, arising in the Womb: because in such Tumors or
Swellings there is a fever and a pain which is increased by the least touch;
also the Inflammation reaching even to the parts of Generation. And it is
distinguished from Scirrhous and Cancerous Swellings, because in it there is no
such great Hardness, which can resist the impression of the Finger, but it
rather gives way, and pitts.

To the Sixth Quaere we say: When a woman is big with Child, the Swelling is
not so even and depressed, but it is sharp, buncheth out, and seems greater
about the navel than elsewhere. Secondly, In Greatness with Child, after some
months, women are for the most part somewhat better than they were, because the
Child grown big consumes the greater part of those humors, which in the first
months were burdensome: But the Dropsy, the further it proceeds the worse it
grows. Thirdly, In greatness with Child, the child is manifestly perceived. to
stir, after the third or fourth month; which is not in the VVomb-Dropsie. Yet
it falls out sometimes, that when the Dropsy is caused by wind, a certain
Palpitation is preceived in the Womb; but it is easily distinguished from the
moving of a Child, which is more even, and is wont to be perceived in diverse
parts of the Belly. Fourthly, In Greatness of Child, the woman's Duggs swell;
but in the Dropsy they are extenuated and become smaller.

To the seventh Quaere we Answer, that in a Mole, women find a kind of
Heaviness in their VVombs, which they feel not in the VVomb-Dropsie; and when
they lie on the one of their sides, they perceive the weight to roll like a
stone to that side. Again, in the Mole, violent flux of Courses comes by fits,
namely, every third or fourth month; which happens not in the VVomb-Dropsie.
Lastly, in case of a Mole, the Duggs swell, and sometimes have milk; in the
VVomb-Dropsie, quite Contrary.

As touching the Prognostics of this Disease. A simple Inflation or puffing up
of the womb with wind, because it lasts not, is without danger. Yet if not
quickly cured it may grow to a true Dropsy.

A Womb-Dropsie caused by a good conditioned Humor void of putrefaction, is
wont to prove a long Disease; yet may it in process of time be cured, yea
sometimes, the water flows of its own accord out of the womb, and the Patient
recovers her health.

But if the Humor be malignant, sharp, or putrid, which is known by the
grievous Symptoms following; the Disease is dangerous, and for the most part
deadly: For if the Disease depend upon some private Disease of the Womb, it
betokens a perfect ruin of the natural Functions of that part; whence follows
at last an universal Dropsy of the whole Body. But if the Womb suffer by
consent of other parts, viz. of the Liver, Spleen, or Stomach, the Mischief will
be the greater, and ruin is thereby threatened to the whole Body. Hence it was
well said of Aetius, Such as is a woman's womb, such for the most part, is the
rest of her body.

If wind or water be contained in the Cavity of the womb, it is more easily
cured than if it be shut within little skins or bladders.

The Cure of this Disease is performed almost by the same Remedies which have
been propounded to cure the Dropsy and Green Sickness. Whereunto some things
more properly belonging to this disease must be added. And in the first place
concerning Blood-letting; In the Disease, being new, proceeding from a
suppression of the Courses and from some Plenitude still appearing,
blood-letting may be convenient; otherwise it will hurt, seeing natural heat is
exceedingly weakened and diminished; and stubborn Obstructions caused by a cold
Humor, do cause fear of an Universal Dropsy.

But Purging is altogether necessary, and must be often reiterated, as we
ordered in the forenamed Diseases.

After sufficient Purgation, Openers, Diuretics, and such things as move the
Courses, are to be given, such as are described in the places aforesaid. Unto
which, these following may be added.

Take Roots of Smallage, and of Madder, of each half an ounce: the Leaves of
Savin, Feaverfew, Penyroyal, of each one pugil: Carrots seeds one dram. Boil
all in the Broth of a young Pidgeon, and let her drink the strained Liquor
diverse days together.

Before she drink of the Broth, let her swallow one of the following Pills.

Take of the best Castoreum, Mirrh, Madder, of each half a dram: Saffron twenty
grains. With Juice of Lemmons make all into nine Pills.

After which Medicaments the Patient must exercise her self stoutly, by which
means, not only the Excrements bred in the Bowels, and the whole compass of the
Body, may by assistance of Heat be dissipated; but all which is contained in
the womb, may be voided out, the bladders being broken by violence of the
Exercise.

If the woman do easily vomit, something may be profitably given her twice in a
week to that end; by which means, not only the Humors which were wont to flow
unto the womb, will be recalled, and brought forth; but the foresaid bladders
sticking in the womb, and sometime containing a watery Humor, happily may be
broken by the vehement motion and agitation, whereupon the Humor offending will
be voided.

To discuss the said Humor contained in the womb, the following Bolus, or
Morsel, will be most effectual.

Take of Mineral Borax half a dram: Saffron twenty grains: With Juice of Savin,
make all into a Morsel. Let it be taken twice in a week.

Sweat-drivers are likewise very profitable in this disease, for by them,
wheyish and phlegmatic humors, whether in the womb, or the whole body, are
discussed and evacuated.

In the mean while, the inbred heat of the Stomach must be strenthened both
with things given in, and outwardly applied, described in the Cures of the
diseases of that Part.

And outwardly, Medicines must be applied to strengthen the womb, and to
discuss the Humors contained therein.

And in the first place, Fomentations and Baths to sit in, may be made of a
Decoction of Briony roots, wild Cucumer, the leaves of Danewort or Dwarf-Elder,
Mercury, Elder, Origanum, Calaminth, Wormwood, Rue, Sage, Marjoram, Time, Bay,
Penyroyal, Mugwort; Seeds of Broom, Carrots, Cummin, Annis, Fennel; Berries of
the Bay and Juniper Tree; Flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, and Rosemary. Of which,
little bags may likewise be made, boiled in white Wine. Or the foresaid
Ingredients, or some of them, may be boiled in the Lie made of the ashes of
Vine-boughs.

And that the foresaid Fomentations may work the better, they are to be applied
before and behind: and the sick woman ought to sweat, if she can, in her bed,
or in a Stove conveniently prepared. Which likewise may be procured by help of
a Bathing Tub.

In a windy Dropsy, dry Fomentations will be more profitable, with bags of
Milet, Salt, Cumminseed, and Bran fried in a pan and besprinkled with Wine.

After Fomentation let her Belly from the Navel downward, be anointed with Nard
Oil, Oil of Dill, Oil of Rue, Wormwood, and Southernwood. Which Oils, if drawn
out by Chemical Art, they will be much more effectual.

After Unction, lay on a Plaster of Bay Berries, or a Pultiss of Cows and
Sheeps Dung, with Seeds of Smallage, Parsley, and Cummin, as also Honey boiled
therewith.

To the same purpose the Skin of a Sheep newly killed is commended, sprinkled
with warm Canary Sack, and laid warm upon the Belly.

Clysters are frequently to be given, made of the Decoction of Wormwood,
Origanum, Penyroyal, Rue, Centaury, and the like: Or of the Oil of Rue, Nuts
and Dill, with white Wine, Hypocras, or Muskadine. In which Clysters dissolve
Benedicta Laxativa, Hiera Diacolocynthidos, Terebinthinam, Confection of
Bay Berries, Rosemary-flower Honey, and the like.

Injections into the womb may be very profitable to evacuate the Humors
contained therein, being compounded after this manner:

Take Roots of Asarabacca three drams: Leaves of Penyroyal, Calaminth, of each
half a handful: Savin a pugil: Mecboacan a dram: Annis seed, Cummin seed, of
each half a dram. Boil all, and in six ounces of the strained Liquor, dissolve
an ounce of Oil of Orice, and as much of Elder Oil, and make thereof an
Injection.

To the same end may Pessaries be made, thus:

Take Coloquintida and Mechoacan, of each one dram: Sal Nitre ten grains:
boiled Honey as much as shall suffice. Make all into a Pessary. Or,

Take Bindweed Roots, Roots of Esula, of each a dram: Seed of Gith, or Nigella
Romana half a dram: Honey as much as shall suffice. Make all into a Pessary. Or,

Take Elaterium half a dram: bruised Figs as much as shall be requisite. Make
them into a Pessary.

When the Swelling of the womb proceeds from wind, a Fumigation of Nutmegs is
very helpful, being commended by Solenander, in these words: A Woman newly out
of Childbed, exposing her self over soon to the wind and air, fell into
insufferable pains, neither could she find any help. At last comes an old well
experienced Midwife, and calls for three Nutmegs grossly poudered. Then she put
an Earthen pan with hot Coals under the woman, and sprinkled the powder of
Nutmegs upon the Coals, so placing the pan, that the woman might receive the
smoke through a funnel into her womb by the Watergate. At the same time she
was smoaked above with the same Fume: Which when it had penetrated into her
body, the woman presently cries out, I must needs go to stool: which she had
hardly spoken, but a fizzing and sound was heard, such as is made when
Gun-pouder is fired being shut in a narrow box: which wind being expelled, the
woman was perfectly well in a moment. Being advised by this Experiment, having
upon like occasion used the like Remedy, I have very often found it to do much
good.

In the same case, Cupping-Glasses with much flame, is profitably set upon the
Navel, for it excellently dispels wind.

If the Disease come from Humors, Issues are to be made in the Thighs, that by
those Fountains the filth of the womb may be by little and little drained out.

Brimstone and Nitrous Baths are commended likewise by many, both to drink, and
to be washed in; provided there be no great heat of the Liver or whole Body,
conjoined with this Disease.

For the pain of the womb, which is frequently troublesome in this Disease,
Amatus Lusitanus commends the water or Decoction of Chamomel flowers, given to
the quantity of four or five ounces.

And finally, If the Inflation or puffing up of the womb happen after
Childbirth, there will need no other Purgation than that by the womb: Which if
it find any hinderance, it must be helped forwards by drawing Pessaries, and by
Cupping-Glasses fastened to the Thighs, and by other Medicines described in our
Chapter of Suppression of Courses. And if there be wind, the Fumigation made of
Nutmegaforesaid, will be most seasonable.

Chap. 11. Of the falling down of the Womb.
WHen the womb loses its Natural Situation, and falls toward the Watergate,
the Disease is termed, the falling down, or slipping forward of the womb.

Many Differences there are of this Disease, differing only in degrees: For
sometimes only the inner neck falls down into the Watergate: sometimes the whole
body of the womb falls downwards, but does not appear without the Watergate, in
the threshold whereof appears the inner mouth of the womb, in likeness of a
man's Yard, or a Goose Egg with an hole in it. Other whiles with the bottom
turned out, it hangs without the Watergate like a man's Cod, or an Ostridges
Egg, save that it is rugged, and has an uneven surface: and it is in a word,
sometimes so reluxed, that it falls so far out as to reach the Patients Thighs.

The immediate Cause of the falling down of the womb, is the Rupture, or
Relaxation of those Ligaments, which are wont to retain it, and its Neck in
their proper place.

A Rupture of the foresaid Ligaments may proceed from all violent Causes, as a
blow, a fall, dancing and leaping, lifting some heavy burden, or carrying the
same, violent compression of the Abdomen, vehement Coughing which dures long,
violent neezing, especially in Childbed, hard straining to stool, difficult
Travel, violent extraction of the Child out of the womb, or of the Afterbirth;
vehement endeavor of the womb to cast out somewhat offensive thereunto, as a
dead Child, a Mole, or an Afterbirth: for then, according to Galen, in his
Third Book of Natural Faculties, the same thing betides the womb, which is wont
to happen to two wrastlers who endeavor to throw one the other upon the ground,
till both fall together. Hereunto add, frequent setting of Cupping-Glasses upon
the Thighs, and very vehement agitation of Body, or of Mind.

Relaxation or slackening of the Ligaments is caused likewise by diverse causes,
as by a long-lasting Catarth, diverse Crudities, which are cast out into the
womb, as the sink of the whole Body. Whence it is that women long troubled with
the Whites, can scarce avoid this Disease, especially elderly women which are
most of all troubled therewith. Add hereunto external causes, as over-frequent
bathing, especially in cold water; Southern and moist Air, especially being
received into the womb after Child birth; moist Diet, much drinking; Idleness,
long sleep, and all other causes, which may decrease phlegm, and cause its flux
into the womb.

The Signs whereby to know this Disease are evident to the sense. For the womb
is found sticking in the Watergate like an Hens or Gooses Egg, or like a Clew
of Third, with the perceivance of a weight pressing upon the Watergate, when
the Patient stands upright. And while they sit or go to stool, a vehement pain
is felt about the privy Parts, and the Region of O sacrum, or the Hanchbone. If
it hang far out, the greater pain and heat is felt, the urine comes away by
little and little, and makes the womb smart as it passes.

The Causes procuring this Falling-down of the womb, may be thus distinguished.
If it proceed from looseness or slackness of the Ligaments, it comes by little
and little, has the less pain, and white Purgations have preceded, or other
Causes moistening the womb, and relaxing the Ligaments thereof. But if it
proceed from a breaking of the Ligaments, the pain is more vehement, and blood
sometimes breaks forth; and such Causes have preceded which have been able to
break with violence the Ligaments.

As for the Prognostics belonging to this Disease. The Disease of it self is
not dangerous; yet is it very unhandsom and troublesome, hindering the Patient
from freedom to go and walk at will; also from Conception and convenient
expurgation of her Courses.

Yet may it sometimes occasion death, if pains, Fevers, convulsions, or other
grievous Symptoms be joined therewith.

Also the womb in this Case is sometimes corrupted through distemper of the Air,
or by violent impulsion, and becomes Gangraenated, which necessitates it to be
cut off.

The Disease being fresh, and the womb coming not far out, is more easily cured
than when it is an old Infirmity, and the womb comes far out.

In younger women, the womb is more easily restored to its place than in Elderly
women.

Falling down of the womb, by reason of the Ligaments being broken, is
incurable.

To come to the Cure. The womb is to be thrust back into its Natural place, and
to be detained there; and the fault of its Bands or Ligaments must be
corrected; If they be broken, by things that do glue and sodder together; if
they be relaxed or slackened, with things drying, aftringent, and
strengthening. All which may be done by the following Medicaments.

In the first place therefore, That the womb may more easily be restored to its
place, the Guts and Bladder must be disburdened, left pressing the Neck of the
womb, they should hinder its reduction; forasmuch as the neck of the womb rests
upon the straight Gut, and the bladder rests upon the neck of the womb.

When the Gutts and Bladder are discharged of their Excrements, let the woman
lie along upon her Back, with her thighs wide asunder, and her knees drawn
upwards, and let her with her hands thrust her womb inwards; and force it still
upwards into the neck, so as to turn it inwards as it goes, till all is
returned within the cavity of the Belly which should contain the womb. Or if
she is not able to do it her self, let her do it by help of the midwife; or use
a thick blunt ended stick with Clothes wrapped about it, by which it may be
forced further into the Cavity of the Belly, than is possible by the hands to
drive it. Or, for fear of hurting her Body, a Pessary may be made of Linen
Cloth often doubled and rolled together with a string tied fast thereunto, and
accommodated to this service of thrusting up of the womb.

But if the womb fallen from its place shall, swell, so that it cannot enter
into the cavity of the Belly, the swelling must in the first place be removed.
And if there be an inflammation, such things must be applied as are sit to heal
the same. If otherwise it be blown up, such things must be used as will discuss
the inflation. Rodericus a Castro washes the swollen womb with a Decoction of
Beets, and then sprinkles it with vinegar and salt, and so when the swelling is
aborted, he reduces the same.

The same Rodericus a Castro writes, that it is very good toward restoring the
fallen womb, for a Physician or a Chyrurgion to come with burning red hot Iron
in his hand and to make as if he would thrust it into the womb. by that means
nature contracts her self, and the womb with her, and any other part that
sticks out of the Body. For he relates that a certain very expert Chyrurgion
did by this stratagem force Back a man's Gutts, that were ready to come out at a
wound in his belly, when other remedies did no good. For holding a great red
hot Iron in his hand, the Patient looking on, he made as if he would Clap it
upon the wound. With the sudden fright whereof the Gutts were presently drawn
back into their place.

Avenzoar in his Second Theizir, Tract 5 Chap. 4. Propounds some such thing as
this. When this disease (says he) begins first to appear, the Physician may
gently cure the same. And it is reduced all these ways, viz. by your hand If
you please; and if not make her he on her Back and let some Body sit upon her
breast, and another upon her thighs; and then cause her to be frighted putting
some creeping Vermin upon her Legs, such as Mice, Efts, frogs and such like;
by which let her be so frighred as to endeavor to get away by drawing her
Legs and thighs up to her; whereby all her Members and her whole Body may at
once be contracted: by which means the Womb will return unto its own place.

Zacutus Lusitanus following Avenzoar relates the following story in the 66
observation of his Second Book. Coming to a woman (says he) Which had her Womb
fallen down the space of a year and an half, with extreme hardness; it seemed
very hard by reason of its stretching out to be reduced to its place;
especially seeing Avenzoar says, that this work must be done before the Womb
be grown hard. I devised many remedies for this disease; astringent Insessions,
Pessaries, Plasters, Confections. At last, having wrastled stoutly with the
disease, I could do no good. I betook my self to this stratagem. I put Mice
tied by the tails, between the woman's Legs. Which running up her Thighs, the
woman is mightly frighted, and forthwith (a strange thing to see) her Womb is
reduced into its proper place. This done, The Plaster against Ruptures being
laid upon the Region of the Womb and to the Groynes, she remained for the time
to come free from that Disease.

Before the Womb be reposed in its place, it must be anointed with the
Mucilage of comfrey Roots, or with an infusion of Gum Tragacanth. Then are
pouders to be sprinkled thereupon, which have no asperity or sharpness, least
they hurt the Womb or its neck; but of quality rather gluing than astringent
or binding. Such an one may be thus made.

Take Frankincense, Mastick and Sarcocolla nourished (that is, well steeped so
as to drink up as much of the Milk as it can hold) with Brest-Milk, of each one
dram. Mummy, Gum-arabick, Acacia, Hypocistis, of each half a dram. Make all
into a most fine Powder, to be sprinkled as aforesaid.

The same Powder may be applied in form of an Ointment, if it be mixed with the
aforesaid mucilages, or Oil of Saint John's wort, or some other consolidating
thing.

After the Womb is conveniently replaced, all art must be used to retain the
same in its place, the woman lying in her bed, a little bending, with her
thighs gently stretched out and the one resting upon the other. And let her
abide some days in this posture, and put in at the Watergate a little wool,
cotton, or sponge wet in harsh red Wine, or in Rosewater wherein Acacia or
Hypocistis has been dissolved.

To further this Retention of the Womb in its place, Cupping-Glasses with much
flame are frequently to be fastened under her Duggs and upon her Navel.

Likewise sweet savors are be presented to her Nose, and stinking things to be
applied to her Genitalls, unles she be subject to sits of the Mother.

Let the said Parts be somented with a Decoction of astringent things made in
red Wine and the Water of a Smyths Forge.

Also Practitioners use a Bath to sit in, made of the Same Decoction. In which
there needs caution. For it is to be feared, least in that posture, the Womb
should again fall from its place, especially at the beginning, while the
Disease is yet fresh. But when it has held the Patient long, and she is
provided of a convenient kind of Truss, such a bath will do much good.

After the said Bath a Fumigation will likewise be very good, of Frankincense,
Mastich, Sandarach, red Roses. Others indeed do commend a Fumigation on made of
a salted Eel-skin.

Injections into the Womb will work much more effectually than those remedies
which are outwardly applied: they may be compounded of the Decoction for the
Fomentation or Sitting Bath aforesaid,

Ointments and plasters will likewise be good in this case such as were
described in the Immoderate flux of Courses and in the VVhites; and as shall
hereafter he propounded to prevent Abortion.

The Retention of the Womb in its place may likewise be helped, by astringent
and strenghening Medicaments taken in at the Mouth. And among the rest, the
following Powder frequently taken is very proper for this Disease.

Take Mullein two drams: Myrtle Leaves, Garden Parsnep Seeds of each one dram:
Shavings of Hartshorn, half a dram: Ashes of Cockle-shells one dram: red Coral
two drams: Make all into a Powder. The Dose is one dram with harsh red Wine.

Touching these astringent Medicaments both internal and external it is to be
observed: that they must be warily used, it the woman's courses do still flow at
their seasons, least they being suppressed may cause more grievous Diseases to
follow. The best season for these Medicaments, is when the Patients courses are
past.

These Remedies are to be contained twelve or Fifteen days together. Also care
is at the same time to be taken, that the Patient be neither costive nor loose.
For if the Excrements be hard, the Womb is easily thrust out by the Patients
straining at stool; and a loose Belly does relax or slacken the bands or
Ligaments of the Womb.

While the foresaid Remedies are used, we must resist the Antecedent Cause, by
such things as shall purge out and discuss those phlegmatic humors which relax
and slacken the Ligaments of the Womb.

And first convenient Purgations must be ordered; which must not be violent in
their operation and disturbing, least the Womb out of its place again, bringing
abundance of humors into those parts.

Some allow of vomiting, because it draws the humors into the upper parts of
the Body: and in that respect it would be profitable, if it were not to be
feared in another regard: Namely because it is performed with great straining,
and drives the Womb downward, as much as neezing. Yea and experience has
taught that nothing does more effectually facilitate hard travel, and bring the
Child sooner into the light, than a Vomit given to the Childing woman.

After sufficient Purgation, a Decoction of Guajacum is to be given three weeks
together that every day the Patient may sweat in the morning. And in the
Evening let her Belly beneath the Navel be fomented with a Decoction of Sage,
Origanum, Marjaram, Time, Feaverfew, Tansie, Wormwood, Rue, red Roses, Cyperus
Roots, Calamint, Cypress Nutts, and the like simples boiled in Smythes
Forge-water and red Wine. After the Fomentation, the Fumigation and Liniment
may be used which were before described.

Instead of a Sweat-driver, or after the use thereof, Bathes arising from
Sulphurous Mines, will be singularly profitable, such as our Balerucan Baths;
and experience has shown that many have bin cured by such Bathes.

And that a woman may be secure that her Womb fall not down again, which it is
very apt to do; or if there be no hope of a perfect cure let her wear such a
kind of truss as is called Hyppocrates his Girdle. Whereby women are so guarded
and defended, that without fear of the falling down of their Wombes they may go
about and do their daily businesses; also their Womb is thereby defended from
the cold. They are made almost after the same manner, as trusses that are used
against Ruptures or Burstennes.

Pessaries are likewise very profitable in desperate Fallings down of the Womb,
which some do make of a good long piece of cork covered over with Wax. Others
make of Wax alone, some round, others square, triangular, oval or any other
fashion; which are conveyed into the Cavity of the Womb, and are never taken
out, but keep the Womb in its place: so as the women notwithstanding do all
their usual enployments, conveniently are enjoyed by Men in carnal
conjunctions, do conceive, carry their big Bellies, and bring forth. Which is
confirmed with many Examples by Franciscus Rossetus in his Book entitled De
Partu Coesareo, Sect. 6. Chap. 5. and by Bauhine in his Appendix to Rossetus.
All which are transcribed word for word by Schenkius and Sennertus, in their
proper Chapters, where they are to be seen.

Chap. 14. Of the Womb shut up, or Imperforated.
VIrgins that have their Wombs closed up, are said to be imperforated, or
unboared, like a Barrel of Beer that has no hole to put in a Spigot. Now this
Closure of the Womb is wont to be in three places; viz. In the inner Mouth of
the Womb, in its Neck, and in the outward mouth of the Womb next the
Watergate. And it is caused, either in the first formation of the Infant, when
some Membrane is drawn before the mouth of the Womb, or its neck; or by some
precedent wound or ulcer, which growing whole again, the parts of the neck of
the womb, or its lips come to be closed together; or by tumors shutting or
stopping up the inner Orifice; or by some compression, streightness, or
distortion, which hinders the man's Yard and Seed from going in, and the Monthly
Purgations from coming out.

This Disease is in part easy, and in part hard to be known. If the closure or
stoppage be in the outward Orifice of the Privity* it is discerned by seeing
and feeling. But if it be in the Neck or Mouth of the Womb, it is not discerned
til the courses begin to break out, or til the parties begin to addict
themselves to generation. For when the time of their monthly Purgations is
come, pains and gripings ar^ felt in the Region of the Womb at certain periods
of times, with a sense of weight, yet no flux of Courses follows; the
Conjecture will be more probable, if the Virgin be of a good habit of Body, not
troubled with any Obstructions, or Cachectick dispositions. The Disease
persevering, their wombs swel, so that Maidens seem to be with Child; and
sometime their whole Body swells, which likewise seems as it were black and blew
through the abundance of blood. But if the closure do possess the neck of the
womb, it is perceived in the first Carnal Conjunctions, because it does not
admit the Man's Yard.

Lastly, I^ the Closure be in the Orifice or Mouth of the Womb, it is hardly
discerned; yet may it be in some measure perceived by the hand of a skilful
Midwife; and it gives some suspicion thereof when the man's seed does presently
slip away, as soon as it is castin.

As for the Proguostick. If the Closure be in the Orifice of the Privity, it is
easily cured, being opened by a slight Section. But if it be in the inner
parts, it is much harder to cure.

When the Passage is stopped with a Membrane, its more easily cured; but when
the closure is caused by a fleshy matter, as it happens after Ulcers, the Cure
is more difficult.

The Closure of the inner Orifice of the Womb is incurable, because the
Instruments of Chyrurgiry cannot be applied to open the same.

The Cure of this Disease, because it belongs chiefly to Chyrurgiry, we shall
dispatch in few words.

If the Closure of the Womb have been caused in the first formation, it is to
be opened by cutting only. The manner of which cutting is largely described by
Sennertus, in its proper Chapter.

But if the Closure have been occasioned by reason of an Ulcer, as it happens
in the Whores Pox; it is to be considered, whether it be only an excrescence of
flesh not wholly stopping the passage, or a perfect and entire growing together
of the sides of the neck, or of the lips. For, if flesh only be grown up,
endeavor must be used, convenient Evacuations being premised, first to prohibit
the increase of that flesh by drying and discussing Medicaments, then to
diminish the said flesh by Medicines of Frankincense, Birthwort, Bark of
Frankincense, Roses, Balaustines, Mastich, Mirrh, Aloes, and such like. Which
not doing the deed, we must come unto such flesh-consumers as are least
painful, as burnt Alum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and such like. And at last, if
this will not consume the flesh, it must be cut off round about, with the same
Instrument where with the superfluous flesh breeding in the Nose, called
Polypus, is wont to be cut off. But if the neck of the womb be wholly grown
together, we must try to renew the Ulcer, and with the foresaid Medicaments to
remove the superfluous flesh. And if that cannot be, we must undertake to cut
it, in the very self same manner, as we are wont to cure the natural coalition
of the neck of the womb.

If the passage of the womb be shut up by some tumor, proper Remedies are to be
appointed thereunto; such as have been propounded in the Inflammation, Scirrhus,
and Cancer of the womb.

If it be caused by compression of the neck of the womb, or of the inner mouth
thereof, the compressing cause is to be taken away, which may be diverse, viz. A
Stone in the Bladder, a Swelling in the straight Gut, Fatness of the Caul, the
Legs or Thighs distorted, and going asplay; the Cure of which acc^dents see in
their proper place.

In streightness of the Pa^^age, which is chiefly caused by hardness or
dryness, we must work with things moiste^ing, emollient, and lax^tive; with
Baths to sit in, Fomentations, Liniments, and Pessaries: and so when the part
is relaxe^, a little pipe of Lead may be put in, or of white wax artificially
contrived, and meared with Butter, or some emollient Oil, which let her always
carry, or at le^^t in the night when she goes to bed, and in the day time* let
a Pessary conveniently made of Cotton be put in the place, being smeared with
Ointment of Marshmallows, or such like.

In Distortion, the same Method of Cure, very near, is to be observed; and let
the pipe be so framed, that it may gently bow the contrary way to the
distortion; and so the neck of the womb may by little and little be reduced to
its due place.

Chap. 15. Of Barrenness.
THis word Barrenness or Sterility, is not in this place taken in so strict a
sense, as to signify only a total defect, and perfect abolition of Conception;
but in a large and ample signification, so as to comprehend all kind of
impotency, and every impediment of Conception: namely, When a woman at such a^
age in which she ought naturally to be capable of Conception, and using the
company of a man, does not conceive. And this defect is termed Agonia, or
Atecnia, that is, Inability to conceive or bear children.

And this Barrenness or Impotency of Conception, is caused diverse ways; all
which for cleerness sake, we may reduce to four Heads, according to those four
Natural Operations which are required to perfect Conception.

The First of which is, That the Woman in her Genial Embracements, do
conveniently receive the Man's Sperm into her Womb.

The Second, That she retain the same a convenient season.

The Third, That she cherish and preserve the same in her Womb*

The Fourth, That she afford fitting Materials to form the Embryo, or first
Conception, and duly to augment the same, as need shall require.

Hence Four Impediments of Conception do arise; viz. If the woman receive not
the Seed; If she retain it not; If she preserve and cherish it not; If she
nourish it not so as it increase and grow.

Reception of the Seed is hindered by many Causes; by things Natural, things
not Natural, and by things Preternatural. Among things Natural hindering the
Reception of the Sperm, in the first place is recko^ed, yongness of Age, in
which, by reason of the smalness and straitness of the Genital Parts, the woman
cannot receive the man's yard, or not without very great pain, which makes her
worse for Genial Embracements. The same effect is caused by over great Age,
seeing that in elderly Virgins, the Genital Parts, through want of being
exercised in actions tending to Generation, do become withered, flap, and
flaggy, and so strait, that they cannot afterward easily ^dmit a man's Yard.
Likewise, all such as are naturally lame, with distorted Legs, and their
Crupper-bone depressed, can hardly put themselves into such a convenient
posture during the genial Embracement, as a necessary that the Seed may be duly
and rightly received. Hereunto add over great fatness, which straitens the
Passages of the womb, and by greatness of the Belly, hinders the right and fit
Conjunction of the man with the woman. And lastly, a cold distemper of the
womb, makes women dull and listless, so that they enjoy no pleasure (to speak
of) in the Genial Embracement, or it is long before they are provoked with
desire; so that the inner Orifice of the Womb is not timely enough opened to
receive the Man's Sperm.

Among things not Natural, Passions of the Mind hold the first rank, and
especially hatred between Man and Wife; by means whereof, the Woman being
averse from this kind of pleasure, gives not flown sufficient quantity of
Spirits, wherewith her Genitals ought to swel at the instant of Generation,
that her womb skipping as it were for joy, may meet her Husbands Sperm,
graciously and freely receive the same, and draw it into its innermost Cavity
or Closet, and withal bedew and sprinkle it with her own Sperm, powered forth in
that pang of Pleasure, that so by the commixture of both, Conception may arise.

The things Preternatural which can hinder the Reception of Seed, are certain
Diseases incident to the Genital Parts, or to such as border near upon them; as
Tumors, Ulcers, Obstructions, Astrictions, Shuttings up, Distorsions, Stone in
the Bladder, and other such like.

The Second fault in Women, which hinders Conception, viz. When the Seed is not
retained, depends either upon the over great moisture of the Womb, namely, when
the womb is filled with many excrementitious Humors, by which becoming looser
and more flaggy than is fit, it does not rightly purse and contract it self
together, so as to retain the Sperm; or the Orifice of the Womb is so slack
that it cannot rightly contract it self to keep in the Seed; which chiefly is
caused by Abortion, or hard Labor in Childbirth, whereby the fibers of the
Womb are broken in pieces one from another, and they, and the inner Orifice of
the Womb over much slackened. And that same immoderate moisture may arise both
from the proper Constitution of the woman, and from external causes of
moisture, such as Baths, Idleness, moist Diet, and especially from the Whites;
which flux of Whites happens very frequently, since the Womb is as it were the
Common-shore, whereinto all the parts of the Body do discharge their
Superfluities, so that this is wont to be the most frequent and ordinary Cause
of Barrenness.

The Third Cause hindering Conception, viz. When the Sperm is not sufficiently
nourished in the Womb, depends upon such things as are apt to corrupt the Seed,
as every distemper of the womb; namely, a cold distemper, which extinguisheth
the Seed; an hot distemper, which dissipates the Spirits; a moist distemper,
which robs the Seed of its due thickness; and a dry distemper consumes and
drinks up the Seed: and thus the Seed being by these distempers corrupted and
degraded from its natural Constitution, becomes unfit for Conception. To these
Causes, Authors do add Witchcrafts, and Charms, by which all confess that
Conception may be hindered. Likewise external things, as Meats and Poisons may
do as much, such as are reckoned up by Authors, viz. Among Meats, Vinegar,
Mint, Watercresses, Beans, and such like: and among Poisons, or at least such
things as have a certain venomous property causing Barrenness, The Agate or
Jet, ^he Matrix of a Goat or Mule, Glowworms, Sapphires, Smaragds, and the
like. And lastly, Malignant and venomous Diseases, may exceedingly corrupt the
Seed, and render it unfit for Generation, as the Consumption, Leprous
Infections, Whores-Pox, stinking and cancerated Ulcers.

The Fourth and last Cause of Barrenness, viz. When the woman does not yield
convenient matter to form the Conception, and to augment the same, depends upon
a want of Seed and Menstrual blood; so over young women and over old, do not
conceive, through want of both those Materials. The Age of a woman fit for to
conceive, is commonly determined to be from the fourteenth to the fiftieth year
of her Age. Yea, and though those foresaid Materials are not wanting, if yet
they are ill disposed, they are not fit for Generation. And they may be ill
disposed through diverse distempers, and other Diseases; likewise by reason of
bad Diet, producing none of the best blood. So women which gorge themselves
with much raw fruit, and cold small drink, breed wheyish blood unfit for
Generation. Yet we must needs confess, that some women have conceived who never
had their Courses, as may be collected out of the Observations of diverse
Authors; yet so much Menstrual blood was collected in those women, as uses to
remain over and above in such as have their Courses, though they had not so
much as to cause their monthly Courses.

To the Causes hitherto mustered up, must be added a certain disproportion or
unsutableness between the Man's Sperm, and the Woman's, which makes they cannot
be rightly mingled, nor conspire to the Joynt-making up of an Embrion or
Rudimental Infant; though there be in the mean while, no sensible defect,
either in the Man or Wife. And it sometimes happens, that the same man can have
a child by another woman, and the same woman by another man; whereas they have
lived together in the married estate barren. It comes likewise to pass, That a
woman shall live with a man for ten or more years together, and not conceive
child, and afterward shall begin to conceive and bring forth: the Cause of
which accident is, The change of Temperature caused by years, whereby the Seed
comes to have another temper, so that being before disproportioned to the man's
Seed, it comes by change of Age to be fitly proportioned thereunto. Now this
disproportion of Seeds, consists chiefly herein; When men much exceeding in
some quality belonging to their temper* are joined with women which partake of
the self same excess, viz. When over hot men are joined with over hot women,
over cold men with over cold women; for those distemperatures can procure no
mediocrity in the Seeds, and other causes necessary to Generation. Some fly
likewise to occult or hidden qualities, which make the Sperms to agree, or
disagree, though no excess of the first qualities can be discerned.

To these Authors add an hidden kind of Disposition, which makes some women
barren, though no manifest cause of such Barrenness appear in them.

The Signs of Barrenness, we will run over according to these four sorts of
Causes propounded.

And in the first place, Causes hindering Reception of Seed are not hard to be
discovered, being evident to our very Senses. For tenderness of Age is easily
observed, and so is an over elderly state of years; and the evil constitution
of those parts which border upon the womb, as when women halt, have crooked
wreathen Legs, have their Crupper-bone deprest, or are over fat; as for the
cold distemper of the womb, we shall treat of that in our third Rank of Causes.
Hatred between Man and Wife is known by relation of themselves, or of those
that live with them. Also the particular Diseases hindering the reception of
Seed, as Tumors, Ulcers, Obstructions, Astrictions, shuttings up, Distorsions,
may be known through search of the Genital Parts made by a Midwife or
Chyrurgion.

Of the Causes hindering the retention of Seed, which make the second Rank, we
shall treat of over great moisture among those of the third Rank; as for
Abortion and hard Travel, they are known by the woman's relation.

The Causes of the third Rank, viz. Which have power to corrupt the Seed to
require more exquisite signs to know them by, which we shall prosecute as
follows.

A Cold Distemper of the Womb, is hereby known, In that the Woman longs not
after Carnal Embracements, and feels little pleasure therein; her Face is soft,
whitish, and cloudy; her feeling is dull about her Share, Loins, and Thighs;
she voids thin and crude Sperm, and with little pleasure; her Courses are
suppressed, or they come every sparingly, and keep no constant orderly time,
and they are pale and discolored. Add hereunto, Diet preceding of a cooling
Nature, consisting of a long use of Fruits and Herbs, with much drinking of
cold small Drink.

A moist distemper of the womb is known by the lax, and slap, flaggy, soft
habit of the woman's body, her much sitting, frequent and almost continual flux
of Whites; plenty of Courses, thin and watery, no appetite to fleshly
Conjunctions, heaviness of her Loins, aptness to miscarry, plenty of Urine, and
a moist Diet.

An hot Distemper is known, by the manly and strong habit of the woman's Body,
such as is seen in Viragoes and Amazones; by a ruddy countenance, black hair of
the Head and Eyebrows; a strong and manly voice; she is frequently disposed to
be angry, over prompt to all kind of actions, he^ thirst cannot be satisfied,
her Urine is yellow, her Courses few, their color is a dark red, their heat and
acrimony so great, that oftentimes they exulcerate the secret Passages; their
Privities itch, and they are prone to carnal Embracements; they are quick and
sudden in the voiding of their Seed; they have frequent Pol^^tions, and
lustful Dreams.

A dry distemper of the womb is known by the small quantity of Courses; dryness,
itching, and choppings of the Mouth of the Womb; little excretion of Sperm in
the Genial Embracement; trouble arising from over much carnal Conjunction, and
Leanness.

If the Seed be corrupted, and Barrenness caused by Witchcraft, all other
signs will be absent, which are wont to declare the Natural and manifest causes
of Barrenness. There will be likewise some alienation of minds between the
married Couple, of which neither of them can give any handsome account; yea, and
sometimes they can both of them, but seldom shoot forth their Seed, and that
with Labor and Difficulty.

Diet or poisons that extinguish Seed, if they have been taken in, we shall
come to knowledge thereof, by diligent questioning of the woman, and those that
are about her.

And lastly, Malignant Diseases, such as are of power to extinguish the Sperm,
as Leprous Manginess, the Whores-Pox, and such like, are known by their proper
signs.

The fourth Cause of Barrenness, which consists in defect or badness of the
Menstrual blood, is known, first by the over great fatness of the whole Body, to
the nutriment whereof the blood is carried away* and consumed, and is not
allowed for the nutriment of the child in the womb. The same is likewise known
by great Leanness of the Body, and extreme slenderness; ^^r when there is not
blood enough to nourish the Body, it can hardly superabound to nourish the
Conception.

And in a word, All such things as consume, and much diminish the blood, if
they have preceded, or be at present in the Patient, they signify want of
blood in her body; such as are, extreme labors and pains-taking, imm^derate
sitting up, and watching, austere fastings, large bleedings at nose or
elsewhere, (...) or chronical Fevers Fistulous Ulcers, and Issues that run
much.

(...), over great quantity of blood, does hinder the nourishment of the Seed,
and of the (...); for the Seed is oppressed with so great plenty, and cannot
exerci^e its formative faculty: which is (...) to happen in full bodyed, and
ruddy women, such as live a (...), and delight ^n Feasting, (...) wombs are
always bedabled with a continual moisture.

Now the (...) on of the woman's blood, may be known by the ill habit of her
Pody, the color of her (...) her strange dispositions, together with an ill
diet foregoing.

The (...) and the Wi^es Seed is hardly known; but if both of them be of a very
hot, or a very hot (...) Constitution, we may conjecture, That the
disproportion (...) from those distempers; (...) more manifest causes of
Barrenness, do not appear.

It is yet harder (...) hat kind of Barrenness which depends of a certain
hidden disposition, no manifest (...) thereof appearing. Yet many Experiments
are related by Authors, whereby to know whether a Woman be ^^turally Barren,
which though they carry no great certainty with them, yet are Physicians (...)
sometimes to make use of them, in favor of Princes and Nobles, who are permitted
to divorce their Wives, in case of Barrenness.

Hippocrates in ^phor. 59. Sect. 5. says, If a Woman conceive not, and thou
would know whether she shall conceive or not cover her with blankets, and
burn some perfume under her, and if the smell proceed through her Body, up to
her Nostrils and Mouth, know that she of her self is not Barren.

The same Hippocrates supposes that it may be known whether a woman be
fruitful or not, by putting a head of scraped and peeled Garlic into her Womb;
for if the next day the smell shall come into her mouth, she is apt to conceive;
if not, she is barren.

Or put Galbanum softened at the fire, and enclosed in Silk, into the woman's
womb at night, and bind her whole head in perfumed Linen; if in the morning the
crown of her head shall smell of Galbanum, the woman is well purged, and will be
fruitful.

You may try the same, if you put a little Balsom mingled with Water, and
received in Cotton, into the Womb, binding it with a string to her Thigh; for
if the womb do draw it inwards, it is a most approved sign of fruitfulness.

Amatus Lusitanus commends this following as a most true sign: He takes a dram
of a Hares Runnet, which dissolved in warm water, he gives the woman to drink,
being in a bath of hot water, and fasting. If the Woman do then feel pains in
her Belly, he pronounces her fruitful; if not, barren.

Many seek to know the Barrenness of a woman by her Urine, wherein they steep
Barley: which Barley, if it grow within ten days, they count it a sign of
Fruitfulness; if not, they account it a certain token of Barrenness.

And others, Finally, do power the Woman's water upon Bran or Fenugreek, and take
it for a note of barrenness, if Worms breed there.

For a Conclution to these Discoveries, We shall diligently consider and
enquire, whether Conception and Generasion be not hindered by fault of the Man,
or any defficiency in him. For in such a Case, it were vainly done to torment
the Woman with a multitude of Medicines. Barrenness proceeding from the Man,
may be known by the diseases of his Genital parts, as inability to raise his
Yard, want of Sperm, Swelling of his Stones, Gonorrhoea, and the rest. And it
gives some token hereof, if the Man be faint hearted and Womanish by Nature, if
he want a Beard, be slow in casting forth his Sperm, and his Sperm be cold, so
that his Wife feel it cold in her Womb; if he have little or no Lust to Carnal
Embracements, and perceive very little pleasure therein. And lastly, If such
Causes have preceded which are of power to make the Seed unfruitful.

The Prognostic must be regulated according to the Method of the Causes, as we
have ranked them.

And in the first place, Tenderness of Age hinders conception only for a time,
which cannot be expected till the Woman is more grown. But Elderly years cause
a Total despair of Conception. But if the Parties Courses do as yet proceed,
in due season, there may be yet some hope of Conception; howbeit very small,
especially in such Women as are at the fortieth year of their Age; for although
Women that have had Children younger, are likewise wont to Conceive at that
Age; yet such as have never been with Child, have little reason to hope that
they shall Conceive at that Age, because the Womb having been so long
unimployed, is become withered, shrunken up and unfit to Conceive Child.

Barrenness which is caused by an evil shape of the Members, as in such as are
Lame, have distorted Thighs, or their Crupper-Bone depressed; is incurable.

But if Barrenness proceed from over Fatness, or some distemper of the womb not
over old, the cure is to be hoped, by procuring leanness and by correcting the
Distempers.

That Barrenness which is caused by other diseases, as by a Swelling, an Ulcer,
Obstruction, whites, want of Courses, falling of the Womb, Consumption, Leprous
Mangyness, Whores-Pox, and such like; is easier or harder to cure, according as
the said diseases are either easy to be cured or hard.

For the Cure of this disease, whichsoever of the causes aforesaid has
produced the same; we must seek the removal thereof.

And in the first place, the straitness of the Genital Parts in regard of
youngness of Age, needs no cure; for as Age increases, they attain to a
convenient wideness. But in the mean time, it is necessary that the Party
abstain from Carnal Conjunction; because the oversoon use thereof, does spoil
the natural constitution of those parts.

Barrenness which is caused by lowness of stature, or Elderliness of years, is
incurable, yet endeavor may be used to help the same, by Emollient and
Relaxing Medicaments, provided the Courses do still slow.

Over great Corpulency, must be corrected by an extenuating Diet and convenient
Evacuations.

If Barrenness seem to arise from a bad Course of Diet, as in persons given
over much to Bellycheer, to Wine, or small Drink, such women are to be reduced
to an exact Course of Life; and all excess of eating and drinking must be
avoided.

Viragoes and strong constitution'd women, such as come near to the Nature of
Men, that they may be (...) fit for conception, must by all the art possible be
effeminated, and reduced to such manners as become their sex; all meats of
grosser nourishment being forbidden them, and all labors and exercises; their
Courses being made conveniently to flow, by plenty whereof they may be abated
of their manly courage, and grow soft and gentle. And if their monthly courses
shall not su^fice to that end, their humors must be diminished, by frequent
Blood-letting, and purging; and by frequent bathing and other alteratiue
remedies, the whole habit of their Bodies must be moistened and cooled.

If Barrenness be caused by Closure of the Womb, by distorsion, by
obstructions, by Tumors or Ulcers; all these must be remedied by such
Medicaments as are propounded in those Chapters which treat of their Respective
cures.

Barrenness depending upon an hidden property in the woman which is natural to
her, is incurable, and therefore it ought diligently to be enquired after,
least remedies be applied in Vain.

If Barrenness come by witchcraft, Charming, or hidden power of Medicaments,
there is little place for Physic; but the party must have recourse to prayers
and supplications, which being Zealously poured forth, by men eminent in piety,
do procure Help from the Almighty.

Howbeit against Medicines which by a secret power do cause barrenness,
certain Amulets are propounded by Authors, which have a peculiar virtue to
resist the malignity of such Medicaments. Cardan will have it, that the Pizzle
of a Wolf worn about the woman, will frustrate all such Incantations and
fascinations. Others do much commend the Adamant and the Hyacinth Stone. The
Ancients called Saint John-wort, the Divel-driver. The same virtue is likewise
attributed to the Squil or Sea-Onion, to Eryngus, ^agapenum, Rue, and other
things, being worn by Man and Wife. Also certain it is, that for the parties
concerned, to endeavor confidently to despise and slight all Charms and
Witch-crafts, is very profitable in this case. Also (if the Author of the
Witchcraft be not known) it is good for them to Change their Habitation, and
to forsake their Houses, Beds, wearing Clothes, and other Household stuff,
wherein the Charms are oftentimes concealed.

If an hot Distemper be the cause of Barrennes, the same Cure is to be used,
which was described in the hot distemper of the Liver. But if the Excess of
Heat be yet more violent, recourse must be had to those things which have bin
described in our Chapter of Womb-fury. But the camphire must be let out of
those Medicines, Because it is held to be a very great Enemy to fruitfullness.

Extreme Dryness, hindering Conception, must be cured by a restorative Diet; and
if the Consumption of the flesh be much, we must have recourse to the Cure of
an Hectic fever viz. Use of Milk, frequent Bathing, and such like.

But the most frequent Cause of Barrenness is a cold and moist distemper of the
whole Body and of the Womb, which is often accompanied with the Whites, whose
particular Cure must be (...) from its proper Chapter. But the following
Medicaments may be peculiarly applied to these distempers, which by a discreet
Physician may be varied; so as to make them more heating or drying, according
as Moisture shall the more offend.

And in the first place phlegmatic humors abounding in the Body are to be
evacuated by purging, diuretic and sudorisick Medicaments. And certain
Revulsions are to be made, by ^ssues in the Arms, Neck, or thighs. Also the
principal parts are to be strengthened with Treacle, Mithridate, Tablets or
Lozenges of Aromaticum Rosatum, Confection of Alkemies and such like. Also
Purgations must be repeated at certain distances of time, if Evil humors do
s^em to abound.

Afterward we must proceed to such things, which do by a peculiar virtue or
spec^^ck property strengthen the Womb, help Conception, and procure desire of
fleshly Imbracements, of which kind of Medicaments there are innumerable forms
described by Authors. We shall in this place choose out the principal and set
before you,

And in the first place, An Electuary may thus be made.

Take Roots of Eryngus and Satyrion candied or preserved, of each one ounce.
Green Ginger candied, half an ounce. ^i^bert Kernells, Pine-Kernells, and
Pistachio^ of each six drams: one preserved Nutmeg. Seeds of Rocket and
Watercresses of each two drams. ashes of a Bulls Pizzle, the Reins of the
Sea-Scinkos and shavings of Ivory, of each one dram. Confection of Alkermes
three drams. The Pouders D^amb^a and D^amoschum Dulce, of each one ounce and a
half. Amber Greece half a dram. With Syrup of Preserved Citrons, make an
Electua^y. of which let her take the quantity of a Chessnut, a^ her lying down
to sleep, twice or thrice in a week, drinking a small draught of Canary Sack or
Hyppocras, after it.

In the form of a Powder, the following Medicaments may be administered.

Take Seeds of Rocket, Siler Montanum, of each half a dram, shavings of Ivory,
Cinnamon, Nutmeg, of each a dram, Musk (in such as can away with it) three
grains. White Sanders three drams. Mix them and make of all a Powder. The Dose
is one dram in Canary. Or

Take Seeds of Rocket, wild Parsnep, Cinnamon, Powder of the Nutmeg, Electuary
Diambrae and Diamoschus, of each one dram: the Matrix of an Hare, a
Bores-stones, a staggs Pizzle, Cloves, of each half a dram: Musk and
Ambergris, of each six grains, Sugar the weight of all the rest. Mingle
them, make them into Powder, whose Dose is two drams with rich Canary.

The Afterbirth of a woman is believed to be of great efficacy, being dried and
Poudered and taken to the quantity of a dram.

Some Reckon as a secret the Powder of the Liver and Stones of a Boare-Pig
which the Sow his Mother farrowed alone without any Brothers or Sisters by him.
This Powder they say cures Barrenness both in men and women.

Matthiolus in his Comments upon Dioscorides cries up the Seed of the Herb Amy,
in these words: The Seed of the true Amy, which is brought from Alexandria,
does exceedingly help the Barrenness of women. For experience has shown, that
many have bin made fruitful only by the use of this Seed. For if it be drunk a
drams weight in a morning in strong Wine, or in broth of flesh, being finely
Poudered, every other day three hours before Meat, it gives great hopes of
Children. But the Man must have to do with his Wife only on those days in
which she does not take the Seed.

In such women whose bowels are apt to be Inflamed, the shavings of Ivory will
be very good, taken to the quantity of a dram in White Wine, for four or five
days together, after the monthly Purgation.

The Essence of Satyrion, described by Crollius, is most excellent in this
case, if it be given from a scruple and two scruples, to a dram, in a Cup of
Muscadine.

Salt of the said Satyrion is also very effectual, given to the quantity of ten
grains in Muscadine, after the Courses.

Diverse Decoctions are wont to be made to the same intent. The most effectual,
are these which follow:

Take Eryngo Roots one ounce: Mugwort, Nep, of each a handful: Boil them in
white Wine. Give a Cu^ of the Decoction morning and evening, with a dram of
Tryphera Magna, made without Opium, nine days together.

Quercetanus highly commends this which follows:

Take of the Stones of a Ram prepared with Wine and dried, the Matrix of an
Hare prepared after the same manner and dried, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, white
Ginger, Seeds of Ammeos, of each two drams: Saffron a dram and an half:
Hazel-nut Kernels, and Pistachios, of each three drams. Beat such of these as
require beating, and boil all in a quart of Muscadine till a third part be
consumed. Let her take three or four ounces of this Decoction in a morning
three hours before meat, and that three days together; and upon the fourth let
her lie with her Husband.

The distilled Water following, is likewise very effectual.

Take of Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, of each an ounce: Cubebs, long Pepper,
Galangal Zedoary, Seeds of Ameos, Seseleos, of each half an ounce: Juniper
Berries one dram: rich white Wine, Rosemary Water, Marjoram water, Balm water,
of each as much as shall suffice. Let them digest together six days, and then
distill them, and give of the stilled Water morning and evening two or three
spoonfuls.

Pena and Lobellius propound as a Secret not to be communicated to any living
Creature, the distilled Oil of the smaller, and more delicate sort of sweet
Marjoram, mingled with the Runnet of an Hare, and a little Musk, to facilitate
Conception.

If a woman upon the fourth day of her monthly Purgations, shall drink about
half a pint of the Juice of Sage with a little Salt, and a quarter of an hour
after submit her self to the Genial Embracements of her Husband, many grave men
affirm, she will undoubtedly conceive. With which Medicine, Aetius testifies
that the Egyptian Women after a great mortality by Pestilence, had abundance
of Children.

To the foresaid internal Medicaments, external Medicaments must be joined. In
the use whereof, it is diligently to be observed, that before we go about to
dry, bind, and corroborate the womb, that the filth contained in the Cavity
thereof be first drawn away and purged, lest it either flow back into the noble
parts of the Body, or be more affixed to the substance of the Womb. First
therefore such things must be given as purge the womb, after this manner
compounded:

Take Diaphoenicon and Hiera Picra, of each half an ounce: Turpentine and Honey
of Mercury, of each one ounce: Castoreum a dram. Mix all, and according to art
bring them to such a constitution as shall be fit to make Pessaries, to put
in^o the Womb. Or,

Take of Hiera Picra half an ounce: Agaricktrochiscated and poudered, Orice
Roots of Florence, of each one dram: old Mithridate, and Diaphoenicon, of each
two drams. With Juice of Mercury, make a Pessary. Roll it in a cloth, put it up
when she goes to bed, and let her keep it two or three hours.

If the Womb be very full of Excrements, a more strong Pessary must be put in,
after this following Injection.

Take Leaves of Wormwood, Mugwort, Mercury, and Rue, of each one handful and an
half: Pulp of Coloquintidaten grains: Agarick trochiscated half a dram: Ginger
and Myrrh, of each a scruple, Boil all in water and white wine to a pint,
wherein dissolve two ounces of Honey of Roses. Let three ounces of this Liquor
be injected into the Womb for three days together, in the morning, and when
she goes to bed, after her Courses have done. Then put up this following
Pessary.

Take Hiera Picra, and Benedict a Laxativa, of each an ounce: the pulp of
Coloquintida, and Agarick trochiscated, of each half a dram: Spicknard, Seeds
of the Roman Nigella, Savin Leaves poudered, of each a dram: Incorporate them
with Honey of Rosemary flowers, and include them in a piece of Silk. Make
Pessaries hereof, and put one into her womb, when she is going to bed, and let
it bide there two hours, and afterward wash the part with white Wine.

To strengthen, fasten, and dry the womb, these following Medicaments may be
used:

Take Roots of round Birthwort half an ounce: Lignum Aloes three drams: Cypress
Nuts and Roots, of each two drams: Calamus Aromaticus a dram: Dictamnus
Creticus, Winter Savory, and Mirrh Leaves, of each one handful: choice Mirrh,
Storax, and Benjamin, of each two drams and an half: Stoechados, Rosemary
flowers, and Marjoram, of each one pugil: Boil all in a sufficient quantity of
strong white Wine. In a pint and an half of the strained Liquor dissolve two
drams of Troches of Alipta Moschata, Ambergris, and Musk, of each seven
grains: Civet five grains. Make hereof an Injection into the Womb warm, morning
and night for certain days together.

Before or after the Injection, this following Fumigation may be used:

Take Troches of Gallia and Alipta Moschata, of each two drams: Storax,
Benjamin, and pure Ladanum, of each half an ounce: Lignum Aloes, and Lignum
Rhodium, of each one dram: Nigella Seeds, Cubebs, and Cloves, of each four
scruples: Amber, and Tacamahacca, of each one dram and an half: Mace half a
dram. Make of all a Powder, of which with Orangeflower water, wherein Gum
Tragacanth is dissolved, make little Cakes or Troches: of which, let one or two
be laid upon burning coals, and let the smoke be received by a Funnel into the
Patients Womb.

The poorer sort may be smoaked with Mirrh, Frankincense* Lignum Aloes, Storax,
Benjamin, Cinnamon, and Cloves, of each a like quantity. After the Injection
and Fumigation, let the following Pessary be put up.

Take Frankincense, Mastich, of each two drams: Troches of Gallia and Alipta
Moschata, of each four scruples: Bistort Roots, Cypress nuts, Shavings of
Ivory, and red Roses, of each one dram: Styrax, Benjamin, and Ladanum, of each
two scruples: Calamus Aromaticus, and Cypress Roots, of each half a dram. Make
them into a Paste with Orange-flower Water: then with thin linen cloth, make
two Pessaries of sufficient greatness; one of which put up when she goes to
bed, anointing the top thereof with a little Oil of Nutmegs and Civet mingled
together.

It is furthermore related of Garden Garli^k, That if it be beaten with Oil of
Spike, and thrust into a piece of Linen made like a Pudding bag, and so put up
far within the Womb, that it powerfully brings down the Courses being stopped,
and wonderfully delights the womb, and purges it: so that hereby, many have
been brought to conceive Children, who for a long time had been past al hope of
ever having any.

Before the strengthening Injections and Fumigation, a Bath to sit in may be
used for an hour together, before the Patient goes to bed; and it may be thus
prepared.

Take Roots of Briony, Master-wort, ^alerian, Orice, Enula Campana, of each
three ounces: Leaves of Marjoram, Mugwort, Nep, Penyroyal, Mercury, Sage, Bay,
of each four handfuls: Bay Berries, and Juniper Berries, of each an ounce: Boil
all, and make thereof a Bath for the Patient to sit in.

As for total Baths, such as arise from Brimstony and Bituminous Mines, are
most excellent; and very many women in this Condition, do flock unto such
Baths, as to a Sanctuary.

After Bathing and Fumigation, the Share, and the space between the Privities
and Fundament, must be anointed with this following Ointment:

Take Oleum Nardinum, and Moschatellinum, of each an ounce and an half: Oleum
Cheirinum half an ounce: Pouders Diambrae, and Diamoschi, of each one dram an
half: Liquid Storax one dram: Civet ten grains: Musk, Ambergris, of each six
grains: a little white Wax. Mix all, and make them into an Ointment: Wherewith
let the parts aforesaid be anointed. Within let her be nointed with Civet, or
Indian natural Balsom. Or let the Man smear his Yard with Civet immediately
before he join himself.

Finally, Let Plasters be applied to the Share, and to the Loins, which let
her wear continually, or at least every night, until the last week, in which
her Courses are wont to flow. Let them be made after this manner:

Take of the Roll of Emplastrum pro Matrice four ounces: Of the Roll of
Emplastrum de Mastiche two ounces: Tacamahacca, and Caranna, of each one ounce:
Powder of Tormentil and Bistort Roots, of each three ounces: Powder of Myrtle
two drams: Powder of Aromaticum Rosatum four scruples: Soften them with Oil of
Quinces, adding thereto a dram of Oil of Nutmegs. Spread it upon Leather, and
shape two Plasters, the one round to be applied to the Share; the other square
for the Loins of the Patient.

Chap. 16. Of Acute and Chronical Diseases of Women with Child.
THe Acute and Chronical Diseases of women with Child are the same in Essence
or Nature, and have the same signs, with the like Diseases in women not with
Child, or in men; wherefore it is needless in this place, to speculate
thereupon, let the Reader please to look for them in their proper Chapters.

But the Prognostic of these Diseases is not the same; because in women with
Child they are far more dangerous, and very often times mortal. So says
Hippocrates in Aphor. 31. Sect. 5. For a Woman with Child to be feized by an
acute disease, is deadly. For it the Disease have a Fever joined with it,
there is a twofold danger attending the same (as Galen shows in his Commentary
upon this Aphorism) one from the Fever, which will kill the Child; another from
the slender diet which is requisite to the Cure of the Fever, but is not
sufficient to nourish the Infant in the Womb. Or if it be an acute Disease
without a Fever, as the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Universal Convulsion of
the whole Body, the Mother and Infant cannot withstand the violence of the
Disease, neither can they bear such strong Medicines as are requisite to the
Cure of those Diseases. Yet we must know that this Prognostic is not
perpetually true. For we know by the Testimonies and Examples in Authors, and
by daily Experience, that many women with Child having acute Diseases, escape
with their lives.

But Chronical or lingering Diseases, as Intermitting Agues, Catarrhs,
Tenesmus, etc. do threaten Abortion, and if they cause it not, they can hardly
be cured before the woman be brought to bed, but do keep her company till she
lie down.

Diseases Acute and Chronical in the first and last months, are more dangerous,
than in the intermediate months. For in the first months, the bands wherewith
the Infant is fastened to the Womb are weak, so as they may easily be broken,
and the tender Infant is more easily over pressed with those preternatural
Causes. But in the last months, namely, the sixth, seventh, and eighth, the
Child being grown greater, requires much nourishment, which in these Diseases
it is deprived of. Also the foresaid bands do not stick so fast as in the
third, fourth, and fifth months, in which there is less danger of Abortion.
Therefore Galen does excellently compare the Child in the Womb to Fruits
hanging on a Tree, which upon their first growing out have very tender stalks,
so that they may be easily shaken off with the wind, or any other violent
commotion; and when they are near ripe, they hang not so fast upon the bough,
as in the intermediate spaces they did.

Likewise the Cure of the foresaid Diseases in women with child does remarkably
differ, as touching their Diet, and those two grand Remedies, Blood-letting and
purging; whereunto we may ad Medicaments which evacuate by other ways, viz.
Such as move the Courie, Piss-drivers, and Sweatdrivers, because it is feared
lest by these evacuations, abortion may be caused: of these therefore we shall
only treat at present, referring what else belongs to the Cure of these
Diseases to the proper Chapters, where such respective Diseases are handled.

As for Matter of Diet it is not to women with Child in Acute Diseases to be
enjoined so spare, lest the little Infant be famished; neither is it to be
allowed so liberal, that the Fever should be thereby strengthened; but we must
steer a middle course, with this Caution, That in the first months of their
Belly-burden, a thin Diet be enjoined, and in the latter somewhat more solid and
plentiful, because the Child does then stand in need of more nourishment. Yet
if there must needs be some error in Diet, it is better to err in keeping too
full, than too slender diet; for recovery is chiefly to be expected from the
strength of the Mother, and the Child.

Touching bleeding, that Aphorism of Hippocrates, viz. the 31. of Sect. 5. is
presently brought in opposition, where he says, If a woman with child be let
blood, she miscarries, especially if the child be grown. And Galen renders the
Reason in his Comment, Because the Blood being let out, the Infant wants its
nourishment, whence follows Abortion. On the other side, daily Experience
shows, That in very many Diseases of big-bellyed women, especially acute
diseases, as the Pleurisy, Inflammation of the Lungs, continual Fevers, and
such like, blood-letting is necessary, and may be administered, not only in the
first but also in the middle months, and sometimes in the last months of a
woman's Belly-bearing. Which if it be omitted, both Mother and Child are in
great danger of death. And to this latter Opinion the elder Physicians assent,
not dissenting from the Mind of Galen and Hippocrates, by so doing. For
therefore it is they held a woman would miscarry, if being with Child, she were
let blood, because blood being taken away, the Child would want its
Nourishment. So that if blood may so be taken away, as that the Infant shall
not want its nourishment, there will be no danger of Abortion thereby.

Now so the case may stand: As first, In the first Months of a Woman's
Belly-bearing, while the Infant in the womb is little, and wants but little
Nourishment, for then its Nourishment by bleeding will not be drawn away,
especially if certain signs of superfluity of blood be apparent in the Mother.
So that from the first month to the fifth blood-letting, may be safely
practiced. But in the middle and last Months, greater circumspection is to be
used, because the Child being greater, and wanting more Nourishment, cannot so
safely admit of Phlebotomy. Howbeit, if the Woman abound with blood, and a small
quantity be taken away, she may safely be let blood, because hereby the Disease
will be allaied; neither will so much Nutriment be there by withdrawn from the
Child, as to cause Abortion. But if it seem that Hippocrates thought otherwise,
let us consider that we let blood after a far other fashion than the Ancients
did, they let blood by pounds, and we by ounces. The very truth is, there is no
better way to preserve women from Abortion, than by blood-letting, when it
springs from overmuch blood strangling the Infant, and overwhelming the same,
in such women as have been accustomed out of their time of being with child to
have a plentiful flux of Courses for diverse days together. Thus Petrus Salius
Diversus in the 22. Chapter of his Book of particular Diseases: I for my part
protest (quoth he) that I have preserved many women from Abortion, which they
had often suffered, only by letting them blood in the first months of their
being big. Neither would I have it thought, that no other kind of blood-letting
may be practiced in childing women, save that which is sparing or moderate. For
sometimes plentiful bleeding in the last month has done very much good. And I
have sometimes experienced this plentiful Blood-letting in the last month, when
the women with Child were afflicted with a burning Fever, and were full of
Blood hoping thereby an abatement of the Fever, and an hastening of the Birth,
both which I obtained by blood-letting, and saved both child and mother in
danger of death, by this only Remedy. Which being in some Patients omitted, and
neglected by Physicians, minding more the words of Hippocrates, than the matter
it self, has been the cause that both child and mother has miserably
perished, being strangled by the plenty and fer vency of blood. So far Salius.
Amatus Lusitanus, in the 57. Cure of his I. Section, let a woman with child of
eighteen years of age, blood, in the sixth month, four times with happy succe,
she being in a burning Fever. And Rodericus a Castro in his third Book of
Women's Diseaeases, Chap. 21. writes, that he let a woman of Lisbon blood, who
had a Pleurisy in the eight month, and was given over for desperate by other
Physicians, four times and no less one after another, and she recovered, and
had a healthy Boy. And to conclude, If I may freely relate somewhat from mine
own Experience, I will set down the following History, which is a rare one, and
worthy to be regarded. The Wife of John Vicules, Citizen of Montpelier, had
three miscarriages one after another at several times of her being with child:
When she was the fourth time with Child, about the end of the second month, she
was taken with the same pains of her Belly and Loins, which had been the usual
forerunners of her former miscarriages. I being called to her, and considering
she was a Sanguine Woman, and full of Blood, presently caused four ounces of
blood to be taken from her; and within half an hour the foresaid pains quite
ceased, and the Woman was so well that she would not use those other Medicines
which I prescribed for her to prevent Abortion. Now those Symptoms appeared in
the self same time, wherein she was wont to have her Courses, when she was not
with Child. Again in the third month of her being with Child, at the same
period of time, the same Symptoms return upon her: She sending for me, desires
I would order her to be let blood, seeing the month preceding she had found so
sudden help thereby. I consent, and she is again let Blood, with like good
success as before. In like manner in her fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and
eighth months the same Symptoms returning, in their just distances of time,
she was again let Blood and presently recovered. The last of her ^leedings was
but eight days before the beginning of her ninth month, with like profit (...)
before; and about the end of the ninth month the said woman brought forth a
living (...) and Lusty.

Yet I would not have a young Physician moved with these examples be too bold
in letting women Blood in their last months of being with Child. But the Nature
of the Diseases and of the women raust be diligently considered, that
Medicaments may be conveniencly suited thereunto. Allwaies remembering that sins
of omission are lighter than sins of commission, and that it is better in a
doubtful case to fall short, than to outpass the due and fitting bounds. Yet
when he finds the evident indications of Blood-letting, let him boldly draw
Blood, first enforming the bystanders or friends of the sick, that there is
more danger of abortion, and of the death of Infant and Mother from the
Cruellty of the disease, than from Blood-letting: and allwaies remembering that
but little Blood be taken away, that the Child may not miss of its nourishment.
And if plenty of Blood require a larget quantity to be taken away, let it be
done at diverse times and not all at once.

Wherefore the foresaid Aphorism of Hippocrates does not absolutely forbid the
opening of a vein, but only warnes that Physicians be wary what they do in that
kind. Which is elegantly delivered by Cornelius Celsus in the 10. Chapter of
his 2 Book, in these words. The Ancients did judge that young and old people
could not bear Blood-letting. And they persuaded themselves that a woman with
Child, let Blood would miscarry. But experience has since taught us, that
these are no general Rules, and there are other considerations of more weight,
which the Practitioner is to regard. For it matters not of what Age the Patient
is, nor what she has in her Body, but what her strength is. So that if a young
man be weak, or a woman not with Child be weak, Blood is ill taken from them,
for the remaining strength dies, and they perish. But a strong Child, and a
strong old man, and a woman with Child that is lustly, are safely cured by
bleading. So for Celsus. Some latter Physicians have dared to open the lower
veins in women with Child, to Cure the Falling Sickness by consent of the Womb,
the venerial and pestilential Bubo, yea, and to prevent abortion, as we may see
in Zacutus Lusitanus in his Book of Wonderful Cures Obs. 23. Book, 1. and Obs.
130 and 151 of Book 2. Who by his own and other men's experiments endeavors to
prove, that such Blood-letting may be safely practiced. Which I leave to
prudent Physicians to consider of.

We said about the beginning of this Chapter, that there is no difference in
Curing the diseases of women with Child, saving with respect to the greater
remedies; which difference must be in them thus determined, viz. That the
diseases which hold women not with Child, as vomiting, want of appetite and the
like; in them being not with Child, they are to be Cured rather by vomiting
than by Blood-letting, because they come from evil humors abounding in the
stomach and the whole Body; but in women with Child, they need rather
Blood-letting, because they Spring from Blood retained in in the very beginning
of their being with Child. And experience has taught that the vomiting, which
is wont often to trouble women with Child, is in the first months of Childing
exasperated by purges; but by bleeding much abated, yea and wholly taken away,
if the Blood-letting be iterated every month till the symptom cease.

The use of Purging in women with Child Hippocrates has defined in Aphor. 1.
Sect. 4. Women with Child (says he) are to be purged if the humor offending do
work in the fourth month and to the seventh, But these about the seventh less.
And we must take heed what we do when the Child is very young, or old. Galen in
his Comment says that there is the same proportion between a Child in the Womb
and fruit upon the true. For fruit when it first grows upon the bough, it is
held by a very tender stalk, and therefore quickly falls, being shaken by a
vehement wind. afterward when they are grown greater, they are not easily
separated from the boughs. And yet when they are fully ripe they fall off of
their own accord. In the same manner women suffer abortion in the first and
last months, because in them the Child is not so fast tied to the Womb. But in
this Age of ours, purges are wont to be given to women with Child in all the
months (very near) of their being with Child in diseases springing from the
tyranny of humors and excrements vitiated, when the matter is in motion and
works, or when it is concocted: so often as there is more danger seared from
the evil humor causing the disease, than from the commotion raised by the
purging Medicaments. Gentle and harmless Medicaments have made Physicians
bolder in this kind, such I mean as we use at this day, as Rhubarb, Myrobalans,
Cassia, Manna, Senna, Agarick and the like. But we must allwaies remember that
saying of Hippocrates; and we must more freely give purges in the middle months
and more warily in the first and last. Also the use of Pills is ever more
suspected in women with Child; both because they make a greater commotion in
the Body, and also by reason of the Aloes, which by reason of the extreme
bitterness is an enemy to the Child, and is thought to open the mouths of the
veins. But if sometimes the use thereof seems necessary, in some grevious
infirmities of the stomach, which are wont frequently to infest women with
Child the first months of their being with Child bearing, let it be carefully
washed with Rose Water, that the acrimony thereof may be taken away; or let it
be mixed with strengthening and astringent things, as Rhubarb, Mastich and such
like.

Clysters are not very safe, because by compressing the Womb they may cause
abortion. So that when there is need of them, and in women accustomed to that
kind of evacuation, they must be made in less quantity, and of such things as
are rather mollfying and lenefying than much purging.

In a word, touching Sweat-drivers, Piss-drivers, and such things as move the
Courses, our Opinion is, That Movers of the Courses properly so called are
never to be used in women with Child. And Piss-drivers because they likewise
are apt to bring down the Courses, ought to be suspected; and if the necessity
of some disease require the use of them, the gentler must be made choice of.
And finally, Sweat-drivers may be safely given, because they drive the humors
out, by the habit of the Body, whereby no danger of abortion is incurred, in so
much that some women in the middle of their being with Child, have bin Cured of
the whores Pox, without harm to their Child.

Chap. 17. Of Abortion or Miscarriage.
ABortion or Miscarriage is the bringing forth of an imperfect or unripe Child.
And consequently a child dead in the Womb, is not counted an Abortion, till it
be excluded. So that whether alive or dead Child be brought fourth, not being
ripe, nor having attained to the just term of growth which it ought to have had
in the Womb, it is to be termed an Abortion, or Miscarried Child.

The Causes of Abortion are some internal some external. The internal may be
reduced to four heads, viz. to the Humors, to the Child, to the Womb, and to
the Mothers diseases.

The humors may cause Abortion while they offend in quantity or in quality.

They offend in Quantity either by way of excess or of Defect.

Humors offending by way of excess are seen in a Plethorick or over-full
Constitution of Body; for Blood being more plentyfull than is requisite to
Nourish the Infant in the Womb, flows into the veins of the Womb, and is
excluded by way of the monthly Courses, and brings away the Child with it.

Defect of Humor fitting to Nourish, springs from such Causes, which are able
to draw the Nourishment from the Child, as fasting, whether voluntary or
forced; as when women with Child loath all kind of Meat, or vomit it up again;
a thin diet in acute diseases; immoderate bleeding by the Nose, Haemorrhoides,
Womb, or by immoderate Phlebotomy. Whereupon Hippocrates in Aphor. 34. Sect. 5.
If a woman with Child go very much to stool, it is to be feared that she will
Miscarry. Hereunto may be referred extreme leanness of the whole body, wherein
there is not Blood enough to nourish the Infant. Of which, Hippocrates in
Aphor. 44. Sect. 5. Speaks thus. Women with Child being very lean, not by
nature, but accident, as famine, long-sicknes etc. they Miscarry, until they
get their flesh again.

In respect of the Child, Abortion may happen, if it be over great, so that it
cannot by reason of its bulk be contained in the Womb; hence it falls often out
that little Women miscarry especially if they be married to Men Bigger than
ordinary whose Children grow very great, and find not in the Womb place large
enough to contain them, till they come to their perfect growth. Which made
Hippocartes say In his Book of superfoetation. If any Woman conceive
frequently, and do duly and at a certain period of time Miscarry, as in her
second, third, or fourth month, or later: the narrowness of her Womb is in
fault, which is not able to contain the Child as it grows great. Also plurality
of Children may cause abortion, as when two or three or more are contained in
the Womb at one time; for then the Womb overloaden excludes the Children before
the fit time: which is the cause that Women often Miscarry of twinns. Also the
dead Child is to be reckoned among the causes of Abortion: for as soon as the
Child is dead; Nature does forthwith set her self to cast it forth.

Abortion happens in respect of the Womb it self, if it be not of largness and
capacity enough, sufficiently to widen itself according as the child grows, as
was showed above out of Hippocrates. As also if there be any thing
preternatural in the Womb, as an Inflammation, a Scirrhous Tumor, an Impostume
and very many diseases besides. And finally if the Womb be overmoist and slack,
that it cannot contain the Child so well as it ought to do.

In respect of the Mothers diseases, Abortion comes two ways. First of all,
when as her diseases are communicated to the Child, whereby it is killed, or so
weakened that it cannot receive due nourishment nor growth; such as are
continual and intermitting fevers, the Whores-Pocks and many such like.
Secondly, when the said diseases of the Mother, do cause great evacuations or
great commotions or the Body, as ^^rge Bleedings, from what part of the Body
soever, fluxes of the Belly, grievous swoonings, Falling Sickness, Vomiting,
and Tenesmus [that is perpetual going to the stool and voiding nothing but a
little slime* which above all other diseases is wont to cause Abortion, because
by that frequent and almost continual endeavor of going to stool, which
perpetually attends this disease, the Muscles of the Belly are perpetually
contracted, and do more compress the Womb than the straight Gutt upon which the
Womb rests; which continual compression or squeezing of the Womb, does at last
cause Abortion.

External causes which further Abortion, do some of them kill the Child, others
draw away its nourishment, and others dissolve those bands wherewith the Child
is fastened to the Womb.

The Child is killed by grievous commotions of mind, as Anger, sadness, Terror
etc. meats earnestly longed for and not obtained, strong purging Medicaments,
such things as provoke the Courses, such things as drive forth the Child; such
things as are reckoned by a secret property to destroy the Child in the Womb;
abominable smells, especially the stink of a Candle ill put out.

The Child is deprived of its nourishment, by the Mothers being famished, and
by immoderate loss of her Blood, especially when the Child is big. As
Hippocrates teaches in the Aphor. 60 Sect. 5.

The bands which fasten the Child to the Womb are loosed by vehement exercise,
Danceing, Running, Rideing, or Jolting in a Coach or Cart; carrying of an heavy
weight, or lifting it from the ground, a violent fall and squelch, a Blow upon
the Belly that mauls the Child, vehement motion of the Belly by coughing,
vomiting, looseness, neezing, convulsions, crying out, immoderate or over wanton
venereal embraces. And in a word, vehement motions of the Arms, by drawing
somewhat violently to a Body, by turning a wheel, or doing some such work, may
exceedingly further Abortion or Miscarriage.

The Signs of present Abortion are manifest of themselves. But such as go
before Abortion, and prognosticate the same, are these; An unusual heaviness of
the Loins and Hips, a loathness to stir, Appetite gone, shivering and shaking
coming by fits, pain of the head, especially about the Roots of the Eyes; a
straitening of the sides, and of the Belly above the Navel; the flagging or
falling, and extenuation of the Dugs, which made Hippocrates to say in Aphor.
37. Sect. 5. If the Dugs of a woman with child do suddenly grow small, that
woman will miscarry. For the extenuation of a woman's Dugs in such a case, does
signify want of blood in those Veins which are common to the womb, and to the
Dugs, by means of which defect, the child is in danger to miscarry. But if
Abortion shall be caused by some external essicient, causing violent agitation
of the Child in the Womb, and a bursting of the Vessels, with a pain raised in
those parts; the Spirits and Blood run speedily to the genital parts, of which
the Dugs being destitute, grow smaller than they were. Furthermore, Plenty of
Milk dropping from the Dugs, does argue weak Child, and consequently portends
Abortion; according to Hippocrates in Aphor. 52. Sect. 5. But if frequent
pains, and almost continual, do torment the Reins and Loins, reaching toward
the Share as far as Os sacrum, with a certain endeavor of going out of the
Womb, it is a certain sign of a woman that will shortly mscarry. For those
parts do signify that the Membranes and L^gaments wherewith the child is
fastened to the womb are stretched and torn in ^under. And if so be that pure
Blood, or such as is wheyish, or water flowing from the Womb, do ^ollow the
foresaid pains and endeavors of coming out; it shows that Abortion is hard at
hand, and that the Vessels and Membranes of the Womb are broken, and the mouth
of the Womb open. At the same time, the cituation or posture of the Child is
changed; for whereas it lay high and possessed the middle of the Woman's Belly
like a Sugar-loof bearing out; it is now gathered, round like a Football, and
roiled down toward the Water gate. Also oftentimes there follow grievous
Symptoms, as shiverings, tremblings, Palpitations of the Heart, Swoonings, and
abundant Bleeding.

Hereunto may be added what Hip^oc^a^es teaches us in the second Book of
Popular Sicknesses, Text 17. That if after violent external c^uses, such as are
blow, a fall, and such like, vehement pain, and perturbation arise in a Woman
with Child, she suddenly (or at most the same day) miscarries; but if the
external cause were weak, the Abortion may be differred till the third day,
which being once over, there is no longer danger of Abortion, because such
wounds and hurts, are wont to grow well again upon the third, or at most, the
fourth day, or very much to be mitigated and assuaged; whereupon the Child is
again confirmed in the Womb and retained. Which Precept is of great moment in
the Practice o^ Phy^ick, that women with child being hurt by some external
accident, should keep their bed for ^nree days or longer, and use such
Remedies as prevent Abortion.

The Prognostics o^ Abortion may be diverse, after this manner:

Women are more endangered by Abortion, than by due and timely Childbirth,
because it is more violent, and unseasonable, for as in ripe Fruit, the Stalks
are loosened from the Boughs, and the Fruit falls of it self; so in a Natural
Birth, the Vessels and Ligaments wherewith the Child is tied to the Womb, are
loosened and untied as it were of their own accord, which in case of Abortion
must needs be violently broken asunder.

Very many women become Barren by their Miscarriages by reason of those
exceeding rendings and tearing which do wholly overthrow the dispositions of
the Womb.

Much bleeding accompanied with fainting, raving, and convulsions, is wont to
cause death; and Aresaeus testifies he never saw any escape, who in the time of
their Abortion, or aiterwards, had Convulsion fits.

In^lamation of the Womb caused by Abortion, is for the most part deadly; for
Blood flowing to the Womb in great quantity, is not purged out, but putrefies
therein, and regurgitat^s or slows back into the upper parts; whence arise
burning Fevers, pantings of the Heart, Heart-burning, and other Symptoms
enumerated before.

Abortion is more dangerous in a woman that never bore Child before, because
being unaccustomed to Pains, and having those Passages more strait, she is
longer and more vehemently tormented.

Women very lean or very fat, are more endangered by Miscarriage; the former,
because of their weakness; the latter, because of the narrowness of those
Passages by which the Child must come forth.

Abortion is more dangerous in the sixth, seventh, and eight months, because
the Child being the greater, is excluded with the more pain and difficulty.

Women which have a more loose and moist womb than ordinary, domiscarry
commonly without danger, especially in the first month; because those parts in
such women, do easily give way, whence their pain and trouble is the less.

Hippocrates in the second Book of Popular Sicknesses, affirms, That to
miscarry of a male Conception of threescore days old, helps a Woman whose
Courses are stopped, By stopping of Courses, he understands only their
imminution, when women are not sufficiently, or conveniently purged, at their
monthly seasons; for by such an Abortion or Miscarriage as aforesaid, those
stopped passages are opened, and the Blood is drawn toward the womb, which
came thither but slowly in former times. Our ordinary women seem to have taken
notice, of the truth of this saying of Hippocrates. who touching an Abortion of
a few months, are wont to say by way of proverb, Amiscarrying woman is half
with child again.

The Cure of Abortion consists in Preservation, for that which is past cannot
be helped. But all the Symptoms which follow Abortion, are the same which
accompany women duly brought to bed. The Preservation from Abortion has two
principal Points or Heads: The one concerns the woman before she is with child:
The other when she is with child.

Before the woman is with child, all evil dispositions of body which are wont
to cause Abortion, must be removed: as fullness of blood, badness of Humors, and
peculiar Diseases of the womb, viz. Distempers, Swellings, Ulcers, and such
like.

Fullness of Blood opens the Veins of the womb, or strangles the Infant while it
is in the womb. This if it be a pure and simple Plenitude, may be cured by
Blood-letting, such as shall answer the quantity of blood super-abounding.

But badness of Humors, is either chollerick and sharp, so as to open the
Orisices of the Veins, or by provoking Nature, to stir up the expulsive
faculty, whereby the child comes to be expelled with those evil humors; or by
reason of plenty of excrements heaped together in the first Region, and
distending the Belly, it suffocates the child; or it vitiates the blood in the
whole habit of the Body, rendering it unfit to nourish the child, or it fills the
Vessels of the womb which retain the child, full of slime and snot.

This Badness of Humors may likewise be helped by blood-letting, but it must be
in a lesser quantity, seeing the principla scope of the Cure, is by frequent
Purgations, to take away the super fluous Excrements of the Body. And in the
spaces between Purge and Purge, such things must be used, as help the distemper
of the Bowels, mitigate the sharpness of Humors if there be any, or thicken the
said Humors, in case they be too thin. Or if slegmatick Humors are too rife,
they must be discussed by Sweat-drivers, Piss-drivers, and other Remedies.
Howbeit we must diligently observe, that whatever ill humor abounds, Issues are
wonderful profitable to prevent Abortion: of which Zacutus Lusitanus gives a
special note, in these words: By most happy Experiments I have observed, That
frequent Abortion caused by corrupted Humors which slow from the whole Body to
the Womb, and by their evil disposition or abundance do kill the child, is
hereby as by a most present help prevented. Many women did miscarry upon this
very account, among which some having often times brought forth a Child of
seven months or four months growth, but torn and putrefied, could by no other
means be freed from so great a Calamity, save by Issues made in their Arms and
Thighs, which were always made at the beginning of the fluxion; by which means
they went out their time, and brought forth Children healthy, and not defiled
with any Infection.

The peculiar Diseases of the Womb, as over great Moisture, Swellings, Ulvers,
and such like must be cured by their proper Remedies described in the Chapters
which treat of them.

In women with Child, if the same Causes be present as in other women, the
difficulty is yet greater, because big-bellied women cannot so easily bear all
kind of Remedies. Yet, lest being destitute of all help, they should remain in
extreme danger of Miscarriage and Death, some kind of Remedies are to be used.

In case therefore the Patient be too full of blood, she must have a Vein
opened, though with child, especially in the first months; and that the second
and third time, if need be. Always remembering that there never be much blood
taken away at a time. Of which kind of bleeding we have discoursed more at
large, in the foregoing Cure.

And when there is an abundance of some very bad Humors, gentle Purgations must
be reiterated, especially in the middle months of a woman's being with Child.
And if a moist, rheumatick, snotty, or windy distemper do annoy the Patient, we
may sometimes proceed to a Sudorifick Di^t, at least a gentle one, in the
stronger sort of women.

Mean while, in the whole course of being with child, astringent and
strengthening Medicaments are to be used, such as have a virtue to hinder
Abortion. Many of which have been described in our Chapter of immoderate flux
of Courses; whereunto these following may profitably be added.

Take of Kermes, and Tormentil Roots, of each three drams: Mastich one dram and
an half. Make all into a Powder, of which give the Patient half a dram at
certain distances of time, or as much as may be taken up upon the point of a
knife. Or,

Take red Coral two drams: Kermes berries, Date Stones, of each one dram:
Shavings of Ivory half a dram: Pearls not bored through, ascruple. Make of all
a Powder.

Or ler her swallow every day certain grains of Mastich in the morning.

Our ordinary women do frequently use Plantane Seed, which they take in the
morning about the quantity of half a dram, with Wine and Water or in an Egg, or
Broth, or by it self, almost every day, the whole time of their being with
Child, and that not in vain.

To the same purpose very effectual Electuaries are compounded, according to
this following Example:

Take Conserve of Roses two ounces: Citron peels candied six drams: Myrobalans
candied, Pulp of Dates, of each half an ounce: Coral prepared, Pearls prepared,
and Shavings of Ivory, of each a dram. With Syrup of quinces, make all into an
Opiate, of which let the Patient take often the quantity of a Chestnut.

If a Liquid form shall be more desired, a Decoction of Tormentil Roots,
sweetened with Conserve of Roses, may profitably be given.

The following Lozenges are very good; for they strengthen, and do by little
and little free the Body from Excrements, though sometimes they do not visibly
purge.

Take Mace, the three sorts of Sanders, Rhubarb, Senna, Carals, Pearls, of each
a scruple: Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, four ounces. Make all into Lozenges,
weighing three drams apiece. Let her take one twice a week by it self, or
dissolved in a little Broth.

Outwardly Ointments and Plasters are to be applied, made after this manner:

Take Ship-pitch half an ounce: Frankincense an ounce: Mastich half an ounce:
Dragons Blood and red Roses, of each two drams. Make all into a Cerate or
Plaster. Or,

Take Oil of Myrtles, and Mastich, of each an ounce: red Sanders and yellow,
Hypocistis, Acacia, of each half an ounce: Spodium, red Roses, of each two
drams: Bole Armoniack, Terra Sigillata, Shavings of Ivory, of each two
scruples: Turpentine washed in Plantane Water an ounce: Wax as much as shall
suffice. Make all into a Cerate or Plaster; spread it upon a Cloth, and apply
it to the Reins.

Plasters are compounded of the Mass of Emplastrum pro Matrice, and Emplastrum
contra Rupturam, to be applied to the Region of the Share, and of the Loins. Or
after this manner following:

Take of the Mass or Roll of Emplastrum pro Matrice three ounces: Bistort
Roots, Acacia, Hypocistis, Pomegranate peels, of each half an ounce: Ladanum
six drams. Moisten and soften them with Juice of Quinces, and make a Roll of
Plaster for the use aforesaid.

Concerning Plasters it is to be observed, That they must not be worn long
together, but taken off ever and anon; otherwise, if they stick too long upon
the Back, they do so heat the Kidneys, that the poor women are sometimes
troubled with sharpness of Urine, or do sometimes piss Sand, Stones, yea and
Blood it self.

Neither must we omit such things which are accounted by a secret property of
their Nature to retain a Child in the womb; as an Aegle-stone worn about the
Neck, a Lodestone applied to the Navel, Corals, Jaspers, Smaragds, Bones found
in the Hearts of Stags, and such like, worn under the Armpits, or hanged about
the Neck.

Zacutus Lusitanus in Obs. 152. of the Second Book of wonderful Cures, commends
a Girdle made of the Hide of a Seahorse; and if that be not to be had, he
says a Wolfs Skin may profitably be used instead thereof.

And that the success of these Medicaments may be happy, the Patient must be
enjoined to rest and keep her self as quiet as possibly she can, both in her
Body and Mind; also to abstain from Genial Embracements, which do vehemently
towze and disquiet the Womb. For while the Womb opens it self to comprehend the
Man's Sperm, with which it is exceedingly delighted, it drives forwards the
lately conceived Child, not yet thoroughly fastened in the womb.

But if notwithstanding the Medicines aforesaid, by reason of the vehemence of
the Cause, whether it be internal or external, the Patient be ready to
Miscarry, we must apply our selves to do the best we can, with these following
Remedies. And in the first place, so soon as pains and throws shall be
perceived in the lower part of the Patients Belly toward her Share, in her
Loins, and about the Ossacrum, we must seek to allay and stop them, both by
things given in, and outwardly applied, according to the variety of Causes. For
if Abortion be provoked by Crudities and Winds (which is most usual when it
begins from an Internal Cause) a Powder must be given, compounded of Aromaticum
Rosatum, and Coriander Seeds: Yea, we may give of the Aqua Imperialis, if the
quantity of phlegm and wind be very great.

At the same time let Carminative, or Fart-forcing Medicaments be applied below
the Patients Navel: such are, bags of Annis seed, Fennel seed, Foenugreek seed,
Flowers of Chamomel, Elder, Rosemary, and Stoechados mingled together; Or a
Rose Cake fried in a Pan with rich Canary, and sprinkled with Powder of Nutmeg
and Coriander, or the Caul of a Wether newly killed, or his Lungs laid on warm.

If with these means the pains cease not, let a Clyster be cast in, made of
Wine and Oil, wherein two drams of Philonium Romanum may be dissolved, or
Narcoticks may be given inwardly in a smaller Dose, to allay the violence of
Humors and Winds, as we are wont to do in pains of the Chollick.

But if by reason of contumacious pains that will not be assuaged, or of the
violence of some external cause, blood begin to come away, Revelling Medicines
are to be applied, to withdraw the course of the blood from the Womb: such are,
Rubbings of the uper parts and painful bindings; also Cupping-Glasses fastened
to the Shoulder-blades, under the Dugs, and under the short Ribs on both sides.
Yea, and if the Woman be full of Blood, it will not be amiss to take some blood
from her, both when she begins to void blood, and especially before it begins
to come; and the blood must be taken away at several times, a little at once.

And if all this will not suffice, but the Flux of blood continues, we must
proceed to astringent and thickening Diet, and Medicaments; and so the Pouders
and Electuaries formerly described, may be administered. Also Juice of Plantane
new drawn, and Syrup of Poppies to the quantity of an ounce, with Powder of
Bole-Armoniack, or Dragons-blood.

Also outwardly may be used fomentations binding and strengthening, made of
Pomegranate peels, Cypress Nuts, Acorn Cups, Balaustians, Grape-stones, and
such like things boiled in Smiths water, and red Wine.

Or a little Bag full of red Rose Leaves and Balaustians, may be boiled and
applied hot to the Patients Belly.

Hereunto may be added the foresaid Plasters and Cerecloaths: Or for to cause
the more astriction, make a Cataplasm of astringent Pouders, with Turpentine,
and the whites of Eggs, which must be spread upon Tow, or course Flax, and
applied to the Navel and the Reins warm. The Tow which shall be applied to the
Navel, must be moistened with Wine; that which is to be applied to the Kidneys,
in Vinegar.

The two following Medicaments are accounted for Secrets, and it is believed
they will certainly hold the Child in the Womb, if they be used before it be
loosened from the Wombs Vessels.

Take twelve Leaves of Gold: Spodium a dram: the Cocks Treading of three Eggs
that are not adle. Mix all very well, till the Gold be broken into small Atoms.
Afterward dissolve them in a draught of white Wine, and give it to drink three
mornings together.

At the same time let the following Cataplasm be laid on.

Take male Frankincense poudered two ounces: five whites of Eggs: Let them be
stirred about together over hot coals, always stirring them that they may not
clodder together: add Turpentine to make them stick, Then spread it upon
Parcels of Tow, which lay upon her Navel as hot as she can possibly endure
them, twice a day, morning and evening, on the three days aforesaid.

Chap. 18. Of Hard Childbirth.
HArd Travel in Childbearing, is such as keeps not the due and ordinary Laws
of Nature, taking up longer time than ordinary, and accompanied with more
vehement pains than are usual, and other more grievous Symptoms.

Diverse causes here of may be assigned both internal and external. The internal
depend either of the Mother, of the Womb, or of the Child.

In respect of the Mother, Travel with child may become sore and hard, by the
weakness of her Body, either Natural, or in regard of Age, as in very young and
very ancient women, or in regard of Diseases wherewith the woman was troubled
during the time of her going with Child, or is still troubled. Hereunto also
Leanness, and over great dryness of the whole body, may be added; as also over
fatness, and grossness compressing and straitening the passages of the womb;
ill shape of such bones as border upon, and embrace the womb* as in such as
limp, wind stretching the Guts; stone or preternatural tumor possessing the
bladder, and pressing the Womb; and the ill constitution of the Lungs, and
other parts serving for Respiration, because holding the Breath is very
necessary to exclude the Child.

In respect of the Womb, diverse Diseases thereof may cause a sore Labor, as
Swellings, Ulcers, Obstructions, Astrictions, Stoppages arising from
preternatural Causes.

In respect of the Child, Hard Travel is caused, when there is some fault
therein, in respect of its substance, its quantity, its figure, and certain
things thereunto belonging.

The Child is faulty in regard of Substance, when it is dead or putrefied, or
some ways infected, or weakened with some Disease, so that it has no ability
to contribute to its own exclusion.

In regard of Quantity likewise, the Child does not further its own Birth,
which is either discrete or severed quantity, or concrete and joined; the
former is called Number, the latter Magnitude. In regard therefore of continued
quantity, the child is faulty, if the Body or Head of it be over great; which
makes the Birth thereof become difficult and laborsom; in regard of the
disjoined quantity of the child or burden, Labor becomes difficult, as when
there are more than one in the womb; so the Birth of Twins is more painful than
of a single Child, for the most part.

In respect of the Figure, or Situation of the Child in the Womb difficult
Travel happens many ways; as when the Child endeavors to come forth with its
feet or its hands foremost, or puts out one hand only, or one foot; or when it
endeavors to come forth doubled, with its breech, or its belly foremost.

In regard of the Child's Adjuncts or certain things belonging to the Child,
difficulty of Travail happens, when those membranes which enclose the Child are
more thin than ordinary so that they come to break, sooner than they should;
whence followed an over quick effusion of the waters contained therein,
whereupon the mouth of the Womb remains dry at the time of the exclusion of
the Infant; or where the foresaid Membranes, are more thick and compact than
ordinary, by which means, the Child is hardly able to break them.

External Causes depend upon things necessary and things contingent, the things
necessary are such as Physicians commonly call res non naturales, things not
natural. So a cold and dry air, and the Northern-wind are very hurtful to
women in travail, because they straiten the whole Body, drive the Blood and
spirits inwards, and prove very destructive to the Infant coming forth of so
warm a place as the Womb. Also air more hot than ordinary dissipates the
spirits and exhausts the strength both of Mother and Child, easily introduceing
a feverish Inflammation into a Body replenished with ill humors, and
exagitated.

Meats raw and hard to digest, or of an astringent quality, taken in a large
Quantity before the time of travail, may render the same laborious, the stomach
being weakened and the common passages stopped, which in this case ought to be
very free and open.

Sleepyness and Sottishess do slacken the endeavors both of the Mother and the
Child, and show nature to be weak.

Unseasonable stirring of the woman does much delay the Birth of the Child,
whenas she refuses to stand, to walk, lie down, or to sit upon the Midwifes
stool, as need shall require; or when she is unduely agitated to and fro;
whence it comes to pass that the Child cannot l^^ue in a sitting posture, or
looses the good posture it had, by reason of the Mothers undue and disorderly
moveing her self.

The retention of Excrements at the time of Travail, as of Urin distending the
Bladder of hard excrements in the straight Gutt; and hemorrhoids much Swelled,
do straiten the neck of the Womb, and divert nature from her endeavor of
expelling the Child.

And in a word, vehement Passions of mind, as Fear, Sadness, Anger, may very
much increase the difficulty of Child birth.

To things contingent are referred Blows, Falls, wounds, which may very much
hinder the Birth: hereunto likewise appertain the parties assistant in time of
travail to help the laboring woman, viz. strong women and maid servants, which
may lift her up and support her when she is in her labors, and especially an
expert Midwife, which ought to manage the whole Business. For if the Midwife
err in her office, it is wont to cause difficulty of Birth. For sometimes the
Midwises do over soon exhort the Childing woman, to hold their breath and to
strain themselves to exclude their Child, while the bands which fasten the
Child to the Womb, are as yet unloosed; by which means, the strength of the
woman is wasted before hand, which should have bin reserved to the just time of
her travail. Yea and the truth is, while the Midwifes do oversoon persuade the
Childing women, that the time of their travail is at hand, they bend all their
strength to exclude the Child, and oftentimes violently break those bands with
which the Child is fastened, and cast themselves into no small Jeopardy.

Hard Travail is known both by the Childing woman, and by the Assistants, but
especially by the Midwife. And in the first place, if the woman continue a
longer time than ordinary in her Labors, as two, three, four or more days
whereas a truly natural Childbirth ought to be accomplished within the space
of 24. Hours. Again, it is a Sign of an hard Labor, if the woman's pains be
weak, and are long before they return, and if her pains are more about her
Back than Privities. And the Causes of hard travail, are known by relation of
the Childing woman, and are for the most part evidently to be seen. So the
weakness of the woman, her over leanness, or over fatness, is perceived by the
habit of her Body. Diseases of the Womb are known by their proper Signs. The
Child's weakness is known by its weak and slow moving it self. But the Signs of
a dead Child shall be declared in the next Chapter. The greatness of the Child
may be gathered from the stature of the Parents, especially when a big-Bodyed
man is matched with a little woman. But when there are none of these Signs,
and the woman labors stoutly, and the Child stirrs and makes its way
sufficiently, and yet the travail is hard and painful; it is a token that the
secundine or Afterbirth is stronger than ordinary, and can hardly be broken,
which conjecture is more probable, if no water or moisture come from the woman
dureing her Labors. The disorderly posture of the Child is perceived by the
Midwife, and the other Causes are visible to the Eye, as we said before.

As for the Prognostic. Hard-Travail, is of it self dangerous in which
sometimes the Mother, sometimes the Child and sometimes both do loose their
lives.

If a woman be four days in Labor, its hardly possible the Child should live.

Sleepy diseases and convulsions which befall a woman in Travail are for the
most part deadly.

Sneezing which befalls a woman in sore Travail is good. Out of Hippocrates in
his Aphorisms.

To cure difficulty in Childbirth first all causes which may delay the birth,
are as much as may be, to be removed. And afterward, such Medicines as further
the Birth are Methodically to be administered.

And in the first place it is common among the women to give a groaning wife a
spoonful or two of Cinnamon Water. Or Cinnamon it self in Powder with a little
Saffron may be given, or half a dram of Consectio Alkermes may be drunk in a
little Broth. Also Saffron alone being given ten grains in every Mess of
Broth the woman takes, or every hour being taken in a little Wine is very good
Or.

Take Oil of sweet Almonds and White Wine of each two ounces. Saffron and
Cinnamon of eath twelve grains Confectio Alkermes half a dram. Syrup of Maiden
Hair one ounce and an half. Mix all and make thereof a potion.

If this shall not suffice, but that stronger things, must be used, the
following potion will be most effectual, which I have had frequent experience of.

Take Dictamnus Cretensis, both the Birthworts, and Trochiscs or Cakes of Myrrh
of each half asc uple. Saffron and Cinnamon of each twelve grains. Confectio
Alkermes half a dram: Cinnamon Water half an ounce, Orange-flower and Mugwort
Water of each an ounce and an half: Make all into a potion.

Among the more effectual sort of Medicaments are numbered Oil of Amber Oil of
Cinnamon and extract of Saffron, which do in a little quantity work ^^ch viz.
Extract of Saffron to five or six grains, Oil of Cinnamon to four or five
Drops; Oil of Amber to twelve or fifteen Drops, in Wine, Broth or other Liquor.

Sneezing hastens the Birth, or Hippocrates in the Aphor. 35. Sect. 5. Sneezing
which happens to a woman in sore Travail is good. Sneezing may be provoked by
the following Powder.

Take White Hellebore half a dram. Long Pepper one scurple. Castoreum five
grains. Make all into a Powder, and blow thereof into her ^st^^lls the quantity
of a Pease.

The same Hippocrates prescribes another Remedy in the first Book of women's
diseases, which is omitted by all authors almost. And that is the opening of
one of the lower veins of the Body, which he propounds in these words. But if
(says he) a Big-bellied woman be so stopped that she cannot bring forth, but
continues diverse days in her ^ains: if she be a young woman, vigorous and full
of Blood, her Anckleveines must be opened, and Blood taken away, according as
her strength will bear, Although this remedy be never used by our
Practitioners, and it seems much to be feared, because in Travail nothing is so
needful as strength, which may be weakened by Blood-letting: Yet if difficult
Travail do arise from fullness of blood, which Hippocrates does insinuate in
those words, where he says If the woman be young and in the prime of her
strength, and very full of Blood; there is no question, but bleeding may be
very profitable, because the Veins being very full of Blood, are wont to make
al other inward passages of the Body more strait. Whence it comes to pass, that
in pains of the Stone in the kidneys, the like Blood-letting does often work
wonders, and facilitate the expulsion of Stones contained both in the kidneys
and Ureters.

Also hard Travail may be helped not only by those inward Medicines prescribed,
but likewise by outward

Let the Midwife therefore frequently anoint the Womb of the Childing woman
with Oils of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Lin-Seed, and such like.

Also let her belly be fomented on the nether parts with an emollient Decoction
of Marsh-mallow and Lilly Roots, Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Mugwort, Seeds of
Line and Fenugreek, with the flowers, of Chamomel and Melilot.

Let sharp Clysters be administered, by the provokeing virtue of which the
expulsive faculty of the womb may be likewise ^oused up; and the Gutts being
emptied will afford larger space for the womb.

Let her Navel be anointed with Oil of Amber. Some commend the Gaul of an Hen
applied to the same part.

Also such things may be used which are thought by a peculiar property to help
the Birth: as Aegle-Stone, Lodestone, Storax, and the rest being fastened to
the Hipps.

Hartmannus Commends the Eyes of an Hare taken in the month of March: which are
carefully to be taken out and dried entire with Pepper. Let one of these with
Pepper be so tied to her Belly, that the Sight of the Eye may touch her belly:
and it will bring forth the Child, be it alive or dead. Which being done take
away the Eye least it bring forth the Womb it self. He says likewise that it
is good to bring out the Mole.

Heed is likewise to be taken that the woman carry no Precious Stones about
her, either in rings or otherwise, but let her lay them al away: for many of
them are conceived by a peculiar property to retain the Child in the womb.

If the Child seem to be weak, it must be refreshed, both with strengthening
things given to the Mother, as warm wine, Confectio Alkermes, Cinnamon Water;
and also with things outwardly applied, as with a Crust of Bread, or a Rose
Cake strewed with Powder of Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cloves, Kermes Berries, and
sprinkled with Aqua Imperialis or with warm Wine. Or with a piece of
Wether-Mutton a little broiled upon a Gridiron, and sprinkled with Water of
Roses or of Orange-flowers; with the call of a wether newly killed, not yet
cold, and such like.

If the Child begin to come forth in a disorderly manner, as by putting out one
Foot, one Hand, or any other way; the Midwife must no ways receive it on that
manner, but thrust it into the Womb again, and compose it to a right and
natural posture or form of egress. Which must be done by laying the Childing
woman on her Back in the Bed, with her Head somewhat low and her Buttocks high:
and then gently pressing her Belly toward the short Ribs, and thrusting the
Child into the Womb. Afterward let the Midwife endeavor to put the Child into
a right posture for coming out, by an artificial Hand procuring that the Child
turn its face toward the Mothers Back, and its Buttocks and shighes let her
lift up toward the Mothers navel, and so hasten the same unto a natural manner
of coming for^h.

When all Hope of the Child's coming forth is past, or when the Mether is almost
dead, some Authors proceed to the Caesarean Section [that is to cut the Child
out of the Womb, as Caesar was cut out] of which Francilcus Rossetus has
Printed a most elegant Treatise; in which by many reasons and examples he
endeavors to show, that such a thing may be sometimes done with good success.
Howbeit, seeing this Operation is very dangerous and terrible, it ought seldom
or never to be practiced by a discreet Physician, that would preserve his own
reputation.

Chap. 19. Of A Dead Child.
IN sore Travel of Childbirth by reason of great and long Labor, the Child is
oftentimes killed; and sometimes before a woman's pains come upon her, the Child
happens to die through some preternaturall accidents, such as those which are
wont to cause Abortion; and if it has not attained to the due time of natural
Birth it causes Abortion, but if it have, it causes an hard and sore Travel,
Because in a due and natural Birth, both the Mother and the Child ought to
join their Forces, to bring it from the Dark Dungeon to the Liberty of Day.

All such things therefore which cause difficult Childbirth being in a greater
and more grievous degree, are of power to kill the Child. But especially the
Child is wont to be killed, if it come in so untoward and preposterous a figure,
that it can by no means be brought forth in that manner neither can the Midwife
or Chyrurgion draw it forth, or reduce it to a better Posture. For while
sticking thus in the mouth of the Womb, it frustrates all the endeavors of the
Mother straining her self to exclude it: it comes to pass, that in those
s^^ainings, various motions and compressions, sometimes both Mother and Child,
sometimes the Mother alone and sometimes the Child alone does die. It is to be
admired which Fabricius Hildanus writes, touching two women which died through
hard Labor, in whom their Wombes were found broken a sunder and the Heads of
the Infants in their Mothers Bellies By which we may gather, how strongly a
lusty Child does labor to work it self out of the Mothers Womb.

A Dead Child is known, when the motion thereof cease, which either the
Mother did feel, or the Midwife perceive by her hand laid on, or other warm and
strengthening things which were wont to awaken and rouse up the powers thereof
when they were in a slumber or stupefied. Also the Mothers find a greater sense
of weight, with which and pain of the Belly they are troubled: when they turn
from one side to another they perceive the Child to roll from one side to
another like a Stone. The lower part of their Belly feels very cold, the native
heat being extinguished and those spirits dissipated, which were formerly in
the Child; their Eyes become hollow and troubled: their face and Lips are pale;
their extreme parts appear cold and of a Leaden-colour: their Duggs become slap
and flaggy, and at length, when the Child rots, stinking moistures flow from
the Womb, like water and blood: their belly is blown up with vapors asending
thereunto: a filthy smell, and a stinking Breath comes both out of the Mouths
of such women and from their whole bodies. If the Afterbirth be excluded before
the Child, it is a certain token that the Child is dead in the Womb.

As to the Prognostic. A Child dead in the Womb is a very exceeding dangerous
thing, and if it be not timely voided forth it is wont to cause Fevers,
Faintings, Dead-sleeps, Convulsions and death it self.

Yet sometimes a Child dead in the Womb may be kept a long time, as appears by
many stories related by diverse Authors, which Schenkius has collected in great
number as rare Cases, and Sennertus has transcribed out of him, touching many
Women which have voided the Bones of Children dead and putrefied in the womb,
by their Watergate, their Dung-gate, and by a Swelling that broke in their
Belly.

I have seen one Woman which voided all the bones of her child by her Navel,
and her Navel growing afterward whole again. she recovered her perfect health.

The Cute consists wholly in the Exclusion or Extraction of the Child; for
seeing great danger of life at ends the Mother so long as the dead Child is in
her Womb, as soon as ever by the foregoing signs, we certainly collect the
Child is dead, we must make have, to force it out. Which is done by the same
Remedies which were formerly propounded to hasten the Birth. But among them we
must choose out the most strong and effectual, whereunto some other things may
be added which are yet stronger, after this manner:

Take Leaves of Savin dried, round Birth-wort Roots, Troches of Mirrh, and
Castoreum, of each one dram: Cinnamon half a dram: Saffron a scruple. Mix all
into a Powder. The Dose is a dram in Savin Water. Or,

Take Dictamnus Creticus, Savin, Borax, of each a dram: Mirrh, Asarum Roots,
Cinnamon, Saffron, of each half a dram. Mix and make all into a Powder. The
Dose is a dram in the foresaid, or such like Liquor.

In the mean time, let the Fomentations aforesaid be applied to the Privities,
the Share, and space between the Water and the Dung-Gate; adding Briony Roots,
Roots of wild Cucumer, Florentine Orice, round Birthwort, called Aristolochia
rotunda, and Broom-flowers.

After Fomentation, anoint the said Parts with Vnguentum de Arthanita, or with
this following:

Take Aristolochia rotunda, or round Birthwort, Coloquintida, and Agarick, of
each one dram: Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Wine and Bulls Gall, of each two
drams: With Oleum Cherinum, as much as shall suffice. Make all into an Ointment.

Also let this Pessary be put up into the Womb:

Take Aristolochia rotunda, Orice Root, Black Hellebore, Coloquintida, Mirrh,
of each one dram: Galbanum, Opopanax, of each half a dram: With Ox Gall, make
all into a Pessary. Or this:

Take Ammoniacum, Opopanax, Castorium, Sagapenum, black Hellebore, wild Vine,
round Birthwort, Pulp of Coloquintida, Scammony, of each one scruple:
Euphorbium one dram: With Juice of Rue, Bindweed, wild Cucumer, and an Oxes
Gaul, make all into a Pessary.

Zacutus Lusitanus in Obs. ^54. of the Second Book of his strange and Admirable
Cures, does testisie, that a dead Child in the ninth months growth, producing
many Symptoms in the Mother, was driven out by this Pessary, and by help of an
Oily Bath, wherein was mixed the Decoction of such Herbs as do open and widen
the Passages of the Body.

A Fumigation of Galbanum, or an Asses Hoof, may be received by a Funnel into
the Womb.

If the Matter hang long, it will be good, the woman being sufficiently strong,
to give her a purging Medicine; whereby evil Humors, which in this case are
easily collected, may be evacuated, and the dead Child comequently cast forth.

Angelus Sala, in his Book which he calls Triumphus Emeticorum (that is, the
Triumph of Vomits) does witness, That in this case he had often with happy
success given four or five grains of Mercurius vitae, which does most
powerfully expel the dead Child, and excel all other Medicines in that point.
Which notwithstanding, in regard of its vehement working, requires great
Caution and Discretion in the Physician that would use it.

If after Medicines long tried, the dead Child cannot be ejected, we must
implore the Chyrurgions aid. Who may pull it out, either by Instruments, as
Paulus Aegineta describes the manner, or only help of the hand, as is taught by
Carolus Stephanus, Bauthine, and others; all which are diligently transcribed
by Schenkius and Sennertus.

Chap. 20. Of the Afterbirth retained.
IN a Natural Birth, commonly the Secundine is excluded presently after the
Child, yet sometimes it is retained in the Womb, by which means the Mother is in
great Danger of her life.

The internal Causes of this retention are, the over thickness of those coats,
and their too great compactness, by which means they cling more fast to the
sides of the Womb: their being swelled through con^luence of humors, which is
stirred up in a laborious Travel, weakness of the Mother caused by hard Labor,
so that she wants strength to exclude the Afterbirth; and the shutting up of
the Mouth of the womb, after the Child is come away. But the external causes
are, the Cold Air, by force whereof the Secundine is repelled and the Wombs
mouth stopped; Certain smells by which the Womb may be enticed upwards or
agitated; some grievous passion of mind, as fear, or sudden terror or
frowardness of the Childing woman, which will not abide in such a posture nor
use such endeavors as are necessary to this work; the over great weight of the
Infant, by which the Navil-string is broak unawards and the secundine is left
within; and the Error of an unexperienced Midwife, which cuts the Navil-strings
too soon, or holds them not fast in her le^t Hand; as she ought to do, for if
she let them go, they are drawn back into the Womb, and there lie hid with the
Afterbirth, which they ought to have helped to pull out.

The Tokens of a Secundine retained are needless, its apparent of it self; yet
sometimes a bit thereof is severed from the whole and retained, which is not so
easy to be known; yet it may be known, because the Womb after the Birth, does
yet labor to cast somewhat forth, although those endeavors are not so great as
formerly; there is perceived in the womb, a sense of pain and heat, and after
certain days, a ^ilthy and carrion-like smell exhales from the Womb.

The Retention of the Secundine is a very dangerous thing, and if it continue
some days in the womb, it acquires a silthy putrefaction, whence arises an
acute Fever, aptness to vomit, fainting, difficulty or breathing, a
Diaphoretick Sweat, Coldness of the extreme parts, Hysterical Fits, Fits of
Falling Sickness, and at last death it self.

Hippocrates in the Second Book of Popular Sicknesses, by the example of a
certain Carriers Wife, does hint unto us, That it is good in this case, when
corrupt blood does suddenly come from the womb in large quantities, for it is
hopeful, that those Membranes being rotted and wasted, will flow forth upon the
sixth or seventh day.

The Afterbirth retained, is expelled by the same Remedies which were
propounded to drive out the dead Child, whereunto we may add some appropriated
or specific Medicaments, mentioned by Authors.

Gesnerus and Augenius, do very much commend the stones of a gelded Horse, cut
in pieces and dried in an Oven. The Powder whereof is given, as much as can be
taken up between three fingers, with the Broth of a Pullet: which Medicine, if
need be, must be twice or thrice re^^erated.

Rulandus gave thirty drops of Oil of Juniper with happy success.

Some advise the Childing Woman to hold an Onion hard between her Teeth, and
squeeze it there, swallowing down the Juice; and she is to bite it so three or
four times, still sucking out the Juice, and swallowing the same; and at last
to drink a draught of warm Wine upon it, which presently helps her.

Forestus makes relation of a certain Midwife, which received this following
Secret from a ^ewish Physician. She took the green Tops of Lovage, she stamped
them, and strained out the Juice with the best Rhenish Wine, and gave a draught
of it to the Patient.

Angelus Sala commends Mercur^us vitae in this Case, as well as in the
Expulsion of a dead Child.

Hereunto add, Sneezings, Fumigations, Fomentations, Liniments, and other
Medicines both inward and outward so^^er^y described in the case of a dead
Child.

The following Decoction used by a Country woman of ours, has done wonders.

Take Vinegar of Roses eight or ten pints: Bay Leaves, and Bay Berries, of each
three handfuls: one Rose Caze cut in bits. Boil all together, and let her Hips
and Legs be a long time together bathed, from her g^oyns down to her feet. Upon
the use hereof, the Womb has opened of its own accord, and the Afterbirth
fallen away. To this Decoction may fi^^y be added, of Mirrh, and of the two
Birthworts, of each one ounce.

And among other helps, the hand of a skilful Chyrurgion can do much, being put
into the womb, before the Inflammation or Inflation be augmented. For he laying
hold of the After-births, and gently turning them this way and that way, may
draw them out, and free the woman from so many Symptoms, and tiresom Medicines.

If the Secundine can by no means be persuaded forth, but stick strongly to the
womb, and there putrefie, suppurating things are to be put into the womb,
clensing things being mingled with them, that as much as is putrefied, may be
by little and little brought forth. To which intent Rondeletius commends
Vnguentum Basilicum, especially if it be dissolved in the following Decoction.

Take Leaves of Mallows with their Roots, three handfuls: Roots of the two
Aristolochia's, or Birthworts, of each six drams: Lin-seed, and Foenugreek
seed, of each half an ounce: Violet Leaves one handful: Flowers of Chamomel,
and the smaller Centaury, of each half a handful* Boil all in Water, mixing
therewith (if there need great sup^^ration, or reduction to Matter) a little
Oil; but if there be more need of detersion, or clensing, add a little
Unguentum Aegyptiacum.

Chap. 21. Of Immoderate Flux of the Loches, or Childbed Purgations.
THe Immoderate Flux of Childbed Purgations called from the Greek, Loches, is
not to be estimated from the quantity, or the time of continuance; because that
in diverse Natures, Ages, and Courses of Life, it is very different; but from
the ill-bearing of the woman and her weakness therefrom arising.

The Causes of this immoderate Flux, are the over wide opening of the Vessels,
or their rending in hard Travel, or the violent drawing forth of the
Afterbirth; or a more than ordinary quantity of blood, which has been
collected in the Veins of the Womb, during the whole course of the Woman's being
with Child; or the thinness and sharpness of the said Blood, which does too
much open the Mouths of the Veins, and provoke Nature to Excretion.

Immoderate flux of the Childbed Purgations is known, as has been said, from
the strength of the woman which is dejected through the exhaustion of her
spirits that issue with the blood; also the blood is clotted, and the Patient
loathes all meat, is pained under her short Ribs, feels a distention of her
Belly; her Pulse is weak and frequent, her sight is dimmed, she has noise in
her Ears, is subject to Swooning and Convulsions.

As all great Fluxes of Blood are dangerous, because blood is the Treasure of
our Life, so immoderate flux of the Childbed Purgations is more dangerous than
the rest, because of the Travel which goes before, and weakens the Patient. But
the danger is more or less, according to the greater or less quantity of the
Blood which comes away, and as the Symptoms are more light or grievous which
attend the same; which made Hippocrates to say, in the 55. Aphorism of the fifth
Section. If Convulsion or Swooning betides a Woman upon her Feminine
Purgations, it is a shrewd sign.

The Cure of an Immoderate flux of Blood, consists in one only Point, viz. The
stoppage of the said flux. Yet extraordinary care is to be taken, lest that be
kept within, which by these Purgations was wont to be carried away, and so
prove the cause of grievous Infirmities. And therefore if the flux do not
extremely urge, we must begin with lighter Medicaments, proceeding by little
and little if need shall require, to such as are stronger.

And in the first place, The violent Motion of the Blood is to be bridled by an
incrassating of thickening Diet, as by Panadaes, Gellies, Rice, Starch, with
Calves-foot Broths, Pears, and Quinces boiled, Roasted Flesh sprinkled with
juice of Pome-granates.

Let her have pretty plenty of Meat, but not at once, but diverse times one
after another. For by this means the Heat and Spirit which in the Womb do
aslist to the Expulsion, are called away to the Stomach, and by that means the
Patients strength is restored.

Let her Drink be Water that has had Iron quenched in it, or Gold, or in which
a little Mastich has been boiled. Then such things are to be used as do revel
the Blood into the superior parts, as rubbings and bindings of the upper parts,
Cupping-glasses fastened under the short Ribs on either side.

It is good likewise to bath the Patients hands in hot Wine, in which Confectio
Alkermes, or Venice Treacle has been dissolved.

Also let her Belly be moderately swathed with a Rowler or Swath-band; because
hereby the Vessels of Blood will be pressed together, and the immoderate flux
hindered.

Let Linen Cloths be applied to her Loins moistened with a mixture of Water
and Vinegar, by which the blood contained in the Vena Cava, is tempered, and
the motion thereof hindered.

If the flux be very immoderate, and weaken the Patient, so that there is
danger of Death, we must have speedy recourse to stronger Remedies: Among the
rest, this following Potion has commonly good success.

Take Waters of Plantane, Orange flowers, and Roses, of each one ounce: Syrup
of Corals, or where it is wanting of red Roses, one ounce: Sal Prunella one
dram: Dragons blood ten grains. Make all into a Potion.

If the flux do yet continue, a Powder, or an Electuary for diverse Doses, may
be prescribed after this manner:

Take Boodstone four scruples: Powder of Bole-Armoniack, red Coral, prepared
Pearls, of each one dram: Seeds of Plantane, Coriander prepared, and grains of
Sumach, of each two scruples, Mix all, and make them into a most fine Powder,
of which let her take one dram with the Decoction of Knotgrass and Syrup of
Quinces.

Take Conserves of Roses and of Comfrey Roots of each one ounce:
Bole-Armoniack, Troches de Carabe and prepared coral of each one dram: with
syrup of coral or of dried red Roses make all into an Electuary, of which let
her take the Quantity of a Chestnut, drinking a little of her ordinary drink
after it.

Also a fomentation and an Ointment will profitably be applied outwardly, made
after this manner.

Take Topps of the red Mastich or Lentisch, Plantane, Cypress, Olive, and
Solomon's Seal of each one handful: Red Rose Leaves two pugills: Myrtle Berries
one ounce and an half: Cypress-Nuts, six: Peels of Pomgranates two pugils: Boil
all in Steel-quenched Water and astringent harsh red Wine, and with the
strained Liquour bath the Privy Parts, very lukewarm, and almost coldish.

Take of the Countesses Ointment or Uuguentum Comitissae two ounces: J^yce of
Plantane one ounce: work them together into one Ointment, to be used after the
fomentation.

Also an Injection may be made of the Juice of Plantane into the Womb,
commended by Galen in the fifth Book of his Method, or of the Decoction of the
foresaid fomentation.

Other remedies not helping, to open a vein in the Arm is a present Cure, if
the Blood be drown out in distant spaces of time; for experience has taught,
that many women given over as it curable have by this means recovered.

And finally, the disease still remaining, all Medicines prescribed for the
immoderate flux of the monthly courses, may be used in this Case likewise.

And among the Medicines for immoderate Courses, Cataplasmes were propounded to
be applied to the share, and Loins; unto which the following Cataplasm or
pultis may be added, very good for all immoderate fluxes of Blood, but especial
for these Childbed Purgations.

Take Pure Soot from the Chimney not mixed with Dart eight ounces: work it
lustily with the strongest Vinegar, and make a pultis to be applied to the
Reins of the Back.

And it is here specially to be noted touching sleep; that while the Blood
flows plentifully, the woman must not be suffered to sleep, for many by that
means are taken away, because the natural heat retiring inward, causes the flux
to be greater. And if sleep in such a case cannot be avoided, some must be
always by of the servants to feel her pulse and mark how she fetches her
Breath.

In a word, if clotters of Blood do settle in the Womb, and cause a pain and
stretching therein; endeavor must be used speedily to bring it out, least
coming to putrefy, they transmit filthy vapors to the Brain and Heart and
cause a fever. Therefore the Childing woman, if strong enough, ought to walk
gently, or stand bolt upright for some time together, or to sit upon the
groaning Chair, as if she had list to stool. And if this suffice not, the
clotters are to be dissolved with a warm Decoction of French Barley and a little
Oxymel or honey of Roses injected into the Womb. But here we must go warily to
work least while we bring out the clotters, the flux of Blood be afresh
provoked.

Chap. 22. Of Suppression of Childbed Purgations.
THe good and happy success of Childbearing does especially depend upon the
convenient and orderly flux of the Loches or Childbed Purgations; seeing the
Impurities which have bin collected in the veins of the Womb, during the nine
months time of the woman's Belly-bearing, are wont to be avoided by these
evacuations; but if they be suppressed wholly or diminished, insinite Dangers
and Calamities arise thereby viz. acute Fevers, Phrenzies, Madness,
Melanchollies, Squinz^es, Pleurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs and other
swellings, which are for the most part malignant.

The Cause of this supression or imminution are, the thickness of the Blood,
narrowness or obstruction of the vessels, which hinders the free egress of the
Blood; cold air heedlesly received into the Womb, which closes the Orifice of
the vessels, taking cold at the feet, drinking of small cold Drink, fear,
Affrightment, sadness and other Passions of the mind, which withdraw the Course
of the Blood from the Womb.

This Suppression is manifest of it self, and the diminution thereof is not to
be judged by the Quantity which comes away, because some women have more
superfluous blood and some less. But the perfect knowledge thereof is gathered
from the supervenient Symptoms such as are a swelling of the Belly, a pain
possessing the nethermost part of the Belly the Loins and Groines; redness of
face, difficulty or breathing, perturbation of the Eyes, shivering fits,
Fevers, Fainting fits, and other Symptoms related before.

The Prognostic is drawn out of the Symptoms propounded as supervenient to
this Disease, for they being for the most part dangerous, the cause from which
they spring must needs be very dangerous likewise.

Childing women are freed from the foresaid danger, if some other evacuation
happen which may at least in some measure supply the desect of these
purgations, as Bleeding at the Nose or by the hemorrhoid veins: plenty of Urine
with a sooty settling, or plentiful sweating. Or if after some days
Lead-colored, black, and stinking matter begin to flow forth. But it is to be
feared, lest by the corrupt blood, ulcers should be bred in the womb.

The whole Cure of this Malady, consists in the provocation of these Purgations,
which must be endeavored by such Medicines as provoke the Course of the Blood
downwards, and open the Vessels of the Womb.

And in the first place, Emollient, Purging, and Opening Clysters are to be
administered, made after this manner:

Take Roots of Marshmallows, and Water Lillies, of each one ounce: the long
and round Birthwort, of each three drams: Leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Pellitory, Mercury, of each one handful: Line seed and Fenugreek seed, of each
half an ounce: Flowers of Chamomel and Elder, of each two pugils: Boil all to a
pint. In the strained Liquor dissolve, Oil of Dill, and Lillies, of each one
ounce: Hiera simplex, half an ounce: Unguentum de Arthanita one dram. Mix all
into a Clyster.

Let her Thighs be rubbed downwards; let the Toes of her Feet be tied till they
ache again; let diverse Cupping-Glasses be fixed to her Groyns and Hips, and let
some of them be scarrified.

If these means suffice not, open the Veins about the Knees, or of both the
Thighs; or the Hemorrhoid Veins, if Nature seem to incline that way.

If a Fever be caused by suppression of these Purgations, a Vein must be
opened in the Arm, as shall be said in the Diseases of Women in Childbed.

This following Fomentation may be applied to her Belly beneath the Navel, and
to the Privy Parts.

Take Roots of Marshmallows, Lillies, Briony, Angelica, and Birthwort, round
and long, of each an ounce: Leaves of Mercury, Mugwort, Penyroyal, Savine,
Calaminth, of each one handful: Lin-seeds, and Fenugreek seeds, of each an
ounce: Flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, Elder, Tansie, of each a pugil. Beat them
and cut them according to art, and put them into two bags, which boil in
Fountain Water, and apply by course one after another.

After Fomentation anoint the foresaid Parts with Oil of Lillies, Sweet
Almonds, and Sesamum, adding thereto a little Saffron.

Hereunto may be added such Pessaries and Fumigations as have been set down in
our Chapter of Suppression of the Courses, beginning with the most gentle.

Let her drunk a Decoction of opening Roots, Cinnamon, and red Vetches with a
little Saffron. Or,

Take Opening Roots, of each two drams: Leaves of Bettony, Endive, Maidenhair,
of each a handful: Schaenanth one pugil: Annis seed, and Fennel seed, of each
one scruple: red Vetches a spoonful: Boil all to a pint and an half. To the
strained Liquor ad Cinnamon Water two drams: Syrup of the five opening Roots
three ounces. Let her take four ounces twice a day.

Before the Fever be increased, we may sometimes give Troches of Mirrh one
dram; with white Wine or Fennel water.

Forestus uses the following Decoction though there be a Fever.

Take French Barley one handful: Liquoris scraped half an ounce: Schaenanth one
dram and an half. Boil all to a pint, for three Doses.

For the weaker he causes one dram of Schaenanth to be boiled in Chicken
Broth, which he gives the Patient to drink.

Also a Purgation may be convenient, seven or nine days after she is
delivered, of the Infusion of Rhubarb, Agarick, or Senna, or with a Laxative
Broth made of opening Herbs and Roots with Senna; or with an ounce and an half
of Manna dissolved in Broth.

Chap. 23. Of Gripings after Childbearing.
GRipings do so frequently betide Women in Childbed, that very few Women are
free from them. But they are not wont to seek to the Physician for these Pains,
because within two or three days they go away. But if they happen more sharp,
and of longer durance than ordinary, they are forced to send for the Physician,
who before he prescribe any thing, must consider the Causes.

The chief Causes of Gripings and Pains after Childbirth, are the plenty of
Blood, its thickness, sharpness, and narrowness of the Vessels. For the Veins
of the Womb, having for nine months forborne their usual evacuation of blood,
and the blood being gathered in great quantity, and by its retention becoming
thick and sharp; while it goes through the narrow passages, it causes pains,
which return by fits, as often as the womb endeavors a new expulsion of blood;
which being over, they cease till such time as other blood does seek its way
forth.

Sometimes these gripings are caused by Winds, or by Cold received into the
Womb, but not so often.

These Pains are differenced from others which are wont to afflict the Belly,
by their continuance, and by the distances of holding up, which they observe
according to distant fits of the bloods issuing forth: and the women themselves
can easily distinguish these pains from all others.

Thick blood is known by clottering, but the thin blood by its tenuity, fresh
color, or yellowish.

If the Pain spring from wind, it is more wandering, being sometime in one part
of the Belly, and sometimes in another; neither does it observe the distances in
which the Blood issues. If cold Air have entered the Womb, it may be known by a
relation of what has been acted about the sick woman.

These pains are not dangerous, but for the most part exceeding troublesome:
therefore must be removed or mitigated as soon as may be.

The Cure of these Gripings ought to be directed to these ends; viz. That the
Vessels of the Womb be made wider, the Blood thinner, and its sharpness
mitigated. All which may be accomplished by these following Medicaments.

And first of all, let the Patients Belly be gently swathed that her womb may
settle, and not be moved this way and that way, as often falls out after
Childbirth, by reason of the sudden evacuation.

Then give her three ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, with an ounce
and an half of Syrup of Violets, and two ounces of Hippocras.

Let Clysters be cast in of Milk and Sugar, with the Yolks of Eggs.

Or they may be made of a Decoction of Chamomel flowers, and Mugwort in Pullet
Broth, adding Oil of Lillies, and the Yolks of Eggs.

Anoint her Belly with Carminating or Wind-expelling, and opening Oils, as Oil
of Dill, Rue, Jasmine, or with this following, which being of great efficacy,
ought to be made in time convenient, and kept in the Apothecaries Shop for such
occasions.

Take Roots of round Birthwort, Orice, and Peony, of each one ounce: Cypress
Roots half an ounce: dried Leaves of Mugwort, Feaverfew, Origanum, Calaminth,
Penyroyal, Dictamnus Cretensis, Wormwood, Savin, Rue, Bettony, and Sage, of
each one handful: Flowers of Rosemary, Stoechados, Lavender, Chamomel, Dill,
St. John's wort, and Elder, of each half a handful: Bay Berries, and Juniper
berries, of each half an ounce: Seeds of Cummin, Rue, Piony, Carrots, and Agnus
Castus, of each three drams: Cloves, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Ginger, of each two
drams: Storax, and Mirrh, of each one ounce. Let all being beaten and cut, be
steeped in six pints of old Oil, adding a little white Wine. And put them in an
Earthen Vessel close stopped, the space of a week; and then boil them over hot
Embers the space of four o^ five hours; then let the Oil be strained out, and
reserved for use. If the foresaid Oil be wansing upon occasion, let the
foresaid simples boil in equal portions of Oil and white Wine, till the white
Wine be consumed; then let the Oil be strained out.

Also a Fomentation may be made of the Decoction of Mugwort, Bawm, Bay Leaves,
Calaminth, Carrot seed, Cummin, and Caraway Seeds, Flowers of Cheiri and
Chamomel in Water, white Wine or Milk. Or the following Cataplasm may be
applied.

Take three or four Onions well boiled in Water; beat them in a Mortar, and put
thereto Seeds of Line and Cummin beaten, of each one handful: As much Chamomel
flowers: Barley Meal as much as shall suffice to make all into a Pultiss. And
if need be, add a little of the Water wherein the Onions were boiled. Spread it
upon a Cloth, and apply it warm to her Navel.

It is likewise profitable to apply the Skin of a weather newly flead off while
it is warm, to her Belly. For this kind of warmth is very near of kin to our
Natural heat, concocts and mitigates the cause of the pain; also it hinders the
Skin of the Belly from gathering into wrinkles.

These following Medicines may be given inwardly:

Take Carrot Seeds poudered one dram: white Wine three ounces: Mix them. Give
it warm twice a day. Or,

Take Nutmeg, Annis seed, Cinnamon, of each one scruple: mix them into a Powder
to be taken in white Wine; or give one scruple of Oil of Nutmegs in Broth. Or,

Take Date and Peach Kernels, of each half a dram: Nutmegs four scruples:
Powder of Diamargaritum Calidum two drams: Annis seed one dram: Cinnamon two
scruples: Saffron ten grains: Sugar the weight of all the rest. Make all into a
most fine Powder, whereof give two drams in Wine twice or thrice a day, if the
pains are much.

Forestus gave a Decoction of Chamomel flowers in Beer, or a Decoction of
Mugwort and Chamomel in Puller Broth with good ^ucce^s.

It Is good presently after the is brought to bed, to give her the Broth of an
old Cock, three days together ear^y in a morning while she is fasting, with a
little Cinnamon and Saffron.

The following Powder taked presently after the delivery of a woman, does
wonderfully preserve her from Gripings; insomuch that it is thought, If it be
given a woman after her first Childing, she will never after in her following
Lyings-In, be troubled with these Gripes.

Take the greater Comfry Root dried one dram: Peach Kernels and Nutmeg, of each
two scruples: Amber half a dram: Ambergris half a scruple. Make all into a
Powder; of which let her take one dram in white Wine, or if she be Feverish,
in Broth.

For her ordinary Drink, let her use a Decoction of Mugwort with Cinnamon.

If the Gripings be caused by Chollerick and sharp humors, they are cured much
after the same manner that the Chollick is cured, when it proceeds from
Choler. As for Example:

Take Syrup of Vio^^ts and Borrage, of each one ounce: Mucilage of Quince seeds
drawn out with Violet Water, half an ounce: Water of Borrage and Scorzonera, of
each three ounces. Mix all, make thereof a Julep for two Doses. Or,

Take Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces: Syrup of Violets an ounce: Borrage Water
half an ounce. Mix all for a draught.

External Medicines must likewise be used, such as are laxative and emollient,
which do likewise by one and the same labor, ease pain.

Oftentimes, after they are brought to bed, women are pained in their Groyn, by
reason of their wombs being gathered together like a ball in their Groyn. It is
cured by applying to their Navel a Plaster of Galbanum and Anafoetida, in the
midst whereof, some grains of Musk must be put.

Chap. 24. Of Acute Diseases of Women in Childbed.
WHat we said before touching the Acute Diseases of women with Child, we may
now repeat touching the Acute Diseases of women in Childbed; viz. That they
have the same Essence, and the same Signs, with the like Diseases in women
which are not with Child, and in men. So that we shall refer the Reader for the
Theory of these Diseases to their proper Chapters.

Now these Acute Diseases are for the most part, continual Fevers, both
Essential, as Synchus putrida, a continual Tertian, and the rest; and also
Symptomatical, which accompany inward Inflammations, as the Pleurisy,
Inflammation of the Lungs, Inflammation of the Liver, Phrenzy, and such like.

Yet there is a peculiar sort of Fever, which besals almost al women in
Childbed, which is called by them the Fever of their Milk, which is wont to
befall them about the third or fourth day after they are brought to bed, when
their Milk begins to increase in their Breasts; and it arises from the reflux
of the blood from the womb to the Dugs, and the motion and agitation thereof.
Which kind of Fever is reckoned among the Diary Fevers of the longest
durance; neither needs it any Medicines, because within three or four days,
viz. about the ninth after her delivery, it is finished by sweat. It is
distinguished from putrid Fevers, because commonly it seizes the woman about
the fourth day, after her being delivered, and her Dugs begin to be filled with
Milk, and to be troubled with hardness, pain, and heat; with heat and heaviness
in her Back and Shoulders; also her Childbed Purgations slow duly, which
seldom is seen in putrid Fevers.

Now putrid Fevers do befall women in Childbed from three causes, viz.
Suppression of their Childbed Purgations or diminishing, by the heaping
together of bad Humors during the time of their Belly-bearing, which were
agitated by her Labors, or by Errors in their Diet. Some add immoderate flux of
the Childbed Purga ions, which is rather a sign of the secret badness of
Humors causing the Fever, but cannot be it self any cause thereof.

In suppression of the Childbed Purgations, the blood and vicious humors which
are collected during the whole time of her going with child, do flow back again
into the greater Veins, and there putrefie, and sometimes are c^rr^ed to the
Liver, Spleen, and other parts, in which they raise Inflammations; or if they
abide in the Veins of the womb, they putrefie, and so cause a Fever, in those
women which were before in perfect health.

But if (the Childbed Purgations duly flowing) a fever arise, it comes either
from superfluity of Choler, or from errors in Diet. Evil Humors agitated by
the Labors and Pains of Travel, do easily inflame and putrefie, and stir up a
fever. Errors of Diet may happen diverse ways: And first in point of eating in
which women that he In, are wont to be very faulty, stopping themselves with
plenty and variety of Dishes, which cannot be by them digested, but causes
putrefaction in their Bodies. Another error is committed when Childing women do
unadvisedly expose themselves unto the cold Air, especially while their
Milk-feaver is in its vigor, which is wont to be terminated by sweating and
transpiration, which is hindered by heedless admission of the cold Air, whence
it comes to pass that the Fever which of it self was void of danger, and would
in a few days have ceased, is changed into a dangerous putrid Fever.

There is yet another frequent Cause of the Fevers of Childing Women, viz.
When the Afterbirths are not wholly cast forth, but some portion remains
behind. This happens principally in the Womb-Liver, a part whereof is sometimes
annexed to the Womb, and left there, does putrefie; which makes the Childbed
fluxes to come forth greenish, stinking, and Carrion like; and if within few
days it be not separated from the womb, and excluded, it casts the sick woman
into great danger of death, seeing it may mortify the Womb.

If Clotters of Blood, or any other preternatural thing, shall remain in the
Cavity of the womb after Childbearing, it may thereby be known, because the
neck of the womb remains soft and open, neither is the inner Orisice thereof
shut, neither is the womb drawn upwards; and whereas, when all goes well after
Childbirth, the womb is drawn upwards, and its neck and orifice are quickly
shut. An Example here of is propounded by Dr. Havey, in his Treatise de Partu,
concerning a woman, who having a malignant Fever, and being very weak,
miscarried; and after exclusion of a perfect Child, and uncorrupted, yet being
very weak, with a creeping Pulse and cold Sweats, she was ready to give up the
Ghost. He feeling her womb, perceived the Orifice thereof lax, soft, and very
wide; and putting in his fingers, he drew forth a Mole as big as a Gooses Egg,
having certain holes in it containing a clammy, black, and stinking putrefied
matter, and the woman was soon freed from the foresaid Symptoms, and quickly
recovered her health.

It happens likewise in some women that the Orifice of the womb presently after
their delivery, is so shut up, that the blood contained within the womb,
suddenly clottering and putrefying, causes most sad Symptoms, and when no Art
can bring it forth, present death follows. Yet Dr. Harvey relates in the place
aforesaid, the History of a woman cured by him of this Disease. The Lips of the
Watergate were swelled, and very hot; the mouth of the womb was hard and close
shut: He opened it a little with an Iron Instrument which he forcibly put in,
so as it would admit an Injection made by a Syringe; and thereupon, clotted,
black, and stinking blood, some pounds in quantity came away, by which means
the sick woman had present ease.

The Prognostic of these Fevers herein only differs from the Prognostic of
such like Fevers which happen to those that are not in a childing condition;
because through the Labors of Childbirth, the strength of the patient is more
dejected; and by reason of the Childbed Purgations suppressed there is a
greater redundancy of Humors in the Veins; and in both respects the Party is in
greater danger.

The Decision of that famous Question, Whether the computation of the days of
the woman's sickness, ought to be made from the beginning of her Disease, or
from the day in which she is delivered of her Child, makes much to clear the
Prognostic of this Disease, especially to foretell the Crisis. Which Question
we shall therefore thus briefly determine: If the Birth of the Child were
natural, attended with no grievous symptoms, and the Childbed Purgations were
as they should be, and the Fever come some days after, the account ought not
to be made from the day of the Child's birth, but from the day the Fever began,
which was provoked by some other preternatural Cause, viz. Evil Humors lurking
within the Body, or from some external Cause. But if the Childbirth were hard
and beside the Course of Nature, and the Fever arose after three or four
days; we must reckon from the day of the Child's birth; because then the whole
order of the Body began to be overthrown, and the Humors to be disturbed, which
was followed by the Fever. So in grievous wounds of the wont of the Head
especially, though the Fever come not til after the fourth of fifth day, yet
the account is wont to be made from the day of the wound received, because the
Humors began then to be in a commotion, and to be disposed to cause a Fever.

The Cure of these Fevers, differs not from the Cure of other Fevers, unless
in point of those great Remedies, Blood-letting, and Purging,; in the
administration whereof, there is no small scruple, which we shall briefly
endeavor to remove.

As for letting of Blood in acute Diseases of women in Childbed, the
disagreement of Authors is so great, by reason of the contrary Indications on
the one side, and on the other, that we can scarcely find two of the same mind.
We shall briefly in these following Theorems or Maxims, propound that Opinion
which comes nearest the Mind of the wisest Authors, and is in the course of
Practice most successful.

An Acute Disease befalls a Childbed woman, either in the beginning, or in the
middle, or in the end of her Lying in.

If it happen in the beginning, and the woman be plentifully purged, there must
be no other evacuation of blood, than that which is directed by Nature when she
rightly and conveniently performs her Operations. But if the Childbed
Purgations are suppressed, or flow sparingly, let the interiot Veins be opened,
and take a good quantity of blood away: because at that time the Childbed
Purgations of blood, ought by the appointment of Nature to be plentiful.

If an Acute Disease happen in the middle time of her Lying In, two things are
to be considered. The one is, Whether the Morbifick matter be contained in one
particular place, or if it be dispersed through the Veins? The second, Whether
the Woman has been conveniently purged or not, in regard of quantity? If the
Disease proceed from matter scattered abroad, as in Fevers, and the woman has
not been fully purged, the lower Veins ought to be opened: because both the
Morbisick Matter will be diminished, and her Natural flux will be provoked. But
if the woman have been sufficiently purged, and the Disease get ground, and the
Natural Evacuation have not been sufficient for the Disease, the inferior Veins
must be opened notwithstanding; and so much blood must be taken away, that by
two Evacuations that may be accomplished, which the Disease requires, according
to the Doctrine of Galen, in the ninth Book of his Method, Chap. ^.

If the Fever be very high, and great heat vex the Patient, let that be done
which we shall presently declare; which ought to be performed when the Disease
arises of Matter driven into some corner, and there putrefying.

In a particular Acute Disease, as the Pleurisy, Inflammation of the Lungs,
Squinzy, and the like; we must mark whether the Fluxion be only beginning, so
that the Disease is only ready to seize upon the Patient, or is in its
beginning, and very little blood be collected in the part. For then the
inserior Veins are to be opened, that revulsion may be made to such opposite
part. For then the inserior Veins are to be opened, that revulsion may be made
to such opposite parts as are at greatest distance from the part affected, and
by that means that preposterous motion of Humors may be stopped. But if the
fluxion be already in good measure begun, and an Inflammation bred which proves
very troublesome, whether the woman be sufficiently purged, or not, the superior
Veins are presently to be opened right against the Part affected, because such
an Evacuation draws Blood out of the Part Affected. But if the inferior Veins
should be opened, which are neither next the part affected, neither can
evacuate therefrom, both the strength of the Patient will be weakened by the
evacuation, and that matter which is by Nature driven into a corner, and
subdued, will not be thereby diminished. And so you must either draw all her
blood in a manner out of her Veins, to revel the matter of the Disease from the
part affected; or the woman will be killed by the Disease before sufficient
Revulsion be made. Neither need we fear, lest by taking blood from the upper
Veins, we should draw the Course thereof from the womb, because in such Cases
the superior parts of the Body do abound with blood. And although much blood be
taken away, yet are not the Veins so emptied, that they should be forced to
draw new blood from other parts. Yet for the greater Caution, it will not be
unprofitable before blood be taken from the superior Veins, to cause the Thighs
to be lustily rubbed, and presently after to tie them with bands so hard as to
pain the woman, which must abide so bound til the bleeding be over, and a
little after they may be loosened; and now and then Cupping-Glasses must be
fastened to the same parts, or at least they must be again well rubbed. So we
may procure an evacuation of the Matter offending, and yet preserve the Natural
course of the blood toward the Womb.

The same course is to be taken in vehement and burning Fevers: For although
the matter offending be dispersed through the Body, yet is the burning heat so
great about the Heart and Bowels, that it cannot be so well extinguished by the
opening of a small, and far distant Vein, as by the opening of a nearer and
greater, such as is the Vein called Basilica.

This Method of Curing may be observed not only in Childbed women, but in
other women who are taken with Acute Diseases, and have their monthly Courses
upon them.

If in the end of a Woman's Lying-In, an acute Disease befall her, the same
Course must be followed as in the middle, the same conditions being observed;
observing this for a Rule, That by how much a woman is further from the
beginning of her Lying-In, by so much more safely may the uper Veins be opened;
but the nearer she is to the beginning, yea, even in the middle, we are to open
those Veins with the greater premeditation. And if the Disease be not
importunate, nor the sharpness thereof require such a thing, and the Natural
Purgation be copious, we must wholly abstain. But if the Purgation be scanty,
we must open the inferior Veins to supply that which is wanting in the
Evacuation. But if the contrary shall happen, let us follow that Rule which we
presceibed to be followed, in followed, in the urgency of an acute Disease.

The use of Purging in Childing Women that are held with acute Diseases, shall
be comprehended in these following Maxims.

While the Childbed Purgations do Naturally flow, a Purge is never to be
administered; for it is to be feared lest Nature be diverted from her business.

But if the Childbed Purgations are not kindly, we must consider whether their
consist its Quantity, or in Quality.

If they offend in Quantity, so as to be too little, so that the woman be
purged either not at al, or not sufficiently: After al Remedies fit to procure
these Purgations have been given in vain, and the Morbisick matter appears
digested, eight, ten, or twelve days being past since she was brought to Bed,
according to the more or less urgency of the Disease, she may be purged gently,
wholly abstaining from al stronger Purgatives.

If other Purgations offend only in Quality, so that a white flux, or some
other unnatural color do proceed from her, the Matter being ripe, she may in
the last part of her Lying-In, be safely purged.

But this must evermore be generally observed, That by how much the longer a
Childing Woman is distant from the day of her bringing to bed, by so much the
more safely she may be purged, and contrariwise: For Experience has taught us,
That women wanting their Childbed Purgations, if after the seventh or ninth
day they are taken with a looseness, they commonly escape. But if the Looseness
seize upon them upon the first days, viz. on the secoed, third, or fourth, for
the most part they die.

And so have we finished the Cures of Women's Sicknesses; all Praise and Honor
be given to God therefore.

The End of the Fifteenth Book.
THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of Diseases of the Joints, and
Rhewmatick Pain of the whole Body.
The PREFACE.
THough all Diseases of the Joints depend upon the same Causes, differing only
in respect of the place affected, and are wont to be cured with the same
Medicines; yet is there some difference between the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout, and
the pains of other Joints, by reason of the structure and largeness of those
parts, of which the Huckle or Hip-bone, is articulated, and made up; in respect
of which, it requires some diversity in certain Medicines: therefore it is that
I have resolved to treat of the Sciatica by it self. And because the Rhewmatick
pain incident to the whole Body has great Affinity with the running Gout which
afflicts only the Joints, I have thought good to annex the Explication thereof
in this place; so that this Book will consist only of three Chapters: Of which,
The First will treat of the Pains of the Joints in General: The Second, of the
Pains of the Hucklebone, called Sciatica: The Third, of those Rhewmatick Pains
which seize all Parts of the Body.

Chap. 1. Of Pain in the Joints, called Arthritis, or the Gout.
ARthritis, or the Gout, is a pain in the Joints which comes for the most part
by fits, stirred up by an Influx of Humors into the said Joints.

The parts pained are, Membranes, Tendons, Nerves, and all the Nervous parts
that are near the Joints, which are stretched by the Humor which flows into
them, or by their sharpness are pricked and twitched: but the Ligaments which
spring out of the Bones, are void of sense. Now the Humors which cause the
Gout, do seldom flow into the very Cavities of the Joints, and that only in an
old Gout, and where the Cavities are wider than ordinary, as it happens in an
old Sciatica, in which sometimes the Thigh Bone falls out of its place, the
Ligaments and other parts binding the Joints together, being loosened, and then
the Cavity of the Joint is filled with a snotty kind of phlegm, as we see in
Hippocrates, Apor. 59. Sect. 6.

It is wont here to be demanded, why the Humors flowing into Nervous and
Membranous Parts, and distending and twitching then, they should not cause a
Convulsion. We answer, that the Parts affected in the Gout are chiefly
Membranes, which being no instruments of motion, they cannot cause a
Convulsion, though never so much stretched or twitched. And although the
Tendons and Nerves ordained for motion should be likewise pained, yet do they
not cause a Convulsion; because to make a Convulsion the Muscles must be drawn
back to their Head, and that retraction ought to be made by a contraction of
the nerves which are inserted into them; but when they are gone out from the
muscles, or are come unto their extremity, though they be distended, yet can
they not contract the Muscles.

Authors do commonly make four forts of Gouts, according to the diversity of
the Joints affected; Chiragra, or the Hand-Gout, when the Pain is in the Hands;
Sciatica and Ischias when it is in the Hip. Gonagra when it is in the knees;
and Podagra or the Foot-Gout when it is in the Feet. And the Pains of the other
Joints go under the common name of Arthritis: though Pareus have imposed proper
names upon every one of them drawn from the Parts affected; calling the Pain in
the Joints of the Jaw Bone Syagonagram; in the Neck Trachelagram, in the
Backbone Rachysagram; in the Shoulder Homagram; in the Elbow Pechyagram. But
these names have not been entertained by Practitioners. Therefore its
sufficient to refer the Pains of those Parts to the general name of Arthritis.

There are besides, other differences of the Gout; as that some Gouts are
General, occupying all or most of the Joints of the Body; others particular,
residing only in some one Joint: some are ingrafted and Hoeredetary from the
Parents, others are adventitious caused by external Causes and Errors in Diet,

Now the Humors which breed the Gout, may have their Course not only into the
Joints but sometimes also into other Parts of the Body as the head, Teeth,
sides, yea and the internal Parts as the Liver and Spleen and stir up diverse
Pains in these parts, which Pains are not to be termed the Gout, though they
are Caused by the same matter which Causes the Gout.

Again all Pains seated in the Joints merit not the name of Gouts for sometimes
there are Swellings in the Joints especially in the knees, from which Pains
arise, occasioned by thick, phlegmatic, and Melanchollick humors, which Pains
continue very long, but are not to be reckoned among the Gouts, but have a
distinct nature of their own. Which difference will more clearly appear by the
different Characters of the Gout, which we shall describe in our Diagnosis
thereof, that is in the Art of discerning the Gout from other Diseases by
certain signs and tokens.

The next and immediate Cause of the Gout is a serous or wheyish Humor, either
by its quantity stretching those sensible Parts which are about the Joints, or
by its sharpness twitching the same. That this matter is wheyish is hereby
known, because thick Humors could not so easily flow into the Joints, and they
would make a more Visible swelling in the Joints, which is wont to be very
little, yea in the begnning there appears no Swelling at all though there be a
most bitrer Pain; add that the Tumor which is in the Gout, never comes to
suppuration or ripens of matter, which often happens in other thicker Humors,
if they have never so little Blood mingled with them, But in the Gout the Blood
is drawn to the Joints, as appears by the Inflammation of the Parts; yet there
never happens any suppuration or growing to a mattery Head, because Serosities
or wheyish Humors rule the roast, and they hinder Suppuration.

But this wheyish Humor is seldom pure and sincere, but has other Humors or
their serosities and thinner Parts Joined with it; whereupon great variety
ari^es, according to the greater or lesser acrimony of the Humors mixed with
the wheyish Humor, according to which the Pain is more or less; the Tumors is
sometimes notably great and sometimes not visible; some are of a red color,
others yellow or white; in some the malady is soon ended, in others it
continues long; sometimes a mighty and fervent heat possesses the Parts,
otherwhiles little or none is discerned; sometimes hot things laid on do good,
other whiles they do hurt and cold things help. Howbeit, it cannot be denied
but that the wheyish Humor may of it self have more or less acrimony, according
as it has more or less Salt mixed with it: for seeing the serous or wheyish
Humor, is wont to dissolve and drink up those heterogeneous salts, which are
multiplied in the Body by reason of the multiplicity of meats we use (whence it
is that all the serum or wheyish Humor in us is salt) according as this Humor
is more or less salt, and according as the salts mixed there with have more or
less sharpness, more or less Pain is wont to be caused.

And because in the Gout, as in every Fluxion, for things are considered, the
matter flowing, the Part sending that matter, the Part receiving the same, and
the ways by which the Fluxion is made; seeing we have spoke of the matter
flowing, we are now to speak of the other four.

Touching the Part sending the Humor there is disagreement among Physicians.
Fernelius would have all the material cause of the Gout (which he takes to be
thin and phlegmatic) to flow from the Head; not from the brain it self, (whose
excrements are either voided by the nostrills, or flowing through the palate,
are driven to the mouth, throat, wesand or stomach) but from the external Parts
of the Head, situate without the scull. For seeing very many veins derived
from the external Jugulars do run thither, he says they do there lay down
their thin and wheyish excrements, and seeing the Skin of the Head is thick and
compact, and the Humors cannot easily breath through the same, in process of
time they grow there to a quantity, and as he conceives from thence they flow
through the surface of the Body, under the Skin, into the Joints. But others do
conceive, that the Head is the fountain of the flood of Gouty Humors, but they
conceive those Humors flow from the inner Parts of the Head viz. From the
Brain. Finally others there be that give sentence, that these faulty Humors do
flow from the bowels contained in the lower ^elly, namely from the Liver,
Splen, Womb and others, and also from the whole Body, through the Veins and
Arterie^ into the Joints. All which Opinions in my Judgment are Partly true and
Partly falls. We Judge they are true in that, they say the Humors which cause the
Gout do flow from the Head by the inward and outward Parts, and from the
Bowels and the whole Body by the Veins and Arteries: and falls we say they are,
because they say that only the internal Parts of the Head, or only the
external, or only the inferior Bowels do furnish the Gouty Humor. For seeing
the whole Body is passable to and fro by Humors, all Parts of the Body may send
their superfluities to the Joints, if they be disposed to receive them. Now
that disposition of the Joints which makes them fit to receive a Fluxion of
Humors (that I may take this occasion to open the condition of a receiving
Part) is their weakness, either native from the Parents, or arising from other
Preternatural Causes, which we shall speak of by and by. Seeing therefore it is
established by Physicians as a most sure maxim, that the stronger Parts of the
Body empty their excrements into the weaker, we may avouch that all the Parts
aforesaid may discharge their excrements upon the Joints, if they being
weakened, cannot sufficiently resist the same. And that the Opinions aforesaid
may be severally refuted: Fernelius indeed does clearly enough demonstrate,
that Humors collected without the Soul, do flow upon the surface of the body,
and under the Skin creep into the Joints, seeing sometimes the Pain begins in
the Head, goes thence into the Neck, thence to the shoulders, and at length
into the Joints. But that Humors do never flow from other places and Parts into
the Joints, he no ways proves, neither is any man able to prove after him. In
like manner, they which say that such Fluxions come only from the brain, seem
to contend against sense; Forasmuch as those Parts which compass the Joints
about, do receive Veins and arteries, by which blood is brought unto them to
nourish them withal, why may not also the wheyish Humor collected in the
greater vessels be carried unto the same Parts by the same ways? Galen has
taught this precisely, in his Comments upon the Aphor. 10. Sect. 3 where he
shows, that in the knobbs and Pains of the Joints the profound Parts of the
body are purged, the vicious Humors being driven from the principal Parts of
the body into the Circumference. This is seen by the Fever which is oftentimes
raised in the beginning of the Gout; for it is caused by wheyish excrements
contained in the Veins, put into a commotion and working, when nature sees her
self to expel the same, and seeing she cannot drive it all forth, she
discharges the same into the weaker and ignobler Parts. Also the third Opinion,
which Sennertus defends, is Void of reason, and is herein faulty, because it
denies that Gouty defluxions do ever come from the brain. For seeing all Parts
of the Body both inward and outward, do receive Fluxions from the Brain, how
can the Joints be free from them? And if Humors causing a Catarrh do often flow
by the Veins and arteries, whence Rhewmatick Fevers daily arise; and the
Humors contained in the Veins and Arteries (as Sennertus himself affirms) do
easily flow unto the Joints, it is a clear demonstration, that a Fluxion is
made from the brain into the Joints. Also plentyful Pissing declares that
Humors flow from the brain through the Veins, when the said Pissing is caused
by some commotion of the brain by reason of long abiding in the Sun, or in a
very cold air; for then the wheyish Humors contained in the brain are agitated
by those Procatarctick Causes, and driven into the Veins and Arteries, through
which they flow unto the Kidney's and the Bladder, and thence comes so
plentiful making of water.

The next and immediate Internal Cause of the Gout has hitherto bin
sufficiently expounded; now let us proceed to the external and Procatarctick
Causes or occasions thereof: which we may for clearness sake distinguish into
three Tribes or Ranks, The first Tribe is of them which afford matter
convenient to breed the Gout. The second is of those which do weaken and loosen
the Joints. The third is of them which promote the flux of the Morbifick Humor
into the Joints.

To the first Tribe are referred al things which increase raw and wheyish
Humors, or any bad Humors whatsoever: as meats of gross substance hard to be
digested, and such as afford many excrements, frequent Gluttony and
Drunkenness; immoderate Carnal Embracements; which is the reason that Gout is
called the Daughter of Bacchus and Venus; Idleness and a sedentary life, and
intermission of such exercises as men have been formerly accustomed unto; long
sleep and unseasonable watching; intermission of such natural and artificial
Evacuations as men have been accustomed unto; fear, Sadness and continual Care.

To the second Tribe are referred vehement motion and Labor; frequent use of
carnal conjunction, especially of that which is celebrated standing;
refrigeration and humectation of the Joints; frequent Bathing; Contusion,
Luxation and Fracture of the Joints.

To the third Tribe are referred, Cold air squeezing out the Humors, and Heat
melting, dissolving and agitating the said Humors and opening the secret
Passages; meats of a servent and salt nature which attenuate the Humors; thin
and strong Wine; Immoderate exercise, unbridled Lechery, vehement anger and
other immoderate passions of the Mind.

The Signs do either foretell the Gout at Hand, or declare the same to be
present.

Signs of the Gout at Hand: a Sense in the Joints more exquisite and quick
than ordinary so that the lightest thing will hurt them; as for example the
hard sitting of a new Shoe, Long walking, a small blow, or a light hitting
against a stone, or some other hard thing. A Fever commonly ushers in the
Gout, which is caused by wheyish Humors and others contained in the Veins and
arteries, being disturbed and agitated, whiles nature endeavors to expel them
to those less noble Parts. But the nearer approach of the Gout, and its
beginning as it were, is signified by a stupidity, and sense of crawling
Pismires in the Joints, and a kind of unusual Heat felt in them.

The Gout is known to be present by an actual pain tormenting the Joints, which
commonly is attended with redness and swelling; which if it appear not at the
very first; yet is it seen presently after. The pain does usually seize upon
the great Toe, especially on the left foot, and oftentimes it spreads it self
from thence into other Joints. The Fever which comes before the pain, does
sometimes continue; and sometimes it goes not before, but comes together with the
pain.

The Signs of the Causes are likewise to be considered: For although the Humor
causing the Gout be principally wheyish, yet is it needful to know what other
Humors are mixed therewith, that we may fit out Medicines thereunto.

And in the first place, Choler abounding with the wheyish Humor, is known by
a vehement and cutting pain, a small swelling, a reddish or palish color, great
heat, and the Fever intense and persevering in its state or height; thin
Urine, yellow and riddish; cold things help, and hot things hurt.

Signs of phlegm abounding with the Whey, are, a softish and somewhat loose
swelling of the parts affected, which if a man press with his finger, there
remains a pit; the pain is not so great, Urines are thick and troubled; Cold
things hurt and hot things help; little or no heat is felt: the color is white,
little differing from the Natural color of the part.

Signs of Melancholy abounding are, an obscure color of the part like Lead,
deep pain, a thin and watery Urine, a weariness of the whole Body, and the temper
thereof inclining to Melancholy.

As for the Prognostic. The Gout is no dangerous Disease, but very troublesome
by the vehemence of pain, and of a very long continuance; so that for the most
part it accompanies a Man during his life, to his old Age; yea, and it does
cause some to live long, because Nature at certain seasons drives unto the
Joints vicious Humors, which might cause other Diseases; and by so doing frees
the nobler parts of the Body from bad Humors.

Yet does it often fall out in weak bodies, or such as are decayed with Age,
that when Nature can no longer expel such Humors as are collected in the inner
parts of the Body, deadly Diseases do thereupon arise; as most sharp Fevers,
Inflammations of the Bowels, Apoplexies, Convulsion, Phrenzies, Difficulty of
Breathing, and inability to breath, unless sitting upright, Pantings of the
Heart, and other most grievous Infirmities.

Although a Disposition rooted in the Bowels tending to breed Goutish Humors,
and Natural weakness of the Joints cannot be perfectly taken away; yet may the
Invasions of the Gout be very much retarded, and kept off; so that some only by
abstaining from Wine, others by usual Purges frequently repeated, have kept
themselves for many years free from the Assaults of this Disease.

Hippocrates in the Second Book of Predictions, affirms, That many Gouty
persons may be cured, distinguishing them from such as cannot be cured, in
these words: Touching the Gout, this I say; All that are aged, or have stony
knots about their Joints, or live miserably, being costive, cannot be cured by
Art of Man that I know of. Such are well cured by a Dysentery, when it seizes
upon them; and by other fluxions of Humors to the inferior parts. But he that
is young, and has no stony know about his Joints, and lives accurately, being
inclined to labor, and having a belly well inclined to stool; this man having a
skilful Physician may be cured.

An hereditary Gout may well be accounted incurable.

If the Veins of Gouty persons do swel with black blood, their Gout leaves
them; out of Avicenna. Because the Humors which were wont to flow into the
Joints, are derived to the external parts of the Skin.

If the Gout, being accustomed to return at certain seasons, shall not return,
it portends grievous, and oftentimes deadly Diseases, unless the Morbifick
matter by a diligent prevention shall be taken away. For if through weakness of
Nature, the matter which is gathered together within, shall not be expelled, it
breeds the greatest and most dangerous Diseases imaginable.

Whosoever they be that have the Gout within the space of forty days the
Inflammation is allaied, and they are freed. Hippocrates in the 49. Aphorism of
the fifth Book or Section. For in such Parts as have little Natural heat, the
matter offending requires a long time before it can be discust. Howbeit this
period of Hippocrates is not certain and perpetual; for some are healed sooner,
and some later; which depends upon the quantity, thickness, or rebellion of the
Morbifick causes; the strength or weakness of the Parts affected and the
obedience of the Patients in Point of keeping the Diet, and using the
Medicaments appointed for them.

The Cure of all Gouts consists herein, viz. That the flux of Humors into the
Joints may be stayed, that which already is come in and abides in the Joints
may be removed, and that the Pain may in the mean while (if it be sharp) be
abated; all which may be performed by the following Medicaments.

And in the first place, Letting of Blood will be very convenient, if there be
no want of Blood in the Patient, and if phlegm do not abound; because the Blood
is agitated by the motion of the Humors flowing into the Joints, and does as it
were boil, and is by Pain drawn into the Part affected: wherefore it is
necessary to draw the same back, into that Part of the Body which is opposite
to the Part affected: and therefore if the right Arm be Diseased, a Vein must
be opened in the left; if the right Foot be Pained a Vein must be opened in the
right Arm; and if the left Foot in the left Arm. And Blood is to be taken away
at the first beginning of the Disease, and as much as needs must be taken at
one time, if the Patients stength will bear it: if not, it must be done at
several times, till the plenitude of Blood be sufficiently diminished.

One thing we must allwaies remember, that copious Blood-letting in such as can
bear it easily, does exceedingly shorten the Disease, if it be done at the
beginning of the Disease, at least by Piecemeal, drawing now a little and then
a little.

Also Purging must be used at the beginning of the Disease, as soon as may be:
for so both that Humor which is influx and is ready to flow, will be drawn from
the way to the Joints and be brought unto the Gutts. But in this purgation two
things are worthy of observation, being frequently noted by Solenander a famous
practitioner.

The first is, that this Purgation be not made by some mild lenitive
Medicaments, whereby the Humors are rather stirred than Evacuated, and are
precipitated into the Joints, whereupon a more grievous Pain and swelling is
wont to follow such purges; but with some strong purgative, which may force out
the stirred Humor and turn the cause there of from the Joints. The other is,
that the Medicaments being given, the Joints above the Knees and elbows, be
Plastered with some defensative, by which the Humor which is put in motion by
the Medicine may be intercepted, so that it may not so much nor so forcibly
fall down into the Joints.

To which intent let an Ointment be made of Bole, Pome-Granate Rinds,
Balaustians, Roots of Bistort and Tormentill, red Roses with the white of an
Egg, and Vinegar; which being spread upon snipps of cloth as broad as ones
Hand and indifferent long, let them be wrapped about the Parts aforesaid. If
these simples be not to be had at present, wet them only with Vinegar and water
and let them lie on at least an whole day. If the Fluxion be vehement, use a
liniment of Bole, Dragons Blood, the white of an Egg and Oil of Roses made with
Oil of unripe olives: or at first use it without Oil adding a small quantity of
the Oil aforesaid or of Vnguentum Comitissae, least growing dry and hard it
cause Pain.

And for to procure such a purgation as we have spoken of, let the skillful
Physician prescribe a Medicament fitted to the Nature of the Patient and such
Humors as are redundant in his Body: or some of those Specific Purgations
which we shall propound in our Doctrine of Preservation from the Gout.

Vomiting is likewise profitable in this Case, for such as are easy to vomit;
because it brings out the evil Humors by a shorter way, and so there is no such
fear least they should rush into the Part affected. But gentle Vomits are to be
used, which do only evacuate those Parts which are near the stomach. For if
they be vehement, and draw Humors out of the Veins, they may precipitate the
said Humors unto the Joints. Then after vomitings, purgation must be procured
downwards; yea and if one purgation will not serve turn, it must be repeated.

After sufficient Purgation, it will be very good to procure sweat; for so the
wheyish matter will be discussed by the habit of the Body. But, seeing when the
Gout gives its first Onset, there happens a kind of boiling and working of the
Blood, and commonly there is a Fever, hot sudoroficks will not be convenient,
but only such as are temperate; amongst which Sennertus commends Hartshorn,
either crude, or prepared without burning, either alone, or with Carduus Water;
as likewise Antimonium Diaphoreticum. In an old Gout without a Fever, a
Decoction of China Salsa Parilla ar Sassafras may be given, qualified with
coolling Herbs, as Cichory, Endive, Sorrel and Or after the Sweat is wiped off,
it may suffice to give the Patient Chicken-Broth, altered with the Herbs
aforesaid.

Martinus Rulandus did use this following Sweating Medicine with happy success:

Take Tops of Centaury two handfuls: Asarum Roots two ounces: Boil them in ten
pints of Water to five pints, and strain the Liquor. Give the Patient eight
ounces of this Liquor hot, in the morning some days together; and let him
sweat upon it.

But Forestus commends the Roots of the greater Burdock; because it cuts,
discusseth, and provokes both Sweat and Urine. And he reports that a certain
Gouty person that kept his bed, and could not stir a Limb, drank hot Beer in
which the great Burdock Root had been boiled; after the drinking whereof, when
the Physicians could do him no good with all their Medicines, he pissed a great
deal of white Matter like Milk, and was freed from his pains.

Hercules Saxonia puts a great many Loaves hot out of the Oven round about the
Patients Body, by which means Sweat is plentifully procured, and the pains
removed.

Also a Decoction of Elder, Bay Leaves, Sage, Rosemary, and such like Herbs will
do much good, the Patient receiving the vapor of this Decoction in a sweating
Tub, which will make the sweat to come lustily.

Also the Waters of Natural hot Baths do provoke sweat, and do readily discuss
the Matter contained in the Joints. And therefore when the sick are not able to
go unto them, their Water is wont to be brought unto them and heated in a
Caldron for them to bath in. Erastus in his 15. Counsel, prefers this above al
others, for easing the pains, but he boyls so much Salt in the Water, as gives
it an evidently brackish taste.

In the beginning of the Fluxion of Gouty Humors, in the spaces free from
Purgations, such things must be given as stop the Flux, which have been
propounded by me in the Cure of an hot Catarrh; especially Juleps of Waters, or
Decoctions and Syrups which do cool and thicken.

Yea, and the truth is, We are sometimes compelled to use Narcotick or
Stupefactive Medicaments; for they both stop the flux of Humors, and they
mitigate the rage of the pains. Of these sort of Medicines new Venice Treacle
is most convenient, which may often be repeated without danger from half a dram
to a dram. Unto which may profitably be added, a little Bole-Armoniack to stop
the flux of Humors. Howbeit, instead of Treacle, Laudanum Opiatum, and other
Narcoticks, may conveniently be substituted.

After due Evacuations have been celebrated, and other things given inwardly
which respect the antecedent Cause, we must proceed unto local Applications,
such as mitigate the pain, and discuss the contingent Cause: Which are not
presently to be used before the universal Remedies aforesaid have been first
applied; for otherwise they are wont to do more hurt than good. For either the
Matter which Nature intended to drive into the Joints, is driven back into the
inner parts of the Body, whereby grievous Symptoms are raised; or it is forced
into the Joints, and the pain is exasperated; or the part is effeminated, and
made lax, and so the fluxion is increased.

Which Cautions being commonly neglected, and external things untimely and
heedlesly applied; the Patients receive commonly more hurt than good thereby.
And those external Medicines do either respect the pain alone, or the Cause
likewise of the pain, viz. The Humor which has took its course into the part,
and caused both the pain and Swelling.

Such things as mitigate pain, are very necessary in this case, because the
extremity thereof weakens the Patient, and draws the Humors to the parts
affected. Furthermore, by the use of Anodines, the parts are relaxed, and the
Humor which before did flow into the more deep parts about the Joint, is
diffused to the more ambient parts and external. Whence it is that the pains of
the Gout are most vehement before the part swells; but after it is swollen they
are mitigated. Now there are many Anodine, or Pain-charming Medicaments
propounded by Authors to be applied to those parts which are troubled with the
Gout. But the chief are these which follow:

Lukewarm Milk applied to the part affected, by wetting Linen Clothes
therein, and laying them on, does assuage the pain; as also if the part be
sprinkled and bedewed therewith, especially when it comes fresh from the Dug;
which Amatus Lusitanus does very much commend, in the 41. Cure of his sixth
Century, in these words: One mightily tormented with the Gout, caused a she
Goat to be brought into his Chamber, and her Milk to be milked out upon his
pained Joint; by which he perceived the pains evidently lessened. And there is
good reason for it: For Milk newly milked, does assuage, mitigate, and lessen
pains. It is a Medicine commonly used by the Great Turk: by you who seek Profit
and Honor, highly to be prized.

Of Milk likewise is made the Cataplasm of white Bread Crumbs boiled therein,
adding the Yolks of Eggs, and a little Saffron.

Also the Leaves of Henbane, or Violets, are boiled in Milk, or in Vinegar and
Water, and profitably laid upon the part affected.

Also a Cataplasm is made of the Pap of Marsh-mallow Roots mingled with Milk.

Also a Cataplasm is made of the Pulp of Cassia alone, or mingled with Oil of
Roses, or the following Ingredients:

Take Crumbs of white Bread boiled in Milk, half a pound: Pulp of Cassia three
ounces. Make them into a Pultiss. Or,

Take the Pulp of Cassia four ounces: new Venice Treacle half an ounce: Barley
and Oaten meal, of each three ounces: the Crum of white Bread four ounces: Cows
Milk two or three pints* Boil all into the form of a Pultiss, which apply warm
to the parts pained. If you shall add half an ounce, or an ounce of Vitriol
calcined and finely poudered, you will make it far more excellent.

In the beginning of the Gout, which seizes only the great Toe, lay on this
following:

Take two whites of Eggs: a little Salt beaten to Powder: a few drops of
Vinegar of Roses. Mix all, and apply it upon Tow, or course Flax to the part
affected.

Other Cataplasms are likewise made of greatest efficacy, compounded on this
manner:

Take Water of white Mullein, and of Fern Root and Branch, of each half a pint:
calcined Vitriol exquisitely poudered, one ounce and an half: Meal four ounces:
Saffron two drams. Make all into a Pultiss.

Take Mallows, leaves and Roots, as much as you please, Boil them in a new
Earthen Vessel, with equal parts of Wine and Vinegar, till a third part be
consumed; then ad as much course Rye Bran as will make it into a Pultiss; which
being well wrought together and spread upon a Linen Cloth, let it be applied
to the parts pained, as hot as the Patient can endure it. Solenander does
exceedingly commend this Pultiss.

Forestus relates that a Cataplasm made of Duck-weed and Chamomel Flowers
boiled in Milk, adding a little Barley Meal, will do miracles.

Montagnana affirms this following to be most excellent in extreme pains.

Take the Yolks of ten Eggs; beat them in a Frying Pan with half a pound of Oil
of Roses. Let them boil gently till they grow thick, adding two drams of
Saffron; and lay it on hot.

In the beginning of the Flux, many lay on a Cataplasm of Salt and Soot,
wrought into a Body with whites of Eggs.

Or of two ounces of Chamomel Flowers: red Rose Leaves one ounce and an half:
Mullein flowers half an ounce: Powder them, and boil them in sweet Milk to the
stiffness of a Pultiss, adding three or four Yolks of Eggs.

Or of Barley Meal, and Bean Meal, of each one handful: Flowers of Chamomel and
Roses, of each half a handful: Mullein Water, and Willow Water, or Plantane
Water and Wine, of each as much as shall suffice. Incorporate all together in
form of a Pultiss.

Also diverse Fomentations may be made to be applied to the place affected,
after this manner:

Take of the Leaves of Mullein six pounds: red Wine a Quart. Beat the Leaves
and st^ep them in the Wine for three days. Distill them, and bathe and foment
the parts affected therewit^ warm, with Linen Clothes dipped therein. Or,

Take Flowers of Mullein as much as you please; fill a glass Bottle therewith,
and stop the mouth, and set it in the Sun; for so they will turn to Liquor,
which being applied to the part affected, with Linen, mitigates the pain.

Salsaturni, that is, Salt of Lead dissolved in subtle Spirit of Wine, eases
pains wonderfully.

Frog-spawn-Water stilled in May, applied to the parts pained, does wonderfully
assuage the pains, and tempers the Inflammation and redness of the part. These
following Simples may profitably be mingled therewith.

Take Frog-spawn-Water, Water of Tapsus Barbatus, or of Mullein, and of Fern,
of each one pound and an half. Infuse therein Lapis tutiae, and Litharge of
Gold, of each two ounces: Vitriol calcined, and Alum, of each one ounce.
Foment the pained Parts herewith warm.

An Infusion of Litharge made in Vinegar, the Vinegar being a little
evaporated, till it grow sweetish, does much good to an hot Gout.

Oil of Calves Feet is excellent to allay the pains of the Gout, and it is thus
prepared:

Let the Calves Feet be beaten, and the Bones broken, then boil them all to a
Pap. Take the Oil which swims on the top of the Water, mingle it with Aqua
vitae, and Salt, and therewith bath or anoint the parts pained.

Also Oils and Fats are by many used. But seeing the Inflammation which befalls
those Members which are troubled with the Gout, does draw very near the Nature
of an Erysipelas, or red fiery swelling, oftentimes those fat things may do
more hurt than good; for by stopping the pores, they may keep in the Humor, and
so increase the pain.

According as Sennertus makes relation of a man troubled with the Gout, who
found great good by very new Sheeps-milk Cheese laid upon the pained part: for
as soon as the Cheese being heated by the pained part, began to melt and shed
its Butter, the pains were increased. Yet in some Bodies, Oil of Roses, and
such like, may do good, especially mixed with other Medicaments; because
according to the different Natures of Men's Bodies, several things do good to
several persons. And therefore we must be furnished with a mighty company of
Medicaments, that upon al occasions we may have change; because there is scarce
any one so effectual, as to do good to all that are troubled. Take these
following for an Example or Pattern.

Take Crum of the whitest Manchet half a pound: Boil it in new Milk to the
consistence of a Pultiss; then ad of the Mucilage of Marsh-mallow seeds two
ounces: Meal of Line seed and Fenugreek seed, of each two drams: Flowers of
Chamomel, and of Melilot poudered, of each one ounce: Saffron one dram: Oil of
Roses one ounce: Mix all into a Cataplasm.

Or to the Cataplasm of white Bread Crum before described, Oil of Roses may be
added.

Also Liniments and Ointments are wont to be made to mitigate pain.

Take Yolks of Eggs two or three: dissolve them with Oil of Roses, or Violets,
or Wine, and apply them lukewarm.

Balsamum Saturni prepared with Oil of Roses or Violets, allaies pain most
effectually.

Take Ceruss two ounces; dissolve it in Endive Water and a little Vinegar make
thereof a Liquid Ointment.

Of the said Ceruss is made a Plaster of great efficacy which may be laid on
in the beginning of the Disease, even whiles the Tumor and Inflammation is
present. Its composition is thus.

Take Common Oil one pound, Wine a pint and an half: Boil them till half the
Wine be consumed. Then ad a pound of Ceruss finely Poudered and two drams of
Camphire. Boil them to the Consistence of an Emplaister. When there is great
Inflammation, Vinegar must be used instead of Wine. Spread this plaster upon
Linen Clothes that it may the more commodiously be wrapped about the Parts
affected.

A Living whelp laid to the pained Part, does very much assuage the pain.

When the pain rages extremely we may have recourse to Narcoticks; howbeit they
must not lie long upon the Part, because they are adverse unto the natural
heat and to the nerves.

Take Henbane Leaves two Handfuls: Nightshade and Housleek of each one Handful.
Garden Poppy-Head one pugil, Mandrak Roots one ounce. Chamomel Flowers and
violet Flowers of each one pugil, make a Decoction in Water or Milk with which
let the Part be bathed.

Beat the residue after the Liquor is strained out, and add of the Flower of
Lin-Seed one ounce and an half. Wheat meal two ounces: Oil of chamomel three
ounces: and make a Pultis. Or,

Take Spirit of Wine somewhat Yellow by infusion of Saffron four ounces:
camphire one scruple: Boil them a little, then dissolve therein, one dram of
Opium: With that Liquor let the pained Part be bathed: It is a safe and most
effectual Medicine.

Green Tobacco Leaves beaten and laid on do ease the Gout, and are said to be
of a stupefactive Nature.

As for the Efficient Cause of the pain, to the Humor flowing into the Part
repelling Medicaments must be opposed; and to that which is already in,
deriving and resolving Medicaments must be applied.

Howbeit repelling Medicines are disallowed in this Case, especially alone and
without the commixture of other things. For if they shall wholly stop the influx
of the matter into the Parts affected, it is to be Feared least they retiring
to the inward Parts, should cause dangerous diseases, unless they happen to be
translated to some other Joint. Again the Humor which has already flowed into
the Part, is the more driven inward, by which means, the Pains become more
violent. But yet, if in the beginning of the Gout there be a great afflux of
Humors especially hot ones, which threatens sharp Pains to follow, it will be
convenient in some measure to repress the same, by applying repellers, not
alone, but mixed with such things as mitigate Pain, after universal and
sufficient Evacuations. For then such things as do overmuch relax, do help
forward the afflux of Humors. And therefore, we may ad unto the foresaid
cataplasmes and other remedies Plantane, Lettice, Purslane, Housleek and such
like as also a little Vinegar. As for example.

Take Barley Meal three ounces: Boil it in Water and Vinegar, add two Yolks of
Eggs, Saffron twenty grains: Make all into a Pultis. Or,

Take Red Roses an Handful: Barley and Fenugreek Meal of each one ounce: Red
Sanders one dram and an half: Chamomel Flowers one pugil: when they are Boiled
and beaten, add two Yolks of Eggs, Vinegar four ounces: Oil of Roses as much as
shall suffice; make all into a Pultis.

Among remedies which derive the Humor from the Part affected are
Horse-Leeches, after sufficient Evacuation applied thereunto: for then they do
much good, especially when the Veins in the Part affected, do seem distended
and swelling with Blood.

Now resolving Medicaments are wont to be used in diverse forms as of Waters,
Oils, Unguents, Balsoms, Fomentations, Fumigations, Cataplasmes, Plasters and
the like, compounded after this manner.

Take Vitriol white and green, of each one ounce: camphire two drams: aqua
vitae and white Wine, of each one pint: Mix them and apply them with clothes
dipped in them. Or,

Slake Lime in Urine, purify the Liquor and foment the Pained place therewith
It is likewise good if it be done with Vinegar and Lime.

Martinus Rulandus in the Centuries of his Cures, does mightily cry up his
Gout-quelling Water, but never describes the same. But Libavius, Petreus and
others suppose it was thus made.

Take Fountain Water a Pint, Aqua fortis half an ounce: Sublimate one dram:
Boil them a quarter of an hour. Wet linen clothes in this Liquor and apply
them lukewarm to the Part affected.

Quercetanus in his Pharmacopoeia propounds these following.

Take Pickle of salt, and the Vrin of a Boy of each Equal Parts. Still them and
Wet Linen Clothes in the Water and apply to the place affected, often
changing the clothes for fresh ones.

Take Green Elder Leaves and flowers of each one pound: beat them and steep
them in Aqua vitae for two or three days: still them in a Glass or Copper
vessel, till they be dry.

Take Spirit of Wine rectified two pounds: of the finest honey one pound.
Distill them in Balneo Vaporoso: So you shall still two Liquors; The first is
watrish; The second much stronger, and Sulphurous, which you shall keep by it
self. To the remaining materials add an ounce and an half of whole Oriental
saffron: Venice turpentine two ounces: Castoreum six drams: Tartar calcined
till it be white, half a pound; dissolved salt an ounce: Phlegm of vitriol not
separate from its spirit four ounces, Lie made of Vinetree-Ashes two pound:
steep them together twenty four hours. Then still them til they become dry:
keep the Liquor which comes likewise by it self. To the Dreggs remaining pour
on the former Water which you kept: Steep them and still them. Lastly put all
the distilled Waters together and distill them in Balneo Vaporoso.

Quercetanus says, That this Water is of wondrous efficacy, and that it was
communicated unto him by a certain most famous German, as a special gift,
affirming, that this was the very Water of Rulandus. And he averred that he had
seen the rare effects thereof in easing the Pains of the Gout, if Linen
clothes being moderately warmed and dipped therein, be applied to the Part
affected,

The same Quercetanus in his Council touching the Gout, does brag that he
reserves to himself his Gout-quelling Water, as a Master-peice for such an old
soldier as himself to boast of which he says is made of plain Fountain Water,
wherein he does diverse times quench certain Metallic substances, which are
wont to be taken inwardly when rightly prepared: whose spirits being impressed
into the foresaid Water, do contribute thereunto the power of penetrating unto
the Roots of the Disease, and of truly resolving the Tartarous, stony matters,
with the salts, which are combined in the Joints, from whence such intolerable
Pains do arise.

Peradventure this that follows it not unlike it, nor a whit inferior in Virtue.

Take Unslaked Lime four pound: Slak it in River-water as much as you please,
and let it stand in a Wine Cellar three days, that the Salt may be better
extracted out of the Chalk or Lime. Afterward let them Boil a little and strain
the Liquor through an Hippocras Bag. In twenty pints: of the strained Liquor,
quench seven or nine times; first Plates of steel red hot; and then Plates of
Copper red hot; and thirdly to the quantity of ten ounces of Vitriol calcined
till it be white; fourthly Antimony melted in a Crucible to half a pound;
fifthly Litharge or Ceruse heated in a Crucible, half a pound; white
Precipitate once washed and no more one ounce and an half. Brassburnt and
finely Poudered, half an ounce: After the quenching of these mineralls, let the
water stand still in a Wine Cellar, the space of ten days. Afterward, Boil it
a little, and strain it through an Hippocras Bag. In this Water being hot,
doubled clothes must de dipped and frequently applied to the Gouty Part.

Among Fomentations easy to make, that is commended, which is made of Salt
Ammoniack seven times sublimed, and fitly dissolved in Wine or Water. or of the
Urin of a young man in good health, Boiled till half be consumed and laid on
with Rags;

Solenander Writes in his 24. Counsel, Section the 4. That a certain Gouty old
man was wont to make himself this Medicine. When the swelling and Pain was
great and the place red, he took Salt, the Urin of a Boy and Vinegar. In these
being mingled together, he Wet a Linen cloth and squeesed it and laid it on,
this he did diverse times and so the Pain was much abated,

As we said before, that Anodine or Pain-quelling Oils did little good in the
Gout, the same must here be said of resolving Oils, beeause they close the
pores of the skin and so hinder the freedom of transpiration and increase the
heat, neither can they by reason of their clammy substance pierce into the
innermost Parts of the Joint, so to temper and resolve the Salt, sharp and
Tartarous Humors which lurk in them, Yet if the foresaid Oils shall be
Distilled in a Retort, they will become very fit for this use, because they
will be very searching and no ways clammy. Among these the most excellent are
Oil of Cheiry, Saint John's Wort and of the Yolks of Eggs, which being mixed
together* and stilled by a retort, are very profitable to ease Pain and to
discuss the Cause thereof.

Also Mathiolus his Oil of Scorpions stilled after the manner aforesaid, is
most excellent.

Oil of Wax is likewise effectual to the same purpose.

But Oil of Man's Bones made after the same manner that Oil of Tiles is made, is
preferred before all others, and commended not only by the Chemists, but also
by the Dogmatical Doctors, as Crato, Platerus, and others. The manner of making
it is this: Man's Bones fresh and unburied, are broken and burnt, and cast into
old Oil: afterward, they being full of the Oil, are beaten and cast into a
Retort, and so by the force of the fire, an Oil is drawn out.

Where Man's Bones are not to be had, the Bones of other Animals may serve the
turn.

This following will also be very good:

Take Mastich, Frankincense, Mirrh, Ammoniacum, Opopanax, Bdellium, Mummy, of
each two ounces: Vitriol one pound: Honey two pound: Tartar one ounce and an
half: Spirit of Wine four pound. Distill out of all an Oil, with which let the
pained part be anointed with a feather.

To ease the pain, and to resolve the Matter of the Gout, a Liquor made of
Snails is likewise commended, which is thus compounded:

Put an handful of Snails into an Hippocras Bag, and cast upon them an handful
of common Salt; upon the Salt, a handful of Dwarf-Elder, or Danewort seeds very
finely poudered: And so one Lay after another of Snails, Salt, and Seeds, until
you have made four or five Lay's of every one in particular. Let the Bag hang
in a moist Celler; and after a few days there will drop a slippery Liquor and
fat; which set in the Sun for four days, and then smear the place affected
therewith.

A resolving Unguent may be made after this manner:

Take Chamepitys, common Wormwood, and Rosemary tops, of each a handful:
Chamomel flowers, Melilot flowers, and Rose Leaves, of each one pugil: Oil and
Wine, of each half a pound: Let them boil till the Wine be consumed: the Liquor
being strained, add thereto as much Wax as shall suffice to make it into an
Ointment. Let the Part affected be anointed herewith warm; within twenty four
hours the Part does swell, and the pain cease.

Also diverse Pultisses resolving and easing pain, may be made. The principal
are these:

Take Wheaten Bran a pound: Salt one ounce: Soap as much as shall suffice. Boil
all into a Cataplasm, or Pultiss. Or,

Take Bean Meal half a pound: Boil it in a sufficient quantity of Wine, adding
thereto a little Aqua vitae and Butter. Make it into a Pultiss. Or

The Leaves of Dwarf-Elder, or Tree-Elder being beaten, may be applied; or they
may be fried with Butter in a Drying Pan like a Pan-cake.

Briony Root bruised with Aqua vitae, is also very effectual.

Also some commend Aron, Cuckoo-pintle, or Priests-pintle Roots, being mingled
with Cow Dung.

This following is commended by Solenander, because it resolves without any
great heating, eases the pain, and strengthens the Joints. And it may be
safely applied after the beginning of the fit, about the fifth day of the
Disease.

Take Powder of red Roses two ounces: Mastich one ounce: Camphire half a dram:
Barley meal half a pound. Boil all in white Wine, evermore stirring the same,
till it come to be thick, and lay it on warm.

Emplasters are likewise wont to be of great use in this Case. The chief are
these which follow.

Take Frankincese, Mummy, Colophony, of each one ounce: Mastich, Mirrh, white
Coral, of each half an ounce: Man's Fat six drams: Gum Ammoniacum, and Bdellium
dissolved in Vinegar, of each three Drams: Turpentine half an ounce: Oil of
Foxes, and of Roses, of each as much as shall suffice to make all into a
Plaster.

Take Florentine Orice Roots, and Hermodactils poudered, of each six drams:
Emplastrum Oxycroceum, and de Mucilaginibus, of each two ounces: Rozin of Pine
one ounce. Melt them together, adding Oil of worms as much as shall suffice,
and make thereof a Plaster.

Emplastrum Diapalma, or Diacalciteos, is very much used, both alone, or with
Camphire added thereunto, after this manner:

Take of the Roll of Diapalma Plaster half a pound: Camphire two drams. Mix
them together, and apply them to the parts affected.

Or in Form of a Cerecloth.

Take of the Roll of Diacalciteos Plaster half a pound: Plaster of Sulphur an
ounce: Storax and Benzoin, of each half an ounce: Tacamahacca two ounces: Oil
of St. John's wort, and Worms, of each an ounce: Liquid Storax an ounce and an
half: New Wax, as much as shall suffice. Melt all together, and dip your cloth
therein, twice or thrice, make it smooth and dry, and keep it for your use.

But yet the same Plaster mingled with these things following, ought to be
reckoned amongst the most excellent Medicines for the Gout.

Take Diacalciteos Plaster dissolved in harsh red Wine, and boiled till the
Wine be consumed, one pound: Myrtles, red Roses, Mastich, Tartar of red Wine
poudered, of each two drams: Chamepitys, or Ground Pine, and right sweet
Chamomel poudered, of each half a dram. Make of all a Plaster, to be applied
after the swelling is much abated.

And at last, in a very old and settled pain, especially from a cold Cause, some
lay Vesicatories to raise Blisters upon the parts affected. Sennertus makes
mention of them, but so as that Anodines be mixed with them. But the most wise
Varandaeus, my Master, did with happy success use the common Vesicatory
Plaster, which is kept in our Shops, simply, and by it self without any
mixture; wherewith he cured a great and rebellious Swelling upon the Knee, when
other Physicians had in vain used many Purgations, a Sudorofick Diet-Drink, and
many External Medicines.

In the use of all the fore-recited Medicaments, this one thing is diligently
to be noted, That we must take our hints from such things as we find do help or
harm the Patient: forasmuch as the Natures of Men are diverse, their Complexions
diverse, and diverse kinds of Excrements are bred in several Men, whence it is
that the same Diseases do extremely differ in several persons: therefore what
profits one man, does another no good at all; which often comes to pass in
curing the Gout. And for this Cause, every Practitioner must have an abundance
of Medicines, that when one has been applied in vain, he may use another and
another, making always choice of such as a rational Method shall most approve
of.

When the Gout becomes stony and knotty, it is extremely hard to cure,
especially if it be of long standing. But new knobs may with Emollient and
Resolving Foments, Unguents, and Plasters, be dissolved. The most Specific or
Appropriate, are these which follow.

Galen exceedingly commends a Plaster compounded of old strong Cheese, made
into a Plaster with the Decoction of a poudered Sows pestle or Leg.

Others boil poudered Sows Legs, till they come to a slimy substance or Gelly.
Afterward they mingle therewith two parts of old Cheese, powder of
Watercresses one part, and so make a Plaster thereof. Or,

Take Juice of Tobacco three ounces: yellow Wax two ounces: Rozin of the
Line-tree an ounce and an half: Turpentine one ounce: Oil of Chamomel as much
as shall suffice. Make all into a soft Cerate or Plaster. Or,

Take of those Eastern Berries, which the French call Coques de Levant, and
Mirrh, of each half a pound. Powder them, and mix them together with strong
Vinegar into the form of a Cataplasm.

Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, does powerfully soften.

Rulandus anoints those hard Swellings in the morning, at noon, and in the
Evening with Oil or Balsom of Sulphur hot, and then he lays on a Plaster hot,
of Emplastrum Diasulphuris.

But this Plaster following, is your rare Plaster, because besides easing the
pain, it draws the gritty, stnoy substance out of the Joints likewise.

Take Roman Vitriol one pound: Roch Alum half a pound: Salt four ounces.
Calcine all these together in a Crucible or Earthen pot, letting it to steem so
long till the spirits shall begin to go away. Which when you perceive by their
smell to rise, leave presently your calcining, and let all cool, and then powder
them.

Take of this Powder, and Barley Meal, of each a like quantity; mingle them
with Wine Lees to the form of a Pultiss, which spread upon a rag as thick as a
knife, and apply to the place affected. When it is dried, dissolve it again
with Lees of Wine, and apply it again, until in the first place the pain be
discussed; and in the next place, until all the stony substances be consumed
out of the knobbed and knotted Joints. In the mean while it falls out often that
the Skin will break, which need not affright us; for either afterward the
Ulcers close of their own accord, or at least by laying Wax upon them in manner
of a Plaster, they are closed up, the Joints having regained their motion with
activity.

Finally, If the Gout be very exceeding old, and perfectly knotted, by the
preceding Cure a mitigation of pain is to be hoped, but the stony substances
will hardly give way; therefore with a gentle Caustic the Skin is to be opened,
and then the stones are to be taken away with a drawing Plaster of Gums.

The Cure of the Gout when present, is performed by the Remedies aforesaid. But
because this Disease is wont to return by fits, especially in the Spring and
Fall, we must now show the way to prevent the same. Which Prevention ought to
aim at the hindering of any Gouty Matter, like to fall into the Joints, from
gathering in the Body; or if any be collected, that it may be carried away. And
finally that the Joints may not be so disposed to receive the Humor which flows
unto them. The collection of Matter will be hindered, by an excellent Diet, and
by Medicines rectifying the distempers of the Bowels. The Matter collected will
be carried away by Evacuating Medicaments. And the Joints will not so easily
receive if they be fortified with corroborating Medicaments.

As for the Matter of Diet, although in this Case it be of very great, yea
greatest moment, yet the Nature of this work will not give me leave to describe
the same.

I shall only speak of the Patients Drink so as to say, that Wine is extreme
hurtful to all Gouty Persons, and many have recovered only by abstaining
therefrom. Yet if the Patient in regard of some other Infirmity cannot wholly
abstain from Wine, let him drink weak Wine, or well allaied with Water.
Hollerius instead of Wine commends thin Metheglin viz. Of forty or forty eight
Parts of Water to one of Honey. Yet this suites not with such as abound with
bitter-choller and those that are dry and thirsty.

This following Diet drink suits all Natures, and has done much good to very
many persons.

Take Salsa parilla Roots two ounces: Liquorish one ounce: Cinnamon and Annise
Seeds half an ounce: Make all into a very sine Powder. Of this Powder mix one
spoonful with so much small Beer or ale as the Patient is wont to drink at a
Meal. Brew them together out of one Pot into another three or four times. Then
strain the Liquor for the Patients ordinary drink. Doing the like for every
Meal.

And as for Evacuations, Bleeding must be first practiced especially in the
spring and fall, in such as abound with Blood and whose Blood is wont to work
and ferment or be very hot.

But Purgation is not only to be used spring and fall, but four times in a
year, yea and every month in every Cacochimical Body that is which abounds much
with evil Humors. To which purpose many forms of Purgations are handed to and
fro, of a special property for this Disease. These that follow are the chief,
which are so to be used by the discreet Physician, as that he must make many
changes, both in respect of the materials and the Dose, according to the
various Constitutions of the Patients,

Take Senna cleansed, Turbith, Hermodactiles and Powder of a Man's Skull that
has never been in the Earth of each one dram: Diagridium half a dram: Make all
into a Powder of which give one dram: at a time, in Groundpine Water, or in
Broth. Or,

Take Salsa parilla one ounce: Senna six drams: Turbith, Hermodactiles, Jalap,
Mechoacan of each half an ounce: Agarick Trochiscated two drams: Diagridium and
Cinnamon of each half a dram: Make all into a Powder. Steep a dram thereof in
white Wine all night, in the Morning let the Patient drink Powder and Wine.

Electuarium Caryocostinum is by Petrus Bagerus exceedingly commended, and is
approved by all Practitioners, and it is described in the London Dispensatory in
Folio 111. and in that of Bauderon. It is given to half an ounce: But in hot
Constitutions it may do harm.

Rhasis Commends his Pills so far as to say, that they can make such as are fain
to Ride, to go on Foot again. Thus they are made.

Take Aloes of the best half an ounce: Red Roses two scruples: Hermodactiles
white and purged from their outmost Skin or shel, one dram and an half:
Diagridium one dram: With Water of Ground Pine and honey of Roses make all into
a Mass of Pills. the dose one dram.

These also are good which follow.

Take Aloes, Hermodactiles of each half an ounce: Groundpine, or Chamepitys two
drams: Chamaedris or Germander, Stcoehados of each one dram: Saint John's Wort
Seeds, half a dram: With Venice Turpentine make a Mass of Pills, which because
they Purge little may be given the oftener.

Also Evacuation by Vomit is very good for Prevention if the Patient can bear
it well; which is declared by Alsaharavius a famous Physician in these words. A
Vomit is better than a purg to Root out such ill Humors of a gross Nature as
are below the Knee even to the Foot; as in the Knee-Gout, Sciatica and such
like.

Now Vomiting may be procured every Month two days together because the second
day drives out the Relics of the first. And some have observed that vomiting
is more successful than ordinary when is in a Sign that chews the Cud, such as
the Bull and the Goat or Capricorn. It is good to Vomit the Moon after Supper
the Patient having eaten diverse Meats, Fat, sharp of Salt or Spice etc. and
others in great Quantity, and afterward rubbing his stomach and putting his
finger into his throat. And if that will not do, he must take a Vomit,
especially of Asarum and Broom Boiled together and the Decoction drunk, which
are otherwise good in the Cure of the Gout,

That Evacuation likewise which is made by sweat, Purges the Blood from wheyish
excrements, and draws out the antecedent Cause of the Gout. To this Purpose a
Sudorofick Diet drink may be ordered for the Patient Spring and Fall, of a
Decoction of Salsaparilla, China, Sassasras, or of Guaiacum, as the temper of
the Patient shall advise,

But some late Physicians have brought into use, a Decoction which carries
away the Matter merely by invisible Transpiration through the Pores of the
Skin, without any sweat at all, which has done a world of good. Its
Composition and use is thus:

Take Sarsaparilla, Crude Antimony, Nut-shels, of each six ounces: China Root
one ounce: A little Brasil Wood: Water nine pints: Boil them to four pints and
an half. Let the Antimony and Nutshels be poudered and tied in a cloth, which
must be so hanged in the pot that it touch not the bottom. Let him take a good
draught of the strained Liquor, on mornings three hours before dinner; in the
afternoon four hours after dinner, and three hours after supper, for fifteen
days together. Bleeding and universal Purgation being premised.

Of the Grounds remaining in the Strainer with like quantity of Water, may be
made a DietDrink for ordinary use instead of Beer. Boil the Water half away,
and ad Coriander and Liquoris as much as shall suffice to give it a good smack.

To prevent the Gout, and to root the same out of the Bowels, some
Practitioners commend the use of Gout-quellers given an whole year together,
whereby they avouch many have been perfectly cured. Among many of their
Receipts, this is the Principal.

Take Salsaparilla four ounces: St. John's Wort seeds, Groundpine, and Germander
Leaves, of each three ounces: round Birthwort six drams: Angelica three drams:
Cinnamon three drams: Cloves four scruples: Saffron two scruples. Let all be
finely poudered and incorporated with Spanish Honey clarified as much as shall
suffice. Make all into an Electuary, which let the Patient use a year together,
taking every day in the Spring, Fall, and Winter, one dram and an half; in the
Summer only one dram. Let the Patient forbear to take it in the Dog-daies. Let
him wholly abstain from Wine and Lechery.

Peradventure the Decoction of Germander may be of the Nature of the
Gout-quelling Medicaments our Practitioners talk of; which was therefore
commended to the Emperor Charles the Fifth exceedingly by the Physicians of
Genoa; and Solenander does testify, That very many who drank this Medicine
threescore days together, were perfectly cured. The Composition of this
Decoction is thus:

Take Germander gathered when it flowers, and well preserved, one handful: Ripe
Wine not very strong, nor very small, three pints: Boil them in a double vessel
five hours. Let the Patient take a draught of the strained Wine, and compose
himself to sweat. This is to be done after the Patient has been purged.

And it is here to be noted touching those hot Medicines, that they are not
only unprofitable for hot Constitutions, but they cause such Resolutions of
Humors or Joints, or other inconveniences, as can never be cured, and therefore
they must be given with great Caution.

Peradventure this following Electuary may be used with more safety and
success, which does purge the Body by little and little from all superfluities
without heating the same.

Take Senna half an ounce: Turbith, Hermodactils, of each six drams: Lignum
Guajacum, Sassapbras, and Salsaparilla, of each half an ounce: China Roots one
ounce and an half: Nephritick Wood two ounces: the three Sanders, of each one
ounce: Annis Seed two drams: Honey very well clarified fourteen ounces: make
all into an Electuary. The Dose is one dram every day in the whole year, except
the Dog-daies.

Among the common People, some hold it for a great Preservative from the Gout,
to swallow three Cloves of Garlic whole every morning for a month together. For
they heat and strengthen the Stomach, without heating the Liver, or other
Bowels; for they are voided forth with the Excrements whole, but boiled and
wrapped in clammy Phlegm, which they bring from the Stomach and Guts.

In the Gout proceeding of Chollerick Humors, Waters of Medicinal Wels, which
are Acid, Vitriolate, and cooling, such as that of Tunbridg in Kent, Blackbois
not far from Jews in Sussex, one in the Parish of Sandherst in Kent, do very
much good. So that by the use of such Waters, some persons have been for a long
time freed from the Gout.

To the same purpose Hippocrates commends in his Book of Diseases, the use of
Asses Milk, which Experience shows has done good to many Gouty persons.

And in a word, All things which are good against an hot distemper of the
Liver, and to strengthen that Bowel, will be good in this Case, as they are
described before in the Cure of the hot distemper of the Liver.

But if a wheyish Humor flowing from the Brain be Cause of this Disease, as
most commonly falls out, the greatest care must be had of the Brain; viz. That
its distemper may be corrected, and that the Humors bred therein may be derived
and discussed. To which intents; Issues, Vesicatories, Medicines to be drawn up
into the Nose, Masticatories, Pouders, Spiced Caps, will be very serviceable;
and other Remedies propounded in the Cure of Diseases of the Brain.

The last Point of Prevention, is to strengthen the Joints that they may not so
easily receive the the Humor flowing in. Yet it is to be noted, that
strengthening Medicaments, are not only Vain but hurtful also, unless the
antecedent Cause, and the Humor ready to flow into the Part, be carefully
removed by the foresaid Medicaments. Otherwise those strengtheners, either are
not able to hinder the influx of the Humors into the Joint: or if they do
hinder the same, the Humors retire to the more noble Parts of the Body and
raise much worse Diseases.

Among the principal strengtheners the pressings of Grapes viz. their Seeds
etc. are reckoned, which discuss the relics of the Morbisick Matter by their
actual heat, and by their astringency, do very much strengthen the Parts.
Duretus upon Hollerius does thus commend them. But the use of Vine-Grape
Kernells does exceedingly profit in the time of Vintage. If the pressings of
the Grapes be brought out of the Wine Press into a Barn and being covered with
Blankets do there grow hot. In them let the Patient thrust his Feet, Legs,
Thighs, Arms, or his whole Body. I have tried it (says he) an hundred times,
there is no better thing under the Cope of Heaven.

And Solenander in his Counsel 21. Sect. 4. Does give the foresaid Medicine
this commendation. But among the best and safest remedies, (which do also
strengthen the Parts affected, and do cherish the innate heat,) is this to be
reckoned, and diligently once every year (for oftener it cannot) to be
practiced, viz. That in Vintage time, the Feet and hands affected, be whelmed
in pressings of Grapes hot from the press, or made hot with warm Wine, every
Morning for fifteen days. And I could name a worthy Personage, to whom I have
communicated this Medicament, and received from him a very considerable
Gratuity; therefore who could not go at all, and by this Medicine and Gods
Blessing, he was restored. And by how much the Grapes are riper, by so much the
more good, will the pressings do in this Case.

Sulphurous and Nitrous bathes such as the Balerucane in France, do not only
discuss the Matter of the Gour, by provoking sweat, as was said before; but
also by strengthening the Joints, they do much conduce to the Prevention
thereof; as also being used by way of Embrocation, that is the Head being wet
therewith or it being pumped upon the Heat, Cotton wet therein be at last laid
on and made fast. The mire of the said Bathes applied to the weak Parts, does
likewise strengthen them.

Where the benefit of Natural bathes cannot be had, the Feet may be washed and
other Parts Fomented, with a Decoction of nerve Herbs, some astringents being
added thereto, as Balaustians, Mirtill. Cypress Nutts, Alum, and Salt, with
Iron-quenched Water and red Wine.

Also Ointments are commended, being frequently used, made after this manner.

Take Oil of Mirtles or Roses two ounces: Salt two drams: Mix them and make a
Liniment. Or,

Take Oil of unripe Olives Oil of Mastick one ounce: Salt fried in a pan two
drams: Bole Armoniack three drams: Dragons Blood, Hipocistis, Frankincense,
Mastich, of each one dram and an half: Let each Particular be first finely
Poudered by it self, then with the Oils mix them into the form of an Ointment.

The Plaster called Emplastrum Diapalma is very good to strengthen the Joints:
and its useful in all Gouts whatever the Humor be which offends. and Solenander
writes in Counsel 25. Sect. 4. that he has known some, who had wont to be
often troubled with the Gout, and by the continual use of this Plaster, with
frequent purges taken at certain distances of time, they were freed from those
Pains for five years together. And this Plaster does not daub and foul, does
not raise Itch or Pimples, nor is it troublesome by its smell or any other evil
quality. And it is fitted to the shape of the member. When the Feet are
troubled shoes are made of thin Leather which being smeared with this plaster
are put upon the Feet. The like spread with this Plaster may be applied to the
Wrists and other Parts. But the truth is the same Plaster boy led in Wine and
mingled with Powder of Myrtles, Roses, Tartar, Chamepitis or Groundpine and
Chamomel, so as we described before in the Curation, is much better for the
same uses. And we have seen Gouty persons, who contiually wore such a Plaster
upon their Feet and Wrists, with most happy success.

Chap. 2. Of the Hip-Gout, or Sciatica.
THe Pain of the Sciatica or Hip-Gout, does herein chiefly differ from other
sorts of the Gout, because in those the Pain possesses only the Joints; but
this, it is not only in the Hip, but it holds the top of the Buttock also, the
Loins and the Os sacrum, and reaches into the Thigh and Leg even to the very
Foot. Which comes to pass by reason of Nerves arising out of the Loins and Os
sacrum, which are carried unto the Hip, and are from thence derived and spread
unto the Thigh, the Leg and Feet.

The Cause of this Pain is the same which was propounded in other sorts of the
Gout.

The knowledge of this Disease is taken from the Part affected: from whence it
also took its name, for the Pain does especially affect the Region or Part of
the Huckle-bone, for it has this property, that no Humor, nor Inflammation or
change of the color appears as is wont to be in other signs of the Gout:
because the flowing Humors do insinuate themselves into more profound or deep
Parts, and into such as are larger, and covered with much flesh, and they are
not diffused into the surface of the body nor the very Skin as in other Gouts.

This peculiar Prediction belongs to the Hip-Gout, that if it continue long it
puts the Hip out of Joint: for a wheyish and phlegmatic Humor does insinuate it
self into the Hollow of the Joint which is very large, and if it bide there
long, its thinner Part is discussed, the thick or remaining, which becomes
snotty and softens and looseus the bands which knit together the bones which
belong unto that Joint; so that the Bone of the Hip falls from its Socket,
whence follows Luxation, and thereupon limping or halting, and a Consumption of
the whole Thigh; because the Bone being slipped out of its seat, does press upon
the Muscles, Veins and Arteries, by which means motion is hindered and Blood
and spirits cannot conveniently flow into the inferior Parts. The foresaid
Doctrine is confirmed by two Aphorisms of Hippocrates, viz. The 59. of the 6.
Section. Such whose Hip after long pains, slips out of Joint and in again, they
have Snotty excrements in that Part. and the 60. Aphorism of the same Section;
Such as being troubled with long Pains of the Sciatica, come to have their Hip
disjointed, their Thigh Consumes and they halt, except they be burnt.

The Cure of the Hip-Pain has many things common with the other sorts of
Gouts; yet in many things it differs because of the structure and Largness of
the Joint; therefore it is to be distinguished from the former Gouts, and to be
handled in this Chapter by it self.

And in the first place a Clister or Gentle Purgative being premised, the Vein
of the Arm on the same side must be opened for revulsion sake: afterward for
derivation sake, the Vena poplitis must be opened about the Knee, or that Vein
near the outward Anckle-bone, which is called the Sciatica Vein, because of the
great good which the opening therefore is wont to do in this Disease; which
alone being opened does often heal this Disease.

It is wont to be opened on the Leg of the same side the Gout is on, yet has
it done much good being opened on the contrary side, and has been seen
suddenly to take the Pain quite away.

Galen in his Book of Blood-letting, Section 18. I remember (says he) that I
have Cured diverse troubled with the Sciatica in one day, opening a Vein in
their Thighs; viz. the Cause being, not from cold, but fullness of those Veins
which are in the Hip; so that a Vein opened about the Ham or Knee, is more
Proper and commodious in such cases, than in the Ankles.

Also Blood drawn out of the Hemorrhoids by Leeches, does wonderfully help
those that are Hip-Gouty, because the Blood contained in the Veins of the Hip
is thereby drawn out: for there is the greatest Consent and fellow-feeling that
can be between these Parts by means of their Veins.

Strong Purgations are proper in this case; for lighter purges do rather
precipitate the Humors into the Parts affected. And therefore the Arthritical
Pouders are most convenient, Carpocostinum, Pills of Hermodactils and such like.
The Chimists do sometimes successfully use Mercurial and Antimonial purges in
strong Bodies.

Mercurius dulcis which Scammony or other purgatives given frequently, does
powerfully eradicate the Humor causing this Hip-Gout.

Many prefer Vomiting Medicaments before purgatives, because they Evacuate the
Humors by a place more remote from the Part affected. Rondeletius prefers
Alarm before other Vomitories.

After sufficient Purgation, we must proced to local Medicaments. And as for
repelling Medicines, they are no ways convenient, because it is to be feared
least the Humors be so much the more fixed into the Part affected; but at the
beginning Resolving things must be applied; first milder and less hot, least
they should attract the Humors more into the Part affected; after such as are
more vehement, in this manner.

Take Briony Roots two pounds: Dwarf-Elder Roots one pound: Juniper Berries
half a pound: Leaves of Groundpine, Mint, Marjarom, Sage, Rosemary, flowers of
Chamomel and Melilot of each four handfulls: Make a Decoction for a bath to sit
in, which let the Patient sit in twice a day for two or three days together.
At the beginning the Decoction may be made of Water alone afterward in Water
and White Wine.

With the same or like Decoction hot, may the Part Pained be fomented
frequently.

Also Bags may be prepared of Salt, Millet and Bran fried with rich Canary in a
frying Pan and laid on Warm.

Or, Bags very effectual may be made only of Juniper Berries beaten and fried
in a Pan as aforesaid.

Also anointings will be convenient of Oil of Chamomel, Oil of Dill, Orice,
Nard and Rue; which by relaxing the exterior Parts, will draw the motion of the
Humors to themwards, by which means the inner parts will be less affected.

Oil of Scorpions of Mathiolus anointed on, will be very effectual.

To resolve more powerfully, The Aqua Balsami Guidonis, being anointed on, will
be exceeding good.

Ointment of Marshmallows does loosen the external parts, and does gently
discuss the Morbisick Matter; therefore toward the beginning, the whole Thigh
may be anointed therewith, and the Leg to the Foot by a flaming fire.

In the Progress of the Disease, this following being hotter and stronger, may
be used.

Take Oil of Worms, Tiles, Turpentine, of each two ounces: Oil of Foxes one
ounce: Gum Ammoniack, and Sagapenum dissolved in Aqua vitae, of each six drams:
Fat Castoreum three drams: Euphorbium two drams: Wax as much as shall suffice.
Make all into an Ointment.

Spanish Soap, or Castle Soap dissolved in Spirit of Wine, is most excellent,
smeared on by the fires side.

Oil of Tiles or Bricks alone, being anointed hot, after six Cupping-Glasses
have been fastened upon the pained place, and about the same; and after the
anointing, the place being covered with very hot Linen Clothes, has in one
day cured a very stubborn Sciatica.

Lacuna in his Comments upon Dioscorides, does commend the following Ointment
as wonderful:

Take the Juice of the Roots and Leaves of Dwarf-Elder, or Danewort, of each
one ounce: Oil of Chamomel six ounces: Boil them to the consumption of the
Juyces. Then add Wax as much as shall suffice, and a few drops of Vinegar to
make the virtue pierce. Make of all an Ointment.

A Cataplasm of the Herb Iberis, wild Cresses, or Sciatica Cresses, is much
commended by Authors, because this Herb is very effectual in the Cure of this
Disease. It may be made after this manner:

Take of wild Cresses four handfuls: boil them in Wine, and beat them, adding
thereto Meal of Lupines, Vetches, and of Beans, of each three drams: Powder of
dried Rue, Chamomel flowers, and Costus Root, of each one dram: Oil of
Turpentine half an ounce: Oil of Earthworms as much as shall suffice. Make all
into a Cataplasm.

Platerus witnesses that it has done much good, when green Sage has been put
on an hollow hot Tile, and often stirred lest it burn; and thus being half
boiled and sprinkled with Vinegar, and a Cl^th put about the Tile. and the same
put under the Hips, the vapor thereof has been received into the part affected.

Also a Loaf very hot out of the Oven, cut in the middle, sprinkled with Aqua
vitae, and laid on, will be very helpful.

To draw the Morbifick Matter outward, a Cupping-Glass is good, four times
fastened upon the highest part of the pained place, which appertains to Os
sacrum, without Scarrification.

To the same intent, eight or ten Leeches fastened to the part affected do much
help, which are allowed and approved of by Paulus and Aurelianus. And Zacutus
Lusitanus says that in ten hours space he therewith took away the pain of the
Sciatica, which no other Remedies could help.

Plasters are likewise frequently used, and in this Case may do much. But in
the use of them, this is always to be observed, as it has been said generally
of the rest; that at the first mild ones be applied, which if they do little
good, we may arise to more vehement. Which order we will likewise observe in
our setting down the making of such Plasters.

Take Pitch used in Ships, two ounces: Brimstone poudered very fine three
drams: Mastich two drams: Turpentine half an ounce. Mix them, and make of all a
Plaster, adding as much Wax as shall be requisite.

Take Ship-Pitch two ounces: Gum-Ammoniack, Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, of
each one ounce: Live Brimstone, Turbith, Hermodactils, of each half an ounce:
Castoreum one dram: Turpentine a little: Wax as much as shall suffice. Make of
all a Plaster.

Take Gum Ammoniack, and Sagapenum dissolved in Vinegar, and then thickened
again, of each two ounces: Emplastrum Diachylon cum Gummis, one ounce and an
half. Melt all together. Then add Cinnabaris, Cinoper or Minium, and burned
Brass, of each one ounce: Orpment and Verdegreece, of each two drams. Make all
into a Mass or Plaster. If it raise Bladders, lay a Linen Cloth between the
Plaster, and the part affected.

If the Disease do pertinaciously continue, we must proceed to a Vesicatory,
which does draw out the Morbisick Matter, being applied to the part affected.
Wherefore a Blistering Plaster must be laid on, either alone, or that it may
work more gently, with some of the foresaid, mingled in equal proportions, for
so it may be endured upon the part a longer time. Or this following may be made
fresh.

Take Ship-Pitch, Wax, white Pitch, of each one ounce and an half: Colophonia,
Frankincense, Mastich, of each two drams: Euphorbium, Ladanum, Quick Sulphur,
Opopanax, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Sagapenum, of each half an ounce:
Storax, and Benjamin, of each two drams: Cantharides three drams: Galangal,
Cloves, of each two drams: Liquid Storax, as much as shall suffice. Make all
into a Plaster.

In an old Disease, an Issue in the Leg on the pained side, does derive the
Matter away, and sometimes cures the Disease. Zechius will have it made in the
outside of the Leg. And if there be suspicion of a Catarrh from the Brain,
another must be made in the hinder part of the Head. For that has sometimes
cured an old Sciatica when nothing else would do it. And then likewise other
Remedies, correcting the Brains distemper, must not be neglected.

Zacutus Lusitanus tells of his making an Issue behind the Ears with wonderful
success, when the Humor came from the Head. Of this he makes a peculiar story,
Observat. 160. Book 2.

During the whole Course of the Cure, frequent Clysters are to be injected, that
part of the Morbifick Matter may be derived unto the Guts. Also to discuss the
next and immediate Cause of the pain, this following has sometimes been useful.

Take Rich Canary half a pint: Walnut Oil, and Oil of Rue, of each three
ounces: Oil of Turpentine half an ounce. Mix all, and make thereof a Clyster,
to be cast in so often as the pain shall require.

And this following Clyster does wonderfully draw the Humors from the part
affected, in regard of its Neighborhood to the Guts.

Take Pulp of Coloquintida one dram: Lean Bran an handful: white Wine a pint
and an half: Boil all to a pint. Of the strained Liquor make a Clyster, and let
the Patient keep it an hour.

The Hip-Gout is sometimes bred of Choler, and hot Humors, which is known when
the pain is very sharp, and pricks the pains are greater every other day, the
party is lean, the Constitution of Body Chollerick. Age youthful, Country and
Season hot, the pain is increased by heating things, Chollerick Diseases have
preceded, an hot Diet, and vehement Exercise; and then the Medicines must be
fitted for Choler, and an hot distemper. Wherefore, Bleeding is good,
Purgations of Choler, sometimes Lenitive, sometimes strongly purging with
Diagridium, that the Morbifick Matter may be brought forth; cooling Juleps,
emollient Clysters cooling, Milk, Bathing, and other Remedies propounded in an
hot distemper of the Liver. Always being careful to avoid things Opening, and
to choose rather such as do incrassate or thicken, such as we propounded for a
thin and hot Rhewm.

The Pain being extreme, some Narcoticks may be given, especially Syrup of
Poppies, whereby the pain is allaied, and the flux of Humors stopped, by the
Humors being thickened.

But Laudanum Opiatum is far more powerful, given to the quantity of three or
four grains; which also dissolved in a Clyster of Broth or Milk, using a
Purging Clyster before it, does often take away the pain in a moment.

The external Medicaments must be gentler, as Oil of Lillies, Violets,
Chamomel, and sweet Almonds: Pultisses, of Lettice, Nightshade, Endive, Barley
Meal, with the foresaid Oils; and toward the declining of the Disease,
Fomentations, Liniments, Milder Plasters, and less Heating.

The Matter Causing the Sciatica, comes sometimes to maturity, so as to make an
Imposthume. Which Hippocrates shows in the third Book of his Epidemicks in the
History of Eupolemus, who had such an Imposthume, which killed him with a
Consumption. If the Imposthume be opened, there remains a filthy il conditioned
Ulcer, which likewise pines the Patient away. Yet Zacutus Lusitanus glories,
that he had often cured the Sciatica with an Ulcer, in Obs. 126. Book 1. Which
Observation ought to be read and diligently meditated upon.

Chap. 3. Of Rheumatick Pains of the whole Body.
AFter Gouty Diseases properly so called, it is worth our while to treat of the
Rhewmatick Disease, because of the likeness between these Diseases, which
verily is so great, that the generallity of Physicians, which know not the
Nature of this Rhewmatisin, are wont to call it the universal Gout. For in both
Diseases the Joints are pained: but therein is the difference; In that in the
Gout, only the Joints are pained; But in this Rheumatismus, or Rheumatick
Malady, not only the Joints, but also the whole Body, viz. The middle spaces
between the Joints, namely, the Muscles and their Membranes, and especially the
Skins which cover the Bones, and the whole habit of the Body; yea verily, and
sometimes the inward parts of the Body, as the Stomach, Womb, Lungs, are
troubled with this Rheumatick Disease.

And although the Greeks call a Catarrh by the name of Rheuma; yet this
Rheumatism we speak of, differs from a Catarrh, being indeed contained under
the general term of Flux of Rheum, yet of a different Nature from that kind of
Flux which is commonly called a Catarrh, which comes only from the Brain, and
trouble no more than one or two parts; whereas this Disease we treat of, comes
from the internal Bowels by the Veins and Arteries, and is shed into the whole
Body.

This is no new Disease, yet is it not sufficiently described by the Ancients.
We have a rude ^raught thereof in Hippocrates, in his Book, de locis in Homine:
and in Galen, Book 1. of the dif^^^ence of Fevers; and the first de
compositione Med. secundum Genera. But the most notable (...) ^leer place of
al, explaining this Disease, is in the first Book of the Differences of
Fevers, in (...) the words are these: Understand thou, That the Rheumatick
Disease so called, is caused (...) such way as this; viz. The whole Body being
weak, and the principal Parts thereof, though (...) but little blood, yet
finding themselves burdened, they thrust the same and expel it to the (...)
parts of the Skin. Whereby it appears that the true Nature of this Rheumatick
Disease, (...) to Galens Doctrine, consists herein; That the whole Body is so
weak, that when any princi^^^ (...) is burdened with blood, although it be in
no very great quantity, it transmits the same to the (...) parts and habit of
the Body.

(...) that is not simply to be understood which is said by Galen, That the
principal Parts being (...) with blood, do thrust the same unto the fleshy
Parts of the Body. For so Inflammations (...) ^^ellings would arise in those
parts. Whereas Experience shows, that in this Disease called (...), for the
most part there appears no Swelling, no Inflammation, no change of color in
(...) pained.

(...) and immediate Cause therefore of this Disease, is a wheyish Humor, which
by reason of (...) does not swel the parts, and because of the substance
thereof, not apt to turn into Matter (...), it never makes any Imposthume, but
only a certain Inflamatory disposition, arising from (...) of the wheyish Humor.

(...) the Primary Original of this Disease ought to be ascribed to the Liver,
which being affected (...) an hot distemper, and being weakened, breeds not
blood convenient for to nourish, and affects (...) whole Body with the like
weakness, whereby it becomes exceedingly disposed to receive all su^^^^luities.
And from the same Distemper and weakness of the Liver, great quantities of evil
Hu^ors do arise, which being long detained in the Veins and Arteties, they
become vitiously corrupted, ^^d are there dissolved and turned into the Nature
of Whey, and Blood-watry Liquors, and as an (...) burden, are by Nature cast
off into the ignoble Parts, she being not strong enough to drive ^^em out of
the whole Body. Now these wheyish and blood-watry Humors being very sharp, do
(...) and cut (as it were) those parts unto which they are carried, from whence
pains and torments (...). And although we conceive the Liver to be the primary
Cause, and Original of this Disease, (...) is apparent that these Humors do
sometimes flow immediately from the Brain, because the (...) do often begin in
the Neck, and afterward do descend unto the Shoulders and Arms. But the (...)
^eneration of these sharp Humors was in the overheated Liver, which being
translated from (...) into the Brain, do from thence afterward fall down into
the inferior parts.

(...) although these Humors are expelled by the Veins in manner of a Crisis,
yet is not their motion (...), but is performed by little and little; viz. When
those evil Humors and corrupted, (...) for work in the Veins, and are afterward
leisurely by the Veins expelled and vomited as it (...) for which cause this
motion is wont fitly to be called, the Vomiting of the Veins.

(...) a ferous or wheyish Humor is the principal Cause of these pains, many
Reasons do convince. (...), because ordinarily they cause no swelling nor
change of color in the part affected; howbeit, (...) when the Humor does much
abound, it raises the part into a little, and very red Swelling, which
nevertheless is easily discussed. Secondly, Because these pains are exceeding
movable, and ^^ seize now this, now that part of the Body, and are suddenly
gone from one part into another, the former part being quickly well, and free
from al pain; which sudden mutations cannot come but from an Humor very apt to
move, and exceeding thin. Thirdly, Because this Disease is often terminated by
Sweating. Fourthly, Because there appear many tokens of abundant Serosities in
such as are troubled with this Disease; Thin and abundant Urines beyond the
Quantity of what they drink, and abundance of Wheyish Humors appearing in the
Blood that is taken from them.

And although a wheyish Humor be the principal, and most frequent Cause of
these Rheumatick (...), yet probable it is, that wind does sometimes concur in
the production of these pains. Which we may conjecture by the quick Passage of
the pain from one place to another, and because there is ^^ weight or heaviness
felt in the parts pained. This is the Opinion of Avicenna, who seems to
de^^ribe this Disease, and to assign windy Vapors for the Cause thereof: Fen.
1. Book, 3. Tract. 2. Chap. 7. in these words. In pain Caused by winds, the
extension of the part is increased and the heaviness diminished sometimes it is
with pricking, and sometimes with Corrosion; and in a flatuous Pain there is no
Heaviness. And sometimes there is a Change of the Pain from one place to
another. These are the words of Avicenna: unto which he Joins these following,
which seem to come nearer the description of this Disease we treat of. And the
wind is sometimes in the Coats and fibers of the Members, as in the Colic
from wind; or in the Coats of the Muscles and under the membranes, and upon the
Bones, or in the Circumference of the Muscles, between the soft flesh and the
Skin, or lurking in the Member it self,

And if any shall object, that Diseases arising from wind, do not endure so
long, because windy Vapors are soon discussed. We shall answer, that a wind
contained in the Parts Pained is easily discussed, whence comes often change of
Pains from one Part to another; but there is a seminary in the Veins from
whence winds may perpetually arise, and afterward be carried to the Parts
aforesaid. Now this Seminary of winds is a thick, viscid Humor and phlegmatic,
which the Blood taken from them does often testify to be redundant in such as
are troubled with these Pains; it being frequently thick and clammy like Glue,
in appearance like crude and putrid phlegm.

The knowledge of this Disease may easily be learned out of what has been said:
yet shall we discource thereof a little more fully. First therefore, the Parts
affected with these Pains viz. the Muscles and their Membrans, and the
Membranes which infold the bones, do distinguish this Disease from all other.
For allthough the Pains of the Lechers Pocks, do possess both the Joints and
the spaces between the Joints, and specially the membranes covering the bones;
yet they differ herein, because they do not so universally infest the whole
Body, neither are so continual night and day, for they vex the Party only in
the nights and very little in the day time; neither do they hinder the Patients
from their business commonly; whereas this Rheumatick Pain, does Nail them to
their Beds, so as they can hardly stir themselves; neither can those that look
to them, once so much as move without great trouble and increase of their
Torments. And finally other signs of the Whores Pox have preceded or are
present, as Gonorrhea, the Whores Boil, Putrefaction of the Privities and such
like.

Other symptoms also there are accompanying this Disease, which help much to
the knowledge thereof. For if you lay your hand upon the Part pained, you feel a
kind of sharpness with Heat; commonly there is a Fever Joined therewith, but
it is very small; and some times there is none at all. The Blood which is taken
away is evidently corrupted, thick and clammy like glue, and after many times
bleeding, it is full of wheyish moisture, and so changed, that it has not the
appearance of Blood. When the Pain is quite gone or intermits there remains no
weakness in the Part, as is usual in the Gout. Purging Medicaments at the
beginning do no good, nor things outwardly applied to the Part affected; they
do rather augment the Disease and the Pain: but when the Disease begins to
decline, both are profitable.

As for the Prognostic, this Disease is seldom or never deadly, but is very
troublesome to the Patient by its length: for it continues two or three months,
if it be without a Fever; nay verily; sometimes if it be not rightly cured, it
continues for a year or years. Franciscus Portus who in an elegant verse writ
ten Poems of Physic speaking of this Disease relates that he was troubled with
this Disease about two years space, which at length he overcame by the earnest
Endeavous of six Physicians of Paris, the most famous in their times, viz.
Basinus, Belly-Quercus, Sanjacoboeus, Seguinus and Hollerius.

If this Rheumatisus do begin with a Fever, it is wont to be the shorter, but
it torments the Patient with more direful and cruel Pains: and then it
finisheth within twenty or forty days, or at least, it is much lessened.

This Rheumatick Pain coming upon the Neck of other Diseases as an Apoplexy or
convulsion, does make the Case less Dangerous, the morbifick matter being
translated from the internal Parts to the habit of the Body.

Sweates happening in the Declination of the Disease are good.

Thick and abundant Urins in the Declination, do bring an end to the Disease.

For the Cure of this Disease the Morbifick matter must be revelled, mitigated
and Evacuated, the distemper of the Bowels must be corrected, and the strength
of all the Parts both the sending and receiving must be maintained.

All which may be done by these following Remedies

Take Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Betes, Lettice, Borrage, of each one Handful.
Anis-Seeds two drams: Boil all to twelve ounces, in the strained Liquor
dissolve Honey of Violets and Sweet Butter of each two ounces: Make thereof a
Clister. Give it at a convenient Hour, and repeat every day, or every other day
during the whole Course of the Disease.

When the Clister is come away open a Vein in either Arm and take away eight or
nine ounces of Blood. It Matters not on which Arm the Vein be at first opened,
because Blood-letting must be often repeated and the Veins of both Arms diverse
times opened. Blood must therefore be drawn every day from the beginning of the
Disease til the Disease come to remit and the Pains to lessen neither matters
it though the Patient be let blood ten or twelve times one after another in so
many days, because it is a peculiar property of this disease, that the
Patients strength is not diminished by frequent bleeding, as in other Diseases
it is wont to fall out. My manner therefore is in these Diseases when I appoint
Bleeding so often, least the friends and attendants or the Patient should be
affrighted with so frequent Blood-letting, to ad this restriction, that
Blood-letting be continued every day, til either the Pains be diminished or the
Patient much weakened. And seeing no weakness follows the continual use of this
Evacuation the patients do willingly undergo the same, and are easily persuaded
to repeat the same. Now the condition of the Blood it is which makes this easy
bearance, which in this Disease comes always away very much corrupted.
Experience shows how profitable this frequent Blood-letting is; for by the
constant continuance thereof, the Disease which is wont (as was said in the
Prognostic) to be long, is often mastered in a short time. And experience
shows that large Bleeding at the Nose, if it happen to one that has this
Disease, it persectly Cures that party, Hippocrates seems to hint at this in
Aphor 74. Sect. 4. Those who are likely to have an Impostume about their
Joints, are freed from that danger, danger, if they void much thick and white
Vrin, such as in painful Fevers, some begin to make upon the fourth day: and
if with all their Nose Bleeds, the Disease will very soon break. For the
falling down of Humors into the Joints tending to an Impostume, has some
Analagy with this Rheumatick Disease we treat of. Also the same Hippocrates
seems to propound a certain adumbration of this Disease in the second of his
Predictories, and ascribes the cause thereof to the suppression of some usual
Hemorrhage or Bleeding, in these words. They who have Pains and swellings about
their Joints, which are all aied not as the Gout uses to be, in such you shall
sind their Bowels large, and a white settling in their Vrin etc. afterward he
adds; now this Disease betides those who in their Childhood and in their youth
have been accustomed to Bleed at Nose, which custom has left them.

Whiles these bleedings are Practiced, Clisters (as was before said) must be
given every day or every other day; also Juleps must be given, which have power
to correct the distemper of the Bowels, and to mitigate the Acrimony and
agitation of the Humors. To this intent Red poppy water is very profitable in
this Disease it is to be given alone morning and Evening six ounces at a time,
with Syrup of Lemmons and Pomegranates in form of a Julep; howbeit it is no
less effectual alone without the Syrups.

For ordinary Drink let the Patient use a Ptisan Drink of Barley, Grass and
Liquoris; or of the Decoction of Sorrel Roots, or of the tincture of Roses:
abstaining from Wine which is the great Vehiculum or Spreader of all Flowing
Humors.

Purgation in the Beginning, Augment, and state of this Disease does no good at
all; nay verily it does hurt, for it sets the Humors on running, and increases
the Pains; as it is wont to fall out in all inflammatory dispositions. But in
the Declination it is necessary and frequently to be Celebrated, and that with
gentle Medicaments, that the evil Humors abounding in the whole body may be
Evacuated by Degrees. To which purpose this following potion may be prescribed.

Take Senna and Tamarinds of each half an ounce: Annis Seed and Cream of
Tartar, of each one dram: Sorrel Leaves half a Handful. Boil all to three
ounces: In the strained Liquor dissolve Manna and Syrup of Roses of each one
ounce: Make a potion, to be iterated diverse times, as the Physician shall think
sit.

If the form of a Bole be more desirable, it may thus be made;

Take Cassia new drawn six drams: Catholicum doubled three drams: Rhubarb in
Powder and Cream of Tartar of each one dram: with Sugar make a Bolus.

If you would purge more effectually add to the potion or the Bole a scruple of
Jallap.

If these Purgations shall not suffice to eradicate this Disease (which is
often very rebellious) we must proceed to stronger Purgatives, as Electuarium
Diephoenicon, Diaprunum Solutivum, and such like provided there be no Fever. I
have all ways cured this Disease (when the foresaid Medicaments could not do
it) which Mercurius Dulcis six times sublimed, being given diverse times to the
Quantiry of a scruple with ten grains of Scammony or Rosin of Jallap. An
example of which kind of Cure is to be seen in my observations, viz. in Obs.
41. Cent. 3. One only Clister of Vomiting Wine Cured this Disease in a certain
Gentle Woman, as you have it in Obs. 22. of the same Century.

Touching Sweat-Drivers, the same is to be said which was said of Purges; viz.
that they in the Beginning, Augment and state, do no good; nay do very much
harm; which the common sort of Practitioners find by experience, who being
deluded with the likeness of a true Cararrh, and wearied with the stubbornness
of the Disease, do fly to Sudorosicks, by which the Disease is doubled and the
Pains increased. But in the Declination, after due Purgations, no Fevers being
present, they may do much good, and they may be made of a Decoction of China,
or Salsa-Parilla; or sweat may be procured in a Laconick Bath with spirit of
Wine or some appropriate Decoction.

After sufficient Evacuations; yea rather while they are celebrated, we must be
careful to strengthen the whole body and the principal Parts thereof; which
Indication Galen in 1. of the Difference of Fevers Chap. 6. where he expounds
the Nature of this Disease, says, is to be preferred before all others, in
these words. Justly therefore the aim of a Physician in cureing these kind of
Patients, is not Evacuation, but Roboration of the whole Body. Which is not so
to be understood, as if no Evacuation were fit in these Cases (for the same
Galen begins the Cure of this Disease by Blood-let-ting) but that we must make
more and more often use of strengthened, and less and seldomer use of
Evacuations. Yet sure enough it is, that the Parts cannot be strengthened,
unless the superfluity of Excrements, by which they are burdened be purged out.

Now these strengtheners we speak of, must be of a cooling Virtue; seeing (as
was said) the over hot distemper of the Liver gives beginning to this Disease.
There is great plenty of such Medicaments in Authors: Of these I shall
propound four, which I account most effectual and least ungrateful to the
Patient.

The first is the Tincture of Coralls, two ounces of which the sick may take in
a morning, two hours before Meat, every day on which no other Medicaments are
administered.

But because the Tincture of Coralls cannot long be kept, it is reduced into a
Syrup for longer keeping, with Sugar, of which two spoonfulls may be taken in
the morning: but the Efficacy thereof is much less, than of the simple Tincture.

The second, is the Conserve of the fruit which grows upon the Rose-b^^ar or
the Eglantine Briar, which is most pleasing to the taste, cooles the Liver, and
by a gentle a ^riction corroborates the same. The Patient may take thereof the
Quantity of a Chestnut, morning and evening.

The third is the Electuary of Triasantalon with a fourfold proportion of
Rhubarb, made into Lozenges; two drams whereof the Patient may take every day
and drink a little ordinary drink thereupon.

The fourth is A Tincture of Roses, a Cup whereof the Patient must drink, once,
twice, thrice a day far form Meals. It is thus made.

Take Red Rose Leaves dried one ounce: Water, Blood Warm three Pints: spirit of
Sulphur or Vitriol one dram and an half: infuse them six hours: To the stramed
Liquor ad white Sugar half a pound: keep it in a Glass for Use

The foresaid Remedies or some of them must be used in Course one after
another, least Nature be too much accustomed to one, and so the less altered
thereby,

When the Disease is Cured, the Patient must be cautious for a time least new
matter being collected a Relapse should happen. The Prevention therefore
hereof, will chiefly consist in a state or periodical Purgation, to be iterated
once or twice every month; which may fitly be done by this Magisterial Syrup
following, which will do more good by altering and strengthening the Liver than
by purging.

Take Juyces newly pressed and cleared by settling, out of Endive, Cichory,
Egrimony, Fumitory, Hopps, and Bugloss three pints: Juice of Apples that are
Odoriferous, as Permaines and Pipins, two pints, Senna six drams: Epithimum two
ounces: Rhubarb elect, and Agarick newly trochiscated of each one ounce: Mace
and Cloves of each half a dram: Infuse and Boil all according to Art, till
there remain fifteen ounces of the Liquor, wherein dissolve of white Sugar the
same Quantity and make a Syrap perfectly boiled. Of with let the Patient take
two ounces once or twice in a month, with Chick or Veal Broth, qualified with
the Leaves of Borrage and Cetrach and Agrimony.

Allo spring and fal'twil be good to open a Vein.

Furthermore, to temper the fervency of the Liver, a Bath of Lukewarm Water
will be good, which must be frequently repeated, the whole Summer through: or
for more Convenience a Tub to sit in may suffice.

To the same intent Conserve of Bramble-Rose or Eglantine Rose-Berries will be
good, or an Electuary of the same virtue, and Lozenges made of the Species
Diatrion Santalon, being frequently used.

Hereunto must be added a good Diet of Meats affording good Juice and easily
digested, as Partridges, Capons, Chickens and Pullets; especially broths and
the Juyces of flesh pressed forth, and such like, all which must be taken in no
great Quantity, that they may be more easily digested.

The End of the Sixteenth Book.
THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. Of FEVERS.
The PREFACE.
WE find by many Authors great Volumns written touching the Theory and Cure of
Fevers; in which, innumerable Controversies, and difficult Disputations are
handled. Which as they are in the Schools very useful, yea, and necessary; so
are they tedious to most Physicians, who having left the Universities, do give
themselves unto the Practice of Physic: For they desire a short and clear
Explication of the Theory of Diseases, which may suffice to declare their
Nature, Causes, and Signs, both Diagnostick and Prognostic, with their right
Method of Curing, which is the only thing they regard. It being my endeavor in
this whole Work to satisfy their Desires, I have banished all Controversies,
briefly expounding the decision of Questions only which seem most nicessary for
a Practitioner. This we have likewise done in our Doctrine of Fevers; and
letting pass all tedious Controversies, which are continually handled in the
Schools, usque ad Nauseam; we have declared only such things as principally
regard Practice. And this Book for better Methods sake, I have distributed into
three Sections, following that General Division of Fevers, into Simple,
Putrid, and Pestilential. So that the first Section of this Book shall treat of
Simple Fevers: The second of Putrid: And the third of Pestilential.

SECT. I. Of Simple Fevers.
The PREFACE.
THat which we call a Simple Fever, is subdivided into three sorts; of which,
one is called Ephemera; another Synochus simplex, or Imputris; and another
Hectica. And therefore we shall divide this Section into three Chapters: The
first of Febris Ephemera: The second of Synochus simplex: The third of Febris
Hectica. Wherein we shall declare their Nature and Cure.

Chap. 1. Of the Fever Ephemera.
THis Fever is commonly bred of external Causes, and of vehement Motions of
Body and Mind, as Anger, Cares, Labor Pain, Watching, and Fasting, by which the
Spirits are inflamed; also by Sleep and Sorrow, by which the hot Humors and
Vapors are kept within the Body. Also by being heated with the Sun, Fire, or
Stove, by which means, hot air being drawn in with the Breath, and received by
the Pores of the Body, it does inflame the Spirits. Also by Surfeiting,
Drunkenness, and especially by over large taking in of Meats and Drinks, that
are of an hot Nature, as Peppered Meats, and stroog Wines, by which more Vapors
are raised than can exhale. Also by Retention of hot Excrements, and that not
only of the Dung and Urine, but especially of those Sooty Vapors which are wont
to pass through the Pores of the Skin, if those Pores be shut up with cold, an
Alluminous Bath, and such like Causes.

Also this Ephemera Fever is bred of internal Causes, as from a Bubo, and
other Swellings of the Thighs or Arms, especially whiles they break; from an
hot fiery Swelling of the Extremities of the Body, when hot Matter shut up
together in one certain place, does offend the Heart, not by its putrefaction,
but heat alone. Also by some small Obstruction of the Vessels, by which means
the sooty exhalations being retained do cause a Fever; as is wont to happen in
Distillations, when they arise in hot Natures, and a thick habit of Body.

This Fever is known, both when some of the Causes specified has gone before;
and also by a swift, frequent, and great Pulse; breathing frequent and great,
Headache and Heat; there is neither cold nor shaking, no sense of weariness, nor
want of Appetite. Yet may there be sometimes a shivering or shaking fit, namely,
when the Fever is occasioned by the heat of the Sun, or by cold. Feeling the
Patients Hand we find a mild and gentle heat; the Urine is concoct, like that
of one in health, unless by some Obstruction or Crudity it be changed. It is
commonly terminated in the space of twenty four hours, with an easy gentle
Sweat; yet it reaches sometimes unto the third day, which if it pass it
degenerates into a simple Synochus, a Putrid, or an Hectic Fever.

For the Cure of this Fever, the Ancients did chiefly use a bath of lukewarm
Water, which they did also frequently use in their Health. But seeing it is in
these times out of use, neither is it in practice in the Cure of these Fevers.
Neither is it counted safe, in regard of a Plethorick or Cacochymical
Constitution of Body, Putrefaction, or flux of Rheum, which may be in such
bodies, or may be feared will happen.

But this Fever is better cured by a Cooling and Moistening Diet; as Barley
Cream, Cooling Broths, Small Drink and Sugar, common Ptisan Drink, or Fountain
Water with Syrup of Lemmons, Maidenhair mixed there with.

But the Cure admits some variation, according to the Nature of the Cause. So
if it spring from the Heat of the Sun or Air, a cooling Diet is good, and the
Patient must be conveyed into a cool lodging; and Vinegar of Roses must be
applied to his Forehead, to the Temples and former part of the Head it self, if
there be pain, as commonly there is when the Fever comes from the heat of the
Sun.

If it come from being in the Cold, especially if the Patient being hot with
Exercise went presently into the Cold, Sweat must be provoked, especially
toward the end of the Fit.

If it come from the Skins thickness and closing up of the pores, the same Cure
must be used; and to both these Causes, small Wine very well allaied with Water
may be convenient, because it opens the pores, and helps to sweat.

If the Disease was caused by Labor, the Patient must rest and be nourished
more liberally with Meat of easy Digestion. If from weariness, the Patient
must be artificially rubbed. Tranquillity of mind, and cheerfulness, must be
opposed to Anger; and Choler must be tempered with Meat and Drink of a cooling
Nature. To Sadness, Recreation of the Mind is a Remedy, and the use of thin
small Wine. If the Fever was caused by watching, let the Patient sleep by
application of things convenient: If by fasting, let the Patient eat cooling
Meats of good Juice: If by over eating or drinking, let the Patient abstain
from Meat and Drink, not omitting such things as strengthen the Stomach, both
inwardly given, and outwardly applied: also with an Emollient and Laxative
Clyster, part of the Crudities is to be taken away. If Putrefaction be feared,
Vomit may be procured, or a Purge given. If the Fever arise of Obstructions,
we must consider whether the Patient be Plethorick or Cacochymical, viz.
Whether the whole Mass of blood be over great, or only some bad Humors abound in
the blood. If the Patient be too full of blood, blood-letting must be advised;
if evil Humors only abound, a Purge must be prescribed. And if the Obstruction
will not easily be removed, this Fever changes into some of the other sorts of
Fevers, whose Cures shall be described in their proper places.

Chap. 2. Of the Fever Synochus Simplex.
THe Causes of the Fever Ephemera aforesaid, if they light upon a Plethorick
Body, and thick skinned, they cause the Fever Synochus Simplex. Yet may this
Fever arise only from abundance of Blood stuffing the Veins, and yielding many
Vapors more than can breath through the pores of the Skin.

This Fever is known by a thick and swelling habit of Body, the color of the
Body and Face is ruddy; the Head is pained with a stretching or distending kind
of pain; the Patient is sleepy, has a beating in the Temples, is unquiet, has
a straitness in the Chest with difficulty of breathing; the Pulse is great,
even, frequent, full; the Veins strut with blood, whence a stretching kind of
weariness does proceed; the Urine is thick, little differing in color from a
Natural Urine, only somewhat redder; the heat is to ones hand mild, tempered
with a steamy Vapor; the Fever holds an even progress, for either it holds one
and the same tenor, or it lessens by degrees, or it increases equally, never
remitting or ceasing. Whence there are reckoned three Differences of this
Fever: For that which continually increases, is called Epacmastica; That
which continually decreaseth, is called Paracmastica; That which keeps one and
the same tenor, is called Homotonos, or Acmastica. It lasts til the fourth day,
and sometimes til the seventh; and then it is terminated by bleeding, or
sweating; and if it be further prolonged, it degenerates into Synochus Putrida.

The Cure of this Fever is performed, by blood-letting, by cooling, and by
opening the pores of the Skin. Galen in the ninth Book of his Method, Chap. 4.
cures this Fever by two Remedies only; viz. Letting of Blood til the Patient
faint away; and by giving a great quantity of Water to the Patient to drink.

Blood-letting is absolutely necessary in this Disease, because it is bred by
fullness of blood; and a Vein must presently be opened at what hour soever the
Physician is called, unless the Patients Stomach be full of Meat, the digestion
whereof must be expected for certain hours. And although Blood must be
plentifully drawn, and Galen reports in the forecited place, That he cured the
most of such as had this Fever, suddenly, by letting them bleed til they
fainted away; which bleeding was attended by a looseness, vomiting of Choler,
and plentiful Sweat. Yet in these days of ours, that same large blood-letting
is out of date; which is not without danger, seeing Galen himself relates in
his Book of Curing by Phlebotomy, Chap. 12. That it besel three Physicians,
while they were practicing this large Blood-letting* that instead of fainting
away, their Patients died outright. It is better therefore at several times to
take away so much blood, as the Nature of the Disease does necessarily require.

Before Blood-letting, if the Patient be Costive, or the Guts abound with
Crudities, an Emollient and Laxative Clyster must be given.

As for the point of cold Water, Galen orders it to be given in so great
quantity, that the Patient grow pale, tremble, and be cold all over; and so he
says, it extinguisheth the fiery heat, it strengthens the solid parts, and
drives out unprofitable Humors by stool, by urine, and by sweat. But he says
there must be many Cautions in the use thereof; viz. That it be given in the
Vigor of the Fever, the signs of Concoction appearing; that the Patient have
been used to drink cold Water in time of health, have strong bowels, and full
of juice, a fleshy and wel-set Body; have a constant and vigorous strength; be
not full of thick and clammy Humors, have no tumor in any bowel, nor stomach,
throat, or sinews weak. Otherwise, if these conditions be wanting, it is to be
feared lest the Patient fall into shortness of breath, Dropsy, Trembling,
Convulsion, Lethargy, or some other grievous Disease. This kind of Medicine is
likewise grown out of date in our times, seeing it is hard to observe all those
conditions, and so many dangers attend the undue use thereof. For it is better
to use other more safe Medicines which cool the whole Body, and the Blood; as
Juleps, and opening Emulsions, Epithems, Liniments, and a Diet altogether
cooling. Juleps are made of the Decoction of Barley, or Sorrel, or Cichory; or
with Water of Cichory, Endive, Sorrel, Lettice, adding Syrup of Juice of
Cichory, Lemmons, Pomegranates, Vinegar, etc. Whereunto also for the greater
cooling and opening, may be added some drops of Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur.
If the distilled Waters seem too crude or raw, let them boil with a little
Species Triasantalon, or Diamargaritum frigidum.

Emulsions may be made after this manner:

Take sweet Almonds blanched and steeped in Rose Water, one ounce: the four
greater cool Seeds, and Seeds of white Poppy, of each two drams. Beat them in a
Marble Mortar, pouring on by little and little, a pint and an half of Barley
Water. In the strained Liquor dissolve Sugar of Roses three ounces. Make an
Emulsion of Almond Milk for three Doses. Which will be convement, and is to be
preferred before Juleps, if there be want of Rest.

Epithems to be laid upon the Region of the Heart and Liver may be thus made:

Take Water of Roses, Bugloss, and Lettice, of each three ounces: Vinegar of
Roses one ounce: Powder of the Electuary Diamargaritum frigidum one dram and an
half: Camphire six grains. Make an Epithem, lay it upon the Region of the Heart.

Take Water of Endive, Cichory, Sorrel, of each four ounces: Vinegar of Roses
an ounce and an half: the three Sanders two drams and an half. Make an Epithem
for the Region of the Liver.

A cooling Ointment may be anointed upon the Liver and Loins, of Vinegar of
Roses, Vnguentum Rosatum, Vnguentum Refrigerans Galeni, or Ceratum Santalinum,
washed in Vinegar, tempered with Water.

If the Disease seem to lengthen, after bleeding we must purge, lest the
wheyish and Chollerick Excrements putrefie, and thereby a putrid Fever arise.
But we must use such Medicines as purge without heating and agitation of
Humors, as Cassia, Manna, Syrup of Roses, Tamarinds, Catholicon, and such like.

Ad hereunto a convenient Diet, viz. Cooling, moistening, and thin, of Broths
made with cooling Herbs, Prunes, and sharp Apples boiled, and Panadaes.

Let the Patients Drink be, a Decoction of Barley, Water boiled, and Water with
Bread boiled in it, or mixed with Syrups of Maidenhair, or of Pomegranates.

Chap. 3. Of an Hectic Fever.
AN Hectic Fever occupies the solid Parts of the Body, which constitute the
Habit thereof, and are commonly called Spermatical, or fleshy; in regard of
which parts it is more fixed and rooted than other Fevers which are in the
Spirits, or Humors. For which cause it is also termed Habitual, because it is
become Habitual, and can hardly be removed from its subject.

There are many Divisions of this Fever. For first of all, there is a Primary
Hectic, which begins of it self; and another Secondary, which follows other
Fevers. Secondly, an Hectic Fever is simple and solitary, or joined with a
putrid Fever. Thirdly, some Hecticks begin at the Heart; others from other
Parts, as the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Womb, and other Parts inflamed,
ulcerated, corrupted, or possessed with some other grievous Disease. And this
Fever though it have its habitual seat in the Heart, and the whole Body; yet is
it commonly termed Symptomatical, because of its first Original which it has
from other parts.

Galen makes three Degrees of an Hectic Fever. The first is the very
beginning of an Hectic; in which the Body is hardly extenuated; yet the moist
Humidity of the Body is inflamed, consumes, and dries. The second comprehends
the Augment, and therein is an evident extenuation of the Body, the fleshy and
fat substance of the Body perishing. The third contains the state of the
Disease, and its last age; for it never comes to a declination, because
therein, viz. in that degree it is incurable: for then the fibrous and
membranous substance of the Body is consumed, and the whole Body is so
extenuated, that the Face of the Patient is like that described by Hippocrates,
nothing but skin and bone. This last Degree is called Marasmus, or rather
Hectica Marasmodes; because in a true Marasmus, cold is joined with dryness.

The Causes of an Hectic Fever are divided into an Internal, and External. To
the External are referred, what ever Causes may occasion any of the other
Fevers, if the Action of Heating be continual and vehement, or the Patients
Body be apt to entertain this kind of Fever. Such are, the heat of the Sun, or
of the Fire, vehement Exercise, Meats and Drinks that are heating, immoderate
Evacuations, as in a Looseness and bloody flux, vehement passions of Mind; and
finally, fasting in a Chollerick Body that is hot and dry of Constitution;
seeing Galen affirms, that those Physicians that were wont to enjoin their
Patients to fast three days together, did bring Chollerick Constitutions by
that means into burning and hectic Fevers.

The Internal Causes are, burning and pestilential Fevers, which do speedily
consume the moisture of the Heart; also a long slack Fever. Also some peculiar
Disease of any of the bowels, as an Inflammation or Ulcer; or putrefaction of
some Humor contained therein; or finally, the corruption of the Member it self,
which are wont to cause a lingering Fever, and an hectic.

Of these Infirmities peculiarly possessing some certain Members of the Body,
and causing an Hectic, we have Examples manifest enough. For, as for what
concerns Inslamations, Galen says he saw a woman that by reason of an
Inflammation in her Midrif, fell into an Hectic Fever. And we daily observe in
the Consumption of the Lungs, or Phthisis, a complicated Hectic Fever. The
putrefaction of Humors contained in some bowel, falls out in great obstructions,
or cold swellings. The corruption of some Member is often seen in the Lungs;
sometimes in the Liver, in such men as are given to Wine, and who use much hot
Spices; for a certain filthy corrupt blood is bred in their Liver, by which the
substance thereof is corupted. Fernelius says, he sometimes met with this kind
of Fever, and that it is a sign thereof, when the Patients extremely covet
Wine; but abominate all kind of Flesh.

A Simple Hectic Fever is known, because it is continual, without any ^its,
allwaies alike, neither increasing nor decreasing, save that it is somewhat
augmented, an hour two or three after Meat. The heat under the short Ribs, is
at first laying on the hand mild, afterward sharp, biting and dry. The Pulse,
is little, frequent and quick; the sick perceive not any Fever, they are lazy,
and loath to stir, and when they stir it is with Pain, because their strength
is in a languishing condition. Their arteries are hotter than the Parts
circumjacent, which may be preceived by the touch after the Patient has washed
in cold Water. The Urin is like that of one in health both in point of color
and sediment. In the progress of the Disease Oily substance Swims on the top,
and the sediment is like to Meal, which is sign that the substance of the Body
does melt,

More particularly, we may know not only the several degrees of an hectic, but
foresee it before it comes after this manner.

An hectic Fever at hand, is known, if the causes have preceded; viz. if
there have been a burning Fever, in a body naturally hot, dry, and of a thin
contexture, in an hot season of weather, it is to be Feared, the Patient will
fall into an hectic, and such remedies as may prevent the same are to be used.

The first degree of an Hectic Fever if it be Joined with a putrid Fever, is
very hardly known: if it be alone, not very easily. In the first day, there are
all the signs of Febris Ephemera. In the second, the dryness is augmented, not
the heat. On the third day it repeats not, it is not evidently augmented nor
diminished. And at length one hour or two after Meat, the Heat seems somewhat
increased.

In the second degree, the Patient perceives no Feaverishness, only some
alterations after Meals. There is a manifest dryness, a smaller and swifter
Pulse, with a certain hardness.

The signs of the third degree are most manifest; the Eyes are hollow, dry and
have dry excrements in them, the bones evidently stick out, the lively color
of the Face is extinguished: the whole Skin is dry, the Midrif vehemently
contracted, so that the Patients seem to have no Guts. Their Pulse is perceived
under the stomach, in all extenuated persons.

And because a putrid Fever is many times coupled with an Hectic, they are
both exactly to be distinguished, because it is of great moment in regard of
the Cure, which in this case is very much differing. Now this coupling may be
known by Comparing the signs of an Hectic propounded, with the signs of a
putrid Fever, which shall be hereafter described in their proper place.

The first degree of an Hectic Fever is easily Cured, the third is incurable;
the second is of a middle Nature, and look how much the nearer it approaches to
the first or third by so much is it easier or harder to be Cured. An Hectic
Fever happens most commonly from the eighteenth year to the thirty five, for
in that Age the Heat is most intense, and soonest consumes the Body. But they
who before this Age or a little after are taken with an Hectic Fever, do more
easily escape and are sometimes Cured perfectly; or by a palliative Cure their
life is protracted a long time, especially if they be Women.

For the Cure of this Disease, we must first consider whether it depend upon
any Diseaseof some particular Part or not: for then the Cure must be directed
to that Disease: as also if it be single or combined or complicated with a
putrid Fever. And in this case the putrid Fever is first to be Cured by
Bleeding, Purging, and by Opening Medicaments and such as hinder putrefaction:
the Hectic Fever in the mean while not being neglected. But if the Hectic
Fever be single and alone the Cure must be effected only with cooling,
moistening and restaurative things; the matter of must be taken from Diet and
Medicine.

Diet, here, as in all Chronick Diseases, can do much; nay in this Disease it
can do more than all Medicines. Therefore the Patients Diet must be by the
Physician exactly ordered, viz. That it may be directed so as to cool and
moisten the whole Body. If therefore the Air where the Patient is, be moderately
cold or temperate, let him use the same; if not, let it be corrected, so as
that it may cline to cold and moist. For this Reason Galen in the 10. of his
Method Chap. 8. in the Summer when the Air is hot, orders the sick to abide in
a Room under the Ground, that is very cold and blown through with the Wind,
open toward the North. By which Remedy alone, we have seen a man extremely
consumed, restored within a month. Again the heat of the Air in the Patients
Chamber must be altered, by cold Water being powered out of one vessel into
another, by the very noise whereof Sleepis caused; also by moistening the
Pavement often with cold Water Sprinkled thereupon, or by cooling Herbs,
oftentimes fresh strowed therein: and by forbidding any number of people to
come in, which among other things, does likewise heat the Chamber. And Galen
gives order that when the Air is coldest it should be received by the sick
namly by drawing it in by the mouth, because it exceedingly cools the heat of
the heart; but it is not good for the Body of the sick, least it stop the pores
of the Skin and hinder the breathing forth of excrements. But Galen affirms
that the breathing in of the cool Air does the Patients more good, than they
can receive hurt, by the stopping of their pores, if that should happen: but
that may be hindered by warm clothing of the Body. Yet it is to be observed,
that if the Hectic Fever ari^e from an Ulcer in the Lungs; that the cold Air
is not good in that respect, but rather temperate, a little inclining to heat,
and dry. For which Cause Galen sent those that had consumptions of their Lungs
to the Mount Tabias where the Air was more dry than ordinary.

The Meats of the Patient must be cooling and moistening and quickly
nourishing, as Chicken-Broaths and Broaths of Hens, Capons, Veal, Kid, Wether
Mutton; Yolks of Eggs, with French Barley, Lettice, Purselane, Endive, Borrage,
Sorrel; The flesh of Calves, Kidds, Piggs, Pheasants, Partriches, Young Hares
and such like. Panadaes, Barley Cream, Water Gruel, Rice-Pottage, with Sugar and
a few Almonds or rather with the greater cooling Seeds. Boiled Meats are fitter
than Roasted which are sooner Inflamed and turned to Choler; the boiled do
more moisten. But if the Patient be more delighted with Roast-Meats; they must
be very moderately Roasted, and tempered afterward with Juice of Lemmons,
Citrons, Orenges, or of unripe Grapes, without Salt.

Fishes may be eaten, because they cool and moisten but such as are taken out
of stony places are to be preferred, and such as have a tender friable flesh,
haunting the Sea or Pure Waters.

Among fruits, Apples are commended because they breed cold Blood. also Pears
are convenient, Damask Prunes, and French Prunes boiled in Sugar; also Raisons
cleansed, which being prepared after this following manner, do nourish the body
without heating.

Take Raisons of the Sun cleansed one Pound: Let them be tempered in endive,
bugloss and Rose Water and very diligently washed, that the Laxative power may
be taken away. Afterward let them be lightly boiled in the same Waters, adding
a little Sugar, wherewith let them be preserved for use: let the Patients take
of them in the mornings and allwaies after Meat.

And because Persons that are Hectical, have the Feverish heat fixed in the
solid Parts of their bodies, by which the Nutriment is easily and suddenly
consumed and dis^ipated: therefore Practitioners are wont to prescribe unto
them, Meats solid and of a clammy substance, as the Feet of Living Creatures,
The flesh of Snails, Crabbs, Tortoises, and of Froggs. For seeing these sorts,
of flesh are moist and clammy they easily adhere unto such Parts of the body as
want nourishments neither are they easily consumed by the Feverish heat: and
so they hinder the drying up of the solid Parts of the body. Yet some do reject
these Meats, because hard of digestion and trouble^om to the stomach. But this
difference is thus reconciled. In the beginning of an Hectic, while the
digestive faculty is yet strong, these thick and clammy nutriments are
convenient: but in a confirmed Hectic they are not to be given because hard to
digest. Add hereunto, that they may be so prepared and qualified, as that they
may easily be digested; as by being boiled to a gelly, or giving only what is
strained out of them being beaten into a mash. Among other things the land
Tortoises are mightily praised for an Hectic, not only for a single Hectic,
but when Joined with a Consumption; and they are prepared diverse ways. For
either they are boiled in Water till they are dissolved then casting away the
shells, the flesh is separated from the bones and boiled again with Cichory,
Sorrel, Borrage, French barley, and prunes in a single Hectic: but in an
Hectic of the Lungs it is Boiled with Bramble Leaves, Purslain, and Plantan.
Let the Patient drink the broth and eat the Flesh twenty days together. Or
the Juice is pressed out of the Flesh being beaten. Or little Loaves are made
of the Flesh of the Tortoises boiled in Barley Water, with sweet Almonds, pine
kernells, the cooling Seeds and Sugar. Which are lightly baked in an Oven and
are given the Patient at Dinner and Supper. They may be thus made.

Take of the Flesh of Land-Tortoise Boiled in Barly-Water four ounces: sweet
Almonds steeped in Rose Water six ounces: Pine-Kernells so steeped two ounces,
of the four greater cool Seeds, of each one ounce: Annis Seed not Poudered, but
lightly baked in an Oven one dram and an half: Cinnamon two drams: Sugar
dissolved in Rose Water, to the Quantity of all the rest. Make thereof little
Morsells.

Instead of Tortorises the Flesh of a Capon is used and of a Partridg, and
March-Pane is made thereof, good to restore Hectic Persons, after this Manner.

Take Pulpe of a Capon and Boiled Partridg of each three ounces, sweet Almonds
steaped in Rose Water four ounces: Pine-Kernells one ounce and an half: Seeds
of white Poppy two drams: Gum Arabickand Traganth of each one dram and an half:
Pearled Sugar Cakes two ounces: with a little Rose Water make a March-pane, and
gild it with Gold.

To such as have weak stomachs, Gellies, broaths, and Restorative stilled
Waters are given. A Gelly may be made after this Manner.

Take a choice Capon, a Knuckle of Veal, or a Wethers Thigh, two Calves Feet,
or six Wethers Feet. Boil all in fountan Water, till it be ^ufficiently wasted.
Strain and squeese out the Juice and Broth and take off the Fat. In the
strained Liquor dissolve a pound of white Sugar, six whites of Eggs, a little
saffron or Cinnamon. Stir them together let them Boil lightly, and strain them
through an Hippocras bag twice or thrice. At length put it into Porrengers, or
other Vessels in which it will become a Gelly. If the taste of Saffron or
Cinnamon be displeasing, or you desire to have your Gelly more cooling, add
instead thereof the Juice of a Lemmon, or of one Citron.

Restorative Broths may be made diverse ways; this is far the best of all,
which follows:

Take a well fleshed Capon; pull, draw, and cut him in pieces, and take away
the fat and skin: add, if you please, some Veal, or Weather Mutton cut into
bits, and freed from the Fat. Put them into a stone Vessel well glazed; in
which, about the middle, there must be a grate of Wood, or other materials, on
which the pieces aforesaid must be so laid that they may not come at the
bottom. Then cover the Pipkin with its cover, and close it up well with paste,
and let it stand in boiling Balneo Mariae five hours. There will drop into the
bottom a clear transparent Liquor; of which three of four spoonfuls, may be
given in Broth, or by it self, three or four times in a day.

Such Distillations of Flesh by Descent, are very convenient for Hectical
Persons; but those that are made by Ascent, although they refresh the Spirits,
yet do they very little nourish; neither do they restore the solid substance of
the Body.

Let the Patients Drink be, Barley Water, either by it self, or with Syrup of
Vinegar, or Pomegranates mingled therewith, or Water in which a piece of Bread
has been boiled, sweetened with a little Sugar. But if the Patients Stomach be
very weak, weak Wine well allaied with Water may be allowed, which helps the
concoction and distribution of Nourishment. Galen, Meth. 10. Chap. 5, 6. gives
cold Water, with which he boasts he had saved many from the Marasmus. Howbeit,
great Caution is to be used in the giving thereof; for when the Body is very
much pined away, it is to be seared lest the small heat of the Patient should be
wholly extinguished. And therefore it is only good when an Hectic is feared,
or in the beginning thereof, and to such as are accustomed thereunto, and while
the Body is yet sufficiently full of blood.

Motion of the Body is not good, but the Patient must be enjoined to rest;
howbeit before Meat, if strength will bear it, some light exercise will be good;
or instead thereof, a few light frictions or rubbings may serve turn,
especially presently after sleep, beginning at the inferior parts of the Body;
for they provoke the Humors outward. And the Patient must be rubbed no longer
than til a light redness begin to appear upon the Skin; for to rub longer would
dry the Body. Carnal Embracements must be above al things avoided, which do
very much consume the substance of the Body.

Let the Patient sleep, neither very long, nor very little. For long sleep
increases the heat of the Bowels, by the retiring of the Natural warmth
inwards: too short sleep dries the body more. But there is less inconvenience
from sleeping a little over largely, than too scantily, because sleep does
exceedingly moisten, which in this Fever is very much to be desired. Let the
Patient sleep in a soft bed, and that a Flock-bed, not a Feather-bed, and large
enough. Let the Patients Linen be often changed, which must be sprinkled with
Rose Water before they be put on.

If there be Costiveness, the Belly must be provoked with a Suppository, or a
Clyster of Chicken Broth, with Barley, Mallows, and Violet Leaves boiled in it;
adding Cassia, Honey of Roses, Butter, and the Yolks of Eggs.

Finally, The Mind must be preserved in peace and cheerfulness, avoiding
vehement Perturbations, as Anger, Sadness, Fear.

As for point of Medicaments fit for Hectic Persons, they are Internal or
External. Among Internal, in the first place Purgers must be considered; and
because addition is more necessary than detraction in this Disease, Purgers can
hardly be convenient, unless a putrid Fever be joined with the Hectic. Yet if
the first Region of the Body seem filled with Excrements, because of Crudities
arising from a weak Stomach, Purgation may safely be used with Cassia, Manna,
or Syrup of Roses. Nay verily, if strength be not deficient, the Infusion of
Rhubarb may be given, with a Decoction of Prunes, Tamarinds, Myrobalans,
Bugloss, and Violets.

But Altering Medicines may be reduced into the form of Juleps, Broths, and
Emulsions, after this manner:

Take Waters of Endive, Lettice, Sorrel, of each four ounces: Syrup of Violets,
Water Lillies, Apples, of each one ounce. Mix all into a Julep for three Doses,
to be taken at several times in one day, and to be continued for diverse days
together. Or,

Take Whole Barley one pugil: Leaves of Endive, Cichory, Lettice, Pimpernel, of
each one handful: Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Violets, and Water Lillies, of
each one Pugil: Damask Prunes three pair: Boil all to a pint and an half. In
the strained Liquor, dissolve simple Syrup of Cichory, and of Water Lillies, of
each two ounces. Make of all a Julep for four Doses.

Of the same Simples with a Chicken or a Pullet, may be made a Broth for the
same use. Or,

Take Roots of China one dram and an half: Entire Barley two pugils: the four
greater cool Seeds half an ounce. Beat all together, and therewith fill the
Belly of a Capon, or young Pullet, and make Broth; to which add Sugar of Roses
half an ounce. Let the Patient take of this broth a long time together. It
restores flesh and fatness.

Take sweet Almonds blanched and infused in cold Water one ounce: the four
greater cool Seeds, and of white Poppy seeds, of each one dram. Beat all
together in a marble mortar, pouring on by little and little a pint of barley
Water. In the strained Liquor dissolve Sugar Cakes made (...) Pearl four
ounces. Make hereof an Almond Milk for three Doses.

If we be minded more powerfully to cool, we must add to every Dose of the
Julep or Emul^^^^ two scruples or one dram of Sal prunella.

In the use of Refrigerating things, this is to be observed, That we use not
the more (...) of a sudden, or frequently; for they might extinguish a weak
heat. But it is better to (...) and little, than suddenly. And Moisteners are
always safer than Coolers, because they exerc^^^ (...) Operations slowly.

While the foresaid Remedies are using, we must be careful to strengthen the
Bowels, by a c^^^^nient Opiate, which may be made after this manner:

Take Conserve of the flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, and Violets, of each one
ounce: Conserve of the flowers of Water-lilly half an ounce: Powder of the
Electuary Diamargaritum frigidum four scruples: Shavings of Ivory, Bones found
in hearts of Stags, of each half a dram: Pearls prepared, and Coral prepared,
of each one scruple: three Leaves of Beaten Gold: With Syrup of Apples, make of
all an Electuary.

In extreme consumption of the Flesh, nourishing Clysters are frequently to be
injected, of the Broth of a Chicken, or Weathers Head, with Sugar and the Yolks
of Eggs. But their Quantity must be small, or else compressing the Guts, they
will provoke the Expulsive Faculty to drive them out.

But among other Medicines most convenient for Hectical Persons, Milk is a
principal one, it being endued with all the qualities which can desired in this
Disease, namely, of cooling and mostening; it nourishes much, and is easily
distributed into all parts of the Body. In the use whereof, the same Cautions
must be observed, which were set down in the Cure of a Consumption.

Among External Remedies, a Bath of fresh Water is principal; for it powerfully
cools and moistens, and relaxeth the external Parts that they may more readily
receive Nourishment. Among the Ancients the use of Baths was most frequent, and
there were four parts of the bathing place: In the first somewhat warm, they put
off their Clothes: In the second there was a bathing Vessel of hot Water: In
the third a bathing Vessel of cold Water: In the fourth the Sweatiness and
Moisture was dried off. Galen in 10. Meth. Chap. 19. does thus moderate the use
of these parts of the Bath; That the Patients should be brought into the first
part of the Bath, which was heated with the vapor of the bath, that the pores
of their bodies might be opened; then being anointed with fresh sweet Oil, they
were to be plunged in the hot Water to moisten their bodies; and then they were
of a sudden to be thrown into the cold Water, quickly to be taken out again,
and to be dried and anointed with Oil, that the pores being closed, the
moisture may be received from the hot bath, might be retained. But inasmuch as
the Industrious Diligence of the Ancients in the use of bathing, is long since
out of use; and our Practitioners have likewise left this Method of bathing
Hectical persons, which they judge unsafe, seeing it is to be feared, lest by
the sudden receiving of the cold Water, the Patients Body should be hurt, and
the Patient not be able to endure the sudden sense of contrary qualities. So
that our Practitioners do more advisedly, and more compendiously, whiles they
conveigh the Patients into a bath of Water moderately hot, in the morning,
after a stool procured by Nature, or by Art, and two or three hours after they
have eaten some broth, or milk, or the Yolks of Eggs; wherein they abide
solong, till it grow lukewarm of it self, and at last cold. For seeing Galen
conceives the use of a cold has after an hot to be so necessary, that without
it the hot bath does no good: the use of a cold bath is supplied, if the
Patients stay so long in the bath til of it self it grow lukewarm, and cold.
But this Caution is to be observed, That whereas a three-sold quality may be
had in the same bath, the Patient must abide in the hot a little while, in the
lukewarm longer, in the cold least of al.

And although the Ancients were wont to make their baths of simple Water; yet
is it good to make them more moistening by boiling therein Emollient and
moistening Herbs, as Mallows, Marth-mal-lows, Violet Leaves, etc. or with
barley and beaten Almonds, especially in the Summer, because a bath of
Decoction of Herbs is sooner corrupted. After bathing, the sick is softly to be
wiped with hot Clothes: then to be anointed with Oil of Violets, sweet Almonds,
with fresh Butter; and after some time of rest, let the Patient eat some broth,
or other food.

A bath of Water and Oil, is exceedingly cried up by Zacutus Lusitanus, in the
35. Observation of his third Book of wonderful Cures; where with he says a
young woman was cured, when a bath of simple Water and Goats Milk could not
help. The reason of which great good, he renders to be this; Because bath made
of fresh Water, with store of Oil in it, does soften the distended stiff parts,
does moisten the dry and withered: and by opening the pores obstructed, and
through dryness contracted, it draws the Nourishment to the outmost, and most
distant parts of the body.

When the Patient cannot use baths, apply an Epithem to the Heart and Liver, in
this manner compounded.

Take Waters of Roses, Water Lillies, and Purslain, of each three ounces: Juice
of Pome-Granates an ounce: Powder of Diamargaritum frigidum two drams: Bones
out of the Stags Heart one scruple: Camphire four grains: Make an Epithem for
the Heart.

Take Waters of Endive, Lettice, Cichory, of each three ounces: Vinegar of
Roses one ounce: the three Sanders, of each two scruples: Burnt Ivory one
scruple. Make an Epithem to be applied to the Liver.

Also the Region of the Liver may be anointed with Ointment of Roses, or
Ceratum Santalinum. But Oils and Unguents must be sparingly used, because they
may sometimes increase the Fever.

Among the Symptoms which are wont to come upon this Disease, the chief is a
Looseness, which is wont to bring the Patients to their death. This is to be
bridled with a Decoction of French-barley toasted, for their ordinary drink,
Syrup of Quinces, dried Roses, Chalybeate Milk, Rice boiled in Milk, and such
like.

SECT. II. Of Putrid Fevers.
The PREFACE.
PVtrid Fevers are divided, into Continual, or intermitting. The continual
Putrid Fevers are generated when a putrid Vapor, or a preternatural Heat,
which arises from putrefied Humors, does perpetually afflict the Heart, and
stirs up therein a continual Heat; from whence likewise is perpetually diffused
a Feverish Heat into the whole body. But the intermitting Fevers are caused,
when the said Vapors are carried unto the Heart, only at certain distances of
time. Continual Fevers are again divided into Essential, and Primary, or
Symptomatical. Those are called Essential and Primary, which spring from a
putrefaction inflamed in the common Veins, and not in any particular part of
the Body. Those are Symptomatical that arise from the putrefaction or
suppuration of some particular part inflamed; out of which part by communion of
the Vessels, a putrid vapor may continually be carried unto the Heart: Such
fevers are seen in the Pleurisy, Inflammation of the Lungs, Inflammation of the
Liver, and in the Inflammation of other Internal Parts. Again, the Primary
continual Fevers are twofold; for some are without any Exacerbation or Fits,
and remission, but continue alike from the beginning to the end, and are called
Sunochi, or Continentes. But others have manifest Exacerbations or fits, and
remissions, and are called Sunecheis, or Continuae, by the name of the kind.
And these again from the difference of their Exacerbations or fits, and
remissions, are divided into three sorts. For some are called continual
Tertians, which have their Exacerbations or fits every third day; others
continual Quotidians that are exasperated every day; others continual Quartans,
that are exasperated every fourth day. The intermitting Fevers or Agues, are
likewise divided into Tertians, Quotidians, and Quartans, according as their
Fits are wont to return every third, every fourth, or every day. There are
other Differences of Fevers likewise, which are either Accidental, or arise
from the Composition of those aforesaid; all which we shall Particularly and
briefly Explain.

Chap. 1. Of Continual Putrid Fevers.
ALthough there are diverse sorts of a continual putrid Fever, yet have I
determined to describe the Cure of them all together, because in a manner the
same Remedies are suitable to all, of which some differ only in more or less,
and are accordingly to be varied; which depends more upon the Judgment of a
Physician, and his Dexterity attained by Practice, than upon particular
Precepts, Yet shall I as near as I can, observe what is peculiar to every sort
of Fever, in its peculiar place.

Fevers Putrid, Continual, and Primary, or Essential, are wont to be bred of
the putrefaction of Humors, which are contained in the Veins and greater
Arteries: And according to the various Nature of putrefying Humors, several
Species do arise.

Synochus Putrida is distinguished with no fits or exacerbations, but its whole
time is taken up as it were with one fit, which reaches from the beginning to
the end of the Disease and of this as of a simple Fever there are made three
differences. The first whereof is, that which continues all alike during from
the beginning to the end. The second is that which increases by degrees. The
third is that which decreases by little and little. The first is named
Acmastica or Homotonos, and it happens when the whole course of the Disease the
manner of putrefaction is one and the same. The second is called Epacmastica,
when more putrefies than is dissipated. The third is called Paracmastica when
less putrefies than is dissipated. Yet allthough these kind of Fevers do
perpetually increase or decrease, or keep the same Tenor: yet does not this
hinder but that they have four times, if they terminate in health; but some
have them longer, others shorter, if they be considered according to the
vehemence of the Symptoms. So that which is called Homotonos, has a very
brief beginning and Augmentation, but a long state. The Epacmastick has a long
augment: the paracmastick a long declination, but the other times do quickly
pass away. Yet we must know, that the times of Putrid Fevers are two ways
considered; either with respect to the Symptoms, or with respect of coction
and crudity; which two in other Fevers do commonly comcide or happen at one
and the same time: But in these continent Fevers called Sunochoi it is not so.
For their times ought not so much to be defined by the increase and decrease of
the Symptoms, as by the signs of Concoction or non Concoctions, which appear
chiefly in the Urines.

Now Galen propounds two sorts of this continent Fever called Synochus: one
springing from Blood putrefying, of which he treates in the second of this
Method Chap. 7. and 9. as also in the 9. of his Method Chap. 3. and 5. another
arising of choler putrefying in the greater vessels, of the kind of burning
Fevers, which he explaines in his second of the Differences of Fevers and the
second of Crises Chap. 6. The first is called Synochus Sanguinea; and the other
Synochus Biliosa. For allthough the whole Ma^s of Humors contained in the Veins
do go under the name of Blood, yet do we acknowledge four Parts thereof, of
which the more temperate is specialy called Blood; the hotter Part Choler; the
rawer and colder, phlegm; and the thicker and more dreggy Melancholy. So then;
if that more temperate Part, which is more especially called Blood, do surmount
the rest in quantity, and the whole Mass putrefy, that Fever is caused which we
term Synochus Sanguinea. But if the thinner and hotter Part of the Blood, which
is of the nature of Yellow Choler, do exceed the rest, and putrefy, that
Fever is caused, which we term Synochus Biliosa.

Synochus Putrida is engendered by the same causes which are wont to produce the
simple Synochus, And so not only the shutting the pores of the Skin, but the
obstruction of the vessels also, by reason of much Blood and thick and cla^my
Humors, is wont to cause this Fever. For seeing by such like obstructions the
Transpiration of Fuliginous Vapors is hindered, putrefaction is bred in the
blood redounding within the Veins.

A continual tertian, which every third day does more afflict the Patient than
ordinary, takes its Rise from bad and Chollerick Blood putrefying in the Vena
Cava. And the Causes thereof are all such things as multiply this Humor in the
Body, as an hot and dry distemper of the Liver, Meats hot and dry, Youthful
Age; fasting or very spare Diet; vehement and frequent exercise; hot and dry
constitution of the Air; over great watchings and such like.

A continual Quotidian (which the Barbarous writers term Latica or lurking,
because it has a certain, hidden and concealed heat) is produced by phlegmatic
Blood putrefying within the Veins; and therefore it has its exacerbations or
fits every day. It is wont to assail phlegmatic bodies, as of Infants and
Children and old men, as also of such as are of a fat and corpulent
constitution given to idleness and cramming of bellvchear, and inhabiting moist
places. This kind of Fever happens but seldom because phlegm is hardly
putrefied.

A continual Quartan, is that which is exasperated every fourth day, being
Caused of Melancholy Blood putrefying in the branches of Vena Cava. And all
things may Cause this Fever, which are apt to breed Melancholy Blood and to
Cause the same to putrefy. Howbeit this kind of Fever is most rarely observed.

The accidental differences of Fevers are taken from their evil Symptoms,
which are wont to be complicated with the Essential, and from them they are
named. Among these are wont to be reckoned Febris Ardens that is the Burning
Fever, Colliquans the ^elter or dissolving Fever; the shivering Fever
Horrisica, Assodes the tumbling, tossing and vomiting Fever; ^lodes the
sweating Fever; Syncopalis the swouning Fever Epiala the Fever which makes
the Patient hot and cold at one and the same time.

Causus or Febris Ardens the burning Fever, is properly that, which is
perpetually accompanied with these two symptoms viz. an ardent burning heat,
and an unquenchable thirst though the Patient drink never so much. Galen. 3.
Epidem. Com. 3. text 34. It is divided by the same Galen in Com. 4. de Vict:
Rat: in acutis text. 13. into a Ligitimate or bastard burning Fever. The
Legitimate or exquisite burning Fever is that, which has the two symptoms
aforesaid, allwaies, and evidently conjoined therewith. The bastard, in which
those symptoms are less vehement, the thirst less Urgent, and the body not so
burning. The Lightimate is Caused by a Chollerick Humor putrefying within the
large Vessels near the heart; the bastard is caused by Choler mingled with
Phlegm or Salt Phlegm putrefying in the Vessels aforesaid. Whence it appears
that a Ligitimate burning Fever is no other, but a continual Tertian Fever,
whose Matter is more sharp and plentiful than ordinary and contained in the
larger Vessels which are near the Heart; whereas the Matter causing a simple
continual Tertian is in Vessels Remoter from the Heart. Again there are two
sorts of an exquisite burning Fever the one from the beginning to the end has
one only accession or fit, which we before named Synochus Biliosa, and it is
likewise called Synochus Ardens; which is caused when the Humor putrefying does
occupy all the Vessels which are most neert the Heart: the other is named Ardens
Periodica and conteines in it self diverse fits or accessions; it is caused by
the same Choler contained in the Vessels near the Heart, but not in all or not
so near as in Synochus Ardens. So that a Continual Tertian, Synochus Ardens,
and Ardens Periodica, do differ one from another, only as the Choler causing
them is more or less sharp, plentiful, and near the Heart.

Febris Colliquans, the Melting Fever is of the kind of burning Fevers, which
in regard of the exceeding heat, does suddenly melt the Fat, Flesh, and
substance of the solid Parts, and sometimes the Blood contained in the Veins,
and dissolve the same, by insensible Transpiration, Sweats, Urines or Stools.
It is wont to be caused by a thin, sharp and Chollerick Matter, which is
vehemently inflamed, and Galen teaches that often times there is adjoined
thereunto a malignant and pestilential Quality. Comment in 3. Epid. Sect. 3.
Sent. 57.

Horrifica Febris, in Greek Phricodes, is that Fever in which the Patient does
often undergo shaking fits, it is caused by a mingled Matter, viz. Partly
Chollerick and Partly Phlegmatic o^ wheyish, which being unequally moved is
wont to excite those Horrors or Shakings; either because the thin sharp and
wheyish Matter, does twitch and nip as it were the sensible and menbranous
Parts; or the inflamed Choler does putrefy and put in motion the crude Humors;
or because Nature does in Vain seek to shake of the crude undigested Humor
whereupon the Heat being driven Back to the Center the Extreme Parts of the
Body are cold; and afterward, when the same blazes out again, they grow hot.

Assades Febris, the Fever so called, is a kind of burning Fever, in which
the sick do tumble and toss and are exceeding unquiet, much oppressed with the
disease, being for the most Part subject to stomach sickness and vomiting.
Because it is wont to arise from the vexation of the Stomach by sharp and
Chollerick Humors, biting the orifice or Coats thereof.

The Fever Elodes, is that in which the Patient prepetually Sweats: and it is
caused by a mighty Putrefaction or Maliginty of Humors, dissolving the
Substance of the Body.

The Fever Syncopalis, is that in which the Patient often Swoones and Faints
away. Avicenna makes two sorts hereof, one of thin sharp and Venomous Choler:
another of much Phlegm, or abundance of crude Humors. The former is called
Syncopalis Minuta, because it arises from a little Quantity of Humor, but thin
and malignant. The latter Avicenna does call Syncopalis Humorosa vel
Repletionalis, because of a great Quantity of crude and Phlegmatic Humors
abounding therein and there is also Joined a weakness of the mouth of the
stomach, by which means e^pecially the sick persons come to Swoon so often.

That Fever is by Galen termed Epiala 2. de diff. Feb. cap. 2. and Lib. de
inaequali intemperie cap. 8. in which at the same time, through the whole Body
in the smallest particles thereof there is felt both cold and heat. For, albeit
one and the same Part cannot be the subject of contrary qualities: yet is that
which has been said of this Fever to be understood of the smallest particles
in respect of sense, but not indeed and in truth. Galen shows that this Fever
is caused two ways; the one is by means or Glassy Phlegm mingled with bitter
Choler and ^o diffused into the whole body. For Choler causes a sense of heat
and the Phlegm a sense of cold. The other is by means of Glassy Phlegm alone, but
partly putrefied and partly void of putrefaction. For, inasmuch as Glassy Phlegm
is extreme cold and clammy, it does not readily putrefy, nor al at once, but
only by peecemeal; so that one portion thereof being putrefied the other
remains unputrefied. That Part of the said phlegm therefore, which is not
putrefied being shed among the sensitive Parts, causes a sense of cold, by
reason of the extreme coldness thereof; and that which is putrefied causes a
sense of heat. And so the whole body at one and the same time feels both cold
and heat. Platerus also has invented a way how this Fever may be bred, viz.
when intermitting Fevers, or Agues, do one fall upon the Neck of another the
same day in the same Patient, so that the cold fit of the latter Ague begins,
ere the hot sit of the former be ended; or else when intermitting Fevers
co^cide with those which are continual, so that the heat of the continual
Fever and the cold of the Intermitting, happen at one and the same time.

There are likewise other accidental differences of continual Fevers, which
because they are wont to be reckoned among the Symptomatick Fevers, they shall
be discussed forthwith in the Description of the said Symptomatick Fevers.

Now although the Cure of Symptomatick Fevers depend upon the Cure of those
Diseases in particular, from whence they arise, yet must we declare their
Nature, least they come to be confounded with Essential or Primary Fevers.

Those therefore are called Symptomatical Fevers, which arise from the
Inflammation and putrefaction of Humors contained in some of the Bowels. Of
which kind are those Fevers which accompany the Pleurisy, Inflammation of the
Lungs, Frenzy, Squinzy, Inflammation of the Liver, and other Inflammations,
Ulcers or Impostumes of the internal Parts.

And it is diligently to be observed, as a thing of great moment in Practice
and by few taken notice of, that al Fevers perpetually which are Joined with
Inflammations of the Parts of the Body, are not Symptomatical; But that some of
them are essential and the foresaid Inflammations, do follow upon them. For it
often falls out that Blood corrupted or filled with evil Humors, after it has
raised a Fever, comes to be agitated by Nature and her as hurtful to her
expelled to the weaker Parts, or to such as are most convenient to receive
them: whereupon an Inflammation is caused in those Parts, which does not cause
the Fever, but is rather a Consequent thereof. So we may often see in the
Course of our Practice, the Patients sick of a continual Fever, for a day or
two before Pain in the side and other Signs of a Pleurisy appears So many on
the third or fourth day fall into a Phrensy; so, al Gouty persons in a manner,
before they are troubled with Pain, swelling and Inflammation of their Joints,
are wont to have a continual Fever for a day or two. So they which have the
Rose or Saint Anthonies Fire, have a Fever sometime, before the swelling break
forth. The same thing appears by the Urine, which in such Inflammations as
these, do show manifest signs of putrefaction in the Veins. For in the
beginning they appear crude and undigested, and in the progress, they show
tokens of concoction daily increasing. Also Blood is often taken away very
corrupt. Which things would not happen if such Fevers were only Symptomatical,
simply depending upon those Inflammations.

And these Fevers whether they be Symptomatical or primary and attended by
Inflammations of the Parts, have their accidental differences. For if the
Inflammation be of Blood, the Fever is called Phlegmonodes: if it be of
Choler, Typhodes. And peculiarly an Erysipelas or Chollerick Inflammation of
the stomach and Guts brings the Fevers called Zipyria, in which the outward
Parts are very cold and the inward Parts burn. For the inward burning does draw
the Blood and spirits co the Part inflamed; whereby the heat is so increased,
that the inward Parts seem to be burned with unquenchable thirst, but the
outward are cold, being destitute of heat and spirit.

Lenta Febris, the flow or Lingering Fevers, is wont also to be reckoned
amongst Symptomatical Fevers, which arises from some hidden obstruction and
putrefaction, sticking so close to some Bowel and so impacted, that the
substance of the Bowel is for the most Part Vitiated. And when a portion of the
putrid Humor is shed into the Veins and mixed with the Blood, it stirrs up a
slow Fever, and so mild, that it troubles the Patient with no grievous
symptom, yea and the Patient is scarce sensible of any Fever. Yet some notes
of putrefaction appear in the Pulse and Urin. And sometimes this Febris Lenta is
bred of the putrefaction and corruption of some of the bowels; because by the
Veins inserted into that Bowel, putrid and hot Vapors do breath unto the Heart.
Such a kind of Fever is often bred in the Consumption of the Lungs, which
degenerates into an Hectic. It is also sometimes caused when the substance of
the Liver or spleen corrupts: or when putrefaction settles upon the Mesentery,
the Caul or the Pancrea, or other Parts; or also sometimes when the Child or
Afterbirth are corrupted in the Womb. And hence not only slow Fevers, but
sometimes also acute ones do arise, according to the different Nature of the
putrefactions. And finally, to this kind of slow Fevers, those are to be
referred, which are found in Cachectical persons, and in Maids which have the
Green Sickness; which Fernelius conceives do arise from a light putrefaction of
wheyish phlegm shed abroad in the Body.

Besides these forenamed differences of continual Fevers, which are most
frequent, and are commonly set down by Authors; there are also some other,
arising from peculiar and extraordinary Causes, which sometimes we meet with in
our Practice. The Case of a certain Infant may serve for example, propounded by
Zechius in his 46. Counsel. The Infant was scarce two years old, and had a
continual Fever, with most grievous Symptoms viz. Unquietness, convulsions,
and continual stomach Sickness enclining to Vomit; and it was conjectured that
there was some Malignity adjoined, because such grievous symptoms did not
answer to that Fever. For all the external Parts were cold, though the inner
Parts were burned with heat, as appeared by the heat about the breast and under
the short Ribs, and also from the dryness and blackness of the Tongue. The
Cause of which was blood putrefying contained in the stomach. For this Infant
being tongue-tied, was lately cut by a Surgeon, in which work some Veins or
other was opened which shed some blood into the stomach, which putrefying
there, by sending forth hot, putrid, and as it were poisonous Vapors into the
heart and Brain, was the Cause of all the symptoms aforesaid. But how this
cause was found out and removed, it is worth the while here to recite, out of
the Story of Zechius. So often (quoth he) as I diligently consider with my
self, how hard a thing it is to understand internal Diseases, and their causes,
I come easily to be of the mind that Hippocrates in his second Book of vulgar
Diseases, Sect. 4. did not without greatest premeditation leave in writing;
then in the Curing of all hidden Diseases, the Physician must diligently
enquire the first assault of the Disease, that is to say, the first occasion of
the Patients illness. For of that for the most part depends the knowledge both
of the Cause and Cure. See an Example hereof: This Disease of the Gentleman's
Child was very acute, and the Cause very hard to find, had not I diligently
asked of the Parents touching the conditions of the Child and the Nurse; who
told me that two days before its being first ill, a certain Chyrurgeon had cut
the Membrane, whereby the Tongue of it was fastened to the parts beneath it.
And when I again asked them, if presently after this was done, they had caused
the Child to be held forward, or if any blood had come out of its mouth; they
said no, it was neither so held, neither came any blood from the mouth of it.
Whereupon I presently conjectured, that blood was fallen from the place cut
into the Stomach, and there putresied, and was the cause of the Disease, and
symptoms aforesaid. Neither did my Opinion deceive me; for having given it Oil
of sweet Almonds to make it vomit, it uttered a considerable quantity of
clotted blood, and matterish. Also it voided with a Clyster many clodders of
blood. And presently, by the blessing of God Almighty, the Fever was abated,
and all Symptoms began to cease. Whereupon it fell greedily and lustily on
sucking its Nurse, and all the following night it slept quietly, and was
afterward perfectly well.

The Diagnostick Signs of putrid continual Fevers, do some of them show the
continu'ty, others the putrefaction, and the rest the peculiar differences of
them.

The continuity is easily known, in that the Fevers is continual, and has no
intermision.

The putrefaction is signified by a sharper heat than ordinary, and more
biting, and by a sharp and biting Sooty vapor, produced by the exhalation of
putrid Humors. The pulse is not only great and frequent, and oftentimes
unequal; but it has this peculiar property, That the Systole is quicker than
the Diastole; because the Expulsion of Sooty Excrements is more necessary than
refrigeration. The Urins are in the beginning crude, or very little digested
The Exacerbations or fits keep their certain times, which yet is not to be
understood of the Fever Synochus. A cold shaking fit at the beginning of the
Disease. Hereunto are added various Symptoms, commonly accompanying putrid
Fevers, as Ilness of stomach, vomiting, heaviness of the body, pain of the
head, raving, giddiness of the head, hiccoughs, anxiety, heart-burning, thirst,
roughness and blackness of the tongue, stretching of the parts under the short
ribs, and the rest. Before which preceded, weariness without labor, pursiness,
troubled sleeps, watchings, tension of the parts under the short ribs,
difficult breathing, pain and pulsation of the head, stomach-sickness, want of
Appetite, plenty of stinking Excrements, frequent yawnings and reachings, or
some of these.

But the peculiar Differences of continual putrid Fevers, may be discerned by
these Signs following:

A continual putrid Fever, called Synochus putrida, has the same signs which
were propounded in Synocha simplici, but more vehement; for the heat is more
sharp, the watchings, headache, thirst, disquiet, and other Symptoms are more
vehement; also the pulse is unequal, so that the Systole appears greater than
the Diastole, the Urines are crude, red, and thick.

The Signs of a Fever from Choler, are burning pain, a pulse mighty frequent
and swift, a sharp Urine, fiery, in the beginning always crude, without
Sediment; Stomach-sickness, Chollerick vomitings and Stools Chollerick, much
anxiety, mighty thirst, bitterness of the mouth, dryness and blackness of the
tongue, watchings, raving, and an ulcerous kind of weariness, soregoing,
paleness of Face, or a citrine Color, youthful Age, temperature hot and dry,
Summer season, hot and dry Diet, Chollerick Evacuations suppressed. And a
continual Tertian is distinguished from a Synochus biliosa, or continent Fever
springing of Choler, because it has Exacerbations or fits every third day,
but the Synochus biliosa, keeps still one and the same tenor.

The Signs of a continual Quotidian are, Heat at first rather vaporous than
biting, afterward somewhat sharp, but unequal, because of the thickness of the
Humor which is difficultly dissolved; the Urines are at first white, watery,
troubled; afterward somewhat red and thick; the Pulse is seldomer, slower, and
less than in the rest of these Fevers; thirst little or none; seldom sweat,
unless there be salt phlegm; the Face of the Patient is somewhat bloat or blown
up, lax, flaggy, and as it were Lead colored; Drowziness, want of Appetite,
phlegmatic Excretions, a cold and moist Temperament, old Age, Winter Season,
Cold and Moist Diet, Evacuations suppressed, and a daily Excretion of the
Disease.

A continual Quartan is known by these Signs. The Heat is less sharp than in
Fevers of Choler, yet sharper than in Fevers of Phlegm; likewise Thirst
greater than in a Quotidian, and lesser than in a Tertian; a Pulse in the
beginning slow, rare, languishing; afterward stronger, frequenter, and very
unequal. The Urine in the beginning thin, afterward various; the body dry and
lean, of a tawny or swarthy color; Temperament cold and dry; Age inclining;
Autumn of the Year, or very changable weather; a life entangled with many Cares
and Studies; suppression of the Hemorrholds, Swelling of the Spleen, and
Exacerbation or vehemence more than ordinary of the Fever every fourth day.

The Signs of a Causus or burning proper to that Disease, were propounded
before, viz. a burning heat of the Body, and an unquenchable Thirst. Yet it is
to be marked, if any Cough arise, that the Patients Thirst is thereby
diminished, viz. by such moisture as is drawn by the Cough out of adjacent
parts; howbeit, the Cough is never wholly taken away while the Fever lasts.
The other Signs are all such as we have before showed, do signify a Fever
from Choler. Yet the signs which signify a bastard burning Fever, are much
more remiss than the foresaid.

A melting Fever is known by a sudden Consumption of the Body, and growing
lean; the Eyes are hollow, the Temples fallen, Nose sharp, Stools red, fat,
stinking, clammy, corpulent, sincere, chollerick, and frothy; the Urines, fat
and Oily.

The Shivering Fever, and the tumbling and tossing Fevers are to be known, by
what is said of them in their Descriptions.

In the Fever called Elodes, the Skin is ever moist with a clammy moisture,
and the heat to feel to, is not very sharp. Malignity is distinguished from the
largeness of putrefaction; because in Case of malignity, the Urines are in a
manner Natural, or appear not much different from the Natural; or somewhat swins
in the Urines like a Spiders Web, when the Fat melts; or if with the Urine
there comes away somewhat like Vetches or Barley, which signify a melting of
the flesh; or finally, abundance of Urine coming diverse days together, when
the blood and humors are melted. Add hereunto an extreme decay of strength; a
small contracted Pulse, not very frequent. In great putrefaction the Urines are
thick and troubled, the Pulse great, soft, and frequent.

Syncopalis Febris, viz. the Swooning Fever, is known by fainting sits, and
swoonings frequently befalling the sick. And that sort called Minuta, is
distinguished from that Humorosa, because in the former are seen the signs of a
Chollerick, in the latter of a Phlegmatic Fever, as they were lately set down.

The Fever Epiala is known only hereby, That at the same time, heat and cold
is felt in the whole Body.

Finally, Symptomatick Fevers, and such as are called Comitatae, are known by
what has been said of them in their Histories, or Descriptions.

Now in every of these sorts of continual putrid Fevers, the Prognostic Signs
are to be described, by which their events may be presaged.

And first for Synochus Putrida, seeing it is of the kind of acute Fevers, it
is not without danger. Yet if signs-of Concoction do evidently appear upon the
fourth day, and no error be committed, it will terminate toward health the
seventh day. But if the Signs of Concoction appear later, it may reach unto the
eleventh or fourteenth day. But if no signs of Concoction appear, and the sick
have a round swollen Face like a Globe, it signifies the Disease will be long.
By how much the Urine is redder at the beginning, other signs corresponding, by
so much safer it is, and signifies the Disease will soon come to an end, if
there appear therein signs of Concoction; but with signs of Crudity it
threatens death, especially if the party be weak. White Urine is the worst of
all, and commonly portends death. Among the Differences of Synochus,
Paracmastica is more secure, Acmastica more dangerous, Epacinastica most
dangerous of all. Furthermore, an exquisite Synochus, and benign rightly Cured,
is safe; a bastard one that has malignity in it, with cruel Symptoms, and
strength decayed, is dangerous.

Chollerick Fevers inasmuch as they are acute, are also dangerous; and that
more or less, according to the more or less distemper, vehemence of the
Symptoms, and validity of the Patients strength. The distemper is measured not
only absolutely by the degree of Heat it self; but also comparatively, with
reference to the Natural Constitution of the sick party; so that look how much
the heat is increased above the Natural temper of the Patient, so much the
greater is the danger. So a burning Fever in an old Man, or in Winter, is for
the most part deadly. The vehemence of Symptoms, is considered in actions
Animal, Vital, and Natural; in Excrements, qualities changed, and proper
adjuncts; whose enumeration requires a work by it self, according as we have
expounded them, in the third Section of our Semiotica, or Doctrine of Signs,
out of Hippocrates his Aphorisms, Prognostics, Predictions, and his Coic
Praenotions, which may easily be transferred to this place. And finally, the
strength of the Patient must be compared with the vehemence of the Symptoms;
For if the strength be lusty, and likely to hold out against the Cruelty of the
Adversaries, there is good hope; if not, we may justly fear the Patients death.

A continual Quotidian, is wont to be long by reason of the thickness and
contumacy of the Humor: but if diverse Evacuations happen in its course, it is
wont to be the shorter. We must measure the danger thereof, by comparing the
vehemence of the Symptoms, with the Patients strength. And the chief care
ought to be least it degenerate into a Cachexy or dropsy, by reason of the
obstructions of the Liver and spleen, which happen in these long Fevers.

A Primary continual Quartan is most rare, yet sometimes an intermittent Fever
or Ague degenerates thereinto, and then for the most Part deadly.

The melting, shaking, Tumbling, Sweating and Swouning Fevers, seeing they
borrow their Names from such bad symptoms as they are attended with; they are
in regard of such symptoms extreme dangerous, and for the most Part is deadly.

Finally, the Prognostic of Symptomatick Fevers, is to be gathered from the
Excellency of the Parts affected, vehemence of the Symptoms and Validity of
the Patients strength.

Now in the Cure of al putrid Fevers, we must take our Hints or Indications
from the Fever, from its Cause and from the Patients strength. The two former
indicate their own ablation or removal; the third, its own Preservation. Which
must be done by assistance of those ordinary Medicinal Utensils viz. Diet,
Manual Operation, and Medicaments.

The Diet in all Chollerick Fevers ought to be cooling and Moistening, in
phlegmatic and Melancholic more warming and attenuating. Let therefore the Air
be cold and moist, which being drawn in by the Lungs unto the heart, does
exceedingly temper the burning heat thereof. Yet must not the Patient be laid
bare to the cold Air, because transpiration, which is exceeding needful, would
by that means be hindered; and the sooty Vapors and sweats would be driven
back again into the Body. Howbeit the sick must be covered only with light and
soft Coverings, and not loaded with over many blankers or Rugs. also the
Feather-bed must be taken away and a flock-bed put in place, upon which also in
the extremity of Summer a covering of Leather will conveniently be laid on. Let
the bed be wide, that the sick may change place therein. Let the Patients
Linen Shifts be often changed contrary to the vulgar opinion; provided they be
not newly washed, nor smell of Soap, and that the Time of the Crisis be not at
hand, in which nothing is to be stirred, least the motion of Nature be hindered
and disturbed. The Sunbeams are to be kept out of the Patients Chamber, and
store of Company is to be avoided. Water is often to be powered out of one
Vessel into another, in the sick Persons chamber. The Pavement of the Chamber
is to be sprinkled with Water, Vinegar and Rose Water mingled; or with cooling
Herbs and flowers; as Vine Leaves, Willow Leaves, Leaves of Water Lillies,
Flags; Roses, and flowers of Violets and of Water Lilly; which must be kept at
hand in good Quantities in a cool place, and be often fresh sprinkled and
strowed about the Patients Chamber; for when these Herbs and flowers are dried,
they heat the Chamber. If the Chamber be cold, as in winter, it must be a
little tempered with a fire avoiding Smoke. Howbeit in phlegmatic Fevers the
Air must be Moderately hot and dry.

As for Point of Nourishment, the Diet ought to be thin and spare in acute
Fevers. And therein the Ancients were so severely diligent, as to place the
greatest Part of the Cure in ordering the Diet, enjoining such as were sick of
a most acute Fever, to keep a most thin and slender Diet; and giving them
nothing but a ptisan drink of Barley Water, as most convenient for persons in a
Fever; seeing it cooles, and Moistens; withal extenuating and opening and
hindering no Evacuation. And they had two kinds of Ptisans. One simply so
called, or whole Ptisan not strained; the other was strained, which we call
Barley Cream. Barley cleansed of the Husks boiled in sair Water, to a
Consistency or Pottage, is the whole Ptisan; this being strained with pressing,
is called Cream or Juice of Barley.

But in our Times, at least in our Country, by the refractoryness of Women [who
fear nothing but that the sick person shall be starved, as al their care in a
manner is to cram their Children with meat like Pudding Bags, how empty their
Brains be of wit, or their Hearts of Grace and wisdom, matters not] and the
Indulgence of Physicians [who the best of them smell too strong of the
Mountebank] it is grown into a fashion in all Fevers, yea the most acute and
violent, to allow the sick at al times broaths of the flesh and Hens Chicken,
Capons mutton; and that for the most Part they give every third or at most
every fourth hour. And in the Summer the flesh of a pullet, kid or Lamb is
added to the former Diet. And sometimes again broaths are made of nothing but a
chick with cooling Herbs, as Lettice, Endive, Sorrel and Purslan. Or to
ordinary broaths is added Juice of Oranges, Lemmons, or Pome-Granats, when the
heat of the Fever is very great, or the putrefaction very intense.

Moreover in Fevers not so very acute Panadaes are given twice or thrice in a
day made of washed bread and broth. Also Barley broaths are sometimes used of
the Ptisan of the Ancients being strained, with the broth of the flesh
aforesaid, and Sugar; or without broth, adding sweet Almonds. But these for
the most Part do oppress the stomach, and therefore the use of simple broaths
and Panadaes seems more convenient. Howbeit very profitable it it to boil a
little Barley with flesh and thereof to make broaths.

In long Fevers, a fuller Diet is fitting, of the flesh of Chickens, Veal Hens
and Pullets, Capons, Partridges, Mutton, or of the Juice pressed out of them,
Gellies made with them, and such like.

Concerning the time of giving the Patients meat, this is principally to be
observed, that they never eat in the time of the Exacerbation or fit but in the
time of the Fever. But if the Exacerbation be very long, let the Patient eat
in the declination thereof.

For drink, the Ptisan of the later Physicians, made of the Decoction of Barley
with Liquoris, is usually given in all Fevers. To which if the Fevers be very
burning may be added a little Lettice, Sorrel, Tamarinds. But more ordinarily
are added the Roots of Grass or Sorrel which makes the Water look of an Elegant
Color like Wine. But in long Fevers may be added sweet fennel Roots, Parsley
Roots, Annis Seed, Coriander Seed, or Cinnamon, as often as the stomach through
weakness is offended with drinking.

Take of the ordinary Ptisan-drink of Barley and Liquoris two pints: spirit of
sulphur as much as shall suffice for to make it pleasantly tart. Hartshorn
burnt till it be white one ounce: Let the Patient use it for ordinary drink,
shaking the Vessel before it be powered forth.

Also Water that has had a piece of bread boiled in it either by it self or
sweetened with Sugar is good; or mingled with a little Vinegar; or Water alone,
boiled to take away the Cruditie; wherewith sometimes a little Sugar is mixed,
and sometimes a little of the Juice of Lemmons, Pomgranats, Barberries,
Cherries, or of their Syrups; or as much spirit of sulphur or Vitriol as may
serve for a great full Acidity; or a little Sal Prunellae, if need be of potent
refrigeration.

Water is commended wherein are steeped Tamarinds, Berberies, or Prunes.

A Decoction of french Prunes is very pleasing to the taste.

Or Barley is boiled with Tamarinds, and toward the End, the broth is
Aromatized with yellow Sanders and Cinnamon. Which drink does not only Quench
thirst, but loosens the belly, and cools and strengthens the Liver.

Take Sugar eight ounces: Sal Prunellae one ounce: Make it into a Powder, to be
taken with the Patients ordinary drink. Whereunto if thirst be extreme, the
spirit of vitriol may be added.

Touching spirit of Vitroil and of Sulphur, this is diligently to be observed,
that in putrid Fevers the use thereof is great, because they have a mighty
cooling, opening, and putrefaction quelling faculty; prohibit the Inflammation
of the Humors, and quench thirst. Howbeit in the Pleurisy, Inflammation of the
Lungs, Spitting of blood, Consumption of the Lungs and other Diseases thereof
(unles they spring from thick phlegm stopping the Vessels thereof) Inflammation
of the stomach, Dysentery or bloody flux, Pissing of blood, Ulcers of the
Kidneys and Bladder, they do very much hurt and therefore we must abstain form
them.

In Fevers arising from very thin and hot Choler, or Joined with a sharp thin
distillation, sharp things are not convenient; but rather such as gently
thicken, as Syrup of Violets, of dried red Roses, with Barley Water, or Bread
boyld-Water, or simple Water boiled, or small beer, mixed therewith.

Where thick and clammy humors abound, the Syrup of Vinegar will be very
profitable. in stead of those last named.

Also sometimes Conserve of Roses, Violets, or Borrage is wont to be mingled
with clear Water boiled, with Barley Water, and to be strained through an
Hippocras bag for ordinary drink, unto which some drops of spirit of Vitriol
may profitably be added. Or a Tincture of Roses is made after this manner, most
delightful in color and in taste.

Take Red Roses one ounce: Bloodwarm Water three pints: spirit of sulphur or
Vitriol one dram and an half: Let them stand infusing cold for three or four
hours. To the strainings add, white Sugar, four ounces: Rose Water half a pint:
Make thereof a clear Julep for ordinary drink.

Also Julepus Alexandrinus, is very good, and extreme pleasant. It is thus made.

Take Fountain Water one pint: Rosewater, Juice of Lemmons, and white Sugar, of
each four ounces: Boil them over a light fire till you have taken away the Scum.

As for other things pertaining to Diet, Sleep is extreme good and watchings
bad. Yet over much Sleep does overwhelm the natural heat and hinder the
Evacuation of excrements. Rest is necessary in acute Fevers; but in long
Fevers, light and gentle exercise is good. Also we must endeavor, that nothing
be retained which ought naturally to be expelled; howbeit al immoderate
Evacuations, which exhaust the strength, are to be stopped; and al vehement
Perturbations of mind, must be turned out of Doors.

Among manual Operations, Blood-letting holds the chiefest place. for it does
not only diminish plenitude, whether it be a simple fullness so as to stretch
the Vessels, or only a fullness with reference to the strength of the Patient;
whether it be in the whole body or in some Part; but also revels the influx of
Humors Causing obstructions; cools the whole body and makes it perspicable;
keeps back putrefaction, and furthers the concoction of putrefying Humors.
Presently therefore, and at the beginning of the Disease, blood must be drawn
(unless weakness hinder, as in the Swooning Fever, and other like Cases) and
that after the Belly has been loosened with a Clyster, or a Suppository. How
much blood should be taken, it gathered from the Patients strength, from the
greatness of the Ple^hora, Custom of the Patient to bleed or not to bleed, and
other circumstances. The Ancients in the Synochus Putrida, and the burning
Fever, did let blood til the Patient fainted away. But it is much more safe
(as we have said in the Cure of a simple Synochus) to take away at several
times so much as shall be sufficient; then suddenly to put the Patient in
danger of death. Avicenna in a burning Fever, and in a continual Tertian, does
forbid letting blood, unless the Urine be thick and red. For he fears lest
Choler should be the more inflamed, which he says is bridled by Blood. But
the wiser Physicians do explode this Opinion of his, seeing these kind of
Fevers are often terminated even by Nature her self, by bleeding at the Nose;
and they do sometimes cause Frenzies, and other Inflammations: and finally,
because Blood-letting does potently refrigerate, does rather stop than further
the Ebulition, or boiling and working of the Blood, and Choler comes away as
well as Blood when a Vein is opened; so that in that Mass of Blood, which is in
the greater Veins remaining, there is the same proportion of blood to Choler
which there was before. Nay verily, when a Vein is opened, if the sick party be
any thing lusty, and the blood flow amain, only the putrid Blood which is
offensive to Nature is voided, the purer remaining in the Veins; which few
Authors have taken notice of, although it be in the course of Practice every
where observable. For if the Blood flow out of the Vein drop by drop, it is the
purest Blood, because it comes out of the Vein by its own proper motion. But if
it spring out with a forceable stream, it appears foul and corrupted, Nature
expelling the worser part of the Mass of Blood. Howbeit Blood is more sparingly
to be taken from such as are of a very Chollerick Constitution, in the middle
of Summers Heat, and the Dog-Daies, than in other Natures and times. But in
Phlegmatic and Melanchollick Fevers, Blood must be taken away in lesser
quantity: and evermore great regard is to be had to Coindicants, and
Contraindicants; forasmuch as Quotidian Fevers do for the most part happen
unto Children, or old Persons in cold Countries and cold Seasons of the year;
which considerations do lessen the Quantity of Blood, which otherwise the
Disease, or its Cause require, should be taken away. When the Fever is caused
by over much labor, blood must be taken away more sparingly. If a Fever happen
by over great use of Carnal Embracements, Blood-letting is pernicious.

Concerning the time of Blood-letting, it is to be noted, That a Vein must not
be opened presently after the Patient has eaten; but after Digestion is past,
and after the Patient has been at stool. Again, Blood is to be let when the
Fever is most remiss, and not in the vigor thereof, for then Nature is not
able to bear both the violence of the Disease, and the loss of Blood. As for
the repletion of Blood-letting, if the same be necessary, to cause Evacuation,
it must be repeated the same day; if for Revulsions sake, on another day. For
where Evacuation is necessary, especially in acute Diseases, the Body must be
suddenly changed into another condition; also it often happens, that a Disease
is quickly past its first time or beginning, so that afterward we cannot so
conveniently open a Vein. But in Revulsion we have respect to the motion of the
Humors, which is then best ordered, when it is done at diverse times, some space
being interposed, whereby Nature becomes accustomed to a contrary motion. For
in the space between Bleedings, the Blood which was shed into the parts
regurgitates into the Veins, and by another Blood-letting is profitably drawn
forth. We understand that Blood-letting must be iterated, if that blood which
was first drawn forth, were very much corrupted; and there is reason to think,
that there is yet a great quantity thereof abiding in the Veins.

Yea verily, Although the Blood at first seem pure, and uncorrupted, yet must
we not desist from taking the same away, but continue so doing until it appear
more impure and corrupted. And truly that Precept delivered by Hippocrates, in
his 4. de Victus Rat. in Morbis acutis, in the Cure of a Pleutisie, may very
profitably be observed in acute Fevers, viz. That Blood-lettings be so long
continued, til the blood change color; so that if at first corrupt blood come
away, we must let it run till it appear more pure; and on the other side, if at
the first the blood appear laudable, we must suffer to flow, til that which is
impure and corrupted be come away.

Yet is there some diversity to be observed in both Cases. For if at first good
Blood come away; blood ought to be again taken from the same Vein; that putrid
blood residing in the innermost parts of the Body, may the sooner be drawn
forth. But if at first corrupt blood be taken away, blood is next time to be
taken out of the other Arm, and afterward out of the former again, and so in
course as often as need shall require.

But if the Symptoms declare, that the Putrefaction is in the inner branch of
the Vena Cava descendent; as heat and pain in the Loins, redness and thickness
of the Urine: after two or three Blood-lettings in the Arms, it will be
convenient to draw Blood out of the Vena Saphena, two or three several times.

If in the latter Blood-lettings, some part of the Blood seem laudable, and not
so putrid as before; it is a sign that Nature does repair and restore new good
blood instead of the corrupt blood which has been taken away. Contrarily, If
the more is taken away, the worse it comes, its a sign the Disease grows worse,
and that Putrefaction is increased; whence there is reason to fear a
stupefaction of the Internal Parts.

The Vein in the bending of the Arm, or the Basilica, of the Mediana, is for
the most part to be opened, in the right Arm most commonly, sometimes in the
left, viz. when more distention is felt under the short Ribs on the left, than
on the right side. Yet sometimes a Vein is profitably opened in the Foot, if
Revulsion be necessary and the Patient weak, the Matter of the Disease being in
the Head, and the sick person molested with Headache, and want of rest.

Frictions are seldom used in putrid Fevers, unless it be in the Swooning
Fevers; the Cure of which we shall set down in the Cure of the Symptoms of
Putrid Fevers, toward the end of the next Chapter.

But Cupping-Glasses are more frequently used, as being the Substitutes of
Blood-letting, in whose stead they serve, when Weakness or Age of the Patient
will not permit a Vein to be opened.

Medicinal Remedies are comprehended under a double kind; whereof some are
Evacuative, others Alterative. Under the Evacuative, we comprehend Purgatives,
Vomitories, Sudoroficks, and Diuretics. Under the Alterative, we comprehend
Coolers, Attenuaters, Cutters, Openers, and Strengtheners. Of all which we shall
set down the Composition and use in order, according to the usual Method of
Practice.

And that we may begin with Purgatives, its a great Question among Authors,
Whether or no they ought to be used in the beginning of Fevers? Which
Controversy, omitting all Circumlocutions, is thus determined. In respect of
the Matter immediately producing a continual putrid Fever, which is contained
in the greater Veins, Purgation is not convenient in the beginning; unless the
said Matter do heave and work, being so stirred by Nature, provoked by the ill
quality thereof, and endeavoring to expel it, that thereby it becomes more
disposed for expulsion, and there be danger by the foresaid working thereof,
lest it rush into some noble part; howbeit this seldom happening, for the most
part the Concoction thereof is to be expected, before we undertake to evacuate
the same by Purging Medicines. But in respect of the Matter contained in the
first Region, if it be very much, and do increase the Fever, oppress Nature,
and divert her from concocting of that which is in the Veins; Purgatives may be
given the next day after Blood-letting, but they must be gentle, such as
evacuate only the first Region. Now that naughty Humors and Excrementitious do
abound in the first Region, that is to say, in the Stomach, Guts, Mesentery, or
about the Midrif, may be known by Stomach-sickness, Bitterness of the Mouth,
Thirst, Pain of the Stomach, or some other part contained in the lower Belly,
Looseness of the belly, and other Symptoms; in regard of which Purgation is
sometimes to be practiced before Blood-letting. Now the Medicines for this
intent, must be Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Catholicum, Electuarium lenitivum
Diaprunum simplex, Syrupus Rosaceus, de Cichorio cum Rhabarbaro; which may
diverse ways be compounded after this manner:

Take Cassia newly drawn one ounce: Tamarinds half an ounce. With Sugar make it
into a Bolus. Or,

Take Catholicum six drams: Elect. lenitive, or Diaprunes simple, half an
ounce: Cream of Tartar one dram. Make all into a Bolus. Or,

Take Leaves of Endive, Cichory, Sorrel, of each half a handful: Tamarinds half
an ounce: Boil all to three ounces. In the strained Liquor dissolve Catholicum
half an ounce: Manna and Syrup of Roses, of each an ounce. Mix all into a
Potion.

If you desire your Medicine a little stronger, you may ad a dram or four
scruples of Rhubarb infused in Endive or Cichory Water with yellow Sanders.
Yea, and sometimes if the Fever be not very strong, two or three drams of Senna
may be added to the Decoction.

Some reject Rhubarb, because it heats; also Manna, and Syrup of Roses, because
being sweet, they are soon turned into Choler. But with cooling Waters or
Decoctions Rhubarb being infused, or Manna and such like dissolved, can do no
hurt; especially if to the said Decoctions, Tamarinds be added, which are much
commended to this intent, or if the Pulp thereof be given dissolved in the
Potion.

Some in Chollerick Fevers do use the Whey of Goats Milk, and that very
pertinently; for it tempers the heat of the Fever, evacuates Choler, and
strengthens the Bowels. In a Cup of Whey they steep all night one dram, or one
dram and an half of Rhubarb, or they add two or three ounces of Syrup of Roses,
and so give it in the morning; and afterward they give the Patient a quart of
Whey more to drink, that all the Whey may not be infected with the taste of the
Medicament.

That kind of Purgation which is practiced in the beginning of putrid Fevers,
the Vulgar Physicians call Minorative purgation; and that which is practiced
when the morbifick matter is concocted, they call eradicative purgation: which
is also convenient in the beginning (as was said) in the Judgment of
Hippocrates, if the matter be turgent. Now this same turgescence* and boiling
as it were of the matter is known hereby, because the Patient perceives in
diverse Parts light Pains which soon go away and shift suddenly from place to
place; and has diverse colors of the Face and other Parts, so that sometimes
there is a redness and then again a paleness in some Part of the Face. And in a
word the Patient is exceedingly tormented with anxiety and unquietness,
continually tumbling and tossing.

Howbeit that Rule of Hippocrates touching the use of Purgation, when the
morbifick matter does ferment and work in the Patients body, is not observed in
ordinary Practice: but when the Humors appear in their fermentation and Motion,
we do more safely apply our selves to Bloodletting; and by that means we do
more readily present the rushing of the stirred Humors into any noble Part,
which being agitated by the Purgation may more easily flow into the said Parts.

Sometime also in the beginning of these Fevers Vomit is to be procured, viz.
when the Patient is much vexed with illness of stomach and with vomiting for
then Nature endeavors to evacuate the morbifick matter upwards, and the
Physician ought to assist her endeavors. And many times it falls out, that
great Quantity of matter is contained in the stomach and Parts thereabout,
which must be Evacuated as soon as possible may be, by Vomit; seeing no
concoction can be expected of such excrementitious matter in so great a
Quantity; and what ever the Patient eats or drinks is changed into such a like
Humor and increases the Matter which is cause of the Disease. For Fernelius
has well observed in his third Book of the Method of Healing, Chap. 3. that
all superfluity of Humors in the stomach, spleen, Pancreas, Mesentery, and the
Cavity of the liver; is conveniently emptied out by a Vomit, which sometimes will
not be removed with Medicines that work downwards, though diverse times
administered. And it comes often to pass, that the Matter being Vomited up, the
Fever is taken away at the first, which otherwise would have proved long, in
case that matter had been transmitted into the more inner Parts of the body,
and very well mixed with the blood.

Now of the three degrees which we reckon of Vomitories, the mildest is to be
Chosen, as Barley Water Lukewarm with Oil of Almonds or common Oil, or with a
little Quantity of white Vinegar. Also Syrup of Vinegar, or Oxymel simple which
Chicken broth or a Decoction of Dil Seed, Raddish or Orach, whereunto also Oil
may be added. All which are to be given to the Quantity of a pint or more; for
in a less Quantity they abide in the stomach. And seeing these weaker sorts of
Vomits are of little efficacy, we may sometimes apply our selves to those of the
middle Rank; which shall be propounded hereafter, in the Cure of a Tertian Ague

And not only in the beginning of the Disease before Blood-letting, but also
the whole Course thereof, Clysters must be given every day or every other day,
if the Belly be not of it self very free, made of a Decoction of Emollient and
refrigerating things, such as French Barley, Prunes, Mallows, Violet Leaves,
Mercury Leaves, Beares-Foot, Orach, Lettice, Endive, Houseleek, Water Lillies:
dissolving therein Catholicum, Cassia, Diaprunum simple, Red-Sugar, Honey of
Violets, and Honey of Mercury; Oil of Water Lillies, Violets etc. But in a
violent hot Fever, it is better not to add the Oils, because they are easily
enflamed.

Observe in the first place, that not above three or four blades of Houseleek
must go into one Clyster, because it cools most potently, and being taken in
greater Quantity, may hurt the Guts.

Observe secondly, that in all Fevers of Choler, Clysters are not to be
injected actually hot, but only Blood-warm.

In Fevers that spring from phlegm, Decoctions for Clysters are made of the
Emollient Herbs with Annis Seed, Seeds of Fennel and of Carthamus; flowers of
Chamomel and Melilote; dissolving therein Hiera Picra, Diaphoenicum, Honey of
Roses, Honey of Mercury, Oil of Chamomel, Dil, or common Oil.

And because, as we noted before, absolute and perfect Purgation, which they
call Eradicative, is not to be attempted till the Morbifick Cause be ripened and
digested; the Physician from the beginning of the Disease, after the first
Blood-letting, and when the passages nearest the stomach are cleansed, ought to
use such Medicaments as prepare crude Humors for digestion and Evacuation, and
withal temper the Feverish Heat, hinder Putrefaction, and open obstructions;
such as are Juleps, broaths, Emulsions and other things which shall be hereafter
described.

Juleps are compounded in a Chollerick matter offending, of Syrups of Lemmons,
Pomegranats, Sowr-Grapes, Vinegar simple, of the Juice of Sorrel of Cichory
simple, with Waters of Endive, Sorrel, Grass and Cichory.

Or better, of the Decoction of the Roots of Sorrel and Cichory, of the Leaves
of Sorrel, Maidenhair, Garden Endive, Dandelion, the four cool Seeds,
Tamarinds, with the Syrups aforesaid.

And sometimes that we may cool more effectually, a dram of Sal Prunella is
added, for every Dose of the Julep, or so much spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, as
shall suffice for a moderate sharpness.

Sour things are never to be omitted in Fevers springing from Choler; because
bitter things are sweetened by Sour and acid things: which if they are Sour in
an high degree, as spirit of Vitriol and of Sulphur, they deface the bitterness
even of Aloes and Coloquintida. Now yellow Choler being plundered of its
bitterness, i^ dead. And Harmles.

Juleps also of great Virtue, may be made of Juyces and which are very grateful
to the taste, after this manner.

Take Juice of Apples that smell sweet, newly drawn out and settled four ounces:
Juice of Lemmons three ounces: Rose Water two ounces: Juice of Pomegranats one
ounce: finest Sugar half a pound: Make of al a clear Julep for three Doses.

If very thin Choler and sharp be in motion and cause either a Looseness or
some other grievous fluxion; Juleps must be compounded which thicken, of Waters
of Lettice, Purslain, Plantan, flowers of Water Lilly, Red Poppy and Violets
with the Syrups aforesaid.

Yet we must observe that Syrup of Violets and other of the sweeter sort of
Syrups, are not to be given alone; both because they loosen the stomach; as
also because, ere they can Pass into the Veins, they are turned into an hot
Vapor, which does afterward cause thirst to increase. And therefore there must
evermore some Quantity of sharp Syrup be mixed with the sweet Syrups aforesaid,
that they may more easily pierce into the Veins, and the better resist the Heat
of the Fever.

In the Progress of the Fever, when Coction begins to appear, to the foresaid
Decoctions must be added Roots of Asparagus and Liquoris; Leaves of Agrimony,
Pimpernel, Liverwort and Maidenhair.

In Phlegmatic and Cronick Fevers, things more cutting, attenuating and
opening are prescribed beginning with the more weak, such as are Syrup of
Vinegar, of Maidenhair, Syrupus Bizantinus, with a Decoction of Egrimony,
Maidenhair, Betony, Liquoris, Raisens. And in the progress of the Fever unto
the former we add Syrup of the opening Roots, Vinegar compound, of Hyssop,
Oxymel simple, and compound. And to the Decoction we add the five opening
Roots, Leaves of Hyssop, Carduus benedictus and (if the matter be very impact,
Clammy and roapy) of Germander and Centory. Whereunto if Salt of Tartar and
spirit of Vitriol be added, they work more happily.

In Fevers springing from Melancholy, such things are added which do moisten,
as Syrup of Violets, of bugloss, of Borrage and Apples, toward the Beginning:
and afterward Fumitory, of Epithymum, of the five opening Roots, Oxymel of
Squils; with a Decoction, first of Bugloss, Borrage, Cetrach or wall-fern,
Maiden Hair, Fumitory, Hops; and afterward Dodder, Scordium, Centory, Bark of
Capers, of the Ash-tree and of Tamarisk.

And finally in bastard Fevers, which arise from the mixture of different evil
Humors, the Medicines aforesaid must be mixed together; yet so that such as
respect the most predominant Humor be put in the greatest Quantity.

For the more nice and dainty soft of Patients, Medicinal broaths are
prescribed instead of Juleps: and also that the sick may not grow weary of the
same kind of Medicine too long used; and these broths are made of such of the
Roots and Herbs aforesaid as are most pleasant to the taste with a chick, or
part of an Hen of Capon: unto which sometimes may be added one dram of Sal
Prunella, or some drops of spirit of Vitriol, when we would have it more
cooling than ordinary.

Howbeit in slow and long lasting Fevers, caused by rebellious obstructions
hard to be cleared, Germander though bitter and Cichory, Endive and Dandelyon,
though bitter, may be boiled in Broaths; and Montanus in his Counsels, does cry
up Cichory and Germander boiled in Broaths as an admirable Remedy for such as
have a long Fever with obstructions.

In Fevers from phlegm a Decoction of Chamomel is excellent. Zacutus Lusitanus.
Observat. 26. in the third Book of his Praxis admiranda.

Also emulsions or Almond-Milks are very good in putrid Fevers, and are
commonly more pleasing than Juleps. They are most in use when the Fever is
Joined with a dry distemper of the Bowels, or a thin Catarrh, or an Inflammation
of the Lungs and Parts serving to breath withal; or for variety, least the
Patient should be over tired with continual use of Juleps. Now the Composition
of these emulsions, has been described in the foregoing cures.

Cold Water given in great Quantity in continual putrid Fevers, was wont to be
in use among the ancients, and is commended by very many latter Physicians. But
as we said the use here of was dangerous in the simple Synochus; so in this
Case, we think the discreet Physician shall do best to for bear the same, for
the reasons we delivered, in our Chapter of the simple Synochus.

Yet will it be sometimes good, in extreme heat of a Fever to give a good
draught of cold Water, to ten or twelve ounces with a few drops of Spirit of
Vitriol: For hereby sometimes the same effects are wrought, which Galen
attributes to cold Water being drunk, the quantity of three or four pints at a
time; When as notwithstanding there are none of those dangers to be feared,
which Galen himself confesses did sometimes happen upon the preposterous
drinking down of so great a quantity of cold Water as he advises. For the
Spirit of Vitriol causes that the Water breeds no Obstructions, but rather
opens the same, quickly piercing and passing through the Bowels, not biding in
the Hypochondria's as plain and single cold Water is wont to do; but is very
like the acid Mineral Fountains and Wells, which though they are drunk in great
quantity, do not lie heavy in the parts about the short Ribs, but are quickly
pissed forth, and very good against Obstructions.

To strengthen Nature, which in every violent Fever is much dejected,
Electuaries are good, and strengthening Conserves and Preserves, compounded of
Conserve of Roots of Bugloss, Leaves of Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Stalks of Lettice,
Flowers of Bugloss, Borrage, Violet, Cichory, and Roses, Pulp of Citrons.
Whereunto are added the Pouders of Coral, Pearls, Ivory, Hartshorn,
Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatriasantalon, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Confectio
Alkermes, and de Hyacintho; which are commonly after this manner compounded:

Take Conserve of Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Roses, of each an ounce:
Confectio Alkermes one dram and an half: Powder of Diamargaritum frigidum,
Ivory, Coral prepared, and Pearls prepared, of each ten grains: Sugar of Roses,
the weight of all the rest: three Leaves of beaten Gold. Make of all an
Electuary covered over with Gold, of which let the Patients take often by it
self out of a spoon, drinking a little of their ordinary Drink after it, or
mingle some of it with their ordinary Drink, and with their Broths.

Take Conserve of Cichory, Sorrel, Lettice, and of the sharp Pulp of a Citron,
of each half an ounce: Powder of yellow Sanders, and of Pearls prepared, of
each one scruple: Spirit of Vitriol half a scruple. With Syrup of Violets make
all into an Electuary.

Take Conserve of the Flowers of Bugloss, Roses, and Violets, of each one
ounce: Waters of Endive, Sorrel, and Borrage, of each three ounces. Mix them
together, let them stand over the warm Embers and heat; then strain the Liquor
through a searse; then add Confectio Alkermes two drams: Powder of the
Electuary Diamargaritum frigidum half a dram: Coral prepared, Pearls prepared,
and Shavings of Ivory, of each one scruple: Syrup of Lemmons and Pomegranates,
of each three ounces. Mix all; give one spoonful at a time.

For the more dainty and nice sort of People, in great debility of Natural
strength, this following Julep very pleasant to the taste may be compounded:

Take Waters of Sorrel, Orange flower, and Roses, of each one ounce and an
half: Syrup of Lemmons and Pomegranates, of each one ounce: Confectio Alkermes
one dram: mix them. Let the Patient take hereof frequently in a spoon.

Altering Medicines having been used for some days together, and such as
prepare bad Humors, when the Fever begins to decline, we must set our selves
to purge out the said Humors, when the signs of Concoction do appear, avoiding
the Critical days. And this must be done with Medicines a little stronger than
those which were given at the beginning; of which sort are, Senna, Rhubarb,
Agarick, Catholicum duplex, and such like; whose Matter and Dose must by the
skilful Physician be accommodated to the Humors offending, and the Nature of
the Patient. And some Physicians are so bold as to proceed to Scammoniate
Medicaments, as Diaprunum solutivum, Diaphoenicon, Electuarium de succo,
Rosarum and Diacarthamum. Which notwithstanding are very seldom to be used in
continual Fevers, because Scammony is wont very much to inflame the Humors,
and to cause vehement thirst; and that especially in burning Fevers, in which
Scammoniate Medicaments are very hurtful. Yea verily, and Rhubarb it self,
although a gentle and most excellent Medicament, is by some suspected as not
safe in very Chollerick Fevers, because of its notable heating and drying
faculty. Howbeit the hurtful faculty thereof may in great part be corrected, by
infusing the same in Cooling Waters, and by mingling therewith a Decoction of
Tamarinds and cooling Herbs; and by adding thereto Cassia, Syrup of Roses,
Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb, and such like.

If the Fever do still continue, Purgation must be ever and anon repeated,
using between whiles preparatives and digestives, til the whole seminary of evil
humors be taken away. For otherwise, if we cease Purging before the Fever be
perferctly abated and gone; the Patient will be in danger of a Relapse. Yet this
Rule needs some restriction. For if after many Purgations, a lingering fever
continues, which does by little and little pine the Patients, and seem to cast
them into a Consumption; it will be the best course to leave Purging, and seek
to conquer the Fever only by Alteratives and Dier. For it sometimes falls out,
when there is some evil disposition of the Bowels, causing a protraction of the
Fever, that so long as Medicaments are given, so long the Disease continues,
because that Nature is weakened. Which afterward (Purgation being omitted)
gathers strength, concocts the Cause of the Disease, and being concocted,
expels the same.

But if a lingering Fever arise from Obstructions, as is often seen in
Children, frequent and very gentle Purging, which draws away the Humors by
little and little, is wont to remove the Disease; especially if the Purgation
be compounded with Rhubarb, which both opens obstructions, and strengthens the
bowels. The Commendations whereof celebrated by Montanus in his tenth Counsel
of Fevers, is worthy to be set down in this place. He setting down the Cure of
a Boy that had a lingering Fever arising from Obstructions: Among other things,
I shall commend (says he) one which I have by long Experience found never to
fail, viz. That he take every day the Infusion of Rhubarb in Endive Water. For
I never knew Fever from Obstructions, which was not cured by this Medicament,
provided it were constantly taken without weariness, or giving over. For I have
sometimes seen most gross Humors impacted into the narrow passages of the Body,
and such Obstructions, as by reason of the weakness of Natural heat could
hardly be removed, cured by Rhubarb. My Course therefore has been to take one
pint of Endive Water, and therein to infuse a dram of Rhubarb tied in a thin
piece of Linen. Of which Infusion, having lightly pressed out the Rhubarb, I
give four ounces in the morning; and this is the Dose for Children. Neither do
I cease giging this Medicament, until I see the Fever and Obstructions wholly
gone. For they will doubtless be cured, if all other things be rightly ordered,
and suitable to the Cure. So far Montanus. But we are wont ordinarily to use a
Diet Drink made with Rhubarb, which to such Children as are troubled with a
lingering Fever and Obstructions, I am wont to give for their ordinary Drink
with good success. It is thus made: Half a dram or a dram of Rhubarb (according
as the Child can endure the taste thereof) grossly poudered and tied in a Rag, is
infused in two or three pints of small Beer or Ale an whole day, cold: Of this
the Child drinks for a month together, or longer if the stubbornness of the
Disease require the same. Whereunto, if the Fever be very remiss, and the
Child phlegmatic, a little Wine, or stronger Beer or Ale may sometimes be added,
to qualify the unpleasing taste of the Rhubarb.

After Purgation of the Morbifick Matter, Nature is for the most part
accustomed in the declination of the Disease, to purge away the relics of the
Matter offending by Urine, which we may discern, because the Urines are then
more thick, or more plentiful than ordinary; which endeavor of Nature must be
assisted by Diuretic Medicaments which are most temperate, such as are
Emulsions, and the Openers formerly set down in Juleps or Broths; whereunto, if
the Fever be very gentle, some Roots of Fennel and Parsley, or Leaves of
Wormwood, may be added, and that especially in Fevers of Phlegm, and continual
Quotidians.

But if Nature do expel the Relics of the Morbifick Matter to the habit of
the Body, Sudoroficks are to be used; not those hot ones, which are more
properly called Sudoroficks; but others more temperate, which are the same in a
manner with the Diuretics, and being of an attenuating faculty, do dispose the
Humors in such sort, as Nature may more easily expel them by what place or way
soever she is most inclined. Howbeit, to these may be added, Carduus Water,
Spirit of Vitriol, and other things which shall be more fully described, when
we shall treat of Malignant Fevers.

Besides inward Medicaments, diverse things are also outwardly applied, to
temperate the Feverish heat, to confirm the strength of the principal parts,
or to open the Pores of the Skin, and draw out the smoaky Vapors, and Feverish
Heat: viz. Epithems, Liniments, and other things to be applied unto the Region
of the Heart, Liver, and other parts. Which are invented to mitigate the Heat,
and are not to be applied save in the state or declination of the Disease, when
the Heat diffuseth it self to the exterior parts; not in the beginning or
augment, while it resides yet about the bowels; nor yet when the Crisis is at
hand.

An Epithem to be applied to the Region of the Heart may be thus compounded.

Take the Waters of Bugloss, Sorrel, Water Lillies, Roses, of each three
ounces: Vinegar of Roses, or juice of Lemmons one ounce: the Pouders of
Diamargaritum frigidum, and Triasantalon; of each one dram: Camphire and
Saffron, of each five grains: mix all. Make hereof an Epithem to applied warm
with Scarlet Cloth.

For the more strengthening, and to make it smell the sweeter, ad three ounces
of Orange flower Water, and one dram of Confectio Alkermes.

Where we desire yet more potently to strengthen, solid Epithems are applied
unto the Heart, made after this, or the like manner:

Take Conserves of Bugloss and Roses, of each one ounce: Confectio Alkermes two
drams: Powder of Diamargaritum frigidum one dram and an half. With Juice of
Lemmons, or Rose Water, make a solid Epithem, to be applied after the liquid
one aforesaid.

Or one yet more Cordial, may in form of a Liniment, be thus made:

Take Confectio Alkermes, and de Hyacintho, of each three drams: Powder of
Triasantalon, and Diamargaritum frigidum, of each two drams. With Water of
Roses make all into the form of a Liniment or Ointment, wherewith smear the
Be^ion of the Heart.

Also to strengthen to and drive out the Sooty Vapors and the Feverish heat,
young Pigeons are very good, being split through the Back bone, and applied to
the Region of the Heart, which likewise are oftentimes sprinkled with cordial
Pouders as Diamargaritum frigidum and Triasantalon. Or before they be applied,
the Region of the Heart is smeared with Confectio Alkermes and the cordial
Liniment aforesaid.

Also to the Liver, Epithems are wont to be applied, which are made commonly
after this manner.

Take Waters of endive, Cichory, Sorrel and Roses of each three ounces: Lettice
Water two ounces: Vinegar of Roses half an ounce: Powder of the Electuary
Triasantalon one dram and an half: Spodium half a dram: Camphire ten grains:
Make of all an Epithem.

For to cool more powerfully, an Epithem may sometimes be made of Juyces, after
this manner.

Take Juice of Cichory and Endive of each half a pound, Juice of Lettice and
Vinegar of Roses of each two ounces: Powder Triasantalon two drams: Mix all and
make thereof an Epithem.

Now it is very profitable to apply cooling Epithems not only to the Liver, but
to the whole Region of the Hypochondriaes; for they do not only further Coction,
but also help the distemper of the bowels; and hinder the principal Parts from
a deadly Consumption.

The Region of the Liver may likewise be anointed with this following Ointment,
which also may be applied to the Reins and Loins.

Take Ointment of Roses one ounce and an half: Ceratum Santalinum one ounce:
Juice of Endive one ounce and an half: Oil of Roses and Wax, as much as shall
suffice, to make a Liniment. Whereunto add a little Vinegar of Roses, at the
time of anointing.

Also cooling things are profitably applied to the stones because of the great
consent between them and the principal parts of the body; they therefore being
cooled, the heat of the whole body is in great measure extinguished. To which
purpose such an Epithem as this following may be made.

Take Waters of waterlilly, Plantain, Roses, and Cichory of each three ounces.
Vinegar of Roses one ounce and half. White wine two ounces. Mix all and dip a
cloth therein cold, and warp the same about the Stones.

Also the cooling of the hands and feet does great good, because of the Consent
they have with the whole body, by reason of the Arteries Veins and Nerves, which
end in those parts.

Neither need we fear least it should hinder the voidance of excrements by the
pores, because they are few that come that way; so that there comes more good
than hurt by the cooling of those parts.

The Patients may therefore hold in their hands balls of marble, Ivory, Brafs
or Lead. Or they may hold their hands in cold Water, with a little Wine and
Vinegar mingled therewith. To the soales of their Feet may be applied the
Leaves of Lettice, of Water Lilly, wet in Water and Vinegar Or to wash both,
Hands and Feet, the following Decoction may be provided.

Take Leaves of Lettice, Violets, House-Leek, Purslain; Vine Leaves, and
Willow-Leaves of each one handful. Heads or Leaves of Poppy (if the Patient
rest not) an handful: Vinegar one ounce: white Wine two ounces: Fountain Water
as much as shall suffice. Make of al a Decoction. Hereunto may be added, if you
please, a little Quantity of Lie, for to strengthen the Joints. Herewith let
the Hands and Arms, the Legs and Thighs of the Patient be washed warm, twice in
a day, or once at bed time.

We are furthermore to note, that the Ancients frequently used baths of fresh
Water to cure putrid Fevers, as we may see in Galen in his Book de Marcore.
Cap. 7. and in the 11. of his Method Chap. 9. and 20. and in his 1. to Glauco
Chap. 9. and those baths were either cold in a vehement Fever such as is an
exquisite burning Fever; or Blood warm in the declination of Fevers when the
signs of Concoction appeared. But in this Age of ours, these kind of baths
cannot be used, without danger, and they are convenient only in one Case; viz.
when the Fevers become very lasting and possessing a body hot and dry and
lean, seems likely to turn to an Hectic.

And onething yet more I shall ad for a Conclusion of all, that if the Fever
terminate with some Crisis, the relics of the Morbifick matter, must be taken
away with a Purge; especially if the Crisis were by way of Sweat or bleeding.
For by those Evacuations only the thinner portion of the matter is voided
forth, but the thicker being left behind, as afresh inflamed and brings the
Patient into a Relaps. Only therefore that Critical Evacuation which is wont to
proceed by way of Stool, is secure from a Relaps. Yet must we not so confide
therein as to abstain usually from al Purgation. For the Parts about the
Midriff are yet foul, and do corrupt the nutriment which comes into those
Quarters, from whence proceeds either a relapse into the former, or some new
Disease. Therefore it is for the best way (as some latter Physicians have
observed) by repeating once and again a gentle Purge, so to cleanse away all the
remainders of the morbifick Cause, that all fear of a Relapse and al occasion
of another Disease may be taken away.

Chap. 2. Of the Symptoms which accompany Putrid Fevers.
ALL Authors in a manner who have writ of Fevers, have described those
Symptoms which either accompany or follow upon them, with their Cures at the
end of their work, that so they might be best accommodated to al kinds of
Fevers. Which Counsel of their though I shall not disallow, yet I have thought
it much more commodious for the service of Practitioners, to Join them
immediately after the Doctrine of putrid Fevers, seeing in those kind of
Fevers they are wont to be most vehement and frequent, and require peculiar
Remedies.

So that although very many Symptoms are wont to be Cured by the Remedies
aforesaid, accommodated to the Cause and the Disease: yet very many there are
more offensive than the Disease it self, which are here briefly to be discribed.

Headache, Want of Sleep and Ravings, are Cured in a manner with the self same
remedies viz. Revellers, repellers, derivers, resolvers and anodines. Revellers
are emollient Clysters and such as are Laxative, Gentle Purgations,
Blood-letting, Cupping-Glasses, and washing the Feet. Repellers are frontals,
Vinegars, Roses, Unguents. Or Liniments; Derivers are opening of the forehead
Vein, and Vesicatories. Resolvers are certain Oils, and certain Live Creatures
applied to the Head, which likewise are Anodines. And while the foresaid
Remedies are used, Juleps are given and Emulsions, to temper and qualify hot
and sharp Humors. After all these come narcotick Medicines, which are not to be
used, but upon extreme necessity when other things will do no good. The matter
of al which Medicaments, is set down in our Chapters of the Phrensy and
Headache proceeding from an hot Cause. But in the administration of the said
Medicaments, one thing must be diligently noted, that they be not to be used,
when the Crisis of the Fever is near: for they would then disturb the motion
of Nature and hinder the Crisis. Which is to be understood as of all the rest,
so more especially of the narcoticks.

Against want of sleep and Ravings, a Cataplasm laid to the Soals of the Feet
will be very good, being made of fresh gourds beaten, the Leaves of the larger
HouseLeek, of Lettice and such like. As also to wash the Feet with a Decoction
of refrigerating Herbs. For by this means the Coldness is communicated through
the Nerves unto the Brain.

Convulsions in Fevers, especially Malignant ones, do sometimes happen, by
reason of Malignant Vapors which vex and fret the Skins which cover the Brain
called Meninges. Against which convulsion fits we must use revelling Clysters
and Cupping-Glasses; also often give in Juleps or broaths Epileptick Pouders
and finally anoint the Patients Backbone with Oil of Chamomel, Violets, Sweet
Almonds and of the Jndian Nut.

When profound sleep happens to such as are in Fevers the same Remedies are
given which have been described in the Cure of sleepy Diseases, only observing
this one thing; that we give no very hot Medicine inward.

The thirst of Persons Feverish is chiefly allaied with refrigerating and
moistening drinks. But if thirst be so Violent that moderate drinking cannot
assuage it (and to drink over much does much hurt and often times endangers the
Patients Life) we must by other means deceive and assuage the same.

First therefore, let the Patients draw in the cold Air, and abide in Silence
not speaking a word, let them keep their mouths close and breath through their
Nostrils, and give themselves to sleep.

Let them wash their mouths with Barley Water Blood-warm, or with Water wherein
has been boiled Jujubees, Sebestens, Prunes, Lettice, Purslain and such like.

Let them hold in their Mouths a piece of Liquoris Scraped and steeped in
Vinegar and Water, or let them wash their Mouths with Barley Water either
simple or with a little Vinegar in it, or a little Juice of Lemons,
Pomegranats, or a little spirit of Vitriol.

Or let them hold in their mouths the Kernels of Pomegranats, or a Slice of a
Citron, or a Lemmon, or an Orange, Steeped in Rose Water with Sugar; or Stalks
of Lettice, Endive, or Purslain; Leaves of Sorrel, Bits of a Gourd, Cowcumber
or Melon first Steeped in cold Water; Or Acid Cherries, or red Currence, or
Res-berries, or Tamarinds, or a piece of Crystal, or the Stones of sharp
Prunes upon which a little of the Pap Hangs, and such like.

Also Sugar Dissolved in Rose Water with a little spirit of Vitriol, and dried
again, is very good to quench thirst.

If thirst cannot be taken away with these lighter things they must be
permitted to drink, not in the beginnings of the Exacerbations, or fits nor in
the Augment, but very spareingly, but in the Vigor and especially when it is
toward declining: for then large allowance of drink does carry the heat
outward, and sometimes moves sweat; especially in the fits of Agues, in the
declination of which, it is many times good for the Patient to drink unto
satiety. Several Materials convenient to make Drinks in these kind of Fevers,
are set down in the foregoing Chapter.

But if thirst be caused by a Chollerick Humor contained in the Stomach, the
said Humor must be voided by Vomit or Stool. Vomit may be procured, if the
Patient be Stomach-sick, with an ounce and an half of Syrup of Vinegar Simple,
with five ounces of Barley Water, or of the Decoction of Rhadishes. If that
will not do, purge the Patient with a Bolus of one ounce of the pulp of Cassia,
and three drams of the pulp of Tamarinds, or with two ounces of Manna,
dissolved in a Decoction of Prunes or Tamarinds; or the following Potion may be
given.

Take Cassia new drawn six drams: Mucilage of the seeds of Flea-bane half an
ounce: the Decoction of Barley, Prunes, and Tamarinds, four ounces: Syrup of
Roses one ounce. Mix all into a Potion.

The Heat, Dryness, and Roughness of the Tongue and Throat, is cured by diverse
Remedies, apapplied to those parts, and contained in the mouth, compounded
after this manner:

Take of the Mucilage* of Quince seeds one ounce: the seeds of Mallows half an
ounce: Powder of Diatragacanthum frigidum, and Sugar Candy, of each one dram:
white Sugar, as much as shall suffice. Make of all a Lohoch. Or,

Take of the Mucilage of Fleabane seeds, or Quince seeds extracted with Rose
Water, or Lettice Water half an ounce: Syrup of Violets, Lemmons, or
Pomegranates, an ounce and an half: mix them. Let the Patients take now and
then a little, and bold it in their mouths. Or,

Take Cucumer seeds half an ounce: Quince seeds two drams: Gum Tragacanth one
dram and an half: Beat the seeds and dissolve the Gums in the white of an Egg.
Mix all, and make thereof little Cakes, for the Patients to hold in their
mouths. Or,

Take Seeds of Fleabane, and of Quinces, of each one dram and an half: Gum
Tragacanth half a dram: Sugar Candy three drams. With Mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth make all into little Cakes. Or with a thin Rag make Nodules, which
shall be steeped in Rose Water, and held in the Patients Mouth.

If the roughness be very hard to remove, make a Gargarism of the Decoction of
Barley, Roots of Marshmallows, Leaves of Lettice, Purslain, Violet flowers,
adding thereto Honey of Roses, Syrup of Violets, or Sugar Candy, or Oxymel
simple, and such like.

If filth cleaves to the Tongue, as it most times happens, it must be
oftentimes wiped with a rough Cloth dipped in a mixture of Water and Vinegar.
Whereunto also sometimes may be added, the Juice of Housleek, and Sal prunella.

If the Heat be more vehement, with great blackness of the Tongue, more
refrigerating Medicines must be mixed with the moistening ones, after this
manner:

Take Juice of Lettice, Housleek, and Lemmons, of each an ounce: Mucilage of
Quince seeds and Sugar Candy, of each half an ounce: white Sugar as much as
shall suffice. Make all into a Lohoch. Or,

Take Green Housleek one handful: Vinegar of Roses three ounces: Barley Water
one pint: Boil all till the third part be wasted away. In the strained Liquor
dissolve of Sal prunella one dram and an half: Alum a scruple: Syrup of
Violets and Mulberries, of each one ounce: Make of all a Gargarism. Or Sal
prunella alone may be dissolved in Housleek Water, and the Tongue and Throat
washed therewith, which is very good; also some Portion thereof may be
swallowed to cool the mouth of the Stomach, when it is likewise inflamed.

Also outwardly; let the Neck and Throat be anointed with Oil of Violets, and
fresh butter, washed in Rose Water, with which the Throat being as it were
scorched and parched, may be moistened.

For Cooling, the Ointment of Roses, and Galens cooling Ointment may be used,
with others of like Nature. But the Leaves of Lettice and Purslain being
bruised and enclosed between two Linen Cloths, and so applied to the Neck and
Throat, are much more effectual. Also those kind of Bugs which we call Sows,
may be bruised and laid on in the same manner.

In great Heat of the Breast, such as is wont to happen in Fevers, the whole
Breast must be anointed with Oil of Violets, Water Lillies, and of sweet
Almonds. Yea, and if the Heat be very vehement, Fomentations ought to be
applied to the said part made of a Decoction of French barley, Lettice,
Water Lillies, Borrage, Violets, and such like; after which, irrigations ought
to be used of the Oils aforesaid. Seeing that, according to the Prescript of
Galen and Avicenna, in such like Fevers, great care is to be had of the
breast, as of the Furnace of Heat. Now these kind of Remedies, according to the
Rule of Trallianus, are seldom to be cold, because they drive the Heat inward;
nor lukewarm, because they relax; but such things ought to be applied to the
breast, as are actually hot, and potentially cold.

Pain in the Loins is caused in Fevers by hot and plentiful blood boiling and
working in the Vena Cava, and it must be eased by Emollient Clysters and
Cooling, and Emulsions made of the Cold Seeds, adding Sal Prunella; and by
anointing the Loins with Galens Cooling Ointment, with Juice of the larger
Housleek, and Camphire, or Vnguentum Populeon, or Oil of Roses, Lillies, and
Poppies; or with an Epithem made of Plantane Water, Rose Water, Vinegar of
Roses, and Camphire; or with a Mixture of Rose Water, Oil of Roses, and
Vinegar: all which are to be applied actually cold in the Summer, and a little
less than blood-warm at other Seasons of the Year.

Disquietness, and tumblings, and tossings, which are wont to happen in the
Fever Assodes, and in the Fits of a Tertian Ague, are best cured by purging
away the Chollerick Humor which vexes and frets upon the Stomach, and other
sensible parts, and that by Vomit or Stool, according as Nature seems more or
less to affect the one or other way; also it may be drawn downwards by
Clysters, and presently all Art is to be used to make the Patient rest, and
cold Drink is given, as also cooling Juleps, whereunto sometimes Syrup of
Poppies, or a little Laudanum may profitably be added.

Swooning Fits are wont to happen in those kind of Fevers which are commonly
called Febres Syncopales, or Swooning Fevers, of which there are two kinds, as
was said before; and the one is called Minuta, the other Humorosa. The Cure of
which Fevers, much differing from the Cure of other Putrid Fevers, we have
reserved unto this place, in regard of the said Symptom of Swooning.

The Minuta Syncopalis, which is bred of Chollerick Humors, sharp and venomous,
must be cured after this manner. Let the Air be cold and moist, and a little
astringent, that dissipation of the substance of the Body, may be thereby
prevented. Let the Patients Diet be thin, cooling, and restorative, of the
Broth of Chickens boiled with Sorrel, Purslain, etc. To which may be added,
Rose Water, Juice of Pomegranates, and a little Sugar. Bread steeped in the
Juice of Pomegranates, or of Oranges may be given, if a more liberal Diet is to
be granted, as also Cream of Barley, or Panada's with Juice of Lemmons or
Pomegranates. Also Restorative Broths of pressed Flesh with the foresaid
Juyces. To the stronger sort are given the Yolks of Eggs with Juice of sour
Grapes, the Stones of Cocks, the Flesh of Pullets, Hens, Partridges, qualified
with the aforesaid Juyces.

Let the Patients drink with their Meat, if they have no Inflammation of any
bowel, thin Wine not very old, nor yet new and windy; or Beer that is
indifferent strong, not new, or very stale. When they eat not, or otherwise if
there be Inflammation, let their Drink be Barley Water, or Water in which a
piece of a Loaf has been boiled, with Syrup of Pomegranates, Lemmons, Citrons,
Julep of Roses, etc.

Sleep is good out of the Paroxysm, but in the same it hurts. And finally,
special Care must be taken that nothing provoke the Patient to Anger, Sadness,
and the like Passions.

In the Paroxysm, Resolution of the Spirits must be prevented by blowing cool
Air with Fans upon the Patients, and by sprinkling them with sweet smelling
Waters. Their Face must be sprinkled with cold Water, or Water of Roses, and
Vinegar minled. With which the Stones of Men, and the Dugs of Women must be
bathed cold.

If Heat and Spirits will not be revoked from the Heart to the outward Parts of
the Body, it is to be revelled and forced back by binding of the extreme Parts,
and by nipping and pinching them; also pluck the Patients often by the Nose,
pluck them by their Hair, and call upon them often by their Christen Name. Give
of the Crum of White-bread steeped in the Juice of Pomegranates, of thin
fragrant Wine, tempered with Rose Water; and when necessity urges, some
Cinnamon Water mingled with Rose Water. In the mean space, Restorative Broths
are not to be omitted, wherewith Confectio Alkermes, and such like may be
mingled. Also Cordial Potions are often to be given out of a Spoon, made after
this manner:

Take Water of Roses two ounces: Orange flower Water one ounce: Cinnamon Water
half an ounce: Confectio Alkermes one dram: Pearls prepared, and Coral
prepared, of each half a scruple: Sugar Cakes made with Pearl six drams: Mix
all, and make thereof a Julep, or Cordial Potion. To these may be added the
Electuaries, and Conserves, and Preserves, described in the foregoing Chapter.

Also the inner side of a Loaf hot out of the Oven sprinkled with Rose water
and Vinegar, may be applied to the Patients Nostrils, and Mouth.

To the Heart, Cooling and strengthening Epithems may be applied.

To straiten the Pores, and prevent the Evaporation of the Patients strength
and Spirits, wrap them in Linen sprinkled with Powder of Roses, Balaustians,
and Sanders; or let their shifts be sprinkled with Rose water, and a little
Vinegar.

Let their whole Body, especially the Back be anointed with this following
Liniment.

Take Oil made of unripe Olives, one ounce and an half: Mirtles, Quinces, and
Mucilage of* Seeds of Flea-bane, of each six drams: Gum Arabic dissolved in
Rose Water two drams, white Wax as much as shall suffice make all into a
Liniment.

A special regard is to be had of the stomach, because the Humor offending is
chiefly there collected. Now the region there of must be anointed with Oil of
Roses and Quinces: and then also may be laid on a Toast of Bread, wet in Juice
of Quinces and unripe Pomegranats. Or if it be afflicted with great heat,
soment the stomach blood-warm, with a Decoction of Purslain and Roses, o^ with
Juice of Nightshade, Purslain, Sowr-Grapes adding thereto Oil of Roses and
Quinces.

The Swooning Fits being removed and the Patient strengthened, we must bend our
minds to remove the Fever and its Cause. Which may be done, by Alteratives and
Evacuators proper for turning Fevers, which we have described in their proper
place: viz. Where the Cure of burning Fevers is set down.

The Cure of the second sort of Swooning Fevers, which is called Febris
Syncopolis Humorosa, which is caused by abundance of Phlegmatic and crude
Humors, is in a manner contrary to the Cure of the Minuta newly described. For
the Air ought to be temperate, inclining to heat, light, pure and dry. Meats,
of good Juice easily digested, prepared with Hyssop, Fennel and such like Herbs.
Let their drink be thin and not very strong. Let their sleep and Watchings be
Moderate.

But Frictions or artificial Rubbings of the Body, and by Galen much extolled
in this Case. In the 12. Method Cap. 3. They must be used from the beginning of
the Disease, with Course Clothes, beginning above and so Rubbing downwards;
first on the Thighs and Legs; afterward on the Arms, shoulders and Back. Let
the Clothes with which the Frictions are performed be first Smoaked with
Storax, Lignum Aloes, Frank-Incense Cloves etc. When after friction the Limbs
are lustily warm, anoint them with Oil of Dil, of Chamomel, of Orice, of Castus
and others of a resolving Faculty. Such Frictions as these are highly
commended, because they call the natural Heat and spirits together with the
Humor offending which did Choke the natural strength, into the outward Parts.

In the fit the Sick-party must be rowzed, by pulling the Nose, Rubbing the
Ears, plucking off of Hairs, Loud calling etc. Also sweet Smelling things must
be Applied to the Mouth and Nostrils; as Cinnamon and Orange flower Water,
Vinegar wherein Cloves have been steeped, inside of a white Loaf dipped in
Hippocras alone, or Cinnamon Water, or the following cordial Water.

Take Waters of Bawm, Rose-Mary and Orange flowers of each one ounce; Cinnamon
Water half an Ounce: Confectio Alkermes one dram: Syrup of preserved Citron
Peels and of Gilly-flowers of each one ounce: Mix all into a potion or Julep,
which the Patient must often take of, by a Spoonful at a time. Also Electuaries
may be made after this manner.

Take Conserve of flowers of Bugloss, Rosemary, and of Citron Peels preserved,
of each half an ounce: preserved Nutmeg three drams: Consectio Alkermes two
drams: Species of Diambra and Diamoschum dulce of each one scruple: With the
Syrup of preserved Citron Peels, make all into an Electuary.

Unto the Heart Epithems may be applied and young Pigeons to the stomach and
Stones; Fomentations may be applied, and other things administered, which have
been propounded in case of decay of strength.

While these things are in doing, frictions must ever and anon repeated, which
must in this Disease never be omitted.

When the Patient has a little gathered strength, the Morbifick Matter is to
be drawn out by Clysters and Purgations (in which Hiera cum Agarico, in regard
of the stomach, is very profitable) which ought to be gentle and frequent, yet
so as fitting Preparatives be administered between Purge and Purge.

Want of Appetite is common in a Manner to al Fevers: for when the stomach is
inflamed, thirst is increased, but Appetite of eating diminished. Yet sometimes
Appetite is so dejected that the Patients can hardly sup a little broth. Which
Loathing of Meat is caused by Vicious Humors collected in the stomach or soaked
into the coats thereof; or of corrupt and Malignant Vapors which infest the
stomach. It ought to be Cured by Evacuation of the Morbifick Matter by Vomit or
Stool, and first with an infusion of Rhubarb and Tamarinds. But in the
declination, if the Fever be not strong, with Hiera Picra dissolved in a
Decoction of Barley, Vetches, Wormwood and other detergent things. Afterward
we must use Clysters, which occasionally do revel from the stomach. Also acid
and refrigerating things are frequently to be given, as Syrup of lemmons,
Pomegranats, some Cherries etc. given alone or with cold Water. In the
declination or when the Fever ceases, Syrup of Roman Wormwood may pofitably be
given, either alone or mixed with acid Juyces or Syrups. Let Meats that are
grateful be presented to the sick. For as Hippocrates teaches in Aphor. 38.
Sect. 2. The Pleasanter Meat and drink, though somewhat the Worse, is to be
preferred before that which is bitter and not so pleasant. Also let them eat
but little and seldom, for much and frequent eating causes Want of Appetite
even in those which are well. And let their Meats be sauced (provided they have
no cough) with Juice of unripe Grapes, Vinegar of Roses and Juice of Lemmons.
If the sick do so abhorer al Meats that they can take nothing at al, let them
have nourishing Clysters given them twice or thrice in a day; the excrements
being first avoided by a clensing Clyster. When the Fever is wholly allaied
and gone, if want of Appetite do remain, let the sick person Moderately
exercise, and use Capers, Saxifrage, Olives; let him change place and go into
a colder Air. And finally if these helps suffice not let the Patient use
Wormwood Wine and pills of Hiera Picra, which do powerfully cleanse away such
Humors as are fast sticking in the Coats of the stomach.

Hiccupings and Vomitings which betide persons in Fevers are opposed by diverse
Medicaments, the materials whereof are to be sought for in our cures of those
Infirmities of Vomiting and Hiconping and to be Judicially accomodated to such
persons as in Fevers are troubled with those Symptoms. But special care is to
be taken that a critical Vomiting be by no Means stopped. Hiccoughing sometimes
proceeds from immoderate use of refrigerating things, as Lemnius witnesses,
whose words Schenkius does thus relate. Hiccoughing in Fevers does sometimes
follow over abundant use of Refrigerating Juleps; and I have seen many so
affected by the unadvised Rashness of Physicians, which Symptom contrary to the
expectation of all Men, I Cured by giving the Patient Wine to drink.

A Looseness befalling one that has a putrid Fever, if it be critical (that is
proceeding from the Conquest of Nature over the Morbifick Matter and tending to
expel the whole or Part thereof) it must not be stopped; neither must a
Symptomatick Looseness be presently stopped, at the very first, if it do not
very much weaken the Patient, least the Vicious Humor do flow back again to
some principal Parts. When it is seasonable to stop it, it must be done with a
gentle astringent Purge, with clensing and Corroborating Clysters; by Medicines
taken in and outwardly Applied, which do thicken, strengthen and bind. All
which may be taken out of our Cure of a Diarrhoea or Looseness: beginning with
the gentler and proceeding if need be to the more strong by Degrees.

Sweats if they be not Critical (that is caused by Nature expelling the Humor
offensive) but Symptomatical [that is, caused by the vehemence of that Disease
dissolving the Body, and hunting the Humors through the Skin] and does very
much weaken the Patient, they must be suppressed by cooling the Air, with
sprinkling cold Water and the leaves of the Willow and Vine-tree upon the
pavement; and if need be by opening the Windows; the Body being cooled and
ayred by little and little, the Cloths being light upon the Patient, and a
Flock-bed being put instead of a Fether-bed: also by often sprinkling the
Patients Face with Water and Vinegar mingled together, and finally by the use
of cooling Astringent Medicaments; such as are cooling Epithemes applied to the
Heart, Liver, and whole Belly, and often changed. Ointments made of Oil of
Roses, of Mirtles, of Mucilages, and Astringent Pouders, are to be anointed
upon the whole Body; but especially upon the backbone. Pouders of Roses,
Balaustians, Pomegranate rinds, Myrtle, Mastich, Terra Samia etc Must be
sprinkled upon the Neck, Throat, under the Armpits, and in the Groins. Or let
the Patient be wrapped in a Linen Cloth, sprinkled with a mixture of Vinegar
and Water, and the aforesaid pouders strewed thereon; being in the mean time
careful that no Inflammation, or Tumor be in the parts about the short Ribs: for
then we must abstain from Astringent things, at least such as are strong. The
Sweat must not be wiped off, but suffered to dry about the Pores of the Skin,
so to stop them that more may not follow.

Also we must give in at the Mouth, Medicaments that thicken and strengthen, as
Barley Water boiled with Lettice and cooling Seeds; Restorative Broths, with
Juice of Pomegranates, sour Grapes, Pouders of Corals, Pearls, shavings of
Ivory, Sanders, or Baulaustians. Juleps of the Waters of Roses, Lettice,
Purslain, with Syrup of Pomegranates, dried Roses, or Quinces. Conserved
Electuaries, of Conserve of Roses, Corals, Pearls, Terra Sigillata, pouders of
Diamargaritum frigidum, and such like.

AN APPENDIX.
In the Cure of most acute and pernicious Fevers, one thing is diligently to
be noted that such Fevers seldom happen without some inward and peculiar
disorder and commonly Inflammations of some of the inward Bowels as Liver,
Spleen etc. So that we must evermore be careful of the Parts under the short
Ribs, of the Head, the Breast, the Womb; Reins and Bladder: that by all means
possible we may hunt out, which of those is much out of order, and as much as
may be restore the same to its Natural Constitution.

Chap. 3. Of a Tertian Ague.
AN Ague, or Intermittent Tertian Fever, is caused by an Excrementitious
Chollerick Humor, contained in the first Region of the Body, and there
putrefying.

A Tertian Ague is either Legitimate and Exquisite, or Illegitimate and bastard.

A Legitimate or Exquisite Tertian Ague, is terminated in twelve hours, and is
caused by the putrefaction of Natural Choler. But a bastard Tertian has fits
that last above twelve hours. But if it exceed twenty four hours, it is termed
Tertiana extensa, a stretched Tertian. And it is caused either by Preternatural
Collar putrefying, or by Natural Choler mingled with other Humors, especially
with phlegm.

Also Tertian Agues are Simple, or Double, or Triple. A Simple Tertian, is that
whose Fits come every other day. A Double Tertian is that whose Fits come every
day. And although herein it differ not from a Quotidian or every day Ague, yet
they are known one from the other by their proper Signs, showing the abundance
of Phlegm or Choler in the Patient; of which Signs in their place. Sometimes
notwithstanding in a double Tertian there are two fits in one day, the other
day remaining free; and this some latter Physicians do call two Tertians, and
make it to differ from a double Tertian. Which Distinction notwithstanding is
of small moment. A Triple Tertian is when there are three fits in the compass of
two days. This is a most rare and seldom seen sort of Fevers. Yet Galen
propounds one single Example thereof, and I saw another in the year 1637. in a
certain Gentleman, who once in sixteen hours had a fit of a Tertian Ague. And
all the fits did every one of them terminate in the space of ten or twelve
hours, by sweat. Now these diverse Paroxysms are made by a different matter
putresying in different places, so that each one has as it were its peculiar
Chimney where it is first kindled.

Now the Humors causing Tertian Agues, are collected chiefly in the first
Region of the Body, viz. In the Liver, the bladder of Gall, the Stomach, the
Mesentery, the Pancreas, or in the Veins of those Parts.

Their Causes, are all such things which engender Excrementitious Choler, viz.
An hot and dry distemper of the Spleen, youthful Age, Hot Constitution of the
Air, Watchings, Cares, Anger, Fastings, use of hot Meats, over much Exercise.
To these are added, for the breeding a bastard Tertian, such Causes as engender
Phlegm and Melancholy. Hereupon, such as have hot Livers, and by Glutinous and
bad Diet, do breed many Crudities, are subject to bastard Tertians, by reason
of the mixture of Choler with crude Humors. And hence also it is, that in
Summer time, crude Humors bred through weakness of the Natural Heat, by eating
of Fruits, and over much drinking, being mixed with Choler, do breed bastard
Tertians.

The Signs to know an Exquisite Tertian by, are these: That this Fever always
begins with great shaking Fits, whereas in a Quotidian Fever or Ague, there is
only a light shivering or coldness. After the cold shaking Fit, follows great
Heat, sharp and biting, Intolerable Thirst, great and frequent breathing, want
of Sleep, Headache, and sometimes Ravings. After the shaking fit, sometimes there
follows a vomiting of Chollerick Humors, or a purging by Stool. The Urine is
sometimes Yellow, Yellowish-Red, or Red. The Fits last not above twelve hours,
and they are terminated by Sweat. Also the Causes forecited, breeding Choler,
have preceded.

In a bastard Tertian, all the foregoing Signs are more remiss than they are in
an Exquisite one, but more intense than in a Quotidian Ague. And according as
there is more or less phlegm mingled with the Choler, the Fits come nearer to
those of an Exquisite Tertian, or of a Quotidian; but in respect of the
vehemence of the Symptoms, and the length of the Fit it self. So that the
Paroxysms of a bastard Tertian may be lengthened out to sixteen, eighteen, or
more hours. Although they may be sometimes shorter, because of the paucity of
the Matter, and be terminated within the space of eight, ten, or twelve hours.

The Prognostic of this Disease, is taken out of Hippocrates, in Sect. 4. Aph.
59. Exquisite or exact Tertian Agues last but for seven fits at most. And in
Aphor. 43. of the same Section, All Intermitting Fevers are void of danger.
Which is to be understood only of such Tertians as are void of all malignity.
For there are Malignant and Pestilent Tertians, which though they have evident
Intermissions; yet do they often kill the Patients. Furthermore, many things
fall upon the Neck of a Tertian, which may breed danger, although the Fever of
it self be not dangerous.

Haly writes, and common Experience shows, That if such as are sick of a
Tertian Ague, have Ulcers, Scabs, or Pustles breaking out in their Lips, it is
a token the Ague will leave them. For it is a kind of Critical Evacuation in
those parts.

A Looseness befalling one that has a Tertian Ague, the matter being digested,
ends the Disease. And this is the way by which alone Nature does perfectly
expel the Cause of these Fevers. For seeing the Original Cause of these
Fevers is contained in the Gallbladder, or the Liver, or the Mesentery, and
other Parts in the first Region of the Body; although that which steems and
vapors therefrom in every fit, do get into the habit of the Body, and is purged
away, either by Sweats, or by insensible Transpiration, or by Pushes and
Pimples; yet the gross parts and setlings of the Humor abiding in their place,
which unless by the benefit of Nature, or Medicaments it be purged away by
stool, it is wont to be the Cause either of a long Ague, or of Obstructions, or
of a Relapse, or of other stubborn Diseases.

Agues are wont to be of small durance and little danger, if the habit of the
whole Body be good, if the bowels be well affected, if it be Spring or Summer, if
the Patient eat little, and drink sparingly. And contrary wise, they are wont
to be long and more rebellious, if there be an evil disposition of the Liver or
Spleen if the Patient abound with phlegmatic Humors or Melanchollick, if the
Winter or Autumn be in their full force, if the Patients do eat much, or by
much drinking do oppress their Natural Heat.

The Cure, as in other Fevers, is to be directed to the Fever, its Cause, and
strength of the Patient. The Fever calls for Coolers; the Cause requires
Coolers likewise, and withal such things as digest and purge the Humor
offending; the Patients strength calls for things that corroborate and vigorate
the same.

And in the first place, A Cooling Diet must be appointed, and which moistens;
it must be the very same in an exquisite Tertian, which we before prescribed in
our Cure of Continual Fevers. But in a bastard and single Tertian, a fuller
Diet somewhat, is to be enjoined, especially if the Disease prove to be long;
for then solid Meats are to be given on the wel-day, and five or six hours
before the fit. But in a double Tertian, as in an exquisite Tertian, the Sick
must be nourished only with broth, and other supping things.

This is a most pleasant Drink out of Forestus, for those which have a third
day Ague.

Take Fountain Water two pints: Cinnamon half an ounce: Sugar three ounces: Let
all be strained cold and raw, through an Hippocras Bag.

The Patient must not eat when the Fit is coming, according to that saying of
Hippocrates, in Aphor. 11. Sect. 1. For Nature (as Galen shows in his
Commentary on that place) by Concocting of newly eaten Meat, is called away
from Concoction of the Morbifick Humors. Add hereunto, That in the fit of an
Ague, the whole body is filled with a filthy vapor, which does mar, and for the
most part corrupt that meat which is eaten near the fit. But if the fit prove
so long, or the Patients body so hot and dry, so lean and thinly woven
together, with wide pores, that it is soon dissolved and dissipated, and cannot
hold out to the end of the fit; the Patient in such a case may be allowed to
eat in the fit, and it will be better to eat when the fit is in the state or
height, than at any other time. Howbeit, in the beginning also, and in the
augmentation, necessity compelling, Meat may be given. For so Galen in the
tenth of his Method, Chap. 5. was compelled to give Meat even in the beginning
of the fits, unto such as had this kind of Ague, being of a hot and dry
temperature, unto whom fasting is extremely hurtful, lest they should fall into
swooning fits. And in imitation of him, Amatus Lusitanus in the 68. Cure, of
the fourth Century, to one that was full of, and vomited pure Choler, and by
that means fell into swooning fits, he gave bread dipped in water, and sprinkled
with Juice of sown Grapes in the beginning of the Ague fit; by which means he
hindered the aforesaid Symptoms.

There is one thing yet further to be observed both in this, and all other
Agues, That the Patient do neither eat, drink, nor sleep, before the fit. But
it will be good that the Patient go to stool, by means of a Clyster, provided
the same be administered before the beginning of the fit.

Having therefore ordered a convenient Diet, we must forth with proceed to
evacuate the Morbifick Matter, which seeing it sticks in the first Passages, it
must be voided not only by Clyster, but by Purges and Vomitories.

Clysters in an exquisite Tertian, must be made of an Emollient and Cooling
Decoction, with Cassia, Catholicum, Diaprunum simple, and purgative. But in a
bastard Tertian, let the Decoction be of Emollient and Cutting simples,
dissolving therein Diaphoenicon, Honey of Roses, etc.

Purgative Medicaments in an exquisite Tertian, must be the same which have
been propounded in continual Fevers. But in a bastard Tertian, there must be
added Agarick, Senna, Catholicum, Diaphoenicon, and others, such as the
Judicious Physician shall conceive most suitable to the constitution of the
sick. And in every sort of Agues, Cream of Tartar may profitably be added to
the Medicaments, because it opens Obstructions, is potently clensing, and yet
cools withal. Purging Medicines are to be given on the day of Intermission, and
that in the morning, as commonly is used; if the time of Intermission fall
within those hours: if not, the middle space between the two fits must be
chosen. And at any hour of the day or night, we may give a Purge, provided it
be far from the Fit, and the Stomach have digested what was last eaten.

But in a double Tertian, it is an hard matter to choose a convenient time to
give a Purge, because many times, not above three or four hours do fall between
two fits. Yea, And sometimes the fits are so long, that the one begins before
the other be ended, which makes them be called Febres Subintrantes, encroaching
or intruding Fevers. For then the speediness of the occasion or opportune
time, requires the uttermost diligence of the Physician. Now the more
commodious hour of giving the Medicine, is thus to be chosen. In a double
Tertian not encroaching, the Medicament must be given in the end of the Fit, at
such a distance from the following Fit, that the working of the Physic may be
over ere the other Fit come. But in an encroaching Ague, when the latter Fit
interfers with the former, the Medicament must be given in the beginning of the
declination, as soon as it begins never so little to remit. And in both Cases
the Patient must drink Broth, three hours after the Medicament is taken; yet
so, as that there must be remaining three hours from the Broth-taking before
the next Fit begin. So that the Medicament, is to be given at least six hours
before the next Fit.

As for Vomits, What was said of them in the Cure of Continual Fevers, may be
here very commodionsly applied; because the abundance of evil Humors contained
in the Stomach, Mesenterie, and Cavity of the Liver, which is wont to cause
these Fevers, is brought away by Vomit; which sometimes cannot be moved by
purging Medicines given again and again, as Fernelius has well observed. And
therefore, If in the beginning of the Fit, the Patient be vexed with Vomitings,
the Physician shall do well to follow that motion of Nature. And seeing the
gentlest sorts of Vomits, will not ordinarily serve the turn, we must proceed
to the middle sort, such as is especially Asarum, of the powder whereof, half
adram, two scruples or one dram, is given in Broth, or some other convenient
Liquor. Others give the Decoction thereof, which is made of three drams of
Asarum Roots, boiled in Chicken Broth, or in Barley Broth made with Raisons.
The Chemists do give white Vitriol prepared, and Salt of Vitriol, and also Aqua
Benedicta, which is made of Crocus Metallorum. Which, as other Medicaments made
of Antimony, as they do sometimes happily rid away such morbifick Matter as is
lodged in the first passages about the Stomach and Mesenterie, etc. So do they
require a prudent and skilful Physician to administer them; otherwise they are
like a sharp Knife in the hand of an Infant, or like a Sword in the hand of a
Madman.

The first passages of the Body, or first Region thereof, being purged, at
least with one Purge, a Vein is to be opened in the Wel-Day. Yea verily, And if
the Patient be Plethorick, the Urins red and thick, the Cure is well begun by
Blood-letting, for the Purge will afterward work the better.

If the Blood appear very Hot, Adust, or Putrid, Bloodletting must be repeated;
which yet is left to the Judgment of the Physician, according as he finds the
Patients constitution.

After Purgation and Phlebotomie, we must endevor to prepare the Humors, by
Juleps such as were set down in the Cure of Continual Fevers; the matter
whereof must be varied, according as Phlegm or Melancholy is mingled with
Choler, as was observed in the place aforesaid.

In the mean time, whilst the Medicines aforesaid are making, the Feverish
heat is to be allaied with cooling Epithems applied to the heart and Liver,
such as were propounded in Continual Fevers, with this Caution, that they be
never laid on, but in the height of the Hot-Fit, or rather when it first begins
to abate.

To the Liver also and the Loins, Ointment of Roses, or the cooling Ointment of
Galen may be applied.

Also Emollient and cooling Clysters, will be very good at the end of the Fit,
as well as in the beginning.

The matter being prepared certain days, by the use of Juleps, Purgation must
be again used, with Senna, Rhubarb, Catholicum, Syrup of Roses; adding thereto
Agarick, if Phlegm abound. And And if the Patient be strong; we may add
Diaprunum Solutivum, Electuarium de Succo Rosarum, or Diaphaenicon.

The Body being again purged, after the use of Juleps, if the Fits return and
seem longer than they were before, it is a sign that gross Humors, and such as
stick fast in the Body, do nourish the Fever, and breed Obstructions: In
regard of which, clensing, opening and cutting things are to be used The
Principal of which is Wormwood, which is exceedingly commended by Galen. In his
1. Book ad Glauconem Chap. 9. and Century, which in regard of the rare virtues
it has in curing Agues, is called Febrifuga, that is to say Ague-Queller. But
because these Herbs are hot, they may be qualified by the Commixture of cooling
things, after this manner.

Take Roots of Grass, Cichory, Asparagus, of each one ounce: Leaves of
Agrimony, Sorrel, Cicbory, Endive, of each one handful: vulgar Wormwood and
Centaury, of each an handful: Boil all to a pint. In the strained Liquor
dissolve three ounces of Syrup of Lemmons. Make all into a Julep for to be
taken at three times in the morning.

The Juleps being finished, a Purgation must be again administered or a
Vomitory, if Nature affect to discharge her self that way. For then, the signs
of Concoction appearing, these Fevers are sometimes happily Cured by Vomiting.
And Galen in his first Book ad Glauconem Chap. 10. Writes that many are Cured
of this kind of Ague only by a Vomit yea verily and daily experience shows,
that Aqua Benedicta does eradicate these Fevers or Agues for the most Part,
unless some contumacious obstructions of the Bowels do hinder. Many Experiments
hereof are propounded by Martinus Rulandus in the Centuries of his Cures. But,
it is, as was said before, a vehement Medicament, and not to be given without
extreme Caution. Some give an ounce of Aqua Benedicta with the Infusion of half
an ounce of Senna, and so it works more by Stool than by Vomit.

Others use Cambogia, others Mercurius Dulcis with Scammony. Which Medicaments,
seeing they do potently Evacuate, do often Pluck these kind of Fevers away by
the Roots, but they are to be given only to such as are strong of Constitution.

To these Medicaments exquisite Tertians and Bastard ones too, are wont to give
place. But if the Agues do yet stubbornly resist (as it ofttimes falls out)
Solemn Purgation must be made with an Apozem to be taken three days, made of
the Materials of the foresaid Juleps, adding thereto Senna, Rhubarb, Agarick,
Syrup of Roses of Cichory with Rhubarb and such like. Yea verily and although
the Ague be gone before the use of this Apozem, if a Voluntary Looseness do not
befall the Patient. For the solution of an Ague by Sweat or insensible
Transpiration, as not to be trusted unto, gives suspicion of a Relapse; because
by them the thinner Part only of the Humor is Evacuated, the thicker being left
behind: which can no other ways be Evacuated, save by Stool.

Before the Apozem aforesaid be used, if there be a Distension in the Parts
under the short Ribs, let this following Emollient, attenuating and
strengthening fomentation be applied.

Take Roots of Marshmallows, Grass and Asparagus, of each one ounce: Roots of
Enula Campana and the middle Bark of Tamarisk of each half an ounce: Leaves of
Mallows, Violets, Agrimony, Maidenhair and Wormwood, of each an handful:
Lin-Seed and Faenu-Greek Seed, of each one ounce: Flowers of Chamomel, Melilot,
Roses of each a pugil: Boil all in three Parts of Water and one of white Wine,
put in toward the conclusion, with two ounces of Vinegar: with this Decoction
foment the Parts under the short Ribs Morning and Evening, for two days before
the use of the Apozem.

After Fomentation, anoint the said Parts with this following Ointment.

Take Oil of Lillies, Sweet Almonds and Tamarisk of each one ounce: Ointment of
Marshmallows two ounces: and a little Wax. Make all into a Liniment.

If after al these remedies, the stubborn Ague do yet lengthen the time and
keep its ground; and the Patients Face appear swollen, and palish, also their
Lege swel toward night: they are to be plied with such Medicines as are
commonly prescribed for obstructions of the Liver. Among the rest, Montanus
does very much commend the Decoction of Cichory and Germander in Broth; which
he says is admirable in long Fevers that are caused by obstructions.

Yet, it is to be noted; that the length of a Tertian Ague is some times caused
by an hot and dry distemper of the Liver, whith perpetually produces a
Chollerick Humor, the Cause of new Fits. Which is often observed in many, which
being of a dry and meagre constitution of body and wholly Chollerick, have had
a Tertian Ague three or four months together, especially in the more hot season
of the year, without any tension of their Bowels, or any abundance of Humors.
To such as these, strong purgers, and strong aperitives or heaters do hurt. But
such as these are to be plied with a cooling and moistening diet, with Juleps
and Broaths of the same Nature. And the superfluous Humors are to be Purged
away by little and little with Emollient and Refrigerating Clysters, with
Cassia, Tamarinds, Catholicon and Syrup of Roses. But in this case especially
great miracles are performed by a bath of Blood-warm Water, which does
extinguish the hot and dry distemper which is imprinted upon the Bowels. Let
the Patient use these baths, on the Well-day, but without sweating.

Sometimes also the Length of Tertian Agues arises from the evil disposition of
some of the Bowels, especially of the Liver and Melentery; which cannot be
Cured by purgations though never so often repeated, because that evil Quality
remaining still in the Liver, causes new Morbifick Matter daily to breed, which
produces new Fits. Which evil Disposition or Quality of the Bowels, is taken
away by Diuretics, Sudorosicks and other resolving Medicaments.

With which faculties these following simples are endued viz. Wormwood,
Centory, Carduu^, Roots of Dictamnus, of pimpernel, Tormentil etc. Of which are
made Decoctions, Pouders, and such like, which must be given for diverse days
together before the Fit.

A dram of Uenice Treacle is ordinarily given with white Wine, before the Fit,
three times one after another.

Some give a walnut preserved in Sugar or Honey after the same manner.

When the Heat of Uenice Treacle is feared, it is at first given by it self,
and a draught of Plantain-Water is given after it. My Master Varandaeus did
often use this as a Specific Medicine.

A Cup of Hippocras given before the Fit will work the same effect, with which
pleasant Medicine many have been Cured.

Yet must it carefully be observed, that these remedies must not be given, till
the Patient has been diligently Purged.

Zechius Frequently used these following Pills, which are most effectual for
opening Obstructions, streng^hening the Liver, and taking away the distempers
of the Bowels.

Take Treches of Rhubarb, of Eupatorium, and of Wormwood, of each half a dram:
Powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis one scruple: with Syrup of Wormwood make a Mass of
Pills. Of which let the Patient take one dram in the morning three days
together, drinking after them a draught of Broth made with Cichory and
Maidenhair.

Montanus was wont to give many days together a scruple of Troches of Rubarb
or of Wormwood, with Broth in which Barley, Parseley Roots, Cichory and
Borrage have Boiled.

Let the Region of the Liver be anointed morning and evening before Meals, with
a Liniment made of two ounces of Ceratum Santalinum, Juice of Cichory half an
ounce: Juice of Wormwood two drams: and a little Vinegar of Roses.

In l^ke manner let the Region of the stomach be anointed with this Liniment.

Take Nard Oil, Oil of Wormwood and of Quinces of each half an ounce: Gallia
Moschata one scruple: white Wax as much as shall be requisite. Make al into a
Liniment.

Besides the Medicaments hitherto propounded, which respect a regular and
Methodical Cure; there are many other specific and Empirick Medicaments, both
internal and external; both commended by Practitioners, and frequently used by
the common People; out of the almost infinite number whereof I shall here set
down such as are the choicest. And among these Medicines may be reckoned, such
things as were before propounded, to amend the evil Quality of the Liver and
Mesentery which is wont to make long Agues: whereunto, these things following
may profitably be added.

And in the first place, Spirit of Sulphur in a Legitimate Tertian, or one very
near Legitimate, after bleeding and Purging, being given with Purslain Water in
the vigor of the Fit, does powerfully extinguish the heat of the Fever; and if
the Humor be thin, drives the same out by sweat, that there remains no matter
for a new Fit, and so is the Disease Sometimes plucked up by the Roots. It is
given from half a scruple to a scruple, with four ounces of Purslain Water.

And sometime the said spirit is mingled with Salt of Wormwood, which is also of
great Efficacy in the Cure of Agues the Composition is thus.

Take Salt of Wormwood half a dram: Spirit of Sulphur a scruple: Carduus Water
four ounces: Mix them. Let the Patient take it when the Fit Approaches and he
covered with many Clothes.

Some Affirm that the Juice of Plantain Clarified and drunk to the Quantity of
four ounces, an hour before the Fit, does Cure a Tertian Ague. Some give it
with Vinegar and Saffron after this manner

Take of the Juice of Plantain four ounces: Vinegar of Roses half an ounce:
Saffron three grains: Mix them and give the Patient to drink, two hours before
the Fit.

Manardus prefers a Decoction of Chamomel, or the distilled Water thereof, to
the Quantity of four ounces, two hours before the Fit.

A Medicine commonly used, and often successful, is, a little Potion made of
Rose Water, Plantain Water and Aqua Vita of each a spoonful; given before the
Fit.

These following are outwardly applied.

Take Leaves of Hyssop and Tansie cut small, of each a pugil; Mirrh two drams:
Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves and Cinnamon, of each half a dram: Venice Turpentine and
Juice of Tansey, of each one ounce: Mix all and spread them upon a Rose-Cake,
fried in a frying Pan with Canary Wine, which being covered with a Linen
Cloth must be applied hot to the Region of the stomach, an hour before the
Fit. Or,

Take Wormwood and Green Mint of each a pound: Crust of Bread toasted and
steeped in Vinegar half a pound: pulp of Quinces, or Conserve of Quinces made
with Honey two ounces: Mastich half an ounce: Mace and Nutmeg of each two
drams: Let al be beaten and lustily wrought together, with Oil of Quinces. Make
hereof a Cataplasm to be applied before the Fit. It provokes sweat and takes
away the Pains of the stomach. Or,

Take Nutmeg, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each three drams: Mirrh and Ginger of each
two drams: Make al into a Powder; mix it with Liquid Pitch and make thereof a
Plaster for the stomach.

Also this following Cataplasm may profitably be applied to the Liver.

Take white Sanders and Red of each one dram: Barley Meal two drams: Aloes half
an ounce: Flowers of Violets and Roses dried of each one dram: With Juice of
Wormwood and Vinegar make a Cataplasm, to be applied to the Region of the Liver
one hour before the Fit.

Neither are those Medicines wholly to be rejected which the common people are
wont to apply unto the Wrists of such as have Agues. For not only the Opinion
of People is hereby satisfied, who conceive that many are cured with these
Remedies; but somewhat they may effect, by communicating their virtues unto the
Heart by those notable Arteries which are situate in the Wrists. The chief of
which kind of Medicines are these that follow.

Take Leaves of Plantane, Celondine the great, of each one handful: Cobwebs,
Nettle Seeds, Soot from the Chimney, and common Salt, of each one dram: the
strongest Vinegar as much as shall suffice. Make of all a Cataplasm to be
applied to the Wrists a little before the fit, and to be repeated fresh three
or four times.

Mous-Ear beaten with Salt and Vinegar, is by some accounted of great efficacy,
being applied to the Wrists before the fit.

Of some, the smallest sort of Housleek or Mous-teat is commended, being used
after the same manner.

Others commend the Leaves of Shepheards-purse beaten with Salt and Vinegar.

Platerus applies unto the Wrists the inner bark of the Nut-tree sleeped in
Vinegar; which he says, had been by him used with success.

Finally, Others apply such things as are apt to blister the Skin, as Garlic,
Onions, Crow-foot, and the like; which are less safe than the former, and very
troublesome to the Patient.

Chap. 4. Of a Quotidian Fever.
A Quotidian Ague is so called, because its fits do return every day. Wherein
it agrees with a double Tertian, and a triple Quartan, but is distinguished
from them by signs proper to it self. This Fever is most rarely seen, so that
among six hundred Patients that have Agues which come every day, scarce one of
them is troubled with a Quotidian or every day Ague.

This Ague is caused by phlegm putrefying in the first Region of the Body: And
therefore all such things as multiply phlegm in the Body, may cause this Ague,
such as are, a cold and moist distemper of the Bowels, old Age, Child's Age, an
idle life, Autumn Season, Meats cold and moist, long Sleeps and such like.

The Diagnostick Signs are such as testify phlegm to abound in the Body; as
greatness of bulk, softness and fatness, white color, or pale, dull sense,
profound sleep, and dreams of Waters. Also this Fever for the most part comes
in the night, and that without shaking, only with a coldness or light
shivering, because the Morbifick Matter being benign, and not much an Enemy to
Nature, does less provoke her; and therefore the heat is not suddenly drawn
inward as in a Tertian Ague, but retires by little and little. The time of
Coldness being over, Heat is slowly and unequally kindled, so that the Patient
feels sometimes heat, and then cold, and then heat again. Also the heat is mild,
and not at all scorching, and thirst little. The Urines are at first white,
thin, and undigested; and in the process they appear more thick, and better
colored. The Pulse is small, seldom, and slow. The Parts about the short Ribs do
swel, and are commonly puffed up, and distended. The fits do commonly last
twelve hours, and do not end but so as to leave some Feverish heat behind
them; because this Fever is like a fire of green wood, which is both long in
kindling, and leaves much smoke behind it. Sometimes the sit is extended to
twenty four hours, and it seems to be a continual Fever.

Now these Signs are very variable, and appear more intense or remiss,
according as the phlegm is either simple, or mingled with other Humors; and
likewise according to the different kind of the phlegm which putrefies. So that,
according to Galen in his Book of Plenitude, Chap. 11. Salt phlegm makes the
Patients thirsty; acid or sour phlegm makes them hungry; sweet phlegm makes them
sleepy; tastless phlegm makes them without appetite to Meat: and likewise
Fevers which are caused by acid or Glassie phlegm, are wont to come with a
shaking fit.

This Fever is wont to be perpetually long, because of the thickness and
contumacy of the Morbifick Matter, and lasts forty days, and sometimes three or
four months. Neither is it without danger, seeing it may degenerate into a
Cachexy, Dropsy, Lethargy, and other grievous Diseases. The longer or shorter
durance of this Fever, is known by the signs of Crudity and Concoction, and
also by the Evacuations, which for the most part Nature endeavors by Vomit,
Stool, or Sweat: For those Evacuations appearing, show the Disease shorter: but
if Nature endeavor no Evacuation, the Disease will prove the longer.

A Quotidian Ague that comes in the day time, is less dangerous than that which
comes a nights, as Hippocrates does teach us in 3. Epidem. Sect. 5. T. 64. He
calls the former a Diurnal, the latter a Nocturnal. The reason of which
Prognostic, is because that the Diurnal have longer fits; for teaching unto
night, in which the pores of the Skin are closed, the putrid vapors are kept
within, not having freedom to breath forth by which means, the fits are
lengthened, and as Hippocrates himself says, do very often bring the Patient
into a Consumption. Ad hereunto, That seeing the Intermission happens in the
night, we are forced to give the Patient Meat in the night, which is
un^easonable, and hinders the Patient from sleeping; by which means great
weakness is caused, and the Patient is much hurt, and the Functions of the Body
quite put out of frame.

The Cure must be in a manner the same with that which was propounded for a
bastard and lingering Tertian, yet so as that among such things as prepare the
Humors, and open Obstructions, we make choice of such, which have a greater
power to attenuate and cut the Humors. Also in this Fever a special care is to
be had of the Stomach, which for the most part is grievously afflicted; and
therefore must be recreated with strengthening Medicaments, both given in, and
out wardly applied, The Cataplasm of Mint and Worm wood, propounded in the Cure
of a Tertian Ague, is very good in this case.

Zacutus Lusitanus propounds two Medicines, with which he glories that he had
vanquished most stubborn Quotidian Agues. The one is a Decoction of Chamomel,
made after this manner:

Take Flowers of Chamomel three pugils: Tops of Roman Wormwood two pugils. Boil
all in three pints of Water to a pint and an half. Add to the strainings four
ounces of Sugar. Let the Patient drink five or six ounces every morning.

The other is a Decoction of China and Guajacum drunk twenty five days
together; which though Physicians are afraid to use in such Fevers as these,
because of the overgreat heating and drying Faculty; yet is it mightily
commended by such as have writ whole Books of the Spices and Drugs of India. Yet
we must remember that Zacutus Lusitanus practiced Physic in a Country cold and
moist, where these Medicines may more safely be used. And therefore in other
Countries that are hotter, they must not be given save unto very Phlegmatic and
Cachectical bodies.

Chap. 5. Of a Quartan Ague.
AQuartan Ague is that which has its Fits returning every fourth day, and it
is caused by Melancholy putrefying in the first Region of the Body.

Now Melancholy is of two sorts; Natural, and Preternatural. The Natural is
bred of the thicker and more earthy part of our Nourishment, being cold and
dry. The Preternatural, is caused by adustion of Choler, and is therefore hot
and dry. Hence arise two sorts of Quartan Agues; for that which is bred of
Natural Melancholy, is called a legitimate Quartan; that which is bred of
Preternatural Melancholy, is called a bastar Quartan. Howbeit, the bastard
Quartan may also come of Natural Melancholy, being mingled with some portion
of Choler.

Again, A Quartan Ague is either Single, Double, or Triple. A Single Quartan is
when one Fit alone comes every fourth day. A Double is when two Fits happen
upon two days one immediately after the other, and the third day is free. A
Triple Quartan is when the Fits come every day, as they do in a Quotidian, and
in a Double Tertian. Now these Double and Triple Quartans come of Melancholy
putrefying in diverse parts of the Body.

The Signs to know this Ague by, are first, such things as argue that
Melancholy abounds in the Patient. Unto which must be added the coming of the
Fit upon the fourth day, which is the peculiar sign. Also the form of the fit
differing from the fits of other Agues, does discover this Disease. For it
begins with yawning and stretchings, together with heaviness of the whole Body;
after which follows cold, and then shivering and shaking, in which the Patients
seem to have their bones broken. Also the heat is kindled by little and little
in a cold and thick Matter. The Pulse is seldomer and slower than in other
Fevers. The Urines are at first white, thin, and watery; but in the progress
they are more colored, and thicker. Now these signs appear in a legitimate
Quartan. But in a bastard Quartan, the vehemence of the Symptoms being
greater, does argue the Humor to be thinner and hotter. But a bastard Quartan
is not distinguished from a legitimate, herein alone, in that in a bastard
Quartan, the heat, thirst, watchings, and other Symptoms, are more vehement;
but in that the legitimate begins of it self, without any Fever foregoing; but
a bastard Quartan succeeds other Fevers and Agues, by reason of the adustion
of the Humor which caused those Diseases, by means of which adustion, it
degenerates into Preternatural Melancholy.

A Double Quartan is easily known by the Course of the fits. And a Triple
Quartan is distinguished from a Double Tertian, and a Quotidian, not only by
the Signs of Melancholy abounding, and by the form of the Fits; but also
because it was first a Single, or a Double Quartan before it came to be a
Triple Quartan. For very rarely, or never does a Quartan Ague begin with a
Triple; but a Simple or Double Quartan degenerates into a Triple.

As for what concerns the Prognostic; this kind of Ague is wont to be longest
of all others; and that which begins in the fall of the leaf continues al Winter
commonly, and goes not away til the Spring come. Yea and some Quartans
continue a year or years. Summer Quartans are the shortest. In all of them we
must have a continual eye to the signs of concoction which signify the
solution of the disease to be at hand; and with these, for the patient to make
black urine is a good token.

A legitimate Quartan is longer than a bastard Quartan because the former
proceeds from a thicker, the latter from a thinner Humor

This kind of Ague is wont to be very safe from danger, especially the
legitimate, being accompanied with no grievous affection of any of the bowels.
But the bastard Quartan is more dangerous. and if the Liver, Spleen, or any
other part be grievously damnified, it degenerates into a Dropsy,

Aged persons above sixty years, being taken with a Quartan Ague, do for the
most part die of it: because their natural heat is too weak to overcome so
contumacious an Humor.

An intermitting Quartan, being changed into a continual, is for the most part
deadly. Because that Fever whose motion was outward, is changed into one whose
motion is inward. Which mostly falls out in the Winter, the cold meeting with
the humors which were but outward and beating them back into the innermost
Closets of the Body. The which also come to pass by unseasonable use of sharp
and vehement purges. For thereby of simple Quartans, double, triple, and
continual are generated.

A Quartan Ague coming upon one that has the falling sickness cures the same,
according to Hippocrates in the 70 Aphorism of the 5 Section. Those that have
Quartan Agues are not much troubled with Convulsions. And if having first
Convulsions, a Quartan Ague follows, they are freed from their Convulsions, Now
the reason which Galen in his Comment gives hereof, is; because the thick
matter which caused the Convulsions is by the long heat of this Ague,
attenuated and digested. Also by the shaking of the Body in the cold Fits, the
said Humor is more easily ejected. We must also add, that the evil Humors
lurking in the Brain and other parts, as also in the veins, is transferred to
the Hypochondria and more ignoble parts, where the Melancholy Quartanary
Humors are seated, and so leaves the parts aforesaid.

A bloody flux coming upon a quartan Ague, tends to health, according to
Hippocrates in the 48 Aphorism of the sixth section. To such as are splenetick a
Dysenterie is good. Now in a quartan Ague, commonly the Spleen is misaffected,
and a melancholy humor is common to a quartan Ague and a misaffected Spleen*
but this must be understood of a short dysenterie, for a long one is wont to be
mortal; as we have it in the 43. Aphorism of the said section. Such as being
troubled with the Spleen have a flux of the Belly with pain, if it turn into a
long Dysenterie or Bloody flux, they fall either into a Dropsy or a Lienterie,
and die.

To bleed at the nose in a quartan Ague, is a very bad sign. Because the Humor
which causes a quartan is too thick and too cold to be voided that way; and
because such bleeding is symptomatical, and if it continue will breed a dropsy;
it must presently be stopped by opening the basilica vein, out of which the
putrid blood may flow, because the pure blood comes from the Nose.

The quartan Ague has a double cure according to the two kinds thereof. For
the remedies used in a bastard quartan, must be far different from those which
are used in a legitimate one.

And that we may begin with a Legitimate quartan: we must presently set our
selves to vanquish the cause thereof, not regarding the Fever. And seeing the
cause thereof is an humor cold and dry, thick and earthly; we must use
medicaments that do heat, moisten, and attenuate. Also the Peccant Humor must
be at seasonable times evacuated, which notwithstanding will require a long
time to do; because of the extreme contumacy of the Humor and length of the
disease. But before these medicines be used, we must appoint the patient a
convenient diet. Let the patient therefore use meats of good juice, easy to
digest, of thin substance, and moderately heating and moistening; as the flesh
of young Animals and mountain Birds, new Eggs soft boiled, Fishes that are taken
in stony Rivers. In the state of the disease we may allow the patient Salt
Fish, Capars, and Olives* Galen 1. ad Glauco. Grants likewise Pepper and
Mustard. Among Herbs Borrage is commended and Bugloss, Pimpernel and Spinach,
Fennel and Parsley Roots, but especailly Turnips, which must be first boiled in
water, and afterwads in fat broth which is very good for such as have the
quartan. Crato in his Councels collected by Scholtzius, brags that he had cured
many of the quartan Ague by the second broth of turnips seasoned with Butter
and Sugar. Of fruits, Apples, and stewed Prunes, Raisons of the Sun, fat Figs,
Almonds, Dates, Pine-kernels are good. And finally, to Spice their Meats, let
them use Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Saffron.

Let the Patient abstain from Meats which are thick of substance and clammy and
are long in passing through; such as the Flesh of Swine, Beef, Deer, Hares and
Water fowl, from Pease and Beans, Colewort, Course Branny Bread, Cheese, Nuts,
Walnuts and Chastnuts; from Flesh much Salted, or dried in the Smoke; from
fruits, Raw Herbs, from Vinegar, Verjuice, because they are thought as al other
sour things to ferment Mellancholy and make it work

Let their drink be small Ale or bear of moderate strength and meanly hopped
neither new nor hard, Pure and well Clarifiedwhite Wine or Cla^ret that is not
strong, with Water in which the Bark of Tamarisk or the Leaves of Egrimony have
been steeped, or a Decoction of Salsa Parilla, or Barley Water that has Steel
quenched in it.

Let them eat sparingly, no more than may barely preserve strength; for too
larg feeding breeds crudities which makes the Disease of long continuance. But
above al, they must be very spare in drinking, because nothing makes this
Disease more rebellious and hard to Cure than over much drink and moist things,
for they fill and Swel the spleen. Crato forbids al use of drink in the fit,
which to forbear does much as he says help the Cure. On the fit-day, the
Patient must eat six hours before the sit comes. And afterward nothing must be
taken til the fit be over. Long sleep is good, because it moistens, but it must
be forborne in the beginning of the Fit. On the days of Intermission light
exercise before Meat, is good; or in place thereof, frictions of the whole Body,
after the Patient has been at Stool. If thee Patient be costive, a Clyster or
Suppository must be given. Finally let the Patient be as cheerful as may be and
avoid sadness

The Patients Diet being thus ordered; first a gentle Purgation must be
administered, by a Clyster and a purging Medicament. the Clyster may be thus
Made.

Take Roots of Bugloss two ounces: of the four Emollient Herbs, mercury and
beetes of each one handful: Fat Damask Prunes five Pair: of the four larger
cool Seeds and Annis Seed of each two drams: Epithymum three drams: Boil all to
a pint and an half: in the strained Liquor dissolve Catholicum one ounce: Oil
of Violets and Chamomel of each one ounce and an half: Red Sugar one ounce:
Make of all a Clyster, which must be given the day before the following Potion,
at a seasonable time.

Take Senna half an ounce: Annis Seed a dram: Leaves of Borrage and Fumitory of
each one handful. Liquoris three drams: Boil all to three ounces: in the
strained Liquor dissolve Manna and Syrup of Roses of each one ounce: Make all
into a potion.

Galen in I. ad Glauco. Ch: 11. Bids us give only gentle and benign Medicaments
in the beginning of this Ague, otherwise, it is to be seared, that if we use
stronger Medicaments, of a simple Quartan, we shall make a double, a triple or a
Continual Fever.

After the first Purge aforsaid, Blood must be drawn from the Basilica Vena of
the left Arm. Yet, if the Liver be affected, it may be drawn from the right
Arm. And their Opinion is Ridiculous, who say that we must expect Concoction
before we let Blood, because then the Blood will be more thin and apt to flow:
for it is better digested and prepared, if first some Quantity thereof be taken
away. Neither must we give ear to them which say, that Blood-letting is not to
be allowed of in a Quarran Ague, unless redundancy of Blood do show it self by
the Swelling of the Veins and by other signs. For there is evermore at the
beginning a Plethora ad Vires viz. Such a fullness of Blood as the Strength of
the Patient cannot manage, unless a Quartan do follow some other long Fever.
But that Precept of Galen formerly mentioned in I. ad Glauconem, is worthy of
al Commendation, which says that if the Blood which first comes away be Black
and impure, that then the greater Quantity is to be taken away: but if it be
Red and Pure, little must be taken, and the Patient must not be let Blood any
more. The well days are fittest both for Bleeding and purging. Yet some let
Blood upon the fit day, five or six hours before the Fit. which is not Ammis,
because the Humors beginning then to be moved, are more easily drawn out.
Zacutus Lusitanus says, that it is very good to let Blood when the Moon is in
the full. For then, by reason of the Moons influence, that earthy Melancholic
Humor does Boil and become more fluid and Apt to come away with bleeding. And
he does Testify that many have by bleeding at that time been helped, and some
perfectly cured, who could not by any other means receive Help. But Botallus
contrary to the mind of Galen and al other Physicians, does aver that frequent
Blood-letting does cure the Quartan Ague, yea when it threatens a Dropsy; and
he endeavors to confirm his Opinion by reasons and examples. Which
notwithstanding is to be rejected as a Paradox, seeing the Refrigeration of the
whole Body caused by much Beeding, makes the Morbisick matter more thick and
contumacious.

The flux of the Hemorrhoids, is very good in Quartan Agues, and many are
thereby Cured. For seeing the Hemorrhoid Veins are branches of the Mesaraick
Veins, in which the matter of this Disease is contained, when they are opened
they Evacuate the immediate cause of this Disease. If therefore a flux of the
Hemorrhoids happens in such as have been accustomed thereunto, it must not be
stopped. If it be too sparing, it must be furthered. As also if Nature seem to
incline that way (which is known by itching of the Fundament, and by some drops
of blood coming that way) the Blood must be made to come by application of
Leeches.

But in such as have not been used to have their Hemorrhoid Veins opened, after
bleeding in the Arm, it is good to let them blood in the Ankle Vein; by which
oftentimes the Ague ceases; or at least that Bleeding, with other Remedies,
will hasten the Cure; especially in Women whose Courses are stopped, or flow not
sufficiently.

The opening of the Vein between the little Finger and the Ring Finger, called
Vena Salvatella, is approved by the Ancients, and many later Physicians, who
said it cures the Quartan Ague. But very many others reject this Conceit, as
being founded upon no reason, because the foresaid Vein is a Branch issuing
from the Arm Veins. Yet being commended by others with many Experiments, I
conceive it ought not wholly to be neglected. Some hold, it ought to be opened
in the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun; others when the Moon inclines two
hours before the Fit, at three several times, in three immediately succeeding
Fits, which in some persons has happened very well.

After these first Evacuations, we must bend our study to concoct and prepare
the Humors, with certain Juleps, compounded after this, or some such manner:

Take Roots of Asparagus, Bruscus, Cichory, Bugloss steeped in white Wine, of
each one ounce: Bark of Tamarisk half an ounce: Leaves of Borrage, Bugloss,
Ceterach, Maidenhair, Fumitory, Germander, Ground Pine, of each one handful:
Liquoris one ounce: the three Cordial Flowers, of each one pugil. Boil all to a
pint and an half. In the strained Liquor dissolve Syrupus Bizantinus, and Syrup
of Maidenhair, of each two ounces. Make thereof a Julep to be taken at four
times, four mornings together. Which must also be continued many days, for the
Matter being contumacious, requires long preparation. Or if the Patient be
nice, and squeezy, Broths must be made of part of the foresaid Simples, choosing
such as are most grateful to the taste, whereunto, as also to the Juleps, Cream
of Tartar may profitably be added.

With these Preparative Medicaments, between whiles, Purgatives must be given;
so that every third or fourth day the Patient must take a Purge, with this
Caution, That as long as the Matter is very crude, we use mild Purgatives: and
when Concoction begins to go well forwards, we must then give such Purgers as
are a little stronger. Now the Materials for these Purgations are very well
known, so we need not reckon them up.

It is sometimes good to prescribe an Apozem both Purgative and Preparative, for
four or five Doses, that a good part of the Morbifick Matter may be cleansed
away. Which Apozeme may be made of the Materials of the foresaid Juleps, adding
Purgatives thereunto. But if the thickness and contumacy of the Humors, with
the cold distemper of the Bowels, do seem to threaten that the Disease will be
long and bring a Dropsy, we must then fly to such Medicaments as do powerfully
cut and divide the said Humors; of which this following Apozeme may be
compounded.

Take of the five opening Roots steeped in white Wine, of each one ounce: Enula
Campana, Gentian, Aristolochia, and Asarum Roots, of each half an ounce: Leaves
of Germander, Agrimony, Hops, Borrage, Ceterach, Wormwood, and Centaury, of
each one handful: Liquoris, and Raisons stoned, of each one ounce: Senna one
ounce and an half: Epithimum one ounce: Agarick newly trochiscated three
ounces: Ginger and Cloves, of each one dram: Boil all to a pint and an half. In
the strained Liquor dissolve Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb five ounces: Troches
of Capars, and Salt of Wormwood, and of Tamarisk, of each one dram. Make of all
an Apozeme, for five Doses to be taken in the morning.

In this Chronick and lasting Disease, an obstinate Perseverance is necessary,
that the perpetual vicissitude of Medicines may concoct and purge away the
Cause thereof. For this is in a manner the only Cause why many that have
Quartan Agues remain uncured, because after the use of a few Medicines they
grow weary, and wholly reject and disdain all the rest.

For a continual Use therefore, certain Purgatives are always to be in a
readiness. Which may be made in the form of a Magistral Syrup, or of Pills, or
in any other form.

A Magistral Syrup may be made of the Materials of the Apozeme Aforesaid,
adding a triple quantity of the Purgative Ingredients.

Pills for frequent use may be thus compounded:

Take Aloes diligently steeped with the Juice of Wormwood, half an ounce: Gum
Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar, and afterward thickened, two drams: choice
Mirrh a dram and an half: Gummy, Turbith, and Agarick newly made into Cakes, of
each two drams: Diagridium one dram: Salt of Wormwood and Tamarisk, of each two
scruples: Saffron half a scruple. With Oxymel simple, make all into a Mass of
Pill-stuff. Let the Dose be half a dram, or two scruples, twice in a week.

If the Patient be of an hot Constitution, these following Pills may be used.

Take Polypody of the Oak half an ounce: Roots of Asarum, and seeds of Broom,
of each one dram: Cristal of Tartar one dram and an half: Flowers of Bugloss
and Borrage, of each half a pugil. Boil all in a sufficient Quantity of Water,
Of the Liquor strained, and very well clarified, take half a pint: Juice of
odoriferous Apples very well clarified four ounces. Infuse therein Senna one
ounce: Turbith and Agarick, of each three drams: Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, and
Epithimum, of each one dram. Let them digest together three days in Balneo
Mariae, then strain and press them out. And add yet of Extract of Aloes made
with Endive and Sorrel Water one ounce: Mirrh dissolved in Wine over the fire
and strained two drams: Salt of Tartar one dram: Let all evaporate and thicken
over a gentle fire, adding toward the conclusion, of the Pouders of Diarrhodon
Abbatis, and Laetificans Galeni, of each one scruple: Salt of Wormwood and
Tamarisk, of each half a dram: Extract of Saffron half a scruple. Make a Mass
of Pill-stuf for the use asoresaid.

Also a Purging Medicament very familiar, and most easy to prepare, but very
profitable, may be made of three ounces of the Decoction of Wormwood, wherein
two drams of Senna has been infused, which must be taken now and then.

These Purging Medicines are wont to be given the day before the fit, because
the Patients are then stronger than at other times. Yet many contend that they
ought to be given before the fit, because the matter being agitated by the fit,
is made more apt for Expulsion. This Opinion they underprop with the Authority
of Hippocrates in his Book de Affectionibus, who would have a Medicine Purging
downwards to be given at the beginning of the Fit. And although in Galens
Judgment, that is none of Hippocrates his writings, but of his Son in Law
Polypus; yet they conceive it ought not therefore to be of no Authority, seeing
Polypus also was a very Learned Man, and frequent Experience confirms this
Opinion; as the said Experience is set down by Arculanus, Genitilus, Amatus
Lusitanus, and others, who have ordered that the Purging Medicament should be
given four hours before the Fit. Which practice notwithstanding, has need of
much wariness and prudence in the Physician, seeing the shaking fit intercepts
the evacuation, and in the Ague Fit the Humors are moved with a motion quite
contrary to that wherewith the Purge does move them; by which means great
disturbances may fall out in the Patients Body. Wherefore this course is not to
be followed but in strong Bodies.

The Consent of Physicians is greater and more general touching the giving of
Vomits in the beginning of the Ague Fits, because Nature is at that time more
prone to that kind of Evacuation. Neither is it to be doubted, that a Vomiting
caused in the beginning of the Fit, and at the same time often repeated, does
make the Disease gentler and shorter. The Materials of Vomitories are set down
in our Cure of a Tertian. But in a Quartan Ague, Asarum is preferred before the
rest, one dram being given in Powder, in white Wine, and three or four times
repeated.

In the Intervals of purging, Clysters must frequently be given, which do
accustom Nature to expel the hurtful Humors into the Guts, and do by little and
little bring away some of the morbifick matter contained in the Meseraick Veins.

The Disease continuing (as for the most part it is long and lasting) we must
sometimes rest, and abstain from Physic a month, or thereabouts; that Nature in
the mean time may gather strength, be wearied with continual use of
Medicaments, and may set her self to concoct the morbifick matter. And
afterward we must return to our Preparatives and Purgatives.

Howbeit, in a long Ague, we must not always use the same Medicaments; lest
Nature be over much used thereunto, and the Patient become weary of them. Also
because from more gentle Aperitives and Purgatives, we must pass on to such as
are stronger. Various sorts of Purgatives have been already propounded. And
these following Aperitives besides the Apozems aforesaid, and the Juleps, may
be used in the progress of the Disease, when the Signs of Digestion begin to
appear.

Take White Wine three pints: Enula Campane Roots three ounces: Bark of Capar
Roots half an ounce: Tops of common Wormwood dried one ounce: Infuse them three
days in Balneo Mariae. Reep all together without straining, and give of this
Wine to the Patient two or three ounces in the morning, two hours before meat.
And these following Pills may be used either alone, or with the said Wine.

Take Roots of Gentian two drams: round Birthwort Roots one dram and an half:
Mugwort one dram: Briony dried three drams: Mirrh and Saffron, of each one
dram: Asarum Roots two drams: Aloes one ounce: With Oxymel of Squils make all
into a Mass of Pill-stuf. Let a dram be given every day by themselves, or a
little before the taking of the Wine aforesaid.

To these Pills, Steel prepared may profitably be added, if the Patient be able
to walk after the taking of them. For the use of Steel in all Chronick Fevers
is very profitable, because it potently opens Contumacious Obstructions, which
are wont to foster those Diseases.

Or to open and strengthen at once, the following Electuary may profitably be
prescribed.

Take Conserve of Elecampane Roots, Conserve of Wormwood, and Maidenhair, of
each one ounce: Preserved Citron Peels* half an ounce: Confectio Alkermes three
drams: Preserved Myrobalans, two: Powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis two drams: Salt
of Wormwood and Tamarisk, of each one dram: Saffron two scruples. With Syrup of
preserved Citrons, make all into an Opiate: of which let the Patient take the
quantity of a Chestnut every morning, two hours before meat. Or if in the
morning the Patient take some other Medicine, then may the Electuary be taken
two hours before Supper.

To the same intent is commended as a most excellent Remedy, the Extract of
Germander mixed with Salt of Tamarisk made into Pills.

Add hereunto, Discussers, and Diaphoreticks, which are very useful to discuss
the relics of the declining Disease, when signs of Concoction appear. For
they do not only discuss the said relics, but they do likewise correct that
distemper which is bred by so long a Disease, and amend the ill habit of the
Body; and strengthen the Stomach, Liver, and other Bowels, weakened by the
length of the Disease. Among these Medicaments, Venice Treacle challenges the
first place, being by older and later Physicians commended to this Use. It is
given one hour before the fit, one dram in weight, with Wine, or in a Decoction
of Germander. Or if its heat be feared, it may be given with a Decoction of
Agrimony, or with the Juice or Water of Plantane. This Medicine must be
repeated before diverse Fits one after another. It may also be given in the
mornings for some days together on the well-daies. But a little before the
fit, it operates happily, because it hinders the increase of cold, and does
more commodiously discuss the Humor, which is cause of the fit, now beginning
to work in the Veins, and by this means it diminishes the fit, and if the
morbifick matter be little, takes it quite away. Here, notwithstanding, great
Caution is to be used, lest Treacle, or other such hot Medicines, should be
given when the Humors are yet crude; for they dissolve the putrid Humors, from
whence arises a confusion in the Body, and an increase of the Ague Fits; so
that a single Quartan comes to degenerate into a Double, and Triple, yea, into
a Continual Fever. As it happened to Eudemus the Peripatetick, as Galen
relates in Lib. de Praecog. ad Posth. Cap. 2. and 3. in whom was a single
Quartan, the Physicians of Rome having given him Treacle unseasonably, was
changed into a Triple. Howbeit, afterward when the Signs of Concoction
appeared, Galen gave him of the same Treacle, and cured him.

Among other Diaphoreticks, some commend the Roots of China, and Salsa parilla,
whose first and second Decoction being given twenty days together, does
sometimes cure contumacious Quartans. But they work more effectually, if with
the Primary Decoction, Purgatives be mingled.

Other Remedies are also given before the Fit, which are accounted specifical,
and appropriate to this Ague, and being given toward the declination, they do
very often keep back the fits, and cure the Quartan. The chief of this sort,
are these which follow:

Take Green Leaves of Plantane one handful: Green Sorrel half a handful:
Vinegar and Treacle, of each three ounces. Distill them, and let the Patient
take of the distilled Liquor three ounces, half an hour before the fit. Or,

Take Sugar Candy three drams: Ginger two drams: Camphire one dram. Make all
into a Powder. Give one dram in warm Water.

Ten Grains of Saffron in powder, given with white Wine before the fit, does
much weaken the same.

Seed of wild Rue given before the Fit in white Wine, cures.

Heurnius assures us that with the following Troches, many have been cured,
even in the Winter, with once taking.

Take Seeds of Rue, Parsley, Mirrh, and new Andromachus Treacle, of each one
dram: Opium half a scruple: Make all up into little Cakes or Troches. And let
the Patient take one of those Cakes in Water, before the fit. Narcoticks do
indeed much abate the fits; but unless the greatest part of the morbifick Humor
have been before abated, and the Obstructions much lessened, they may do hurt,
because they may retain the vicious Humors in the Body, and breed Obstructions,
and other worse Diseases. But given in a small quantity, and mingled with things
which open and cut, as in these Troches, they can do less hurt.

Also to restrain the Fit, gentle Purgers are profitably given an hour before
it comes, which do revel the Humors, more by soliciting and provoking Nature,
than by their purging. To which intent, such as these which follow are
prescribed.

Take Senna, Polipody of the Oak, Time, Epithimum, of each one dram: Borrage
flowers a pugil. Make a Decoction to three ounces. Give it an hour before the
Fit.

Or,

Take Senna three drams: Turbith one dram: Cinnamon half a dram: Saffron and
Ginger, of each ten grains: Sugar, the weight of all the rest. Make of all a
Powder, divide it into three parts. Give the Patient one part before the fit,
in white Wine.

Quercetanus in his Dispensatory, does exceedingly commend Camillus his Pills of
Sagapenum; of which he gives only one at the beginning of the fit, for diverse
days together; and a little after he anoints their Backbone with a Liniment
composed of Treacle, Aqua vitae, Oil of Bays, or of Spike. And two or three
hours after the Pills are taken, he gives Broth with opening Roots, Borrage,
Bugloss, Time, and an odoriferous Apple boiled in it.

Now those anointings of the Backbone, are very good to mitigate the cold fit,
and must often be used, although the foresaid Pills are not used. For they are
frequently useful, when the shaking fits are vehement and importunate. And
these Anointings are made, not only with the foresaid, but with very many other
Medicaments; as with Oil of Dill, Chamomel, Orice, Costus, Rue, the Peppers,
and other hot things, with Aqua vitae, Treacle, Cloves, Castoreum, Mustard
seed, Pepper, and other things mixed therewith. Now these Liniments are more
effectual, if the backbone be anointed therewith by the fireside, an hour
before the coming of the fit; and the sick party be presently thereupon
conveyed to a hot bed, and hot Tiles sprinkled with odoriferous Wine, and
wrapped in Linen Cloths, be applied to the Soals of the Feet, and Palms of the
Patients Hands.

While the aforesaid Medicaments are used, a special care must be had of the
Spleen, because that part is always affected in this Disease: And therefore
those Medicaments which ordinarily are prescribed for Obstructions of the
Spleen, viz. Fomentations, Liniments, and Plasters.

Yea verily, and sometimes a Bath of lukewarm Water, after many Evacuations
have been celebrated, is good, not only to mollify the Spleen, but also to
moisten the whole body, and to further the Coction of the morbifick matter. The
bath may be used on the days of intermission, giving diligent heed that it be
no other than lukewarm. For if it should be hotter, it is to be feared, lest
the Humors being thereby dissolved, should run on a sudden into diverse parts of
the Body, and breed dangerous, very dangerous Imposthumes.

Finally, Such things as are wont to be laid to the Wrists, are not to be
neglected, seeing Authors of good account do make some reckoning of them. For
Rondeletius affirms, That he has used this following Medicament, with great
success.

Take Leaves of Elder, Sage, Doves-foot, Rue, of each half a handful: Marigolds
a third part: a handful of Salt, and a little Wine. Beat all together, and
apply to the Wrists before the Fit. Crato applies the Roots of Nettles being
beaten and moistened or steeped in Vinegar, to the Arteries of the Wrists, and
of the Feet. And Sennertus relates that a certain Citizen having had a Quartan
Auge the whole Autumn and VVinter, and at last being afflicted with most sharp
pains in his left shoulder, by the persuasion of a certain woman, he applied
Crowfoot to his wrist, which raised a Push, and freed him both from his pain
and Fever.

A Bastard Quartan is cured with the same Medicines in a manner, which have
been propounded for the Cure of a Tertian; adding to the Decoction of Juleps
and Apozems, such things as do peculiarly regard Melancholy adust. Whereunto
may be added all the more temperate, and less heating Medicaments, which have
hitherto been propounded for a Legitimate Quartan.

In the beginning therefore it is good to use Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Hops,
Sorrel, Cichory, Ceterach, Scolopendria, Agrimony, and Odoriferous Apples.
Whose Decoctions, distilled Waters, and sometimes their clarified Juyces may be
prescribed in the form of a Julep, an Apozeme or Magistral Syrup.

But in the Progress of the Disease, it will be good to add unto the Simples
aforesaid, the Bark of Capar Roots, of Tamarisk, Enula Campana, Polypodie, and
Wormwood.

While the Patient uses these Preparatives, Purgatives are frequently to be
interposed; which are to be given the Day before the Fit, and to be repeated
twice a Week. To which Intent Various Forms may be prescribed. But for such as
are Delicate, a Laxative Ptisan, Syrupus de Pomis Saporis, or the Broth of a
Chicken, qualified with Borrage, Bugloss, Pimpernel, and three drams, or half
an ounce of Senna, may profitably be given.

Blood-letting in the beginning must not be omitted, and so such quantity of
blood must be taken away, as shall correspond unto the Quantity and Quality of
Blood, and to the Age and Constitution of the Patient.

If the Disease prove long, when the fervor of the blood is abated, Vomits may
profitably be administered; especially to such Patients as are troubled with
Stomach-sickness and Vomitings in the beginning of their Fits. Among Vomitories
good for a Quartan, Asarum (as was said before) is the principal, being given
to the quantity of a dram in white Wine, and diverse times repeated, if the
Disease shall not after once or twice giving, be discussed.

Hereunto ad fomentations and liniments applied to the parts under the short
ribs, to correct the evil disposition of the bowels (which continually affords
new matter for the fits) and to soften and make thin the fast, settled and
impacted Humors: which may be prescribed after this manner.

Take Roots of Marshmallows, of Lillies, of Enula campana, Barks of capar
Roots, and the middle rind of Tamarisk, of each one ounce; Leaves of Mallows,
of Marshmallows, of Pellitory of the wall, of Borrage, Bugloss, Pimpernel,
Wormwood of each one handful; Lin-seed and Parsley seed, of each an half ounce;
flowers of Chamomel, Melilot and Dill, of each one pugil: make a decoction in
three parts of water, and one of white wine added toward the end. With which
decoction foment the Hypochondria, twice a day, far from meals.

Take Ointment of Marsh-mallowes, one ounce and an half; Oil of Lillies,
Chamomel, Roses and Wormwood, of each an half ounce: make al into a Liniment,
which must be used after the fomentation.

Or Oils alone may profitably be applied to the same Parts, laid on with wool.

And finally a bath of warm water either alone or with emollient and qualifiing
things boiled therein, or of Barley and Almonds as is usual, will be very
convenient to cure this disease. For it corrects the distemper of the bowels,
rectifies the heat and dryness of black Choler, mollify that which is hard,
opens the passages and widens them, and digests crude Humors. Wherefore the
frequent use thereof will be most convenient, using the caution before
specified.

Now the operation thereof will be exceedingly advanced, if preparative
Medicaments and such as open obstruction be given to the patient, upon entrance
into the bath. Among which the chief is a decoction of Wormwood and Enula
Campana, which is exceeding good to digest all contumacious Humors. provided
the over great heat of the Bowels, do not dissuade the use thereof. In which
case it may be tempered by the mixture of other things fore recited.

And while these things are doing, gentle purgations must be repeated, as we
advised before. And when the disease does indeed decline, those specified
medicaments propounded in the Legitimate Quartan, may here also be brought into
use.

In the whole course of the disease we must be careful of the Breast, least a
Consumption betide the same, for the Humor offending in this Disease is of a
corroding quality

Chap. 6. Of Compounded or Complicated Fevers, and particularly of a
Semi-Tertian.
GAlen in his second Book de Crisib. cap. 7. and 9. and in his second Book de
Differ. Feb. Cap. 7. and Avicen. Fen 1. Lib 4. Tract 4. Cap. 16. Do propound
many compositions of Fevers. Namely when putrid Fevers are compounded with
non-putrid, as when an hectic is joined with a putrid; or of a putrid with a
putrid, which is done many ways viz. Either continual Fevers being
complicated with continual or intermittent with intermitent, or continual
with intermitent.

The Composition of two continual Fevers, is a thing controverted among
authors, and a man shall hardly observe it in the course of his practice.

An intermitting Fever or Ague is complicated with another intermittent,
either of the same kind, or different: compound intermittents of the same kind
are a double and triple Tertian, and a double or triple quartan, which have
been expounded in their proper places. Of several kinds are when a tertian is
compounded with a Quotidian or quartan; which also is very rarely seen in
Practice.

Intermittents are complicated with continuals two ways viz. An intermittent
tertian with a continual Quotidian, or a Quotidian intermittent with a
continual tertian. and each of these is termed a Semi-tertian, constituting
Species or sorts thereof.

Yet that is properly and truly a Semi-tertian which is made of an intermitting
Tertian and a continual quotidian: and consequently is caused from choler
putrefying without and phlegm putrefying within the vessels. By Hippocrates and
Galen in 1 Epidem. it is named Horrifica, or the shaking Ague because it causes
the patient to shake, not only at the first coming of the fit, but in the whole
course of the disease and especially in the beginning and augment, two fits
being met and joined in one, viz: Of the tertian and quotidian Ague, with many
reduplications, which are nothing else but unequal shaking and shivering
motions, returning diverse time in one and the same Ague Fit, by reason of the
mutual fight of the two Fevers; in which, if Phlegm overcome, there will follow
shiverings, and coldness of the extreme parts. And then again, when Choler
does vanquish, the Body becomes warm, and the Fever seems to tend toward the
vigor; whenas phlegm again getting the better, they are again brought into a
cold and shivering condition; and this Contention is wont to last til the
Fever comes to its height. Hence it is that those shaking fits come only every
other day, viz. When the fit of the Tertian Ague is upon the Patient, being
joined with the Quotidian.

But while the Quotidian alone is present, there is wont to be no shivering
Fit. Yet we must take notice, That there are some Malignant Fevers, which
without a commixion of a Tertian and Quotidian, without that same fight of
Choler and Phlegm, do shake the Patient; in which the Shiveverings come from
sharp Vapors, and malignant, which do arise out of the corrupt Matter of
malignant Fevers, and do beat upon, and pull the sensitive parts, and nip or
twitch them as it were.

Now this Semi-Tertian properly so called, is either exquisite, wherein an
equal portion of putrefying Choler and Phlegm is redundant, such as has been
now described; or it is a bastard Semi-Tertian, which is again twofold: For
either it has Choler abounding, or Phlegm. In the former there are more
Symptoms of a Tertian; in the latter of a Quotidian. And so if Choler abound,
the whole Fever is more horrid, and sometimes it has a shaking fit accompanying
the same; also it proves more fervent, and some portion of Choler is voided
forth by vomit, stool, or sweat. But when Phlegm prevails, a more vehement cold
does possess the extreme parts of the Body, and there are few shiverings; and
the pulse it more and longer depressed, and the fit is longer before it grow
toward its height, and remains in its consistency a long time; yet does it
cause no great thirst, nor burning.

This Fever is known by what has been said thereof, being continual, and
cold, with many reduplications, and very great Symptoms. Because it comes
every other day with a shaking cold fit; but upon the even days it comes only
with a coldness in the extreme parts of the Body. The Urines are crude, thin,
and without color; sometimes troubled, with no Sediment, or that which bodes no
good. The Pulse is frequent and unequal. The Differences are known by the Signs
of more or less of Choler and Phlegm, propounded.

As for the Prognostic of this Fever, it is a dangerous Disease, and therein
the Stomach and Nervous parts are very much affected. And it is attended with
dryness of the Tongue, Thirst, Swooning, Watching, and sometimes with Ravings,
and dead Sleeps. Hippocrates reckons it among acute Diseases because of the
Choler; and among Chronick Diseases because of the Phlegm, in 1. Epidem. And
Avicenna says, That it lasts sometimes seven months, and sometimes ends in
Chronick Diseases, and an Hectic.

The Cure of this Fever is to be taken from what has been formerly said of
the Cure of a Tertian, and a Quotidian Ague; and seeing it is continual, it
must be handled with the same Method which was set down in the first Chapter of
this Section, as common to all putrid continual Fevers. So that when Choler
chiefly bears sway, we must use most of those Simples which respect Choler;
and when as phlegm prevails, we must principally use such things as do prepare
and purge that Humor. And finally, When both Humors are equal, the Remedies
proper to each must be used in equal proportion likewise.

SECTION III. Of Pestilential Fevers.
The Preface.
All Authors (very near) who have writ of Fevers, do distinguish a
pestilential Fever from a malignant, and do treat of each of them severally
in diverse Chapters; so that by the name of a pestilential Fever they do
understand the true Pestilence or Plague; and by a such malignant Fever, they
mean that which is commonly called the sp^^ted Fever, or such a Fever which
though it be epidemical and contagious, yet it is not so dangerous but that
more live then die of it: whereas the true essence of the Plague consists in
this that more die thereof than recover. But for as much as these Fevers
differ one from another only according to the greater or lesser degree of
malignity, and must be cured with the same Medicaments; we have thought it more
convenient to include al these kind of Fevers in one Chapter, and to handle
them all under the name of Pestilential Fevers. and consequently this last
Section shall consist of two Chapters, the first of which shall treat of the
Pestilentiall Fever; and the later of the Measles and small Pox: For seeing a
Malignant Fever does allwaies attend them all Authors do justly treat of them
in this place.

Chap. 1. Of a Pestilential Fever.
That Fever is termed Pestilential, which does afflict Nature not only by a
bare distemper, or by heat arising from putrefaction, but also with a Maliguant
and venomous quality. This is wont to be for the most part Popular and
Epidemical; so that many are at the same time sick thereof: yet sometimes it is
sporadick or single afflicting but here and there one, which arises from evil
Humors that have attained a venomous quality.

It is likewise Contagious, so that it may be caught not only by means of the
common Cause, Viz. Corruption of the Air or Diet; but also by Conversing with
those that are sick.

It is also commonly called a Malignant Fever, whereas many diseases are
termed Malignant. by reason of their evil and cruel symptoms in which no
venomous quality is found, in which alone the essence of a Pestilential disease
consists.

In what Fever soever therefore, this same venomous quality is found, whether
it be a diary, an hectic, or a putrid Fever, it is rightly termed
Pestilentiall: although a dairy and hectic are much controverted, touching
which consult the Authors.

Now this same venomous quality arises from the corruption of Homors, which
consists not in a bare change of the temperament, or in ordinary putresaction,
such as is found in putrid Fevers; but in a destruction of the whole Nature and
Essential substance of the same Humors. As Wine when it is turned an iosipid
tastless Liquor, is totally and essentially corrupted; but when it becomes
vinegar, it is said simply to putrefie.

And a Pestilentiall Fever differs from the Plague as a species or sort
differs from the genus or kind, because there may be a Pestilence without a
Fever, as Hippocrates has taught us in his third Epidem, in many places; and
also Galen in his Exposition of the said Book. and in his ninth Book, de Medic.
Facultatib. Cap. de Terra Samia. And this is suitable to Reason forasmuch as the
venomous Quality is not necessarily attended with putrefaction, which is the
Cause of a Fever. For that same venomous quality may be produced in the
Humors, by a perfect corruption of their substance, and introduction of a new
form, of which that venomous quality depends. And certain it is, that so often
as a new from is introduced, the former is corrupted; unto which mutations
there are requisite preparatorie alterations, but not putrefaction so that
Humors may undergo such a corruption without putrefaction; but because the
Humors of our body are very liable to putrefaction, they can rarely undergo so
great a corruption, without the Intervention of putrefaction likewise;
wherefore those Pestilences are very rare, which are not accompanied with a
Fever: Yea verily and by an intense, profound and fordid (as they are wont to
say) putrefaction, such a Corruption as that of the Plague is wont to be
raised. So, many Fevers, which at first were not pestilentiall, if by the
Ignorance of the Physician or negligence, the disobedience of the Sick, or the
fierceness of external causes, they have been mis-handled, the putrefaction
becomeing more intense, they turn in the end to malignant and Pestilentiall
Fevers. And that corruption does often precede Putrefaction is collected from
such as are infected with the Plague by contagion; in whom a malignant, and
venomous quality is first transfused, and therewith the Humors are corrupted,
which corruption is followed by putrefaction, whence it comes to pas that such
as have the Pestilence have sometimes no fever for the first days of their
ilness; but afterward the Fever begins to show it self, when putrefaction is
bred; some such things we see in a part that is affected with a Gangrene, which
is first corrupted, and afterward puertfied.

A pestilentiall Fever is caused, when the Humors being corrupted and having
attained a venomous quality, do come to putrefie: And so it affects the Heart
by those two means Viz. By a putrid heat and a malignant quality.

Now this corruption of Humors, is not always after one sort, but sometimes it
is more intense and sometimes less and according to its diverse degrees, the
venomous quality arising therefrom is more or less pernicious; from whence
proceeds the greater or less Malignity of Fevers. And hence arose that common
distinction of Pestilential Fevers among Physicians, into a Pestilential
fever simply and properly so called and into a Malignant Fever; calling that
a pestilentiall Fever properly so termed wherein is the true Plague; having
this peculiar, note or character, that more die than live and recover; and
calling that simply a malignant Fever which being less pernicious, more live
than die of it.

The differences of a Pestilentiall Fever are taken either from the matter
wherein that venomous Quality is produced; or from the place wherein the said
matter is contained: and so they follow the difference of putrid Fevers, which
in respect of the matter of putrefing are divided into the Fever Sunochos,
Tertiana, Quartana, and Quotidiana, according as the matter putrefiing it,
Blood, Choler, Melancholy, or Phlegm. And in respect of the place wherein the
Humors putrefie, they are divided into continual and intermittent; according
as the aforesaid Humors are lodged within or without the veins: even so
pestilential Fevers, some are termed Synochi, others Tertians, Quartans or
Quotidians; some continual, others intermittent: though Hippocrates has said
in the 43. Aphorism of the 4 Section, That intermitting Feave^ are void of
danger however they intermit, which only is to be understood of such as are
void of all malignitie; for we see almost *every year (in our country at least)
tertian intermittent Fevers, which being extremely malignant, do at the third
or fourth fit kill the patients: others which bring them into great danger,
especially by the cruelty of the Symptoms.

There are other Differences of a pestilential Fever taken from the intensnes
of their degree or Remissness; namly, as some ate greater, other lesser, some
partake of greater malignitie some of lesser. They are said to be simply
greater or lesser, according as the Putrefaction is greater or less, or as the
preternatural Heat ariseing therefrom, is more intense or remiss; more
malignant or benignant, according to the greater or less intension of the
venomous quality Hence it comes to pass, that sometimes a pestilentiall Fever
has extreme putrefaction, and malignancy at the highest; and then it is wont
to be most fierce, and therein in regard of the malignancy the vital faculty is
exceedingly afflicted; and in regard of the extreme putrefaction, the other
faculties are likewise hurt, and cruel symptoms follow thereupon. But
sometimes in this Fever the putrefaction is very high, and the malignant
quality remiss; and then the Fever is trouble-som by reason of the
putrefaction; but the vital faculty is less afflicted. Contrarily sometimes
Putrefaction is little, but the malignant quality intense: and then the Fever
in regard of putrefaction shows no such bad symptoms and seems remiss; yet the
strength of the patient is more than ordinarily weakened. For sometimes the
putrefaction is so remiss that it is in a manner none at all; but the malignant
quality in a very high degree: and then we have a Fever, which seems neither
to the Patient nor by standers any thing troublesome; but it seems at first
sight mild, as mild can be, when as indeed and intruth it is very mortal; for
when the malignant quality is increased, the patients strength is dejected,
and the Heart wholly overwhelmed: and this kind of Fever does not only deceive
the Patients and bystanders, but sometimes the Physicians themselves are
thereby cheated; whiles there being no sign present either by crudity or
pravity of Humors, the Pulse being in a manner in it is natural state, and the
heat of the Body at first appearance seeming mild and gentle, it leads unto
destruction. Some such thing is likewise wont to happen in the first difference,
viz. When it is joined with the highest degree of malignity: for putrefaction
being by convenient medicaments subdued, and the signs of recovery appearing;
death notwithstanding sometimes ensues by reason the malignant quality did
remain uncorrected.

And finally the differences of a Pestilent Fever are taken from its adjuncts,
and they are very many and most evident, for there is no evil symptom, nor kind
of deadly disease which is not sometimes joined with this Fever. The symptoms
are Headache, Watchings, Raveings, Dead sleeps, Thirst, Stomach-Sickness, and
Vomiting, want of Appetite, Swooning* Fainting, Hiccoughing, Unquietness
Looseness, Sweats and such like, which are common also to other kind of Fevers.

But there is one Symptom proper and peculiar to a pestilential Fever, which
does not happen in other Fevers; viz. Purple Specks, or Spots on the whole
Body, but especially in the Loins, the breast and back, like unto Flea-bitings
for the most part; which the Italian Physicians name Peticulae or Petechiae;
and these Fevers which have these Symptoms, are commonly named Purpuratae or
Petechialis, Purple or Spotted Fevers. For these Purple Spots do not appear in
all Pestilential Fevers; but when they appear, they are a most certain Sign of
a pestilential Fever. Now we call them Purple Spots, because they are for the
most part of a Purple color. Yet they are many times of a violet color,
Green, bluish, or black, and then they are far worse, and do signify greater
Malignity. And although these Spots are for the most part like Flea-bi^ings:
yet they appear somewhat greater: So as to represent those black and blew marks
which remain after whipping, and then they are worse. And sometimes they are
very large, and possess whole Members, and a great part of the body; viz. the
Arms, Thighs, and back, and then the parts appear tainted with redness; which
in few hours oftentimes vanishes away, and then returns again, as it were by
Fits, whilst the Fever undergoes it is Fits, or Exacerbations; wherein the
blood boiling, does send forth it is thinner Exhalations to the surface of the
Skin, by which the Skin is not swelled; but only infected with a red Color.
Oftentimes notwithstanding, by these Ebullitions, the Skin is in diverse parts
puffed up with a certain redness: and makes certain broad and soft tumors in
the Skin, which in a few hours vanish away, and are commonly called Ebullitions
of the blood. In these, and the aforesaid, there is always some Malignity, but
so light, that it threatens no danger; unless in the progress of the Disease it
prove more intense. Now the Spots aforesaid like to Flea-bitings, do differ
from those Pushes, which are wont also sometimes to appear in these Fevers, and
are mentioned by Hippocrates in Epidemiis, which have an Head, and are a kind
of Tumors, which come sometimes to Suppuration, or Exulceration. But the Purple
Spots, have (as was said) no eminence or Head, and were unknown to the
Ancients, being described only by later Physicians of after Ages.

As to those Diseases which are joined to a Pestilential Fever, we may affirm
what has been said of the Sym ptoms; viz. that many deadly Diseases are joined
with these Fevers; namely, Phrensies, Squ^ i^es, Pleurisies, Inflammations of
the Lungs, Inflammations of the Liver, bloody Fluxes, and very many more. But
the chief Diseases which show themselves in a Pestilential Fever, are two,
viz. a Pestilent Bubo, and a Carbuncle, which declare the venomous quality to
be in the highest degree, and are not found but in the true Pestilence, and are
wont commonly to accompany the same: So that the common People call them by the
very name of the Pestilence.

The Causes of Pestilential Fevers, are some Internal, others External: and
the Internal are some Immediate, others Mediate.

The Immediate Cause of this Disease, as we hinted before, is a corruption of
the Humors, joined with putrefaction. From the Corruption they acquire an evil
and venomous Quality and from Putrefaction the Fever is bred.

The Mediate Causes are a Plethory, Cacochymie, and Obstructions. Now we
understand such a Plethory, or fullness of Blood; not as distends the Vessels,
but such at least as the strength of the Patient cannot master, which not being
regulated by Nature, does easily undergo Corruption, and Putrefaction. Now a
Cacochymie, or abundance of evil Humors, is easily corrupted and putrefied.
Finally, Obstructions are apt to breed all kind of Fevers: forasmuch as Humors
being close shut up in an hot and moist place, wanting free transpiration, do
casily putrefie. The Internal Mediate Causes, are by Authors commonly called
Morbosus Apparatus, a sickly Disposition of Body; and the efficacy thereof is
so great, that it alone is sometimes sufficient to produce a gentle Pestilential
Fever, such as is commonly called a Malignant Fever simply, or a Purple
Fever, without the Intervention of any External or common Cause. For we
oft-times see, when the year is not Pestilential, and there is no Epidemical
sickness abroad, some persons through the evil Condition of their Humors, fall
into such Fevers, which are accompanied with many Symptoms of Malignancy; yea,
and with other Purple spots.

Concerning the point of Obstruction, we must observe, that it does necessarily
concur as the principal Cause in Malignant Fevers, which proceed from Internal
Causes, and are not Epidemical: but that Epidemical Fevers* which proceed from
a common Cause; viz. A Pestilent constitution of the Air, or are gotten by
Contagion, have not necessarily any Obstructions for their Cause. For the
venomous quality is received only by breathing in the corrupt Air, or only by
Infection from others, by which venomous Quality the Humors of the Body,
declining from their own proper Nature, do of their own accord putrefie. For
even as Fruits that will not keep, and other things ap^ to corrupt, though they
have never so much freedom of the Air, yet cannot be preserved from Corruption:
Even so the Humors, when they have conceived that pernicious Quality, are apt
to Corrup-tion: so that though there be no Obstruction present, they
necessarily fall into a Putrefaction, and a Fever. Howbeit, Putrefaction being
by this means brought into the Humors, when Nature does no longer rule them,
they are wont for the most part to breed Obstructions, whereby the Fever is
augmented; so that in these Fevers Obstructions may Concur, which though in
the beginning they were not the Cause of the Fever, yet do they follow the
same, being cherished by the Causes of the Fever, and being infected with
Pestilential Venom.

The External Causes of Pestilential Fevers, are the six Non-natural things,
which as they are necessary, so do they necessarily alter our bodies: and when
they are far departed from their Natural condition, they breed in us Malignant
and venomous Qualities. Among these, the Air holds the chief place: which as it
is a most common Cause, so Diseases that are common does for the most part
proceed from some fault thereof.

Now the Air becomes vicious and hurtful to men, for the most part by a
threefold means. First, If it be not blown through with wholesome Winds.
Secondly, If it be polluted with the Infection of putrid and stinking
Exhalations. Thirdly, If by an excess or preposterous condition of the first
Qualities, it does so alter Men, that thereby evil and malignant putrefactions
of the Humors be engendered.

The first is evident enough. For if the Air be not blown through, and stirred
with Winds, it is easily corrupted. Whence Hippocrates in the 3. Epidem.
Describing a most grievous Pestilential constitution, says; This year had no
Winds.

And the Second is most effectual and frequent, viz. When Putrid, Filthy, and
malignant vapors are mingled with the Air, and do infect the same, which is
wont to arise from diverse things, viz. Lakes, Pooles, Fi^h-ponds, and other
quiet and still Waters, or such as are full of mud, or wherein Flax, or Hemp
have been steeped. Or from the stink of Privies, Dung-hils, and nasty Allies.
Or from the unburied bodies of such as have bin slain in battle. Or out of Dens
or Caves or Caves (wherein the Air having been longshut up, has gained a
filthy putrefaction) being opened by an Earthquake, or some other ^asualtie.

But the third Reason, which consists in the Excess, Inequality, or
Preposterous condition of the first Qualities, may happen diverse ways, and
especially when there is a great excess of Heat and moisture. For those
Qualities, when they are extranious and adventitious, and increased above their
Natural condition, they are the principles of putrefactions. Hence a Southern
Wind lasting long in the Seasons of the year, according to Hippocrates in
Epidem. was the principal cause, of all Pestilential Fevers there described.

But a dry Constitution of the Air, though in the Opinion of Hippocrates, it is
more wholesome than a moist; yet because excess of Qualities, is hurtful to our
Nature; certain it is that a very dry Constitution of the Air, more than
ordinary, does produce Pestilential Fevers; especially if it be joined with
Excessive Heat. A clear example whereof we have in Livy in the first Book of his
History Decad. 4. viz. How by over great dryness, a Pestilence happened at
Rome, because there had been little or no Rain that year: neither was there
scarcity of Water from Heaven alone; but the Earth was scarce able to continue
her Springs. Now this dry Constitution does therefore Cause the Pestilence,
because the Humors being above measure burnt and dried up, degenerate into the
Matter of Biles, Carbuncles, and consequently of a Pestilential Fever; and
being very much thickened, they produce grievous Obstructions; whereby in a
matter otherwise well disposed thereunto, Malignant putrefaction is easily bred.
Add hereunto, That this immoderate dri^ess of the air, does corrupt the Corn,
hindering it from attaining its due maturity. For it brings the Corn sooner out
of the Earth, and it gives it at first plentiful nourishment, and afterward
Scanty, whereby the Corn is unequally digested, being Burnt without, but within
qui^e Raw; like Flesh scorched with an over violent Fire: and so it proves a
Cause of indigestion, and diverse Crudities.

It is proved also from Hippocrates, That immoderate Cold does produce a
Pestilence 1. Epidem. Sect. 5. tempest. 1. where he says. In the Country of
Thasus, a little before the appearance of Arcturus (a Star or Constellation)
and whilst He appears, the North Wind blowing, there are many and great Rains.
In which places he fetches the Cause of a Pestilential Season, from over great
Coldness. Also we may read in Livy Lib. 5. Decad. 1. That a Pestilential Season
was caused by vehement Cold; in these Words. The year was remarkable for a
Cold, and Snowy Winter, so that the Ways were stopped up, and the River Tyber
was unnavigable. So sad a Winter was followed by a grievous and Pestilential
Summer, Mortal to all kind of Living-Creatures; whether i^ were occasioned, by
the sudden change of the Air from one extreme to another, or by some other
means. And the reason of this Accident is at hand, viz. That by reason the
Pores of the Skin are closed up by the extreme Cold, so that the vapors cannot
steem forth so as naturally they should, there follows the greater
putrefaction, and more grievous poison; whereupon follows more dangerous
fevers, than in the Summer, in which the condition of the air, although in
some sort it gives beginning to the Disease, yet does it make the pores and
passages wider, Through which that which putrified does exhale, and the natural
and preternatural evaporations do readily breath out.

Inequality of the Season is wont also to be the Cause of this kind of Fevers;
viz. when it is sometimes Hot, sometimes Cold; sometimes wet, sometimes dry in
a short time; or when these various seasons do endure longer one after
another. As when after long vehement Hot weath^^, a freezing cold claps in, or
after long rains, an extreme drought steals upon us, or contrariwise. Or when
after a preposterous fashion, it is hot in Winter and cold in Summer. Now these
inequalities of Seasons may help the production of Pestilential Fevers;
because in them, the humors are exceedingly disturbed, by which means they
arrive unto an evil condition, far from their natural stare and fit to produce
malignant Diseases especially in those bodies which during the Course of the
Seasons aforesaid, by disorderly Course of Diet and liveing, have contracted
either a Plethory a Cacochymy or some notable obstructions.

To this kind of Causes may be added the malignant Influence of the
Constellations, which by changeing the Air, are wont diversely to affect the
Bodies of Liveing Creatures. Such they say are, the Conjunction of the superior
Planets, Saturu, Jupiter, and Mars, in humane Signs, such as Virgo and Gemini,
and especially when Mars is Lord. Which do bring Diseases in otherwise they by
change of the Air, so far as to corrupt the Nature and substance thereof. And
that change is wrought two ways; and is by the manifest qualities, as when by
the Influence of the Stars the air is so long and so far changed by excess of
the first qualities of Heat, Moisture, Cold and Dryness, that at length it is
proper Substance becomes vitrated the other is by occult qualities, when by the
secret power of the Stars, without any notable excess of the first qualities
the substance of the air is so changed, that it receives a certain degree of
corruption contrary to our Life. Touching the first, no man doubts, seeing it
is clear by Common Consent of Philosophers that inferior Bodies are governed by
the Heavenly Constellations. And as the alterations of the Air, which happen in
the four seasons of the year, do arise from the yearly motion of the Sun: so
the great diversity of years, whereby one proves very moist, another exceeding
dry the Sun holding every year the same Course in the Zodiac; can depend on
nothing, but the various aspects of the Constellations. The other way because
it is occult, is not so freely granted by all. How be it by common Consent of
Astrologers, it is held for certain, that the Stars do act upon inferior Bodies
in a threefold manner, viz. by their Motion, Light, and Influence The light
and beat do alter these Sublunary Bodies according to the first qualities and
especially Heat. But the Influences do induce both the first qualities for
example the cold which Saturn causes, cannot depend upon his Motion nor his
Light) and also the hidden and occult ones. For seeing Pestilential Diseases
do ostentimes happen, no great mutation being made in the air in regard of the
first qualities; but when they rag^, the (...) app^ares exceeding pure, and
puret sometimes, than it is wont to do when there is no pestilence stirring;
neither have very hot and moist seasons preceded, from which great
putrefactions are wont to arise, it to be coniectured, that these pestilential
Diseases do arise from some malignant Influence of the Stars. Ad^ hereunto,
that Pestilences are wont to rage even in the depth of Winter, which no
remarkable alteration of the first qualities has preceded. For in such a
Case* these diseases are to be attributed to the hidden power of the Stars
which have (as Astrologers teach) a power of corrupting the Air; no
extraordinary mutation of the first qualities being made therein. And this is
that divine principle in diseases, which Hippocrates acknowledged, and
according to the Exposition of Galen is in the Air, but is produced by the
Celestial Bodies and hidden causes. It is also hinted at by the same
Hippocrates, in the second Epidem. Sect. one. When he says. The time and the
Diseases do answer one another, unles some innovation happen in the Superior
Powers

Neither does that hinder which is brought as the opinion of Plato, out of his
Epinomis, that the Course of the Heavens and heavenly Bodies have always good
influence here below, and from them nothing but preservation and benefit do
flow. And Aristotle in the ninth of his Metaphisicks Chap. 10. Says that in
those Bodies which are eternal and ethereal, neither error nor corruption is
found. And Averrhoes says in his 1 De Caelo. cap. 24. The Heavenly Bodies do
contain the Elements, preserve them, and universally are unto them instead of
a form. whence it is collected, they cannot infect them with a poisonous and
malignant quality. Ad hereunto that if pestilential diseases should be raised
by influence of the Stars, they would at one and the same time in^ect the whole
World almost, seeing those influxes are universal causes, and by the
circulation of the Heavenly Bodies, do affect all the quarters of the World.
But these diseases do peculiarly invade some one Region only. And finally if
the Stars were said to be malefick and of an evil disposition; God the Author
of them would be accounted the cause of Mischief, which is full of Impiety.
These objections, I say, do not a whit prejudice the truth propounded, which
may thus be answered. All created substances are considered two ways; either
as they are things in being and do concur to the completing and perfection of
the Universe, and in that respect, they are all good: for to be and to be good
are one and the same, neither has the High God blessed for ever created any
thing which ought to be termed evil, simply considered. or they are considered
in regard of their operations, and then they may be termed evil, forasmuch as
they may damnefie some other things by reason of the antipathy and inbred
Enmity of Nature. And although almost innumerable contrarietyes of nature are
found in the world, yet must they al be termed good in respect to God their
maker, and in regard of the Univers, whose perfection consists chiefly in
variety. Furthermore the operations of things created, may be termed evil two
ways absolutely or simply considered in themselves, or in respect of somewhat
else; They are absolutely evil when at all times, in all places and upon all
occasions they do perpetually evil; and in this sense no Creature can be found
which is evil; in respect of some other thing, the operations of things may be
termed evil when they hurt one and do another good; and so there is nothing in
the whole universe so hurtful, but that it has some other ways its uses and
benefits, for which it was created: So al poisons though most hurtful to men or
other Animals, yet conveniently used they do a great deal of good to them. And
in the Art of Physic there is scarce so deadly a poison found, but that out of
it, by skill of Art, an healthful medicine may be drawn. And finally the
actions of Stars upon these inferior Bodies are considered two ways, either in
respect of the whole sublunarie world containing the Elements and al mixed
things: and so the action of the Heavens and Stars is simply benign,
ingendering, conserveing, vivifieing all things, and doing al other good
offices which tend to uphold the univers; and in this sense most true it is,
that these inferior Bodies are cherished and sustained by the influence of the
Heaven and Hevenly Bodies, or they are considered in respect of the proper
nature of this or that Element, or this or that living creature: and then it is
no absurd^^^e to say that there are some influences hurtful to some Element or
living Creature in such or such a part ^^ and so affected which depends not of
any fault of the stars (for they are of a most perfect nature) but rather of
the imperfection of sublunary things which cannot suffer any consider^ble
mutation without the corruption of their proper substance: now these diverse
natures and qualities of the stars, produced in sublunary Bodies by their
diverse concourse and influence were ordained by the great Architect of this
universe, for the Conservation of the whole world which being (...) up of so
diverse and so contrary natures, had need of as g eat variety in the influence
of the Stars, that all things might be preserved, as it were in an even balance
out of which diversity of influences notwithstanding, it could hardly come to
pass but that some parcel of things so different should sometiems suffer, not in
any whole kind o^ sort (which should tend to the destruction of the universe)
but only in some individuals that were less able to resist and for the most
part misaffecred, and only in some part of the Air more disposed to receive
malignant influences. From whence we may conclude, that those corruptions do
chiefly depend upon the defect of sublunary bodies forasmuch as many places are
in the world, where the air is so perfectly constituted and the inhabitants ^o
evenly tempered, that let never so malignant Influences of Stars show^ upon
them, yet are they never infected whith other pestilence.

To the same kind of Causes must we refer the Defects and Eclipses of Sun and
Moon, unusual Meteors and especially Blazing Stars: which are never wont to
appear but that Epidemical and Pestilential Sicknesses, and Diverse changes in
the World do follow, as is Consirmed by the experiments of many Histories:
whence that usually Cited verse of Claudian is become as a Proverb.

In Caelo nunquam Spectatum impune Cometam. A blazing Star does not appear.
But some Beholders plagued are.
A most evident witness whereof was that hairy Comet which appeared Anno 1618.
Toward the East on the 27 of November and was afterward seen near upon the
whole Month of December, moving and shining. It Is thicker and more solid part
being turned toward the Sun, did behold the East, and did far exceed Venus,
both in the clearnes of its shining, and in its largnes, thickly compacted and
conglobated together. The remaining part, being more thin, and less enlightened
by the Sun, because of its thinnes did move like fairly spread beard and
stretched toward the West. This Comet first appeared under the sign of Libra
nere the Aequinoctial Line; but by a private and peculiar motion of its own, it
was carried from thence, through the feet of Virgo, the middle of Boots and
the tail of the greater Bear. And at length, its light decreasing by little and
little and the matter whereof it consisted being dissipated, it vanished between
the great Bear and the Dragon. It was carried with the common motion of the
Stars from East to West, but it seemed to be moved some what swifter than the
Stars, for in the first Days of its Apparition, it was wont to rise a little
before five in the morning; and afterward it rose about four a Clock and
before four, and so sooner and sooner, till it prevented the Midnight, and
Bedtime. And we have reason to believe, that this Comet was the Prognostic
and sorerunner of malignant and pestilential Diseases, and also of those Wars,
wherewith whole Europe in a manner, has since that time been laid Wast.

And although the Air be chief among the mediate Causes of malignant and
pestilential Fevers: yet sure enough other non-natural things do concur to
their generation, as I shall particularly and berifly declare.

The next to air are Aliments, because bad Diet Causth a sickly disposition of
the body, which is an internal efficient, and Causasine qua non, or malignant
and Pestilential Fevers. Whereupon Galen in his Book De Cibis boni et mali
Succi, and in the 1. de Differ. Feb. Chap. 3. Does demonstrate, that from bad
and corrupt Diet Pestilential Diseases do arise. Now meats are said to be evil
and the Causes of those diseases in many respects.

And in the first place, when the Fruits of the Earth and of Trees, by reason
of a bad constitution of the year viz. Over moist or over dry, or corrupted by
mists, or some tempestuous weather, or some malignant influence of the stars;
do, being eaten, produce bad Juices in the body.

Secondly, when there is great Famine and scarcity of Corn: From whence came
that Proverb Ho loimos meta limon, the Plague follows famine. For then the poor
common People are forced to fill their bellies with such meats as are cheap and
bad, whence arises abundance of bad Humors. And which is much worse, when a
plenty presently follows famine, they do then suddenly cram themselves with
much meat, which by the languishing heat of their internal parts cannot be well
digested, and thereupon those meats come to participate of a malignant
putrefaction.

Thirdly, When Aliments, which in their own Nature are good do by some way or
other, gain putrefaction or some evil quality, such are wheat, barley, beans,
and pease, and other kind of grain, which being either overlong kept, or ill
laid up in a moist place, or otherwise misaffected, do come to be musty, or
have some other putrefactive quality. Such is flesh over long kept, or
stinking or such as is of beasts that were not killed, but died of some
disease: as Julius Obsequens relates, that in the Isle called Lipara when the
Sea was made hot, the fires which by means of an Earthquake were forcibly
vomited out of the Mount Aetina, and had boiled the Fishes casting them upon
the sho^^^ the Inhabitants eating greedily of those Fishes, a sore Pestilence
followed.

Neither is there less power in drinks, when putrid and corrupted wines or beer
or other liquors are drunk; or when water is drunk out of putrid and muddy
Lakes, or otherways infected. As good Histories do ^^sti^ie that numerous
Armies, have been destroyed by pestilential Diseases, with drinking such waters.

These non-natural things mentioned viz. Air and Meats and drinks, have the
greatest force to engender malignant Fevers. but the four remaining viz.
things voided or retained Motion and Rest Sleep and waking, with Pamons of the
Mind, are of less efficacy, and do only concur as adjuvaut Causes, or such as
dispose the body to conceive a malignant pucrefaction; as in our exposition of
them shall pre^ently app^ar.

The ^^tention of Courses in women, or of some other accustomed evacuation Men,
as of the Hemorrhoides, blee^^ing at nose, and Loosenes, which betides some
persons, at certain seasons; when they happen in a pestilential year, they are
wont to produce a malignant disease. For those things which are wont to be
avoided as superfluous and burdensome to Nature, if they be retained in the
body, they do easily conceive putrefaction so likewise over great evacuations
either of blood or other humors, do much weaken the Body, and do Cause that
Natural Heat being weakened, it is soon infected by the vicious and pestilential
impurities of the Air.

As for motion and rest, certain it is, that overmuch Idleness is a Cause, that
Natural heat is not sufficiently e^entilated, and consequently the Humors
conceive putrefaction: so over great exercise does very much open the pores,
and dissolves the Heat; whereupon the body becoming weak and more apt to take
impression, does easily receive the Infection.

And too much sleep, makes many Excrements and fills the body with Humidities,
which easily putrefie, but too much watching does engender Crudities, and they
easily putresie, because Natural Heat cannot well master them: and because by
them, many obstructions are caused, by which Transpiration is prohibited, and
at length putrefaction engendered.

And finaly, passions of the Mind, are wont vehemently to exagitate the body
and to disturb the humors: and so they much Dispose the body to receive
infection; and especially fear and Sadness which Drawing the vital Spirits
inward, do as it were choke and smother them, whereby the vigor of the Heart is
so broken, that it cannot sufficienly resist the venom and first assaults of
pestilential Sicknesses, yea verily and the Humors being stirred in the veins
and vehemently disturbed, are thrust out of their Natural constitution, and do
conceive a malignant putrefaction. Insomuch that some have conceived, that
Pestilential Diseases are bred in Camps and at Sieges of Towns, not so much
through bad Diet and stink of dead Carcases, as through Terror, Fear, Anxiety
and dread of Death, which do exagitate the Humors, and put them into a
tumultuary Combustion and Fluctuation.

The Signs of a pestilential Fever do some of them foretell the disease when it
is coming; others declare it to be present; and others witness where it has bin.
All which must be set down, because the first tend to Preservation, the second
to Cure, and the third sort to be a Caveat to such as are not yet infected.

The Signs which foreshow a pestilential Fever, are taken from three things
viz. From the the Disposition of the Body, from the Presence of Causes, and
from some intermediate dispositions.

Those bodies are disposed to receive pestilential Infection, which have
collected evil Juyces through bad diet, and by a preposterous use of the six
non-natural things aforesaid. Or such as being plethorick do gorge themselves
and inordinately and unseasonably replenish themselves. Furthermore some that
are neither plethorick nor cacochymical, do dispose their bodies to the
reception of this disease, while they torment their minds with most troublesome
passions, or give themselves immoderately to carnal embracements; for from
these two Causes, the pestilential fever is very ordinarily produced,
forasmuch as by them corruption is easily introduced even am^ngst good humors
for Passions of the Mind do distract and draw away the spirits, from their
proper operations and overmuch Carnal embracement, does weaken all the powers of
the body* but, the Spirits being distracted, and the virtues weakened, the
Humorrs change their Nature, and grow corrupt.

Finally, those whose principal Members are weak, or some ways tainted, either
from the womb, or by bad diet or any other external Cause; which have an hot
and moist temperature; which have a very thin or very compacted habit of body,
are al disposed to pestilential Fevers, for hot and moist bodies are subject
to putrefaction, thin bodies are liable to al (...), compacted constitutions,
have no free transpiration.

The presence of such Causes as can breed a pestilential fever do portend the
same: and consequently il seasons and unnatural temper of the year, Dearth, and
Scarcity of Victuals, Wars and other Causes, reckoned up before, when they
appear, they declare the Plague to ^^ approaching.

Those intermediate dispositions are, when such a disposition o^ body and the
Causes aforesaid being present, we see a Man more ^ad than ordinary, an
unexplicable fear in him without good ground or cause, the Color of the face
changed; is not rightly disposed in point of die; is disturbed with bad
dreams; infested with wearines which comes without labor, thirst, watchings,
stomachsickne^; it is easily conjectured, that man will have the Pesttilence:
for all there thing do declare, that the humors do attain another nature, and do
corrupt* from whence comes a pestilential Fever.

Such Signs as declare the Pestilence to be present are exactly to be
propounded and therefore all the Heads of Signs must be run over out of which
this Disease may be known* which Heads of signs, are taken from the three kinds
of symptoms, because the symptoms are the Effects of Diseases, and Causes can
no way so conveniently be known as by their effects. And therefore, some signs
are taken from the Actions hurt, some from Excrements voided, and others from
qualites changed. Unto which Heads a fourth must be added taken from
supervenient Infirmites. To the right understanding of which, these things
following must be premised.

Frist, we must know that the same signs in a manner do show a pestilental
Fever properly so called, and a Fever simply malignant, and that the signs
of the one and the other do differ only according to more and le^s; so that in
the pestilential Fever the symptoms are more, and in the malignant Fever less
cruel; yet there are some adjuncts more proper to the one than the other which
we shall declare in their proper place.

Secondly, we must note, that there is no true, proper and Pathognomonick sign
of these Fevers viz. Such an one as wherever that sign is, there is the
pestilence, and where that sign is not, there is no pestilence; no not the Bubo
or swelling in the Groyn nor the Carbuncle; seeing that many have them not
though they have the plague, and many have Buboes and Carbuncles that have no
malignitie in them: neither are those purple spots any such pathognomonick
sign, although a malignant Fever is from them termed the spotted Fever,
forasmuch as many have a malignant Fever without any such spots; and those
spots do sometimes appear on women that want, their courses, and in some
Children by reason of a light ebullition of blood, without any Fever, which I
have often seen in both. Howbeit by a Concurrency and collection of all signs
and tokens these Fevers may certainly be known,

Thirdly, we must mark, that all the signs which shall be propounded, are not
found in all sick persons of these Fevers; but only a part of them, which
notwithstanding will be sufficient, punctually to discover the kind of the
disease. For according to the variety of patients bodies and the intention or
remisnes of the disease, now these kind of symptoms, and anon those do;
chiefly show themselves.

Finally, it must be known, that the signs of a pestilential and malignant
Fever (although they are also found in other Fevers) yet are made in some
sort pathognomonick in this Fever in a twofold respect. First, because in
these Fevers, they are so conditioned as in other Fevers they are not. For
the Headache, Ilness at Stomach, Vomiting, the manner of the Heat and other
signs, when they accompany pestilential Fevers, they have a peculiar
malignant condition whereby they differ from themselves when they accompany
other ordinary Fevers; which is well known to them that are but indifferently
exercised in the Practice of Physic. Secondly, because the symptoms do not
observe the same proportion among themselves in these Fevers, which they do
in ordinary ones. So that the heat being gentle to the touch, the pulse not
much changed, do show a small Fever: yet with them is joined mighty Headache,
watchings and sometimes raveings, and other symptoms which are wont to
accompany a burning Fever. These things being thus premised, we shall decribe
the order of signs, beginning from the actions hindered.

Because therefore, the Heart is chiefly afflicted in these diseases, by the
malignant and venomous quality thereof, therefore its action viz. The Pulse, is
diversely changed, according to the variety of times and the diverse condition
of the diseas^* For sometimes at the first, it is in a manner natural, and very
like the pulse of persons in health, as Galen shows in the 3 de presag. cap. 4.
but in the progress and augmentation of the disease, it is little, weak and
unequal. Also the frequentness of the pulse is always more than the increas
of heat can require, because the Heart being provoked by the malignant
quality, does in that regard disturb it self more than the necessity of
eventilation does require. Likewise the signs of this Fever are.

Cardialgia, Heart burning or pain of the mouth of the stomach, which
Hippocrates condemns as a sign of malignity 1. Progn. in these words, Pam of
the mouth of the stomach, with distention of the Hypochondria and Headache, are
signs of malignity.

Sometimes great thirst, exceeding the measure of the Patients heat and sometimes
want of thirst, with a vehement Fever, and dryness of the Tongue, for both are
signs of malignity

Great want of appetite which make many abhor al kinds of meat, as much as if
they were the most loathsome medicines. Now this is wont to arise from malignant
vapors which vex the stomach.

Stomach Sickness and vomiting arising from the same Cause, especially when it
happens in the beginning of the disease, and is so diverse that some presently
vomit what they eat; other vomits as soon as they have taken broth, but they
vomit not the broth which they took, but diverse kinds of Humors; some keep any
kind of meat, but vomit their Drinks, Iuleps, Emulsions and whatever drinking
matter is given them, presently; great thirst notwithstanding remaining, with
dryness and blacknes of the tongue.

A frequent and inordinate shivering, which comes diverse times in a day,
springing from sharp and biting exhalations of an adverse quality to our
natures, which are carried unto the sensitive parts: which kind of shivering
does rarely happen in other putred Fevers, because the vapors in them have not
the like malignitie. In malignant intermitting tertians, sometimes a sign of
malignitie is taken from the shaking and the cold. For it sometimes happens,
that in the beginning of the fit, with a light coldness or shivering, the heat
does so much retire inwards, that the flesh of the patient is very cold and the
face is like that of a dead person, and the pulse so little as if it did not
beat at al. After which follows an Heat, which neither in the Augment nor in
the state, does to the touch feel great or sharp; yea and the flesh of the
patient is either lukewarm to feel to, or coldish even to the decl^nation. The
pulse, when the heat comes, does more appear, yet it is small, unequal,
frequent and very weak: and many other symptoms of a pestilential Fever are
present, which may sufficiently prove, that there are intermitting malignant
Fevers as well as continual; as was hinted before.

Wearyness of the whole body, Heaviness, and a breaking as it were of the
members appear in the beginning of the disease, by reason of the foresaid
vapors, dispersed through the whole Body

Pains of the Head, Watchings and Raveings, which al come from the same
causes, viz. from sharp and venomous vapors; which when they lodge themselves in
the membranes of the Brain, they cause headache and in as much as they heat and
dry the very substance of the brain, if the alteration be but small, they cause
watchings, if great they cause ravings. And to these symptoms, besides Heat
and Dryness, the venomous quality contributes much, because in the vulgar
Fevers such symptoms do not happen, unless the distemper be much more than
ordinary. And pains in this Fever, have a peculiar property to be very
diverse, and to shift places. For sometimes only the fore part of the head,
otherwhiles the hinder part, now the forehead, anon the eyebrowes are
cu^a^under as it were with pam, and sometimes other parts as the
shoulder-blades, the sides, the back, etc. Sometimes it is fixed in one part,
otherwhiles it changes place and vexes now this, now that part of the body.

In some patients drousie and sleepie dispositions happen, viz. In such as have
their brains full of phlegmatic excrements: which phlegmatic excrements, are
desolved by hot vapors ascending from the inferior parts, and do hinder the
functions of the Brain.

The urin in these pestilential Fevers, is sometimes like the urin of sound
persons, namely when the humors do more offend through a malignant Quality,
than by putrefaction; and sometimes it continues so for the first days;
afterward it becomes thick and troubled. Sometimes in the state of the disease,
it appears concoct, though the sick are in a perishing condition. sometimes, it
is thin and crude, having no sediment, or such a sediment as is more like an
excrement than a sediment. But most commonly it appears thick and troubled, and
of an high color; and has a thick, red, distrubed and scattered sediment. And
finaly al evil dispositions of urines, do happen in this disease, according to
the diverse alterations of the putresieing and corrupted Humors.

Chollerick fluxes of the belly, which either comes of themselves or through
some like occasions by some gentle Clyster or medicament; which bring many to
their end, So Hippocrates relates in 3. Epidem. In a pestilential Constitution
there described, that many died of the looseness and Bloody Flux: For the Humors
being made more furious by the malignant quality which is in them, do
exceedingly provoke Nature, so that she endeavors to drive them out the nearest
way: Now in these Stools, there is wont to be a mighty stink, by reason of the
extreme corruption of the humors.

An abundance of Worms is wont to be avoided in this disease, especially at the
beginning: For the great Putrefaction does very much dispose the Humors to
breed Worms.

Frequent sweates, small, short and unprofitable do break forth in the
beginning of the disease.

The Heat is mild and gentle to feel to, so that they searse seem to have a
Fever, whereupon Galen 9. Simp. cap. de Bolo Armen, and Avic. fen 4. lib. 1.
cap de febre pestilenti. Do teach that pestilential Fevers have of^times a
mild and gentle Heat; and the reason is, because these diseases are rather
caused by a malignant and venomous quality, than of an ordinary distemper and
Pucrefaction.

Readness of the eyes isoften seen in pestilential Fevers, because the
membranes of the Brain are in a sort inflamed by sharp vapors ascending into
the head, which they easily communicate to the Tunica adnata or skin of the
eyes so called, which is propagated from the said membranes

Finally, purple spots like Flea-bitings, called by later Physicians Peticulos
or Petechiae, are the proper and peculiar Signs of a malignant Fever. For they
are found in no other kind of Fever; forasmuch as they do arise from a vicious
quality of the blood or other humors, joined with malignity. Yet there do
appear in other diseases, spots very like unto those aforesaid, but springing
from a far different Cause; viz. From the over thinnes of the blood, which
being exagitated by the heat or the expulsive faculty, does sprout forth of the
Capillary Veins into the Skin. These spots, are wont for the most part to
appear in such as have some flux of blood, because the blood in such is more
thin and watery: and also in splenetick persons, in such as have the Jaundise
and old obstructions of the Bowels, and (in a word) in all such, who by reason
of the weakness of their Bowels, do breed watery blood and are apt to fall into a
Cachexy. For in such persons, the blood being made thinner than ordinary,
sometimes flows out at the Nose, sometimes at some other part, and sometimes it
comes out of the Capillary Veins into the Skin; where being retained, it
losethits own coluor, and becomes either bluish, or black, or light red, and
causes great variety of spots; which notwithstanding are very far different
from the spots of pestilential fevers, and do argue nothing but the watery
thinness of the blood and weakness of the Liver. Now those spots which come
out, in Pestilential fevers, do arise from Humors putrefiing and infected with
an evil quality. Furthermore, those spots do break out sometimes critically and
sometimes Symptomatically. Critically, when as Nature having either in Part or
in whole overcome the putrefaction and corrected the bad quality, does drive the
corrupt humor to the external parts; And then the disease is evermore abated.
Symptomatically when Nature is pricked forward by the quantity or evil quality
of the morbifick matter, does transmit a portion thereof unto the Skin, before
it be concocted, or the evil quality thereof amended. And from thence the
Patient receives no Ease, but rather, Nature having unprofitably wrastled with
the disease, it is a token rather that she is conquered than conquers.

The Colors of these spots are diverse* and do show the Diversity of the humors
by which they are bred. For the red spots are bred of the purer sort of blood,
and the black from chollerick blood more or less adust. As for the store of
these spots, sometime they appear in greater numbers and sometimes in less. They
begin to appear sometimes on the fourth, fifth, seventh, or ninth, or some other
critical day, if their coming out portend any good; sometimes on other days,
when there is little good to be hoped for thereby. Sometimes they are seen in all
parts of the body, but most frequently in the Loins, breast and Neck.

Now the Diseases which come, upon a pestilential fever for the most part are,
something coming out like Pox called Exanthemata; Pushes and Ulcers of the
Mouth; Carbuncles; Risings in the Groyn and behind the Ears.

The Exanthemata aforesaid, differ from the purple spots, because in the spots
there is only the color changed, but here is a certain rising in these
Exanthemata to an head. Sometimes they are like warts, and sometimes less,
resembling millet seed. Sometimes they are red, being caused by blood sometimes
white, proceeding of phlegm or Serosities; yellow from choler; purple from
adust Choler; bluish or black, by reason of great burning or Mortification.
Some break out Symptomatically, others Critically, others in a middle way. Some
dry away, others come to matter, others grow to be ulcerous.

To these may be referred pushes appearing in the Mouth which have all the
differences of the forsaid Exanthemata, and are sometimes so malignant, that the
sick can hardly endure to eat and drink. From Children they often Cause Death
because they will not endure the pain of eating and drinking. These pushes do
sometimes degenerate into Ulcers, which breed very great trouble to the
patients, hindering the motion of their tongue and especially their swallowing.

But sometimes Ulcers are bred in the Mouth immediately without any pustules or
pushes foregoing which the Greeks call Aphthe: of which there are many sorts.
For some are superficial, others profound; some clean, others foul; some
benign, others malignant; some with a Crust, others without. And the Crust is
sometimes white, sometimes yellow, sometimes bluish or black. Those which are
deep, filthy and malignant and that have a black Crust, are the most dangerous.

Carbuncles and Buboes, are wont to rise in diverse parts of the body, but
especialy where the Glandules are; because the expulsive faculty being provoked
by a malignant quality does expel the pernicious matter from the internal parts
especially the more noble ones to the external: so that from the Brain she
sends it to the Glandules or kernels behind the Ears; from the Heart, to the
Armpits; from the Liver to the Groyns; whence swellings under the Ears called
Parotides, and those in the Groyn called Bubones, do arise. Which kinds of
tumors do chiefly appear in a true pestilential fever, especially those in the
Groyn, which therefore the common people call the Pest or Plague. But
Carbuncles and Parotides orrisings behind the Ears, do also break out in
malignant Fevers, but in such as are at the top of malignity, and come very
near the Nature of true Pestilential Fevers.

Signs commemorative, are chiefly in request when Physicians are called to view
the Corpse of the dead, at ^uch times as there is a Plague abroad, or some
suspicion thereof, that it may be known whether the party died of the plague or
not.

And first of al, in such dead bodies there do sometimes appear those spots of
which we spoke before and sometimes marks, or stripes, as it were after
whipping: for these are the tokens of a Pestilential disease and venomous,
seeing those that are poisoned have also these signs. And those spots do
especially denote the Pestilence, when they are of a lead Color or black. Also
those Exanthemata spoken of before, do show the same, especially if they have a
bad Color: but much more the Buboes, Tarotides and Carbuncles whereunto may be
added such signs as have appeared in the Course of the disease: for the
recounting of them will make a certain demonstration.

The Prognostic of Pestilential Fevers is so uncertain, that nothing can be
certainly affirmed touching their Event, until certain tokens appear either
that Nature or the disease has gotten victory; which is not wont to happen,
unless about the end of the state or the Beginning of the Declination. Where
the discreet Physician ought to delay and suspend his Judgment touching the
Issue of the disease in the Beginning and the Augment

We must nevertheless propound the chief tokens out of which we may draw a
great Conjecture, whether the disease will end in Death or Health, by help
whereof we may foresee, what is to be hoped or feared. yet not being over
confident: for Experience has taught us, that many have escaped, with most
mortal signs; and others have perished under all the tokens of Recovery. But we
shall pass over al such prognostic signs which are common to al acute diseases,
of which Hippocrates has discoursed largely in his Prognostics, Coick,
Predictions, Procheticks, and Epidemicks and likewise in his Aphorisms, which
may have a place likewise in this disease. But we will propound only such as
are proper in a special manner to pestilential Fevers, from which a more
certain Prediction may be drawn.

Now these may be drawn from the same fountains from whence we drew the
Diagnosticks.

First Therefore, in these Fevers, if the pulse keep a tenor and equality, be
the Fever never so great, it gives always some matter of hopes. Contrarily an
inordinate, unequal and contracted pulse, is dangerous, especially if it appear
weak from the Beginning. But those differences of pulses are not so dangerous
in malignant Fevers, as in ordinary ones. For although an intermitting pulse
in a young man, be so deadly a sign, that Galen testifies, though he had seen
many old folks and children escape having an intermitting pulse diverse days
and yet escaped. Pulses like those of persons in Health are very dangerous: for
they signify that Nature out of weakness abstains from the Concoction of
Humors. For where by an evil and pernicious quality, the strength is
exceedingly weakened, Nature being weak, does not set her self to digest the
matter, not meedling with the Humor which has caused the disease: so that no
endeavor of coction being used, no labor follows, and there is either no
Fever, or a very little one. We have an example hereof in external tumors, in
which so long as the Part is almost overwhelmed by the plenty or il condition
of the matter, there is neither Pain nor Terror; but whereas Nature begins to
fight against the matter and to turn it into quittor then the fever is much
increased. Even so in malignant seavers, the Patients seem sometimes freed from
their fever, whereas they grow worse and draw toward death: as we may see in
Hippocrates 3. Epidem. Secti. Aegr. 2. where Hermocrates from the twentieth day
to the twenty fourth seemed to have no Fever, and yet on the twenty sixth he
died.

Raving is very common in this Fever. neither is it to be feared, if it be
lessened by sleep, and especially if it vanish away with a plentyful sweat: for
it is a sign that the matter is drawn from the Brain, into the habit of the Body.
But a persevering dotage, is pernicious, because it is a token that it
degenerates into a true Phrenzy.

The contractions and hoppings of the Members, which do often happen in this
Fever, are Convusive motions and very pernicious, and that the more if joined
with raveing, for they signify the brain to be extremely hurt

Trembling motions of the hands and Tongue are wont to be deadly and are by
Hippocrates much condemned in the 1. Prognost. For they show great weakeness,
and that Nature is overcome by the disease.

Deafnes though in the beginnings of occult diseases it be exceeding dangerous,
according to the Doctrine of Hippocrates; yet if it appear in the State of a
disease it portends health, especially in malignant Fevers. And I have
observed a thousand times, that such as being sick of Pestilential Fevers,
were taken Deaf in the State of the disease, did al escape, though the other
symptoms were never so dangerous; for it is a token that the brain, being
sufficiently strong does thrust the humors from the internal to the external
parts.

Sneezing, according to Hippocrates, even in deadly diseases (provided the
Lungs be in good Case) do give Hope of recovery. But in malignant Fevers, be
the symptoms otherwise never so dangerous, they promise Recovery.

Frequent Heart-burnings or Hiccoughings, do portend danger, and signify that
the stomach is grievously afflicted by the venomous quality.

Extreme aversness to meat, is very dangerous for it signifies the Stomach to
be mastered by the malignant quality of the Humor, and that its temper is
wholly overthrown, so that it refuses and abominates laudable nourishment,
which it most familiarly affects in time of Health.

Suppression of al evacuations in the beginning and augment of the Disease, is
counted a good sign. For it shows that the morbisick matter is not so
malignant, as to provoke Nature to excretion before the due time but that
Nature does yet conquer, and will in due time expel the matter, provided there
be no sign that the Humor will settle in the Head, Belly or any principal part.
But in the state of the disease for nothing to be evacuated, but for worser
signs to appear in some principal member; is bad. For it is a sign the disease
will either last long, or give little hope of Life. For the matter which in
diverse days could not be overcome, does bring some great damage in the same
member, as a phrenzy, Lethargy, and others which arise after the eleventh of
fourteenth day, which can very hardly be cured by all the Medicines imaginable.

Blood that is drawn by Phlebotomie, if it appear no ways faulty, but pure and
according to Nature, it is a dangerous token. For it is a plain argument that
there is more of a venomous quality, than of putrefaction; or that putrefaction
may lurk in the Veins next the Heart, which cannot be drawn away by Phlebotomy.

From Urines in a Pestilential Fever, there is scarce any, or a very uncertain
prediction to be made. For not only the confused, troubled, thinner, and
thicker Urine* are bad, as in other Fevers: But also that Urine which is like
the Urine of a healthy Person. Yea verily, and many have died, after the Urines
have showed signs of Concoction, and then became crude again.

Howbeit, Concocted Urines, and which have a laudable Enaeorema continuing many
days; and daily more uniting it self* and descending by little and little into
the bottom of the Urinal, does perpetualy promise certain recovery, even in
malignant Fevers. For it cannot be, that a lusty and strong natural Faculty,
which discovers it self plainly in these Urines, should not rise^s against the
malignant Quality, and at length overcome the same. And therefore I have
oftentimes with great confidence foretold a good event from the signs of
Concoction persevering in the Urines in such as have had malignant Fevers,
attended with most grievous Symptoms, so that all the Bystanders were in great
fear of their Lives.

A Fat and oily Urine, black or livid, with a black or bluish settling, does
certainly betoken death.

Very much Urine being made, and no abatement of the Fever thereupon is
dangerous, because it signifies a melting of the Body.

Sweats in this Fever, although they come well conditioned, and in the
Critical day, does seldom perfectly judge the Disease. And sometimes the Fever
is abated by Sweat on the first day; and then the Symptoms grow high, and after
many Sweats the Patient dies. For plentiful Sweats, not diminishing the
Disease, does arise from the melting of the whole Body. Neither must we
therefore believe, that Critical Sweats does never any good in these Fevers.
For by how much less Venom there is in the Disease, they do so much the more
good; as it happens in ordinary Fevers. And we find by Observation, that it is
far the better for the Patients to Sweat often at the beginning of the Disease
(provided they be not worse after their Sweats) for it is a sign that Nature
does attenuate the Matter by little and little, and expel the same by Sweat.

Looseness of the Belly is a very uncertain sign. For oftentimes a Looseness at
the beginning of the Disease has been good, which yet experience shows, is
sometimes a deadly token. Again after some Coction, we have seen the Patient
killed, by a looseness, and sometimes by the same recovered: Yet we must thus
distinguish. When a venomous Quality has the mastery, the more the Matter goes
away by Stool at the beginning of the Disease, the less danger. But when the
Disease arises most part from putrefaction of the Humors, they are worse that
are loose, at the beginning of the Disease.

Purple spots* when they are many and large, and of a benign color, and break
out Critically they foretell that Nature will Conquer. But if they be few, small,
and of a bad color, and are Symptomatically put forth, they signify that
Nature is never worsted. And further, If they go in again, its the worst sign
of all; for it shows that the morbific Matters reflux into the inward parts.

Exanthemata, or wheels appearing in diverse parts of the Body, are effects of
greater malignity than Purple Spots, and consequently portend greater danger.

Carbuncles and Buboes, or risings in the Groin and some other parts, does
witness greatest malignity, and threaten most danger: seeing they are wont to
follow those Fevers whose peculiar Character it is, that more die of them than
recover.

Carbuncles and Buboes, by how much they are the further from the Heart, grow
faster and come quicker to ripen, by so much the less dangerous are they. But
if Tumors increase suddenly with bad Symptoms, it is ill. Carbuncles very great,
of a filthy color, with an eating Ulcer, or which turn into a Grangrene, are
deadly: as also those which are near the Heart, or rise upon the Throat
Experience has taught that many Carbuncles are more dangerous than few; and
contrarily many Buboes or other risings are more safe, than few. Perotides (or
risings behind the Ears) in malignant and Purple Fevers, are in the Augment
and state deadly. But if they appear when the Disease does never so little
decline and come to Suppuration, they are a good token.

The Cure of a Pestilential Fever is divided into two parts. The first
contains the preservation of those that have it not; the second contains the
healing of those that have it.

The preservation from the Pest consists chiefly in taking away of those
Causes, which make Bodies fit to receive the Pestilence, and breed it in them.
And they are Internal or External; the Internal are a Disposition of the Body
apt thereto, a Plethorie, a Cachochimy, and Obstructions. The External are
especially, a vitiated Air, and a wandering Contagion. Bodies disposed to this
Disease, are such as either Naturally or Accidently, are more moist than they
ought to be; Weak lax and rare, dense and compact. Moist bodies must be dried;
dry must be preserved in that temper; the former must avoid full diet, much
drinking and all moist nourishments; such as are especially Fruits that will not
keep, Herbs, Fishes, Meats made of milk; the South air, such as comes from
lakes, and especially the air of the night, Idleness, long Sleep, especially
Sleeping after dinners, Batheings and whatever else can moisten the Body.

Let weak bodies be strengthened, with a restorative diet and with
strengthening medicaments. Those of a rare lax and thin constitution, need the
same ways of prevention with the moist. But the dense and compacted
constitution* because it is most of al disposed to a pestile^^ial disease must
more carefully be freed from a plethorie, Cacochymie and from obstruction;
which causes, seeing in all bodies they may breed this kind of Fever, as
internal causes, we m^st perpetually study their removal.

A Plethory requires Phlebotimy provided nothing do advise the contrary, as a
very cold or hot season of the year, and a pestilential Constitution of the Air
in which a vein must not be opened, unless a Plethora ad vasa do manifestly
urge the same; or some usual evacuations of blood by courses, hemorrhoids, or
nose-bleeding, have been stopped. For the blood being exhaust the air which is
breathed in will more easily imprint it is pestilential quality, and in case
the disease happen, the Patient will the hardlier escape, for being weakened by
blood-leting even as they who drink poison after blood letting, it penetrates
the more and they are with more difficulty recovered. Also when we fear poison,
we let not the patient blood, so Galen Lib. 7. de diff. Feb. Cap. 4. Where he
propoundes a preservation from a pestilential Fever, he prescribes indeed
Purgation and opening of obstructions; but he makes no mention of Phlebotomy

To Cacochymy we must oppose purgeing, such as is proper for the bumors
offending, convenient preparation being premised if it seem necessary: with
this caution, that benign medicaments be only used, abstaining from such as
have a malignant and deadly quality. with which it will be good to mix some
Bezoarticks and such things as are Alexipharmical.

Obstructions are caused by the multitude of humors their thickness and
clamminess. The multitude will be helped by such urin as evacuates the
thickness; by such as attenuate the cla mminess by things that are abstersive
or clensing.

In respect of external causes, Precaution must be made first by correcting
the excesses of the air viz. By cooling that which is too hot, as we taught in
continual Fevers; by drying that which is over moist, with sires both in
streets and in private houses, and that as much as may be made with sweet woods
as Juniper, Bays, Rosemary and such like. Secondly by removing all the causes
above recited which do infect the air. Thirdly by consuming and dissipating the
infections in the air. which may be don by kindeling of fires, as was said in
correcting the moisture of the air, and the perfumes of sweet smelling and
Alexipharmical materials. Also by vehement agitation of the air, to which end
the frequent discharging of great Guns will be very effectual.

But if the air shall be very much infected, so as therefrom a Fever truly
pestilential shall arise, the best kind of preservative is to change the air,
and they that are forced to continue, or to converse in places infected and
among the sick: have need of many other cautions and they must often use
Antidotes. All which are at large set down by such Authors as have treated
expressly of the Plague, and from thence the reader must fetch them; because my
design is but briefly to touch such things as are requisite to the cure of the
true pestilence; because few Physicians of any note dare hazard themselves in
the cure of the true Plague: and contrarily seeing both in England and in
France and whole Europe over; al Physicians in a manner have employed themselves
in the cure of spotted and malignant Fevers; I have thought it most worth my
pains to direct this cure to that kind of pestilential Fever, which is
simply called malignant and the spoted or purple Fever. Yet so that it may
serve for the cure of the true Plague; seeing as we said at the beginning, the
same Medicines and the same Indications, will serve for both.

The Cure therefore of those which are actualy sick must be directed unto the
Fever, the putrefaction and the malignant quality. The Fevers must be
opposed with Coolers and Moisteners, the Putrefaction with Evacuators and
Alterers. The malignant quality with Antidotes. Al which intentions must be
satisfied by a threefold Medicinal Means after the manner following.

The same diet must be appointed in this Fever which was appointed in the
continual Fevers. Only this one thing must be observed, that sharp things must
be oftener used in drinks and broaths as being very fit to resist putrefaction
and the malignant quality. Also touching drink this must be observed that the
use of wine and strong drink is sometimes good in this Fever, because they and
especially wine are very cordial and contrary to the malignant quality. Yet
many times they do much hurt and increase the heat of the Fever. Wherefore the
prudence of a physician, is in this case very necessary, that he may
contemplate the Nature of the disease and constitution of the patient: for by
this means he shall know whether the use of wine or strong drink be safe or no
For if the Fever be very small, but the venomous quality very intense, and the
body of the patient abound with phlegm, wine well allaied with water may be
safely given and to good purpose. But on the other side in an high Fever and a
chollerick constitution, to give wine or strong drink is pernicious. This I
have learned by a mutlitude of Experiments and especially in the year 1623.
When the Purple Fever was rife at Montpelier after the City had bin beseidged.
Which Fever was so malignant, that a third part at least of those which had it
died, and it differed from the true Plague only in the point of a Bubo:
forasmuch as not only whelkes and Exanthemata, red, bluish and black, but also
Carbuncles and swellings behind the ears did often appear. For to such Sick
persons whose pulse was not very quick and like the pulse of a sound person,
their Tongue moist and they without thirst, I gave wine with good success; and
I was inclined to continue the use thereof, by reason of the good the patients
found thereby, and because by the use thereof the Fever was not at al
augmented, neither did any thirst or drynes of the tongue arise thereby. But in
such whose Fever was more strong, with thirst, dryness roughness or blackness
of Tongue, I wholly forbad wine, and kept them perpetually to the use of
cooling and tart drinks. But it is to be remembered, that in the first days of
the disease wine must never be given, least the crude matter be too much
agitared, but only about the state, when the signs of malignity do begin more
and more to show themselves. Howbeit Zacutus Lusitanus in the 93. Obs. Lib. 1.
of his wonderful Cures and Cases, relates that in a pestilential Fever, the
patient being extreme thirsty, with a dry and black tongue and past hope, he
gave wine with most happy success, so that the patient was cured there with
alone. But here that saying of Cornelius Celsus is to the purpose, Those which
Reason could not, have many times bin cured with Rashness.

Diet being ordered, the cure must be begun by blood-letting, a Clyster being
premised: for bleeding is very convenient, both in regard of the Greatness of
the disease, the hot distemper and the putrefaction. But in defining the
quantity of blood which is to be taken away, prudence is necessary, when in
regard of the malignant quality, it does no good but hurt; for thereby the
vital faculty is exceedingly weakened, and those which are let blood after
being poisoned, are hastened to their death. Therefore if a malignant and
venomous quality be more than the putrefaction, which may easily be known by
the proper signs a foresaid, little blood must be taken away but if
putrefaction be more considerable than the venomous quality, blood must be
taken in a greater quantity. And consequently, if by reason of a sickly
Constitution of body, and of putrid humors contained in the veins, the
malignant Fever have bin produced chiefly; blood-letting may safely be
repeated, once, twice or thrice until the Burden of vicious humors contained
in the veins be discharged. And that especially if Inflammation of any of the
Bowels be feared, which many times happens in malignant Fevers. Now bleeding
must be used betimes and at the beginning of the disease for if the disease
shall have taken progress and the malignity be diffused into the whole Mass of
blood; bleeding does not only no good, but very much weakens Nature; so that
very many Authors hold, that blood must not be let after the fourth day is
past. And truly, forasmuch as malignant Fevers do at several times differ much
one from another, in regard of the different degree of Malignity; when they
begin to be rife once, diligent observation must be made, what good the
Patients receive by bloodletting. For some Fevers being of the kind of
Synochi, in which there is great putrefaction and little malignity, are much
lessened by Phlebotomy. And others whose Nature consists very near wholly in
malignity do become more pernicious by blood letting. This appears in the true
Pest, in which by the experiment of many approved Authors, it is assured, that
al which were let blood died So Wierus relates in an Epidemical Catarrh which
wandered al Europe over in the year 1580. in which al in a manner recovered, so
that scarce one of a thousand died; yet all that were let blood died thereof.
Now we must diligently observe that which Galen has taught us in the 14.
Method chap. 10. that in the Cure of Carbuncles it is good to take blood til
the Patient faint away, that the boiling blood which causes the Carbuncle may
be plentifully evacuated. Whenas the same Galen, Lib. de Curat. per venae, S.
Cap. 14. Commands that in Phlegmonous tumors blood be taken away, till the
Color Change, unless the Patient be weak, or the Phlegmone malignant. Whereby
is intimated, that Galen admits copious bloodletting in a simple Carbuncle that
is void of malignity but not in a malignant and Pestilent one; which agrees to
an hair with the former Precept propounded by us.

As concerning the times and intervalls of blood-letting wherein it is to be
iterated, this is to be noted: that if the disease proceed slowly, the
blood-lettings must not be hastened: for the patients strength is too soon
weakened; so that it cannot hold out, til all the morbisick matter be expelled.
According therefore as the disease is moved; so the Physician ought sooner or
later to let the Patient blood.

And there is a great Controversy, whether Purple spots or wheales appear;
Phlebotomy is to be used. For some account it to be an hamous Crime to let
blood when the Exanthemaia appear, because at that time the humors are moved
from the Center to the Circumference, which motion must be by all means
furthered; and by blood-letting the humors are put into a clean contrary
motion, and the blood is drawn from the Circumference to the Center, when as
the inner parts being emptied, it must needs be that the blood contained in the
outward parts, should run inwards again; which Galen plainly teaches in his 9
Desanit. Tuend. Cap. 10. viz. That the Blood when a vein is opened, does flow
back from the whole bulk of the body into the internal parts. And the same Galen
in his Comment upon the 9 Epidem. Does conjecture that Simon. of whom
Hippocrates spoke having broad pushes came out, had no good from his vomit,
because such juyces were thereby to be evacuated, which took their Course to
the Skin. Howbeit, by the more sound Advice of Doctors it is concluded, that the
Purple spots appearing in the beginning of the disease and on those days in
which a vein is wont to be opened, if blood were not sufficienly taken away
before, it must even then be drawn in immoderate quantity; Nether is there any
danger to be feared by so doing; seeing that same Eruption of wheals, which
comes in the beginning of the disease, is not critical but Symptomatical only,
arising from an exceeding ebullition of blood, and from the fervency of
malignant and putrefying Humors; and therefore the Motion of Nature cannot be
hindered, when there is more to hinder. For in Case the Pacients body being
Plethorick, the Urme thick and red, you shall not let blood because of the
Exanthemata or wheales breaking forth; Nature will scarce be able to Master such
a quantity of Humors, and it is to be feared least they should rush into some
internal part of the body and breed therein a pernicious inflammation. Howbeit,
blood at such a time must be sparingly taken away, not so as the veins may be
emptyed, which might cause a retraction of the evil humors inward again but
only so as to take away their over great abundance, which being taken away, the
veins draw no new blood, but only fall a little together as it were and become
a little loosened so as to purse themselves the better, and consequently to be
the better able to rule the remaining blood. And so is the motion and expulsion
of Nature furthered which she endeavors toward the Surface of the body, for
she being eased of part of her load wherewith she was oppressed, does more
easily cast off the remainder, and drive the same out. Which we do every where
behold in our practice, whiles the very same day oftentimes, in which a vein is
opened, yea verily sometimes a few hours after, pleantiful sweats, critical and
healthy do break forth. And in truth, though nature were so strong that she
could sufficiently rule all the redundant blood, seeing that in plet horick
bodies the blood is wont to be thick and by these eruptions into the Skin, the
thinner part of the blood only is evacuated, and the thicker abiding in the
veins does more and more putrefie, and makes the disease much more dangerous.
But I hold the most advised Course to be a little after the Blood-letting, to
fasten many Cupping glasses, that the motion of the humors to the outward
parts, may be hereby the more assisted; of the Admonstration of which
cupping-glasses, we shall speak by and by. Now it must be diligently noted, as
we said before, that we observe the time in which the Exanthemata do begin to
appear. For if it be in the beginning of the disease and before the fourth day,
in which time their breaking forth cannot be critical, and no help comes to the
patient thereby; but the symptoms do rather grow more vehement, in which
regard blood-letting ought by no means to be hindered. But if they break forth
after the fonrth day and that in great quantity, so that the sick party is
thereby bettered, and the symptoms lessened; it is much betteer to abstain from
blood-letting, and to fix many Cupping-glasses with Scarrification, that the
motion of the Humors out wards may thereby be well furthered.

What we have hitherto said of blood-letting, is to be understood of opening a
vein in the Arm, which does quickly diminish the blood. Howbeit sometimes, it is
very profitable to open the inferior veins viz. if the patient be weak, and
cannot suffer a reiteration of the former phlebotomy. But this is especially
good in women; for it is as Ribasius says Lib. 7. Chap. 10. proper to women
and very efficatious, because it imitates the manner of their Natural
evacuations. Yea verily and when they want their courses that kind of bleeding
is proper for women, because naturally they have much blood in these veins
which are high the womb. Also it is good for such, in whom we fear a
translation of the matter into the brain, which is often wont to happen in
these Fevers and to cause a Frenzy. Which may be perceived easily (as we
said in the prognostic) by the Urins thin, white, and void of Color; and when
the Urins are so, it will be very good to open the inferior Veins. Also
Oribasius relates in the forecited place that he was taken with a pestilential
Fever, and having two pound of blood drawn from his inferior veins, he
recovered: and all that used the like bleeding, were recovered.

The opening of the Hemorrhoid veins by Horsleeches works the same effect.
For seeing by this means the blood is drawn out by little and little, there
follows little abatement of strength. Yet is the blood revelled from the in
most bowels, where is wont to be the Heat and the Matter which foments the
disease. and this is special good for Melanchollick persons, because in such,
Nature is wont to evacuate earthly blood, by these ways.

After Sufficient blood-letting, Revulsions must be celebrated by
Cupping-glasses, both dry and with Scarrification. Dry ones, when we would only
revel: but Scarrified ones when the redundancy of blood is not wholly taken
away by blood-letting, which the patients strength could no longer bear. For,
blood is drawn by Cupping with much less expense of strength and besides the
venomous spirits lurking within, are thereby drawn to the Surface of the body.
But Authors agree not touching the places where Cupping-glasses are to be
applied: for some and especialy al Italian Physicians very near do hold they
ought to be applied to the inferior parts viz. to the thighs and buttocks and
no where else, that the venomous matter may be drawn from the Heart to the most
distant parts: but that they are not good to be fastened to the shoulder blades
or the Back, because they draw hurtful humors from other parts toward the
Heart. Others are of a contrary opinion, that Cupping-glasses are best to be
applied to the shoulders and back, viz. that poisonsom humors and vapors may be
drawn from the Center to the Circumference which motion is most suitable to the
motion of nature in this disease: But I am of opinion that Cupping. glasses
should be fastened to each and every of the places aforesaid; and that is is
good to set them first upon the lower parts, that some portion of malignity may
be drawn back unto the more remote parts: But because the Glasses fixed in
those parts, cannot sufficiently draw back the venomous homors and vapors from
the heart and its neighboring parts; it is good to fasten them likewise to such
parts as are near the heart viz. To the shoulders and back. For by this means
the motion of nature is very much furthered, seeing that experience does teach
that the eruption of the spots is commonly in those parts which by frequent
fixing of cups is much furthered. Which Mercatus has most elegantly delivered
in these words. Howbeit in the mean time, while the Body is plied with other
medicaments, small cupping-glasses must either many at once, or a few
frequently be applied. And if the venom of the disease or the weakness of the
Patient be much, they may be fixed without any, or with very little
scarrification. In which kind of use and upon that occasion, it is the best
course to scarrify those which are set upon the Back over against the heart
which experience has taught to be of such moment that. Anxieties and
Inequality of the Pulse, and other grevious accidents have thereupon ceased.
Wherefore we must not cease applying of them, until the venomous accidents are
mitigated or wholly taken away.

But the Reason urged by those of the former opinion, is of small moment for
the fear lest ill humors should be drawn from other parts unto the Heart. For
this reason might peraduenter be of some force: if they should be used at the
beginning of the disease the whole body being full of humors. But after an
universal evacuation sufficiently procured by blood-leting they can cause no
such danger; which is made manifest by a clear example drawn from a pleurisy,
in whose beginning, if the pained side should be cupt, doubtless it would bring
the Humors more and more to the greived part. But when after often blood
letting a cupping-glass is fixed upon the pained side, it does not only draw
nothing from other parts to the place affected, but that humor which is fixed
and wedged into the part is thereby powerfully drawn out, so that ofttimes the
disease is thereby perfectly cured. Although in this disease, there is more
danger of drawing Humors to the part affected, because it is in a manner
external and near the Cuppingglass

Zacutus Lusitanus in Observe. 13. Lib 5. Praxeos admirandoe does very much
commend cups with scarrification, fastened near the groins and armpits. for by
such cuppingglasses so fixed the vicious humor is drawn to the ignoble parts
and to those common Emunctories, unto which nature is wont to expel the same.

Among revulsive remedies, Frictions may very will be reckoned, being often
exercised upon the extreme parts of the Body with a course cloth. But that
Friction is most commended. which is made upon the whole Body with the Liniment
of Aetius, which is thus compounded.

Take of sweet Almonds and fountain water of each three ounces: Sal nitre two
drams. Boil them together til the water be consumed, and with this Oil warmed,
let the patients body be rubbed al over with the hands being dipped therein.
Aetius does prescribe Oil of Savin, but because it is too hot. Oil of sweet
Almonds was by Baptista Montanus, fitly substituted in its place. This ointment
does open the pores of the Skin, that nature may more fitly expel the venomous
vapors thereby.

Vesicatories do likewise powerfully draw out evil and venomous juyces and
serve for revulsion being applied in diverse parts of the body: Commonly they
are applied to the hinder part of the neck; for they do both draw out the
matter, and drive it from the head, and serve well to cure such sleepie
symptoms as are usual in these diseases. But where great malignity does posses
the whole Body and grevious symptoms afflict the patients, one vesicatory will
not suffice but more must be laid on: I am wont when the disease is very
violent to lay them on in five places viz. The Neck, both the Arms on the
inside between the bending of the Arm and the Shoulder, and to both the Thighs,
in the space between the Groyn and the Knee, with happy success.

The great profit of this Remedy we may learn from Galen, who in Lib 5. Method.
Cap. 12. relates, that of pestilential Fever al recovered, who happened to
have exulcerations in diverse parts of their Bodies; because the morbifick
matter was evacuated by those ulcers. And because the use of these Vesicatories
do often cause the Strangury (for the Cantharides do by a peculiar property
affect the Bladder) it will be good when they are applied, to give the Patient
emulsion, that may temper the acrimony of the urine. This symptom may likewise
be prevented by mingling the poudered Seeds of Ameos with the vesicant
plaster, which seeds have the faculty to keep the Cantharides from hurting the
bladder

Amongst Revulsive Medicines may likewise be mustered, the Cataplasm of
Radishes commended by Crato: The Radish (says he) because it powerfully draws
the malignity of matter it is good to apply the gross powder or scrapings
thereof to the feet, having first cleansed them with salt and vinegar. And the
following Cataplasm may be better for the same purpose.

Take scrapings of a radish and the two Briony Roots of each two ounces, seeds
of Garden Cresses one ounce. Grains of Paradise half an ounce, Sea Salt three
drams, Mix al and sprinkle them with the strongest Vinegar, and make them up
into a body, with a sufficient quantity of soft soap, til it become like a
Cataplasm, and apply it warm with tow to the soles of the feet, when the
patient is disposed to sleep.

To this Cataplasm may profitably be added leaves of Rue, Nettle, Sage,
Scordium, Pigeons dung, juice of Rue and Vinegar.

A Cataplasm of Snails beaten has the like Efficacy, and powerfully draws
unto the nether parts hurtful humors and vapors, as Galen highly commends the
same, for powerfully attracting and disscussing the waters of Hydropic Persons.

These revulsory Remedies have place during the whole Course of the disease
after universal evacuations viz. Phlebotomy and Purgation: of the use whereof
we are now to speak, that so we may pass from Chyrurgery to Pharmaceutick
Remedies.

Now it is much controverted among Practitioners, whether we ought to purge in
the beginning of malignant Fevers. Many reject purging at that time, not only
because of that well known precept of Hippocrates, that Concocted humors are to
be purged, but crude humors not: but also because in this disease the malignant
humors are too much exasperated by purgations, and diffuse their malignant
quality the more abroad, and by sharply provoking or Nature, they produce
pernicious fluxes whereas otherwise of themselves in these Fevers, melting
fluxes. do often arise and bring the patients to their long home. But others
contend, that sometimes there is such plenty of evil and venomous humors in the
first passages, that unless they be first removed by purging, or very much
lessened, they infect the rest of the humors, so that Nature cannot master
them, however assisted by antidotes and corroborating medicaments.

We conceive this Controversy may be thus composed; viz. that in the beginning
of this disease we must abstain from purgations for the reasons fore alleged;
and that the sink of putrid humors which lies in the first passages (which the
truth is do very much hinder the Cure) be drawn away rather by frequent
Clysters, than purging Medicaments. Howbeit, if their be so great a quantity of
il humors in the first Region, that it seems imposible sufficiently to
evacuate the same by Clysters (which chiefly happens, when evil humors abound
in the stomach, and then there is great loathing of meat, bitterness in the
mouth, stomach sickness and vomiting) or when there are many worms, it is very
good in such a Case to draw away the matter by a purging medicament that the
morbifick matter contained in the veins, may afterward be the more easily
subdued. Which matter it is that cannot be purged before concoction, and of
that must the saying of Hippocrates be understood, that only concocted humors
must be purged. But the matter contained in the first region and that mass of
excrements may be drawn away without any preparation or concoction premised,
and is ordinarily purged out only by Clysters, as we said before. Now those
Medicaments which we give to purge the first Region, must be chosen from
amongst the most be^igne and gentle purgations, avoiding the most vehement, yea
and the middle sort too, so that we may safely use Ca^^ia, Manna, Tamarinds,
syrup of Roses, and Cichory compound. And it is Scarce lawful to arise to Senna
and Rhubarb, or at least to mix them with the others in a small quantity, when a
great abundance of evil humors do afflict the patient. The former of these
Medicaments were propounded in our cure of continual putrid Fevers, and how we
should purge in the beginning of them.

But Clysters are to be used, not only in the beginning of the disease, to free
the first region from excrements; but they are to be given in the whole Course
of the Disease, if the patient be not loossbellied, and that every or every
other day. For by those the daily excrements are brought out, and some portion
of the Morbifick matter is also by little and little drawn away, Likewise the
humors mounting upwards, are broug^^ down to the places more suitable to the
intent of Nature. Now these Clysters must be composed of an emollient and
refrigerating decoction, adding gentle laxatives; for sharp ones and
scammoniated, do over much irritate nature to excretion and often produce
perricious fluxes.

And the truth is ^is best in the vigor of the disease to put no purgers into
the Clisters, least a Looseness be caused which is very incident to this
disease, so that they are rather to be of the nature of an internal
fomentation, then of a laxative Medicine.

But if in the Course of the disease the belly seem to be loose: we must not
therefore abstain from Clysters, but we must use such as do moderately deterg
and refrigerate, and in Juleps we must dissolve syrup of Pomegranates with
powder of Corral prepared.

While the foresaid Medicines are using, we must endeavor to correct the
Feverish Heat, Putrefaction and malignant quality, with these following
Medicaments.

And first of all the altering Juleps which were propounded in the Cure of
continual putrid Fevers will be very convenien^, of the decoction chiefly of
the Roots of Sorrel, Cichory, Grass, Bugloss, Sharpe-pointed Dock; the leaves
of Endive, Cichory, Sorrel, Pimpernel, Maidenhair and Tamarinds. Whereunto
must be added such things as by a Specific property do fight against the
venomous quality, commonly called Alexipharmaca or Antidotes, as roots of
Cinkfoyl, Tormentil, white Thistle; leaves of Scordium, Carduus, Scabious,
Scorzonera, Meddow-sweet; Flowers of Marygolds, Vetonica rubra; bitts of
Lemmons or Citrons and their seeds; Skinns of odoriferous apples, Shavings of
Hartshorn etc. with the Syrups of Lemmons, Pomgranats, Vinegar, of the juice
of Sorrel etc. and we must frequently mix tart things with them such as juice
of Citrons, or of Lemmons, Spirit of sulphur or of vitriol: for they do
mightily resist the putrefaction and the venomous quality.

Touching the Pome-Citron Athenaeus reports, that once in Egypt certain
condemned men were exposed to death by biting of beasts, and they were bitten
indeed by the Aspes, but had no harm thereby: because as they were led to
executiou, a Woman out of Pity gave them some Pome-Citrons to refresh them and
quench their thirst: which having eaten, they received no hurt by the biting of
those venomous Beasts. Now al parts of the Pome-Citron have an antidotary
quality; and therefore it is profitably cut in pieces rind and al, and boiled
with Roots and Herbs aforesaid to make juleps; and it is likewise to good
purpose steeped in small drink which the patient ordinarily uses, unto which it
gives a fragrant smell from its rind and a tartnes from its pulp: howbeit the
juice only has a cooling faculty.

The acid spirits of sulphur and vitriol are highly extolled especially by
Chemist, and their rare virtues approved by long experience have caused that
long since they have bin entertained by Galenists, and ordinarily prescribed.
And that it may appear how highly the Chemist esteems of them let it suffice to
cite the words of Mindererus alone in his 18 Book De Pestilentia, where
treating of spirit of vittriol and sulphur, and of other Medicaments made of
sulphur: There is (he says) no putrefaction whose neck they break not; no
infection which they do not overcome; no pravity of Humors but they can
conquer. Verily (to deal clearly) if I should be for bidden or hindered from
the use of vitriolated medicaments, I should never come to cure the Plague, or
always without my weapons.

To the same Juleps may sometimes be added Sal prunella because it powerfully
cooles, and extinguishes the Feverish heat; and it has besides a kind of
diaphoretick faculty, by means whereof it is excellently fitted for malignant
Fevers.

In place of Iuleps for the more delicate sort of Patients, may be substituted
sometimes medicated Broaths, made with the Leaves of Borrage, sorrel, Pimpernel,
and other herbs that are not offensive to the palate, with Skinns of fragrant
apples, with the pulp and juice of Citrons and a chick; and to them sal
prunella may sometimes be added, for to cool more effectually.

Also Emul^ions may be made of sweet Almonds, and the greater cool Seeds, with
the Decoctions of the Juleps. And for the greater quelling of the venomous
Quality, to the aforesaid Seeds may be added Seeds of Citrons, of Navew or
Turnep, and of Carduus Benedictus. And to commend the taste, the aforesaid
Syrups may be mingled therewith.

Now in the whole Course of the Disease, Antidotes must be used, not only
mingled in Juleps, Broths and Emulsions, as was said before, and shall be
further declared: But also contrived into other forms. And because al are not
to be used indifferently, nor at all times of the Disease; that their right Use
may be well distinguished, they must be sorted into four Tribes. The first
conteins those, which besides the Specifical Quality by which they resist
poison, are cold and dry and moderatly astringent; and consequently they hinder
putrefaction, strengthen the Heart, bridle the Venom, that it cannot be so
easily spread into the whole Body, and hinder the dissolution of the parts
thereof by a kind of compression; as Bole-Armoniack, Terra Sigillata, Coral,
Cinkfoyl Roots, and the Roots of Tormentil. The second Tribe contains such as
by their coldness and the tenuity of their substance do resist putrefaction,
and restrain the venomous Quality; as Juice of Lemmons, Spirit of Sulphur and
of Vitriol, as al acid things, and Vinegar it self. The third comprehends hot
and Diaphoretick medicaments, which expel venomous Humors and Vapors from the
Heart, and bring them from the Center to the Circumference; as Angellica,
Zedoary, Dictamnus, Meddow-sweet, Scordium, Carduus, Scabious, Treacle,
Mithridate, Treacle water. The fourth contains such as by a Specifical virtue,
without any excess of the first Qualities, do oppugn the venomous Quality; as
Bezoar stone, Hartshorn, Unicorns-Horn, Troches of Vipers, and such like.

The Medicines of the First, Second, and Fourth Tribe, do best agree in the
beginning and the Augment; and those of the Third Tribe in the state and
Declination. Now these medicaments must be exceedingly varied, and diversely
mixed, according to the different degree of malignity or putrefaction;
according to the various Intention or Remission of the Fever; and according to
the diverse temperaments, Sex and Age of the Patient; and according to other
Circumstances: the determination whereof depends wholly upon the Judgment and
Prudence of the Physician, and cannot be determined by any certain Rules. Only
one thing I shall advice you of, which is very well known, viz. That when there
is a vehement burning of the Fever, we must chiefly use Refrigerating and
cooling things; but the hot and Diaphoretick must not be meddled with; which
notwithstanding will be very proper, when the Fever is more remiss and the
malignant Qual^ty is that which most offends. Of these Tribes therefore, diverse
medicaments may be Compounded, according to the judgment of the Physician. But
least young Practitioners should be wholly destitute of some forms, I shall ad a
few, in imitation whereof, they may devi^e a thousand others, as the occasion
of practice shall require.

Take Roots of Sorrel, Bugloss and Tormentil of each one ounce. Leaves of
Endive, Cichory, Sorrel, Pimpernel, of each one hand u^. Tamarinds one ounce.
Boil al to a pint. In the strained Liquor disolve syrups of Pomegranats and
Lemmons of each an ounce and half. Makes of al a Julep to be taken at thrice:
adding to every dose a drant of Confection of Hyacinths bezoarstone six
grains.

This form of a Julep, may do well in the beginning of the Fever. But if the
Fever be very high and the Patient of a Chollerick constitution, a dram of Sal
Prunella may be added to every dose, or as much spirit of vitriol or sulphur,
as may suffice to make it moderatly tart, or both of them together. ^u^ in a
Fever not very high may be added to the decoction, Roots of the white-Thistle
and of Cinkfovl, Leaves of Scordium and Scabious.

Take sweet Almonds blanched one ounce: Seeds of Melones, Gourds, Navew,
Citrons and Carduus of each two drams: Beat them together in a Marblemorter,
pouring on by little and little a pint and half of the a^oresaid Decoction;
Syrup of Lemmon three ounces; Sal prunellae three drams. Make an Emulsion for
three Doses, to be taken twice or thrice in a day.

In the whole cour^e of the Disease, let the Patients use in their Broaths the
Confection of Hyacinths, or the following powder, which is not unpleasant.

Take of prepared (...), Pearls prepared, shavings of Ivory Hartshorn, and
Bezoar, of each one scruple. Mix them. Make of all a powder, of which, give
half a scruple in every mess of Broth.

The Innovators of this Age, who endeavor to banish Gemms, Pearls, Coral, and
al Cordial things from the use of Physic; and cure all Fevers, even those
that are malignant, with Blood-letting and mere refrigerating Apozemes; may be
convinced wi^h this one Experiment, at least touching Coral and Pearls: which
being poudred, if they be infu^ed in Vinegar, Juice of Lemmons, Spirit of
Vitriol, or Aquafortis; they take away all the Acrimony of those Liquors.
Whence we may gather, that the same Medicaments taken into our bodies do
sweeten and molifie the acrimony and malignant quality of humors and reduce
them to a moderation. They which have tasted the solutions of Pearls and
Corals, made in juice of Lemmons or di^^illed Vinegar, do know the truth hereof
very well.

Where the malignant and venomous quality is very rise Alexipharmaca or
Po^on-quellers, are to be given in Juleps, broths the ordinary drink of the
Patients, and (...) they take in, that by a perpetual and incessant Conflict,
the troublsom Enemy may be oppo^ed.

Bezoar stone is given alone to the quantity of five or six grains, with water
of Mead-sweet, Scorzonera, Carduus, or such like not only to oppose the
malignant quality, but also to help the Diaphoretick motion; for this stone is
reputed for a sweating Medicament, which notwithstanding many approved Authors
doubt of, because they could never see any sensible effect, by the giving
thereof. And truly (to speak out my mind) there can no great Confidence be put
in this stone; because although we may allow to the true and genuine bezoar
stone, those faculties which are hereunto ascribed; yet because the great price
thereof Causes that many Traders take a world of pains to sophisticate the
same, we can now a days hardly get any but counterfeit. A clear testimony
whereof is, that the writers of the Indian Histories do aver that Bezoar stone
is very scarce and of great price among the Indians themselves; when we have
plenty of them and cheap enough.

More credit should of right be given to that same Root, which the Spaniards
have in this Age of ours brought out of Italy; which they call Contra yerva
which signifies the Poison-pelting or Antidotary Herb, because the powder
thereof is a present remedy against poisons, and drives them out of the body by
sweat, or insensible transpiration. And they Conceive that Plant to be the
Common ordinary food, of Those beasts in which the Bezoar stone is found, and
that the stone has its virtue primarily from thence. A scruple or half a dram
of this Root poudered may be given in Carduus matter, or other medicaments.

Mendererus cries up this following powder.

Take Sugar Candy three drams, white-ginger two drams. Camphire one dram. Make
al into a powder; the dose one dram in some convenient liquor. But the Author
does advise that in great pains of the head or stomach, Camphire is warily to
be used; which yet he highly commends in pestilential diseases; and avouches
that seasonably given, il does more good than the most precious bezoardick
medicaments. I conceive the powder is too hot because of the Ginger, and I have
Composed this following in imitation thereof, Which I have used with happy
success.

Take mineral Bezoar three drams: Sal prunella two drams: Camphire one dram.
Make of all a powder: Give one dram at a time in Carduus water, or some other
convenient Liquor.

Pouders may likewise be made of the fragments of precious stones whose virtues
many deride and others as much admire; so that from the times of the Arabian
Physicians to our days many compositions are prepared of them in the shops, as
Electuarium de Gemmis, and Confectio de Hyacintho. But in pestilential and
venomous diseases many have extolled the great virtue of the Smaragd, amongst
the rest Avenzoar, Mindererus, and Zacutus Lusitanus. Avenzoar 2 Teisir. tract.
1. Cap. 5. That himself being poisoned, was thereby cured. Mindererus Lib. de
Pestilentia Cap, 15. Relates that to a woman in a Pestilential Fever who
abhorred al Physic, he gave the following Powder which she might easily
swallow having neither taste nor smell; which when she had taken the
conbustions of cruel symptoms being allaied, and the disease turning to
health, she was cured.

Take of the Smaragd stone prepared, East India Bezoar of each six grains:
Hyacinth prepared three grains, mix them. Make of all a powder for one Dose.

And Zacutus Lusitanus, relates that a Portugal Gentleman, having through
poison fallen into a looseness and a Consumption, from which no abstersives,
astringents or Antidotes could free him; he was cured only by the Smaragd, the
powder whereof to the quantity of twelve grains he took every other day in
conserve of quinces, and when he had taken it five times he was cured of his
Looseness.

The Physicians of Mountpelier, do use in this Fever as a most profitable
Antidote, no ways heating; the Troches of Vipers, which are usually prepared as
an ingredient into Andromachus Treacle, which they give from one scruple to
half a dram in cordial waters or Juleps.

Yet the flesh of vipers were better being dried, which has no venomous
quality (as people imagine) but is rather a potent Antidote; which is much
abated by boiling; for it is boiled in water to make the troches. So that we
see greater effects wrought only by the heart and Liver of vipers, being dried,
without any other preparation

The Alexipharmick Medicaments of the third Tribe viz. The Diaphoreticks and
sweaters must be given only in the state or declination of the disease, as was
said before. which is to be understood, when they are given in a fever simply
malignant or spotted: for in the true Plague they must be used at the very
beginning* that the venomous quality which would quickly kill the Patient may
be suddenly and potently opposed, and the malignant vapors discussed. Yea
verily and in simple malignant Fevers, if the venomous quality seem to be
greater than the putrefaction they are likewise to be given at the beginning in
small quantity; making choice of such as are least hot, mixing them with Juleps
and other cooling medicines formerly precribed.

Now of these Diaphoretick medicaments there are diverse degrees, for some are
more hot, as Angelica, Zedoary, Dictamnum, Treacle, Mithridate, Treakle water;
which are never to be given when the heat of the Fever is at the highest, but
only when the same is much abated, and when the signs of malignity do very much
prevail. But others are less hot, as Scabious, Carduus Mead-sweet, Scordium,
which may safely be given, though the Fever be in it is height. And these
distinctions are carefully to be observed in practice. and as for the forms of
particuliar medicaments, every Physician can vary them, according to the
different degree of the Feverish Heat and of the Malignitie. But I shall here
discribe such as are most effectual

Take water of Mead-sweet and Carduus of each two ounces: juice of Lemmons one
ounce: old Treakle half a dram, two scruples or one dram, according as the fear
of heating the Patient is more or less. Mix al into a potion. give it warm and
cover the patient somewhat more than ordinary. if there be great vehemence of
symptoms, new Treakle will be more convenient, because of the vigor of the Opium
by means of which the vehemence of the symptoms will be allaied, and the
boiling of the Humors will be restrained: yea and sometimes when it seems
unconvenient to use Treakle as in the beginning of the disease especially,
Laudanum Opiatum given to two grains and mingled* with Antidotes, do much good.
For by the Narcotick and congealing power thereof those fervent Spirits so
vexatious to the Heart, are as it were fixed; and the morbifick matter (which
is most pernicious while it is in motion) is thereby stopped and remains in a
manner unmovable, whence it comes to pass, that Nature not being provoked by
the malignant humors and spirits, recollecting her strength, does more easily
apply unto her self the virtue of Antidotes

Aqua theriacalis seems fit to be preferred before Treacle it self. For seeing
it is exceeding thin and spiritous, it does more easily and suddenly pierce
into and pass through the whole body and Cause sweat. And because there are many
descriptions of Treacle water, their dose ought to differ according as they are
compounded of Simples more or less healing. I shall in this place propound the
chief.

And first of al, the Treacle water of Bauderon is most excellent, because it
is exceeding temperate. For there goes no other Liquor thereinto than Vinegar
and Juice of Lemmons, by which the hot Ingredients are very much tempered, and
therefore it may be given from half an ounce to an ounce in Sudorofick
decoctions or waters. And although this is less heating than any of the rest
prescribed by diverse other Authors; yet have I invented another, easily made,
which is more cooling, and does no less oppose the Fever than the malignant
quality, and may consequently be used in the whole course of the disease, at any
period thereof. Its composition is as follows.

Take twelve fresh and juycie Lemmons. Take away the bark or rind and the seeds
and press out the fuyce, and ad thereunto the said rindes and seeds; and three
pints of juice of Scordium, juice of sorrel, of Goats Rue; of scabious, and
Carduus, of each one pint. Shavings of Hartshorn four Ounces. Old Venice
Treacle six ounces. Let the rinds of the Lemmons be cut into thin chips, let
the seeds be beaten, and such herbs as have little juice, let them in the
beating be moistened with the juice of Lemmons and let al be distilled in
balneo Mariae. Of the water give one ounce by it self or mixed with other
Liquors.

The hotter sort of Treacle waters are made with white Wine or with spirit of
wine; which must be warilly given and in lesser quantity; yet they pierc more
than the other and move sweat, and are chiefly used in the true Pestilence.
Howbeit in some Cases they may by the prudent Physician be used. Among the many
Descriptions of such Treacle waters, I will propound in this place, two of the
most excellent.

Take roots of Angelica, White-Thistle, Gentian, Tormentil, Zedoary,
Hartshorn, of each one ounce. of the three sanders, of each half an ounce.
Treacle three ounces, Camphire a scruple. beat al and steep them three days
together in two Pints of strong white wind, in a warm place. Then distill Them
in Balneo Mariae, and keep the water for use, the dose is, from two drams to
half an ounce, in refrigerating Juleps, adding spirit of vitriol to correct the
Inflammation thereof.

Take Spirit of Wine, very well rectified one pint and an half. old Treacle
eight ounces. Elect Mirrh four ounces. Oriental Saffron one ounce. Camphire
half an ounce. Infuse al for twenty four hours in Balneo Mariae. afterward still
them in the same Bath; and you shall have a very effectual water.

The Chemists do exceedingly cry up their Bezoardica Mineralia, because they
are Sudorofick or Diaphoretick at least and yet do not at al heat: which they
endeavor to prove by their having no taste, in which regard they are easily
taken even by the most nice Patients, that loath unpleasant medicaments. They
also commend their Medicine which is called by them Mixtura Simplex or Mixtura
Spiritalis, made of Treacle Water Camphorated, spirit of Vitriol and of Tartar:
and they mingle a dram hereof in Juleps and antidotary Potions.

A Physician that undertakes the Cure of malignant Fevers ought to have diverse
Antidotes in a readynes, and to change them ever and anon, least nature be too
much accustomed to one and the same, and slight the virtue thereof. Also the
nature of the venomous quality is not always one and the same but very diverse
according to the diversity of the patients bodies. So that what has helped one,
will do another no good; so that when he has for some time used one antidote,
he must try another and another.

While the foresaid diaphoreticks are using, if we have a Mind at any time to
help their Operation, that they may more powerfully bring out the poison into
the surface of the Body, some external helps may be used: viz.
Cupping-glasses, both dry and with scarification, many and often set on and
Vesicatories, of which we spok before; which are most convenient in the state
of the disease and at what time Sudorofick Medicines are given; as also Oil of
Scorpions of Matthiolus, which is much commended by all Practitioners; for it
calls forth the poison residing in the profound parts of the body unto the
external parts, And therefore the Emunctories of the body, as the Groines and
Armpits, with the Pulses of the Templs, Hands and Feet, ought frequently to be
anointed with this oil warm; viz. thrice or four times in a day, or else every
third hour. Where this Oil is not to be had, a Liniment may be made of Treacle
dissolved in Juice of Lemmons adding a little saffron and Camphire.

If at any time Nature being oppressed with the malignity of the Poison and
overcome, and seem not to act, but as it were to submit her self with hands
bound to the mercy of the humor. The strongest diaphoreticks, are then to be
given, in a large dose, that the daunted mettle of the heart may be as it were
spurred up, And then the strongest sorts of Treacle waters and Bezoardicks
which have greatest force to penetrate, must be used: and the addition of
Camphire will much help their penetration and outwardly, at such a time this
following fomentation, will wonderfully assist the operation of such things as
are taken in, and will help to drive out the malignant vapors. For by this
Method, many have bin reduced from the Gates of Death.

Take roots of Angelica and Gentian, of each two ounces, Leaves of Bawm,
Origanum, Scordium, of each two handfuls. Seeds of Carduus benedictus one
ounce. Flowers of Chamomel, Mullien, Melilot, St. John's wort, Centaurie the
less, Staechados, Rosemary, Marygold, of each two pugills. Make a decoction of
all in water, adding toward the end a little white wind, wherewith foment the
feet, Groins, Armepits, and sides warm with sponges.

If drynes of the tongue, thirst and other signs do show that the Fever does
prevail as much as the malignant quality, we must abstain from the fomentation,
and instead thereof let a Hen cut down through the Back, or the Lungs or Caul
of a Wether new killed, be applied to the patients Belly.

In the whole Course of the Care, the greatest Cure of al must be to preserve
the patients strength, which is much dejected by the Venomous quality. It is
best kept up, first by Convenient broths made with a Capon, unto which, when
necessity urges may be added the distilled broaths of flesh, and especially the
Aqua Caponis which is made in Balneo Mariae per Descensum, as the common manner
is now to make it. Consection of Hyacinths given in broaths, does repair the
strength, and does oppugn the malignant quality. In the same broaths Gelly of
hartshorn, does satisfy both Endications. If the strength of the Patient be
very much decayed; we may make bold with Confectio Alkermes, provided the Heat
of the Fever be not very violent. And finally, wine is the most cordial thing
in the world, of the use whereof in this disease, I spoke before, treating of
the Patients Diet. The only smell of wine does much refresh the Patients
strength, and much more a toast dipped in Canary and Rosewater and so held to
the Nose.

And in this Case also Confectio Alkermes and de Hyacintho are wont to be put
into alexipharmical Potions. Or in extreme dejection of strength, Potions
merely cordial may be thus made.

Take Orenge-flower water and Rosewater of each one ounce and an half.
Confectio Alkermes one dram. Syrup of Apples one ounce. Juice of Lemmons three
drams. Make all into a potion. If the Fever be not intense Cinnamon water may
be given to the quantity of one dram or three drams. and sometimes Amber Griese
may be added, to the quantity of five Granes or Seven. Neither in extreme
Weakness of the Patients must we so much fear those hot cordials, that we should
resuse to save the patient from present death, for fear of augmenting the Heat
of the Fever for we must always regard that which is most pressing, and when
the patient has a little recovered strength if the hot cordials have made some
increase of Heat, it may afterward be tempered by potent coolers, as Sal
Prunella, and Spirit of vitriol, mixed in juleps and ordinary Drink. This
Method being observed by the discreet Physician, in his administration both of
Strengtheners and of hot Antidotes and sweaters; will prove happily Successful.

After these things, must follow the Application of Epithems and Liveing
Creatures to the Region of the Heart; fomentation of the Genitalls with
Confectio Alkermes dissolved in Wine; Bags to be laid upon the stomach, and
other both internal and external Medicaments, largly by me described in my
Chapter of Weakness or Decay of strength.

As for Epithems, there is Caution to be used in their application, Because
very many Authors do wholly reject the use of them; because they are wont to be
compounded of refrigerating and repelling things; viz. of the waters of cooling
herbs and Vinegar, by which the venomous quality is beaten back to the heart,
and the transpiration thereof, which ought always to be promoted, is hindered.
But this reason cannot hinder the use of Epithemes, seeing we may compound them
of cordial and diaphoretick waters that have repelling no or astringent quality
in them, and without Vinegar (which some do yet allow) adding cordials
thereunto; and by these things mingled together, Epithems may be made, not only
which strengthen the heart, but also open the pores of the skin, that through
them the malignant vapors may more easily transpire. Of such Epithems this may
be an example.

Take waters of scabious and Carduus, of each four ounces. Oreng-flower water
two ounces. Con'fectio Alkermes two drams. Powder of Diamargaritum frigidum one
dram. Saffron and Camphire of each six grains. Make an Epitheme and apply it
warm to the Region of the Heart frequenly.

Take Confectio Alkermes half an ounce, Powder of Triasantalon and
Diamargaritum frigidum, of each one dram and half, a little Orengflower water.
Make of al a Liniment to be applied to the part after aforesaid the use of the
foresaid Epitheme.

Neither must we here omit such Epithemes as are to be applied to the parts
under the short ribbs, because of the reasons of their use propounded in the
Cure of putrid Fevers, from whence the Materials must also be fetched.

At length whenas the malignant and venomous quality is mastered by the
Remedies aforefaid, and the Fever abated and the Disease begins to decline,
and the signs of Coction do manifestly appear; pargation must be used, which by
the experienced Physician may be accomodated to the strength and constitution
of the Patient. I shall here, for the sake of Beginners propound only one
example.

Take Senna half an ounce. Annis seed one dram. Leaves of Scabious and
Scordium, of each half an handful. Liquoris three drains. Boil al to three
ounces. In the strained Liquor dissolve the infusion of four scruples of
Rhubarb Made in bugloss water with yellow Sanders. Manna and Syrup of Roses of
each one ounce. Make all into a Potion.

And for the most part one purge is not sufficient in the declination of the
disease when the Patient begins to recover health; but purgation must
oftentimes be repeated twice or three times at convenient distances, that the
evil humors may be perfectly rooted out. Otherwise there will be danger of a
Relapse, or at least the Patient will be long in Recovering prsecte health.
Because though nature; be str^ng enough to master the relics of the Morbisick
matter yet can she not do it but in a long time and in the mean space the body
is long in recovering its former strength.

For the perfect Completing of this Cure, it remains only that we speak
something of the Correction of such symptoms as happen in this disease. Now
their cure is very near the same which has bin propounded in the second
section of this Treatise Chap. 2. where we delivered the Cure of such symptoms
as attend putrid Fevers. And the symptoms of this Fever are the same in a
manner with those of putrid Fevers, the difference being only in degrees of
more or less; and therefore the same Remedies will suit with both. Howbeit I
shall here set down such things as have bin frequently tried in the taming of
such symptoms as attend malignant and Pestilential Fevers, and which have
proved most successful. And we shall withal declare the Cure of such diseases
as do Supervene upon these Fevers.

And first of al, In Pains of the Head, Want of sleep, and Raving, at the
beginning Revellers of al sorts must be used, as opening of the inferior veins
and of the Haemorrhoids; emollient Clysters, frictions of the nether parts,
Cupping-glasses, first set upon the Calves of the Legs, afterward upon the
Back and shoulders, both dry and with scarification; and Vesicatories, which in
a simple Delirium or Dotage arising from a Chollerick matter, must be applied
to the Arms and thighs. But if with the Raving there be joined a dullnes and
sleepvnes, a Vesicatory must be applied also to the Neck; and then Repellers
must be applied unto the Forehead and Oxyrrhodines; of which it is to be noted,
that they are not so good in malignant as in mere putrid Fevers; because the
venomous vapors must by all means be expelled, and at no hand be kept within
the body. And therefore first gentle repellers must be applied, and if the
vehemence of the foresaid symptoms shall compel us to fly to the stronger, we
must not use them long together.

Among Repellers of the gentler sort is reckoned that common frontal of the
flowers of water Lilly Violets and Roses, the greater cool seeds and Chermes
berries, bedewed with the Vapor of vinegar, And if that will not suffice, let
this following be laid on.

Take Unguentum populeum one ounce, Conserve of Roses and violets of each half
an ounce. Oil. of Roses six ounces. Vinegar of Roses two drams. Mix them all
and receive them in tow and put them between two clothes and apply them to the
forehead.

Mean while the Emulsions of the four greater cool seeds may be used, from
which cool and gentle vapors are wont to be carried unto the Brain, which are
wont to mitigate the foresaid symptoms. Which if they suffice not, narcoticks
may be added, which do wonderfully hinder the ascent of sharp and malignant
Vapors unto the brain, and procure sleep. Yet they must be given in a small
quantity, as half an ounce of Syrup of poppies; or if necessity compel, two
grains of Laudanum opiatum with conserve of roses may well be given; or they
may be dissolved in some Julep; or in stead there of new Treacle may be given
to the Quantity of half a dram. Howbeit these narcoticks are seldom to be given
and in small Quantity, because they Concentre the poison, howbeit they are by
some accounted sudorosicks.

After repellers have bin used a day or two, we must come to derivers, among
which is reckoned a vesicatory applied to the Neck of which before, whereunto
must be added blood-letting from the forehead vein to the quantity of five or
six ounces: which is very successful provided blood was before sufficiently
taken from the veins of the Arm. Also horseleeches may be fastened behind the
Ears. which is a good remedy but less effectual than the former, because by
leeches the thinner part only of the blood is drawn away; whereas by the
forehead vein sometimes in a frenzy more corrupt blood is drawn away; whereas
by the Arm. At length, in the state of a Frenzy, or at the beginning of the
declination, resolvers are to be applied, especially liveing Creatures and
their Parts, as the Lunges of a wether which is better than young prdgeons or
whelps, because it does safely encompass the whole Head. Now these Animals do
partly resove evil humors contained in the brain, and partly ripen and digest
them, that Nature may afterward more easily expel them, Some do unadvisedly
apply them in the beginning of a frenzy, because by increasing the Heat, they
increase the Flux of Humors to the Brain, and increase the Raving.

In the Inflammation, Dryness, and Blackness of the Tongue, Remedies propounded
in the aforesaid place are convenient; especially such as are composed of
Water, or the Juice of Housleek, and Sal prunellae. Whereunto this following of
Mindereus may be added, because Experience has taught, that it is very
effectual.

Take fresh butter washed in Rose Water, two ounces: Sal prunelloe half a dram.
Mix them, and keep the mixture in cold Water. Give the quantity of an Hastifer
or bean, oftentimes in a day, and let the Patients hold it as long in their
Mouths, as they can possibly. It is a sign that the Cure goes well forward, if
the black Sootiness go away, and the dry chopped Tongue begin to grow moist,
and pselings come away, and the dry chopped Tongue begin to grow cough up the
peelings of their Throats. But then their palate is pained, and that very thin
Skin where with it is covered, can hardly bear any thing in regard of its
tenderness, but its offended with every light tartness, and the least Acrimony
imaginable, because the former Inflammation having left it in diverse parts
Flaid, it must be covered with new Skin; and so it requires to be perfectly
cooled and healed. To this purpose the following Gelly will be most convenient.

Take Seeds of Flea-bane and Quinces, of each one dram and an half: Gum
Tragacanth one dram. With Water of Roses draw out a liquid Mucilage, whereunto
ad the like quantity of Syrup of Violets. Make it in manner of a Gelly; of
which let the patients take often in a Spoon and hold it long in their Mouth.

Warm Milk does mitigate the pain Caused by Gargarismes, tempers the
Inflammation, moistens the Tongue and Throat, and attracts the Venom to it.

These following Pills may conveniently be used.

Take Seeds of Cucumbers picked and bruised, one ounce: White of an Egg as much
as shall susfice. Make Pills, which let the Patients often hold in their
mouths. Or,

Take Seeds of Gourds and Melones cleansed, and of white Poppy, of each one
dram. Liquoris and Gum Tragaganth of each one dram and an half. Beat all to
powder, and with the Mucilage of Quince Seeds drawn with Rose Water, make Pills
to be held in the mouth.

And because this Inflammation, Dryness, and Blackness of the Tongue, proceeds
from the burning that is within. Juleps very Refrigerating are good to cool the
same; unto which may be added, Sal prunellae, and Spirit of Vitriol. Also they
may be mingled with the Patients ordinary drink.

The Cure of extremity of Thirst was sufficiently propounded in the aforesaid
place. But in a malignant Fever, it will be happily extinguished, with these
two Medicines newly commended, viz. with Sal Prunellae, and Spirit of Vitriol,
taken in Juleps, and in the ordinary drink of the Patient.

Want of Appetite, Stomach-sickness, Vomiting, and Hiccuping, must be cured
according to the Method delivered in the aforesaid Chapter. Yet we shall ad one
thing touching vomiting; that it does sometimes so vex those that have malignant
Fevers, that they presently vomit what ever they take, and though they have
Thirst, with Dryness and Blackness of Tongue; yet can they bear no kind of
Liquor or drink: but vomit all their Juleps, Emulsions, Ptisans, and their small
Beer presently after they have drunk them. This most grievous Symptom is
suddenly cured, as it were by a miracle, with a dram of Salt of Wormwood, given
in a spoonful of fresh Juice of Lemmons, as I have learnt by Experience.

A Looseness is very frequent in this Disease, and herein the wisdom of the
Physician is very necessary. For if it be unseasonably stopped, the venomous
Matter is kept within. And if it be let alone, it weakens the Patients, and
many times brings them to their deaths. In the Cure of this Looseness, we must
therefore thus proceed. If it be so moderate that it weaken not the Patient, it
must not be stopped, but only moderated by Strengthening Clysters, But if it be
immoderate, and do very much weaken the Patient, it is wont to be a melting
Looseness, that Thawes the Patient as it were away, and must be boldly stopped;
which new Treacle to the quantity of half a dram, or Laudanum Opiatum, to the
quantity of two or three grains, will effectually perform. Yet I have often
seen a pernicious Flux which threatened to kill the Patient, stopped as it were
in a Moment, by giving of powerful Diaphoreticks in a great Dose; which did
expel by the Skin that venomous Matter, which by vexing and grating upon the
Guts, and other Bowels, did cause such a melting and consuming Looseness.

Worms do very often vex those that have these Fevers, and are plentifully
bred by the great putrefaction of the Humors. These are conveniently drawn away
by sweet Clysters, and by potions against the Worms; especially such as are
made of a Decoction of Seordium. For Scordium is equally good against the
malignity and the Worms. And to temper the heat thereof, it must be boiled with
Purslain, Sorrel, and Hartshorn. Also burnt Hartshorn is profitably boiled
against the Worms. For Forestus in the fourth Observe. of his sixth Book, that
no Remedy did so much good to such as having a malignant Fever were troubled
with Worms and a Looseness, as burnt Hartshorn given to the quantity of a dram
in convenient Juleps.

When the malignant and venomous Quality bears great sway in these Fevers,
that they come near the Nature of the true Pest; in such Patients there are
commonly risings behind their Ears, and Carbuncles. Wherefore we will here
subjoyn their Cure.

In the beginning of a Parotis, or Rising near the Ear, as soon as it begins to
appear, the Part recipient must be relaxed and widened as it were, and if the
swelling rise but slowly, the motion of Nature endeavoring to expel the
morbifick matter that way must be assisted, by applying drawing things to the
swelling, and by giving Antidotes and Diaphoreticks. To relax the Part, make an
Injection of Ointment of Marshmallows, and lay on afterward moist Wool which
is greasy, from the Sheep. Attraction may be caused by applying Whelps, or
young Pigeons, by which also the pain will be mitigated. Plasters made of
Leven, Figs, Onions, Doves-dung, adding thereto butter, Hensgrease, fresh
Hog's Grease, and Oil of Lillies, or sweet Almonds. If by these Attractives the
Part be overheated, and the pain be too much increased; they may be omitted by
fits, laying on in the mean time the Cataplasm made of the Crum of White-bread;
or nointing with the aforesaid Oils, being laid on with unwasht Wool; or with
Ointment of Marshmallows, as was said before. And because the part is not
sufficiently capable to receive the morbifick matter; to derive another way a
portion thereof, a veficatory must be applied to the hinder part of the Neck,
and also the Diaphoretick formerly cited must frequently be given. The Matter
being called forth into the external parts, let Suppuration be endeavored, by
laying on a Cataplasm made of the Roots of Marshmallows, and of Lillies with
Figs, Meal of Linseeds, and the Oils and several sorts of Grease aforesaid.
When Suppuration is made, let the Tumor be opened; let the rest of the Matter
be digested, by continuing the Cataplasm, or by laying on a Plaster of
Diachylon. Let the Ulcer be cleansed with that common Digestive made of
Turpentine, Yolks of Eggs and Oil of Roses. Let the Ulcer be kept long open with
a Tent, that all the Venom of the Disease may sufficiently be purged out, and
at last heal it up and Cicatrize it. Yet this oue thing is to be observed; That
if the Tumor does so increase as to cause danger of Suffocation, or Choking,
it must be opened before it be perfectly ripe: For so some portion of the
matter being drawn ^orth, the Tumor will fall somewhat, and the danger of
Suffocation will be avoided. In like manner, If the malignity be very intense,
that the Patient seems likely to miscarry before the Tumor be ripe; then also
it must be opened before its due time that the force of the Venom may expire*
whence oftentimes the Patient recovers. And upon this Account, in the Pest the
Buboes or swellings in the Groin, are wont to be opened, before they come to
Suppuration.

Finally, It were a Wickedness to pass over in silence a rare Experiment, which
happened to me in that same Epidemick Fever, which cruelly raged and ranged at
Montpelier, in the year 1623. So that near half of those that were sick died of
the Disease. But especially, So many as had swellings by the Ears (which was
wont to happen about the ninth or eleventh day of the Disease) they al died
within two days after; there preceding or happening at the same time Raving,
Stupidity, Convulsions, with an unequal, frequent, and very small Pulse, as it
were the creeping Pismire-Pulse. And after I had seen diverse in this condition,
who could not be helped by Antidotes, or by drawing things laid to the swelling;
musing with my self it by any means possible, they might be delivered from so
certain destruction: I began at last to think, that therefore these swellings
proved to fatal, because the Part in which they happened was not capable to
receive all the Morbifick Matter, which being retained within kills the
Patient, and that therefore the work of Nature being only begun in those
swellings, might be supplied by evacuations, viz. Blood-letting, and purgation;
whenas also Galen in his 3. de Comp. Medic. Secund. Loca. Cap. de Parotidibus,
In the Cure of these swellings prescribes Blood-letting. But this advice was
contradicted by the extreme weakness of the Patients, which was so great that
they seemed to be even now in the pains of death, which also it self soon
followed. But Galen in the forecited place, when He prescribes Blood-letting in
the Cure of such Tumors, does propound two conditions, viz. If blood abound,
and the strength of the Patient will bear bleeding. Both which Conditions were
absent in these Cases, for blood had been before sufficiently drawn, both by
repeated Phlebotomies, and Cupping-glasses: Also the Patients were extremely
decayed in their strength. Weighing all these things with my self, I conceived
that golden saying of Cornelius Celsus, was in this Case if ever seasonable,
viz. That many things are done rightly in time of eminent danger, which were
otherwise to be omitted: And that its better to Experiment a doubtful Remedy in
one or two persons, than to leave so many persons to undoubted Destruction. I
was also encouraged by conceiving, that this great weakness of the Patients,
was rather from oppression of the Morbifick Matter, than dissipation or
dissolution of their strength. For therefore their strength did suddenly decay,
because Nature was not able to cast off her heavy burden, and I hoped when
that burden was made lighter, she would be freed. Add hereunto, That bleeding
might be so ordered, that no danger should be feared therfrom, viz. If two or
three ounces only were taken away at first, for trial sake, and if the success
were good, a greater quantity might be taken away afterward I resolved
therefore upon this course. And a Merchant of Montpelier named Bernardier being
the first I met with, and a tumor arose behind his left ear on the eleventh day
of the disease with such a pulls and other symptoms as aforesaid; I prescribed
bleeding to the quantity of three ounces which the Chyrurgion being an Ancient
and experienced man refused to do for fear the patient should die under his
hands; afterward being emboldened by my presence and authority he took away
three ounces of Blood, after three or four hours, I visit my patient again,
and find his pulls a little stronger and not so unequal; then I caused him to
bleed six ounces, after which his pulls was beter and stronger. The Blood was
very corrupt: The day following I prescribed him a Purg of Senna, Rhubarb and
syrup of Roses: and so the patient was recovered from the jaws of death. And
afterward all the sick that had usings behind their ears, first I Bled
several times a little at a time, and the day following Purged them: and so
all of them (to God be the Honor and Praise) so many as were thus ordered
happily recovered; and never any afterward that had those risings behind their
ears, died in the whole year

Howb it it is to be noted (which we hinted in the prognosis) that the swelling
does often appear critically and profitably, and thereby the sick are recovered
of their diseases; viz, So often as they appear in the declination of the
disease* and this is easily seen by the abatement of the symptoms which follow
upon the risings; and such are wont to happen in Fevers of less malignity But
in the time aforesaid. such was the malignity of the epidemical Fever* that
the tumors behind the Ears would often break forth in the state of the disease
and symptomatically and deadly; until by the remedies aforesaid, their
o^structive faculty was taken away.

In a carbuncle superveneing upon a bu^^ing Fever, if before its appatition,
Blood were not sufficiently taken away. If the patient can bear further
blood-letting open that vein which is nigh the carbuncle, that the greater
attraction may be made of the veremous matter to the part affected. Afterward
let the Tumor be scarrified on every side round about and that with pretty deep
gashes and foment it a while with warm salt water, that the corruption of the
blood may be hindered, and the ^fflux thereof promoted. A while after apply a
grain of a Caustic to the middle of the Pastle, and upon the whole swelling, lay
this following Cataplasm,

Take leaves of Rue, and Scabious bruised of each one handful: three pair of
dried Figs bruysed; sharp Leven an ounce; Pepper poudered one dram; two yolks
of Eggs: Mix all into a Cataplasm, which must be applied for two days together.

And then lay on this following.

Take Juices of Comphry the greater, Scabious, Marygold of each one dram; old
treacle four scruples; Salt one dram; two yolks of Eggs: mix them all and apply
it to the tumor.

Also at the beginning may be applied the Cataplasm de Arnoglosso described in
the Dispensatory of Bauderon.

But to the Eschara after the application of the Caustic, apply Vnguentum
Basilicum, adding thereto Treakle, Oil of scorpions, and the yolk of an Egg.

When the tumor is grown, lest the malignant matter should flow back again to
the internal parts let the compass thereof be anointed, with ointment of B^lus,
twice or thrice in a day: And upon the Eschara or Crust, that it is falling off
may be hastened, ^y Vnguentum Basilicum with butter, and Sows grease mixed
therewith after the crust is com away, let the ulcer be cleansed with this
following ointment.

Take juice of Marygolds, wormwood, Scabious, and Smalladg of each one ounce;
choice of Mirrh, Florentine Oris, Aloes, Sarcocolla, of each one dram; Honey of
Roses two ounces: Make of all an ointment, to be used till the sore be
perfectly curred

Chap. 2. Of the Measles, and small Pox.
THat Fever which is commonly attended by the Measles and small Pox, may
justly be reckoned among Malignant and pestilential Fevers; seeing it is
Epidemical and contagious, and kills very many children, to whom it commonly
happens

What is the difference between the Measles and small Pox, Authors are not yet
well agreed. But custom has obtained that those same larger pustles or Whelks
like unto Warts (from whence they have their name) should be called in latin
Varioloe, in English the small Pox; but those little pustle^ and as it were
asperities of the Skin with a deep redness like St. Anthonies fire or the rose,
which are discussed within five or seven days without suppuration, are called
in latin Morbilli and in English Measles. There is also another kind of pustles
common to Children like unto the small Pox in respect of the fashion and size;
but herein it differs in that the small Pox begins with redness and
inflammation; but these are white and as it were bladderes full of a wheyish
humor, which within three days break and dry up and are wont to cause no
danger, and commonly break forth without a Fever. It is described by Vidus
Vidius, in these words; Some besiaes the two former sorts do ad a third which
they call the Crystalls, For so they term certain Bladdrs full of matter, which
shine like Crystal, wherewith the Skin is in diverse parts diapered; the
common people call them Ravaglione. unto which all men are not so subject as
unto the small Pox and measles, neither are they so greviously afflicted under
them. wherefore these bladders ought not to be reckoned as a third sort with
the small Pox and Measles

Touching the small Pocks, and Measles Authors dispute much, and especially
whether these be new diseases, or if they were known unto the ancients, and
what is the next and immediate Cause of them. But since I affect al possible
brevity in my Lectures, I have bin wont to omit al controversies, propounding
only the plain and naked decisions of them; and accordingly, I shall briefly
unfold what is to be thought of the foregoing questions.

And in the first place I conceive the small Pocks and Measles to be no new
diseases, seeing they rise from a most ancient Cause, viz. the impurites of the
maternal blood; which when the Arabians observed, they accounted it no new
disease. But if they had first come abroad in their times, they would have
mentioned their novelty. And although, they were the first that exactly
described them; and Hippocrates and Galen with the rest of the Ancients, have
scarce mentioned them; we must suppose that therefore the Ancients did not
write distinctly of them, because they are only accidents of a malignant Fever
and critical eruptions, which do not make a distinct disease by themselves. Or
because in Greece through the mildness of the Air these disease were so light,
as not to deserve the Care of a Physician. Even as in the Western Indies, in
regard of the great temperatnes of the Air, it was wont to be to be light, that
it was scarce taken notice of before the coming of the Spaniards into those
parts. But a Blackmore which was brought thither, being taken with Pestilential
small Pocks, the malignant and venomous quality being spread by Insection, the
disease began so to range and rage, that a great part of the Indians were slain
thereby. For whereas before, those impurites of their Mothers blood remaining
in them, were wont easily to be discussed, throught the Clemency of the Air;
now when a venomous quality was added to them, they caused grevious Diseases.

Now that the Mothers blood is the true Cause of the Small Pocks and Measles, is
hence chiefly gathered, because among many thousands of Men, it is hard to sind
one, who once in his Life has not had these diseases. But a disease common to
al Men, must needs depend upon some common cause: such as are the principles of
Generation viz. the seed and Mothers blood.

But the seed cannot be the cause of the small Pocks and Measles, because from
it come hereditary diseases, such as last a Man's Life time; it remains
therefore that these diseases spring from the Mothers blood, with which the
Child is nourished in the Womb. For therein, be it never so pure, some
impurites are found, which communicate their pollution to the parts of the
Child; and that pollution of the parts, does defile the Mass of blood; and
being provoked by some occasion, does make the same to boil, by help whereof,
the blood ferments and becomes purified, both it and the parts aforesaid. This
the Arabians do mannifest by a clear example of Wine, which being powered whiles
it is new into musty or otherwise il-qualited Vessel receives that il quality
from the Vessel but when it begins to work and puresie, it clenses both it self
and the Vessel. Now this working does commonly happen to Children; howbeit
sometimes to those that are elder and have attained Man's estate, because it is
evermore set on work by some external Cause, such as is especially a certain
disposition of air proportionable to this disease whence it comes to pass that
sometimes the small Pocks, sometimes the Measles are rise, because the Air is
sometimes inclined to the one and sometimes to the other.

Neither can those impurites of the Mothers blood, infect her and cause in her
the same diseases, althought Hippocrates says in his Book de Natura Pueri that
there are three parts of the blood, one most pure, with which the Child is
nourished; another impure, wherewith the Mother is nourished; and another, most
impurer, which is kept in the Veins of the Womb, the whole time of Going with
Child, and after the Birth is purged away in the Childbed purgations. For
first, seeing the Mother has parts more hard and solid, they do not so soon
take impresion as the tender and soft body of the Child. Again that most impure
part of the blood which is kept in the Veins of the womb and of the
Afterbirth, the whole time of belly-bearing, does infect the blood in the
passage, which is carried through those parts to Nourish the Child: whence the
Child contracts and evil quality, which in its time is the Cause of that
ebullition in the blood of the Child. But that impurest part of the blood
remaining in the foresaid places, does not infect the body of the Mother.

Furthermore, its not to be wondered at, that the breaking out of the small
Pocks and Measles, is sometimes so long deferred, as that some have them at Man's
estate. For those impurites do not substantially remain in the body as many
imagine: for they would be corrupted by long stay and acquire a most grevious
putrefaction. But only an evil quality is by them imprinted upon the parts of
the Child, which in process of time infecting some part of the humors, becomes
offensive to Nature; which then rowsing her self, does drive those infected
portions of the humors, into the Skin.

And forasmuch as in the Mass of blood a twosold excrement is found, the one
thick the other thin: of the thick, the small Pocks are bred, of the thin, the
Measles. And although the evil and malignant quality be one and the same,
insecting both excrements: yet because the Nature of the excrements is
different, the Analogy of the external Cause unto them both is Different.
whence it comes to pass that sometimes the small Pocks and sometimes the Measles
are Epidemically spread abroad.

And although the small Pocks are wont to break forth in the whole body, yet are
they wont to appear in greatest quantity in the face, feet and hands; which is
otherwise in the purple spots of the Purple Fever, for they appear most on the
breast and back. The Cause of which difference is this, that inasmuch as the
small Pocks arise from an ebullition of the blood, by help whereof an Excretion
is made of the excrements lurking therein, unto the Skin; and the Liver being
the Fountain and original of blood, whose Emunctories are the Face, Hands, and
Feet, whence it comes that such as have hot Livers, have red and rubied faces,
and feel intense heat in the palms of their hands and Soals of their feet; it
follows that the small Pocks and Measles must come out there more than any where
else. Contrariwise the purple spotts which appear in malignant Fevers, do
arise principally from the Misaffection of the Heart, and therefore they break
out chiefly in parts near the Heart, and especially about the Loins; because
in them the Vena Cava ascendens and the Arteria aorta which are annexed unto
the Hair, have their Course,

Also another difference is to be noted between the small Pocks and Purples;
because the small Pocks and Measles appearing on the third or fourth day from
the beginning of the Fever, are wont to be critical, and for the most part
void of danger: but the purple spots, though they appear on the seventh day are
commonly Symptomatical, and render the disease worse; whenas a man would think
it should be otherwise, for a disease is more crude on the fourth than the
seveuth day. But the Cause of this difference consists herein; that in the small
Pocks and Measles the Fever commonly begins at the highest; so that not only
on the third and fourth day, but also on the first or second days, excretions
may be in them critical. But malignant Fevers proceed more slowly, and their
beginning is commonly Extended to the seventh day: so that Excretions which
then happen cannot be critical. Now that the Pox and Measles come so soon to
their state and not the malignant Fevers, is hence; because the Pox and
Measle-Feaver comes from the lightest putrefaction, and rather from an
Ebullition of the blood than from any intense putrefaction of the matter; and
therefore Nature by help of Coction makes it to cease before the seventh day,
because it was a light Fever and rose from the slightest Causes. But in
malignant Fevers, so great and fordid is the putrefaction that it cannot be
corrected in the fourteenth nor sometimes in the twentieth day. And therefore
the spotts breaking out before that time, the disease is exasperated; because
Nature was forced to expel them, without Concoction and symptomatically.

The expulsion therefore of small pox and Measles is caused, by an Ebullition of
the blood: which Ebullition according to Avicennas doctrine, is twofold; the
one perfective, the other corruptive. The perfective or depurative is that, in
which only the impurer and excrementitious parts of the blood, are by Nature
purged forth, that the whole mass may afterward remain pure; and then the small
Pocks are innocent, which are cured without any help of Physic. But the
corruptive is, wherein not only the excrementitous parts of the blood, but the
sincere blood it self is putrefied whence arise dangerous and deadly pox, and
according as there is more or less putrefaction, in more in more or fewer parts
of the blood, so is the danger more or less. This corruptive Ebullition does
chiefly happen, when those diseases are epidemical being occasioned by a
malignant Constitution of the Air, by which an ebullition of the humors and a
malignant putrefaction is caused; whonce many and dangerous small Pocks are
caused; which are sometimes (according to Rhasis) the Forerunners of the Plague.

Pocks and Measles are reckoned among acute diseases because ordinarily they
are terminated within the space of fourteen days. Now some do wittily observe a
double order of times in times in this disease viz. the time of ebullition and
the time of eruption: the time of ebullition is commonly terminated in four
days; so that the first day is counted the beginning, the second the Augment,
the third the state, and the fourth the declination: for then the Fever and
other symptoms are wont to remit.

But the beginning of the Eruption of the Pox is the fourth day it self, the
Augment reaches to the seventh, the state until the eleventh, the declination
unto the fourteenth, at which time the Pocks are dried. Howbeit oftentimes they
are not dry until the twentieth day.

Differences of sinall Pocks and Measles, are taken either from the substance,
in regard of which, some are more or less Phlegmatic, Bloody, Chollerick, or
Melanchollick: or from the Quantity, in which regard they are more or less in
number; greater or less; profound or Superficial; or from the Quality, in which
respect some are red, others white, yellowish, Violet colored, Livid, black,
according to the diversity of Humors of which they are compounded; or from the
time, in respect whereof some come quickly out, others slowly; some are soon,
others late ripe, or dissolved: or from the place, in which respect, some
occupy only the Skin. others do seaz upon the internal Parts also, as the
Throat, Lungs, Guts, Liver, Spleen, and other bowels.

The Diagnosis respects either the Disease present or at hand. The small Pocks
and Measles, when they are present, are subject to the outward Senses, and need
therefore no other signs. But these signs following declare them to be at hand.

Pain in the Head with Pulsation in the Forehead, and Temples; great
Sleepiness: Terrors in Sleep; sometimes Ravings, Tremblings and Convulsions:
Sneezings; frequent Yawning; Hoarsness, Cough, Difficulty in breathing. Heat,
Redness, and Sense of pricking over the whole body. Pain of the back which comes
sometimes alone, or appearing with few other Symptoms in a Synorchus Fever, it
shows the small Pocks will come out. For seeing through the back are carried the
great Vein and Artery, in which the malignant blood boiling, does send forth
sharp vapors to the Nerves, and neighboring Membranes; it must needs be, that
pains should be felt especially in those parts. Great Anxiety and unquietnels.
Tears flowing of themselves. Shining before the Eyes, and their Itching, a
swelling of the Face with some Redness. A vehemence of the Symptoms at first,
so that the Disease seems of a sudden to have attained its vigor.

All which are caused, eather by many and thick vapors sent up by the boiling
of the blood, into the Head, Diaphragm, and other parts; or from the Nature of
the Pocks themselves, now beginning to invade, the parts; or by a Fluxion
caused by heat, which dissolves the Humors in the Brain.

It Is of great Moment to foresee the small Pox; but much more to foretell their
event, which the following Prognostic Signs will declare.

And in the first place those small Pox are wont to be void of danger, which
come out soon and easily, and do quickly ripen.

In which the Fever is moderate, without great Symptoms, which ceases after
they are come out or is very much abated. In which the voice is free and
breathing easy.

Small Pox, which at first are red, and white, soft, distinct, few, round,
pointed, coming only in the Skin and not inwardly, are wont to be safe.

All the Signs aforesaid do signify the paucity of the Morbifick Matter, it is
Obsequiousness, Benignity, and the strength of Nature, lustily expelling.

Contrary wise dangerous and deadly Pox are known, by a great Fever, which
lessens not after they are broak forth; for it signifies the malignant and
venomous humors are not sufficienly expelled unto the Skin, but that the
greatest part of them remains yet in the Veins. Great anxiety and unquietness;
which comes from the same humors boiling in the Veins. Difficulty of breathing,
which signifies either pustles or Impostumes in the Lungs; or a Squinsie, or
great decay of strength. Great thirst which declares the inward burning; and if
with the thirst, shortness of breath be increased, Death is at hand. A Looseness
or bloody Flux, which shows the malignant humors have their recourse inward,
which is a course quite contrary to that of Nature and therefore deadly, so
that few of those which after the Pox coming out, are taken with such a
Looseness do escape.

A Bloody Urine is a most deadly sign; and likewise if by stool pure and
sincere blood be voided. Sometimes also by the Nostrils, Gums, and other parts
of the body blood is voided, which are commonly deadly Signs. For they signify
the extreme Acrimony and malignity of the blood: which does vehemently provoke
Nature, and compells her to a preposterous excretion thereof.

Also Pox long a coming out are very bad, which signify the contumacy of the
matter, or the weakness of Nature, Many, Great, Double and united Pox, do show
an overabundant quantity of Morbifick matter, and are bad. So are hard ones
showing the thickness and incoctibility of the said matter. Also flatt ones
which show the weakness of the expulsive faculty, and they are worse, if they
have a black spot in the middles of them, which argues extraordinary malignity.
And green, bluish and black which spring from that sort of choler called
Bilis porraca, or Atra Leeke-green or black Choler are a bad sign.

They are worst of al which when they are come forth do presently vanish, and
the tumor of the parts falls: for they signify the retirement of the Humor
inwards; and none of those escape who have the Pox on this manner going in
again, but they die commonly within twenty four hours.

They are also dangerous, when sports like those of the purple or spotted
Fever, are mingled among the pox; especially if those spots be livid or black.
For they signify not only that same light putrefaction, which is wont to
happen in the small Pox by means of the ebullition of blood: but also that
intense and profound Malignity is peccant; from which much greater danger is
threatened to the Patient.

Dung or Urines in this Disease livid or black do portend great danger: for
they signify that Melancholy abounds in the Veins, and infects the whole Mass
of Blood.

The cure of the small Pox and Measles is performed in the satisfaction of four
Indications. whereof the first consists in the Evacuation of the peccant
humors. The second in assisting the motion of nature, or helping to expel the
Pox. The third in the opposition of the malignant and venomous quality. The
fourth in correction of symptoms. All which that they may be conveniently
effected, first a convenient diet must be appointed, which must be the same
which was ordered in the cure of putrid Fevers: howbeit some things must be
particularly noted.

First that the patients be kept in a warm room, to the end their pores may be
kept open, and the breaking out of the small Pox may there be furthered.
therefore they must be kept in a Chamber well shut, which the cold air must in
no wise enter into. For many Children that had benign Pox, have been killed by
letting in the cold air upon them, viz. the morbifick matter being thereby
driven back into the inward parts. And for the same cause they must be
moderately covered with Clothes; but so that the heat of the air or the weight
of the Clothes may not augment the heat of the Fever, The foresaid coverings
are wont commonly to be made of red clothes, because they are thought by some
Analogy to move the boiling blood to the external parts. Many are also wont to
keep an Ewe or Wether in the chamber or on the bed; because those Creatures are
easily infected and draw the venom to themselves, by which means some Ease may
happen to the sick persons.

A decoction of Barley, or of the roots of Sorrel, or of Hearts horn is
profitably used for drink, in the beginning of the disease especially, and when
the Fever is vehement. But if the Fever be not* very violent, a decoction of
Barley and Figs will be very profitable, viz. Effectually driving the Humors to
the Skin; and Forestus and Amatus did continually use the same with good
success.

Furthermore, Whereas in the whole Course of the Disease, Sleep ought to be
moderate, yet in the Augment when the Pocks break forth, long Sleep is hurtful,
and it is better to watch more than ordinary.

That therefore the aforesaid Jndications may be fulfilled, the Cure must be
begun by Blood-letting (if Blood in any sort is redundant, and the Age of the
Patient is like to bear it) and a Vein must be opened as soon as may be. But if
the Physician shall not be called the first day, yet he shall do well to take
blood before the breaking forth of the Pocks or while but few are come out;
which time is wont commonly to last until the fourth day, from the first onset
of the Fever. In which Case notwithstanding, diligent heed is to be taken. For
if upon the breaking forth of the Pocks, the Fever and its Symptoms be abated;
it is better to leave the business to Nature working well, which will
sufficiently expel the whole Morbifick Matter to the Skin. Also Blood-leting is
not in this case necessary, since experience shows, that an infinite company of
children having gentle Pox, and not Plethorick are happily cured without
bleeding. Nay rather in the former case sometimes blood-letting may do hurt,
because the expulsion of the small Pox is caused by an ebullition of blood:
which ebullition if it be small, it will by blood-letting be lessened very
much, and so it will become insufficient perfectly to purge the mass of Blood
from it is impurities. Contrariwise, if upon the Eruption of the Pox, the Fever
becomes more strong, there be anxiety, difficult breathing, an urin thick and
red, and other symptoms seem greater it is a sign that naure is oppressed, with
the over great burden of humors, and that she cannot govern them conveniently;
and that therefore Phlebotomy is necessary, that a part of the burden being
taken away, nature may be the better able to expel the rest. In one word, when
there is an Ebullition perfective merely and depuratiue, blood is not to be
taken away, but in a corruptive blood-letting is extremely necessary yea even
in that which has less malignity in it, whose degrees have been specefied
before, And so necessary is blood-letting in dangerous Pox, in which the
corruptive Ebullition is wont to happen, that the tender age of infants must
not hinder it. For it is grown into a custom to let children blood when they
are four years old and sometimes when they are three. The physicians of Paris in
their tender age and while they suck do let children blood. Which yet the
tender age of infants does hardly admit, with that light nourishment of milk,
and the plentiful efflux of their humors by transpiration; neither can this
new license of letting such young ones blood be justified by any countenance
from the wise Authors ^f Physic.

In pretty big children, many times once blood-letting will not serve the turn,
but it must be repeated if the Fever remain intense or if Raving or any other
grevious Symptom do urge, Yea verily when the Pox are perfectly come out,
which for the most part is within nine days, if the Fever be very urgent,
blood must be again let and the Patients ordered, as those who have a putrid
Fever.

If blood-letting be suspected because of the tenderness of the Childrens Age,
or because the fitting season is now past; the superfluous blood may be
diminished by Cupping-Glasses with Scarification, applied to the back,
shoulders, and things, which may also well be used in the state of the disease,
seeing the Motion of Nature from the Center to the Circumference, is by them
promoted. But care must be taken that in young Children the Scarifications be
not too deep: for it happens sometimes that an unadvised Surgeon cutts so deep,
as to cut asunder some Veins and let out the fervent and boiling blood, so that
there is great trouble to stop the same.

Purgation is suspected in this disease; for it makes a motion contrary to that
of Nature viz. from the Circumference to the Center; and to whomsoever, having
Pocks, a looseness happens, the Pocks commonly strik in, and the Party dies, as
I said in the Prognostic. Yet observe, that many times purgation is to good
purpose practiced before the pocks come out, and before the Fever grows
vehement, viz. when the Children are in the Neutral state of Decidence. For
then if il humors abound, they are profitably diminished by purging, that
Nature may afterward, more Cheerfully set upon the Expulsion of the Remainder.
But when the Pox begins to appear, Purging will be pernicious: And likewise, if
there be great malignity abroad, as in an epidemical Constitution, when very
many Children die of that disease; it is better wholly to abstain from Purging;
because in diseases which are very malignant and Pestilential, Purgation in the
beginning of the Disease, is very hurtful. Now the Purgatives must be
compounded of gentle Simples viz. Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, and Syrup
of Roses.

In the Course of the disease, if the belly be hard and bound it may gently be
removed, but not provoked; and that by a suppository of honey alone without
salt; or with a Clister of Breath or milk, or a decoction of French barley,
Raisons and Liquoris with sugar and yolks of Eggs.

After blood-letting and other evacuations (if necessary) the expulsion of the
pox must be helped forward, not only with specific medicines driving the
humors to the Skin, but also with diaphoreticks and Alexipharmicks; especially
if the Pox be Epidemical and being very malignant, do threaten great danger.

There is a vulgar Medicine commended by Rhasis, Avicenna and all the Arabian
Physicians to drive out the Pox; which also the greatest part of our later
Physicians use, according to the description of Avicenna, which is thus.

Take Fat figgs seven ounces. Lentills shaled three drams. Lack two drams and
an half. Gum traganth and fennel seed, of each two drams. Boil al in a pint and
half of fountain water to the third part. Let the patient drink thereof. Rhasis
adds Saffron fifteen grains, Raisons five drams, because Saffron opens and
corroborates, and the Raisons do strengthen the Liver. And Traganth although it
do incrassate and astringe, yet is it therefore mingled with the rest, that it
may prohibit the over great ebullition of blood.

Lentils are by some Neotericks rejected, because they are restrictive and may
hinder the coming forth of the Pox. But the Authority of so many and such noble
Princes of Physic, must not rashly be rejected; but we must rather determine,
that Lentils shaled are with great reason put into this composition; viz. that
by their astringent and incrassating faculty, they may bridle the Fervency of
the humors and hinder their falling upon any noble part; to which purpose Gum
traganth was added, as I hinted before. This is taken out of Galen, who in the
1. De Aliment. Facult. Cap. 18. Does teach us that Lentils twice boiled do
Strengthen the Natural parts, and by their astriction stop the flux of the
belly. The Lentils may therefore be put in or left out according to the Judgment
of the Physician who manages the Cure as there is more or less necessity of
attenuating and driving the humors into the Skin. For if the matter be subtle
and the ebullition great, the Lentils may profitably be put in for the Intent
aforesaid. But if the matter seem to be thick, so that Nature can but slowly
drive it into the Skin then must they be omitted and the Gum traganth; and
only the other attenuating and diaphoretick things used for the drink. By
which it appears, that we must not too strictly adhere to the forms of
Medicaments propounded by Authors; but that in several occasions they must be
variously changed. Let this following Receipt serve for an example, compounded
partly of the foresaid simples and partly of others that are diaphoretick and
resist malignity; which may much help such as have this disease, in making the
Pox to come well out.

Take Roots of Fennel and Sorrel of each one ounce. Hartshorn shavings half
an ounce Leaves of Scabious, Scordium, St. John's Wort of each one Handful.
Three pair of fat Figgs. Gum Lack three drams. seeds of Navew or Turnep and
Carduus Benedictus of each two drams. Lentils unhusked half an ounce. Gum
traganth one dram and an half. Boil al to a pint and half. Of the straining
take three ounces. Syrup of Lemmons one ounce. Mix them. make of them a Julep
let the Patient drink thereof twice or thrice in a day.

If the Malignity be very great, as commonly it happens in Epidemical small
Pocks, we must chiefly use Antidotes. and consequently al those remedies which
we have propounded in malignant Fevers will be good in this disease, respect
being had to the Age and strength of the Patiennt. And among others, Confection
of Hyacinth, Bezoar stone, Powder of Coral, Pearls, Hartshorn; oil of
Scorpions of Matthiolus, must be used frequently, with other things, the manner
of whose use may be learnt out of the foregoing chapter.

Neither must such things be omitted as do restore the Patients strength, both
inward and outward which may be also learnt out of the foregoing Chapter, and
by the prudent Physician administered in due season.

And it must be heedfully remembered, that such medicaments as drive out the Pox
are not to be used in all patients. For sometimes they break forth so violently,
that they have need to be restrained for a while. For the great ebullition and
immoderate Fervor of blood, if they be not tempered. are wont to destroy the
Patients; and therefore, it is good in such a Case to use bridlers and coolers,
For example, a Julep many be thus composed.

Take Whole barley one pugil. Cinquefoil roots and Tormentil roots of each one
ounce. Leaves of Sorrel, Endive and Wood Sorrel of each one handful. Lentils
excorticated half an ounce. Gum traganth one dram. Boil al to a pint. In the
straining dissolve four ounces of Syrup of Lemons or Pomegranates. Make of al a
Julep for four doses, to be taken twice in a day.

Amatus Lusitanus in the 18. Cure of the third Centurie propounds an example of
such kind of Pox arising from boiling humors and cured only by coolers and
thickeners. which example I thought good to cite in this place word for word,
that the young beginners may perceive, in what cases the Cure is most to be
yaried. The Boy of Altarasius (says he) began to have the small Pox, some of
which did run together, so that in two days they flaid his Miserable Carcass:
for the pustles crept along and did only flay osf his Skin; which I have
likewise observed in other Children. Against which, I thus set my self to work;
First because this matter was too thin, I endeavored to thicken the same, and
not only so, but to abate the evil quality of the Liver and internal parts,
that no more such thin subtle Humor might be bred. This I did with
refrigerating Medicaments, as Syrup of Roses, of Cichory simple, of Endive and
Violets with waters of like Nature mixed with them. He was nointed with Ceratum
Santalinum. But the Diet likewise helped much, which was ordered cold and moist.
By all which the matter became thicker and the pox began to appear thick and
large.

And for ordinary drink prescribe a decoction of barley and of Sorrel roots. And
these remedies must be continued, until the Fervency of the humors shall begin
to abate: if Nature seem to want their assistance.

These things might suffice for a direct Cure of the small Pox. But because they
may bring great damage to diverse parts, both internal and external, we must
endavour the Prevention and Cure thereof.

The internal parts may especially be preserved with a decoction of Lentils, of
Gum Lac and Traganth, described before. For Gum Lack defends the Liver and
Spleen, Lentils the Gutts, and Traganth the breast.

But the Lungs are peculiarly preserved by Conserve of Roses and Violets, and
Syrup of Violets Jujubees, Myrtils, Dried Roses, Poppies and also these
following LOHOCHS. Se in my Dispensatory (at the beginning of the Lohochs) what
a Lohock is; and why so called.

Take Conserve of Roses one ounce and half, juice of Lentiles thrice boiled six
drams. poppie seeds an half dram. Gum traganth one scruple. with Syrup of
dried Roses make all into a Lohoch.

Or this of Avicenna, which is commended by Guainerius and Forestus.

Take Lentils unshaled and finely poudered three drams. White Poppie seeds one
ounce. Conserve of Roses two ounces. Julep of Roses, as much as shall suffice,
Mix al into a Lohoch.

Or such a Lohoch as this following may be made only of Syrups.

Take Syrup of violets, jujubees and dried Roses of each one ounce. Syrup of
Poppies half an ounce. Mix them* let the Patient lick thereof often out of a
spoon, and swallow it down leisurely.

But if a flux be at present into the Lungs and cause hoarsness and
suffocation; it must not only be stopped with the foresaid Remedies, but
revelled by Cupping-glasses, both dry and Scarrfied, and by bleeding, if
nothing else hinder. Also give the Patients to drink a decoction of Barley,
Jujubes and Liquoris, and let them use this following Lohoch.

Take Seeds of Marshmallows, Melons, Cucumers, and white Poppy, of each two
drams. Raisons stoned and Jujubes of each four pair. Boil al to a pint. In
which dissolve conserve of Roses and Violets of each half an ounce. Powder of
Diatragacanthum frigidum three drams. Sugar Candy and Sugar of Roses, of each
as much as shall suffice. Make al into a Lohoch. The Jaws and throat may be
fenced against the Pox, before they break out, with this following Gargarism.

Take French barley one pugil. Plantane Leaves two handfuls, red Rose Leaves one
pugil, Balaustians, seeds of Sumach of each two drams. Boil al in two pints of
water to a third parts consumption. In the strained Liquor dissolve Syrup of
Mulberries and Pomgranates of each one ounce. Mix al into a Gargarism.

If the young age of Children cannot admit a Gargle, a Lohoch may be made, of
Syrup of Mulberries, Pome-granats, of dried Roses; either alone, or mingled
with red Rose and Plantain waters. Which must often be given them in a spoon.
Wherewith if the Fluxion cannot be stopped by reason of the abundance of the
rhume, so that there is fear of Suffocation impendent; such things must be
used, which widen the passages, and help excretion, after this manner.

Take Mucilage of Fleabane seed and Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, of each one
ounce and half Whitest Sugar two ounces. Mix them. Make of all a Lambitive to
be given every hour.

If by means of the Acrimony of the flux, or the Plenty of the small Pox, an
Ulcer be berd in the Jaws or Throat; it must be cleansed with barley water and
honey of Roses, or with alum water. and if it tend to corruption a little
Aegyptiacum Ointment must be mingled therewith.

The gutts will be preserved by the same remedies which were appointed to
preserve the Lungs. But if a present Loosens, or dysenterie be urgent, first
detergent and lenitive Remedies must be used and afterward astringents. And so
Clysters must be made of calybeated Milk, of Sugar and yolks of Eggs: and
afterward of a decoction of barley and red Roses with the yolk of an egg; and
last of al, of a decoction of Plantaine, Knot-grass, and Prunella or Self-heal,
and other Simples set down in our Cure of the Disentery. And it is to be
observed, that a looseness in children that have Pox, is oftentimes caused by
worms, which lasts dureing the whole disease, whence they are in the danger of
Death; because the expulsion of the Pox is thereby hindered wholly or lessened.
Which is easily known by the thickness and viscositie of the excrements, and
their gray or whitish color: then must be administered such things as kill
Worms: and sweet Clysters must be injected.

Sometimes also the kidneys are affected and are exulcerated, whence arises
Pissing of Blood. In this Case it is good to give an emulsion of the four
greater cool seeds, with trochiscs of Alkekengy, de Carabe, and other things
set down in our chapters of Pissing of Blood.

Among external parts, the Eyes are most of all to be guarded from the small
Pox. For being endued with a soft and humid substance; the matter of the Pox is
easily driven unto them: whence arise grevious calamites and sometimes total
Blindness.

Before the Pox break out therefore, or when they begin to appear, the Eyes
must be anointed every hour with Plantane and Rose waters, in which a little
saffron is dissolved; or with the following Eye Salve, which does more
effectually preserve them.

Take water of Roses and Plantane, of each one ounce and half. Powder of Sumach
seeds two drams. Infuse them a little while hot. then strain the liquor hard
out. to the strained liquor ad Camphire ten grains. Saffron five grains. Make
all into a Water for the Eyes.

It will be yet more effectual, if Instead of the waters, the juices of
knot-grass and Sheperds-pouch be mingled with the rest.

And if some Pox begin to Peep out of the Eye it self, pigeons blood must be
often dropped in, that their resolution may be hastened. then also this following
Eye-water is to be used.

Take Red Rose water two ounces. Eyebright water half an ounce trochisci albi
Rhasis one dram. Tutty prepared one Scruple. Champhire five grains. Saffron
two grains. make al into an Eye-water and wet the Eyes often therewith, with a
thin linen rag.

But when the Eyes so swel that they cannot be opened, they must often be
washed with a decoction of Linseed, Fenugreek seed, Quince seed and Mallow
seeds; and so the swelling will fall and the Eyes open and if when the Eyes are
opened, there appear clouds in them they must be scoured off with Sugar-candie
finely powdered.

And finally if the Eyes are ulcerated, they may be cured with this following
Eye salve.

Take Washed Ceruss three drams: Sarcocol one dram: Gum traganth one Scruple:
Opium two grains: With mucilage of Gum traganth drawn out with Plantane water
make all into little cakes or trochiscs, which must be dissolved in Women's
Milk, or red Rose water, when it is to be used and in all other things proceed,
as Practitioners teach at large, in the Cure of Ulcers of the Eyes.

To preserve the Nostrills, they must often smell to Vinegar. But a Collyrium of
juice of knotgrass, and shepherds pouch, Sumach seeds and camphire formerly
praised, will work more effectually; let the tent be often moistened therein,
and put up into the Nostrills. If notwithstanding, the Pox do grow within the
Nose, they quickly become hard Scabs, which are often to be nointed with Oil of
sweet almonds, that they may the sooner fall off. And finally if an Ulcer happen
in the Nose, it must be dressed with a liniment of the Oil of Eg-yolkes and
juice of Plantane, stirred together in a leaden Mortar.

To preserve the Face, some wash it with Rose Water and other Astringents.
Which I cannot approve of: for a great part of the impurities flows unto the
Face. For the Skin tthereof long loose and soft, is very fit to receive
Excrements. Wherefore if those impurities which Nature sends hither, be
repelled, being retained within they may cause great hurt; and therefore the
motion of Nature is no ways to be hindered. But this ought to be the Physicians
care, to hinder that the Pocks which break out in the Face, do not leave behind
them pits and Scarrs, which does often deform the Countenance. And this he
shall in good measure perform, if when the Pocks are ripe, and are high and
white in the middle (which is wont to fall out upon the ninth day of the
Disease) he cause them to be nointed with a Fether twice a day with Oil of
sweet Almonds, drawn without fire, until the Crusts fall off, For by this
Medicine the Acrimony of Choler is tempered, the ripening of the Pocks is
hastened, and the falling off of the Crusts furthered; which otherwise sticking
fast, does exulcerate the Skin more deeply, by reason of the Quittor which lies
under them. Oil of Nuts new drawn without fire, mixed well with a like quantity
of Rose Water, till they come to the form of a Liniment, is excellent for the
same purpose.

If by neglecting the Remedies aforesaid, or through the extreme malignity of
the Humor, there remain Pits and Pock-holes, all diligence must be used to
repair the same. Which notwithstanding is extreme hard to do perfectly;
although many have taken great pains thereabout to gratify Virgins, and other
Women, who are exceeding careful to preserve their Beauties. Among infinite
Medicines recorded by Authors to this intent, I shall propound the choicest.

And in the first place, Oil of Eg-yolks does nourish and engender Skin, and
therefore is very convenient to fill the Pock-holes.

Wethers Suet fresh and new, melted and done out with a Fether, is effectual to
the same purpose.

But the filthyness of Pock-holes is much amended, if they be washed first with
Yarrow-Water, or Cows-dung-water, distilled in May, and then anointed with
Mans-Grease.

Forestus does much magnify this following Ointment.

Take Oils of sweet Almonds and white Lillies, of each one ounce: Fat of a
Capon three drams: Powder of Peony Roots, of Orice and Lytharge of Gold, of
each ten grains: Sugar Candy one scruple. Mingle al well in a warm Mortar,
strain them through a Cloth, and anoint the Pock-holes therewith morning and
night. And afterward let them be well washed with Water distilled out of
Calves-feet: and when that is not at hand, use the Water of Yarrow in stead
thereof.

Neither must I omit that which many Practitioners do teach, viz. That when the
Pocks be ripe, they must be bored through with a golden or a silver Needle,
least the Quittor tarrying long in them, should leave holes in the part. Which
Practice, is notwithstanding, now in a manner grown out of use, since
Experience has taught, that the Pocks being bored are longer in healing and
does longer hold their Crusts, because of the Weakness of Natural Heat, caused
in the Part by boring, whereby more deformed Scars are left behind. And
therefore it is better to abstain from this boring, and to commit the
evacuation of the Quittor to Nature alone.

To conclude this Cure, I shall subjoyn how those dispositions of Itching and
Exulceration which happen to persons that have the small Pocks, may be remedied.

And in the first place, When the small Pocks come forth, or when they begin to
ripen, sometimes an huge pain or Itching does afflict the Patients; especially
in the Palms of the Hands and Soales of the Feet, because the thickness of the
Skin in those parts hinders the Eruption of the Pocks.

Which Symptom you shall help, if you cause those parts to be held in hot
Water, or Foment them a long time with an Emollient Decoction. But when there
is great Itching in the Face, which compels the Patients to scratch, whence
great deformity and foul Scars follow; use this following Remedy.

Take leaves of Pellitory of the Wall one handful: Flowers of Chamomel and
Melilote, of each half a pugil. Boil them in a pint of Scabious Water, To the
strained Liquor ad three ounces of Honey-suckle Water. With this Liquor hot,
often let the Itching Pocks be moistened, by dipping a thin Rag or Cotton Wool
therein, and so applying the Liquor gently to them.

Now the Ulcers which arise from deep and malignant Pocks, are to be cured with
Vnguentum album Rhasis, or with an Ointment of Lead made after this manner.

Take Calcined Lead two ounces: Litharge one ounce: Ceruss washed and Vinegar,
of each half an ounce: Oil of Roses three ounces: Honey of Roses one ounce:
Three Yolks of Eggs: Myrrh half an ounce: Wax as much as shall suffice. Make all
into an Ointment.

FINIS.
A PHYSICAL DICTIONARY, Expounding such words, as being terms of Art, or
otherwise derived from the Greek and Latin, are dark to the English Reader.

This Dictionary is of use in the reading of all other Books of this Nature, in
the English Tongue.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil. 1655.

A Physical Dictionary.
A A Pophlegmatisms, Medicines drawing phlegm out of the Head.
Agaricktrochiscated, See the London Dispensatory in English. Apozeme, A
Medicine made of the Broth of diverse Herbs, and other Ingredients; unto which
sometimes certain Syrups are added. Animal Faculties, The Powers of Hearing,
Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling; of Imagination, Understanding, Memory,
Will, Going, Standing, and all Voluntary Motion. Aranea Tunica: The
Cobweb-Coat, or Tunicle Abdomen: The Belly, or Paunch Apoplectick Water: Good
for the Apoplexy Autumn: Harvest, the Fall of the Leaf Actual Heat: is Heat
that may be felt by the hand, such as is in Fire, and all things heated
thereby; or in the Body of one in a Fever: It is oppoied to Potential Heat,
viz. That cannot be felt by the Hand, as the Heat in pepper, in Mustard seed,
in a Flint, in unslaked Lime: and the contrary of Actual Cold. Affected:
Troubled, Diseased: An Affect, a Disease, Trouble, Disorder. Aquae Acidulae:
The Spaw Waters, like those of Epsam, Barnet, and Tunbridg, with us.
Absurdities: Unreasonable things Acrimony: Sharpness, such as in Mustard,
Pepper, and in diverse Humors of the Body which cause sickness. Ascent: Going
up. Apply: lay on. Actually Cold: see Actual Heat. Augment: Increase.
Accidentally: By hap, by chance, upon occasion. Adventitious: not Natural, but
springing from external causes. Actracting: drawing together, or causing.
Attracts: draws to. Accident: something that happens upon a Disease; vide
Symptom. Adstriction: binding together, shutting up. Antecedent Cause:
foregoing Cause. is opposed to the Conjunct Cause. Abundance of Phlegm in the
Body is the Antecedent Cause of the Optic Nerves being stopped by phlegm; but
the Phlegm in the said Nerves, is the Conjuct Cause etc. of other Diseases.
Articulate Voice: A distinct Voice, such as that of Mankind, termed Speech.
Abstergent: Clensing away filth. Access: Addition, joining to, help, or
company. Afflux: flowing to. Astringents: Medicines that bind together, and
straiten the Pores and Passages of the Body. Astriction: binding, knitting
together. Anodines: Medicines which assuage pain. Anastomosis: an opening of
the Mouths of Veins, by which means Blood issues. Astringe: bind, fasten,
close. Acute: sharp, violent: a Disease is termed Acute, when it quickly
changes to health or death. Adustion: burning: Adust, burned. Blood is said to
be adust, when by reason of extraordinary heat, the thinner parts are
evaporated, and the thicker remain dreggy and black, as if they were burnt.
Asthmatical: troubled with shortness of breath. Attest: witness, declare.
Aneurism: a Swelling caused by a dilatation of the Arteries external Coat, the
internal being broken. Axungia: Grease. Atrophy: want of Nourishment, when the
Body pines away. Attenuating Medicaments: are such as make thick Humors thin.
Axiom, or Theoreme: an acknowledged, undoubted Truth. Adjacent: lying near,
bordering upon. Aromatized: Spiced, perfumed. Anus, the Fundament. Astringe, to
bind. Atoms: small Moats hardly visible, and that cannot admit of any division.
Adverse: contrary to, of a contrary Nature. Augment, is the time of a Disease,
while it grows still more vehement, until it comes to its height, which is
called the state of the Disease, and then the Augment ceases, because the
Disease is now at a stand, and increases no more. Alteratives, are such
Medicines as only change the qualities of the Body and its Humors, by heating,
cooling, moistening, drying, etc. they are opposed to such as do cause
Vomiting, Purging, Sweating, Transpiration, etc. Adjuncts of a Disease, are
qualities, dispositions, and Symptoms annexed thereunto. Aliments, are what
ever is taken into the Body to nourish the same; as all kinds of Meat and
Drink. Adjuvant Causes, are such as serve and assist the principal Cause; so is
the Tailors Boy an adjuvant Cause assistant to his Master, the principal Cause
of a Garment. So in Diseases, whatever assists the Primary Cause, is termed an
Adjuvant Cause. Alexipharmical things, are such as resist Plague, Poison, and
all venomous Diseases.
B BAlneum Mariae; the manner of stilling or digesting, when the Glass
containing the Ingredient, stands in a Vessel of Water, with Fire made under
it. Bolus: A Morsel; a Medicine to be taken from a Knises point. Bellilucanae
Thermae: Hot Baths in France, so called from the place where they are.
Breathing of a Vein; Blood-letting, properly if but little Blood be taken away.
Bronchia; the hollow gristly Pipes that spread themselves through the Body of
the Lungs, being Branches of the Wezand or Windpipe.
C CAruncle; a little bit of Flesh that grows and sticks out on any part of the
Body. Catarrh; a Defluxion or Distillation of Humors from the Brain, into any
part of the Body, especially the Lungs, causing Coughs. Condense, to make
thick. Contention; Digestion in the Stomach, etc. Cataphora; a deep sleep.
Cupping-glass, is that which Physicians use to draw out Blood with Scarrifying
of the Skin, Glasses fastened with lighted Tow or Flax. Catalepsis;
Congelation, or stifness of the Body. Causticks, are Medicines which burn the
Skin and Flesh to make Issues, etc. Coronal Suture; the Seam which runs through
the Crown of the Head, where the two sides of the Skul close. Crude; Raw,
undigested: So Meat not well boiled or roasted, is Crude; and Blood and other
Humors not well digested by the Stomach, Liver, etc. are called Crude.
Conjunctiva; a Coat of the Eye, so called because it sticks fast unto the Eye,
and keeps it in its place. Actual Cautery, is burning with a red hot Iron.
Congelation, freezing together, stifness with Cold. Constipation, stopping up.
Chollick, pain and griping of the Gut Colon; and because the pain proceeding
from the Stone, is very like thereunto, it is called the Stone-Collick.
Cerates, Medicines made of Wax, and other Materials, stiffer than an Ointment,
and softer than a Plaster, to be applied to diverse parts. Cephalic, or
Capital Opiate, Head Electuary. Cephalic Pills, Head-pils. Cephalic Plaster,
Head-Plaister. Collyrium, an Eye Salve. Convulsion, a drawing together, a
shrinking together. Contracted, drawn together. Cornea, a Coat of the Eye like
the Horn of a Lanthorn. See Veslingus in English. Chyrurgeon, Surgeon.
Circumvolution, turning round like a wheel or whirlwind. Compression,
thrusting or squeezing together. Contusion, Bruising, a Bruise. Cold seeds, See
the English Dispensatory. Compress, thrust together, squeeze. Condense,
thicken, condensing, thickening; a Condensation, a thickening. Coarctation, a
straitening, thrusting together. Contraction, drawing together, shrinking up,
etc. Contracted, drawn together. Confirmed, A Disease is said to be confirmed,
when it is perfect, settled, and has taken root. Couched with a Needle, that
is, taken away with a Needle, or pressed down with a Needle. Center, is
properly the middle point within a Circle, from whence all Lines drawn to the
Circumference, are equal; it is taken figuratively for the middle of any thing.
Continuity, the oneness, the joining together without interruption. Compact,
firmly united, well thrust and crowded together. So Gold, Lead, and other
Metals, are said to be compact, compared to Cork, Sponge, and light Wood which
are not compact, but hollow and pory. Concocted: An Humor is said to be
concocted when it is either turned into good Blood, as sweet Phlegm is wont to
be; or when it is separated from the Mass of blood, and made fit for expulsion.
Concoction; a boiling, or boiling together: when the meat in the Stomach is
changed into a substance like Almond Cream; that change is called Concoction.
Cataplasm; a Pultiss. Cavity; hollowness. Crisis; by bleeding at the Nose, or
by vomit, page 57. that is a breaking away of the Disease by Natures Conquest
of the Cause, which she drives forth by the Nose or Mouth. Crystalline Humor; a
part of the Eye which resembles a little Cake of Crystal; if you open a Calves
Eye carefully, you may take it out whole. Conus, is a Geometrical Figure,
representing a Sugar Loaf, or an Extinguisher; which Philosophers make use of
when they teach how the Eye perceives its Object. Connatural; which is bred
with a Man; as he that is born with one Eye, or but two Fingers: such a Disease
is termed Connatural. Unequal; bunching out like the backside of a Buckler or
Platter. Conjunct Cause of a Disease, is the immediate Cause; so Phlegm stopping
the Optic Nerves is the Conjunct Cause of Blindness; whereas taking of cold,
swimming in cold water, eating phlegmatic meats, sleeping after Dinner, were
the remote, or far distant Causes, etc. Constriction, a drawing together, a
straitening. Congestion; a gathering together or heaping up. Cumulation; the
same with Congestion. These words are opposed to defluxion. When a part is
diseased by an Humor sent from another part, it is termed Defluxion; when the
Humor is first gathered in the part it self, by reason of its own proper
weakness, it is termed Congestion or Cumulation. Conjoined Matter; see Conjunct
cause. Corroding; biting, gnawing, eating. Consolidation; closing up of a Sore
or Wound, etc. Carus; foulness, rottenness, corruption of a Bone. Cicatrize; to
bring to a Scar, to close up a wound or sore. Commissura; the Mold of the Head,
where the parts of the Skul are united. Cavous; hollow. Critical Evacuations by
bleeding, stool, etc. are such as Nature procures to drive out her vanquished
Enemy; and are means and tokens of Recovery. Symptomatical Evacuations are such
as proceed from the vehemence of the Disease, before Nature has mastered the
offending Humor, and they prove bad tokens. Calcine; to burn to Ashes in a
Crucible, etc. Corrode; eat, fret; Corroding, eating, fretting. Cronical; long
lasting. Cacochymical; abounding with evil Humors. Critical day; See Day of
Judgment. Corrosion; a fretting, eating asunder. Conjugation; a pair of Nerves
is so called. Cardialgia; Heart-burning. Crudities; Rawness, indigestion.
Chylus; a Liquor like a Posset, into which all Meats are changed in the
Stomach, if the Digestion be good. Cydoniatum; Conserve of Quinces, or
Marmalade. Cardiogmos; Heart-burning. Carminating Medicines; are such as do
break Wind. Constringe; draw together. Carminative; expelling Wind. Chalibeat
Vinegar, and Chalibeate Water, are such as have steel quenched in them. Carabe;
Amber. Cronical Diseases; such as usually last very long, as Quartan Agues,
Stone, Dropsies, etc. Crystal of Tartar; Cream of Tartar. Consistence; Body, or
Substance. Catheter; an hollow Silver Instrument to thrust into the Bladder
when the Urine is stopped by a stone, to thrust back the stone, and let out the
Urine. Complication of Diseases; when diverse Diseases are in the Body at the
same time, especially if they depend one upon another. Coalition; healing up,
growing together of a Wound or Ulcer; or any Part that ought to be open, as of
the Privity in some Girls. Coincide; is to happen together at one and the same
time. Cachectical Persons, are such as have their whole Bodies blown up with a
soft and moist swelling, with the color of the Face white, or leadcolored. Also
their Legs especially swell, and their Face is bloated. Coindicants, are diverse
things in a Disease or Patient, which plead for one and the same Remedies. So
in a putrid Fever, the person being full bodied, and the season warm also, the
person lusty and young: The Fever, the fullness of Blood in the Patient, his Age
and strength, and Season of the Year, are Coindicants that he must be let
Blood. Contra-indicants, are diverse considerations that dissuade a Remedy: As
when in a putrid Fever, old Age, Winter Season, Weakness, are
Contra-indicants, that dissuade from Blood-letting; which the Fever simply
considered, does indicate, or persuade and hint out. Coction of Humors, is
their being separated from the Mass of good Blood, and fitted for expulsion: As
when thin Humors are moderately thickened, and tough clammy Humors are cut and
divided. This Coction of Humors is known by the Urine, when it has a light,
even, and smooth settling, etc. Causa sine qua non; The Cause without which a
thing cannot be, though it be not the principal Cause thereof: So a Tailors
Shop-boord is a Cause sine qua non, without which a Garment cannot be made,
though himself and the stuff, the shape and the end be principal Causes.
Commemorative; bringing to remembrance what is past. Cicatrize; is to bring
un^o a Scar, which is done when Wounds and Ulcers are healed up. Contumacy;
stubbornness, rebellion.
D Diuretics; Provokers of Urine. Diagnosis; the knowledge of a Disease.
Distillation; a flowing down of thin Humors from the Brain into several parts.
Decoction; the Liquor where in things are boiled, the Broth of Herbs, and other
Medicaments. Diagnosticks; the Signs to know what Disease a Patient has.
Defluxion; the same with Distillation: also a running together of Humors into
any part, causing pain or swelling, etc. Delirium; Dotage, raving, talking
idly, in time of sickness especially. Diarrhoea; a simple Looseness, without
Inflammation of the Guts, any extreme pain, or voiding of Blood. Diaphoenicon;
see the London Dispensatory in English. Diacatholicon, Diacarthamum; see the
Dispensatory. Diet; this signifies in many places a Diet drink. Diminished;
Lessened. Diminution; a lessening. Discuss; dispel invisibly: as a Plaster
that makes a swelling go away without breaking, is said to discuss the same.
because the Matter of the swelling is not seen to come away; but is turned into
steems and vapors, and partly drinks up the substance of the Plaster, and so
vanishes invisibly. Declination of a Disease; is the breaking of the Disease,
when it begins to tend to health, which is known by the Symptoms growing more
gentle. Diverting Medicines; which turn aside the Humor causing the disease, so
that it flow not into the part offended. Dislocation; putting out of its place.
Derived; turned away from. Diffuse; spread abroad. D^ssipated; scattered
abroad. Demonstrated; clearly proved from undeniable Arguments. Depravations;
marrings spoilings, hurtings. Depressed; made flat or hollow, dented in.
Distemper; any excess of the four first qualities, Heat, Cold, Moisture,
Dryness. There are reckoned four simple or single distempers, viz. a Hot, a
Cold, a Moist, a Dry: and four compound, viz. Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold
and Moist, Cold and Dry. Dilated; widened. Dilatation; widening. Debility;
weakness. Distortion; writhing, wresting, crooking. Dissipating: ^pread abroad,
driving away. Derivations: drawing an offensive Humor from the part diseased,
to some other part near it. Digestives: Medicines which prepare evil Humors for
to be driven out by Nature. Dissolved: melted, consumed away. It is used of
swellings that are brought down by Ointments or Plasters; and in other cases
when the Humor causing the Disease, is invisibly driven away. The Drum
mentioned in page 96. is a pretty little hollow bone in the Ear, covered with a
thin Skin like a Drum, which being beaten upon by another little bone like a
mallet, does cause sounds to be heard in the Ear. See Veslingus his Anatomy in
English. Diapedesis; is an issuing of the blood through the Pores of the Veins.
The Day of Judgment, or Critical day: is that day in fevers especially wherein
it appears, on which side sentence is given, whether on the ^lantifs, viz. the
Diseases; or on Natures, the Defendant; so that by some Evacuation, or
swelling, or other great mutation to the better or worse, it appears whether
the Patient is like to recover or not. Distention: stretching. Depraved:
marred, spoiled. Dilatation: widening, opening. Diaphragma: the Midrif.
Dyspnaea: shortness of breath. Dysentery: a Bloody Flux. Diagrydiates:
Medicines that have Scammony or Diagry dium in them. Dissolution of Natural
Heat: a decay of Natural Heat. Diaphoretick Sweats: which are caused by Nature,
oppressed with a malignant Humor, and forcibly driving the same out by Sweat.
Dung-gate; the Arse-hole. Distillations by descent: are when the Liquor which
comes from the Materials stilled, does not rise up above the said Materials, as
in ordinary distillation; but falls down under the Materials stilled, which are
therefore laid upon a Grace, that the bottom of the Vessel may be empty, and
free to receive the distilled Liquor.
E EXcrement: the Dregs of Digestion in the Body, voided by Dung, Urine, and
Sweat. Evacuation: an emptying or voiding forth, purging. Epispastick: a
Plaster to draw a Blister, called also a Vesicatory, or any strong drawing
Plaster. Errhines: Medicinal Liquors to be snuft up the Nostrils to purge the
Brain. Empyema: Empyems a corrupt matter between the breast and the lungs
following a Pleuris^e. Erysipelas Oedematosum: a tertian swelling arising from
choler and phlegm. Eliphantiasis: a leprous disease, which makes the Patients
skin like the Hide of an Elephant. Electuary: See the London Dispensatory.
Expulsion: driving forth; as of Excrements, Dung, Urine, Sweat, etc. Expel: to
drive forth. Eruption: breaking forth. Extinguished: quenched, put out.
Emunctuaries or Emunctoryes; certain ways and passages that Nature finds to
drive ill Humors into, from the Principal Parts; as certain Kernels behind the
Ears; and in the Groins, under the Armpits, etc. where risings happened in
time of Pestilence etc. Essentially springing P. 11. that is primarily and
principally, not accidentally or occasionally. Ebullition: boiling and working
of the blood in the Veins, like New-wine in a Cask. Extension: stretching out.
Extenuation: Leanness, Consumption of flesh. Extenuating making thin. Expulsive
faculty: the power of our body which drives forth Dung, Urine, Sweat, Vapors
etc. every part partakes of this Ability, or Faculty. Eminent: near at hand
approaching. Erysipelas: a swelling caused by choler. Erysipelas Phlegmonodes,
or Phlegmon Erysipelatodes. Is a swelling caused by Inflammation of Choler and
Blood. Emulsions: Almond milkes; and milkes made of cool Seeds, etc.
Electuaries. Medicines made up of Conserves of Flowers or Herbs; to which is
added some sweet Spicy powder for the most part, and so with Syrup it is made
up in the form of Mithridate or Treacle. Epithemes: are Medicines applied in
Bags, commonly upon the Heart or Stomach Liver or Spleen etc. Certain
convenient pouders being put in a Bag, or between two cloths, and so wet in
Wine or other convenient Liquor, are laid upon the Stomach, Heart, etc.
Essential to the Disease: that is of the being or substance, so that without
that, the disease could not be. So Heat is Essential to a Fever. Excrements:
dregs and refuse of our meat and drink after Concoction, voided by dung, Urine,
Sweat, and invisibly through the Pores. Excrementitious: of or belonging to
Excrements, impure, preternatural humors are so called. Extenuate: make thin.
Expressed: Squeezed out. Epidemical: common to a whole Nation. So the the
Plague, small Pocks, Looseness, Sweatingsickness, etc. when they are rise all
over a Nation* or Country at one time, they are called Epidemical diseases.
Ehxir Proprietatis. A Medicine invented by Paracelsus. Take of the best Aloes,
Myrrh and Saffron, of each half an ounce: Powder them and put them into a
Glass. Then take Muscadine made tart with Oil of Sulphur, and pour upon the
powder, til the liquor stand four fingers above the powder: Let them stand and
digest in a warm place. Then pour off the Liquor and put on more, till all the
Color and virtue be drawn out from the powder. At last still the settlings
with a gentle fire, and pour that which comes away, to the former Liquor, and
let all stand and digest a Month in a warm place, close stopped. The name
signifies such a Quintessence, as has a special propriety of agreement with
Man's nature, whereby it comforts and restores the same, in all kind of weakness.
Emollient: Medicines that soften. Eroded: eaten a sunder, eaten up. Extraction:
pulling out. Exquisite: perfect, in an high degree. Escharoticks: see Causticks
potential. Embrochated: moistened, bedewed, bathed. Erosion: fretting, eating.
Eclegma. See Lambitive. Extreme parts: the Arms and Legs. Emplastick diet:
consists of such meats as are of a clammy substance, viz. Calves Head and Feet,
Sheeps-trotters; all Feet of Beasts, Tripes, Gellys, etc. Excreta and Retenta:
things voided out of the Body, things retained, or kept in. Eradicate, pluck up
by the Roots. Exasperated: pained, vexed, molested. Equivocal: Signs of a
Disease, are such as are common to it and other Diseases. The Efficient Cause:
is the working or making Cause, so a Tailor is the Efficient of a Garment; The
Material Cause is the stuff, a thing is made of which the Efficient works upon;
So the Cloth or Silk is the Material Cause of the Garment. The formal Cause,
the shape that makes it a Coat, or Cloak, or Doublet; the Final Cause, is the
end why it was made, viz. to hide nakedness, keep off Sun and Cold, and to
adorn the body. Emulgent Veins: which bring the Wheyish Excrement of the blood
unto the Kidneyes where it becomes Urine, and is passed by the Urecers into the
Piss-bladder. Evaporation: a steeming out of Vapors. Egress: coming forth.
Evaporated: steemed away, as Water that spends away in boiling. Evacuators:
Medicines which empty out evil Humors, either by vomit, Purge, etc.
Exhalations: Vapors drawn up by the Sun, out of the Earth and Waters.
Eventilated: Fanned, purged as Corn by fanning. So Exercise is said to
eventilate or fan the Body; because the motion opens the Pores, and drives many
vapors out. Eneorema: that which hangs like a cloud in Urines, especially when
the Disease is breaking away. Emollient Decoction: a softening moistening
Decoction, made for Clysters to soften and moisten the hardened Excrements of
the Guts. An Eschara, or Eschar; is the Core that falls off from a part that
has had a Caustic applied thereto.
F FVmigations: Perfumes and others things, burnt to qualify the Air in a sick
man's chamber. Fracture: breaking, as fracture of the Skul or Arm, etc.
Fomentation: when linen Clothes or Spunges are dipped in some Liquor, and
applied to the diseased part, and after renewed. Functions of the Brain: the
Abilities of the Brain, to Hear, See, Imagine, Understand, Remember, etc.
Frictions: Rubbings. Furor Vterinus: Womb-Madness; when Women are mad by reason
of a disorder in the Womb. See the Chapter of that Disease. A Flux of Humors:
flowing of Humors. Febris Catarrhalis: a Fever caused by Rheum falling from
the Head. Fabric: Frame, making up, composition. Frontal Vein: Forehead Vein.
Fortified: strengthened. Fistula: an hollow, deep, but narrow Ulcer that will
not be closed up. A pair of Forceps, a small Instrument like a pair of Tongs, to
draw forth any thing out of the Ears, etc. Fluid: apt to run and flow like
Water, and other Liquors. Filtration: straining through a brown Paper, or by
means of a piece of cloth hanging out of one Vessel into another. Filter: to
strain as aforesaid. Fermentation: the working of Humors, as new drink works in
the Barcel. A Fever Symptomatical, is a Fever caused by some other foregoing
Disease; in respect of which Disease, the Fever is but a Symptom or Accident.
A Flatulent and Pituitous Chollick, is a Chollick caused by wind and phlegm.
Formicans Pulsus; a weak, feeble, quick Pulse, that seels under the Fingers
like creeping Pismires, from whence it is named. Form: See Efficient Cause.
Fluxive: apt to flow and run like Water and other Liquors. Friable: is crumbly,
short, like costly Cakebread, Pie-crust, Puf-past, etc. So Fishes that have a
short crumbly substance, not clammy or slimy, such as Soals, Smelts, Trouts,
are said to be friable in comparison of Eels, Carps, Tenches, etc.
G GVm Animi: Indian Amber. Gargarisms: that is, Medicines to Gargle in the
Throat to wash sore Throats, de Gutteta: a Powder used in Falling Sickness and
Convulsion of Children by the French. It is described page 33. at the bottom.
Going about: by fits. Generating: breeding, begetting. Glandules: Kernels, such
as are about the Throat, and are called the Almonds of the Ears, and such as
the Sweetbread, etc. Gate-Vein: Vena Porta. See Veslingus Anatomy in English.
Generous Wine: strong Wine, as rich Canary, Muskadine, etc. Glutinations:
Clamminess like Gum about the corners of the Eyes. Glutinators: things which
glue and close up broken Veins, etc. Glutinous: clammy like Glue. A Gangrene:
is a corruption of a part tending to the utter deading thereof.
H HYpochondria: the parts beneath the Ribs. Hemiplegia: the Palsy possessing
one side. Hydrelaeum: a Bath and Ointment; that is, of Water and Oil beaten
together. Hippocras Bag: a Bag of Wool shaped like an Extinguisher, through
which Hippocras and diverse Medicines are strained. Hereditary: from Father or
Mother, to Son or Daughter. Hydromel: Honey and Water, Mead, Metheglin.
Hemorrhoids: Veins of the Fundament, to which Leeches are applied. Head-Herbs:
Rosemary, Betony, Sage, Lavender, sweet Marjoram, Hysop, Balm, Cowslips, Roses,
Violets, Lettice, Borrage, Bugloss, etc. Habit of Body: is the whole bulk and
substance thereof. Humidity: Moisture. Holy Fire: a red Inflammation, St.
Anthonies fire, the Rose. Hemorrhagies: breaking forth of Blood from any part
of the Body. Hysterical Fits: Fits of the Mother, Wombsickness. Hermetical
Physicians, and Hermets: Chemists, such as trade with Furnances, Pots, and
Glasses, to draw Spirits, Oils, Waters; to make Salts, Quintessences, etc.
called so from Hermes Trismegistus, an old Egyptian Philosopher, who is thought
to have been a Chemist. Horrors: Shiverings.
I INfuse: that is, steep. Inflammation: great Heat. Indication: is an hinting
to the Physician what he is to do. So extreme heat is said to give indication
of cooling; extreme fullness of blood gives indication of blood-letting; want of
a woman's Courses gives indication of blood-letting, etc. Jugular Veins: that
is, the Throat Veins. See Veslingus Anatomy in English. Insensible Passages:
which cannot be seen, nor felt, by reason of their smalness. Influence: flowing
in. Inherent: sticking fast within, seated and abiding within. Inordinate:
disorderly, unnatural, and unfitting. Internal and External Senses: The
Internal are, Common Sense, Imagination, Understanding, Memory: The External
are, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling. Intercepted: stopped in the
middle way. Internally and Externally: inwardly and outwardly. Juleps: pleasant
Drinks made of distilled Waters, or the broth of Barley, and other convement
things, and sweetened with Syrups or Sugar; given chiefly in Fevers to cool
and quench Thirst. Infusion: a strained Liquor wherein Medicaments have been
steeped, either hot or cold. Incrassate: thicken. Incrassating: thickening.
Insensible: not to be perceived by the outward Senses, of Seeing, Hearing,
Smelling, etc. Illumination: enlightening. Influx: flowing into. Inversion;
turning the inside out. Intermission: ceasing, leaving off. Inveterate: old, of
long continuance, rooted. Inclination: that is, by holding the vessel on the
one side, and so pouring the clear from the setlings: this is called to
clarify by Inclination, in opposition to clarifying with the white of an Eg by
boiling, or any other way. The Iris: a party-color'd round Circle in the sight
of the Eye like a Rainbow, from whence it has its name. Incarnate: to breed
flesh. Irritation: provocation, stirring up. Involuntary Tears: which are not
shed by force of sorrow working upon the mind, but by force of a bodily
Disease. The day of Indication: is that day in a Fever on which may be
collected what will betide upon the following Critical day. So the sourth day
does hint what is like to happen on the seventh; and the eleventh hints what is
like to happen upon the fourteenth; and the seventeenth what will happen upon
the twenty one; and the twenty four what will betide upon the twenty eight.
Therefore the fourth, eleventh, seventeenth, twenty four, are called days of
Indication, or telling and declaring. Judged, see Day of Judgment. Infirm:
weak. Insipid: Tastless. Incising Medicaments; are such as cut and divide tough
phlegm, and other clammy humors, whereby they become fit for expulsion; such is
Oxymel, etc. Intestines: the Guts. Intension and Remission: Increase and
decrease, growing stronger or weaker. Injection: is a Medicinal Liquor cast
with a fitting Instrument into the Womb, Bladder, or Fundament, when there is
forenessof hemorroids, etc. Inserted: fastened or planted into. Inspissate
Juice: is Juice of some Herb boiled till it be thick, as Honey. Illustrated:
made clear and manifest. Invasions of the Gout: fits of the Gout, or of Agues,
may be called Invasions of the said Diseases. Intense: vehement, strong.
Indicate: declare, point out. Impacted: wedged in, thrust far in. Irrigations:
moistenings, sprinklings, waterings. Intervention: coming between, happening
together with. Intermediate: coming between. Intermitting Pulse: is that which
holds up a while, and then beats again; and then stops, and then beats again,
which is a sign of great weakness. Incoctibility: an unaptness to be concocted
or digested, or an impossibility thereof.
L LEnitive: a gentle, refreshing, cordial Medicine. Ligatures: or strings
wherewith the Joints of Bones and the Gristles are compact and bound together.
Lozenges: the same with Tablets, being the form of a Medicine made up.
Luxation: is when one Join is loosned from another. Liniment: Ointment.
Ligatures: bindings of several parts to draw the blood and Humors from the part
diseased, to the parts bound, by reason of the pain of binding which must be
very hard and straight. Looseness of Continuitie: separating and dividing of
things closed and united. So a wound is termed a loosening of Continuitie;
because, it separates these parts of the skin and flesh which were formerly
united together. Laxe: loose, slack, as an unbended Bowstring. Livid: black and
blew. A Lambative or Lohoch: is a medicine to be lickt from a Liquoris stick,
and to be swallowed softly down, being chiefly ordained for the Lungs.
Iron-water: Water wherein Iron has been quenched. Smiths forge-water.
Laxative: which makes the belly loose. Livid: black and blew, Lead-coloured.
M MEninges: or films of the Brain, coats that cover the brain. Masticatories:
that is Medicines to be chewed to bring away Rheum. Mes^eraick Veins: little
Veins that are thought to carry chyle from the stomach to the Liver. See
Vestingus Anat. in English. Malignity: venomous or poysonful quality of certain
humors and Diseases which make them very dangerous, and for the most part
deadly. Matter, or Quittor: a snotty kind of filth which comes out of
Imposthumes when they break, and out of Ulcers when they are in a good way of
cure. Magistral Syrup: is such an one as is invented by a Physician for his
Patient, in opposition to those Syrups commonly kept in shops. Matrix: Womb.
Membrana: skin or coat of the Arteries, Veins, etc. Membranes, skins or coats.
Mortification: a deading of any part of the body. Malign: venomous, poysonful.
See Malignity. Mother: the Womb in Women is so called. Mitigation: abatement,
lessening, growing mild. The Medium: is that through which we see, as
principally the Air, which we look thorough upon objects; also the Water and
Glass, Horn, or what ever is clear, and may be seen thorough, may be termed a
medium of fight. Mammilarie passages, or productions: certain little knobby
bunchings out of the Nerves, which serve for smelling, resen bling Teates,
called therefore Teat-like productions. See the English Anatomy. Malax: soften.
To Malax a lump of Pilstuff, is to soften it, that it may work up into Pills
the better. Mercurial Purges: Purges made of Quicksilver, Chymically prepared,
such as Mercurius dulcis, some kind of Precipitate, Mercurius vitae, etc.
Macerate: steep. Mesenterie: the skin whch knits the Guts together, and runs
all along among them, embossed with Fat. See Vestingus his Anatomy in English.
Membranous: of the Nature of Skin or Parchment. Morbifical, or Morbifick
matter; is that which is the principal cause of any Disease. Minorative
purgation: is gentle purgation, such as takes away only a part of the matter of
a disease: it is opposed to Eradicative purgation, which is strong, and pulls
the whole matter offending up by the Roots; as it were.
N NVtrition: Nourishment. Narcotick medicines: stupefying medicines: that dull
the sense of feeling, and cause profound sleep. Nitre: salt Peter, as some
hold; but Matthiolus conceives the true Nitre is rarely found in these days.
Natural functions: actions of the stomach, Liver, Spleen, Gal, Kidneyes, in
concocting the meat, making blood, and separating and expelling the excrements.
Nauseousness: sickness of the stomach enclining to vomit. Nidorous: smelling of
burnt fat, or scortched Roast-meat, or fried Oil. Noxious: hurtful. Nausiosis
of the Veins: is when the Veins are sick of bad blood, and does as it were spew
it out into the habit of the body: from whence comes scurvy-spots, morphew,
scabs, etc. Neotericks: are late writers in physic, or any other Art, so
called in opposition to the Ancient Authors.
O ORgans: peculiar parts of the body fitted for some notable service of the
Spirit, such as the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Nose to smell, the Skin to
feel, the Lungs to breath, Stomach to digest. Os Sacrum: the great bone whereon
the Ridg bone rests. Opisthotones: a Convulsion so named, when the Body is
drawn backward. Oval form: that is the shape of an Eg. Original: beginning,
foundation. Oedema: a swelling caused by phlegm, which is soft and whiteish, and
has little heat or pain with it. Obstruction stopping. Opiate signifies an
Electuary: properly it is put for Venice Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, etc.
which have Opium in them: from whence the name is derived. But secondarily, it
signifies any Electuary or Antidote made up in such a body as Treacle, etc.
though it have no Opiate in it. Orifice: the whole which is made by a Surgeon
when he lets blood. Also the mouth or passage into the Womb, or Stomach, etc.
Optics: a Part of Natural Philosophy (though falsely reckoned for a branch of
the Mathematics) opening all the Mysteries of sight, and the reasons of the
Deceptions, or mistakes thereof, and teaching to make augmenting Glasses,
mutiplying Glasses, Perspective Glasses, burning Glasses, etc. Oblique:
slantling, athwart, crooked, Obnoxious: liable, or subject unto. Ophthalmy: an
Inflammation of the Eyes, causing foreness and redness. Oscribosum: the bony
Sieve. A bone full of small holes, like a Sieve or colendar, placed above the
Nose, through which Snot and Snivil, is drained from the brain. Occult: hidden,
unknown. Oxycrate: Vinegar and water mingled together. Organical Disease. See
similar diseases. The Systole, or diastole of the Pulse: are the double motion
thereof. For when the Artery is extended by the blood, Issuing out of the
Heart, and smites the Finger of him that feels the Pulse; that motion is called
Diastole, or a widening and stretching of the Artery: but when the Artery
falls, contracts it self, and sinks from under a Man^ Finger, that motion is
called Systole, a contraction. Oxyrrhodine: Vinegar of Roses, and Medicines
made principally thereof.
P PRognosis: the foreknowledg of Diseases. Plethora: a too great fullness of
good blood in the body. Paralysis: the Palsy. Paraplegia: Parisis, Palsy.
Peripneumonia: an Inflammation of the Lungs, or Lights. Pericranium: the skins
which compasses the Scul. A Pugil of Herbs viz. as much as is taken up between
the Thumb and the three fore-Fingers. Physical Regiment: is the right ordering
of a Patient, having taken a Purge, or other strong Medicament. As to keep the
Patient warm, to give posset or thin-broath after every stool; not suffer him
to read, or her to Sow or hold down the head, or to be sad, or to sleep;
especially after a vomit, etc. Frenzy: rageing, Madness joined with a Fever.
see Chap. 11. Book 1. Prognostic: foretelling. A Prognostic sign is a sign
foretelling what will become of the Disease, and patient. Privation: loss.
Plethorick: full of blood, too full of blood. Pores: little holes in the skin,
through which vapors and sweat come out. Sometimes they are visible upon the
Arm or Leg, being swelled and closed with cold; resembling a Goose skin for
roughness. Preternaturally: otherwise then the Course of Nature requires.
Perspicuous: clear, that may be seen through, as Glass, fair-water, etc.
Peritonaeum: the inner coat of the Belly, which covers the Guts: See the
English Anatomy. Poplar Ointment: in the shops called Populeon. See the English
Dispensatory. Potential coldness: that is coldness in operation, though not to
the feeling. So a draught of Whey in which cooling Herbs has been boiled,
being drunk down warm from the fire; is said to be actually hot, because it is
so to the hand and palate; but Potentially cold, because it afterward cools the
stomach, Liver, etc. Pulsation: beating of the Arteries, in any part of the
Body. Precede: go before. Preparing of humors: is the qualifying of them, so as
that they may be fit for expression which preparation consists in separating
them from the mass of good blood: in making them thick, if they be too thin and
sharp: in cutting them and making them thin, if they be too thick and clammy.
Phlebotomy: blood-letting. Preternatural: beside the intent or custom of
Nature* vide Preternaturally. Propriety: a pain by propriety, is when the cause
of the Pain is in the part pained, so when the Headache comes from the Humors
in the Head, it is called a pain by propriety; when it comes from Humors in the
Stomach, or any other part that sends up vapors; it is called Headache by
Consent. And the like may be said of other Symptoms or accidents. A Pyramid: is
a Geometrical figure, broad and angular at the bottom, and growing less and
less toward the top, till it come to a point. The Sepulchers of the Egyptian
Kings were made in this form, and therefore called Pyramides. Naturalists do
make use of this Figure to show how the Eye receives the representations of
visible objects. Pupil of the Eye: is the midlemost round circle, which we
commonly call, the sight of the Eye, and which in Cats, is seen to widen and
contract it self. Pulse: Beans, Pease, Hastivers, French-pease, etc. called so,
because they are gathered by pulling, and not by mowing down, as corn.
Probable: likely, possible. Profound: deep. Producing: breeding, causing.
Peccant Humor: the Humor offending, causing the Disease. A Phlegmon: is an
Inflammation or swelling caufed by blood. If no other Humor be adjoined, it is a
true Phlegmon. If choler be joined, it is called a Phlegmon erisipelous; if
phlegm, aedematous; if melancholy, Scirrhous. Paroxysme: the fit of an Ague, of
the Mother, or any Disease that comes by fits. Perforated: bored through.
Putrid: rotten, filthy, stinking. Pustula: a pustle, push, or whelk. Ponderous:
weighty. Peristaltickmotion of the Guts: is whereby the Guts do contract and
purse themselves together above the excrements, and so squeez them out. Pomum
curtipendulum: an Apple so called. Pubes: the hairy Hillock above the privities
in men and women. The word signifies ripeness, because that hair being grown
out, testifies the parties to be fit to engender. Paerineum: the space which
runs like a ridge between the privities and fundament in men and women.
Praeposterous: unnatural, undue, unfitting. Perturbation of the Eyes: a
troubled, drousie, frighted look of the Eyes. Procatarctick Causes: primarie,
first working and occasional Causes. So in a Fever, the next immediate Cause,
is putrefied choler etc. but the first working and occasional causes, were the
patients taking cold, by swimming in the cold-water; whereby the pores became
shut, and the Matter of the Disease was retained in the Body. So the
Procatarctick Cause of worms in Children, is their greedy eating of Fruit; but
the immediate Cause, is putrid humors occasioned by those Fruits; out of which
humors the worms breed. Precipitated: thrown headlong, forcibly cast down.
Palliative Cure: is when a Disease is not taken away, but only mitigated and
made more mild, so that the patient may have as much ease as possible. Or if
the Disease deform the Body, a palliative Cure, does hide as much as may be
that deformity. So an Eye being thurst out, cannot be properly cured; but it
may admit of a palliative cure, in asswaging the pain, and other Symptoms, and
by putting into the place thereof a Glass or other Artificial Eye. Potent:
powerful. Perspirable: the Body is said to be Perspirable, when the invisible
Pores or holes in the skin, are kept open, so that the vapors arising from evil
Humors may freely breath out. See Transpiration. Pernicious; deadly, causing
death, and destruction. Protraction: is a lengthening out of a Disease and
making the same to last long. Pharmaceutick Remedies: whatsoever kind of
Medicines are made by the Apothecary. Praeposterous: disorderly, undue, unfit,
the Cart before the Horse. Quittor.: See Matter.
R Repletion. over much fullness of blood, or Humors. Resolution, weakening or
dissolving the strength of a part, as when it is palsyed etc. Revulsion:
drawing back of blood or Humors from the part affected. Repelling: Medicines
which draw back the humor from the part affected, Repellers, the same.
Relaxing: Slacking as the string of a bow when the bow is unbent, is said to be
relaxed or slackned. To Revel: to draw back Humors from the part diseased.
Remitted: lessened, abated. Restriction: exception, limitation. Ruption:
breaking, or tearing asunder. Relics remainders of an Humor after Solemn
purging, bleeding etc. Retraction: drawing back. Radical moisture: the
fundamental juice of the Fundamental juice of the body, which nourishes and
preserves the natural heat, as the oil in a lamp preserves and feeds the
flame. Revelled: drawn back, Revulsives, remedies to draw back the Humor from
the Diseased part. Repelled: driven away. Retentive: faculty, the power in our
body and its parts to hold fast its nutriment and what ever is agreeable
thereunto. Rough Artery or Aspera Arteria, is the windpipe or Wesand, which is
rough on the out side with circles and gristly rings. Reduced brought bach
again. Refractions: breaking of the Representations of visible objects. a
term used by the writers of Optics, or the Art of seeing. Recruted: repaired,
restored, made up, a military Resolving medicaments: are such as loosen and
scatter evil humors which are gathered and combined together in some diseased
part of the Body. Re^ercussives: medicines which drive back the Humors from a
diseased part. Relaxation: loosenes. Refrigerating: cooling. Resp ration:
breathing. Reflux: flowing back again. Recipient part, is that part which
receives the Humor offending.
S Suppository: that which is put into the Fundament to cause solubleness.
Sudo^ osick: that is causing sweat. Subeth a deep sleep. Scarefication: is a
cutting of the Skin that it may bleed into a Cupping-glass. Superficies: the
outside of any thing. Stuphes: Stoves or Hot-Houses to sweat in. Spiritus
acousticos: is that portion of the spirit which in the Ears discerns sounds.
Strangulation: choking. Sternon: the breast bone, See Veslingus Anatomy in
English. Sphinchter: is the Musle of the Arse. Stupor: dullness. Spasmus: cramp
or Convulsion. A Scruple is twenty grains or the weight of so many barley
corns. Sternutatories: medicines to snuf into the nose to provoke sneezing.
Stupefying: taking away the sense of feeling; benumming. Stupid: that is
benumbed, besotted, has no feelling or sense, blockish. Symptoms: evil
dispositions of the Body which depend upon and accompany a disease; as Heat,
th^^st, Headache, want of sleep, stomach-sickness, faintings, swoonings etc.
Sympathy: fellow-feeling, a disease is said to come by sympathy, when the
principal cause is in some other part, with which the part offended has a
fellow-feeling. So pains of the Head caused by evil Humors in the stomach, are
said to come by sympathy. And sickness of stomach caused by stone in the
kidneys is a disease of the stomach by sympathy. Nerves Sinnewes, certain
strings carrying the faculty of Motion and sense from the Brain into all
parts of the Body see Veslingus Anatomy in English. Scorbut: the Scurvie.
Steeled in which steel has bin quenched or infused. Scorbutic persons, that
are troubled with the scurvy. Spinal: of or belonging to the Backbone. Serous
matter: wheyish, like whey. Sutures: seams of the Head, where the parts of the
skull are joined together. Species of the Objects: representations of things
seen. For the visible things themselves do not enter into the eyes, but certain
images, and figures of them. Situation place or posture. Species retained in
the Mind: the shapes and patterns of things seen or heard etc. State of the
disease: is when it is at the highest and does neither increase nor decrease.
Saphena: A vein of the foot which is usually opened in women; see Veslingus
Anatomy in English. Sal-prunellae: salf-peter purified with Brimstone Clean
white salt Peter is as good for use, only the Chemists love to mend Magnificat
and many times take great pains to little purpose. Sphacelus: deadnes of any
part, when the flesh and bone are dead; sphacelation signifies the same.
Superfluous: over much, unnecessary etc. Speculum Oris: an Instrument wherewith
the Mouth and throat is kept open, that the parts diseased may be seen and
dealt with. Scirrhus: an hard swelling without pa^^. Suppurated: an Impostume
is said to be suppurated, when it gathers matter and enclines to break.
Suppuration: a collection of matter in an impostume. Suppression: stoppage.
Solution of continu^^ie: a dividing of such parts as were naturally united; so
every wound and Sore, is called a solution of continuity etc. Stupes: cow or
Cotton-wooll. Sealed Earth: Terra Sigillata, it is a kind of Medicinal Earth
brought out of the straights and sealed in little flatt cakes, to avoid
Imposture the Seal is wont to be the great Turks badg viz. the half moon.
Sparadrap: a cerecloath. Sediment: the settlings and dregs of Urine or any
other liquor. Suppression: stoppage. Sincere excrements; are such as are pure
and unmixed, as choler alone etc. Sudoroficks: medicines causing Sweat.
Suffocating, choking, Suffocation a choking. Subject; a logical term, it
signifies any thing that has somewhat adjoined and annexed to it. So the Body
is the subject of Sickness and Health, of Beauty and deformity. The Head is the
subject of pains, and other parts are the subject of other accidents. The Soul
is the subject of virtues and Vices, of Happiness and Misery etc. Suffusion: a
shedding abroad of Humors; as when an Humor is shed abroad in the Eye and
hinders the sight, it is called a suffusion. A Seton is an Hole made in the
skin and a skein of Silk, or yarn, or such like drawn thorough, and kept in,
in which being removed daily causes the matter and humor to come away.
Sulphurus and Bituminous bathes: that is hot bathes like those of Bath in
Summerset-shire, whose Heat and virtue springs from a tincture of Brimstone and
Bitumen which they bring out of the Earth. Suppuration: is when a swelling
comes to gather Head, breed matter and is ready to break. Specific quality: a
peculiar hidden property, not springing from the first qualities. Similar
Diseases: are such as befall the substance of the Body, not considered as
formed into any organ or limb or part; and they are al kind of Distempers.
Organick diseases are such as are proper to the organs and Instruments of the
Body as such, viz. what ever mar their Fabric. Common diseases are such as are
liable both to the Similary and Organick parts viz. Solutions of Unity.
T Tablets: are the same with Lozenges: they are Medicines made up in flat four
squared Cakes with acuted angles. Torpor: numbness. Transpiration: the passage
of the vapors through the pores of the skin of the whole body invisibly, only
causing a smell according to the humors, in some more in some less, in some
offensive in others not so. Tumor: swelling. Tincture: the virtue or strength
of any thing drawn forth by steeping the same in spirit of wine, vinegar, or
any percing liquor', the said Liquor containing the virtue and oftentimes the
Color of that which was steeped in it is called the tincture thereof. Tile
tree: a Linden tree there grow two on Newington green they bear sweet
blossoms. Trepan: an Instrument made to bore an hole in the skull. Turgent:
swelling, working, moving too and fro spoken of the Humors of the Body when
they are in a Combustion, and full of motion. Tacamahaca: A sweet Gumm. See the
London Dispensatory in English. Translation: carrying of an humor from one part
to another. Tunicles: little coats or skins of which the eye is partly made up.
See the English Anatomy Terminated: ended. Topical Medicines: such as are
outwardly applied to the part affected, or the part which sends the Humor etc.
Transparentnes: such a clearness as is in Glass, Horn, the Air, Fair water, or
any other thing which we can see through. Troches or Trochiscs, medicines made
up in the form of little flat Bouls, whence they have their name. Tunica
retiformis: the net-like Coat or tunicle Thorax: the Chest. Trebble Quantity:
thrice so much. Tartarous matter: congealed hard matter like the hardened Lees
of wine which are called Tartar. Transpire: breath through.
V VErtigo: a swimming in the Head. Vesitatoryes: a Medicine applied to the
skin to cause a Blyster. Vertebrae: the turning bones of the whole back.
Ventricles of the Brain: certain hollownesses of the Brain. Venenosity:
poysonfulness. Vapors: Steams ascending into the Head, like the Steams we see
mounting from a mess of hot Broth, or Meat, etc. Vital function: faculty of the
Heart causing Life, Pulse-beating, and Breathing. Visive Nerve: the seeing
Nerve. The Sinnew wherewith the Objects of sight are carried into the Brain, to
the Imagination or Commonsence. See Veslingus Anatomy. Vaporous Matter:
steeming, reaking matter. See Vapors. Vlcerated: having an Ulcer or running
sore. Visor, or Visive Spirits: the Spirit wherewith we see. Universal
evacuation: is a general purging of the whole body, all at once. Vitrous Humor:
a moisture like to molten-Glass. which goes into the making up of the Eye. See
Veslingus Anatomy in English; and cut up an Eye of a Calf, Sheep, etc. Wea
tunica: a coat of the Eye, resembling the skin of a Grape, from whence it is
named. See Veslingus Anatomy in English. Voluntary faculty: that power of our
Body which works according as we please; as the power of going, running,
speaking, etc. whereas the powers of beating in the Pulse, of digesting in the
Stomach, and Eiver, of making blood, flash, fat, etc. do not work according to
our wills. The former we can exercise, or suspend, and moderate them as we
please, but the latter not: which are therefore termed involuntary. Uvula or
Columella: the Palate of the mouth. A Vehicle: that which serves to carry.
Vermicular: Worm-like. The Pulse is so called, when it is weak, and lifts it
self unequally, sometimes more, sometimes less; like the creeping of a
Catterpillar. Vreters: certain long pipes or passages, which bring the Urine
from the Kidney to the Bladder. See Veslingus Anatomy in English. Viscous,
cleaving and roaping, like Birdlime. Vicissitude, the following of one thing
upon the neck of another. Venery: Letchery, the immoderate exercise or doting
upon such Acts as tend to Generation.
W WIld-Poppies. Red-Poppies which grow among Corn, called likewise Corn-Rose.
Watery Humor: a certain liquor like water, which goes into the Composition of
the Eye, See Veslingus Anatomy in English. Watergate: the Privities in Women.
Z ZAcutus Lusitanus: a famous Physician; A Jew that pacticed at Amsterdam in
Holland. He has wrote diverse excellent. Treatises of Physic, suitable to the
Principles of Hippocrates and Galen.

FINIS.
The Virtues, Use, and variety of Operations of the True and Phylosophical
AURUM POTABILE, Attained by the Studies of Doctor Freeman, and Dr. Culpeper,
and left with his Widow, and administered by a Physician in her House near
London, on the East side of Spittle-fields, next door to the red Lion.
The Virtues are as follow:

IT Cures all Agues, whether Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartan: as also it cured
diverse people of that most horrid putrid Fever, which so violently seized on
men's Bodies (both before and after Michaelmas 1653.) to the great admiration of
many; and when the parties Diseased have been both senceless and speechless, for
that neither that, nor any other Medicine or Panacaea, though never so gentle,
could safely be administered into the Body, it has beyond all hopes, by
external application on the stomach revived them. It cures the Gout of all
sorts perfectly being administered as the Physician shall advise. It causes
Women subject to Abortion, or Miscarriage, to go their time: and yet being
given when the time comes it causes a speedy and easy delivery. It is an
infallible cure for the French Pox and does it with such ease, speed, and
Secretness, that none of the nearest relation shall take notice thereof. It
cures the Green Sickness and all sorts of Jaundice, It provokes the Terms. It
is good for Aches and all afflictions coming of cold. It helps the Rickets. But
to what purpose do I nominate diseases in particular, when it is an universal
Remedy for all diseases being administered as the Physician shall advise? For its
chief aim is exhilarating the vital spirits and heart. It both binds and stops
Fluxes, yet Purges; it both Vomits, and stays Vomiting; it causes Sweat, yet
cures preternatural Sweatings and performs all its operations as Nature it self
would, have it, because it only fortifies her in her Center.

To conclude, It is an Universal Fortification for all Complexions and ages,
against all sorts and degrees of Pestilential and contagious Infection, both
preventing before their possession, and extirpating of them after it.

REader, By reason of the mistakes in the printing of this Book in Latin, there
are two words mis-translated: And by reason of the foulness of the English
Copy, there are some other mistakes in printing. All which are thus to be
amended.
PAge 24 line 46. for violent springing read violent Convulsion springing p.
32. for Ephor. read Escar p. 51. l. 39 for ^^ r. do p. 53. l. 7. for proceed r.
preceed p. 59 l 14 r. four ounces p. 116 l. 39 for pure r. impure p. 148 l. 28.
for nevertheless get r. nevertheless the Lungs get p. 160 l. 12 for can endure
r. cannot endure l. 23 for sets more r. feels more p. 167 ^ 33 for blood r.
blood-letting p. 184 l. 40 for Acorns r. Alkermes l. 45 for Acorns r. Alkermes
p. 256 l. 47 for Gloves Cloves p. 259 l. 16 for primary, r. external p. 290 l.
34 for be thirst r. be no thirst p 329 l. 7 for can pass r. cannot p^^ l. 10
for Wine r. Wind p. 332 l. 4 for Turnep Water r. Orange-flower Water p. 341 l.
44 for after dinner r. before d^ner p. 367 l. 9 for scattering r. scalding p.
373 l. 40 for bred r. cured p. 378 l. ^7 for warm r. worn p. 386 l. 51 for
spring Water four ounces r. spring Water four pound p. 428 l. 32 for Turnep
Water r. Orange-flower Water p. 432 l. 29 for suppression r. suppuration p 499
l 18 for decrease r. increase p. 501 l. ^^ for contained r. continued p. 542 l.
52 and 3^ these words [the Moon] at the end of the 53 line, must be taken from
that line, and read at the end of the 52 line p. 567 for great r. grate p. 580
l. 42 for but r. both p 590 l. 40 for be r. being p. 612 l. 10 for puortfied r.
putrefied p. 615 l. 1^ for in r. no p. 622 l. 11 for terror r. Fever for
whereas r. whenas p. 624 l 15 for Urine r. things p. 630 l. 50 for Italy. India
p. 633 l. 11 for care r. cure and for cure r. care and l. 46* for repelling no
r no repelling and l. 57. for after afo^^said r aforesaid after p. 639 l. 26.
for Hair r. Heart


