True Christianity VINDICATED, BOTH IN Praeceding, Present, and Succeeding
AGES, And the Difference between them who are Christians indeed, and them who
are falsely so called MANIFESTED.

Being a Collection of the several Testimonies of the Ancient Writers of the
DOCTRINE, LIVES and MANNERS of the Primitive Christians many Ages ago, which
being found Coherent with the Doctrine, Lives and Manners of the true
CHRISTIANS, who are nick named QUAKERS at this day, are therefore made public.

By Ambros Rigge.

Printed in the Year 1679.

True Christianity Vindicated, both in Praeceding, Present and Succeeding Ages;
and the Difference between them who are Christians indeed, and them who are
falsely so called, Manifested, etc.
CHristianity in its Primitive Luster and Ancient Glory derived this honorable
Title, from the In-dwelling of the Life and Power of Righteousness, in Male and
Female, who lived in and followed Christ in the strait Way of Self denial,
through many Tribulations and Reproaches from the Gentiles or Heathens, among
whom they lived and shined as Lights in the Darkness of Degeneration, which
then Ruled in the World, whereby they suffered the loss of all things; and
through Faith obtained a good Report and Victory over Death and the Power of
the Grave, and were Living Monuments of the Mercy, Goodness and Righteousness
of God: Their Chaste Conversation through the whole Course and Progress of
their Lives witnessed that they sought a City, whose Builder and Maker was God.

The Glory and Excellency of the Anticut Christians consisted not in the bare
Name and Title of Christianity, but in the Manisestation of Piety and
Righteousness in all their Actions; nay, they testified, That if any among them
lived not according to the Discipline of the Gospel, they admitted them not the
Name of Christians.For says Clemens of Alexandria, Admon. ad. Gent. p. 76.
No Man is with us accounted a Christian, or truly Rich, Temporate and
Generous, but he that is Pious and Religious; nor does any further bear the
Image of God than he speaks and believes what is just and holy. So that in
short, this is the state of us, who follow God, such as are our Desires, such
are our Discourses; such as are our Discourses, such are our Actions; such as
are our Actions, such is our Life: Certainly none were ever greater Enemies to
a naked Profession, and the covering of a bad Life under the Title of
Christianity.

Says he, Do any live otherwise than Christ has commanded? It Is a most
certain Argument they are no Christians, though with their Tongues they never
so smoothly Ap. 2. page ^3.
profess the Christian Doctrine; for it is not a mere Profession, but those who
live according to the Christian Doctrine that shall be saved; as Justin Martyr
declared before the Emperor.

Let no man (says Brazill) impose upon himself Comment in ca 1. Esa. to ca. 2.
page 28.
with inconsiderate words, saying, Though I be a Sinner, yet I am a Christian,
etc. But hearken Sinner, all Wicked men shall be bundled together, and in the
Great Day of Divine Vengeance shall be indifferently cast into those Merciless
and Devouring Flames.

Now you who so call your selves, and would have others so account of you,
measure your Ways, Lives and Actions, Doctrine and Discipline, with the Ways,
Lives, Actions, Doctrine and Discipline of the Ancient Christians, whom your
Priests cry up as Fathers of your Church; and see how far they differ from you,
who though you live quite contrary to the Discipline of the Gospel, as your
Fruits daily manifest, yet would assume to your selves the honorable Title of
Christians.

Nay, the Ancient Christians stood at a wide distance from any thing (though
Lawful in it self that seemed to carry an ill color with it, as frequenting of
public Lib. 7. page 375.
Bathes, or going to Sights or Show, because they seemed to owe their Original
to Idolatry, and were the occasion of many gross Enormiti^s This Origin tells
Celsus.

And speaking of those who only took sanctuary at the Name Christian; he adds,
That those who lived not according to the Laws of Christ, but were only called
by the Name of Christians, he begged of the Emperor that they might be punished.

Oh! where is this Spirit that cannot take Sanctuary at the bare Title of a
Christian, nor cannot go to public Bathes, Sights or Shows; but leads all who
are guided with it to delight in the Law of God, and to live according to the
Discipline of the Gospel; Is this found among the Nominal Christians at this
day? I believe nothing less.

Athenagorus told the Emperor, That no Christian Leg. pro. Christ. p. 4.
could be a Bad Man, except he were a Hypocrite.

And Tertullian openly declares, That when Ap. ca. 46. page 36.
men departed from the Discipline of the Gospel, they so far cease amongst us
to be accounted Christians.

Now with the true Light of Christ Jesus measure your selves, all you who are
departed from the Discipline of the Gospel, whether you deserve the Name of
Christians or not: Oh! what good will it do you in the Day of Account to have a
name to live, and be found dead in Trespasses and Sins! Therefore be awakened
to Righteousness, and shake off your Night-Garments, which are patch't together
of Figg leaves; the Lord of the Vineyard is come and coming, who looks for
Fruit, yea, good Fruit; but all who are found Barren of, shall be hewn down and
cast into the Fire.

Tertullian tell us, 'Twas the common Accusation Ap. c. 3. p. 4. Ad. Demit.
page 200.
the Heathen of those Times had in their Mouths, Such, or such a one is a good
man, only he is a Christian; or, I wonder at such a one, a wise man, but lately
turned a Christian.

Minutius Flaeix said to the Heathen, Should we Christians be compared with
you? although our Discipline may seem some what inferior, yet we should be
^ound infinitely to transcend you; you forbid Abultery and then practice it, we
keep entirely to our own Wives; you punish Wickedness when committed, to us,
even a Wicked Thought is Sin; you stand in awe of those who are Conscious of
your Crimes, we of nothing but our Consciences, without which we cannot be? And
Lastly, It is with your party the Prisons are filled and crowded; no Christian
is there, unless it is suchas is either a shame to his Profession, or an
Apostate from it.

Here also let Christendom take a survey of their Ways and Actions: Is it not
a common Accusation, Such and such a one is a good man, only he is turned a
Quaker, or I wonder at such a one, a wise man, but lately turned a Quaker? not
considering that true Christianity consists not in Names and Titles, but in
Life and Righteousness; for the Name Christian was as Reproachfully given in
those days, as the Name Quaker can be in our day.

And do not many of the titular Christians now forbid Adultery and then
practice it? but the true Christians keep entirely to their own Wives. You
punish Wickedness when committed; to us even a Wicked Thought is Sin, which
nothing short of the true Light of Christ in our Consciences can demonstrate
and manifest to us. You are afraid of them who are Conscious of your Crimes; we
fear God, respecting his Witness in our Consciences.

And Lastly, It is with your Party the Prisons are filled and crowded, no true
Quaker is there, except it be for the Testimony of a good Conscience, or else
such who are either a shame to their Profession, or an Apostate from it.

Concerning the true Christians Testimony against Idolatry, both Ancient and
Modern.
THe True, Ancient and Primitive Christians fully Manifested their Detestation
of Idolarty, and testified against all Idols and Image Makers whatsoever; nay,
they looked upon the very making of Idols (though with no Intention to Worship
them) an unlawful Trade, and inconsistent with Christianity.

How have we Renounced the Devil and his Angels, says Tertullian, if we make
Idols; nor is it enough to De. Idolat. ca. 6. p. 88.
say, though I make them, I do not Worship them, there being the same cause not
to make them, as there is not to Worship them ( i. e.) the Offense that in both
is done to God; yet thou do so far worship them, that thou makes them that
others may worship them.

And therefore he fully Pronounces, That no Art, C. 11. p. 92. Vide. ^a. 9, 10.
nor Profession, nor Service whatsoever, that is employed, either in making or
ministering to Idols can come short of Idolatry.

Nay, every Master of a Family was commanded Ca. 41. page 57.
to keep no little Idols nor Images in his House. etc.

Origin tells his Adversary, That the Images that were to be dedicated to God
were not to be canv'd by the hands of Artists, but to be framed and fashioned
in us by the Word of God ( viz.) the Virtues of Justice and Temperance, of
Wisdom and Piety, etc. that conform us to Image of his own Son: those, says he,
are the only Statues formed in our Minds, and by which alone we are persuaded
it is fit to do Honor to him, who is the Image of the Invisible God.

Hearken to this all ye Image-Makers, and Image-Worshippers, throughout
Christendom, who profess the Christian-Faith and Worship; Did not you in your
Baptism in words, Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities
of the World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; and engage to keep Gods
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all your days? And you ask,
Why Infants are Baptized when (by reason of their tender Age) they cannot
perform this? Yes (you say) they do perform it by their Sureties, which when
they come to Age themselves, they are bound to perform.

Oh! Wonderful large Promises indeed! But if we inspect the performance among
the now Nominal Christians, we shall find not only their daily practice
contradicting their Promise and Vow, but their belief also, that they cannot
keep God's holy Will nor Commandments all nor one day in all their Lives; and
so according to their Faith it is unto them: But the true Apostolical and
Spiritual Christians, in scorn called Quakers, who keep his Commandments, as he
said in the days of John, 1 John 5. 2, 3. and his Commandments are not
grievous, but joyous. These now believe with Origin, that the Images that are
to be dedicated to God, are not to be carved by the hands of Artists, but to be
formed and fashioned in them by the Word of God, the Virtues of Justice and
Temperance, of Wisdom and Piety; these are the only Statutes they believe are
to be formed in their Minds, by which alone they are persuaded it is fit to do
honor to him, who is the Image of the Invisible God. These are of old
Tertullians Mind, that the making as well as worshipping of Images is
inconsistent with Christianity, and an offense against God.

The Council of Illiberis that was held in Spain before Constantine, decreed
expressly, that No Pictures ought to be in Churches, nor any thing that is
worshipped or adored ought to be painted upon the Walls.

Now you who call your selves Protestant Christians, are you of this mind? nay,
does not your daily practice demonstrate the quite contrary? How many Images
are painted upon your Walls? How many Image* makers are there within your
Cities and Countries, which draws your Eyes, Minds and Hearts from the true
Spiritual Worship of the invisible God, who is an Eternal Spirit of Life, Light
and Glory, and dwells not in Temples made by the Hands of your cunning Carvers
and Picturedrawers, of Likenesses of things in Heaven, and things in Earth,
contrary to Gods command? Exodus 20.

And Oh! how far are you departed from the Image of God, which is Righteousness
and Holiness, and run into Whoredom, Adultery, Idolatry and Uncleanness; and so
are the perfect Emblem's of the Heathen Gentiles in your Practices, while you
are with your Mouths professing Christianity?

Concerning the Freedom of the true Christians from Covetousness, both Ancient
and Modern.
IVstin Martyr discoursing with Tripho the Jew, tells him, That they were
careful with all fear, to Converse with men according to the Scripture; not
greedily desiring to Gain Riches or Glory, or Pleasure to themselves,
concerning any of which no man could lay any thing to their charge: and that
they lived not like the great Men of his People, of whom God himself had left
this reproachful Character, That their Princes were Companions of Thieves,
every one loving Gifts and following after Rewards.

When Agbarus the Toparch of Edessa offered Thaddeus, one of the seventy
Disciples, great sums of Gold and Silver for the pains he had taken, and the
great things he had done amongst them, he refused them with this answer, To
what purpose should we receive good things from others, who have freely
forsaken and renounced our own.

Hearken to this ye greedy Hirelings of all sorts, are you not quite contrary
in Life and Practice to these ancient Christians? and like Isreal's false
Prophets, every one seeking his own way, every one for his Gain from his
Quarter.

And those who will not feed you with Gifts and Rewards, you prepare War
against them to the uttermost of your power, even to destroy them from the
Earth, as has been manifest to the view of thousands in this our Age, whose
covetous Practices have manifested you to all (who have not willingly closed
their Eyes) to be gone in the way of Cain, and after the Error of Balaam, nay
worse; for Balaam, who though he loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, he durst
not take it; but you are bold enough to ^ue for and take three times the value
from them who will not give it you. But the true Gospel Ministers then, as at
this day, covet no man's Gold, Silver or Apparel, but receive freely and so
give, laboring with their Hands Night and Day that the Gospel may be without
Charge.

Of their Heavenly-Mindedness, and Contempt of the World.
THe ancient Christians did not study those arts of Splendour and Gallentry, as
now the Titular Christians are overrun withal, as stately Palaces, costly
Furniture, rich Hangings, fine Tables, curious Beds, Vessels of Gold and
Silver, the very Possession of which, as Clemens, Alexandrinus speaks, Creates
Envy, Will not a Knife, says he, cut as well, though it have not an Ivory
Haft, or be not garnished with Silver? or an Earthen Basin serve to wash the
Hands? Will not the Table hold our Provisions, unless its Feet be made of
Ivory? or the Lamp give Light, although made by the Potter, as well as if it
were the work of the Goldsmiths? May not a man sleep as well upon a mean Couch,
as upon a Purple Venetian Carpet? Our Lord eat his Meat out of a common Dish,
and made his followers sit upon the Grass, and washed his Disciples Feet,
without ever fetching down a Silver Bowl from Heaven: he took the Water which
the Samaritanness had drawn in an Earthen Pitcher, not requiring one of Gold,
showing how easy it was to quench his thirst; for he respected the Use, not
the Vain and Superfluous state of things.

Give Ear to this you pretended Christians of all sorts; has not the Fineness
and Gallentry of the Gentiles overrun you? Has not the Lust of the Eye, and of
the Flesh, and the Pride of Life compassed you on every side, till there is no
room for Plainness and Simplicity to enter amongst you? you drink your Wine in
Bowls, and Chant at the sound of the Viol, but you consider not the affliction
of Joseph; your Vine is the Vine of Sodom, and your Fruit the Fruit of
Gomorrah: God give you Repentance unto Life, if you have not sinned out your
^ay.

The Primitive Christians were not more studious Min. Foel. pa. 10. Consist.
Aposte. lib. 2 ca. ^2. pa. 886.
of Pleasures and Recreations abroad, then they were of Fineness and Bravery at
home; they went not to public Feasts, nor frequented the Shows which were made
for Disport and entertainment of the People.

The Heathen charged it upon them as part of their Crime; observe how he in
Minis. Foelix draws it up. The Romans (says he) govern and enjoy the World,
while you in the mean time are Careful and Mopish, abstaining even from lawful
Pleasures; you visit not the Shows, nor are present at the Pomps, you abhor the
Holy Games, the Sacrificial Meats and Drinks, Crown not your Heads with
Garlands, nor purfume your Bodies with sweet Odours, a ghastly, fearful and
miserable People.

And when Octavius the Christian comes to answer, he grants it all to be true,
and tells him, That there was very good reason why they should abstain from
their Sights and Shows, Pomps and Divertisments, at which they could not be
present without great Sin and Shame, without affronting their Modesty, and
offering distaste and horror to their minds, and indeed they reckoned
themselves perticularly obliged to this, by what they had vowed and undertaken
at their Baptism, when they solemnly engaged to Renounce the Devil and all his
Catich. Mist. p. 510.
Works, Pomps and Pleasures (i. e.) says Cyril, the Sights and Sports of the
Theater and such like Vanities.

The Truth is, they looked upon the public Sports and Pastimes of those days,
as the Scenes not only of Folly and Lewdness, but of great Impiety and
Idolatry, as places where the Devil eminently ruled and reckoned all his
Votaries that came thither.

Accordingly, Tertullian tells us of a Christian de Spect ca. 26. pa. 83.
Woman, Who going to the Theater, was there possessed by the Devil, and when
the evil Spirit at his casting out was asked, how he durst set upon a
Christian, he presently answered, I did but what was fit and just, for I found
her upon my own Ground.

Draw near, and give Ear ye pretended Christians; who is it now that refrains
from your wicked Sights and Shows? and cannot go with you to your Theaters, nor
adorn their Heads with Garlands, nor perfume their Bodies with sweet Odours,
whom you like your Ancestors (the Heathen Gentiles) call now a ghastly, fearful
and miserable people. Are you not directly in the Steps of them who nourished
their Hearts as in a day of Slaughter, and sat down to eat and drink, and rose
up to play, living wantonly, and in Pleasures upon the Earth, as they did whom
God destroyed? you have had a long time of Laughter and Mirth, but a Day of
Sorrow and Mourning is at hand, ready to break in at your Doors: Oh! therefore
Repent, and put on Sackcloth instead of your Gold and Silver tinkling
Ornaments, and sit down in Ashes; for God is Angry with you, and his Bow is
bent against you, and his Arrows are ready, some of which you have had already;
but the most terrible Ones are yet behind.

Oh! that you knew in this your Day the things which concern your Peace. Mourn,
Mourn, you careless Daughters, who walk with stretched out Necks and wanton
Eyes, the Lord will stain your Glory, and turn it into Contempt, unless you
Repent with speed.

The ancient Christians could willingly part with Athen. Leg. pro. Christ. pa.
2.
any thing that was dear unto them, Friends, Estate, Liberty or Life it self.
We are not moved, says one of their Apollogists, with the loss of our Estates,
which our Enemies wrest from us, nor with the violence which is offered to our
Credit and Reputation, nay we cannot only when beaten, refrain from striking
again, and make no resistance against them that invade and spoil us, but to
them that smite one Cheek, we can return the other, etc.

Justin Martyr says, The Christians dwell in their own Country but as Inmates
and Forraigners; they have all things common with other men as fellow Citizens,
and yet suffer all things as Strangers and Foreigners; every foreign Region
is their Country, and every Country is foreign to them; they Marry like other
men and beget Children, but do not expose or neglect their Offspring; they
feast in common, but not exceed like other men; they are in the Flesh, but do
not live after the Flesh; they dwell upon the Earth, but their Conversation is
in Heaven.

Learn these things ye Professors of Christianity, and do not think to say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father; for if you were of Abraham,
you would do the Works of Abraham; and if you possessed the true Faith, the
Works thereof would manifest themselves in you, as they did in the ancient
Christians, who through Faith obtained an immortal Crown, but walked as
Strangers and Pilgrims in the Earth, suffering patiently the loss of all things
dear unto them in this Life, with great freedom and joy, having only respect to
the Recompense of Reward laid up for them.

When Quintianus the President under Decius the Emperor asked Agatha the Virgin
Martyr, Why? being descended of such rich illustrous Parents, she would stoop
to such low and mean Offices as she took upon her, she presently answered him,
Our Glory and Nobillity lies in that we are the Servants of Christ.

To the same purpose was the answer of Quintianus the Martyr under the
Dioclesian Persecution, when the President asked him, How it came about that he
being a Roman Citizen, and the Son of a Senator would trucle under such a
Superstition, and Worship him for a God whom the Jews had Crucified? The Martyr
told him, That it was the highest Honor and Nobility to know and serve God,
and that the Christian Religion, which he called Superstition, ought not to be
traduced with so base a Name, seeing it immediately guided its followers to the
highest degree of Happiness.

There are three things, as the Son of Syrach well observes, which show a Man
what he is, viz. his Attire, Excessive Laughter, and his Gate; there is not
certainly more open Evidence of a vain Mind than a vain Garb and Habit.
SAint Bazil Discoursing what Habit best becomes Rig. fus. disput. interrog.
22. page 566. tom. 2.
a Christian, tells us, That it ought to be such as most lively expresses the
Meekness and Humility of the Mind, that good men of old were so attired, and
that having Food and Raiment we ought therewith to be content.

It Is not enough, says Tertullian, that a Christian De. cult. famine. Lib. 2.
ca 13. page 160.
be Chaste and Modest, but he must appear to be so, a virtue, of which he
should have such great store and treasure, that it ought to flow from his Mind
upon his Habit, and break forth from the retirements of his Conscience into the
Supefecies of his life.

St. Bazill tells us, The Habit of a Christian ought to be suitable to the two
great ends of Clothing, instituted Ibid. page 567.
of God ( viz.) Honesty and Necessity, and that we ought to remember, that our
Clothes are Moniters of our Apostasy, and that there is little reason we should
pride our selves in that which is only a covering for our shame.

Necessity, and so Clothes were designed to keep the Body in convenient Warmth,
and to defend it from those Injuries and Extreamities, which otherwise would
soon rot down this House of Clay; Are these two ends only answered by you, who
now claim the Name and Title of Christians? Or do you not rather seem to regard
neither, but give your selves over to Excess and Superfluity, and the vain
Garbs and Fashions of the World, which is an open evidence of a vain Mind?

The Garments that we should wear (says Ib. ubi. supr. page 244.
Clemens of Alexandria) ought to be mean and frugal, not curiously wrought with
diverse colors, the Emblem of Craftiness and Deceit; but White, to denote our
embracing of Innocence and Truth; and that is true Simplicity of Habit, that
takes away what is Vain and Superfluous; and that is the best and most solid
Garment, which is furthest from Art and Curiosity, and most apt to preserve and
keep warm the Body.

Chrysostom among other things, especially commends Olimp. 2. tom. 4. 617. and
623.
Olimpias, A Woman of great Birth and Estate, and of no less Piety for the
incredible modesty and meannes, of her Attire, not much better than that of the
poorest Beggar; having nothing in her Garb or Gate that was Feigned or Gaudy;
nothing Eleborate or Artificial.

So far were they then from the Vanity and Affections of Pomp and Bravery, of
dazzling the Eye with Rich and Costly Ornaments, that they thought they could
never seem mean enough.

Tertullian does sarcastically describe, A great De cult. foem. Lib. 1. ca 8.
p. 153.
Estate (says he) is drawn out of a little Pocket, and many thousand Pounds may
be spent upon one string of Pearls; a weak and tender Neck can make shift to
carry about whole Woods and Lordships, vast sums of Money borrowed of the
Banker, and noted in his Account-Book to be repayed every Month with Interest,
are weighed at the beam of a thin slender Ear.

Clemens Alexandrinus censures it very deep, That though Gluttonny and
Intemperance be great Vices, yet not to be compared with a nice overcurious
study of fineness and bravery.

Says he, A well-furnish't Table and Cups that go round may quickly stop the
Mouth of a Hungry Stomach; but where is a nice Affectation of bravery, of Gold
Purple or Jewels there, not the Treasures of the Creation, not what is above or
under ground, not the Spoils of the Tyrian Sea, nor the Fraughts from India or
Aethiopia; No, nor Pactolus with his Golden Streams will suffice.

And also that which the Ancients of those times did most severly censure, and
cry out against, was not only the Expense and Costliness of their Clothes, but
the Arts which they used to add greater Beauty and Handsomness to themselves
than God and Nature had bestowed upon them. This, it seems, the Pride and Folly
of some Christian. Women of those days were got into, which the Zeal and Piety
of those Times vehemently condemn and protest against: Some of the Gallants of
those times pleaded, That they were Rich and had great Estates, and ought
therefore to live like themselves, and to make use of the Estates that God had
given them, etc.

To this Cyprian answers, That they only are De Decip. and Habit. virgin. page
164.
truly Rich that are Rich in and toward God; and that the World ought to be
despised with the Pomps and Delights thereof, which we then renounced, when we
happily turned to God, with the Love of whom all that is in the World, the Lust
of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life is not consistent.
That the use of Riches in this case is to be governed by just and moderate
measures. The Apostle commands all Women, how Rich soever, To Adorn themselves
in modest Apparel, with Shame facedness and Sobriety; not with Breidered Hair,
or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array, but that which becomes Women professing
Godliness, with Good Works. St. Peter also requires of them not the outward
Adorning of Gold, or sine Apparel; but the hidden ornament of the Heart, etc.
And if they thought themselves Bound to use the Estates God had given them, God
had showed them a more Execellent way, to relieve the Hungary, and seed the
poor Members of Christ; and that was the best art of improving Riches, and the
way to lay them up in safe and unsailing Treasures, where we may be sure to
reap the Fruit of them another day, and not to throw them away upon Arts of
bravery, and upon vain and Fantastic Dresses.

Sometimes they pleaded, That they might Beautify and Honor the Body without
any danger of violating their Chastity, or setting open the Casement for Luxury
to fly in upon them.

Tertullian answers, Let them who had a mind to it glory the flesh; but for us,
we have no designs of glory there, partly as being highly unsuteable to us, who
by the Law of God are under a profession of Humility; partly because all glory
(to us especially) is vain and swelling, how much more that which arises from
the flesh, if we must glory it is much sitter for us to follow spiritual
things, and to please in the Excellencies of the Spirit, than in those of the
Flesh.

A Christians indeed may glory in the flesh, but it is when for the sake of
Christ it is torn in pieces, that the Spirit may be crowned, not that it may
prove a Snare to attract the Eyes and Sight of Young men's ungovernable passions
after it, but when it is tormented for the Profession of the Christian Ut. Supr.
page 103.
Name, when a woman is found stronger than a Man that torments her when she
suffers Fires, or Crosses, or wild-Beasts, that she may receive the Crown;
these says Cyprian, are the precious Jewels of the Flesh.

Tertullian says, Beauty being altogether unuseful Ter. Ibid. ca. 4.
to us, ought to be despised by them that want it, and to be neglected by them
that have it a good Woman that is content with her own native Beauty has not
that occasion to betray her into Lust and Folly, and if she had, it became her
not to promote, but hinder it.

Secondly, That these loose, dellicate Arts came too near the practice of Lewd,
Wanton Prostitutes, who made use of those ways and tricks for no other end, but
to enveigle men into their embraces.

And Cyprian tells them, That no Woman's Ubi Supr. page 105. Vide Ters. de cult.
faemin. Lib. 1. ca. 4.
Grab is made so Rich and Gaudy, than theirs whose modesty is most, vile and
cheap and this he tells us the Scripture shadows out by the Woman that was
arraved in Purple and Scarlet color, and decked with Gold and Precious Stones,
and Pearls; having a Golden Cup in her hand full of Abominations and Filthiness
of her Fornication.

But chaste and modest Virgins shun the Dresses of the Desiled, the Habit of
the Shameless, the Badges of Steves, the Ornaments of light and wanton Women.

Whereas all other Creatures (says Clements Alexandrinum) as Birds and Beasts
are content with their own natural Paedag. 3. cap. 2. page 220.
Beauty and colors, Woman only, as if she were inferior to the Beasts, thinks
herself so deformed that there is need to repair the Defect by external, bought
and borrowed Beauty; for while by infinite Arts of curious and costly Dresses
(some whereof be there perticularly mentions) they seek to ensnare them who
(Child like) are apt to admire every thing that is strange and gandy, they show
themselves to be Women that have put off Shame and Modesty, and whoever (says
he) calls them so shall do them no wrong, as carrying the Signs,
Representations of it in their very Faces.

Thirdly, The Ancient Christians mainly insisted upon this, Ap. lib. 1. c. 8.
p. 823.
That those Arts were Injurious to God, and a Disparagement to his Workmanship.
We are not, says Tertullian, to seek after neatness and sinery beyond what is
simple and sufficient, and what pleases God, against whom they offend who are
not satisfied with his Workmanship.

Cyprian prosecutes the same Argument with a great deal of zeal and sharpness,
and faith, Those additional arts De Decipl. and Hab. urig. p. 166.
of beauty are a bold and sacriligious attempt, and an high contempt of God;
that it is to reform what God has formed, and to alter and change his Work,
and (as much as they can) to disfigure that person which God has created after
his own Image and Likeness, and that such a one has cause to fear, that when
the Day of Resurrection comes he that made them should not know them, etc.

Theodoret reports of his own Mother, That in Hist. Relig. ^a. 9. in vit. Pet.
page. 343.
her younger Years having a Blemish in one of her Eyes, which had bassled the
Arts of Phystick; she was at length persuaded to make her Address to one Peter,
famous for the gift of Miracles, who lived near Antivoh, a very serve and
ascetick course of Life, and to render herself (as she thought) the more
considerable in his Eye, she put on all her bravery, her richest Robes, her
Pendants and Chains of Pearl, and whatsoever could render her sine and
splendid, no sooner was she conse unto him; but the serve and uncomplimental
man at first sight bluntly entertained her with this discourse; Tell me
Daughter, suppose an excellent Artist, having drawn a Picture according to all
the Laws and Rules of Art, should expose and hang it forth to view; and another
rude and unskilful bungler coming by, should find fault with this excellent
piece, and attempt to men But, and draw the Eye brows to a larger length, and
add more color to the Cheeks, would not the true Author be (and that justly)
Angry, that his Art was disparaged and undervallued, and needless additions
made to the piece by an unskilful Hand: And so it is here; Can we think that
the great Artificer of the World, the maker and former of our Nature is not
justly Angry, when you accuse his incomparable Wisdom and Perfection of
unskilfulness, and want of knowledge; for you would not add your Reds, Whites
and Blacks, did you not think your Bodies needed these additions; and while you
think so, you condemn your Creator for Weakness and Ignorance.

Corrupt not therefore the Image of God, nor attempt to add what he in infinite
Wisdom thought not sit to give; study not to invent this adulterate Beauty,
which even to haste persons often proves a cause of ruin by becoming a snare to
them who look upon it.

The Beauty of the Body, faith Clemens of Alexandria Padag. lib. 3. ca. 11. p.
248.
consists in a good Complexion, and an apt Semitary and proportion of its
Parts; but the greatest Beauty is that of the Soul, when it is adorned with the
holy Script and the excellent Graces of it (viz.) Justice, Prudence, Fortitude,
Temperance, and the love of Goodness and Modesty, which is the lbid. ca. 2. p.
216.
brightest and most lovely Ornament the Eye of man can behold. He willingly
compares those Women that curiously trick and trim up the Body, but are
negligent of the Soul within, to the Algyptian Temples, Look upon their outside
and they are most Splendid and Magnificent, encompassed with dellicate Groves,
built with large Enteries, and stately Portica's surrounded with fever sorts of
Pillars; the Walls both within and without set off with Stones of several
Countries, curiously Wrought and Carved; the Temples themselves garnished with
Gold, Silver, Amber, and all the glittering and precious Stones that India and
Ethiopia can afford; but enter within them and enquire for the Deity that is
there Worshipped, and you shall be gravely showed behind a Curtain a Cat, or a
Crocodile, or a Serpent of the Country, or some such ill-favored Beast, which
is the Residentiary or Tutelar Deity of that place. And just such, (says he)
'do those Women seem to me, who trim themselves with Gold, and are taken up
with Curling their Hair, Painting their Faces, and Blacking their Eyes,
Coloring their Locks, and other undue Arts of Softnes, and Luxury, beautifying
the Rail and Fence; but if a Man look within the Vail and ^overing of the
Temple what is under all thi^ Gayness and Finery, he shall be so far from
meeting with what is truly Beautiful, that it will Excite his Horror and
Aversation; for he shall not find the Image of God dwelling there, as might
reasonably be expected; but instead thereof some filthy and treacherous Beast,
that possesses the most inward Recesses of the Soul, a lustful Ape, or the
crafty Serpent that devours the understanding of a Man, and turns his Soul into
a Nest or Den full of most deadly Venom, and the Poison of his Error and Deceit.

The Account Gregory gives of his Sister Gorgonia, That she used no Gold to
make her fine, no yellow Hair ordered into Knots and Curles, nor any other
Tricks to make her Head a Scene and Pageantry, no loose and transparent
Garments; no Lusture of Stones and Jewels enlightening the Air round about and
reflecting splendour upon them that wear them; no devices, and arts of painting;
no affectation of Beauty that may be easily bought; no Counter working Gods
Creation, Dishonouring* Reproaching and Covering his Workmanship with False and
Deceitful colors, suffering a Spurious and Superstitious Beauty to steal away
that natural Image which ought to be kept entire to God, and the future state.
The Prim. Chri. part 2. page 65, 6^.
only Redness that pleased her, was that which was the Fruit of Blushing and
Modesty; no other Whiteness but what came through fastening and abstenence,
leaving Fucuses, and Painting, and Living Pictures, and Fading Beauty, to such
as belong to Plays and Theaters, and to such for whom to blush and be ashamed,
is a Shame and Disgrace, etc.

Consider of the foregoing Lines, all Women who now have the Profession of
Christianity; for here are set down and clearly demonstrated the Marks and
Fruits of Chaste and Modest Matrons, and Women professing godliness with Good
Works; what Adorning they loved and delighted to be attired withal, in which
God delighted in them. And also the Marks and Characters of lewd and wanton
Prostitutes, who frequented Plays, Shows and Theaters; their attire being most
Rich and Costly, who Modesty was Vile and Cheap; Is it not so at this day? Oh!
consider and lay these things to Heart; for he that took Vengeance for these
things in Ancient Days, is the same at this day, whose Determinate Purpose none
can change: It is not a Profession of the Christian Doctrine that will stand
you instead, while the Fruits of Heathenism and Atheism is brought forth by
you: If you say as the loose Women in Cyprian's days said, That you have great
Estates, and therefore ought to live like your selves, etc. He shows you how
you may bestow them, to reap the Fruit of them another day. But the true
Christians did then and do now charge all Women how Rich soever, to cloth
themselves in modest Apparel, not with Gold, nor Pearl, nor Broidred Hair, or
Costly Apparel, 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 3.

Obj. But it is said, That Pride lies in the Heart; which is true, for if it
were not in the Heart it would not be on the Back; for as no Branch can grow
without a Body and Root, so cannot Pride and Luxury spread over the Body, till
first it is rooted in the Heart; therefore by the Fruits which you bring forth
you are all known, both Male and Female, and accordingly must reap a Reward,
who from the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth will cause all Wicked men and
women, of both professed Christians and Heathens to be bundled together, and in
the great Day of Divine Vengeance shall cast them in utter Darkness, where is
weeping forever.

Tertullian his Counsel to the Women of his time, was, To cloth themselves
with the Silk of Honesty, the De cult. foemin. lib. 2. cap. 13. ad find.
fine Vestures of Piety, the Purple of Modesty; and being thus beautified and
adorned, says he, God himself will be your Lover.

Among the many Temptations that besiege the L^fe of man and woman, there is
scarce any, into which he is more eaisily betrayed, than into a vicious
curiosity about Meats and Drinks, the Excess of an unruly Appetite.

Therefore the An^ient Christians exhorted and warned the Saints and Believers
in their day, to avoid dellicate Dishes, and the Banquets of the Profane, the
Loose and Waton Assemblies of the Unchaste.

St. Bazill says, That man's Food and Diet Reg. fus. Disput. interog. 19. ^om.
2 page 560.
ought for the main to be regulated by the general end of it, which is not
wanonly to please the Palate, but to maintain Health and to repair the
weakness and decay of Nature.

Justin Martyr tells his Friends, That they ought to use such Food, not as may
gratify their Ease and Epist. ad Zen. and Seren page 50^.
Delliiacy, but such as make their Lives useful and serviceable. Wine (says
he) is neither to be drunk daily to Excess, nor to be used as commonly as
Water; both indeed are God's Creatures: Ibid. p. 512.
But Water necessary, Wine given only to help and ^elieve the Body, which
Immoderately taken, Chains up the Tongue, sparkles Fire out of the Eyes, and
makes the Legs tremble, and the Understanding being gone, readily takes of its
Cup of deadly Poison, and contrary to Gods Ordination, it turns the peaceable
Instrument of Husbandry into Swords and Spears.

Clemens Alexandrinus Discourses at large, representing the great Evils and
Inconveniences of Gluttony and Excess, That it Wastes the Estate, Ruins the
Body by imparing its Vt sup^. cap. 1, 2. per. tot.
Health, Debauching the Stomach, Deflouring its Taste, begetting an ill
Habitude and Temper, and sow it with the Seeds of all Diseases, it dulls the
Mind, and r^nders it unapt and slugguish, and prepares it for the entertainment
of Vice and Wickedness.

St. Jorom Counsels Laeta about the Education of Ad Laet. tom. 1. page 57.
her Daughter, That her Diet should be thin and mean, and that she should never
eat more than she might arise with some appetite.

When they were at any time invited to public Solemnities, as Marriages or the
like, the Prudence of the Con. Laod can. 53.
Church thought fit to lay restraints upon them, not only to forbid them of
light and ludicrous actions, as Leaping or Dancing, but that they should dine
and sup gravely and modestly, as becomes Christians.

When Julian the Emperor to raise Money for Basil. Epist. 208. tom. 3. page
225. Conser. Socrat. lib. ^. cap. 13. page 185 Prim. Ch^. part 2. page 74.
his Wars, began to squeeze and oppress the Christians, he sent among others to
St. Bazill, who had formerly been his Fellow Student at Athens, for One
Thousand Pounds: The Answer he sends him was, That it could not be expected
there, where he had not so much Provision before hand as would serve for one
day. That there was no Arts of Cookery at his House, no Knives stained with the
Blood of slaughtered Provision; his greatest dainties were a few Pot Herbs, and
a piece of Bread, and a little sour vapped Wine.

Chrysostom commends Olympias, not more for the modesty of her Garb than the
meanness and sobriety of her Epist. 2. ad Olymp. tom. 4. page 616.
Diet, to which she had so used her self, that she had got the perfect mastery
over all undue appetites and inclinations, and had not only bridled the Horse,
but tamed and reduced him to an entire subjection, and taught her Stomach to
receive only such Meat and Drink, as was enough to keep her alive and in
Health. Nay, our Feasts (as he says, in Minutius Faelix) are not only Chaste
but Sober, we indulge not our selves with Banquets, nor make our Feasts with
Wine, but temperour Cheerfulness with Gravity and Seriousness, and indeed their
often Watchings and Fasting, and their constant Observance of the strictest
parts of Devotion, sufficiently showed how little they pomper'd or indulged the
flesh, the signs whereof they every where carried in their very Faces, and this
was so notorious, that Pallidi trepidi apud eundem, page 10.
their very Enemies reproached them with their trembling joints, and their pale
ghastly looks. And Lucian giving an account of the Christian Assemblies into
which he tells us Critias was Philopat. tom. 2. P. 1007.
brought to be made Proselite, describe them to a company of Persons with their
Heads hanging down and Pale Faces.

How often have you, who would be called Christians Sorcastically or Tauntingly
described the true Christian-Quakers after this manner, To be a company of
Persons with their Heads hanging down, and ghastly Looks, and not fit for your
company, whose Eyes stand out with Fatness, and your Bodies pust up like
oversed Horses, your chiefest God being your Bellies, and your greatest Glory
in that which ought to be your greatest Shame, and your Minds and Hearts are
mostly taken up with Earthly things, fairing deliciously every Day, like the
Glutton spoken of, Luke 16. 19, 20. and unless God in infinite Mercy give you
Repentance, your end will be Destruction: Oh! w^ile you have time let your
Laughter be turned into Mourning, your Feasting into Fasting, and your Joy into
Heaviness; for the great and terrible Day of God Almighty comes as a Thief in
the Night, and woe to you who are found Eating and Drinking with the drunken,
and Beating, Mocking and Dcriding your fellow Creatures, who are made to Sigh
and Mourn for all the Abominations which are done and committed in the Land,
which threaten Des^lation and Destruction unto it, so that at the terrible
stroke of divine Vengeance, your Faces (which now are full and fat) shall
gather Paleness, and Trembling shall take hold of you, and fear on every side,
which shall bow your now high and losty Looks; then shall the Cup of Trembling
be taken out of their Hands, whom you have Oppressed, Scoffed and Derided, and
shall be given to you, with which (except ye Repent) ye shall be drunk, and
stumble and fall, and never rise again.

We are, says Octavius, Chaste in our Min. Foel. p. 26.
Speech, and chaster in our Bodies; and very many of us (though we do not boast
on it) do inviolably preserve a perpetual Virginity.

But now you who would bear the name of Christians (though you take Wives) yet
many of you are not content with them, but run into Whoredom and Uncleanness,
by which you corrupt and destroy your Bodies, and bring your Souls into the
horrible Pit of endless Torment, where all Whoremongers and Adulterers (whether
called Christians or Heathens) shall have their part and lot.

The Primitive Christians were zealously careful to shun all appearances and
occasions of Lightness and Immodesty, and whatever might tend to inveigle the
Sense, and to debauch their Minds and Manners; nay, whatever might give
suspicion of Wantonness and Inconveniency. They declined, as much as might be,
going to all public Meetings, such as Feasts, Plays, Shows, etc.

There Cyprian severely chides with some Virgins, De Discip. and hab. Vir. p.
167.
For being present at Weddings, where they laughed freely, and could not but
hear loose Discourses, see uncomely Carriages, and seed upon Luxurious Dishes,
all which must needs not only kindle, but add Fuel to the Fire, and fill their
minds with undecent thoughts and desires. And as they were careful not to give
offense to others, so they were not willing themselves to come within the
Shadow: they stood at a distance from whatever was offensive either to their
Eyes or Ears; their Ears they stopped against all loose idle Songs, and all
filthy abscene Discourse; their Eyes they shut against all uncomely Admonit. ad
Grae. pa. 40. Prim. Christ. tom. 2. p. 98.
objects, all wanton and Lascivious Pictures, as Clemens Alexandrinus expressly
tells us, not doing any thing that seemed but to carry an ill Color with it.

When ever any was found guilty of the least Uncleanness, it was looked upon
and bewailed as a very heinous Sin, and a great dishonor to the Christian Name.

What is it that I hear, says Cyprian? How detestable should it be to you, what
with the greatest grief and affliction of my mind I have understood, that there
are some amongst you who have defiled your Bodies, the Temples of God (even
after they were sanctified) with filthy and infamous embraces, promiscuously
using the Beds and Lodgings of the Women, when although they should be free
from actual Adultry, yet even in this 'twould be a fault o mighty aggravation,
that by their scandalous Examples others might be seduced into ruin.

Tertullian uses this Plea in the close of his Apollogy to the Heathen, in the
behalf of the great Chastity amongst the Christians at that day. Condemn us,
Crucify and Torment us, your Cruelty and Injustice is the evidence of our
Innocence, and therefore God suffers this to come upon us; For while you
choose rather to condemn a Woman that is a Christian to the Stews, then to the
Lions, you plainly confess that the violation of Chastity is accounted by us a
heavier Penalty, then any Punishment or kind of Death you can inflict upon us.

Consider this ye Lustful wanton Ones, who are alluring one another through
your unsatiable Lusts, into acts of Uncleanness: Who is your Example for these
things, the Primitive Christians or the unclean Heathen?

Of the Novalty that was charged upon the Primitive Christian Religion, and the
Sufferings they underwent for the Vindication of it.
TErtullian told the Enemies of the Christians in the Primitive Times, That by
every Act of cruelty against them they did but tempt others to come over to
their Party, and the Apol. cap. ult. page 40.
oftener they were mowed down, the faster they sprung up again, the Blood of
the Christians making the Churches soil more fat and fertile.

Caecilius the Heathen in Minutius Faelix Accuses the Arnob. lib. 1. page 7.
Minu Fa. p. 7.
Christians for a desperate undone and unlawful faction.

When Paul preached Athens we find the first thing charged upon him, That he
was a setter forth of strange Gods, because he preached to them Jesus and the
Resurrection, Acts 17. 18. Arnobius said, You are went to change our Religion
as Noval, started up not many days ago, and that you ought Lib. 2. page 40.
not to desert your ancient way, nor the Religion of your Country.

And Eusebius says, The Heathen were wont to reason Praepar. Evang. lib. 1. c.
2. p. 5.
thus, What strange Profession of Religion is this? What new way of Life, etc?

Julian the Emperor writing to the People of Alexandria, Epist. 51. oper. Jul.
part 2. page 208.
concerning the Galilaeans (for so he was wont in seorn to call the Christians)
That he wondered that any of them durst dwell among them, or that they would
suffer those Despisers of the Religion of their Country, to have any place
among them.

Lactantius speaking of the Heathens, They go on, says he, most pernitiously to
maintain and defend the Religion derived down to them from their Ancestors; not
so much considering what they are, as concluding them to be right and good,
because the Ancients conveyed them to them, etc. Upon these the Gentiles bore
so hard upon Christianity, beholding it as a Mushroom Sect, sprung up of a
sudden, and an incroaching Inmate undermining the established Religion of the
World.

Oh! ye pretended Christians, how often have you charged the true Christians in
scorn by you nicknamed Quakers, who in Doctrine and Discipline do follow the
steps of the Ancient and true Christians, with a Noval start-up Religion,
because the hope of our Glory, which is Christ manifested in us, has been a
Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, even from your Fathers, Grandfathers,
and Great-grandfathers, for many Ages; so that the Religion which you uphold,
and have, and do seek to establish, has been and is that only which has been
derived from your Ancestors, by Tradition ( Heathen-like) not so much
considering whether they are right or good, as looking upon it to be Ancient,
and lived in and practiced by your Forefathers, who lived in the Dark Night of
Apostasy and Degeneration from the Life, Marrow and Quitesence of true
Christianity.

Clemens Alexandrinus said, The Heathen told them that Admo. ad Gent. p. 57.
they might not subvert the customs received from their Ancestors: But if so,
why then, says he, are we are not content without any other Food than our
Mothers Milk, to which we were accustomed when we first came into the World?
Why do we increase or impare our Estates, and not rather keep them at the same
pitch, just as we received them from our Ancestors.

Lactantius says to the Heathen, What will thou do? will thou follow Reason or
thy Ancestors? Lact. loco supralaudato.

St. Ambros said, That old Age has true cause Amb. Epist. 2. contr. symach.
inter Epist. s^mach. p. 562.
to blush, that is a shamed to reform; and that it is not the multitude of
Years, but the goodness of manners that makes gray Hairs worthy of Praise and
Honor: No Age is too late to learn, nor is it a shame to grow better

Ambros argues thus with the Enemies of the Christians, Our way of Religion you
say is new, and yours ancient; does this either hurt our Cause or help yours?
If ours be new, 'twill in time become old; is yours old? there was a time when
'twas new, the goodness and authority of Religion is not to be valued by the
length of time, but by the Excellency of its Worship, etc.

Things charged upon the Ancient Christians, respecting their outward Condition.
THe Primitive Christians were charged by their Emenies to be a very mean and
inconsiderable sort of men, and that they were an Useless and Unserviceable
People; nay, Pernicious and Mischievous to the World; and were looked upon as
the lowest and meanest rank of men. Persons neither considerable Adv. gent.
lib. 3. page 49.
for their parts and learning, nor for their Estates and Quality: As Arnobius
tells them, You scorn and spit us out, as Rude and Simple, and think that the
Treasury of all Divine and Excellent Knowledge is only open to your selves.

Thus Celsus objected, that among the Christians no Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 3.
page 137.
wise men were admitted to the Mysteries of their Religion; saying, that such
as are void of reason, slaves, silly Women, and little Children are fit D
sciples for the God they Worship. And he goes on and says, Ibid. p. 141.
That Weavers, Tailors, Fullers, and the most Rustic and Illiterate Fellows at
Home, when before their Elders and Betters, are as mute as Fishes, and when
they can Page 144.
get a few Children and silly Women together, then who so Wise and Learned, and
so full of talk and so able to instruct as they!

See (says the Heathen, in Minutius Faelix, to the Page 9.
Christians) the most and best of all your Par^y are a Poor Beggarly, Hunger
starved Generation, that have Arnob. adv. Gent. lib. 2. prop. fin Lactant lib.
5. De Instit. cap. 22.
neither Riches nor Reputation to bear them out. But this was not all, the
Christians were charged to be a very useless and unserv ceable People, that
contributed nothing to the happiness of the Commonwealth; nay, as Destructive
and Pernicious to Humane Society, and the procuring Causes of all those
Mischiess that befell the World.

Hear what Tertullian says in the Case, Certainly if any have cause (says he)
truly to complain of our being unprofitable, Ap. cap. 42. p. 33. Ibid. cap. 43.
they are Bawds, ^andors, Pimps, Hectors and Russians, Sellers of Poison,
South-sayers, Wizards and Astrologers, etc. and to be unserviceable to these is
the greatest serviceableness.

Oh! how parallel are the sayings of the ancient Heathen Gentiles, with yours
now who are called Christians! how often have you slighted and reproached us as
a mean contemptible and poor People, Rude in Speech and Behavior, Rustic and
Illiterate Fellows, a poor ^eggarly Generation, and very useless and
unserviceable to the Government, and destructive to humane Society; without
considering that in all Generations, God chose the weak and foolish things of
the World to confound the Wise, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Even so it
is at this day. And we are useless and unserviceable to none, but to such, as
old Tertullian reckoned up, as is instanced above, and to be useless and
unserviceable is the account of such in the greatest serviceableness.

How the Ancient Christians helped the Emperors in their Wars.
WHen Celsus pressed the Christians to undergo public Offices, and to help the
Emperor in his Wars. Origin answers that they did, though by divine, Adv. Cells.
lib. 8. page 426, 427.
not humane help, Above all men (says he) we fight for the Emperor, while we
train up our selves in Exercises of Piety, and that they really sought to
reclaim men from Vice and Sin, to a good and virtuous Life; but said, that
wicked men were the Pests and Plagues of humane Society, that taint and infect
others by their bad Examples and Persuasions, and intail Vengeance upon the
places of their Residence. Whilst good Men engage the Favor and Blessing of
Heaven, who both by their Counsels and Examples bring over others Adv. Cells.
lib. 1. pa. 9.
to Sobriety and Virtue, whereby they establish and settle the Foundation of
Government, and the happiness of civil Life, etc.

Origin says, Does Celsus call upon us to bear Offices for the good of our
Country? Let him know that the Country is much more beholding to Christians
then to the rest of Men, while they teach them Piety toward God, the tutelar
Guardian of the Country.

Clement to the Corinthians said, Who did ever Clem. Ep. ad. Corinth. page 2, 4.
dwell amongst you, that did not wonder at your sober and moderate Piety in
Christ, being adorned with a most virtuous and venerable Conversation, and
having the Laws and Commands of God written upon the Tables of your Hearts?
They placed Religion not in talking finely, but living well.

Amongst us (says Athenagorus) the meanest and most Mechannick Persons and old
Women, although not able to ^^g. pro. Christ. p. 12
discourse and dispute for the usefulness of their Profession, do yet
demonstrate it in their Lives and Actions, They do not indeed critically weigh
their words, and recite eloquent Orations, but they manifest honest and
virtuous Actions; while being buffetted they strike not again, nor Sue them at
Law who spoil and plunder them.

Now to Gods pure and living Witness in all Consciences, who shall read or
peruse the Lines aforegoing, I leave them to be tried and judged, and also to
manifest who are the true Christians at this Day, and of right ought to claim
that honorable Name and Title, whether those who Traditionally have received
it from their Ancestors, while they are Strangers and Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, which crucifies to the World its ways and works of Darkness and
Iniquity? or them who in Life, Doctrine and Practice live according to the
Discipline of the Gospel; who though they are in the World, yet are not of the
World; and though walking upon the Earth, yet their Conversation is in Heaven,
having the Laws and Commandments of God written upon the Tables of their
Hearts; these are they who are Christians indeed, whose praise is not of men,
but of God.

Gatton-place in Surrey, the 28th of the 9th Month, 1678. AMBROS RIGGE.

THE END.

