THE MERCHANTS Map of Commerce: WHEREIN THE Universal MANNER and MATTER
RELATING TO Trade and Merchandise, Are fully TREATED of; THE STANDARD and
Current COINS of most PRINCES and REPVBLICKS observed. The Real and Imaginary
COINS of ACCOUNTS and EXCHANGES expressed. The Natural PRODUCTS and Artificial
COMMODITIES and MANUFACTURES for Transportation declared. The WEIGHTS and
MEASURES of all Eminent CITIES and TOWNS of Traffic in the UNIVERSE, collected
one into another; And all reduced to the MERIDIAN of COMMERCE practiced in the
Famous CITY of LONDON.

By LEWIS ROBERTS, Merchant.

Useful for all PERSONS who shall be employed in Public Affairs of PRINCES in
Foreign Parts, for GENTLEMEN and others Traveling abroad, and for all
MERCHANTS and their FACTORS, who Negotiate in any part of the WORLD.

The FOURTH EDITION, carefully Corrected, and Enlarged.

To which is ANNEXED, ADVICE concerning BILLS of EXCHANGE; Wherein all MATTER
relating to BILLS of EXCHANGE, both Foreign and Domestic, is fully Treated of.
Together with that most PERFECT TREATISE of TRADE, ENTITLED, ENGLAND 's Benefit
and Advantage by Foreign TRADE demonstrated: By THO. MVN, of London, Merchant.

LONDON: Printed for THOMAS HORN at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange,
in Cornhill. 1700.

THE AUTHORS EPISTLE Dedicated to the MERCHANTS of ENGLAND in general, Giving a
prospect of the ensuing Work.
Gentlemen,
I Was not ignorant when first I undertook this task, and busied my self to
compass this Work, how difficult it would prove to be in it self; what slender
furtherances I had to accomplish the same; and how weak my own abilities were
to give it perfection: Yet notwithstanding all these obstacles, when I had duly
considered the general want thereof, and the common benefit and advantage that
would redound thereby, especially to Merchants; I resolved to take the same in
hand, and cheerfully and willingly laid both my hand to the Work, and my
shoulder to the burden, collecting and gathering with laborious industry, and
industrious labor, all those principal points and heads, as might either
conduce to the accomplishment of the Building, or any way further my intended
Fabric: So that by my continual toil, and search after fit and apt materials,
I hoped that at length a good issue would crown my endeavors, and finish this
my intended undertaken task.

But after long and tedious inquisition, I found that the farther I sailed in
this Ocean, the vaster were my desires, and the fewer were my furtherances to
my wished Port; so that perceiving the Work thus to increase upon me, beyond my
expectation and first purpose, I was constrained (with the wind-scanted
Seaman) to cast about again, and limit my self to a narrow scantling; for that
to do it at large, and as the matter punctually required, was far beyond the
reach of my knowledge; yet because I could not do as I would, I resolved to do
as I could, and thereupon begun again to cast these my first scattered
Collections into a lesser mould, and reduce my first thoughts and observations
into such a second limit and order, as might best befit my experience, and the
compass to which now I had confined it; conceiving that as my intentions
(joined to my labor and pains herein) tended only to the good of others, and
principally of Merchants and their Factors, that reside or negotiate in Foreign
Parts, so they will in requital be induced to have a good Opinion thereof, as a
reward to me, for the benefit that shall redound to them by the same, excusing
those errors which peradventure the better experienced may by trial find in the
perusal of this Work, and the defects which my ignorance has enforced me to
let pass, which by reason of the diversity and rarity of the matter the same is
most subject unto, and the rather because I have been constrained oftentimes in
this Desert to travel without a certain guide, and not seldom to Navigate by
another Compass, having not in any Language or Country met with any Author,
that could either totally conduct me, or truly rectify my steps when I went
astray. Yet I must confess I met with some that shot at the mark I aimed at;
but it was at random, and came not home to my purposed blank. Others I found
who took up stuff upon trust; but at length I was furthered by some Friends,
whose Star led me when I was benighted, and whose Candle lighted me, when
otherwise I should have stumbled; by which means, and my own Twelve Years
Collections, during my abode and employment in many parts of the World, I have
at last by due sounding of the Channel, safely sailed over the Ocean
aforementioned, and brought my Bark to an Anchor in her desired Harbor; and I
hope so well observed the Depths, Shoals, Rocks and Sands thereof, that he that
Navigates after me, and by this my Map, shall be secured from all dangers, and
thereby bring his accounts to that wished Port, that may prove both to his own
Profit and Commodity.

Now, Gentlemen, having thus then understood with what Industry and Care the
materials of this Edifice have been collected, what pains have been used to
bring it to this conclusion and perfection, and having truly weighed the
benefit arising thereby; all these I suppose are effectual inducements to
challenge a fair acceptance from you. Yet notwithstanding all these real
arguments I cannot deny, but the Work it self may not only suffer in the
opinion of the censorious, but be also subject to the verdict of the judicious.
But I am certain the foundation of it is laid upon the Knowledge of Geography,
and the use of Maps and Sea-Cards in General: So delightful, profitable and
necessary to the Merchant, the study of which must not be neglected by any
Person who would be esteemed an expert Trader.

In raising our Structure; I describe, First the Empires, Kingdoms and
Republics of this habitable World; Next the particular Provinces of each; and
then the most celebrated Towns of Traffic therein, together with their natural
Products, Artificial Commodities and Manufactures.

Then I have given an Account of the several Coins there in use and current,
with the Value and Denomination of them, and the Species wherein Merchants do
there frame and regulate their Accounts by; also the Weights and Measures of
those places, together with their Exchanges, and how those are found to be
calculated amongst the Italians who are accounted the most expert Bankers and
Exchangers in the World.

Lastly, I have added a Table of the Longitude and Latitude of all these
eminent Places of Traffic, not only thereby to satisfy the curious, but the
better to guide the inquirer to any such City or Town sought for.

And, in all this Work my chief ambition has been to please all Merchants in
general, and (if I may not be thought to judge too favorably of my own
endeavors) I hope shall not fail therein. But I am almost confident, were my
Labors duly weighed, my Work might challenge acceptance. However I offer it to
the public for their Benefit, and from the great Respect and Duty I owe to my
native Country England.

L. ROBERTS.

THE MERCHANTS MAP OF COMMERCE.
CHAP. I. The Description of Countries conducible to the Description of Cities
and Towns of Traffic.
The Description of Countries, conduces to the Description of Cities and Towns
of Traffic.
BEFORE I descend to the particular parts of this Treatise, and before I
describe the Situations of these Towns and Cities of Traffic, which here I
intend to handle, I must of necessity for Method-sake, first by a cursory
draught describe the Countries, Kingdoms, and Provinces, wherein the same are
found to be situated and placed, and to do the same orderly, and as the Subject
requires, it is fit I should survey the means whereby the same is or may be
performed, which according to the opinion of the Learned, is noted only to be
done by the knowledge of Geography; which in it self is esteemed to be a
knowledge so needful and requisite for a Merchant, Factor, or any other active
person whose occasions may draw him to see or abide in foreign parts, that it
may not be neglected nor omitted. Neither is it held only necessary to such as
manage private affairs by Merchandising, as Merchants or Factors, who are led
thereto by the Motive profit, but also such persons as are more eminent, and
such as are of greater quality, whose motives are the public affairs of
Princes, as Ambassadors; or pleasure and delight, by Traveling, as Gentltmen,
whose motive may be properly termed curiosity of mind and search of novelty;
whicd last by observing the Fashions and Manners of diverse Nations, and the
Government and Policies of those Kingdoms, do dot only very much benefit
themselves, but better their udnerstandings thereby, making their knowledge
more capable of either public or private employment, when they return to their
native houses.

The like I conceive the ingenious Merchant or Factor may (if he please) do,
for being in his younger years employed abroad in merchandising, he may by well
husbanding his merchantile employment and time, join a future benefit of Mind,
to a present profit of Estate; and by a provident judgment, and a judicious
Providence, so manage his idle hours, and vacant time, that he fit his
capacity, not only wisely to undertake and discreetly to undergo, but also
skilfully to perform the greatest employments that are incident to the service
of a State or Kingdom; neither is it a rare or extraordinary thing to find
those that have had their education thus, to have proved not only good
Comman-wealths-men, but also excellent Statesmen: our own Country has
afforded some examples in all ages, but in other Countries many more are daily
found; for it must be acknowledged, that from this School those ripe and mature
judgments have sprung up, that in many Countries abroad, have given sufficient
testimony to the World of their excellent abilities this way: and that the Art
of Merchandising, together with the frequenting of foreign Countries, at the
first to that end, has afterward rather furthered, than any way backwarded
their abilities to undertake, and judiciously to perform the same.

Merchandising the first School of the present Government of many
Commonwealths,
The ancient policies and present flourishing continuance of the State of
Venice, the politic and rich Estates of the Netherlands, the opulent and
eminent quality of the Duke of Tuscany; the wealthy well-governed Hans-Towns in
Germany, (and many more which I could nominate,) make good this Assertion; for
in all these, Merchandising is found to be the School from whence they gather
their first Principles, and indeed the chief Foundation upon which their
Fabric of political Government is raised: the Scale by which their Counsels
are framed, and the Pillars by which the same is seen to be supported and
maintained.

How excellent is it then for a Merchant (that has another proper and peculiar
end of his travels,) so to employ his time and spend his hours, as that he may
at pleasure, without cost or charges, reap that benefit to himself which others
purposely come to learn and painfully labor for, with great expense of time
and money: and yet for all this, are peradventure destitute of those helps and
furtherances, which Merchants and Factors by reason of their abode or vocation
do continually enjoy, and who return as ignorantly home (perchance) as they
went out; or happily furnished with some such cursory speculations, as reach
not into the depth of such policies of Government, as the real intent of their
travel does truly require; whereas the Merchant that comes thither, not
purposely to that end, but to benefit himself as a Merchant, may gather and lay
up those his Observations obtained as Pastimes, and collected as Recreations,
which will further and furnish him afterward, either by discourse for pleasure,
or by necessity for profit and commodity, when he shall please to publish his
secret treasure and put the same in practice.

Geography delightful, profitable, and necessary to the Merchant.
Geography (by what has been said,) being then granted to be both a profit and
a pleasure to all, and specially to the Merchant, it must necessarily be
granted to be useful also: for though we living in this Island acknowledge none
for Merchants but such as adventure their Estates at Sea, and are by this means
accounted for real Merchants; yet those that are versed in this Profession, and
seen in this Art, know also that there be Merchants likewise that have their
residence in Continents, where neither Seas are known, nor yet Navigable Rivers
sound, yet for all this, supply with Land-Carriages of Horses Mules and Camels,
by industry and labor, what Nature and our Habitation does freely afford unto
us, by the commodity of the encompassed Seas in Shipping; and these are
observed and found to travel by Land in Companies and Caravans with their
Merchandise from one Country to another, (as we do by Sea in Ships and Fleets
(paying their Duties, Customs, and Tolls upon the entry and confines of every
several Princes Dominions.

The commodity of this knowledge to Merchants.
How then shall this Land-travelling Merchant know whose Kingdom he is in? what
Prince commands, or who is Lord of that ground he treads upon, but by a
speculation herein? Whereby shall he know what way he has rid and traveled,
where neither miles nor Leagues are accounted, or in use, but by this? How
shall he know which way his course lies, where neither paths nor highways are
found to direct him, nor guide to inform him; or how far he has yet to go in
that Princes Dominion, but by this? How shall he know what Rivers run in his
way, what Straits or Mountains he has to pass over, but by this? Nay, hereby
he is instructed whether those streams be great or small; and whether passable
by Boat, Bridge or Foord; and by this also what Plains, Woods and Hills, with
their extent, fertility, and confinement, the better to provide for his
accommodation, and the necessaries of his Journey; as also what Cities and
Towns of Traffic stand in his Road; the limits and bounds of Kingdoms, the
disposition of the Inhabitants, the alteration of the Climates, the Laws of
those several Regions, the Commodities that those Countries do afford for
Merchandising; the plenty and scarcity thereof; and lastly, how they are
supplied with foreign Wares and Merchandises, either by Lands, Seas, or
navigable Rivers; and all these (besides many other needful lessons) may be
hence learned and observed, which laid up in memory both in the course of his
life and traffic, may in aftertimes much profit and advantage him. The
benefit reaped thereby being thus briefly expressed, the thing it self
challenges in the next place to be handled; which according to my skill and
insight, I shall succinctly touch so far as is needful to my present purpose.

Geography demonstrated.
Geography in brief then, is an Art that does demonstrate by rules in a flat,
level or Plano, the whole Sea and Earth, and the division thereof, setting down
by a certain method, the limits and extents of Countries, Provinces and
Dominions of Princes; the situation of Cities, Towns, Hills, Rivers, Woods,
etc. The bounds of Seas, Capes, Islands, etc. All which is performed and
expressed by apt lines, numbers and parts of the Heavens; and lastly, it gives
rules to know the distances of the said places, either in leagues or miles from
one Country, City or place to another; all which being also necessary to be
known by the Merehant, I will in few words declare the same

Maps and Cards.
First then to make the same more evident, the ground of this Art is ordinarily
demonstrated and best expressed in Maps and Cards, which do comprize both the
Earth and Waters, of which making one entire body, the Cosmographers do environ
with five Circles; the first is the Equinoctial, then the two Tropicks, and
lastly the two Polar Circles; thereby dividing the whole, which now we call the
World, into five Zones, two whereof are found to be cold, two temperate, and
one extreme hot; all which in these our days are found to be habitable,
contrary to the opinion of some ancient Cosmographers: of which Circles and
their particular parts, divisions, demonstrations and descriptions, it will not
be unproper I should briefly handle, as an entrance into this work, and for the
better understanding of what is to follow hereafter.

The use of Maps and Cards in general.
Every Map or Card then for the most part is commonly traced with two sorts of
lines, or circles, that is, Meridians and Parallels; Meridian.
the Meridians are either Right or Circular lines, passing through both the
Poles of the World, and are imagined to be drawn right up and down from the
head to the foot of the Map, and called Meridians, because that when the Sun
comes to touch any of those lines, it is midday to those that dwell under the
same.

Parallel.
And Parallels are either right or circular lines, imagined to be equally
distant one from another, which do cross the aforesaid Meridians with right
Angles; and in the very midst of these Universal Maps and Cards, are most
commonly drawn, from head to foot a right line, which signifies not only the
first Meridian, but also the Axletree of the World; Poles Artick and Antartick.
the upper end of which line is called the Pole-Artick, or the North Pole, and
the nether end is called the Pole-Antartick, or the South-Pole, Equinoctial
and this line is crossed in the very midst betwixt the two Poles, with another
great circle, or rather right line called the Equinoctial; because, that when
the Sun comes to touch this line or circle, the day and night is equal
throughout the whole World, the one half of which line toward the right hand,
shows the East part, and the other half toward the left hand, shows the
West part of the World; so as those two lines, the first Meridian and the
Equinoctial, do point out the four Quarters of the World; East, West, North,
and South, from whence the four principal winds do blow, between which winds
are set down in all general Maps, and generally in all Sea-Cards, the other
division of the winds, which as not much pertinent to my present purpose, I
willingly omit.

Further, It is to be noted that both the Equinoctial and the Meridian Circles
or Lines are divided each of them into 360 degrees; so as every quarter of them
contains 90 degrees: and in the Equinoctial are set down the degrees of
Longitude, which is the length of the World, round about from West to East, and
from East by West home again. The first degree whereof begins where the
first aforesaid Meridian crosses the Equinoctial, in the very midst of all
Universal Maps in general, and so proceeds Eastward unto the number of 180
degrees; which is as far as you can go Eastward: for from thence by reason of
the roundness of the Earth, you must needs turn back again Westward, until you
come to the 360 degrees, which is the last degree of Longitude, and ends
where the first degree begins.

Moreover, In the said first Meridian are set down the degrees of Latitude,
that is, breadth of the World, both in Nor hern and Southern; for from the
Equinoctial to the North Pole, are contained in the aforesaid Meridian 90
degrees, and that is called the North Latitude; and from the Equinoctial to the
South-Pole are contained in the said Meridian, other 90 degrees, which is
called the South Latitude; and in most Maps the Equinoctial Line is divided and
crossed with 18 Meridians, on each side of the first Meridian, dividing the
Equinoctial into 36 several distances; every distance containing 10 degrees,
and every degree contains 60 Italian miles of length.

Circles Artick and Antartick.
Again, betwixt the Equinoctial and each of the Poles are drawn certain Circles
or Lines, which as I said before, are called Parallels, of which most commonly
it is found that four are pointed with red Ink, signifying the four lesser
Circles; the highest toward the North Pole, is called the Circle-Artick, which
is 23 degrees distant from the Pole; and the lowest toward the South Pole is
called the Circle-Antartick, which is also distant 23 degrees from the Pole; 2
Tropicks. 1 Cancer, 2 Capricorn
and as touching the other two red Circles, the one lying betwixt the
Circle-Artick and the Equinoctial, it is called the Tropic of Cancer; and the
other lying betwixt the Equinoctial and the Circle Antartick, that is called
the Tropic of Capricorn, and each of these two Tropicks is distant from the
Equinoctial 23 degrees, 2. 8. which is the greatest declination of the Sun; for
betwixt these two Tropicks the Sun continually makes his course, and
returns, mounting never higher than the Tropic of Cancer, nor descending
never lower than the Tropic of Capricorn: for which cause some do set down in
their Maps betwixt the said two Tropicks an overthwart line, signifying the
Ecliptic line, under which the Sun continually walks.

Five Zones and where placed.
Furthermore, By help of the said four Circles, the Earth, (as I said before) is
divided into five Zones, one hot, two temperate, and two cold: The hot is
contained betwixt the two Tropicks, in the midst of which the Equinoctial line
is placed; of the two temperate Zones, the one lies betwixt the Tropic of
Cancer, and the Circle Artick, and the other betwixt the Tropic of Capricorn
and the Circle Antartick; and of the cold Zones; the one lies betwixt the
North Pole and the Circle Artick, and the other betwixt the South Pole and the
Circle Antartick.

Moreover, besides the four special Parallels, there be also diverse other
Parellels drawn on each of the Equinoctial, both Northward, and Southward,
which crossing in certain points, the first Meridian marked with degrees, do
show the true Latitude of every place, and under what Clime or Parallel it is:
and also how many hours the longest day of any place under every Parallel is,
beginning to account the same, either from the Equinoctial upward, toward the
North Pole, along the first Meridian, marked with degrees of Northern Latitude,
or else from the first Equinoctial downwards toward the South Pole, marked
with degrees of Southern Latitude.

The division of the World into four parts.
Also this World in all common Maps and Cards is divided into four parts,
Europe, Africa, Asia and America, the bounds whereof will not be amiss here to
be observed, and how many miles each particular division contains, as well in
Longitude as in Latitude, according to the opinion of Mercator, whom I
willingly follow for my director in this point.

Europe.
Europe then is bounded on the North with the North Ocean Sea, and on the South
with the Mediterranean Sea; on the East with the Flood Tanais, and on the West
with the West Oceane and Europe in measuring with a right line from the
farthest part of Ireland on the West unto the Flood Tanais, on the East, both
places having 52 degrees of Latitude, Long. 2166 miles.
has in Longitude 2166 miles, and in measuring with a right line, from the
farthest part of Morea on the South, whose Latitude is 35 degrees unto the
North Sea side, having 72 degrees of Latitude, Lat. 2220 miles.
has in Longitude 2220 miles, or thereabouts.

Africa.
Africa is bounded on the North with the Straight Sea Gibralter, and with the
Mediterranean Sea; and on the South with a Sea which divides Africa from the
South Land, not yet to us fully known; and on the East with the Red Sea, and on
the West with the great Atlantic Ocean: and in the measuring of Africa with a
right line, from Gambra on the West, unto the Cape de Gardaso on the East, both
places having 10 degrees of North Latitude, Long. 4425 miles.
has in Longitude 4425 miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 50.
degree of the Equinoctial unto the Mediterranean Sea, it has in North
Latitude 32 degrees, which multiplied by 60, makes 1920 miles, and in South
Latitude measuring with a right line from the 50. degree of the Equinoctial
unto the Cape of bona Esperansa, it has 35 degrees, which also multiplied by
60 makes 2100 miles, Lat. 4020 miles
which makes the whole Latitude of Africa to be 4020 miles, or thereabouts.

Asia.
Asia is bounded on the North, with the North Ocean Sea, and on the South,
partly with the Red Sea, and partly with the other Seas and Gulphs adjoining
thereto; on the East with the East India Ocean, and the Straight Sea of Anian;
and on the West with the Flood Tanais and Fens of Meotis, with the Cimmerian
and Thracian Bosphorus, the Euxine and Mediterranean Sea, and part of the
Arabian Gulf: and Asia then in measuring with a right line from the mouth of
the Flood Tanais, to the Promontory Tamos, both places having 50 degrees of
Latitude; Long. 4284
has in Longitude 4284 miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 150.
degree of the Equinoctial, unto the Promontory Tabin; it has in North Latitude
75 degrees, Latit. 4500.
which being multiplied by 60 makes 4500 miles.

America.
America is bounded on the North with the North Ocean Sea, and on the South
with the Magellanick Sea; on the East with the Atlantic Ocean; on the West
with the West Indian Ocean, and the Straights of Anian, and in measuring with a
right line from the Straights of Anian to the furthest part of Estotiland upon
the 64. degree of Latitude, has in Longitude 164 degrees, Long. 4264.
which makes 4264 miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 270,
degree of the Equinoctial unto the North Sea: it has in North Latitude 76
degrees, which makes 4560 miles, and in measuring with a right line from the
305. degree of the Equinoctial unto the Magellanick Sea; it has in South
Latitude 53 degrees, Latit. 3210.
which makes at 60 miles the degree, 3210 miles.

Thus far shall suffice to have spoken in general of the Lines, Circles, and
Divisions of the Universal Maps, and Cards found to be made by our Modern
Cosmographers. That which comes in the next place to be handled, as the more
material and useful part, belonging to my present work, is the knowledge and
situation of every Kingdom, Region, City, Mountain, Flood, and Lake found in
this circumference: also the knowledge of the Seas, together with the Islands,
Ports, Capes, Points and Bays which do belong to every one of the aforesaid
parts and divisions of the World, and that are found therein comprised, which
principally is manifested and learned by the Longitude and Latitude thereof in
it self, which teaches these particulars: Latitude how accounted.
First, The very situation of the place; Secondly, The very distance from one
place or City to another; Thirdly, How one place lies from another; And
lastly, With what wind you may sail from one Point, Cape or City maritime to
another: in which four things the chief use of Maps are found principally to
consist. First then, The degrees of Latitude or the elevation of the Pole)
being both one thing) is accounted from the Equinoctial to either Pole which is
90 degrees, and the degrees of Longitude accounted upon the said Equinoctial
from the Isles of Cape Verde toward the East; and so round about the Earth
till you come to the number of 360 degrees: where it is to be noted, that the
Provinces and Towns situated under one and the same degree of Latitude, have at
the same time like hours of the day; but those that are situated under diverse
degrees of Longitude do differ in number of hours; and that is the cause that
when it is in one Town noontide, it is in another Town distant thence 30
degrees toward the East two a clock in the afternoon, and so consequently for
every 15 degrees distance, it is then found to differ one hour in time.

Days and nights differ according to the Latitude.
Also those that dwell under one and the self same degree of Latitude have equal
quantity of days and nights; but yet so as they which dwell on the South side
of the Equinoctial have the shortest day, when we have the longest, and have
their Winter when we have Summer: and those that are under diverse degrees of
Latitude, have inequality of days and nights; for the nigher that any place is
situated toward any of the Poles, the more hours the longest day of the year
in that place has; and those that dwell under the Equinoctial have always
their days and nights of like quantity: but I understand here by the day, the
space between Sunrising and Sunsetting; so that to those that have 30 degrees
of Latitude, the longest day is almost 14 hours, and the nigher the Pole, the
longer, insomuch as those that dwell under the Pole, and whose Zenith is the
Pole, their year is but a day and a night, that is to say, they have six months
day, and six months night.

It is also to be noted, that the Meridians are sound to have many necessary
uses in the general and common Maps, for thereby is learned that it is noon
tide or mid day sooner in one place than in another, by observing that Meridian
that is most toward the East; which the Sun touches always sooner than that
Meridian which is more toward the West.

Meridians and their use.
By the Meridian is also known how the Eclipse of the Moon appears sooner to
one place than to another, and shows what variety of time; for they whose
Meridian is toward the West, do see the Moon sooner than they whose Meridian is
more toward the East; Eclipse of the Moon when seen.
whereas indeed the Eclipse of the Moon is seen to all places (where it can be
seen) at one very instant of like greatness, and yet seems to be seen later
or sooner by reason of the diversity of the time of the day, in places standing
one East or West from another; and if the distance betwixt those two Meridians
do contain 15 degrees of the Equinoctial, then the Eclipse appears to be
sooner to the one than to the other by one whole hour, according to my former
assertion, for every 15 degrees makes an hour, and therefore observe how many
15 degrees you find betwixt the two Meridians, so many hours are to be
accounted; and if fewer degrees be found, then the time of the Eclipse is to be
shortened accordingly, attributing four minutes of an hour to one degree, etc.

Eclipse of the Sun when seen.
As for the Eclipse of the Sun, it is seen neither generally nor fully at one
self-same time, nor yet of the same greatness in all places: indeed it appears
sooner to the Western Countries than to the Eastern; but the diversity of the
time of appearance does depend not only on the number of Meridians betwixt the
two places, but also of the swift or slow motion of the Moon, which coming
betwixt us and the Sun takes the sight of the Sun from us.

Latitude and Longitude found out by the Meridians,
The Latitude and Longitude of Cities and places may be found out by the
Meridians also; but here it is observable, that the degrees of Latitude are in
all places of like bigness, as making ever 60 miles, but the degrees of
Longitude proceeding from the Equinoctial toward any of the two Poles, are
unequal, and every one shorter than the other, and containing four miles; so
that if two Ships were under the Equinoctial 150 degrees distant each from
other, and being to sail toward the North Pole, upon the same course when they
come to the 60 degree of Latitude, their distance shall be but 76 leagues, and
the farther they go toward the Pole, the less distance they shall be one from
the other, insomuch as when they are right under the Pole it self, they shall
both meet: but this point more particularly concerns Navigation, which so far
forth as it is requisite to the knowledge of a Merchant, I have handled in my
Book of the Factors Aviso, which together with a Collection of the Sea-laws, I
intend (God willing) hereafter to publish,

Now forasmuch as the use of these Latitudes and Longitudes is most necessary
and needful in this Art, it is proper I should set down the ways whereby not
only these Latitudes and Longitudes, but also the distances of all Cities and
places by all universal Maps and Sea Cards that are perfectly drawn and
delineated, is learned and found out.

To find out the Longitude of a place.
First then, To find out the Longitude of any place, do thus: Extend a thread so
as it pass through the Pole and through the place whose Longitude you seek in
any Map or Card, even to the very Equinoctial and somewhat beyond, holding the
thread strait, and then the number of degrees written upon the Equinoctial or
Parallel will show the Longitude.

Again. By the Meridians likewise are known what Longitude any place in the Map
has: as thus; set the one foot of a pair of Compasses in the place it self,
and the other in some Meridian, that is next unto it, whether on the right
hand, or on the left, it matters not; from thence draw down your Compass,
following still that Meridian until you come to the Equinoctial line, and there
mark upon what degree of the Equinoctial that foot of the Compass which you did
first put in the place does rest; then count how many degrees that is distant
from the first Meridian, and that is the true Longitude of the place; and note,
that that Longitude serves to all the places that be under that Meridian,
though they be never so far distant one from another North and South.

To find out the Latitude of a place.
Now for the Latitude of that place or any other, do thus: Set the one foot of
your Compasses in the very Pole, extending the other to the Place or City whose
Latitude you seek, and keeping your Compass at that wideness, bring the
moveable foot to the first Meridian whereon the degrees of Latitude are marked,
and there staying it, the number of the degrees counting from the Equinoctial
upwards toward the Pole, will show the Latitude of the place sought; and note,
that the like Latitude have all they that dwell under that Parallel, how far
soever they dwell asunder East and West, and by knowing the Latitude of any
place, you may quickly also find in some Maps under what Clime or Parallel such
a (...) (...), and of how many hours the longest day is there.

Now to know how one place bears from another and with what wind your Ship is
to be directed from one Maritime Port to another, is needless here to be
handled, as not pertinent to my task; but for what distance is betwixt two
several places, many Cosmographers have found, by several ways taught the same;
one only, the most common in use, I will pitch upon, as the most facile and
easy.

To find out the distance of two places or Cities.
To find out then the distance betwixt any two places, do thus: Set the one foot
of your Compass on the one place, and the other foot on the other place, and
apply that wideness to the Equinoctial, and look how many degrees of the
Equinoctial that wideness comprehends, and allowing 60 Italian miles to every
degree, you shall have the distance by a right line of those two places
demanded.

But if the said two places have both either North or South Latitude, then
substract the lesser Latitude out of the greater, so shall you find the
difference; which difference, if you multiply by 60, the product will be the
number of miles; and if to the whole degrees of difference there be annexed any
minutes, then you must add to the product for every minute a mile.

But if one of the two places have North Latitude, and the other South
Latitude, then you shall find their difference by Addition only, and not by
Substraction.

The distances of two places having different Longitudes, and East and West
Latitude.
Now if you would find the distance of two places, differing only in Longitude,
both places having either East or West Latitude; then substract the lesser out
of the greater, so shall you have the true difference, which difference you
must multiply by the number of miles belonging to their Latitude, which
commonly is found on the North-West side of the Maps, or by the Table of miles
answerable, of one degree of every Latitude, and the product thereof will be
the number of miles; whereby the one place is distant from the other; but if
one place have East Longitude, and the other West Longitude, then you must find
the difference as well by Addition as by Substraction.

To conclude this point, I conceive it not much material to my purpose further
to insist hereupon; for the diligent and ingenious will easily hereby
comprehend the benefit that may redound to him by a general inspection in this
Art, referring what is here by me willingly omitted to his own private search
and study, and to such Authors as have learnedly written of this Subject more
at large; and therefore from the universal knowledge of Maps that points out
the General Divisions of the World, I will come to the Particulars comprised
therein, and view the Subdivisions thereof, as Potency, Might and Sovereignty
have prescribed Rules thereunto.

This World then, consisting as I noted before of four Principal Parts, and
every Part consisting of several Empires Kingdoms and Provinces in which many
Commodities both natural and artificial are found fit for Commerce, and
Traffic, and also wherein are noted to be diverse eminent Cities and Towns of
great concourse, of Shipping, Merchants and Trade, which Trade is maintained
and driven by the said Commodities and Wares, and by the natural inclination of
Mankind to in^ich themselves by Invention, and Time, has devised the Art of
Merchandising, and by the means of Weights, Measures, Coins, Exchanges and
Accomptkeeping, have drawn the same to certain Heads and Principals, which in
this MAP OF COMMERCE I shall endeavor to demonstrate: But before I fall to
Particulars, it is requisite I should first say somewhat of the same in general.

CHAP. II. Of the Art of Merchandising, and the General Parts thereof.
Merchandising accounted an Art.
MERCHANDISING (truly considered in it self, and rightly practiced) may well be
said to be an Art or Science invented by ingenious Mankind, for the public
good, commodity and welfare of all Commonwealths; for thereby some places and
Kingdoms are supplied and furnished with those necessary things, whereof Nature
her self has proved deficient in, and which in some other places or Kingdoms
has abandoned, tending either to the need, ornament, or commodity of humane
life, and is performed by exporting the superfluities, that are found in the
one, to furnish the defects and wants that are found in the other: and the
Arts-men that are seen thus to practice and exercise the same, and which do
thus transport these things from one place to another, are generally known to
us and commonly termed by the name of Merchants, and the things themselves
wherewith they Negotiate and Traffic are termed Merchandises or Commodities.

Merchandising what.
Merchandising then of it self, in effect, is nothing else but a Commutation,
Bargaining, Contracting or Exchanging of one man with another, and by giving by
one, so much of one thing or Commodity, to have of the other, so much and the
like value, of some one other differing Commodity else; and the (...)
themselves subject to this Commutation, or Exchanging, are principally observed
in all places to be two; The materials of Merchandising, are Commodities and
Moneys.
first Wares or Goods, and secondly Moneys or Coin; which two are usually
observed to be contracted and bargained for, in three several distinct manners.

Commutations distinguished into three manners or kinds
The first is Goods for Goods, and this is termed Bartering. The second is Goods
for Money, and this is termed Bargaining; and the third is Money for Money, and
this is properly amongst Merchants, (in these days) termed Exchanging: from
whence it proceeds, and may be concluded, that all merchantile affairs and
commerce-like Negotiations may be distinguished into three kinds or sorts, that
is, into Bartering, commonly called Trucking; Bargaining, commonly called
buying and selling; and into returning of Moneys from one place to another by
Bills, commonly called Exchanging.

The first of these was taught to Mankind by necessity, who to provide himself
of things that were needful, gave in lieu and in truck thereof and for the
same, the things whereof he had store and plenty: The second kind was found out
and invented to facilitate the first; and the third and last to facilitate the
second.

Bartering.
In the times of old amongst us, and yet in these days in many places of
America, Asia and Africa: the first manner of Bartering was and is yet in use
and practiced, where though Gold and Silver and Brass was not known nor
accounted as a stamped Coin, yet it was then both here, and is still here held
in greater estimation than was any other commodity or metal; the which Homer
infers in his relation of the Trojan War, where he mentions that Achilles
his Golden Armor was valued in barter at one hundred Oxen, and that the Brass
Armor of Diomedes was valued in barter but at nine: But Man in process of
time, finding it too too difficult a thing, and too too troublesome a business,
to carry about him, all things thus bartered and trucked from one place to
another, chose out one singular thing, which as a common standard or measure,
should countervail and be in Value as all other things, and which should be
received and accounted of in payment, satisfaction, and equivalency to all
others; and the things thus chosen and estimated, was Gold, Silver and Brass,
the most excellent of Metals, which being then and since, by the Authority of
princes, divided into great and small pieces, and into several and distinct
parts and denominations, was stamped and coined with several characters, to
denote thereby the true weight and value of the same; the which was first done
by Servius in Rome of Brass, whereon was imprinted the Image of Sheep and Oxen,
betokening the wealth and riches of those days, as Moneys do now with us; and
because that ten of those pieces was then called a Denier, therefore it is that
universally all such Moneys are still called by the Latins Denarii: this being
then the original of Moneys, which afterward came to be coined both of Silver,
and Gold; as I shall more at large have occasion to demonstrate in the Chapter
of Moneys, in this following Treatise.

Bargaining.
This first sort of Merchandising or Commerce then, as I said before; termed
Bartering or Trucking, of one Commodity for another, begat consequently by the
means of Moneys the second manner of Negotiation, which is buying and selling,
or bargaining; for all Merchants that would transport Commodities from one
Country or place to another, to effect the same, needed either other
Commodities, wherewith to barter. and so to procure them, or Money, and so to
buy them; and therefore to facilitate Merchandising, and to take away the
incommodity and danger of the carriage of Moneys, about a man, or from place to
place, a mean was invented to have the same in what Country a man pleased,
without trouble or danger of the transport, carriages or rigor thereof;
Exchanging
and this was found to be best performed by Exchange, which is the third sort of
Commutation; the which is noted to be no other than the giving of so much
Moneys in one place to one, who should cause it to be again repaid in another
place by another for him; as for example, Edward has here in London one
thousand pounds, and desires to remit the same, or have it in the hands of
Joseph, who resideth in Venice; and Lodowick has one thousand pounds in
Venice, in the custody and hands of Thomas, which he would get, receive, and
recover out and have them here: it happens that Edward meets with Lodowick,
to whom he delivers and pays the said one thousand pounds; and thereupon
Lodowick writes to Thomas, that he pay the said thousand pounds to Joseph, and
thus each party comes to be both satisfied and accommodated; by which it may be
discerned, that in all Exchanges, there is concluded two payments, two places,
and four distinct persons; as he who pays in the one place, and he who
receives in the other; and he who receives in the one place, and he who
pays in the other; and from hence it consequently follows, that no man can
remit except there be another to draw; nor no man can in the second place
receive, except there be another authorized to pay,

Exchanges drawn into a profitable Art, and the reasons thereof.
In this manner then came in use the original of Exchanges, purposely invented
to accommodate Trade and Commerce, the which at first was practiced without
either benefit or loss, or any other consideration; and to render again the
self-same sum and parcel as was received: but other consideration; and to
render again the self-same sum and parcel as was received: but in process of
time it came to be considered, that the giver or deliverer of the Money came
both to lose a certain space in time ere the same was repaid, and did also run
a certrin risgo in the payment thereof, which the receiver or drawer enjoyed,
and profited by; and therefore it was held reasonable that the deliverer should
have some fruit and benefit, in requital and satisfaction thereof, which
afterward occasioned that the second payment came to be somewhat greater than
the former; and that in consideration thereof there should be restored, more
than was received: The endeavor of this gain then has converted Exchanges
since into an Art or Mystery; from whence it proceeds, that many are found at
this day to remit and deliver Moneys, to the intent, to have the same returned
with benefit, and not for a need or necessity to have it more in one place than
in another; and many again are found to be takers and drawers, not with intent
to withdraw or recover their Money, from another person, or place; but to serve
themselves and their occasions with that of others, for a certain time, paying
and allowing for the same, that consideration and interest as is agreed upon,
and covenanted between them; which really and in effect is nothing else but a
certain kind of permitted Usury, and therefore by some accounted as a thing
unlawful, though by many, and by the common and received practice of the World,
it is upheld and maintained with many solid reasons and substantial arguments;
besides which, it is considerable, and peradventure it may well be granted,
that if it were not that there is by this Art and Mystery, a gain and profit
made thereof, very few Exchanges would present; because that draughts and
remittances would in this nature but seldom happen, that would or might any way
be available to Traffic and Commerce, and less benefit would consequently
redound to the public and universal Commerce of Kingdoms: and therefore though
the intention of particular Exchanges, be not always found good herein, yet the
general good effect which it produces, and that proceeds therefrom, is in it
self and in the true use and custom thereof both approved and laudable.

Things considerable in Bartering.
Now in the first sort of Commutation, which I term Bartering, many things do
happen considerable and necessary in the Art of Merchandising; the first is the
knowledge as well in the Commodity, thus to be delivered, as in the Commodity
so to be received: next a knowledge in respect of the value and present request
and estimation of both; then in respect of the quality, whether it be lasting
and durable, or impairing or perishable; and lastly in respect of the property,
whether it be of it self natural and growing, or Artificial, and made by the
hand and industry of man; and lastly in respect of the quantity, whether
plentiful in abundance, or scarce and in few hands.

Things considerable in Bargaining.
In the second sort of Commutation, which I term Bargaining, or buying and
selling, are likewise besides the abovementioned, these particulars to be well
known and considered; first a knowledge how the Commodity is either bought or
sold, as either by weight, as are ponderous Commodities, or as by Concave or
long measures, as are Commodities of length, or Commodities solid or liquid;
the knowledge of which weights and measures, is in like manner perfectly to be
known, and really to be understood; and then the fineness, goodness and current
valuation of the Money of the place, is also to be known, and perfectly and
rightly to be found out and be distinguished, that the bargain may appear to be
made the more justly, equally, and conscionably between both parties; and for
the needful circumstances observed in bargaining, these four things are
considerable, as having necessary dependancies upon.

Principally four.
First, A Merchant must know what to bargain for, and under this the knowledge
of the Commodity it self is comprehended. Secondly, How to bargain, and under
this the knowledge of the weights and measures in the general is comprised.
Thirdly, When to bargain, and under this the fit and proper seasons of
bargaining are generally included. Fourthly, With whom to bargain, and under
this point is comprehended, the person and party interessed, that requires the
accomplishment or credit in the bargain.

Things considerable in Exchanging
Now in the third sort of Commutation, which is here termed Exchanging, the
things necessary to be known and considerable by the said Art of Merchandising
are these: First, A knowledge of the fineness, goodness and current value of
the Princes Coin, both where the party Remitter abides, and whither the said
Moneys are remitted; then a knowledge of the current rate of the Exchanging of
the Par or Value for Value, both according to the Standard of the Country, and
according to the valuation of the current Coin there passable; then of the
Usance of the place; and lastly and principally, to avoid all prejudice and
loss, a knowledge is to be had of the party who is the Drawer and Receiver of
the same; and in default made of current satisfaction and payment accordingly,
knowledge is to be had of the due and true manner and form of making of all
legal intimations, protests, and other such needful instruments, circumstances
and observations as are requisite thereto, according to the strict and solemn
Rules required in a Bill of Exchange, which in its due place I shall more at
large declare.

Now forasmuch as many of these aforementioned points may as well be included
within the mystery of some subordinate Tradesmen, as comprehended within the
bounds of the Art of Merchandising; I shall not need to insist farther
thereupon, only here insert some other principal parts and points more aptly
comprised within the particular limits of this Science, which in brief I will
only nominate, as fitly serving for an Induction to this present MAPOF
COMMERCE, and as being the proper Instruments, wherewith also this Art of
Merchandising is practiced.

I have noted before, that Merchandising principally consists of Adventures
made abroad into several Regions, and that for the most part Merchants are
found to traffic and negotiate into diverse parts and Countries of the World by
the help and benefit of the Seas and Navigation; and to have to that end their
Factors, Servants and Agents resident in foreign parts to perform those their
Merchantile Occasions, and that Ships and Vessels of all burdens are daily
seen to be by them so employed and set on work through all the parts of the
habitable World; therefore the next point needful their knowledge, and
comprised in the Art of Merchandising, I may entitle under the name of
Shipping; which properly consisting of sundry portins may be fitly
distinguished within the duties of four several distinct persons.

First duty to build, belonging to the Shipwright.
The first Person is represented in the building of a Ship, wherein the whole
materials are to be considered; next the Art of the framing, forming, and
making thereof, is to be observed, the due rules of length breadth, depth,
stowage, offense, defense and commodiousness in general is to be noted, with
all other circumstances thereunto appertaining: and this I hold to be the
proper duty of the Ship-wright, and the knowledge consequently not unproper to
the Merchant, and fitly comprehended within the Art of Merchandising.

Second duty to furnish and set out, belonging to the Owners.
The second is represented in the setting forth of this Ship, wherein her
tackle, apparel, victual and munition, and all her needful and dependent
furniture is to be considered, her provision and store is to be observed: and
this I hold to be the proper duty of the Owners and letters out of Ships to
freight, and the knowledge most proper for the Merchant, and comprehended also
in the Art of Merchandising.

Third duty to sail the Ship, belonging to the Pilot or Master.
The third is represented in the sailing of this Ship, wherein the Art of
Navigation is generally to be considered, with all circumstances thereunto of
right appertaining, which I hold to be the duty of the Master and Pilot; and
how far this knowledge may be necessary to the Merchant, I have mentioned in a
Book entitled, The Factors Avizo, which I may, if occasion serve, publish to
the use and benefit of Merchants and Factors that frequent the Seas, and take
pleasure therein.

Fourth duty of employing this Ship, belonging to the Merchant.
The last is represented in the employment of this Ship, wherein is considerable
these six things. First, The lading of the Goods aboard, by which this Ship
comes to be employed, which must be done in fair and dry weather, and at fit
seasons: Secondly, The stowage thereof aboard, which must be done without
prejudice or hurt of one Commodity to another, by building of Bulk heads, and
providing of Desnege, and the like, whereon the said Goods must bear or lie
upon: Thirdly, In truly marking the said Goods, that it may evidently appear
who is the right Owner and Proprietor thereof: Fourthly, In really paying and
truly discharging all Customs, Duties and Charges thereupon, that neither the
Ship nor Goods may be subject to loss, confiscation or prejudice thereby:
Fifthly, In making assurance thereon, that the imployer preventing losses may
not endanger his whole Adventure: And Sixthly and lastly, In a general
knowledge of all the Sea-Laws comprised either in the Roll of Oleron or
Consolato of Barcelona, that all Controversies between the Merchant and Mariner
may be avoided; that he may thereby the better right himself, and do also that
which is right to all others; and this I hold to be the proper duty of the
Merchant and his Factor.

A Merchant is to know the form of a Bill of Exchange.
In order to this I may here nominate such other things as are needful to his
knowledge, and which have a necessary dependence upon the Art of Merchandising,
as next to know all manner of specialities proper to his Place and Calling. And
first the manner, force, and virtue of a Bill of Exchange, the terms, and
proper method thereof, with all manner of Observations required thereto by the
solemn, and strict rules of the proceedings commonly used therein.

Secondly, Of all manner of Protests and Intimations.
Secondly, The making of all Intimations, and Protests, in all cases whatsoever
incident to this Art.

Thirdly, Of Charterparties.
Thirdly, The manner and making of all Charter-parties for the fraightment of
Ships; wherein all conditions and their circumstances must be truly and at
large set down and declared, as the time when the covenanted Ship is to depart,
the Ports where she is to unlade, the days agreed upon for her unlading, the
sum agreed upon for freight, and all other the particutar conditions accorded
upon, the better to avoid all inconveniences and contentions in Law that may
happen thereupon.

Fourthly. Of Bills of Lading.
Fourthly, The manner of making of Bills of Lading, wherein the Goods laden, and
the condition thereof is to be truly set down: also the Ship wherein the same
is put, and the Master or Pilots name and who takes the charge thereof; the
place of unlading the said Goods, and lastly, the freight to be paid for the
same, when delivered according to conditions specified.

Fifthly, of Policies of Assurances.
Fifthly, The manner of making of Policies of Assurances; wherein the Goods
assured are to be nominated, the Ship upon which the same is laden, and the
Master thereof declared, the Dangers and Adventure assured to be specified, the
places whence and whither bound noted, the Rate or Premio agreed upon observed;
and lastly, the Persons or Parties Assurers subscribed, etc.

Sixthly, of Bills of Debt, and Obligatory.
Sixthly, The manner of making of all manner of Specialities and Bills of Debt,
either as they are simply in use amongst us in England, or obligatory, as also
to know the force and strength thereof in Law, both here and beyond the Seas,
with Transportations thereof, as is used in many foreign Countries; wherein is
to be set down the name and profession of the party debtor, the sum owing
thereby, to whom the same is due, and the time when the same is payable, and
the place where, and in Bills obligatory, the penalty for non-payment
accordingly.

Seventhly, of an Acquittance.
Seventhly, When the same is discharged, the form and manner of an Acquittance
and general release in full discharge for the payment thereof.

Eighthly, of a Letter of Attorney.
Eighthly, The manner of drawing a Letter of Attorney or Procuration, with the
strength thereof both here and beyond the Seas: wherein is to be mentioned the
power and authority given, the party that gives the same, and the party who
receives it, and the scope, end and determination thereof; Ninthly, in
Accompt-keeping.
and lastly, to conclude these necessary appurtenances and dependences upon the
Art of Merchandising, there must be added a right and perfect Skill in
Accompt-keeping, that thereby all his daily Affairs, his Adventures, Shipping,
Sales, Buyings, Payments and Receipts, etc. may orderly and truly be
manifested, which is so far forth to be learned and known, that his Estate,
Gains and Losses, and all passages that are else needful happening in the
course of his Negotiations, Merchandising or Commerce may appear, and which may
thereby be either yearly, or oftener reduced into a balance, to his own
contentment, and to the commodity of his Estate and daily Traffic.

Tenthly, of Arithmetic.
And as a Handmaid or Usher to this Art of Accompting, he must, to finish and
make up these helps and furtherances, have the assistance of the Art of
Numbering or Arithmetic, in which whosoever is ignorant may not challenge to
himself the Title of a Merchant, nor be said to have any Judgment in the Art of
Merchandising, nor hardly deserve the attribute of a rational man.

These are now the principal parts of the Art of Merchandising, and the Basis
whereupon the same is observed to have its foundation, as it is seen,
practiced, and exercised by all Merchants in general in these our days
throughout the habitable World, the most part whereof I have more particularly
handled in the following succinct Chapters, and some others I have willingly
omitted, as being such as are so inherent to the Art it self, that every
knowing Merchant must not be ignorant therein, having in all other respects
endeavored to make this MAP OF COMMERCE so perfect, absolute and complete,
that it may stand the Merchant (especially the Learner) in stead, both at home
and abroad beyond the Seas, and serve him as a Guide and Tutor to direct and
instruct him in all the parts of the Art of Merchandising.

And having thus run over the ground of this Art it self in the general, I will
in the next place begin with the Cities and Towns, where at this day it is
found, that for the most part this Art of Merthandizing is seen to be practiced
and used.

CHAP. III. Of Cities and Towns of Trade in general, mentioned in this MAP OF
COMMERCE.
Cities and Towns eminent in Trade, only mentioned in this Map
MY purpose is not here to show the Antiquity of Cities and Towns, according to
their first original, nor the manners and custom used in their first
foundation; neither yet speak of the diverse kinds thereof, as at this day they
are in themselves observed to be: But my intention is in this following Map of
Trade, (having briefly showed the common division of the four parts of the
World,) to nominate and quote out the chief and principal thereof, as they are
known to be to Merchants, and as they are found the most eminent and absolute
in the Trade of Merchandising; and therewith distinguish the diversities that
are observed to be therein.

Six parts required in a complete City.
An absolute and complete City or Town, as some learned have set down and
expressed, cannot subsist of it self without six principal parts and helps, for
the supportation thereof; and without which no City or Town can properly be
said to be, or to have a being; First, It must have Victuals to feed and
nourish it; and this is the proper task and duty of the Husbandman and
Shepherd. Secondly, It must have Arms and Armor to defend it, and offend its
Enemies; and this is the proper task and duty of the Soldier. Thirdly, It must
have Wealth and Riches, as sinews for its employment, in private and public
affairs; and this is the proper task and duty of the rich and eminent
Inhabitants of this City. Fourthly, It must have Justice for Criminal and Civil
Causes, to punish the bad, and reward the good; and this is the proper task and
duty of Counselors and Senators of State. Fifthly, It must have Religion and
the Worship of GOD duly and reverently performed in it; and this is the proper
task and duty of the Priesthood: And Sixthly, To make it a complete, able, and
absolute City, it must have Trade and Arts, practiced therein, and this is the
proper task and duty of the Merchant and Artificer that inhabit it. Now, though
many Cities are seen sometimes defective in some of these parts, and are not so
well furnished as this rule and the exactness of a complete City requires; yet
it is daily manifested to the judicious and learned in Policies of State, and
Government of Commonwealths, that Merchants, and such as exercise the Trade of
Merchandising in Cities, do supply by their endeavors and abilities by
Traffic, most of those other parts and helps here before specified; and which
are or may be found deficient and wanting therein. The Merchants purse and
person supplies many defects in a City of Trade.
For setting aside the Worship and Service of God, which is only fit and proper
to Divines and Churchmen, the person and purse of the Merchant supplies in a
fair measure all the other parts beforementioned; for first, the Merchants
Navigation, and Traffic, is seen to supply the City with Corn, Grain, Cloth,
etc. and all manner of Provision, both for back and belly, delight and
ornament, tending either to pleasure or need; and this way he performs the part
of the Husbandman and Shepherd; His Traffic is seen to supply the City with
Arms, Armor, and all manner of Ammunition, either offensive or defensive; and
thus far he performs the part of Soldier: His Traffic likewise is seen to
bring Riches into the common Purse by Customs, Imposts, and such Duties; and
thereby may be said to perform the part of the wealthy and most eminent
thereof. He is seen by his wisdom, travel, and experience abroad, to be able
oftentimes to sit at the Stern of the Cities Government, punishing the vicious,
rewarding the virtuous; and herein he performs the part of a Senator and
Counselor: neither yet is he wanting in many other particulars, to perform the
duty of a good Patriot and Citizen, (not comprised within any of these
aforesaid limits;) for his Traffic is seen to improve the Countries
Commodities, to set the Poor and Needy on work, to invent new Fabrics, Stuffs,
and the like; to plant foreign Colonies, to setle Peace and Amity amongst
Princes, to build warlike Ships, to train up Seamen; and to make the City and
place of his abode famous and eminent by sundry other means, which I could
exemplify if need were in this place, and which at present I willingly omit.

Now then, if the Merchant and the Art of Merchandising be so excellent, and
consequently necessary in a City, and brings with it so many benefits and
commodities: how happy then is that City, where many notable and well-governed
Merchants are found to reside, and where their care of their own profit is so
necessarily interwoven with the care of the Commonwealth's, and its good, that
to themselves and to their Country, their labors and adventures do bring in
thus mutually, not only a commodity, but also an honor: but to the matter; All
Cities and Towns are not found in themselves proper for Commerce and Traffic,
nor yet all of them fit residences for Merchants; What Cities are found fit for
Trade and Commerce.
therefore it is seen by experience, that Trade has settled it self principally
in two sorts of Cities and Towns; and in such, first the Inhabitants by
Inclination, and then Foreigners and Strangers by Conversation, are observed
and noted to have planted themselves, and established a Trade therein.

Two sorts of Cities of Traffic.
Traffic then residing and abiding principally in two several sorts of Cities
and Towns, by daily observation are found to be such as these; the first is the
Maritime, and these are they that have their situation on the Seashore or
Coast, or upon navigable Rivers and Streams; and the second are they that have
their situation within some Continent, and may be called Land-Towns and Cities,
distant both from Sea and River. And though that in both these, Trade and
Commerce is observable to be settled and driven; yet the manner and common form
of this Trade is found to differ much, as being both of them proper to two
several sorts of Traffic and Negotiation.

Sea-Towns of Trade, what.
The Trade observed then to be driven in Sea-Towns or Cities, seated on
Navigable Rivers, is noted to subsist principally by Navigation, and by the
easy Transportation of Merchandise by that commodiousness, from one place to
another; which is indeed the most proper and customary way, whereby Traffic is
in these days seen to be maintained and preserved; for in many places thus
situated, it is noted that eminent Merchants do reside, who by reason of this
Neighborhood of the Sea, and consequently of Navigation, do hold a
correspondency and Trade from one fit place to another, over all the known
parts of the habitable World, Importing the Commodities of all other Countries,
and Exporting the native Commodities of the place it self; and of this sort is
Masilia, Amsterdam, Genoa, Venetia, Sevil, Lisbon, London, and many others,
etc. Land. Towns of Trade, what.
But the Trade observed to be driven in Inland Towns and Cities, subsists by
carriage of Commodities by Land, which in some places is done by Carts, in some
by Camels, Caravans, Mules, Horses, etc. as is at this day seen practiced in
many great Cities of the World; as at Aleppo in Turkey, at Spahan in Persia, at
Agra in the Mogul Country, and such other, who enjoy neither the benefit of
Rivers, nor yet the commodity of the Sea it self by many miles distance; yet
therein are oftentimes found residing many Merchants of great eminency, and an
ample Trade is discerned therein, as may be seen in this following Tract. And
sometimes to add some furtherance to this their want, some of these have a
Seaport or Haven, as the nearest whereto Ships from other parts do come in,
and do there both land and relade as occasion requires; in which nature is
Alexandria to Aleppo, Combrone to Spahan, and Sindy to Agra.

Towns of Trade in Manual Arts and Fabrics.
Besides which, I might here add a third sort of Cities, where yet Trade is
noted to be settled, differing from both the former, and which cannot be
comprised within either of the limits; and these are such as subsist by some
excellent or curious Manual Arts or Fabrics, as is Norimberg and others in
Germany, Rouen in Normandy, Florence in Italy, and Norwich in England, and some
others; whose Trade subsists by the benefit of Nature, producing of it self,
special or needful Commodities for Traffic, as does Bordeaux by Gascoin Wines,
Zant by Corrants, Smyrna by Cottons, Gilan in Persia by raw Silk, Ivisa by
Salt, and the like: and where these are joined by situation proper for Traffic
to the former, they are found to be far more absolute, eminent and complete, as
shall be discerned also in this following Tract.

Cities of Trade mentioned in the Map of Commerce.
These are then the Cities and Towns which generally in this Map I handle,
relating as near as my observation and reading will permit me, the Commodities
that the place does naturally afford for Merchandise, and the Commodities the
same is noted properly to vent; together with the time when the same is either
sent out or brought in, the quantity, how much; with all other such
circumstances as are thereunto belonging.

Five places in a City depending upon Trade.
Moreover it is to be noted, that in all Cities and Towns of Traffic, there are
always found five particular places, that only have a being and dependency upon
the Trade thereof.

The Burse, or Exchange.
The first place is it where Merchants and Tradesmen do assemble and meet at
certain hours, and limited times of the day, to confer and treat together,
concerning Merchandising, Shipping, Buying or Selling, and the like; as is seen
to be the Royal Exchange of LONDON, the Burse in Antwerp, the Piazze in
Venetia, and the like in other places.

The Custom-house.
The second place is it where the Princes Customs, and Duties upon all Wares,
either Imported or Exported by way of Merchandise is seen to be paid and
collected, where Officers are appointed to attend the same; and where all
Writs, as Cockets, Bills of Entry, Cetificates, and the like, are granted, both
to load and land Goods, either going out or coming in, and these are called by
several names, as in most places Custom-houses, Dattio, Commercios, and the
like.

Magazines for Commodities.
The third place is it where Merchants do keep their Goods and Wares in, where
Weighers, Porters, Carmen, and Laborers, do hourly attend to be set on work;
where Brokers and Contracters are daily employed in making of Bargains, showing
of Wares, transporting of Bills of Debt, and such like, as is seen in the
Besistons and Basars in Turkey, Alfondoces in Barbary, Pack houses in the
Netherlands; and as was accustomed to be done in the Stillard in London.

Kings-Beam.
The next place is it where the Public Beam is set up, by the Authority of the
Magistrate, to weigh all ponderous Commodities bought or sold, to decide
Differences and Controversies arising by Weights and Weighing, and where a
sworn Weigher, with laborers, at all hours attends upon Merchants occasions,
and who by his place is to keep a Register of all Commodities weighed, to serve
if need shall so require; and in this nature is the Weight- house called The
Kings-Beam in London, the Domme at Amsterdam, the Vicont in Rouen, the Romano
in Marsilia, and such like in other places of Trade.

Met-house.
The next and last place is it where the Public Measures, both of length, of
dry, and of liquid Commodities, in every City are kept and set up by the
Authority of the Magistrate, to measure all measurable Commodities bought or
sold; to decide all Differences and Controversies arising thereabouts; and
where a sworn Measurer is to give attendance with other necessary helpers at
all hours to dispatch Merchants occasions, of which he is to keep a Register to
serve in time of need, as was seen of old to be the Standard of Cheap in
London, and as is found the like in other places.

And thus much shall serve to have said of Cities and Towns in general, of
Trade, and of the principal places found therein, which have a dependence
thereupon; which few Cities in the World, of Traffic do want, or are found to
be defective in.

CHAP. IV. Of Customs, Impositions, and other Duties in general, paid by
Merchants upon Commodities in all Cities of Trade.
Customs payable to Princes.
TRADE in it self, has ever been found to be, not only beneficial to the City
and Country where the same is exercised and preserved, but also to the Princes
and Sovereigns who command the same; and though the commodities and benefits
that it brings with it be many and great, yet the principal are such as
accruing to the Princes Coffers, come to them by the payments of certain
Customs, Imposts, and Duties, that are by them imposed upon all Commodities and
Wares, which by the way of Merchandise are either Imported out, or Exported
into their Dominions; and for the better raising and collecting of which, there
is seated as is before remembered, by the said Princes and their Authority in
every such City and Town (where any Trade and concourse of Merchants is found
to be) certain public Houses, Customhouses.
as Offices by the name of Custom-houses, where these Duties are collected, and
where the Traders and Merchants do accordingly pay and satisfy the same.

Customs not always alike in all places.
The Duty then of Custom, though in all Countries it be generally paid, yet it
is not always found to be paid alike in all places, for it is sometimes found
to be more, and sometimes less; and oft-times in some Countries it is paid
according to the will of the Prince who imposes the same, as being partly a
Prerogative inherent to their Scepters, and partly as they are absolute
Commanders in those Cities, Ports and Havens where this Traffic is so
exercised, Custom due upon all Commodities.
and is found to be payable, as I said before, upon all manner of Commodities
used by way of Merchandise, either Imported or Exported out or into their
Dominions, Countries and Cities.

The original of Customs.
This Duty then thus called Custom, is conceived by some to have its first
Original from a safeguard given by those Princes at Sea, to their Subjects and
Merchants from all Rovers, Pirates and Enemies, and a Protection for free
trading from all such dangers from one Port or City of Trade to another: but we
see that in these days the payment of the Duty is still continued, and is daily
paid by all Merchants; but the first institution and ground thereof (if so it
was) is by many Princes either totally omitted, or at least- wise forgotten,
and therefore it may now be more properly called a Custom than heretofore, and
the places where the same is paid and collected, called thence Custom-houses.

The Merchant must learn what the Customs are, and duly pay them.
The Merchant then that intends to Negociate and Traffic into any City or
Kingdom (seeing there is a necessity in the payment and discharge thereof)
ought first diligently and carefully learn and observe the sum and quantity
payable upon all Commodities whatsoever; and then truly and honestly satisfy
the same according to the Ordinances and Proceedings used respectively in those
Countries, partly to avoid the danger of the loss of the Commodity (the
non-payment being in many places the forfeiture) and partly the better thereby
to make his Calculation either to buy or sell or profit, and that before he
make Entry of any Goods in the said Custom- houses or Office (thus appointed
for the collecting of this Duty) he take notice what the true and right custom
in it self is; Book of Rates.
to further which knowledge, it is often seen that a settled Rate by Book, or
particular Teriffe, either in Print or Writing, may easily in every such City
of Trade be had and obtained: But if (as it is sometimes seen) in some places
that the same cannot be had, then the Trader must learn in this case from
others what the Duty and Custom of the place is; wherein much care and
circumspection is to be used; for the fraud and poling deceit, that is
practiced in sundry Custom-houses by many Officers where no such Books are
public, is excessive, when either they collect the same to the immediate use
of the Prince, or when they collect the same to their own use, being let out to
farm by contract and yearly Rent unto them by his Authority; many Merchants
being deceived by their devices and slights, many Underofficers and new
Offices being daily hatched up and maintained by the chief Customers and
Farmers, not only to the detriment of Merchants and of all Trade in particular,
but also to the prejudice of the Sovereign, and all Traffic and Commerce in
the general.

Custom differs in many respects.
These Customs then, as I said before, are noted not to be paid in all Countries
alike, for they are found to differ in diverse regards; the principal whereof I
have observed to be these:

In regard of place.
First, They are found to differ in regard of Places and Kingdoms, as a far
greater Custom is paid in Spain, and generally throughout the King of Spain's
Dominions, than in France, Italy, Turkey, and in some other places.

In regard of Cities.
Secondly, Some difference is also found in regard of times, as in privileged
Towns, enjoying free Fairs, Marts and Markets, as is seen observed by custom
and long use in Rouen, Beaucair, Franckford, Messina, and other places where
the Customs are then, and at that time little or else nothing, or far less than
at all other times of the year besides.

In regard of time.
Thirdly, Somewhat again in respect of Cities, enjoying a more peculiar
privilege and continued freedom in Trade in sundry Kingdoms, where little or
no Custom is paid upon any Commodity whatsoever, either during a year after the
Importing of the Goods, or for certain limited time or months; as it is seen in
Legorn, Marsilia, and in many other Free Cities and Hanse-Towns, etc.

In regard of Commodities.
Fourthly, Somewhat again in regard of Commodities, as is seen in England, and
many other places elsewhere, where some Commodities are higher rated in the
Custom than other some; some paying after the rate of 5 per cent. some 10, some
15, and some 20 per cent. and some yet more, and some less.

In regard of Weight.
Fifthly, Somewhat again in respect of the Weight, as is seen in Rouen by the
Vicont, in Lions by the King's Beam, in Stockholm by the Merchants weight; and
so in other places where there is used a large weight in favor of the
Merchants to pay their Custom by, and another lesser to buy and sell withal.

Strictness for not paying of Customs.
All these things and many others, as necessary to this Commerce, must be truly
learned; for ignorance herein is not pardonable, and is ever a prejudice to him
that is found to exercise Trade; for the rigor and strictness practiced in
sundry Countries herein against Merchants is extreme, whereas these Customs are
not duly and truly to the utmost satisfied and paid.

In Russia, Denmark, Sweden.
As the first in Russia, Denmark and Sweden, the Law is, That if a Merchant do
not declare all his Goods in the Custom-house which he either Imports or
Exporteth, but concealeth some part thereof; all the rest of that Commodity
being of the same kind, are forfeited to the Prince without favor or
redemption.

In Spain's Dominions.
In Spain, and generally throughout all the King of Spain's Dominions, the
Commodities concealed are only forfeited, unless they be prohibited, or as they
term it, Contrabanda Goods, and then all is lost.

In England, Scotland and Ireland.
In England, Scotland and Ireland the like; for there the Goods concealed are
only forfeited; but yet they may be had again upon Composition, for the Officer
that makes the seizure has power by a License sued forth to compound for the
one half, which is his part: and if no intention to defraud the King appear in
the fact, the Barons of the Exehequer will deal favorably with the Merchant
for the other half, which is the King's; and if a Merchant cannot for want of a
Factory make a direct or perfect Entry, he may declare his Goods in the
Custom-house, at sight; and taking up the same, it may be either weighed or
measured, opened and perused by an Officer, and then afterward the Custom may
be satisfied accordingly without further danger.

And if the Merchant would again ship out those Goods so brought in by him, he
may do it by Certificate free of Custom for 13 months, and have the Impost
thereof returned to him again provided the property has not been during that
time altered.

There is also by way of Tares granted to the Merchant in the Custom-house 5
per Cent. upon all Commodities, either weighed or measured, and allowances upon
Wines and Oils for leakage, and upon Clothes, Kersies, and such like, one in
ten for wrappers, with many other limited Observations, which are found
published in His Majesty's Declaration, before the printed Book of Rates for
Customs in England, etc.

In Germany, France, Italy, Netherlands.
In France, Germany, and many places of Italy, and in the Low Countries, the
Goods concealed are only forfeited; but the same may be afterward compounded
for, wherein the circumstances will in some places be considered, and the
manner how the Error grew, and whether it appear to be done with a set purpose
or not.

In Constantinople, Smyrna.
In Constantinople, Smyrna, and many places of Turkey, the Goods concealed are
not at all forfeited, but are to pay double the imposed Custom if taken, and
then to be again restored.

I have noted, that the Rates of the Customs are found to alter in sundry
Countries, as in Spain and Portugal is paid upon diverse Goods 10 per cent. upon
some 20 and 25 per cent. In Turkey is paid by the English only 3 per cent. but
by all other Christian Nations 5 per cent. and the same is not there paid nor
satisfied in Money, as in other Countries but in species and in kind, except
compounded for beforehand, and so by a value reduced into Moneys: so also it
is in some Countries more, and in some less, sometimes settled upon the hundred
in value, and sometimes upon the piece; and in China and some places of India
it is noted, that in favor of this Duty the Tessel and Ship is measured in
length, and breadth, and depth; and so by a certain rule and sum the Custom is
levied accordingly, upon all sorts of Goods aboard her without distinction
alike in bulk.

Impositions upon Goods.
Besides this Duty of Custom paid in most Cities by Merchants, as I have showed,
there is another Duty like to this, which is called by the name of Imposition,
because the same is imposed upon some certain and particular Commodities, and
not in general (as Customs are) upon all; the which also is not alike rated
upon all Wares: for though they be found now to be much of the same nature as
Customs are, yet originally they are conceived to be nothing but Custom
strained beyond a fair proportion, and are imposed oftentimes more for the
enriching of some private Courtier, than for the profit or benefit of the
Sovereign, and which in themselves are found to be very heavy, excessive and
burdensome upon some particular Commodities; and therefore, as there is a
necessity in the payment thereof, so is there likewise a necessity that the
same be truly learned and known, and also the Commodity upon which the same is
so imposed; lest otherwise the Trader make a short reckoning in his accounts,
and find this Impost to deceive him of his expected and hoped for gain.

Fees to Officers to be paid and known.
To conclude, Neither are these Duties thus to be only learned, and duly
satisfied according to the Customs and usance of every City and Country, but
also all such appurtenances as belong thereunto, in the passing of all Goods in
the said Offices and Custom-houses, as in Bills of Entries, Cockets,
Certificates, passing of Bonds, and all Fees thereunto appertaining and
thereupon depending, as to Waiters, Searchers, Clerks, Visitors, and such like,
be also known and satisfied, the better to avoid the dangers and Inconveniences
that may happen by the default thereof to the Goods whereupon the same is
liable.

These Customs then and Impositions thus varying by time, places and
circumstances, and imposed, altered and changed oftentimes at the will of the
Prince, are not by the industry of any one hand to be punctually known in all
places; therefore it suffices me to have given here these General Rules and
Observations, conducing both to the knowledge and the necessity of the
discharge and payment thereof, for the better Reiglement of Commerce in this
particular; therefore I may be held excusable, if I be found in this point to
be defective in this MAP, and so concluding herewith, proceed to the next
point, which is of the Moneys and Coins of sundry Kingdoms, used in the
Traffic of Merchandising.

CHAP. V. Of the Moneys and Coins of sundry Countries, used in general in the
Traffic of Merchandise.
Silver and Gold the most excellent of Metals.
AMongst all the diversity of Metals which GOD the Creator has shut up in the
closet and concavity of the Earth, none is accounted more singular and
excellent than Silver and Gold, of which the Communication and Commerce of
Mankind have framed and invented the use of Money and Coin, which Money and
Coin may be properly termed to be the Universal Measure of all things in the
World; and though that thus naturally and originally they be but Metals, and so
to be in themselves accounted, yet in value and estimation, Moneys and Coins
made thereof are to us (as all things,) for they are to us (converted once to
the use) as Meat, Cloth, House, Horse, and generally what other thing soever
Man has else need of; and thereby it is evident and manifested that all things
are obedient and in subjection to Moneys; and that by this device, a mean was
found out and invented, whereby one thing should be to Merchants as all, and
therefore men thrust forward by natural inclination and worldly judgment, chose
to this end and use at first, the thing that was found most durable, proper,
and maniable, which they only observed best to be Metal; Coins made of Silver
and Gold.
and amongst all Metals gave Silver and Gold the pre-eminence in the invention
of Moneys, which of their own nature was thus observed to be most durable and
incorruptible, and of which we find, as well in these our times, as in times
past, most Princes of the World, to make their current Coins of, between man
and man in Trade of Merchandise. Bartering and Exchanging before the use of
Gold and Silver.
I deny not but in the innocence of those golden times of old, when neither
Silver nor Gold was put to this use, there was yet a Traffic found, and a
Commerce practiced amongst Mankind, which may be imagined did not then extend
it self to buying and selling in that same nature, as now it is in use since
the invention of Moneys, but only to a Trucking, Exchanging, and Bartering, and
that only for things necessary to back and belly to feed and cloth, and so to
preserve life; but these times worn out by a more acute age, and men laying to
themselves a foundation of Sovereignty and Greatness, the stronger still
depriving the weaker, and riches thereby becoming desirable, this Mystery crept
up, and was admitted; and therefore from these two Minerals was found out a
Body, which once authorized by power of the Magistrate, had a predominancy over
all earthly things, and by which was squared out and levelled (as by an
indifferent measure) all things appertaining to Mankind, the abundance thereof
brought with it the abundance of honor, attendants, necessaries, and
superfluities, so that he that had most in his possession, was accounted of, as
being the most eminent and greatest personage in the eye, rule and esteem of
the World.

But to come to the present Times, though in general throughout all Europe, it
is now found that Coins and Moneys, of Silver and Gold, (as is before observed)
is only in use, and that all Commerce and Traffic is principally drawn and
maintained thereby; yet it is noted in this MAP, that all Nations have not yet
submitted their judgment to the Prerogative of these two Minerals, but retain
still in use some other things serving in their stead and place; Several sorts
of Moneys in several Countries. Moneys of Leather in S. Dominico, etc.
for first, in the Islands of Porto Riccio, Saint Dominico, and in many places
of America, they have in use small pieces of Leather, current for Coins amongst
them, not that they want Silver and Gold, for they enjoy it in greatest
abundance, but want the use and invention thereof; as of late days it is found
to be established there by the Spaniards as with us in Europe. Neither was this
only the custom of these parts alone; for it is observable, that in Peru, and
elsewhere, where the greatest plenty of Silver and Gold was found out and
dug, it was never put to this use by the Inhabitants themselves.

Diverse yet in this kind, to this day, is the custom of Coins and Moneys that
are used and goes current throughout the World; for beside the aforesaid use
whereto these Metals have been put, as to be thus employed, the common Standard
to rule all Trade and Commerce, and the Estates as well of the Prince as
Subject in Europe, and many other parts of the World: those Nations that have
been defective in this point, and that have not valued these Metals as the
Europeans do, have yet found out some particular thing or matter, whereto they
have by a National and unanimous consent, (as it were,) attributed this power
to have a main stroke in their Negotiation and Traffic, and wherein their
wealth is found principally to consist.

Moneys of Shells in Tombute.
In sundry parts of Africa, they use for their small Coins a kind of Shells as
current amongst them, though their greatest payments be made either in Sand of
Gold, which they term Tiburin, or an Ingot. The same is the use this day also
in the Kingdom of Tombuto, and other adjoining Countries.

Of Iron in Massa.
In other places of that Continent they use Iron for their Coin, their smallest
pieces being an ounce weight; and this is seen practiced in Massa, and other
Kingdoms also thereabout.

Of Lumaches in Congo.
In the Kingdom of Congo is taken up along the Seashore, great store of Shell
fishes, differing from the former used in Tombuto, called Lumaches, which they
distinguish male and female, the shell whereof is there accounted a Coin, and
wherewith they use to buy both Silver and Gold, but with Silver or Gold either
in Mass or Coin, can they not buy any other thing needful whatsoever.

Of Glass-Beads in Melinda.
In Melinda, they have little Balls of Glass, in manner of our red Beads, which
come to them from Cambaia and other places, and these are their Coins and
Moneys; and with them Gold is neither found to be of account nor esteem.

Of Salt and Paper in Cathay.
In some places of Cathay, their Money is a kind of Paper stamped, and in some
other Salt baked into small Cakes, for the excellent use and scarcity thereof,
passes current as Coins amongst them.

Of Ganza in Pegu.
In Pegu their Money is called Ganza, and is made of Copper and Lead, which
every man may at his pleasure both coin and stamp that is able; for Gold and
Silver is accounted as a Merchandise amongst them.

Of Almonds in Bengala.
In Bengala, their small Money is a fruit resembling the Almond, which passes
current from man to man in Traffic. Of Skulls of dead men in Sumatra.
And in the Island Sumatra it has been observed, that the skulls of their slain
Enemies was accounted their greatest treasure, with which they buy and barter;
and he is the richest man that has the greatest number thereof in his house.
Of Pepper and Cocos in India.
And lastly, in many places of India they use Pepper and Cocos-nuts in lieu of
Money, and the same passes current for Coin in many places of India: and to
conclude, it may be observed throughout this MAP of COMMERCE, that though
Silver and Gold is not the Metal generally in use for the coining and stamping
of Money throughout all the World; yet these other things specified, carry with
them in matter of Commerce in these places the like efficacy and power.

Money called by three several Names.
To proceed then, Budelius, Varro, and sundry Authors writing upon the original
of Moneys, and upon the excellency of this predominant point of Traffic,
affirm, That all Coins in the general have been nominated by their several and
distinct Names. 1. Moneta, 2. Nummus, 3. Pecunia; the reasons given thereof are
these: Moneta.
First, Moneta is said to have taken that name, and is derived a Monendo, which
is to admonish and warn the people of the name of the Prince, vel Nummi nota,
and of such a sign or mark impressed thereupon, thereby alluding to the faying
of CHRIST, Matthew. 22. Where the Pharisees brought him a penny, he thereupon
demanding whose image and superscription that was? and they answered, Caesar's;
then said he unto them, Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and unto GOD the things that are GOD's.

Nummus.
Secondly, Nummus is said to take its name, as some will have it, a Numerando
vel Numine, of the name of the Prince stamped upon it, as a Ducate is said from
Ducatus, or as some say, from Numa Pompilius the Roman King, who is said to be
the first that 1900 years past commanded Moneys to be made, whereof ever since
after his name every piece of Money is called Nummus; or again, as some hold,
it is derived from Nomos, which signifies a Law, and implies as much as such
a Prince or such a Commonwealth has ordained Money, from whom it has taken a
certain price and value.

Pecunia.
Thirdly, Pecunia is derived a Pecude, of Cattle, Sheep, and Oxen; wherein was
said to consist the wealth of the Ancients, and whereon the figure thereof was
stamped, and is constiued to be all manner of living Creatures, wanting the
form of Man: and some hold that the name of Money signifies, not only Money
numbered or told, but also all things that are contained in the World; as well
moveable as immovable, liquid as solid; and in general, all things whatsoever
Men have upon Earth.

From these three names and kinds grew first amongst the Romans a particular
distinction, and nomination of the quality of the species, as they were current
in worth and esteem amongst them: for they had then in use certain Moneys of
Copper, as well as the others of Silver and Gold: Denarii.
and because every piece of the Silver was in value ten pieces of the Copper, it
was called Denarius; and because every piece of Gold was worth ten pieces of
Silver, the same was also called Denarius; and thus for distinction sake, other
Nations in their Coins in after-ages followed their example; Easterling Money
of England.
and our English Moneys came to have the appellation of Sterling, and to be
distinguished into pounds, shillings, and pence, as some say from the
Easterlins that were in times past the Masters of our Mint, and the Refiners of
our Coins, which yet holds this name, and by which the same is known
throughout all Europe. But to conclude this Chapter, however Coins and Moneys
came to have their original and names, and however the same came to be
distinguished, and of what Metal soever the same is in these days found to be
made of and framed; yet when once the same is allowed by the public Authority
of the Prince and Sovereign Magistrate, Coins debased or altered is a capital
crime.
it is held a capital Crime in all Countries, either to deface, mend, alter, or
any ways to debase the same; and therefore most justly (the circumstances
considered) do the Coins of Princes current in all their Countries challenge a
principal part and interest in the Universal Commerce of the World.

A Table showing the fineness (compared with the Tower -Standard) the value as
Bullion, and the Intrinsic value of several Coins of foreign Nations, both
Silver and Gold; as they were Essayed in the Tower of London, June 1651. The
fineness compared with the Tower-Standard. The Names of the Coins of Silver.
The Weight by the Pound Troy. The Value as Bullion. The Value Intrinsic. oz.
dw. oz. dw. gr. s. d. s. d. Worse 0 10 Holland Rix Dollars 0 18 15 4 5^ 4 7
Worse 2 3 Lions Dollar 0 17 18 3 7 3 8^ Better 0 4 Ducate of Flanders 1 0 22 5
4 5 6 Worse 7^ Rix Dollar of the Emper. 0 18 15 4 6 4 7^ Standard. Mexico Ryals
of Eight 0 17 12 4 4 4 6 Better 0 1 Sevil Ryals of Eight 0 17 12 4 4 4 6 Worse
0 1 Old Cardecus 0 6 3 1 6 1 7 0 0 French Jews of sixty Soll 0 17 11 4 4 4 6^
0 1 Old Milre of Portugal 0 14 4 3 6 3 8 0 1 St. Mark of Venice 0 10 4 2 7 2 8
4 6 Double Stiver 0 1 0 0 1^ 0 1^ 0 12 Cross Dollar 0 18 0 4 3 4 4 2 0 Zealand
Dollar 0 13 0 2 8 2 9 0 1 Single Milre of Portugal 0 7 4 1 9 1 10 1 0 Old Phil.
Dollar 1 2 0 5 0 5 2 0 1 Portugal Testoon 0 5 0 1 2^ 1 3^ 0 12 Far. Dollar
1623. 0 18 6 1 3 4 5 0 10 Prince Orange Dollar 1623. 0 18 6 4 4 4 6 0 9 Leopold
Dollar of 1624. 0 18 2 4 4 4 5 0 10 Rodolph. Dollar of 1607. 0 18 7 4 4 4 6 0 4
Max, Emp. Dollor 1616. 0 18 2 4 5 4 7 0 13 Danish Dollar 1620. 0 13 0 3 0^ 3 1^
0 0 Half a new French Crown 0 8 18 2 2^ 2 3^ 0 0 A new quart Card. 0 4 9 1 1^ 1
1^ 0 0 The of a new Card. 0 1 11 0 4 0 4 The fineness compared with the
Tower-Standard. The Names of the Coins of Gold. The Weight by Troy. The Value
as Bullion. The Value Intrinsic. Car. gr. dw. gr. l. s. d. l. s. d. Worse 0 0
French Jews 8 14 1 8 7^ 1 9 2 Worse 0 0 Holland Rider 6 10 1 1 6 1 1 11 Better
1 2 Hungary Ducket 2 6 0 8 0 0 8 2 Worse 0 0 Pistolet of Spain 4 8 0 14 5 0 14
8 2 0 Flemish Alber 3 8 0 10 11 0 11 1 3 1 Flemish half Alber 1 20 0 0 Double
Sow of Flanders 7 3 1 3 10 1 4 3 0 1 Italian Pistolet 4 6 0 13 11 0 14 2 4 2
The Gilder of 2 3 0 5 7 0 5 8 3 1 Gild Matthew. Emperor 2 3 0 6 0 0 6 1 3 2 Gild
of Norimberg 2 3 0 5 11 0 6 0 0 0^ Milre of Portu 7 12 1 5 0^ 1 5 6 Better 1 3
Venice Chequeen 2 5 0 8 0 0 8 2

A Table of the Gold and Silver weights of several Nations, taken from the
Standards, and compared with the Denarius or Pound Troy English, consisting of
5760 Grains. SUch parts, or grains, of the English Standard for Gold, and
Silver (or of the Troy weight) as the Denarius Consularis contains 62,
according to the weight of the best Coins, or according to the weight of the
Congius of Vespasian 62 Grains. The ancient and modern Roman ounce contains
438 grains. The ancient and modern Roman pound, consisting of twelve ounces,
contains 5256 grains. The Troy pound, or English Standard of Gold and Silver,
consisting of twelve ounces, contains 5760 grains. The Troy or English ounce
(to which five shillings two pence of our Money in these times are equal)
contains 480 gr. The Paris pound, or Standard for Gold and Silver of 16
ounces 7560 gr. The Paris ounce 472 gr. The Spanish Pound or Standard for Gold
and Silver of 16 ounces, taken by me at Gibralter, 7090 gr. Another weighed by
me at Gibralter, 7085 gr. The Spanish Pound in Vilalpondus is (I know not by
what error) but 7035 gr. The Spanish ounce at Gibralter, the Pound consisting
of 7090 grains English 443 gr. The Venetian Pound, or Standard for Gold and
Silver, of 12 ounces 5528 gr. The Venetian ounce 460 gr. The Neapolitan Pound
or Standard for Gold and Silver of 12 ounces 4950 gr. The Neapolitan ounce 412
gr. The Pound or Standard for Gold and Silver of twelve ounces at Florence,
Pisa, and Legorn, 5286 gr. The ounce at Florence, Pisa, and Legorn, 440^ gr.
The Pound or Standard at Siena for Gold and Silver of twelve ounces 5178 gr.
The ounce at Siena 431 gr. The ounce at Genoa for Gold and Silver 405 gr. The
Turkish Oketh or Oak, at Constantinople, consisting of four hundred silver
drams, 19128 grains. The Silver Dram generally used in the great Turks
Dominions, as also in Persia, and in the Moguls Countries, if I be not
misinformed, 47 41/50 gr. The Turkish Sultani, or Egyptian Xeriff, being a
Gold-coyn, with which the Barbary and Venetian Chequeen, and Norimberg Ducat,
within a grain more or less, agree 53 gr. The Ratel, or Rotulo, for Gold and
Silver of 144 drams at Cairo, 6886^ dr. The Ratel, or Rotulo, for Silk of 720
drams at Damascus, with which I suppose they there formerly weighed their Gold
and Silver; because most Countries use the same weights for Silks, Gold, and
Silver) 34430 gr.


The Standard for Gold, An. 1577. was 23 Carots, 3 grains and of fine Gold, and
grain of Silver or Copper. 12 oz. of Gold of the said fineness is valued at 36
l. 1 oz. of the same 3 l. 1 Kes of the same 1 l. 10. 1 Kes. grain 7 s. 6. 1
Penny weight 3 s. 1 Small grain 1 d. ob. 1 Carot upon the ounce is in value 2 s.
6 d. 1 Carot is in value 7 d. ob. 1 Small grain 1 d. ob. 12 oz. of Angels of
Gold has in them half a Carot grain of Allay, which is 30 small, and 5730
small grains of fine Gold, which makes together 5760 grains, being 24 Carots
or 12 oz. Troy.


The Standard of Crown Gold is 22 Carots of fine Gold, and 2 Carots of Allay,
which 24 Carots or 11 oz. fine Gold, and 102 of Allay makes the Pound Troy, by
which reckoning 12 oz. of Crown Gold is in Money 33 l. 1 oz. of the said Gold
is 2 l. 15 s. 1 Carot of the said Gold is 1 l. 7 s. 6.


It is to be noted, That all Gold is in value by the Ounce according as it is
in fineness, that is to say, l. s. d. The ounce of fine Gold is in value 3 0 0
23 Kes. fine 2 17 6 22 Kes. 2 15 0 21 Kes. 2 12 6 20 Kes. 2 10 0

And so losing its value 2 s. 6. d. per ounce, as it wants a Carot in fineness
in 24. or Pound Troy.

King James by Proclamation, dated at Westminster, 16 Nov. 2d year of his
Reign, appointed several Coins of Gold and Silver of one Standard, with their
weights according to the Account of the Mintmen of both Nations, which is
expressed in this following Table. Note, that the Pound Troy is greater than the
Pound Scotch by 4 penny weight and 9 gr. English Weight. s. d. Penny with. 20.
Grains 24. Mites 20. Droit 24. Perots 20. Blanks 24. Pieces of Gold. 20 6 10 16
18 10 10 3 5 8 9 5 5 1 14 14 4 12 12 4 1 6 19 8 10 2 6 0 19 7 2 6 6 Pieces of
Silver. 5 19 8 10 8 2 6 9 16 5 4 12 3 20 18 1 10 6 1 22 9 0 15 2 0 15 9 16 5 1
0 7 14 20 2 12 0 3 17 10 1 6 Scotch Weight. Denies. Grains 24. Primes 24.
Seconds 24. Thirds 24. Fourths 24. Pieces of Gold. 7 21 7 1 19 0 3 22 15 12 21
1 23 7 8 10 1 13 20 16 8 0 23 15 4 5 0 Pieces of Silver. 23 15 21 5 0 13 11 19
22 14 12 6 4 17 13 20 1 0 2 8 18 22 0 12 0 18 22 7 8 4 0 9 11 3 16 2 0 4 17 13
20 1

To know the goodness of Gold or Silver upon the Touchstone, by comparing it
unto certain Wires or Needles of Gold and Silver of several allays, which is
approved by Pliny Book 33. Chap. 18. before the way of Trial by Essay by Fire;
for that there are many casualities in the practice of making Essays by Fire;
and the other by the Touch is visible to the Eye

Those Needles or Wires to be made of four sorts: First, they be made of Gold
and Silver; Second, of Gold and Copper; Third, Of Gold, Silver, and Copper; And
fourth, Of Silver and Copper: The three first sorts are only for the Trial of
Gold, and the last for Silver.

Let there be 24 Needles of Wires made of the several mixture or allays
following: The 1 of 24 Carot, that is of fine Gold. 2 23 Carot of fine Gold,
and 1 Carot of Silver. 3 22 2 4 21 3 5 20 4 And so still 1 Carot worst, till
you have but one Carot of fine Gold, and 23 of Silver, all marked of what
fineness each Needle or Wire is of, Also there may be made the like of the
other two mixtures, viz. of Gold and Copper, likewise of Gold, Silver, and
Copper.

For the making those Wires or Needles for Trial of Silver, let the mixture or
Allay be as follows.: The 1 of fine Silver. 2 11 ounces of fine Silver, and 1
ounces of Copper. 3 10 2 4 9 3And so till you have 1 ounce of Silver, and 11
ounces of Copper; all marked of what fineness it is.

The use of these several Needles is, if you desire to know the goodness or
fineness of any Ingot, or piece of Gold or Silver, touch the said Ingot or
piece upon your Touchstone, and by it touch such of your Needles as shall be
most like the touch of your Ingot, which will better appear being wetted with
your tongue, and that of your Needle the Gold or Silver Ingot or Piece is best
like unto, of that finess it will be found to be.

Shows the Fineness or Goodness of diverse several Coyns of Gold and Silver,
and the Rates of certain foreign Pieces of Gold and Silver (not current) as the
^nce is worth in the Kings Mints here in England.

Old Moneys. Carots. gr. Double Ducates the Essay 23 2 Reysers Rials 23 3
Crusados Short-Cross 22 3 Crusados Long-Cross 22 1 French Crown 22 0 Half
Suffrants or old Crown 21 3 Pistolets of Spain 21 3 Milres 22 Philippus Crowns
17 3 Flemish Angel the better sort 22 Flemish Angel the worse 18 Old Portuguez
23 3 The old Spureal 23 3 The old Noble 23 3 The old Angel 23 3 The George
Noble 23 3 The Salute 23 3 The Angel with the Gun-hole 22 The great old
Sovereign weight, 18 d w. 23 The old Crown of Hen. 8th. 21 The old Sovereign of
Hen. 8th. 22 The great Sovereign of Hen. 8th, 20 The half Sovereign of Hen.
8th. 20 The Edw. Sovereign 21 The Eliz. Sovereign and Crown 22 The French Noble
The Unicorn of Scotland The Philippus Real 23 2 The old French Crown 22 2 The
Flanders Rider 23 2 The Guelders Rider The Cullen Gulden The Flanders Noble 23
2 The Golden Lion 23 The Ducat of Castile 23 2 The old Andreas Gulden 18 3 The
Philippus Gulden 15 3 The Ducate of Valence 23 2 The Hungary Ducates of several
sorts 23 2 The Ducates of Rome, Bullen, and Millain 23 2 The Barbary Gold 23 2
The double Pistolet with the Picture of a King crowned on the one side, and
Arms on the other side, dated 1578 21 3 The 2 double Pistolets, with the
Picture of a King Crowned on the one side, and Arms on the other 21 3 The
double Pistolet with an Image like an Apostle on the one side, and Arms on the
other, dated 1566. 23 1 The double Pistolet with a Spread-Eagle Crowned, and
Arms in a Scutcheon, with 2 Letters. S. R. 23 3

The Fineness or Goodness of certain Coins of Silver. oz. pw. A Dollar with 4
Hages and 4 Peeps over, and 4 Crowns over the Peeps, and an Emperor on the
other side, dated 1577. 8 18 A Dollar with 3 Horns in a Scutcheon, and two
Crests, and a Horseman on the other side. 9 19 A Dollar with a Ramping Lion and
a Spread-Eagle on the other side. 9 18 A Dollar with a Lion, a Scutcheon in his
foot, and a Spread-Eagle on the other side. 9 17 A Dollar with a Man's Body to
the Waste, and on the other side Arms, and two Crosses 9 14 A Dollar with the
Picture of the Duke of Saxony, and a Head of both sides, and over the Head two
Swords across 10 17 A small piece of Money with Scripture, and the other side a
Man's Head 10 10 A Dollar with a Cross and a Crown, dated 1569 10 18 A Dollar of
Maximilian, with a Spread-Eagle and the Picture of the Emperor, dated 1569 10
12 A Dollar with a Cross and a Crown, dated 1569. 10 14 A Dollar with three
Scutcheons and Arms, with the Picture of our Lady on the other side. 10 18 A
Dollar with three Scutheons, and Arms in them, and a Cross with Arms on the
other side. 10 18 A Dollar with three Scutcheons and Arms, and a Spread-Eagle
on the other side, dated 1549. 10 18 A Dollar with a Spread-Eagle and a Crown
over his Head, and the Picture of a Man on the other side, 1573. 10 15 A Dollar
with an Arms and Picture of a Man, dated 1549. 10 14 A Dollar with 3 Scutcheons
and Arms in them, and a Spread-Eagle with a Talbotshead, dated 1549. 11 2 A
Dollar with three Crowns and a Spread-Eagle, a Phillippus Dollar of the baser
sort 6 16 A Dollar with three Crowns and a Spread-Eagle. 10 14 A Dollar with a
Ramping Lion on the one side, and a Lion in a Scutcheon and half a Man on the
other side. 8 18 A Dollar with a Heart, and the Arms in a Scutheon. 10 12 A
Dollar with a Wild Man holding a Candle in his hand, and a ragged Staff on the
other side, 1571. 10 14 A Dollar of the same and like Superscription. 10 13 A
Dollar with the Image of the Duke of Saxony and his Arms. 10 15 A Dollar of the
same with like Superscription. 10 12 A Dollar with a Lion in the Scutcheon, and
half a man over the Lion, and a Ramping Lion on the other side 9

Spanish Moneys. A Spanish piece of Money with a sheaf of Arrows 11 2 Another
piece with a Cross and a Lion 11 3 Another piece with a Castle 11 2 Another
piece with Pillars and a Castle 11 3 A small piece of Money of Earl of
Swarborrow 11 4 A Spanish Ryal 10 Another Spanish Ryal. 9

Other Foreign Coins. A French Testoon with 3 Flower-de-luces, and 2 H. with
Crowns over them, and the Kings Picture 10 15 Another Testoon with a
Flower-de-luce and the Kings Picture. 10 2 Another Testoon with a Cross and an
H. in the midst of the Cross, and a Face on the other side 10 1 A French piece
of Money, being called a Half Crown, with a Picture of a King, and on the other
side an Arms with 2 Lions, 6 Flower-de-Luces in a Scutcheon crowned, and 2 E.
on either side the Arms, dated 1682. 10 Also new French Moneys with three
Flower-de-Luces in the Scutcheon, and a Cross with Flower-de-Luces on the end
10 18 A French Soul 3 5 A piece of Portugal Money, being a Crusade on the one
side, and the Arms of Portugal on the other 11 1 Plate made in Lions in France
marked with a Lions head 11 4 A piece of Russia Money 11 2 A Mustecego of
Venice 11 8 A Marsello of Venice 11 8 A Bagatin of Venice 11 8 A piece of
Russia Money 11 12 A piece of Bollonia Money 9 16 A piece of French Money
called a Florin 11 2 A penny of France 4 11 A Slaper of France 10 16 A Snaphen
of Gelderland 7 15 Another Snaphen of Gelderland 8 Other Money of Gelderland 4
18 Other Money of Gelderland 3 4 A Snaphen of Cleve 7 A Snaphen of Deventer 8 A
Snaphen of Campen 8 A Slaper of Millain 11 11 A Slaper of Ravenna 11 10 A
Slaper of Ferrara 11 A Slaper of Sien 10 2 A Slaper of Monferrat 7 5 A Cornebot
of Monferrat 6 6 Another Slaper of Monferrat 11 8 A Slaper of Bourn 11 0 A
Slaper of Portugal 11 A Slaper of Foboria 11 A Slaper of Baden 11 A Slaper of
Wirtenberg 10 16 A Slaper of Lorain 10 A Slaper of Savoy 7 12 A Slaper of
Piedmont 5 6 A Slaper of Salusen 6 10 Another Slaper of Piedmont A Cornbot of
Salusen 7 4 A Slaper of third Alonson 6 6 Targe of Piedmont 6 10 Stick of Salen
6 6

Of Old English Money and Edward Pence, of 20 to the Ounce. Civitas London 11 2
Civitas Chester 10 17 Civitas Kingston 10 18 Villa St. Edmondsbury 10 13
Civitas Barwick 10 18 Civitas L. Bors 11 1 Civitas L. Bors 11 Civitas
Canterbury 10 18 Canterbury Civitas 11 1 Henry 3d. a Penny 11 2 Henry 3d. a Penny
11 2 A Groat of King Edw. 3d. 10 19 A Groat of King Edw. 4th. 10 19 A Groat of
Hen. 8th. 10 18 An old Henry Groat with a long Face and long Hair 10 19 A
Gun-hole Groat, Hen. 8th. 9 The first Gun-stone Groat of Hen. 8th. 8 The second
Gun-stone Groat of Hen. 8th. 6 A Sixpence of King Edw. 6th. 10 19 A Sixpence
of P. and Mary 10 18 A Groat of Hen. 8th. 11 1 The first Harp. Groat of Hen.
8th. 4 The second Harp. Groat 10 Another Harp Groat 6 19 An Irish Harp- Groat
10 Another Irish Harp. Groat 5 19 A Scottish Groat 9 1 Another Scottish Groat 9
16 A Penny of Genoa 10 3 Carolus of Burgundy 10 Money of Anglesey 6 A Penny of
Camarien 11 A Groat of Poland 9

Of the Carot Weight used only for Precious Stones and Pearls.

This is a Weight brought from the Venetians, and derived from the Indians or
Moors, called Mangear or Fanan, which is a Weight not much differing from this
called a Carot-Weight, whereof 150 Carots in weight do make one ounce Troy;
this Carot weight is divided into 64 Carots, 32 Carots, 16 Carots, 8 Carots, 4
Carots, 2 Carots, 1 Carot, Carot, Carot, ^ Carot, ^ Carot.

The Weights used in India for buying and selling Precious Stones and Pearls
by, is called Mangeluy or Mangear, (about 5 Grains in weight) and weighs two
Tarrs, which is parts of 1 Carot, being 4 grains and 4 Tarrs weight a Fanan,
which is also a weight somewhat above 2 of our Carots; for 11 Fanans and is one
Mitigal, and 6 Mitigals and do make 1 Ounce. A Fanan also is a kind of Money,
which is in value 1 Ryal of Spain.

Now follows the Rule in Proportion, how to value the true Rate of a Diamond,
or any other Stone valuable, as Merchants of skill do use to value them one
from the other: the Diamond being as chief of all Precious Stones, is sold by
weight from Merchant to Merchant, called by the English, German, and Venetian,
a Carot weight, as before is rehearsed.

The Diamond has a very certain thickness, whereby it is certainly wrought out
and polished upon the Mill; for it must not be too thick, nor too thin; for
then it will not bear his Tent, but must have his just proportion of thickness
to bear his Tent, or else to be set on Velvet as a thin Stone; the proportion
is, that the two squares on the sides must make the breadth of the upper part
of the Stone, and the under part of the Stone be no broader than that three of
the breadths thereof will make the breadth of the upper part, and in depth
according to the same proportion, and the squares called Bizils must stand
close with the edge of the Ring or Collet, wherein it is set, being of the
whole depth, and somewhat longer than square, and yet no more than that it may
be guerted, which is the length and breadth thereof. Also it must be without
any faults both in corners or sides, and every one of the four corners sharp
and clean cut without any naytness, and of a good water-crystalline, and
shining clear, not yellow or brown, bluish or blackish, but clear and clean in
all perfection. Then we may say, a Diamond thus perfect weighing one Carot, is
worth 50 Ducates, but now much altered from that value to double the same, as a
Diamond of that perfection before spoken of, weighing 1 Carot, is worth 30, 35,
or 40 lib. Sterling; but a Diamond not so perfect (though a good Stone) clean,
and wanting a corner, is in estimation less worth by 10 Ducats, or according to
Arbitrament of the Buyer. Note also, that some Diamonds are not worth passing
34, 35, or 36 Dollars a Carot, which are likewise bought by the Merchant, as
the humor leads him. But when you will value a Diamond, you must look
effectually of what water and fashion it is, as the best proportion is either
the square Table or pointed, then if it has all his depth (called in Art,
Full-ground) which is soon seen in a Stone unset, and easily discerned in one
set in a Ring or Jewel; for being a full-ground Stone, it stands upon his
Tent, as you shall easily perceive by the reflection of the Collet the Stone
stands in; otherwise being a half-^ound Stone, or a thin Stone, it stands
upon Velvet, which is easily perceived by any that is well versed in the
setting or selling of Diamonds; then if it be foul, or want corners, or any
hair or other fault in it, the damage and hurt that it brings to the value of
the Stone is bated in the price of the first Carot (if it be a Stone of a
greater weight) and so shall you not be so soon deceived as otherwise. You must
first understand, that the value and price of a perfect Diamond, or any other
Precious Stone, is first valued from a Carot weight being 4 Grains, as
aforesaid, the which is the groundwork for the Merchant or Jeweller to value a
Diamond by, to know the Price thereof.

Then the half Carot weight is in value the price of the fourth part of a
Carot; as for Example, If the Carot be worth 40 Ducates, then the fourth part
is 10 Ducates, which is the price of a Diamond of half a Carot; so a grain is
reckoned worth a fourth part of half a Carot, which is 2 Ducates and a half,
after the rate of 40 Ducates the Carot, as aforesaid; and so you may value a
Diamond or other Stone at any price whatsoever the Carot shall be rated at,
weighing never so much.

So that if you have a Diamond that weighs more than a Carot, as a Carot and
half, or a Carot and 1 Grain; then take this for a General Rule, that you must
bring the weight of your Carot and half Carot all into half Carots; and so in
like manner, if it be a Carot and a Grain, you must bring both into Grains; As
for Example, If you have a Table Diamond in all Perfection, as is aforesaid,
weighing one Carot, be worth 40 Ducates, (or any other sum you will value a
perfect Diamond at) then shall a Diamond of 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 Carots, be worth
at that rate, as follows: As suppose it be 2 Carots, multiply that by 2, it
makes 4, which multiply by 40 Ducates (the value we here take for a Diamond of
1 Carot) and it produces 160 Ducates, being the value of a perfect Diamond of
2 Carots; so you may value all Diamonds of any weight if it be 100 Carots or
more, by multiplying the weight by so much more, and multiply that product by
the value of your Carot. Secondly, If you have a Table Diamond of 2 Carots and
half, then bring the Carots and half Carots into half Carots, which is 5 half
Carots, then multiply that 5 by 5 make 25 half Carots, which multiply by 10
Ducates, the fourth part of 40 Ducates, the price of a Carot amounts to 250
Ducates, which is the true value of a Diamond weighing 2 Carots and half.
Thirdly, If you have a Table Diamond of 7 Grains, which is 1 Carot and 3
Grains, then bring the Carot and Grains into Grains, and multiply it one by the
other, saying 7 times 7 is 49 Grains, which is to be multiplied by the fourth
part of the half Carot being reduced, and half and the product is the value of
the said Diamond of 7 Grains, which is 127 Ducates. Again, suppose you value a
Diamond at 30 l. Sterling (as one of that weight of former goodness is now
worth in London) and according to that rate a Diamond is worth 1 l. 17 s. 6 d.
Sterling; which Rule is now followed by those that Trade in them, although you
cannot buy a Table Diamond of 1 gr. under 2 l. 10 s. or 3 l. Sterling, which is
after the rate of 40 or 48 pound a Diamond of 1 Carot.

Again, I would know the value of a perfect Table Diamond of 10 Carots,
according to the rate of 30 l. a Diamond of 1 Carot: Do thus, Multiply the
weight of your Diamond by it self, which is 10 by 10, and it produces 100,
which multiply by 30 l. the price of a Diamond of 1 Carot, the product is 3000
l. the price of a Diamond of 10 Carots.

Again, I desire to know the price of a Table Diamond weighing 10 Carots and 1
Grain, bring all into Grains and they make 41, which multiply by it self makes
1681; this multiplied by the value of 1 Grain, which is 1 l. 17 s. 6 d. and the
product will be 3151 l. 17 s. 6 d.

The value of a Diamond of any weight from 1 Grain to 8 Carots, according to
the value of a Diamond of 1 Grain to be worth 1 l. 17 s. 6 d. may be seen in
this following Table.

The Value of Thick Table Diamonds according to their Weight. l. s. d. A
Diamond weighing 1 Grains is worth 1 17 6 2 7 10 0 3 16 17 6 1 Carot 30 00 0 5
Grains 46 17 6 6 65 16 0 7 91 09 0 2 Carots 120 00 0 9 Grains 149 19 0 10 187
10 0 11 226 09 0 12 Carots 270 00 0 13 Grains 316 17 14 367 10 15 421 17 4
Carots 480 17 Grains 558 10 18 599 19 676 17 5 Carots 750 21 Grains 826 17 6 22
899 4 23 991 17 6 6 Carots 1080 25 Grains 1171 17 6 26 1229 8 4 27 1363 14 6 7
Carots 1470 29 Grains 1576 17 6 30 1687 6 4 31 1751 17 6 8 Carots 1920

The Value of thin Table Diamonds, being a thin Stone (in show of 2 Grains) and
weighs 1 gr. l. s. A Diamond weighing 1 Grains is worth 2 10 2 10 3 22 1
Carots 40 5 Grains 62 10 6 90 7 122 7 2 Carots 160 9 Grains 202 10 10 250 11
302 10 3 Carots 360 13 Grains 422 10 14 490 15 562 10 4 Carots 640 17 Grains
722 10 18 810 19 902 10 5 Carots 1000

The like may be said of any Diamond of any other fashion, as Triangular,
Nails, Roses, Roots and the like; which are of less value than the Table
Diamond weight for weight, in regard their beauty is not proportionable to
their weight; so that a Diamond of Perfection of that fashion weighing one
Carot is not esteemed worth above 46 Ducates.

The Value of Brut Diamonds, or Naifs, Rocks and Flat-Stone, as they are sold
at Goa in India by their weight; and likewise the value of the like Diamond
sold here in London by the Carot. The Indian Weight is called a Mangear, which
is of a Carot, and the Fanan is about 6 d. Sterling. Indian Value. Fanans.
English Value. Ducates. 8 Diamonds weighing 1 Mangear is in value 30 Flat
Diamonds weighing 1 in a Carot is in value 21 6 1 40 Naif and Rock 2 14 4 1 60
Flat 2 16 2 1 80 Flat 2 15 1 1 100 Naif 3 21 1 1 165 Rock 3 9 1 1^ 180 Naif 4
18 1 1 220 Naif 4 17 1 2 320 Flat 4 12 1 2 360 Rock 4 7 1 2 380 Naif 5 12 1 2
420 Rock 5 9 1 3 450 Naif and Rock 6 10 1 3 480 Naif 7 15 1 4 550 Flat 8 9 1 5
750 Rock 9 5 1 8 800 Naif 12 14 1 7 1200 1 8 1400 So do the Indians increase in
price, as the Stones in weight.

There are also two sorts of Diamonds called Boards, the one white, the other
black; out of the white are gathered (by those that deal in Boards) all sorts
of small Diamonds under 12 in a Carot.

A parcel of Brut Diamonds brought out of Portugal. l. s. l. s. d. 50 Brut
Diamonds weighing Carots 9 at 3 The Carot is 29 12 6 39 Brut Diamonds 15 2 10
37 16 3 11 Brut Stones 2 2 5 5 6 10 22 Brut Stones 2 2 5 9 5 7 6 Brut Diamonds
1 2 5 2 16 3 128 Diamonds 32 84 17 5

Note, That all great Stones under 5 in 1 Carot are cut by the Carot, and all
small Stones above 5 in a Carot are cut by the piece.

Of the Ruby called the Carbuncle.

This Stone is found in Zeilam in the Indies, and in great esteem among the
People of that Island. The way they use to try if they be right, is by putting
them into the fire for the space of certain hours and if they come out of the
fire burning as a Coal, those are they which are esteemed amongst them; they
are esteemed according to the height of Color; the more perfect red, the
better: they distinguish the goodness by Carots in Color; as 24 Carots in
color is the highest perfection, and so several degrees of goodness downward
from 24 Carots to 18, 16, 14, 12, to 10 Carots in color.

The value of the Carbuncle, as they are bought at Calicut in India.

A Carbuncle of so high a color, and tried in the fire, weighing 1 Carot,
which is Fanata is worth in Calicut 30 Fanans. Fanans. 1 of 2 Carots of the
like color is worth 65 1 3 150 1 3 200 1 4 300 1 4 350 1 5 400 1 5 450 1 6 30
1 6 560 1 7 630 1 7 660 1 8 800 1 8 900 1 10 1300 1 10 1600 1 12 2000 1 14 3000
1 16 6000 And so they proceed to increasing in price as they do in weight.

Of the Ruby.

It is found in a River of Pegu in India, the best is esteemed of a perfect
red, but will not endure the fire, but loses his color therein, being thereby
distinguished from the Carbuncle. There are diverse kinds of Rubies, as the
Carbuncle, the Ballass, the Spinal, the Gurnet, and the Rubas, but the Oriental
Ruby is esteemed the best next the Carbuncle. A Ruby that is squared Table wise
and without fault, and is to fit with a Diamond of the same weight of 16, 18,
20, or 24 Carots in color (as is spoken of the Carbuncle) such a Rubie is
worth in the Indies, weighing a Fanan, 100 Ducates; but there be few Rubies be
perfect of that greatness, the usual way of computing the value of a Ruby is
the same as it is with a Diamond: First, to consider the number of Carots in
Color, and then in weight, and the price does augment proportionable to the
Diamond; or if you shall value of a Ruby of 1 Carot weight to 70 Ducates, and
would know the value of one weighing 2 Carots of like Carots in color,
multiply 2 by 2 makes 4, which multiply by the value of one Carot being 70
Ducates, produces your desire, as in this following Table. l s. A Ruby in show
to accompany a Diamond of 1 Grains is worth 2 10 2 10 3 22 10 1 Carots is worth
40 2 160 3 360 4 640

A Ruby of 20 Carots in color, and weight 11 Carots and, was sold for 350 l.
and sold again for 640 l. Sterling in London.

Another Ruby of most excellent beauty of 24 Carots in color, and weighed 1
Carot 3 Grains 1/^ was sold in London for 60 l. and and sold again for 120 l.

The Proportionable Value of Rubies bought and sold by the Indians. Fanans. 8
Rubies weighing 1 Fanan, which is 2 Carots, is worth 10 4 1 20 2 1 40 1 30 1 1
50 1 1 55 1 1 100 1 1 150 1 2 200 1 2 300 1 3 400 1 3 550 1 4 630

The Saphyre is a Stone found in the Island of Zeilam, Calicut, Canoner,
Basinger, and Pegu, is of four sorts; the best is an Azure Sky-colour, and
valued as it excels in color, and of a most perfect blew, it excels all
other Stones in hardness (the Diamond excepted.)

The Value of the best Oriental Sapphires as they are sold in the Islands of
Zeilam, is after this Rate and Proportion. Fanans. 1 A Sapphire weighing 1
Carots is worth 2 1 2 5 1 3 10 1 4 15 1 5 18 1 10 55 1 15 180 1 16 200 1 17 250

A Saphyre weighing 1 Mitegal, which is 11 Fanans and that is about 23 Carots,
is worth after the rate aforesaid, 350.

The Turquoise is of a thick green color, or between a green and skie-colour,
and of small weight; the softest of all thick-coloured Stones, is in good
esteem in India, and is esteemed the better for having black veins, it being
then accounted of the old Rock. The price in India, according to the weight is
in proportion following: Fanans. 1 Weighing 1 Carots is worth 15 1 2 40 1 4 80
1 6 150 1 8 200 1 10 300 1 12 450 1 14 550

Of the Pearl Oriental.

Unio is the Latin word (in English Pearl) so called, for that it is a hard
matter to find two Pearls alike for bigness, figure, shape, water, and
brightness. The greatest and better sort of Pearl are found between Ormus and
Buzera in the Straits of Persia. There is also a fishing for Pearl near the
Island of Zeilam, but of lower price: Likewise there are Pearls found near the
Island of Burneo, and Island of Anian; but those of Ormus surpass them all.
They are fished for by diverse that dive into the Sea, some 10, 15, and 10
fathom deep; they grow in Oyster-shells; the Diverse have Baskets tied to their
back to put the Oysters in, and bring them up from the bottom of the Sea, and
put them into Boats; the fish are laid in the Sun, and there open themselves;
and when the fishing is over for that day, the Captain and Soldiers for the
King of Portugal, together with the Diverse and Laborers, take the Pearls, and
divide them into four parts, one of which is taken for the King, the second for
the Captain and Soldiers, the third for the Jesuits (whose Cloister is hard
by) and the fourth for the Diverse, Fishers, and their Laborers. This fishing
is only in the Summertime; there is found in some Oysters 200 Grains or Pearl.
Pearls are sold by the Indians by Sieves of Latton full of holes, from smaller
to greater, to the proportion of 12, one bigger than the other; and so the
price in proportion accordingly; the smallest sorts are used by Apothecaries
for Medicine. They use in India where they are fished, to have Rice beaten
small with Salt, with which they rub the Pearl to put a gloss upon them.

The way to value Oriental Pearl from a Grain in weight to any bigness
whatsoever; as also they are usually sold in the Indies and with us. A Pearl
that is in all parts perfect both of water, gloss, and beauty, without knobs,
specks, yellowness, and other imperfection; of form very round, or like a
Pearl, being of the weight of one Carot, is worth one Ducate; and after this
rate you are to make your reckoning, as you have done before with Diamonds and
Rubies; but if there be any fault in the water, clearness, fashion, knobs,
specks, dents, or other default, it must be considered what hurt it may be to
the sale thereof, and according to the goodness or badness value the price
thereof,; which having valued, you try the weight thereof, or by your measure
exactly made (there being such for that purpose) and then make your account, as
before is said; and if there be a whole string or chain, you must look well
upon them if they be all alike, or else make your value thereafter.

The Proportion or Value of Pearl as they are sold in India and Portugal. 1
Pearl of 1 Carots Pardons 1 1 1 3 1 2 6 1 2 8 1 3 12 1 3 16 1 4 20 1 4 30 1 5
35 1 6 40 1 6 45 1 7 50 1 7 60 1 8 70

Small Pearl are sold by the Ivora at Ormus and Goa. The 1 Ivoras for 34
Marividis is worth 6 d. Sterling. 2 180 3 80 4 18 5 8

Seed-Pearl that are small and cannot be holed, are for the Apothecaries; the
ounce is worth about 20 Marividis.

The Value of any Oriental Pearl of any bigness from 1 Grain to 30 Carots of
excellent beauty and perfection for color and shape, as they are usually
bought and sold with us, according to the proportion of weight, and of like
perfection. l. s. d. A Pearl weighing 1 Grains is worth 0 0 7 ob. 2 0 2 6 3 0 5
7 ob. 1 Carot 0 10 0 5 Grains 0 15 2 ob. 6 1 6 8 7 1 10 7 ob. 2 Carots 2 0 0 9
Grains 2 18 6 10 3 2 6 11 3 15 7 ob. 3 Carots 4 10 0 13 Grains 5 5 7 ob. 14 6 8
0 15 7 0 7 ob. 4 Carots 8 0 0 17 Grains 9 15 6 18 10 2 6 19 11 5 7 ob. 5 Carots
12 10 10 21 Grains 13 15 7 ob. 22 15 2 6 23 16 10 7 ob. 6 Carots 18 0 6 25
Grains 19 10 7 ob. 26 21 2 6 27 22 15 7 ob. 7 Carots 24 10 0 29 Grains 26 6 7
ob. 30 28 2 6 31 30 0 7 ob. 8 Carots 32 0 0 33 Grains 34 0 7 ob. 34 36 2 6 35
38 5 7 ob. 9 Carots 40 0 0 37 Grains 42 15 7 ob. 38 45 2 6 39 47 15 7 ob. 10
Carots 50 0 0 41 Grains 52 10 7 ob. 42 55 2 6 43 57 13 7 ob. 11 Carots 60 10 0
45 Grains 63 6 7 46 66 2 6 47 69 0 7 ob. 12 Carots 72 0 0 49 Grains 75 0 7 ob.
50 77 5 10 51 81 5 7 13 Carots 84 10 0 53 Grains 87 15 7 ob. 54 91 2 6 55 94 10
7 ob. 14 Carots 98 0 0 57 Grains 101 10 7 58 104 10 0 59 108 15 7 15 Carots 112
0 0 61 Grains 116 5 7 62 120 2 6 63 124 0 7 ob. 16 Carots 128 0 0 65 Grains 132
0 7 ob. 66 136 2 6 67 140 5 7 17 Carots 144 10 0 69 Grains 148 15 7 70 153 2 6
71 157 10 7 ob. 18 Carots 162 0 0 73 Grains 166 10 7 ob. 74 171 2 6 75 175 15 7
19 Carots 184 0 0 77 Grains 185 5 7 ob. 78 190 2 6 79 195 0 7 ob. 20 Carots 200
0 0 21 Carots 215 0 0 22 242 0 0 23 264 0 0 24 288 0 0 25 312 0 0 26 338 0 0 27
364 0 0 28 392 0 0 29 420 10 0 30 450 0 0

Seed-Pearl.

The value of Seed-Pearl, from the smallest sort of 4500 in one ounce, to the
greatest sort of 400 or 450 in one ounce, being the ordinary six sorts always
sold together. l. s. d. The smallest sort is sexta of 4500 per ounce is worth 2
4 0 second smallest is quinta 3300 0 6 0 third sort is quarta 1900 0 10 0
fourth is tertia 1050 0 18 0 fifth is secunda 700 1 6 0 sixth is prima 450 1 15
0

Rag-Pearl. l. s. d. Rag called Tertia of 350 per ounce is worth 1 18 0 Secunda
250 3 0 0 Prima 150 4 0 0 100 5 0 0 50 7 in 8 0 0 40 10 in 12 0 0 20 14 in 15 0
0

All sorts of half-round Pearls are according to their weight valued at half
the price of a round Pearl; so that if a half-round Pearl do weigh one Carot,
then it is to be valued at 5 s. which is half the price of a round of a Carot.

The Denarius among the Romans may be considered under a double respect; either
as Money, or Weight; the first was a valuation put upon it by the State in
Civil Affairs, as Coin, which has been various and subject to great
alterations; the later in gravity or weight has been at a certainty, and of
long continuation amongst them, for above 1600 years.

The Coins of the Romans were of Gold, Silver, and Copper; those of Silver was
the Denarius, taken by the Romans from the Sicilians, and as Pliny affirms, l.
33. c. 3. was in use with them in the 585th year of the City (as also the Brass
Coins) five years before the first Punick Wars. The proportion then betwixt the
Silver and Brass, in respect of Weight, was very strange; for the Denarius of
Silver was the seventh part of the ounce, and the ounce the twelfth part of the
pound, and yet was esteemed in value equal to 10 asses, which was a Brass Coin
of a pound weight; so that one pound in Silver was esteemed to 840 pound in
Brass. When their Coins of Gold came in use, it was esteemed ten times the
weight in Silver; but this disproportion between Silver and Brass lasted not
long; and the Denarius of Silver in process of time suffered so many
diminutions, that at length it had left only a Name, and of so small a value as
not worth the coining.

The like alteration in respect of weight has befallen in far less time our
own Coin; as to instance in our Penny, which we find in the time of Ethelred,
and so continued to Edw. 1. to be the 20th part of the Troy ounce, Stat. 9.
Edw. 3.
under Edw. 3. it came to be made the 26th part of the ounce; and Stat. 2. H. 6.
under H. 6. it fell to the 32d part; in Stat. 5. Edw. 4. Stat. 36. H. 8.
Edw. the 4th's time it came to the fortieth part of the ounce; in Henry the
8th's time, at first it was the fortieth, then the 45th part, afterward 60
pence were made of the ounce; in the 2 Eliz. and during her reign, and ever
since, 62 in the ounce; so that the Penny in Edw. the 3d's time was more than
three times the weight of ours. And aftertimes may see this of ours as well as
the D^arius of the Romans, brought to so small a value as not worthy a name.

Of Amber.
It is observed, that Amber is found only in and upon the Coast of England and
Poland; the English is found only upon the Coast of Norfolk, near the Bay of
Shippy Island in Kent, in two or three miles space. It is affirmed, that at
both these places it has been found time out of mind: it is not found above
sixty pound weight a year: It is washed out of the Sea, for after great storms
it is most found: many are of opinion it is the Gum of a Tree; if so, sure the
Tree, if it were above ground, would be found long before this. It is most
probable to be a certain Gum, that comes out of some Rock lying in the Sea near
those places; for why else should it be only found there, and no where else?

In Poland are found greater quantities, but not in so good esteem as our
English, being neither so fat nor clear; it is valued according to the
largeness and clearness thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of Weights in general used in Merchandising, and mentioned in this
MAP of COMMERCE.
Of Weights in general.
THE next principal point handled in this MAP of COMMERCE, is the Weights in
general of all Kingdoms and known Cities of Trade, by the invention whereof (as
by Measures) a true mean was found out, to give every man his own; for all
worldly things are found to be governed by it and measure; but most especially
the same has a great Prerogative in all Contracts and Bargains, where either
Buying or Selling is either used or practiced, which indeed is the fundamental
part of the World's Commerce and Traffic; for thereby are all Commutations
regulated, all Accounts framed, and all Profit and Loss in Trade found out and
distinguished: It is also one of the Standards of all Kingdoms, Cities and
Provinces, and therefore as Measure carries with it the Approbation and
Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate, and therefore either to falsify, add or
detract therefrom is accounted a capital Crime, and worthy severest Punishment.

Differences of Weights in all Commodities.
Now for their sorts; These Weights are observed to vary and differ in all
Countries, as well as in sundry Mart and principal Cities; though otherwise
oftentimes Neighbors, yet are herein discrepant, and not seldom is it seen,
(as in this Map it shall be made evident) that several sorts of weights are
found to weigh several sorts of commodities in one and the self-same Place,
City and Country; as in England, where it is observed, that raw Silk is weighed
by the Pound of 24 ounces, and other commodities by the Pound of 16 ounces: And
in Aleppo, some commodities are weighed by the Rotolo of 680 drams, some by a
of 700 drams, and some by a of 720 drams. The greatest denomination.
And as these weights are found to vary in respect of their greatness, so are
they found to differ in respect of their denomination; for some Countries use
to weigh their commodities by Hundreds, some by Quintals, some by Centiners,
Talents, Thousands, Weighs, Shippounds, Charges, Lisponds, Roves, Stones,
Bahars, Mands, Candills, Peculls, and the like.

A second denomination.
A second denomination is again produced out of this, as a lesser Weight,
whereof the former is composed; and is also found in use for weighing in sundry
places, as Pounds, Man's, Batmans, Rotulos, Minas, Lodoros, Oaks, Cattees,
Barotes, Seares, Wesnoes, and the like.

Third denomination.
A third sort again are found to be in use, whereof these latter are composed
and in use, in the custom of weighing; and which are of another denomination,
and lesser in quantity, as Ounces, whereof sometimes 12, 14, 16, 20, 24, and
30, do make according to the custom of the place the pound weight, and then
again have a subdivision into Drams, Scruples, Obolos, Carats, and Grains;
Least denomination.
so that the greater contains the lesser in parts, which also is observed to
differ according to the proportion of the first and greatest; Hundreds, etc.
for the Cantar, which commonly is observed to be the greatest weight, is so
termed, as being the hundred of hundreds, and consists sometimes of 100 l.
just, though sometimes of hundreds, of 112 l. of 120 l. of 125 l. 128 l. and
132 l.

Cargos, etc.
The Weigh and Cargo are in like manner found likewise to vary in many places,
and to consist sometimes of 163 l. of 181 l. of 200 and 300 l. to a Weigh and
Cargo or charge.

Shippond, etc.
The Shippond also consists sometimes of 300 l. sometimes again of 320, 340, and
400 l. the Shippond.

Lispond, etc.
The Lispond also is found to consist sometimes of 15 l. of 16 l. and 20 l. to
the Lispond.

Roves, etc.
Roves are noted likewise to be in some places 10 l. 20 l. 25 l. and 30 l. and
sometimes 40 l. to the Rove.

Stone, etc.
Stones are noted also to consist of 6 l. 8 l. 10 l. 14 l. 16 l. 20 l. 21 l. 24
l. 32 l. and 40 l. to the Stone, still altering according to the custom of the
place.

Rotolos, etc.
Rotolos are also noted to vary and to consist sometimes of 400 drams,
sometimes of 600 drams, 680 drams, 700 drams, and 720 drams, according to the
custom of the place, and according to the custom in use of the commodity.

The Merchant must be versed in all Weights.
In all which the Merchant must not be ignorant, that intends to make either an
use, or reap a benefit by this MAP of COMMERCE: for all weights must be to him
(in regard of his skill and judgment) as one Weight; knowing readily how to
make his Calculations in all Contracts; how the one weight does advance of the
other, or what the one may want of the other, making his Account of
concordancy, allowing or deducting where he finds the discrepancy arising by
overplus, or either by a want in the one or in the other.

Two manners of weighing in use.
Now for the manner of weighing in general (so far forth as ever I have
observed) has been noted to have been done two several ways; that is, either
by a Beam, or by a Romant or Stalier: By Beams.
the weight by Beam I hold the best and justest performed with leaden, brass, or
iron weights, provided the same Beam be good and even, both empty, and laden
with one equal weight; and this is seen to be the common custom of weighing in
England, Netherlands, and in many other places and Countries,

By Stalier.
The weight by Stalier, which is used in Turkey, Barbary, and Italy, and sundry
other Countries, I hold not so sure; for thereupon is marked all the number of
weights that may be weighed thereby, which by the help of a small counterpoise
removed to several stations, supplies sometimes the place of a pound, and
sometimes the place of 100 pound, wherein is oftentimes found great deceit,
which by the buyer and seller is carefully and heedfully in those places to be
both prevented and avoided.

To abbreviate the labor of weighing.
Now if with a Beam one would abbreviate a long labor with a small time and
pains, and weigh much with few weights, his weights must be made by an
augmentation doubled, as by pieces of 1 lib. 2 lib. 4 lib. 8 lib. 16 lib. 32
lib. and 64 lib. making in all 127 lib. with which all sums under that number
may be comprehended and weighed; and some exercised in great affairs, by single
weights tripled have gone further and procured 1 l. 3 l. 9 l. 27 l. 81 l. etc.
and thereby with little labor have performed very weighty and great business:
but I leave this to the ingenious, and to him that shall fancy this method and
manner of weighing.

Weights authorized by the Magistrate.
In all Cities then, and places of Traffic, there is found a weight (as I said)
authorized by the Magistrate, which to alter or diminish is ever held a capital
crime: this weight thus settled in every place and City of Trade, is reputed the
Standard of the place, by which as well the Inhabitants as Strangers do make
their bargains and contracts, and without which many bargains cannot be made
and perfected; Weigh-house.
and therefore partly to avoid scruple and doubt, and partly to do justice to
all men, and partly to decide all controversies incident in weighing, there is
in the most eminent Cities a public Weigh-house set up and appointed, where
every man may repair unto, either for necessity of weighing, or trial of his
weights, and which is authorized by the Prince as a rule for all men, that
shall have occasion to make use thereof in the said places, serving sometimes
as the Beam whereby his Customs and Duties are paid him; Weigher sworn.
the Master, Overseer, or Weigher being ever sworn and deputed to do justice and
right in his weighing, not only between man and man, but (if need be) between
the Prince and the Subject.

By which weights the weight of this Book is calculated.
This Weight accounted thus the common and received Standard of Cities and
Countries, is it, upon which (as near as I could possible) I have in all these
following places made my Observations, and from thence raised not only the
agreement thereof, with other neighboring places and Cities, but also with
that which we call our Haberdepou weight of England, wherein with all industry
I have labored to find out the truth and certainty thereof, which (as subject
to error by reason of the diversity) I must refer to the future trial of the
better experienced, concluding this point with a way and method invented by
unequal weights to accord the weights of any two known places or Cities, which
briefly is thus performed.

A way to accord the weight of any two places.
Prepare a Balance as exactly made as is possible, that a very little thing may
cause them to incline one way or other; likewise prepare of the one place, the
just pound, the half pound, the the the 1/16 the 1/^8 the 1/64 the 1/1^ and the
1/123 part of that pound, if it be possible, until you judge it to be
sufficient; then take the just pound weight of the other place, and put it into
one of the Scales of the Balance, and in the other Scale, put such weights as
may justly counterpoise the pound weight of that place: as for example:

Say that the half the the (...); and the 1/238 part of the pound of the first
place do justly counterpoise the pound weight of the other place; then by
consequence it follows, that 128 lib. 64 lib. 32 lib. and 1 lib. that is in
all 255 lib. of the first place, do justly weigh 256 lib. of the other place,
Again, say that the 1 lib. the 1/^ 1/^ of the first place do justly
counterpoise the pound weight of the other; then I infer thereby that 512.
64.(...)2. and 1. that is in all 579 lib. of the first place do justly weigh
512 lib. of the other place; by which the calculation may be made both to the
hundred and to the pound; therefore the further search and consideration
thereof, I willingly here omit, and refer the same to the curiosity of the more
ingenious

CHAP. VII. Of Accounts and Account-keeping in general, observed in this MAP of
COMMERCE.
Accounts necessary in the Map of Commerce.
ALl rational Negotiators, and Traders in general will grant, That this Map of
Commerce would appear to be very imperfect, if it should want the due Rules and
Observations whereby Accounts are in all Cities of Commerce ordered and kept,
which though found in themselves to vary in several Kingdoms, and places, as
having oftentimes a dependency, and sometimes concurrency with the Coins and
Moneys of each Kingdom; yet in all places they are not found to have the like
agreement together. Accounts kept diversely in diverse Cities and Countries.
Some Countries being observed to keep their Accounts, and the denomination
thereof in imaginary Coins, such as neither that Country not Place has either
proper Coin or Money, that has any affinity therewith, as by daily practice is
seen used in Venice by the Ducate of lire 6; in Florence by the Crown of Gold
of lire 7; and as in England it is used in those ancient Accounts, kept in some
Offices for the Revenues of the Crown by the name of Marks, of which we find
not at this day any proper Coin or Money in use. Again, it is seen by
experience, that one and the self-same place affords several denominations in
their Accounts, and diverse ways are used in one and the self-same City and
Country therein, as in some Cities of Italy, some are observed to keep their
Accounts in Lire, Soldi, and Denari; and some again in the same place in
Crowns, or Scudi, Soldi and Denari; as the like in England is noted, some as
before observing their Rules of Accounts in Marks, and Pence, and some, and
those the most usual and common, in Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, Sterling; the
which is necessary both duly to be learned, and truly to be known, and
understood, by such as shall have occasion to make use of, and exercise the Art
of Merchandising, and this Map of Commerce.

The Method used in Accounts is diverse.
Now for the Method used in keeping these Accounts, every Country and Nation
are observed to frame to themselves, Ways, Means, and Rules, whereby the same
is performed and perfected, and have for the most part every Country a
peculiar form by themselves. The best is by way of Debtor and Creditor.
The general known Method and best form is by the laudable and excellent way of
Debtor and Creditor, first invented in Italy, and now generally practiced by
most part of the eminent Merchants of Europe, received for the most absolute,
best, and truest Method of Accounts that hitherto has been found out and
invented, which here to set down would challenge a Volume by it self; yet such
is the necessity of this knowledge, that every Merchant should by the Rules of
his Profession, be well versed and seen therein; the Grounds whereof being
universally known and daily taught, I reser to my good Friends, Master Ralph
Handson, and Master Valentine Markham, who are both excellent, and excellently
learned therein; Four rules required in an Accountant,
concluding this place with four principal Rules required, and not to be omitted
by such as have to do and practice Accounts in Merchandising.

1. To write all, and all circumstances.
First, It is required that in his Account-keeping, he write all and singular
the passages thereof, and thereto belonging, with all circumstances of time,
price, and other conditions, in every bargain, contract, adventure, receipt of
Goods, sales, etc. in which though there should afterward appear an error,
either by disorderly charging, or by over and under- charging, yet it will
easily at a second view be both corrected and amended.

2. Not to suffer his Accounts to outrun him
Secondly It is required that he never come behind-hand with his Accounts, by
letting the same run overlong, or being daily finished, the trouble will be
nothing; but being a while neglected, a man is still found to be the lother and
lother, to go in hand therewith, and thus growing more loath every day than
other, when necessity constrains him, either he is enforced to mumble them up
to his own prejudice, or to cast them off, and to neglect them altogether to
his own shame and undoing.

3. To keep them true and perfect.
Thirdly, It is required, that he keep them, just, true, and perfect, and not to
falsify any parcel, matter, or thing, nor yet interline or shuffle one matter
with another, but to set every thing (either apportaining to himself, or to any
other) plainly, directly, and orderly down.

4. That he be a good Arithmetician.
Lastly, It is required, that he be well skilled in the Art of Arithmetic and
Numbering, which indeed is the principal step to this Art of Accounting, and
the first degree of this Map of Commerce, without which knowledge, let none
dare to entitle himself a Merchant, nor expect a benefit from this Work. For
the skill whereof I refer to the Learner, the judicious and excellent
Arithmeticians of this City, and so proceed to the next general point of
Commerce, which is Measure.

CHAP. VIII. Of Measures in general used in Merchandising, and comprehended in
this MAP of COMMERCE.
Of Measures in general.
THe next material point here handled, is the Measures in general, used in all
Kingdoms and known Cities of Trade, by means whereof a certain way and method
was found out and invented to distinguish and order by Rule the length and
breadth of all Commodities measurable, especially accustomed in all manner of
Fabrics, either, Linen, Woollen, Silks, or other Stuffs; and this is observed
also (as in Weights,) to have a special prerogative in many Bargains and
Contracts, where either buying or selling of things measurable is subsistent
and in use; being granted to be a fundamental point of all the Traffic and
Commerce of the Universe; for thereby as by weights many Commutations are
regulated, many Accounts are framed, and profit and loss is also thereby found
out and distinguished: It is also estimated to be one of the Standards of
Kingdoms and Cities; False Measures punishable by the Magistrate.
and therefore (as well as Weights) carries with it the Approbation and
Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate; and therefore to add or detract
therefrom, is ever in all Countries held punishable, and accounted a capital
Crime.

Diverse Countries have diverse Measures.
The Measures of length are found so diversely to vary, that every City and
Province is noted almost to have as well a distinct Measure as a distinct
Weight, which in themselves oftentimes are found much to differ; and some
particular Cities are observed by custom to have diverse Measures, for diverse
sorts of Commodities, as it is seen practiced by example in the City of London,
where the Yard is accounted the common Measure for Cloth and Woollen, and Silk,
etc. the Ell accounted the common Measure for Linen, and the Goad for Frizes,
Cottons, and the like, which in many other Countries is also observable. ^ain
the first Inventor of Weights and Measures, Josephus.
And as for Measures in the general, It is a received Opinion, that the first
Measure that was to this end invented was the Cubit, agreeing as some imagine
with the half Ell, the which divided into four parts or quarters, and every
quarter into four inches; peradventure this was in those times a general Rule
to all Nations: but Time and Traffic have since given to every Country a
particular Measure, and therewith a peculiar Law of measuring, which contains a
succinct length by it self, which at this day we see practiced through most
parts of the known World in several ways: and thus diversity of Places gave
also diversity of names to their Measures, such as are the Ell, Yard, Goad,
Fathom, Cane, Auln, Brace, Pico, Stick, Palm, Vare, Covado, and the like.

Measures of solid Bodies.
But Invention by the help and assistance of time, growing more perfect and
absolute, and finding that neither Weight nor yet this Measure could extend it
self to all Commodities used in and by way of Merchandise; the Art of measuring
of solid Bodies became to be hence produced, as we see it in use in the
measuring of Timber, Stones, and such like Commodities; neither yet was
Commerce satisfied herewith; Measures of dry and liquid Commodities.
for the ingenious Merchant found it still defective, and therefore to have it
yet more perfect, invented the Art of Concave Measures, that should serve as
well for dry as for liquid Commodities, as it is seen practiced at this day for
Grain, Rice, and such like commodities; and for Oils, Wines, Waters, Liquors,
and such like commodities, setting by this way by Art and Invention, in most of
these commodities, a concordance of Measure with Weight, as in other
commodities was set a Concordance of Weight with Measure: but for as much as
this knowledge in the general is of it self too capacious and large to be
particularly handled, as the subject requires, I have been therefore
constrained to confine my self to Measures of length only, as being the most
necessary part of this MAP of COMMERCE, yet so as I have not omitted the rest,
where they have fallen within the compass of my observation; and if I have
therein been found defective, the vastness of the Subject may plead my excuse.

All Measures to the Merchants must be as one Measure
He then that intends by way of Traffic to make use of this Tract, must as
well be skilled in Measures, (as I have observed) as he ought to be in Weights;
for he must not only readily know his own Measure as it stands, and is found to
be in it self in use, but also the Measure of that place whereto he bends his
Trade and Negotiation, allowing or deducting by Addition or Substraction where
the overplus or want does challenge a part, to make a due proportion of both,
and be so well versed therein, as that all Measures may be to him as one
Measure, by a true calculation of the length or the shortness thereof.

All Cities of Trade have sworn and public Measurers.
Again, It is found by the observation of the Merchants, that in all Countries
and well-governed Cities, there is for the reiglement of things measurable,
instituted a public Measurer, Authorized by the Sovereign Magistrate, who is
sworn to decide all Controversies that happen in and about the Art of
measuring; to whose honesty and faith is entrusted this public measure, and to
which all Merchants and Traders may in time of need and difference repair and
have recourse unto, and by which in many places it is seen that Princes do
receive their duty of Customs upon Commodities measurable; and by this common,
known, and received public measure, I have made my Observation in all places,
and as near as I could, not only rectified the same in the Agreement thereof
with other neighboring Places and Countries, but also with our own use in
England: and therefore to conclude this Point, I have here inserted the Form of
an Instrument, easy to be made, and purposely invented to accord the Measures
of any two known Places or Countries, whether they be Else, Vares, Yards,
Canes, or any other Measure whatsoever.

diagram of an instrument to accord the measures of any two places. An
Instrument to find out the agreement of Measures in any two Cities.


First then, Learn the order and custom of Measuring of all those sorts of
Commodities in both Places which you would inquire after, then prepare a smooth
straight Board, Plate, or such like, and draw upon the same a straight line of
the length of the Measure in one of the Places with his allowance of Measuring,
either an Inch or Shaftnet, or such like; which for Example, I will demonstrate
in this Figure, AB. First then, Divide the line AB into four equal parts, which
is CDE, and divide the quarter of AC into 250 equal parts and number them from
10 to 10 upwards, making the Print C the 750 part; for the number of parts
contained in the other three empty quarters.

Then mark upon the line AB the length of the Measure of the other Place, with
his allowance, which is for Example from B to F, being just in the 900 parts;
therefore 900 of those Measures in the first Place, make just 1000 of those
Measures in the other Place: but if the Measure of the other Place be longer
than the Measure of the first place; as for Example: If it were from B to G,
then take the distance of AG with a Compass, and set one foot in C, and extend
the other toward A, which for Example does come to rest in F, being 150 parts
from C; therefore then 1150 Measures of the one place makes just 1000 of the
other, by which you may calculate to a lesser proportion; and this is as much
as I conceive needful to insert concerning the knowledge of Measures in general,
and proceed to the next, which is the knowledge in general of Commodities used
by the way of Merchandising.

CHAP. IX. Of Commodities in general used by the way of Merchandise, and of the
knowledge thereof.
Commodities in general used in Merchandising, and the knowledge thereof.
HAving spoken of Cities of Trade in general, as they are distinguished in these
days; and of the Customs more or less, that are imposed (by Princes in all
Cities where Trade is practiced) upon all Commodities used as Merchandise, by
such as negotiate and use Traffic, and of the Moneys, and current Coins
whereby this Trade is driven, with the Weights and Measures whereby the same is
distinguished and regulated: the next thing to be handled in order, is the
Commodities and Wares themselves, wherewith this Commerce is maintained and
practiced in every City and Country comprised in this MAP; which is the proper
thing upon which the said Duties are paid, and for which the said Moneys are
seen to be given in Exchange, by the way of buying and selling.

All Commodities are either natural or artificial.
All Commodities then that are used as Merchandises by Traders and Merchants,
may properly be distinguished into two kinds; and are either Natural or
Artificial Commodities; Natural commodities.
Natural Commodities I call such as the Earth or Creatures, either with or
without the labor and Industry of man does does naturally produce of
themselves: of which kinds are Wines, Oils, Cottons, Wools, Fruit, Grain, raw
Silk, Spices, Drugs, Gems, Gold, Silver, and the like.

Artificial commodities.
Artificial Commodities, I call such as are either wrought or perfected by Art
or Mystery, of which kind are all Fabrics of either Woollen, Linen, Silk, and
also the Commodities of all Manual Crafts, this day seen practiced through the
World in sundry Countries, within the compass of which two sorts may all Wares
and all things used as Commodities be comprised.

Again, both the Natural and Artificial Commodities may be distinguished into
two other sorts and kinds, which are either such as are staple and lasting
Commodities, or impairing and decaying Commodities.

Staple commodities.
The staple and lasting Commodities I call such as endure at all times, and
continue for ever in their true estate and first condition of goodness, never
decaying, nor never losing their virtue and quality: and of this kind are Gems,
Gold, Silve,, Copper, Brass, Lead, Iron, Steel, and the like.

Decaying commodities.
The impairing and decaying Commodities I call such as are either subject to
corruption, or to leakage, and do lose and decay either by long lying, or by
keeping, as are the Fruits of the Earth Corn, Wines, Oils, Currants, Figs,
Fish, and the like.

The infinite variety of which passes any one man's judgment perfectly to know
and distinguish, because that Nature and Art in all Countries and Places brings
into the World such change and diversity, in place, time, use and quality in
all Professions, that it were a work endless to set down the natures,
conditions and properties thereof; therefore it has contented me in all
Countries and Cities here collected, to nominate only the Commodities that the
places are observed to afford, either Natural or Artificial, either Staple or
Perishable, wherewith Merchants are found to negotiate, and upon which it is
found that a Custom is imposed by Princes, and by them satisfied accordingly.

And yet forasmuch as many of these Commodities herein named and found
throughout the World, may seem strange to some not well versed in the general
knowledge thereof; and yet this knowledge so necessary to all that profess
Merchandising, I hold it not improper here, not only to add a word or two,
conducing to this so needful a skill, but also to the preservation and true
keeping thereof in their prime goodness and beauty.

He that intends then by his Pen to teach the Theorique of this mysterious
part of Commerce, must needs come short of his aim: I hope I may therefore be
well excused if I appear defective herein, for I know it is practice and daily
use that makes a man skilled in this Art; and many lets and impediments appear
daily in many men, that hinder the true attainment thereof: for it must needs
be granted, that he that is imperfect in any one natural Sense, or wants those
helps that Nature affords to perfect minds, must neither be a Merchant, nor yet
addict himself to this knowledge: for any one Sense being either depraved or
defective in part or in whole, will enforce him to commit (against his will and
mind) many Errors, and constrain him to take the bad for good, or (at
leastwise) the bad as soon as the good; and sometimes (as we say) Chalk for
Cheese, or one thing for another: All commodities are known by the Senses.
for Experience tells us, That all Commodities are not learned by one Sense
alone, though otherwise never so perfect; nor yet by two, but sometimes by
three, sometimes by four, and sometimes by all: and yet this Art is now adays
come to that height, (I may say) to that height of cunning, that all these are
little enough too.

But in general it must be granted, That the Eye above all the rest of the
Senses, still claims an especial interest and prerogative herein, and must
ever be admitted as one of the chiefest that must still accompany the rest in
this distinction, and therefore many things are oftentimes found saleable that
are pleasing thereto; and in some Commodities the same is noted to have the
whole stroke, and only to give the judgment, as in all manner of Colors, and
such like things depending thereupon.

Some are noted again to require the Sense of Feeling to be assistful to the
Eye, as where the Hand is of necessity to be employed, as is seen in Cloth and
such Commodities. Some require the Sense of Hearing, as where the Ear gives a
help to the Eye, as is seen in some Metals, Minerals, and such like: and some
again require the Sense of Smelling, as where the Nose helps the Eye, as is
seen in some Drugs, Perfumes, and the like; and lastly, some require the Sense
of Tasting, as where the Palate gives the help, as is seen in Spices, Wines,
Oils, and many such Commodities, A principal part of Merchandise consists in
the knowledge of commodities.
where it is to be noted, that in this knowledge does consist much the Art of
Merchandising, a principal part of which Profession is properly to know and
learn the same; and therefore a Merchants judgment must not be limited within
the compass of any one particular Trade or Vocation: for herein must his
Mystery, Skill and Art exceed all other, as requiring by necessity a more
general knowledge than any other Tradesman; from whom there can be expected no
more, than a skill in those Commodities they challenge a property or right by
Trade unto, or as appertaining particularly to their peculiar Profession and
Calling.

A Merchant must be seen in all commodities.
This is manifest in many Tradesmen, as in the Goldsmith, whose knowledge is
confined in Silver, and Gold, and in the goodness, fineness, and quality
thereof: In the Jeweller, whose knowledge is confined in Gems and Precious
Stones: in the Clothiers, to their Clothing, in the Drugsters to their Drugs;
in the Grocer to his Spices; and so generally in all others: But the Merchaet,
whose judgment must be larger, must have skill in all, and have a general
inspection in every part and member or each of them, as being only branches of
his unlimited knowledge; which is not confineable to Commodities and Wares of
value and consequence only, but also to the Wares of the meanest Artificer; so
that in this point his Art may be compared to the Poets, whose excellency must
consist in a cursory Judgment in all Sciences, and to learned in all
Professions, the difference being, that the Merchants skill must be real, solid
and substantial, and the Poets may be feigned and Poetical.

And in all Trades.
Therefore both the natural and artificial Commodities must be comprehended
within the circuit of his Judgment, and into all Trades he ought to have a
general insight, as with the Fisherman, he must dive into the Deep, and know
all sorts of Merchantablish, as Ling, Cod, Haberdine, Herrings, Pilchards,
Salmons, Eels, how caught, and how preserved, and the proper season for the
same.

With the Husbandman and Labourer, he must have insight in the Harvest of the
Earth, and know all Commodities that the same is found naturally to afford for
Merchandise, as all manner of Corn, Grain, or Pulse; the Vintages for all
manner of Wines, the Recoltoes for all manner of Oils, Cottons, Currants, Figs,
Raisins, and other Fruit of the Earth, how and when the same is gathered, and
how and by what means the same is kept and preserved: with the Shepherd, to
know all manner of Wools; with the Woodman to know all manner of Timber, and
all circumstances thereto belonging; and to conclude, his skill and inspection
must be such, that it extend it self from the Commodities belonging to the
meanest Artificer, to the Commodities belonging to the most eminent
Shopkeeper, which I neither know, nor yet am able in all necessary Points to
learn; but especially so much of this knowledge must not be omitted as comes
within the compass of that place, wherein and whereunto the Merchant resideth
or bends his Trade and Adventures.

A Merchant must know the value of all the Commodities, and all other
circumstances thereof.
Neither yet must his knowledge rest it self here upon the consideration of the
mere goodness of Commodities, but must also extend it self to the consideration
of the true worth and value thereof, both in the price and in the esteem; and
also know how the same is both requested and spent, and how Imported, and how
exported, either for Use or for Ornament, from one Country and place to
another; together with the due circumstances of Times and Seasons, when this
Vent or Sale presents, and when the same is out of use and not demanded: also
when sign of plenty does offer it self, and when of scarcity; when of rising
and when of falling; what Commodities in themselves naturally are friends, and
sympathize in the Shipping, and will endure packing, binding, and stowage
together; and which again have a secret antipathy, and will perish and consume
each other; all which circumstances I have at large handled in a Tract, which I
have called The Merchants Magazine, which I may hereafter publish, if I find
this my Labor prove acceptable to Merchants.

Merchants should reduce this knowledge of Commodities to profit.
Moreover, all Merchants endeavoring to obtain this exquisiteness, should not
be satisfied with a naked skill and knowledge in these Commodities thus
belonging to other men's Professions; but their main scope and aim should be to
make this knowledge and skill profitable and beneficial unto them, as by
Exporting the superfluous Commodities of one Country at a plentiful Season of
either Harvest, Recolto, or Vintage to another place or Kingdom, where either
nature, scarcity, the curiosity, pride, sloth, or necessity of the Inhabitants
challenges a supply or stand in need of, which must be done with many advised
circumstances. First, In that consideration must be had as well to the place as
to the time, as well in the Importation as in the Exportation; and to the
property and fitness of both the place and time; for all Commodities are not
transportable at all Seasons, nor yet every Season fit for every Commodity;
some Commodities require Winter and cold Seasons for Transportations, and some
again require Summer and warmer weather; and in the fitness of the place a
judicious Eye is to be had, and the same to be done with a great deal of
providence and circumspection, observing well the nature and the property of
the place, whither the same is to be Imported, and whence Exported, and not as
that Dutch Merchant is said unfitly to have done, that carried Fish to Rame at
Easter, or Shooe-horns and Hats to Constantinople, or as we commonly say, Coals
to New Castle, where great quantities are daily dug up and vented thence to
all parts of the World.

Merchants should know how to preserve all commodities.
And for as much as Merchants find not at all times, a present Vent and Sale for
their Commodities, according to their mind, and to a contented profit,
therefore their knowledge must yet extend it self so far, as that they know how
the same is both to be preserved and kept, from either spoiling or perishing;
for Experience shows, that almost every several Commodity does demand almost a
several and different way of preservation and keeping, that the same may
continue and hold its prime virtue, worth, and goodness, both in color,
substance, and beauty; and also know what may be opposite thereto, and incident
either to spoil, hurt, harm, or prejudice it; for first, some Commodities are
observed to be best preserved dry, as is seen in some sorts of Spices, Drugs,
Sugars, raw Silks, and such like; and these require a dry, close Warehouse, or
Magazine for stowage thereof; some are found to be best preserved by lying
close without air or vent, as some Wines, some Fruits, and such like; and some
are observed to be best preserved by moisture and no air, as Tobacco, Civet,
Musk, Verdigreese, and such like; and so in some other Commodities, which do
also differ in respect of the place; some Commodities requiring low and close
Cellerage, and some high and airy Warehouses, etc. all which things are
considerable in the housing and keeping of Wares and Commodities, and necessary
to be known, lest that by ignorance a damage be sustained in staying for a
Market, or a fit or more proper season for the sale and vent thereof.

Merchants should know how to better their Commodities.
Neither is it sufficient that a Merchant do know how to preserve his Wares and
Commodities in their first splendour, goodness, and virtue, but their skill must
extend, if possible, to give it new vigor, life, strength and beauty, being
either by casualty or time, dead or faded, dying or perishing, which though in
some Commidities it may (in some sort) be performed, yet in all Commodities it
is a matter not only unprobably, but utterly impossible to be in any manner of
ways effected; for this only secret, if any where it were to be learned, would
prove a most profitable knowledge, and worth the learning, and a Mystery, that
would too soon enrich Tradesmen and Merchants. Yet some such there be their
Arts-Masters, who before they will throw away their Goods, when either they are
in part decaying, or totally perishing, will try many ways and conclusions to
rectify the default and defects thereof; sometimes by Commixrures,
Compositions, and helps, adding excellent good to the very worst, or sweet to
four, or one color to another; as is imagined is too oftentimes practiced by
the Art of the Vintuer, in his old perished or pallid Wines. Others again by
changing the Objects, turning one Die into another, as it is conceived is daily
practiced by Mercers, and others, by new dying of spotted Stuffs and Silks:
many such ways being practiced, which the ingenious head and hand of the
Arts-man has found out, and invented, to save, preserve, maintain, and
sometimes to vestore a Commodity that is wasting and perishing, which I refer
to those that are more skilful therein.

How a Merchant may have knowledge in all Commodities.
Now the last point resting to conclude this Chapter, is to show briefly how
this knowledge first spoken of in Commodities may be gained and acquired, which
doubtless is best done by Experience, the true Mother of Knowledge; and this
Experience is best gotten by often viewing the same, and heedfully marking the
Qualities and Properties thereof, and especially the best and principal of each
sort, that a man would be expert in; to which end, it is ever good to procure
and keep Patterns and Samples, and thereby so imprint the very Idea thereof in
a man's mind, that at the sight of the like or equal, the same may instantly be
known and discerned; Merchants to write down their Observations upon
Commodities.
and the sooner to obtain this knowledge, a man that would learn, must be very
inquisitive of men of Experience that are able to instruct in the Commodities
required, and learn from such what is the principal notes requisite thereunto,
either in their colors, goodness, substance, virtue, taste, seeing, or
feeling: and what he has thus learned and gained, to take order never to
forget, by committing the same to writing, and therewith to note the signs and
marks of the goodness and badness of all those Commodities that a man does
either deal in, or would learn to know; and to make this knowledge the more
complete, to note down therewith all manner of charges incident thereto, and
that grow in that place upon the same, with the ordinary price which there it
does commonly bear and hold; and though these notes should either by haste or
misinformation be at the first rude, and undigested, or though many should
prove frivolous and to little purpose, it matters not much; the one sort may
soon be better ordered, and the other may as easily be rejected; his better
knowledge, and a little consideration may amend both these defects; my reason
for the same is, that the use and custom of noting in this manner, will make a
man (especially young beginners) more skilful and ready in this knowledge in a
year, than he that takes only a bare, idle, and superficial view, shall be in
his whole lifetime; for it must needs be granted, that it both perfecteth
skill, and helps memory, which is the only means hereto, and by graving
deeper impressions in a man's mind, enforce him, will he, nill he, to a more
considerate and judicious observation, and marking thereof; whenas he has thus
absolutely tied himself to a necessity of setting down every Commodity, and
each particular circumstance in this manner thereto belonging. And this being
as much as I think needful to insert, concerning this point in general, I will
proceed to the next and last, which is of Exchanges practiced amongst Merchants
in the Art of Merchandising.

CAAP. X. Of Exchanges in general, used by Merchants in this MAP of COMMERCE.
Exchanges in general practiced by Merchants in the Map of Commerce.
THe next and last general point handled in this Map of Commerce, is Exchanges,
which is observed to be the most mysterious part of the Art of Merchandising
and Traffic, being not only necessary for the knowledge of all Merchants, but
also fit and useful for such as negotiate the public affairs of Princes, and
for such as sit at the Stern and Government of the Commonwealth.

The necessity and commodiousness of Exchanges.
The necessity and commodiousness of these Exchanges in all Traffic is
doubtless very great, it having found in all Countries hitherto, such a general
allowance and approbation, and having for so many years stood uncontrouled, and
is still preserved in its pristine splendour and integrity, shows evidently that
at first the same was invented, and devised to a most excellent use and end, it
being observed, that as Money was devised, and first invented of the best and
purest Metals, to avoid the chargeable and troublesome carriage of Commodities
in Trade, from one place to another; so was Exchange of Moneys, first also
devised and found out, to avoid the danger and adventure thereof, and the
chargeable and troublesome carriage of the same from one City or Country to
another.

The excellency, etc. of a Bill of Exchange.
I conceive it will not be material for me in this place to reckon up the diverse
manner of Exchanges, that have been of old in use, and as yet are practiced
amongst Traders and Merchants, throughout the World, nor yet here insert the
form of a Bill of Exchange, which in it self is accounted so noble and
excellent a specialty, that it carries with it not only a kind of commanding
power to pay, but is accordingly observed, satisfied; and discharged, though
directed from the Servant to the Master. Such a high esteem being ever had to
the quality thereof, that the proceedings and ceremonies used therein, are both
singular and extraordinary, and are not subject to any prescription by Law or
otherwise, but subsisting merely of a reverend custom, used and solemnized in
and about the same. Neither yet will I here mention the formalities and
peculiar rites and customs that are only found to appertain thereunto, either
in the punctual Presentment, Intimation, Acceptance, Protest and Return, that
is requisite, and necessary, and thereto belonging, for it is to be understood,
that he that does take upon him the Title of a Merchant, and intends to make
use of this Map, ought not to be ignorant in all the particular circumstances
of place and time, either of Presentment, of Payment, of due Protests in
Default, and therewith know the common Rules governing, the Causes of rising,
the Signs of falling of the said Prices, which I here willingly omit, reserving
the same to a more fit occasion in the end of this Tract.

The mystery of Exchanges reduced to prufitable principles.
I have noted then the first use of this Exchanging, and the excellency thereof,
being preserved in times past in its true integrity and reality; but those
honest and innocent ends are vanished with those innocent and honest days of
our forefathers; for since Trade by a more general and universal Commerce and
concurrency of Nations, being grown to that height and perfection that now it
is, this fair and candid manner and use of Exchanging, and the most excellent
Commodities thereof, is in part given over; for the subtilty of these times
has made an Art and Mystery thereof, which being reduced into heads and
principles, has proved in many places so profitable and beneficial to the
studious therein, that it is now a received opinion, that the excellency
thereof exceeds the Art of Merchandising it self; and what inventions and
sleights to enrich themselves, their policies have brought to the view of the
World, I leave to the censure of Malines and others, that have at large
discoursed thereof, and described the same.

But where the ancient custom of Exchanges is still preserved and maintained in
its true and moderate use, and the crafts and abuses thereof taken away and
purged, it then appears to be most excellent, useful, commodious, and
beneficial, as well to Kingdoms and Cities in general, as to private Traders
and Merchants in particular.

All Coins brought into one by Exchanges.
I have observed before, that all weights and measures should be to the Merchant
as one and the self same weight and measure, abating or allowing, as the
difference of the place requires. So by this knowledge of Exchanging should
all Princes Coins be brought into one and the self-same quality, and parity,
and be to him as one and the self same Coin; for if the allay or Standard of
one Prince's Moneys, be finer or better, than the Coins and Moneys used in that
place where the Merchant resideth, and his consequently coarser or baser, the
allowance given by exchange either in time, in price, or in both, makes up that
disparity, and settles thus a parity between them, in drawing down the one,
which is the finer, or raising up the other, which is the baser, to an even
scantling, time and price giving the allowance to rectify both the one and the
other in equality and true value.

But so far forth is this to be understood, that this is truly seen practiced
where a course of quiet Traffic is settled between two Kingdoms and Nations,
continuing in amity and firm peace together: But where Princes either by the
necessity of Wars, or accidental great disbursements, have occasion, or do use
to inhanse the current Rates of their Moneys in their Payments, or decrying
them in the Receipts, and that Moneys by that either casual or constant course,
become either more plentiful or more scarce than ordinary, then these rules of
parity hold not so justly; The Exchanger rectifieth the disorders of Mints, and
the necessity of Princes.
yet ever so as having in its self a predominant power over the sudden affairs
of Princes in matters of Moneys, and with all expedition possible, rectifying
by a common knowledge and consent of Exchanges and Bankers, the error or
necessity of Princes and their Mints (who indeed are the Sovereigns of all
Coins and Moneys) so that though the Exchanger be not called to the Princes
Counsel, nor yet admitted to give his opinion and verdict, either in his Mint
or in the allay of his current Moneys; nor yet to his Proclamations and Decrees
in the settling or rectifying of the goodness or current value thereof; yet the
overruling part or Balance is in his hand, and he orders (by an invisible
mystery of a visible Exchange) the allay, value, debasement or inhansement
thereof, with the allowances, circumstances, places, and times being rightly
considered, such as the necessity of the Country, the plenty or scarcicy of
Moneys, or other such like accidents may admit; regulating by this means
tacitly in his Closet, the disorders committed by Mints, and the over-sights
which the great Affairs of Princes necessities plunge them in: and thus
erecting to himself and others of his Profession a certain Rule and public
Balance, that shall serve as an equal Parr and Standard of all Princes Coins
whatsoever; thereby (as with a Touchstone) taking the true valuation thereof;
distinguishing still the fineness and coursness according to the true worth and
real goodness, altering and changing the price and rate thereof, as time, place
and occasion may admit and give consent thereunto.

How to find out the Parr of Exchanges.
It now remains that I should show this true Parr of Exchanges, and howit may
be found out and discerned in all Exchanges; Experience has made it evident to
all the Learned in this Art, that the true Royal Exchange for Moneys by Bills
of Exchanges, is fairly and substantially grounded upon the weight, fineness,
and valuation of the Moneys of each several Country, according to the Parr
which by Bankers is understood to be value for value, as the truth thereof is
seen in our Exchanges in England, which has its ground upon the weights and
fineness of our Sterling English Moneys, the weight and fineness of each other
Country according to their several Standards, proportionable in the valuation,
being truly and justly made, giving also thereby the price of the Exchange, in
and for every place, according to the denomination of the Money, and by which
all Exchanges are or should be in themselves framed, cast up, and calculated;
but besides this real Parr of Exchange, there is also a Merchants Parr, which
in due place I shall declare.

These Exchanges then in the general property thereof, do much differ both in
the name and in the proportion between the Gold and the Silver observed in most
Countries; and that to set down the Parr of Exchanges exactly, we are to
examine and compare, not only our own weight (as is aforesaid) with the weight
of other Countries; but also the fineness of our Sterling Standards with the
fineness of the several Standards of the Coins of other Countries; and if we be
found not to differ with them in the proportion between the Gold and Silver,
then may our Exchanges run at one and the same price and rate, both for Gold
and Silver, taking the denomination according to the valuation of the Moneys of
each Country; and hereby shall we find how much fine Silver or Gold of our
pound Sterling contains, and what quantity of other Moneys either of France,
Germany, Low Countries, Eastland and elsewhere, we are to have in exchange to
countervail the same, in the like weight and fineness answerable to ours. be it
by the Pound, Doller, Ducate, Crown, or any other imaginary or real Coin,
giving always a value for value, and receiving the like, which is called by
Exchangers (as I said before) the Parr; the which should in all Exchanges be so
particularly known and considered, that as Money is publica mensura, or the
public measure within the Realm between man and man, so should Exchanges thus
made for these Moneys, be the public measure between us and foreign Countries,
for all Commodities either bought or sold, which therefore necessarily
requires a certainty in the calculation of this Parr aforesaid, admitting
nevertheless (as I said before) an advantage upon the farne, upon good ground
and just occasion on either side.

The price of the Exchanges at the disposal of the Exchanger.
But as the price of Exchanges is at this day seen to be at the only and sole
disposal of the Exchanger and Merchant, and that the same carries with it a
predominancy in the buying and selling of their Commodities, as is observed
especially beyond the Sea, so ought they carefully and circumspectly to
consider the true nature thereof, and not only look upon the present object,
which is to know how the price of Exchange goes at the time when they have
occasion to deal therewith, but also truly to consider the Reality of this
Parr, as is aforesaid, and as it is in it self really found to be; for it is
observed both here in England, and abroad elsewhere beyond Seas, that those who
altogether do practice this Exchanging, and deal for Moneys by Exchange, have
this observation therein; for they being Exchangers indeed, know perfectly the
weight and fineness both of our English and of foreign Coins, and comparing the
same together, make thereby to themselves the true calculation of the Parr
aforesaid, wherein they are not directed by the current valuation of Coins,
which is often seen to be inconstant and uncertain; nor by the toleration of
Moneys, either here or beyond the Seas, going sometimes, and in some places
current above the said valuation; and this indeed is one of the most mysterious
parts that is included in this Art of Exchanging, which the Merchant ought
considerately to learn and distinguish. And concluding here all further
Observations and Circumstances practiced in the general Exchanges amongst
Merchants, I refer the Reader, for what is here purposely omitted, to the end
of this Tract, where I have inserted what I have conceived to be further
needful hereunto.

The Office of Garbling.
That King Henry the Sixth did first give the Office of Garbling all Spices,
Drugs and other Merchandises in London, to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Gommonalty of the same.

That the Merchants and Grocers did devise the Laws, how the same should be
Garbled for ever.

That if the common breach of Laws and Decrees be permitted, then ensues not
only the contempt of the Magistrate, but also the very ruin of that for which
cause such Acts and Ordinances were made and advanced; a thing suitable to the
subject of this matter, namely, in the fact of Garbling of Spices, Drugs, and
other Merchandises, etc. the necessity of cleansing and purifying whereof, in
the time of King Henry the Sixth, was then debated; and the Office of Garbling
was by the same King given to the Mayor and Commonalty of this famous City of
London; but in such wise notwithstanding, that it is very apparent, that as
well the Merchants, Owners of Spices, as the Grocers Retailers of the same
City, were called to give advice for the conceiving and creating of such Acts
and Ordinances therein, as might best tend to the benefit of the Merchant, the
uttering and sale of the Grocer, and the goodness of the thing garbled, for the
health of the People of this Realm; By several Orders and Acts of
Common Council in H. 6. H. 7. H. 8. and Qu. Eliz. 2.
upon which Acts and Orders the Art of Garbling was pronounced and declared to
consist; it being an habit of working according to right Reason, and Mechanical
or Handy-craft; Hackdy and Aunsell first Garblers after the said gift.
the full knowledge thereof was partly gotten and attained by use at that time
by Richard Hackdy, and William Aunsell, Citizens, and partly by Instruction and
reason taught and showed by the Merchants and Grocers, then being, and was left
to the execution of the said Persons the Officers aforesaid; the which advice,
as well of the Merchants, Grocers, and of the said Officers, are thus set forth.

The Division of Spices, Drugs. etc. into sorts, according to the qualities of
the several Commodities; but to set down particularly, how every of these
Commodities in their kind, ought to be Garbled, were a thing too tedious; and
that there is no better way than the ancient manner of Garbling, and the just
packing and putting up of the same, by men experienced and sworn for the due
performance of that work and labor, as heretofore there were, but of a long
time have been wholly omitted; and for the Garblers well-ordering of his
Workmen, and the skilful ruling of, and governing a Company, is to begin in
himself.

What Garbling is.
It is a cleansing, severing, sorting and dividing of the good from the bad,
and to separate each sort according to the qualities of the several
Commodities, and afterward sealed by the Garbler, Deputy, Clerk, chief Servant
thereunto appointed, according to the Statute in that case made and provided:
It was by the wisdom of the Parliament in Primo Jacobi, Enacted, That no
Spices, Drugs, etc. should be sold, or put to sale, before the same were
searched and Garbled, as by the Act more at large it does appear.

Also it is the Duty of the Garbler, or his Servants, to tare all such Cask,
Hogsheads, Barrels, Bags, Serens, etc. wherein such Spices, Drugs and
Merchandises are brought in, truly, justly, and indifferently betwixt Buyer and
Seller; and therefore in former times the Workmen Laborers were all sworn, as
appears by several Acts and Orders of the Court of Aldermen and Common Council.

Also all wet and defective Commodities ought to be kept apart, without any
mixture of good and bad, and after they are sufficiently Garbled, to be sealed
with a Cross-bar Seal, thereby to distinguish the good and Merchantable
Commodities from such as are faulty and defective, which the Buyer may easily
observe by looking upon the Seal: but for as much as covetousness, wherein a
man being surprised, shall want knowledge how to command himself, may entice
him to fall from all ancient Orders, and practice strange Divisions, as well of
Justice as Profit and Honesty, which are never separate in matters of good
quality; for nothing is just nor profitable, if not honest; and he that makes
Division of them, by setting forth and separating his Actions; saying, this
Deed is honest, but that Deed is profitable for me, he cannot be without fraud,
and rend asunder all equity ordained by public Power and Authority.

Also to give License to any man to buy Spices Garbleable, and to License one
and not another and to carry the same from place to place Ungarbled, is
unlawful: also to take Money of Merchants before their Goods are Garbled, and
to take more Money of one than of another for Garbling, is injustice and
partiality, and to take more Money for his Fees than by the Acts of
Common Council is limited, is unlawful. The Rates of the Office of Garbling
were established by several Acts of Common Council, at the first Institution
and Ordination of the said Office, as in the Reign H. 6. A. 7. H. 8. Eliz. and
the Table of Fees appertaining to the said Office, and hung up in Guild-H^ll,
London, in public view, that all persons concerned might take notice thereof;
forasmuch as it may be known to all persons what the Garblers duty is, the same
at large is expressed in an Act of Common Council; but higher Rates were set by
the Garbler about the end of Queen Elizabeth, which were complained of in
Parliament, 1 Jacobi, by one Collen, and others; whereupon it was then
provided, that for the sees usually allowed in that behalf they be sufficiently
Garbled, etc. 4 H. 8. 18 H. 8. 2 Eliz.


The Interpretation of his name Garbler, shows the nature of his Office: In the
beginning faults were but few, and easily suppressed; but in time grew like
Hydra's head, cutting off one, many sprung in the stead. In corrupting times
men are more apt in stooping to Vice than mounting to Virtue. The greediness of
gain did infect some of this Fraternity with the practice of deceit.

The Oath of the Servants, or Workmen of the Garbler of Spices, Wares, and
Merchandises within the City of London.
You shall swear, that you shall truly, and faithfully serve your Master the
Garbler of Spices, Drugs, and other Merchandises within the City of London, and
truly, and justly shall you deal with all persons whose Spices, Drugs, Wares,
or other Merchandises, you Garble, or cleanse, without stealing, imbezelling,
or unlawfully, or unhonestly conveying away any part thereof, or otherwise
mis-behaving your self.

II. You shall not consent, or agree to the stealing, imbezelling, or unlawful,
or unhonest conveying away of any such Drugs, Spices, Wares, or Merchandises:
And if you shall know of any that shall so do, you shall with as much speed, as
you conveniently may, admonish your Master of it.

III. You shall truly, faithfully, and indifferently, without respect of any
person, or any cause whatsoever, Garble, and cleanse such Spices, Drugs, Wares,
and Merchandises, you shall take in hand, or be appointed to Garble, or
Cleanse; And as much as shall in you lie, you shall procure your fellows, and
other workmen to do the like.

IV. You shall neither buy nor sell any Garble dust, light Pepper, or other
unlawful thing which shall be taken out of any Spices, Drugs; Wares, or other
Merchandises, so long as you shall continue in service, or work with your
Master that now is, or with any other who shall hereafter use, or occupy the
Office of Garbler; neither shall you cause or procure any other to buy any part
thereof: And if you shall know any person that shall buy, sell, put to sale, or
convey out of the City, or Liberties thereof, any Spices, Drugs, Wares, or
Merchandises Ungarbled, which ought to be Garbled: Or which shall buy, or sell
any Garble dust, powder, light Pepper, or any other thing within the said City,
or Liberties thereof, you shall with as much speed, as conveniently you may,
inform your Master thereof.

V. You shall not at any time hereafter, so much as in you shall lie, suffer to
be delivered, or consent to the delivery of any Spices, Drugs, or other
Merchandises which shall be Garbled, before the same shall be sealed with the
usual Seal of the Garbler accustomed for the same.

VI. You shall know no person to mix any Garble dust, light Pepper, or powder
with clean Spices, Drugs, or Merchandises, but you shall with convenient speed
inform your Master thereof.

VII. You shall not enter into any work, or labor, touching the Office of your
Master the Garbler, until your said Master, or in his absence his chief Clerk,
or chief Servant by him appointed, or to be appointed in that behalf, shall
have knowledge thereof, and give order touching the same: And all other things
appertaining to the due execution of the Office of Garbler, to be performed by
you as a Servant, or Workman, you shall truly, honestly, dutifully, and
faithfully perform, and execute without partiality, or favor, malice, or evil
will to any party. So God you help.

The accustomed and usual Rates of all Spices and Drugs Garbleable.
Pepper by the bag not exceeding 200 three quarters. ij s. 00 Pepper exceeding
300 by the bag ij s. vi d. Cloves by the pound 00 ij d. Wormseeds by the pound
00 ij d. Maces the 100 weight iv s. 00 Nutmegs the 100 weight iij s. vi d,
Cinnamon the 100 weight ijs. viij d. Ginger the 100 weight 00 xij d. Anniseeds
the 100 weight 00 viij d, Cumminseeds the 100 weight 00 viij d. Corianderseeds
the 100 weight 00 viij d. Carrowayseeds the 100 weight 00 viij d. Fennelseeds
the 100 weight 00 viij d. Almonds the 100 weight 00 viij d. Rice the 100 weight
00 viij d. Dates the 100 weight 00 viij d. Onion-seeds the 100 weight 00 viij
d. French Barley the 100 weight 00 viij d. Galls the 100 weight 00 viij d.
Cochincel the pound weight 00 ob. Indico the 100 weight 00 ivd. Argal the 100
weight 00 vi d. Licorice the 100 weight 00 iij d. Saunders the 100 weight 00
iij d. Long-pepper the 100 weight ij s. viij d. Spignal the 100 weight ijs. 00
Gallingal the 100 weight 00 viij d. Turmerick the 100 weight 00 xvi d. Setwel
the 100 weight 00 xii d. Cassia sistula the 100 weight ij s. viij d. Guiney
pepper the 100 weight iv s. 00 Senna the 100 iv s. 00 Bayberries the 100 weight
00 viij d. Erius the 100 weight 00 xii d. Stavesacre the 100 weight 00 viij d.
Calamus the 100 weight 00 xviij d Fenugreek the 100 weight 00 viij d.
Cassia-lignum the 100 weight ij s. viij d. Grains the 100 weight 00 viij d.
Mastick the 100 weight 00 xviij d. Frankincense the 100 weight 00 xii d. Gum
Arabic the 100 weight 00 xii d. Rhubarb the 100 weight 00 xii d. Scamony the
100 weight 00 xii d. Olibanum the 100 weight 00 xii d. Hermidacles the 100
weight 00 xviij d. Gum-lack the 100 weight 00 xij d. Tobacco the pound weight
00 iv d. Sal-Armoniack the 100 with. 00 xviij d.

The Use of the Alnegers Office.
The Antiquity of Wool in this Kingdom has been beyond the memory of Man,
that accustomed use has always been observed to make it the Seat of our wise
and learned Judges, in the sight of our Noble Peers, within the place where all
wholesome Laws are established for the good Government of this Kingdom; so that
no Kingdom whatsoever can speak so happily of this benefit as this Realm; who
finds it the rich man's Increase, and the poor man's Comfort; who in former
times suffered the Transportation thereof unto a more ingenious Nation, which
made far greater benefit by their labor than those whom God had freely sent it
unto: That it is this time the glory of our Traffic, and maintenance of our
poor, many hundred Thousadds depend wholly on the same, whose bread is gained
by these employments; it affords Raiment, nay, rich Robes for the greatest
Princes, and also warm clothing for the meanest personages, and no part
unprofitable or deceitful in it, but often abused by the wicked practices of
deceitful people,

The Antiquity of the Alneger.
Before the making of Cloth within this Land, the Alneger was ordained, who
exercised that Office upon all Cloths coming from foreign parts, to measure and
try them where they were put on Land, as only measurer appointed for a long
time; his Authority was carried by Proclamation before any Parliament was
holden; 2 Edw. 3. 14.
his Fee was not then given him, but allowance from the Lord Treasurer and
Barons of Exchequer according to his pains and care; his charge was to see all
Cloths of assise marked, and those not of assise, and defective, to be taken
into his hands for the King, although in the presence of any Mayor, Bailiff, or
other Magistrate, wherein his credit and trust reposed by the King was
explained.

Whilst true making of Cloth endured in reasonable manner, it was most credible
in all parts, and so much desired, that foreign Merchants did usually come into
this Realm to fetch them away; but since deceit crept in, has grown greater
and increased every day, the Trade still declining from bad to worse, and now
to worst of all. What makes those now to refuse our Cloths, being brought to
their own doors, which before time earnestly sought it at ours? Falsehood. The
Clothier complains of his dead sales, the Merchant complains of his losses, all
but falsehood. Bad Wares are the breeders of bad Debts, and desperate hazards,
wherewith both Merchants and makers are extremely punished; when defective
Cloth is made, the owner is often enforced to barter for as bad a Commodity, a
Hilding for a Jade; or to deliver out that sweet Herb Thyme, but receive a back
burden of the bitter Herb Rue: so here is an adventure increased. The Law was
effectually provided for the search in all points, that in every place where
Cloth is made and sold, persons appointed for the search thereof, that it be
according to the Law; and those Searchers to be able and sufficient men in
knowledge and skill, and to be sworn to do uprightly. By which may appear, that
the original and proper Office of the Alneger was to view and prevent the false
making of all sorts of Woolen Clothes, etc. and not retail his Seals to
Clothiers to be put upon what he pleases.

When the use of Clothing was planted here, some in all parts of the Realm
undertook the Profession; the number was but small for a long time, but found
such good success on their labors, as they mightily increased in fame and
riches; chief comforters to the aged, and trainers up of youth; their Houses
frequented; their Tables replenished; their Hospitality bountiful, and in their
carriage plain and honest, yet with plenty and content; Noble persons have been
highly pleased with their entertainment; then was true dealing held in great
estimation, and deceit hatefully loathed: these men commonly made their
recourse to London weekly, who might have been strangers one to another in
regard of their distance in dwelling, yet proved Brethren by reason of their
Profession; their conference of meeting was to uphold their credit by truth,
and their care how to suppress falsehood, lest it should steal into their
Trades; happiest was he that could win most commendation by desert; so that
their works made their markets, and their Merchants their Suitors to hold on
their custom; whilst this course continued, the Trade flourished, and Gods
blessing abounded on all Dealers therein; we have president within this Realm
to lead us to a true course from that Nation which were our first Tutors to the
Trade, who now make a Commodity among us of Wool; which by reason of their
slightness and small value, might be esteemed unworthy of wearing; yet by their
good observation in making, searching, and sealing, it is so upheld and
maintained, that it is more vended than any Cloth we make, and so far void of
deceit, that any man though unskilful may buy it without prejudice or loss;
look into their lives and conditions, and you shall find them loving one
toward the another, and harmless to all men; they keep together, and disperse
not in many places, to the end one Government shall rule them, but in two
places, or there do they make their Congregation; Colchester, Sandwich, and
Canterbury.
where it were a wonder to behold so many to maintain themselves on so slight a
Trade, yet never a beggar amongst them; they have no Statute Law to bind them,
but orders amongst themselves, which are so duly executed without partiality,
that the rich are not favored, nor their poor oppressed; their search in the
commodity is threefold, one from the Loom, one from the milling, or thickning,
and one from the dressing; and where offense is made, there punishment is sure:
what would these people do if they had the making and ordering of our rich
Cloths, of great value, that can bring such slight ware in that estimation?

A Statute was made concerning the abuses of Clothes, wherein orders were
provided, that all sorts of Cloths should be truly searched, and their just
contents of length and weight set upon every piece with the word searched, upon
forfeiture: 39 Eliz. 20. 43 Eliz. 10.
This Law intended the general good and Reformation of all; yet in regard there
was but two Counties nominated, or a certain Circuit expressed, which did
before time most offend in those points: all offenders in other places would
stop that Law from going any farther; wherefore the next Parliament following,
understanding that Law to concern the general good, as well as unto the former
limitation, did make the same Act respectively extend unto all and singular
Woollen Broad-Cloths, half-Cloths, Kersies, Cottons, Dozens, Penistones,
Frizes, Rugs, and all other Woollen Cloths of what nature, kind or name soever
they be, or shall be made, and to be made within this Realm, to be viewed,
sealed and searched, and subjected to penalties, in such like manner and form,
and to such purposes and intents respectively was limited to those Cloths
provided for in the former Laws. Now whether can these new Draperie fly to
shroud themselves from the reach of the Law? their new names cannot help them;
if they be called by any name, the Law takes hold of them, they can then plead
no privilege to free them from this Law and order, but in yielding obedience.

Grains, Roman Foot and Denarius
The English foot taken from the Iron Standard at Guild Hall, London, and
compared with the Standards for measures of diverse Nations.

Such parts as the English foot contains 1000 parts 12 Inches:

The Roman foot, or that on the Monument of Cossutius in Rome contains 967.

The foot on the Monument of Statilius in Rome, contains 972.

The foot of Villalpandus, deduced from the Congius of Vespasian, contains 987.

The Greek foot 1007 29/100

The Paris foot 1068.

The Venetian foot 1162.

The Rhineland foot, or that of Snellius 1033.

The Derah or Cubit, at Cairo in Egypt, 1824.

The Persian Arish 3197.

The greater Turkish Pike at Constantinople 2200.

The lesser Turkish Pike at Constantinople, is in proportion to the greater, as
31. to 32.

The Braccio at Florence 1013.

The Braccio for Woolen at Siena 1242.

The Braccio for Linen at Siena 1974.

The Braccio at Naples 2100

The Canna at Naples 6880.

The Vara at Almaria, and at Gibralter in Spain 2760.

Il palmo di Architetti at Rome, whereof ten makes the Canna di Architeti 732.

I^. Palmo del Braccio di Mercantia, and di Tessito, di Tela at Rome: this and
the former are both engraven in a white Marble Stone in the Capitol with this
inscription. Curante Lu Paeto 695.

The Genoa Palm 815.

The Antwerp Ell 2283. 27 1/7.

The Amsterdam Ell 2268. 27,

The Leyden Ell 2260. 27 1/7.

The particulars observed in this Map of Commerce.
Having then thus briefly run over the general Heads upon which I have grounded
this MAP of COMMERCE and Trade, and noted first the division of the World,
according to the received opinion of modern Authors, and showed how the same is
generally bounded, and how distinguished into Empires, Kingdoms, Provinces, and
Islands, and how again these Countries contain certain eminent and principal
Cities and Towns, both Maritime and Inland, which for their situation, opulence
and concourse of Merchants, do merit the name of the great and famous places of
Commerce and Traffic in the World: And having therein observed the
Commodities either naturally there growing, or artificially there produced,
whereby Trade is in the said places both maintained and preserved, and
therewithal noted the general Duty of Customs and Imposts levied upon the said
Commodities by the Authority of Princes, and settled in all the said
Traffiquing Cities, and collected in certain public places, from thence tenned
Custom-houses; and then showed the Coins current in those several Cities, and
Kingdoms, with the original and present kinds thereof in sundry Countries, and
then the real and imaginary denomination of species, wherein Merchants are
observed to keep their Accounts in all the said places, with the weights and
measures there extant and in use: and lastly, the manner how the Par and Prices
of all Exchanges in the said places are settled, ordered, continued and
maintained.

I will now proceed to the particulars thereof, making my entrance into
AMERICA, as furthest from us, and as least known to us, and first survey the
Trade thereof, according to my proposed Method in this universal MAP of
COMMERCE: And from thence coasting through Africa, Asia and Europe, conclude my
Pilgrimage, and finish my MAP in the desired Port of the City of London.

OF AMERICA AND THE PROVINCES THEREOF.
CHAP. XI.
America and the Provinces thereof.
THIS Body then contained in this Universal Map, or (as now I may term it) this
World, is by Geographers divided (as I said before) into four parts, Europe,
Africa, Asia, and America; which last was altogether unknown to the Ancients,
and being of a large extent, the Modern have divided it, some into two, some
into three parts, Mexicana, Peruana, Magellicana, and each of these parts are
found to contain several Provinces and Kingdoms, which I will only
superficially look over, thereby the better to come to the Towns of Traffic,
situated in those Provinces and Kingdoms; which my method and present
intentions will enforce me the longer to insist upon: and because this last
mentioned part America as last discovered, is least known unto us, and the
least frequented by our Nation; I think it not improper there to begin to
delineate my MAP of COMMERCE, borrowing herein the liberty of those Navigators
that publish their Cards, leaving imperfect to the view of all men those
Places, Lands, and Harbors, which have not been fully discovered and found
out; and thence sailing homewards by Africa and Asia into Europe, gathering in
each Country as I pass, more variety of colors to adorn and beautisie this
Treatise, and so at last to close my whole Labors, and finish my MAP within
the circumserence of London, as better known unto us, and as being better
versed in their several manners of Negotiation.

This new World then called by us America, and now adays passing by the name
of the West Indies; being West in respect of its Situation, and India in
respect of its wealth, was at first discovered by Christopher Columbus a
Genoese, at the charges of Ferdinando, and Isabella King and Queen of Castilia,
after 63 days sail from Sevil. Then secondly, by Americus Vesputius a
Florentine, at the charges of Emmanuel King of Portugal: And thirdly, by John
Cabot a Venetian, at the charges of Henry the seventh, King of England, the
first and last had their Adventures of discovering some Islands only in this
part; and Americus of the Main Continent, and thereby gained the honor of
giving name to that vast circuit of Earth, which since by sundry others have
been more exactly discovered, as by our Contrymen Drake, Candish, Frobisher,
Davies, Willouby, Burrows, and others, as desiring to share with the first
discoverers in the riches and wealth, which thence spread it self over all the
other parts of the World.

This America then, or more properly in honor of the first discoverer Columba,
bounded as I mentioned before, is found by the Spaniard, (who challenges all
this large Territory) for their own by Conquest, to be divided into two parts,
Mexicana, and Peruana, of which briefly.

CHAP. XII. Of MEXICANA, and the Provinces thereof.
Mexicana and the Provinces thereof.
MExicana contains the Northern Tract of America, and comprehends these
distinct Provinces. 1 Mexico. 2 Quivira. 3 Nicaragua 4 Jucutan 5 Florida 6
Virginia, and New England. 7 Nurembega. 8 Nova Francia. 9 Corterialis. 10
Estotilandia.


Mexico.
Mexico gives name to half America, now known by the name of Nova Hispania,
whence the Kings of Spain style themselves Hispaniarum Reges; it was very
populous before the arrival of the Spaniards, who in 17 years slew six millions
of the Inhabitants, rosting some, cutting off the Members, and putting out the
eyes of others, and casting them living to be devoured of wild Beasts; to which
place now is found no Trade nor Commerce by any Nation, save only to the
Subjects of this King, and to such only as are known for natural-born
Spaniards, though at first the same was granted by Isabella to the natives of
Castile only, and Andalusia; but now indifferently to all.

Commodities of Mexico.
The Commodities that this Country is found to afford for Merchandise, are
principally Gold and Silver Mines, Sugar, Tobacco, Ginger, Tallow, Hides, and
some Spices, not known to our Ancestors till the discovery thereof; Metle an
admirable Tree.
and amongst others not to be forgotten, that admirable Tree called Metle, which
by them is planted and dressed as we do our Vines, having 40 kinds of leaves
serving to several uses, for when they are tender they make of them Conserves,
Paper, Flax, Mantles, Mats, Shoes, Girdles, and Cordage: on these leaves grow
certain hard prickles, so strong and sharp, that they use them instead of Saws:
from the root of this Tree comes a juice, like unto Syrup, which being sod,
becomes Honey; if purified, becomes Sugar; or otherwise thereof is made both
Wine and Vinegar: the rind roasted heals hurts and sores, and from the
top-boughs issues a Gum, which is an excellent Antidote against Poison.

This Country is divided into four divisions: St. Michael.
The first is Nova Galicia, the chief Town thereof is called Saint Michael, a
Colony of the Spaniards. Sinsonso.
The second is Mechuacan, one of the best Countries of New-Spain, abounding in
Mulberry-Trees, Silk, Honey, Wax, and store of Fish of all kinds; the principal
Town is Sinsonso, and the chief Havens are at Saint Anthonies, and at Saint
James or as the Spaniards call it, Saint Jago. Ilascalan.
The third Province is Gustacan, the chief City is Ilascalan, yielding for
beauty and state precedence to Mexico, and none other in all these parts, the
principal part is Villarico, a wealthy Town, as the place through which all the
Traffic of old and new Spain does pass. City of Mexico.
The fourth is Mexico, wherein that famous City of Mexico is seated, now the
Seat of the Spanish Viceroy and Archbishop of New-Spain; this City is said to
be situated in a Lake upon certain Islands; as Venice does, every where
interlaced with the pleasant currents of fresh and Sea-waters, and carries a
face of more civil Government than any other in America, though nothing, if
compared with any in Europe: the Lake is said to be 50 miles in compass; on
whose banks are found many pleasant Towns and Houses: also it is said that
fifty thousand Wherries are seen here continually plying, and afford such
quantity of Fish, that the same is worth 20000 Crowns yearly. The City of
Mexico it self is six miles in compass, containing 6000 houses of Spaniards,
and 6000 of Indians: it has also a Printing House, a Mint, and an University,
and some Churches of note that beautify the same: it was vanquished by
Fernando Cortes, in Anno 1521. with an Army of 100000 Americans, only 900
Spaniards, 80 Horse, 17 pieces of small Ordnance; in 13 Brigantins and 6000
Wherries, most of the Americans were of Ilascalan, who were ever adversaries to
the Mexicans; for which cause that City does enjoy many immunities to this day;
and to conclude, according to the opinion of an English Traveller, whose
relation I herein follow; Four things are here remarkable for beauty, their
App^rel, their Women, their Horses, and their Sticats: And thus much shall
serve of Mexico.

Quivira 2.
The second Province is Quivira, seated on the most Western parts of America, in
which are two Provinces, Cibola taking its name from the chief City subdued by
Francisco Vasques, in Anno 1540. and Nova Albion discovered by that famous
Seaman Sir Francis Drake, An. 1585. and by him so called: the chief
Commodities and Riches of this Country are Kine, some men being owners of
forty thousand, and these serve to the Inhabitants here, as we say of our Ale
to Drunkards in England, meat, drink, and cloth, and more too; for first the
Hides yield them houses, or to say more properly, the covering of them, their
Bones, Bodkins, their Hair, Thread, their Sinews, Ropes, their Horns, Maws, and
Bladders, Vessels, their Dung, Fire, their Calfskins, Budgets, to draw and keep
water, their blood for drink; and lastly, their flesh for meat, etc.

Nicaragua 3.
The third is Nicaragua, being South-East from Mexico, with which it agrees in
nature both of Soil and Inhabitants, and accounted for its pleasantness,
Mahomet's Paradise, An Admirable Tree.
having Trees in great abundance, of that strange nature, that a branch touched
by the hand of any man, withers presently. Nova Grenada.
The chief City is Nova Grenada, and Lea a Bishop's See. The Commodities thereof
are, Honey, Wax, Cotton, and Balsam in great abundance; it is extreme hot, and
therefore not to be traveled by day, but by night: their Winter begins in
May, and from thence raineth for six months; the other six very fair and dry;
and the day and night being here of equal length.

Jucatan 4.
The fourth is Jucatan, and was discovered in Anno 1517. which in the language
of the place, signifies What say you? which was the answer the Inhabitants
gave the Spaniards that first demanded of them the name of their Country; and
since by this means retains that name by the Spaniards. Campechio.
The chiefest City is Campechio, whence comes that wood so well known in Europe;
also here is the Island called by the Spaniard, Santo Crux, wherein is a City
of that name well fortified by them.

Florida 5.
The fifth is Florida, discovered by the English, under the conduct of Sebastian
Cabot, An. 1467. then possessed by the Spaniards in Anno 1527. and called
Florida; afterward the French got footing here in Anno 1562; but the Spaniards
unwilling the French should be eye witnesses of their rich booty, waged war
with them so long, that there was not a man left on either side to maintain the
quarrel; and then was Florida again in 1567 abandoned: The Spaniards now hold
there three strong Forts, St. James, St. Philip, and St. Augustine; which last
was taken and burnt by Sir Francis Drake, 1586. which since is repaired, and
that is all the Spaniards hold here at this day; desiring (as it seems) neither
to plant further himself, nor suffer others to do it.

Virginia 6.
The sixth is Virginia, which was discovered by Sir Walter Raleigh, Anno 1584,
and in honor of our Queen called Virginia. It lies in the height of 35 degrees
Northerly Latitude, extending to 38 degrees or thereabouts, being seated and
planted from 37 to 38 by the English under the Supreme Authority of the King of
England, (having the great Bay of Roanoke, and Cape Florida to the Southward,
and Maryland to the Northward) the main entrance into Virginia out of the Sea
is about 10 leagues broad, between two Points of Low-land, that on the South
being called Cape Henry, that on the North Cape Charles, by which they pass
into a great River or Bay called the Bay of Chesapiake, which runs away
Northerly about 100 leagues, into which River or Bay of Chesapiake many other
great Rivers empty themselves, all running up West and North-West into the
Country 100, 120, and some 140 or 150 miles, being 3, 4, 5, and some of them 6
or 8 miles broad, all which (with some other smaller Rivers which fall into
them) are Navigable for Shipping, having 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 fathoms, and in the
shallowest parts not less than three fathoms depth of water: Ships that come
out of the Sea are harbored so soon as they are within the aforesaid Capes,
and may ride safely in any of those Rivers where they please, within a mile,
half a mile, and in some places within a quarter of a mile of the shore, which
also they do, Anchoring sometimes at one place, sometimes at another, for the
delivering out and taking in of their Goods, in the several Plantations and the
several Rivers, as stands best with their convenience, after they have given
the Governor an account of their arrival, and from whence they come.

The first River, after they are within the Capes in the Bay of Chesapiake, is
called James River, the next Pamunkee or York River, then Payancatank,
Rapahanock, Wicocomoce, and some others upon the Western shore of that Bay, and
some on the Eastern shore thereof: Most of which Rivers received their names
from the Indians, who were the only Inhabitants and Possessors of that great
Country, before the English came there, and who still some of them live round
about our people, and in some places near unto them, within three or four miles
of some of our Plantations; but are nothing so numerous as at the first, being
very much lessened and destroyed by the quarrels and Wars among themselves and
with the English; especially in and shortly after the years 1621. and 1644, at
which times they treacherously fell upon our people, and massacred about four
or five hundred persons each time in one hours space.

The chief Port is James City, a Town lying about 40 miles up in James River,
which is commonly the place of the Governors Residence, and where the
principal matters relating to Government, and the Administration of Justice for
the whole Country are transacted, by the Governor and his Council, four times
a year, called quarter Courts; and once a year by the General Assembly, who
likewise meet there, being such Burgesses as are elected in the several
Counties by the people, and sent thither to sit and act in the nature of our
Parliaments here in London. Matters of lesser consequence are heard and
determined in the several Counties by Commissioners authorized for that
purpose, called the County Courts, who sit every month, or every two months; In
which Courts and all others, their trials and proceedings are in all respects
conformable, as near as may be, according to the Laws and practice of England.

The climate, weather and soil, are much what like ours in England; only the
Summer about a month longer; something hotter, and much more of Thunder and
Lightning; the days about an hour and half shorter in Summer, and so much
longer in Winter.

The Land fertile, plain, and so free from Rocks, Stones and Gravel, that their
Horses are never shod. English fruits prosper so well, that they have already
attained to make store of Cider and Perry. The Country in all parts woody; the
Trees generally tall, and many of them very big, most of them Oaks of several
sorts, and black and white Walnuts; the rest Poplar, Ash, Pine, Cedar, Logwood,
Gum, Chestnut, Saxafras, Mulberry, Chinkapins, Persimons, besides Shoomack,
Small-nuts, store of wild Grape-Vine, and other small shrubby trees and bushes.

All sorts of English Cattle prove well, and they are well stockt and stored
with Horses, Neat, Cattle of all sorts, Sheep, Hogs, Poultry, Turkies, Geese
and Ducks, besides that which the Country naturally produces of wild Beasts in
the Woods, viz Deer, Turkies, Roacoons, Possums, Hares, Squirrels, wild Cats,
Foxes, Bears, Wolves, some few Lions, and in some part of the Country Elks:
And in the Rivers (where the tide swells not above three or four foot, unless
forced by an Easterly storm concurring with the Springtide) there is in all
places some; but in many places great plenty of Oysters, Crabs, Sturgeon, and
several sorts of Fish

There is little or no Money used among them, but what they have is the same
with ours here, and passes at the same value; their general way of dealing
being to barter or exchange one Commodity for another, both among themselves,
and with the Merchants who bring or send in Goods from hence, or from any other
place: excepting in Trade with the Natives or Indians, there is Roanoke and
Wampampeak, which is a shell cut like Beads put upon strings, and passes among
them for their Money at a certain rate by the arms length.

The Weights and Measures of all sorts are in all respects the same for all
sorts of Goods with ours in London, excepting the Indian Corn or Maiz, which is
commonly bought and sold by the Barrel, the Barrel being five Bushels
Winchester measure. But the Indians among themselves and to us, do buy and sell
their Corn, Pease and Beans, by a Basket, of the bigness of half a Bushel, or
thereabouts.

The principal Commodities produced there, are Tobacco, Hides, Beaver, Otter,
Musk-Rat, Bear, and Deer-skins, Saxafras, Black-Walnut-tree-plank, with which
Goods there are about 40 Sail of Ships laden from thence yearly, most of them
Ships of 300, and some of 400 Tun burden, therehath been sometimes Wheat, Flax
and Silk sent from thence; but hitherto not much of those Commodities, there
being as yet but few people, and they not so well fitted for, nor so well
versed in the ordering of them, especially Flax and Silk; which prosper so well
in those parts, that in a few years, we may in all likelihood expect
considerable quantities of those Goods from thence.

There Is nothing of any Custom, or other Imposition, upon any thing Imported
there, or Exported from thence; their Trade being chiefly with London and
Bristol: Enough, if not a great deal too much, being laid upon the Goods here,
viz. 2. d. for every pound of Tobacco Custom and Excise; 12 d. for every skin
of Beaver, and 5 per cent. for whatsoever is carried over thither.

The Inhabitants and Planters there, have large proportions of Land due to
them, upon the Adventure of their Persons, or Servants; that is to say, fifty
Acres for every person transported, which is made choice of, and taken up by
them, or their Assigns, in any place which they shall choose, not already
possessed, or taken up by another before; paying a quit-rent of 12 d. for every
50 Acres yearly, in Tobacco, Corn, or other Commodities, at the price current;
upon which they live, and plant what they please, without any prohibition or
restraint; there being no other Order, Government, or Regulation in matter of
Trade, but what every man has in his own breast.

Linen and Woollen Cloth of all sorts, Nails, Iron tools, Soap, Starch,
Powder, Shot, Guns, Wine, Strong Water, Sugar, Fruit, Spice; and generally all
necessaries for Housholdstuff and Clothing, are vended and brought in by the
Ships of our Nation, in such proportion or quantity as is necessary for 16 or
18000 people, there being about that number of the English Planters, and some
Negroes and others which are their Servants. No Prohibition of any Commodity to
Virginia, but only Sheep, which by a politic Law of our nation may not to be
carried out of England; yet neverless they are brought in now and then a few in
a ship; and the severe penalty of that Act evaded, upon pretense of fresh
Provision for themselves at Sea.

The Dutch have had a great Trade in Virginia formerly, to the great advantage
and surport of that Plantation: But by an Act of the late Long Parliament, and
the last Articles of Peace, that Nation is prohibited: so that now the Trade is
not free to any but those of our own Nation, excepting what Trade they have
with the Natives or Indians-for Beaver-skins, four or 5000 yearly, also Otter,
Deer, Bear, and some other skins of Foxes, Musk-Rats, etc. to the value of four
thousand pounds Sterling, per annum, or thereabouts; all which are gotten by
way of truck or barter, for a course sort of Woollen Cloth, known by the name
of Duffel, used by them to make Mantles for their Clothing; as also Knives,
Scissers, Beads, Hoes and Axes.

Rich. Bennet.

The manner of Planting Tobacco in Virginia.
The Seed of Tobacco is much esser than Mustard Seed; it is sowed in January or
February, in beds of rich and well-manured ground, where it springs up to
Plants, commonly as thick as they can stand one by the other: the Plants being
come to strength, and about the bigness of a Rose, which is usually in May,
they are transplanted into the midst of little. Hills, made in Fields for that
purpose, about three foot asunder one from the other; so that there may be 4 or
5000 Hills in an Acre of ground. Sometimes if the Plants be weak, they set 2
or. 3 in one Hills to make sure of one; but when once come to strength, they
never suffer above one to grow in one Hill; if they should, they would but
spoil one another. These Plants grow up into stalks, much like Coleworts,
bearing leaves one above another about half a yard long, very thick and sappy,
in shape much like Dock-leaves; they seldom let the stalk grow above two foot
high, (except such as are preserved for Seed) the tops then being cut off, that
the leaves thereon may be the better nourished. The ground if well husbanded,
is cleansed from weeds with Hoes, and the Earth kept about the Plants. It is
ripe in August, then they cut up the Plants whilst the leaves grow on them, and
hang them up in houses to dry from the heat of the Sun, which would else scorch
it to powder; and in a months time, or longer, the leaves are stripped from the
stalk, which is done commonly in moist weather; and then sit to be packed in
Cask, or made up into Rolls. Those stalks which are let grow for Seed, the tops
are not taken off, but let run to their full length, which is four or five
foot, and is ripe also in August: The stalk of Tobacco is about the bigness of
a child's arm; and in an Acre of ground may grow fifteen hundred weight of good
Tobacco.

New England.
The chief Town of New England for Trade, and every other respect, is Boston of
late very much enlarged; it has two Meeting Houses, about a thousand Families;
the building for the generality with Timber, a few with Brick; but most Brick
Chimneys: a State-house newly erected in the middle of the great Street,
Charlestown is not much increased in buildings, and has but a small Trade;
Salem much increased in buildings and Trade, by reason of the Fish there, and
at Marblehead, the next Neighbors: Pescataqua River affords Timber,
Pipestaves, Boards, Masts, as also Fish from Isle-shoals, thrive much, and
begin to draw a Trade. These are all the most remarkable places, or Seaports
for Traffic at present: Plymouth Jurisdiction, Connectacute Jurisdiction, and
all the Towns upon that River, as also New Haven Jurisdiction, and Towns there,
afford little else but Provisions, with which they supply this Town of Boston,
and the Dutch at Manatos: as indeed all other Island Plantations and Islands
do, as Martins Vineyard, Road Island, Long Island, Shelter Island, etc. and so
all other Parts and Islands to the Eastward, which are but so many scattered
petty places, where people raise only Provisions; of which all that possibly
they can spare, is brought by Trading Boats to Beston, which is the Center.

The Governor, as also all other Magistrates, and subordinate Officers, are
all chosen by the major part of the Freemen annually: but none is made free
till first he is a member of some Congregational Church here: for their
Religion is Protestantism, indifferent between Independent and Presbyterian:
here is no Toleration for Anabaptists, Papists, nor Quakers; nor any such
Sectaries that are apt to sow Sedition, or disturb the Peace. But such as will
sit down and attend the ways of God, though they join not with them, may be
quiet. But no Children are permitted Baptism, except either the Father, or
Mother, or both, be a member of some Congregation: But now of late, if the
Grandfather, etc. do present the Child, he being a member, though the Father
and Mother be none, it is accepted.

The chief places for to Ride, Load, and Unload, are Boston, Charlestown,
Salem, Pescataqua, where any Ship of any Burden may come.

Here is a Mint set up a few years since, and coins only Silver, 12 d. 6 d. 3
d. which was occasioned by some, who brought many base new Peru pieces of
Eight; which being discovered, an Act was made against them that they should
not go for current payment: So the people into whose hands they were scattered,
were hereby necessitated to have them resined, and so coined, which was
according to the Standard; and though there was much loss, yet something was
saved. Mexico and Sevil Rials of Eight pass for five shillings per piece, and
so the smaller proportionally; in Coinage they will yield 5 s. 3 d. if good,
all charge deducted. Now to carry out above five pounds at a time for necessary
expenses; here is no rising nor falling of Money: If Bullion were brought in
and coined, it would turn to account, and purchase the Goods of the Country,
sooner than Goods, and cheaper.

Accounts are kept by Merchants; such as can do it according to the Italian
manner, and express their Moneys by pounds, shillings, pence.

Interest is set by Law, not to exceeed Eight per cent. per ann.

Our Weight is according to the English 112 to the Hundred Averdupois, sixteen
ounces to the pound; Silk, Silver, Troy weight.

The dry measure for Corn, Salt, etc. is by the Winchester Bushel strik'd;
Coals, Apples, Onions, etc. heapt: A Boad and Shoes all one measure: Wine, Oil,
and all liquid measure by the Gallon: The long measure is Ell of 45 Inches, and
Yard of 36 Inches, as in England.

They are not yet come so high as to transport Manufactures of their own, for
they cannot supply themselves. The Commodities Exported, are Fish, Beef, Pork,
Biscuit, Flour, some Corn sometimes, Beaver, Musk-skins, Otter-skins,
Pipestaves, Boards, Masts.

All sorts of Foreign Commodities will vend here, if such as the Country
affords will purchase them with the Commodities above expressed, and they are
still clothed with English Drapery: for the colors, the newest are now best
in request: for the quantity, all sorts of course and fine Linen and Woollen,
Shoes, Stockings, Thread, Buttons, and Pedlery Ware; Silks, Ribonds, Lace,
Pewter, Lead, Shot, Powder, small Artillery; Malt, Wines, Strong Water, Oils,
Fruits, Salt, etc. for take notice, we as other Plantations, want almost every
thing, but the particulars above expressed: I think scarce a hundred thousand
pound do suffice per annum the English in these parts.

Here is as yet no Society begun to encourage Trade; and the Encouragement to
Manusacture will be of necessity as people grow numerous. Monopoly here is
none, only the Trade with the Indians for Poultry is committed to a few:
Nothing prohibited but Provisions, which is forfeited if it be landed without
License.

For Custom, etc. here is none upon any Commodity, from any parts brought in by
Inhabitant or Stranger, either for Importation or Exportation of ought: only
upon Wines and Strong Water, which pay Importation, Canary, Malago, and Sherry
ten shillings per Butt: Madera, Lisbon, and Greek six shillings eight pence per
Pipe, Fial five shillings per Pipe, all Strong Water forty shillings per Tun,
to make Entry of them before Landing, or else forfeited.

Consolage none; Factorage from five to ten per cent. for sales and returns. No
Rate set, but as the Principal and Factor agree; other charges are Boat-hire,
Wharsage, Porterage and Warehouse room.

For Tret, allowance or overplus, etc. is none allowed here yet; only Custom
has crept upon us in the sale of Sugar to allow for Tare of the Cask, as it is
in London.

The most of our Negotiation (for want of Money) is in a way of bartering, and
do agree in what Commodities to pay, and at what rates and time.

Little Shipping here, but small Crossed, from twenty to eighty and an hundred
Tuns; and most Catches employed to the Western Islands, Madara, Virginia, and
Caribbe Islands; few or no Nation but our own frequent here.

The chief Fishing is made dry, Dry Cod, or Poor Jack, which is taken by hook
and line in Shallops; the seasons the Spring and Fall; the time for lading the
Spring Fish, which is the best, is in June; the Fall Fish in October, or
thereabouts, a little more or less, sold by the Quintal or Hundred weight
price, ordinarily thirty two, thirty, and twenty eight Rials per Quintal. It is
transported by Ships (that do come to buy it,) to Bilboa, when we had peace
with Spain; the refuse Fish and Maycrils go to the Western and Caribbe Islands;
here is a beginning to make Barrel Cod and Corr-fish for France.

Freight ordinarily, three pounds from London, back three pounds ten shillings,
and some Goods four pounds per Tun, and 3 l. to 3 l. 10 s. to Barbado's and
Western Islands little or no Inland carriage.

Here is no discouragement given to any Foreiner to hinder Trade, but may
freely come, and behaving themselves civilly, and have as free liberty to sell
and buy as any Inhabitant; the more is the pity I think.

Here is no Office of Assurance, nor scarce any that m^ke any private Contract
in that respect. What is that way done, is done in England by advice.

Bank here is none, neither are here men capable of it: but were here those of
ability, and understood it, and resolved upon it, it would draw all the profit
of those poor parts into it.

Maryland an English Colony upon the main Continent of America, beginning at
the Degree of 38, and ending in the Degree 40 Northerly Latitude, bounded on
Virginia on the South, New England on the North, the great Ocean on the East,
and the Meridian-line of the first Fountain of the great River of Pattowmeck on
the West, begun to be planted in the year 1633.

The Religion is Christian, and a Law established there for Liberty of
Conscience, to all that profess to believe in Jesus Christ.

The Country is under the right Honorable Caecilius Lord Baltemore, as the
absolute Lord and proprietor of it, with all the Jurisdictions anciently
belonging to the Count Palatine of Durham; which Lord Baltemore holds it to him
and his heirs of the Crown of England, as of the Castle of Windsor in free
Soccage by the yearly rent of two Indian arrows to be delivered at the said
Castle on Easter Tuesday.

The place abounds with great Navigable Rivers, as Pattowmeck, Pattuxent, Anne
Arundel, (by some called Severn) Patapsco River, Bolus, Sasquehannough River,
Elk River, Choptanck, Nantacoke, or Bever River, Pokemoke, and diverse others,
in which are multitudes of convenient Ports, capable of great numbers of Ships
of any burden.

There is little Money, by reason Barter for Commodity is more profitable to
the Merchant and Inhabitant. But generally all the dealing with the English one
with another, is with Tobacco upon Account till the Crop.

They use generally the Weights and Measures of England, and without any Tret.

The Commodities of the Country for Trade to be Exported, are generally
Tobacco, and Beaver, Otter, Martin, and several other Furs purchased from the
Indians: but they are projucting to fall upon the making of Silk: and the
Country naturally yields store of Mulberry-Trees to that end, and generally it
has all the Commodities that Virginia affords.

There are nine or ten Ships laden there yearly with Tobacco's for Europe.

Custom there is none, nor any Tax upon Commodities paid by the Subjects of
England.

The abuses and defects are, if the Tobacco's be packed up too dry, or too wet,
or not close packed, or that with good leaves be mixed ground-leaves or suckers.
The way to discover them is, by knowledge of what is good and sound Tobacco,
and good packing: a Hogs-head well packed will hold 400 weight, or thereabouts,
or not less than 300.

Of Foreign Commodities, the place vents whatsoever is needful for Clothing or
Housholdstuff, Nails, and other Iron-ware for building, Wine and Hot-waters for
the use of the English; the quantities, such as may be guessed at for the
accommodation respectively of about four or five thousand Planters. And for the
use of the Indians, a certain shagged course Dutch Cloth called Duffeilds, or
an English Cloth called Hogbays, the colors of both which most vendible and in
most esteem with the Indians, are bright red and dark blue.

Shipping pertaining to the Inhabitants there is none but small Vessels trading
to and fro, to Virginia, or sometimes to New England. There is no Prohibition
of any Commodities to be Exported or Imported, and the Trade of the Plantation
is free to all Subjects of England, and those only.

New-Netherland.
There is a Dutch Plantation in the Latitude of 41 Degrees, in a River called by
the English Hudson's River, by the Indians called Monahaton; and by the Dutch
(who have intruded into that place, being within the New England Patent) called
New-Netherland; they have in this place diverse Towns, New-Amsterdam, their
chief Town Grave-Saint, Flushing, and Middleborrough; also Fort-Orania, situate
40 miles up Hudson's River.

Their Religion is like the Religion in Old-Amsterdam in Holland.

Their Government subjected to the Holland West India Company.

They have usurped there a great Trade of Bever from the English Nation,
notwithstanding the late King Charles in the year 1631. did declare to the
States of Holland his discontents for such Intrusion, whereupon the States of
Holland did disclaim the owning or countenancing of that Plantation, imputing
it to the particular Acts of some private Merchants, and so left them to their
own Protection, and to be ejected at the King's Pleasure.

They have also lately thrust the English out of a Plantation in Delaware Bay,
called New Haven, where they were seated within the bounds of Maryland, about
the Degree of 40 North Latitude.

The Trade there with the Indians is like that of New-Amsterdam and
Fort-Orania, for Bever-skins; And in all their said Plantations they seize the
English and their Goods, if they take them Trading with the Indians for
Bever-skins or other Furs.

The yearly Trade that these Dutch hold with the Natives, is at the least 60000
Bever-skins, and as many more of Otter and Elk-skins; besides Bear and
Dear-skins. They Barter with the Natives for these Commodities, Axes, Hoes, and
a shagged course Cloth called Duffeilds; the colors of the Cloth most esteemed
by the Indians are bright red and dark blue; but the chief Commodity by which
the Dutch engross and draw the said Trade from the neighboring English
Plantations, is Guns, Powder, Shot, and Rapier-blades, which Instruments of War
have been twice fatal to themselves by two Massacres committed by the Indians
upon them, with the help of those weapons, to the destruction of half their
people at each time. And has been also dangerous to the adjoining Plantations
of Maryland, Virgania, and New England.

There are good Navigable Ports at New-Amsterdam, and New Haven, and no worm to
eat the Ships.

Though they permit none of the English Nation to Trade with the Indians, yet
they permit them to Trade with themselves, exacting a great Custom at pleasure
for all Goods Imported and Exported, as a Recognition enforced from all
Merchants to their West India Company, and is never less than 15 in the Hundred.

The most vendible Commodities to be brought them, are Guns, Powder and Shot,
the abovementioned shagged Cloth called Duffeilds, and Brandy-wine, Linen
Cloth, Shoes, Stockings, and other necessaries for Clothing.

Their policy is to prohibit the Importation of Guns, Powder and Shot, so that
all Foreiners are to beware how they come there with that Commodity; for the
Stranger shall be sure to have it seized, without some close contrivance in the
landing of it; but once landed, and on the shore, they are sold there in their
common Shops.

There are in New-Amsterdam 1000 people, and amongst all their other Towns
about 1000 more, men, women and children, by which it may be estimated what
quantity of Clothing may be vended there

Corterialis 7.
The seventh is Terra Corterialis; on the South whereof runs that famous River
of Caneda, rising out of the Hill Hombuedo, running nine hundred miles, and
found navigable for eight hundred thereof; this Country was discovered by
Gaspar Corterialis a Portugal, in Anno 1500. and affords only some rich Skins
and Furrs for Commodities and Merchandise. The chief Town thereof is Breast,
Cabomarso, and others of little note.

Nurembega 8.
The eighth is Nurembega, and the chief Town carries that name, in possession
of the French; other things remarkable I find not observable therein.

Nova Francia 9.
The ninth is Nova Francia, discovered by Jaques Cartier, a Frenchman, in Anno
1534. inhabited, besides the Natives, with some few Frenchmen. The chief Towns
are Canada, and next Sanguinai, seated both upon two Rivers so called,
affording only some Skins and Furrs, especially Bevers, which thence by the
French are transported into Europe.

Estotiland 10.
The last and tenth is Estotiland, called by us Newfound land; by the English
discovered in Anno 1527. who imposed the names upon the Capes and Rivers which
now they hold, where some have gone to plant, but the cold has been found to
be too extreme for the English constitution; Fishing in the Newfoundland.
but in the Summer season the Seas here are found to abound with Fish in such
abundance, that a man may take in an hour's space a hundred great Fishes, which
being opened, salted and dried upon the Rocks and Braches are hence transported
to all parts of Europe; and known in England by the name of New-land-fish; in
French by the name of Morleux; in Italy, Bacalio; and in Spain, Abadeses: five
hundred Sail great and small do from England yearly sail to this Coast, and to
a place called the Bank, a sand of 15 in 20 fathom deep, thirty leagues off of
this Coast; and these depart from our Coast about the end of February, and
arriving there about the middle of April, unrigge their Ships, set up Booths
and Cabanets on the shore in diverse Creeks and Harbors, and there with fishing
Provisions and Salt, begin their fishing in Shallops and Boats, continue it
till September, and at this time do not only catch as many Fish as will lade
their Ships, but also as many as will lade Vessels of great burdens, that in
the Summer come hither from England and other parts, to buy up the same, and
purposely to transport it for Spain, Italy, and other Countries: and this
fishing ended and the cold beginning, they leave their Stations and Booths, and
repairing aboard their Ships, lade their Fish and rigging their Vessels, return
to their native homes, where these Fishermen winter, and then become
Husbandmen; so that their lives may be compared to the Otter, which is spent
half on Land and half in Sea,

This Fishing is found to be wonderful beneficial to our Western parts of
England, whose Inhabitants considing upon the constancy of the yearly fishing
upon this Coast, it is usual with them to sell the said Fish either by tale or
the hundred weight in England by Contract, before they either depart their
homes, or before the said Fish be caught, at profitable rates; and when their
Summer is once spent, and that the cold once approaches, and that the Fish
begin to leave the Coast, they return contented to their Families; where
oftentimes in Winter they merrily spend, what thus in Summer they have
painfully fished for.

Other notes of Trading, worthy observation, at my there-being, in my younger
days, I observed not. The Weights and Coins of England passing there current
among the English, and the price of Fish once generally cut at their fishing
Stales, does afterward in lieu of Coin, by way of Commutation, all that year
pass current for all needful Commodities, and is esteemed as a valuable
consideration amongst them from one man to another: And thus much for the
Provinces and Cities of Mexicana.

CHAP. XIII. Of Peruana, and the Provinces thereof.
Peruana and the Provinces thereof.
PERUANA contains the Southern part of America, and is tied to Mexicana by the
Straight of Darien, being ten miles broad; some hold the Spaniards did once
intend to cut this Straight through, and make it navigable, and thereby shorten
the way to the South Sea, China Moluccos, but hitherto we hear not that the
same is any way attempted; this Part does comprehend by the computation of the
Spaniards, whose relation in this vast Country I must follow, five distinct
Provinces, 1 Castella Aurea. 2 Guiana. 3 Peru. 4 Brasilia. 5 Chile; of each
briefly.


Castella Aurea.
Castella Aurea, is the first, and was so termed by the Spaniards at its
discovery, for the abundance of Gold found therein; besides which it is
admirably stored, with Silver, Spices, and some Drugs; it is divided into four
Provinces, which are first Castella del Oro, situated in the very Isthmus, and
is not populous, by reason of unhealthfulness of the Air, proceeding from the
many standing Pools found therein: the chief Cities are Nombre de Dios, Porta
Bella.
and now Porta Bella, the chief Port at which the Fleet unlade on the East, and
Panama on the West Side thereof, both built by Didacus Niquesa the Discoverer;
which since for their unhealthful situation, were removed by the King of
Spain's Command, by Petro Aria, then Viceroy; through which two Towns comes
all the rich Traffic that is betwixt Spain and Peru; Panama.
for whatsoever Commodity comes out of Peru, is unladen at Panama, carried by
Land to Porta Bella, and thence shipped for Spain; and what Commodity comes
from Spain is landed at Porta Bella, and is carried by land to Panama, and so
laden for Peru.

The Islands of Cape Verd.
They are so called, being situated against Cape Verd in the Land of Negroes,
and are 10 in number, viz. 1. St. Antonio, 2. St. Vincent, 3. The Isle of Salt,
4. Boa vesta, 5. Maio, 6. J. D. Fogo, so named from the frequent flashing of
fire. 7. St. Lucia. 8. St. Nicholas, 9: Brane, 10. St. Jago; they were
discovered in the year 1440. by a Genoese for the Portugals, lying all between
13 and 18 Degrees North-Latitude, and about the first Degree of Longitude, at
present only three of them inhabited by the Portugals, and they but of little
concernment to our business of Trade; St. Jago being the most considerable,
though not the biggest, being not above six or seven miles long, lying in 15
Degrees Latitude: it had once a fair Town called Riblera, but sacked and burnt
by Sir Francis Drake, Anno 1585. and afterward in Anno 1596. by Sir Anthony
Sherley it run the same fate; it is at present pretty well Inhabited and has a
convenient Harbor called the Pry, secured by a Castle, where Ships may ride
(with its leave) in safety: they have some quantity of Sugar, Sweetmeats, and
Coco-nuts, being their chief Commodities, which they exchange for such
Commodities as they want for Clothing, as Cloth, Stuffs of several sorts,
Linnens, Hats, and the like. They have very large and good Cattle, which they
sell at easy rates, about 25 s. aplece; also Horses of excellent shape and
metal, but they are Contrabando Goods, and not to be dealt in without leave
from the Governor, under no less penalty than forfeiture of Ship and Goods, if
he get you in his Command; but by Graruities and a particular Trade with him,
small numbers are sometimes admitted to be carried from thence.

Ocknam's brave attempt.
If I should silently pass over the attempt of one John Ocknam, a follower of
Sir Francis Drake, in his Worlds Incompassment in this place, I should much
wrong the honor due to so much worth: This Man, as Mr. Hackluit has it, with
70 Companions in a Creek a little above these Towns, drew on shore his Bark,
covered the same with boughs and leaves, and so leaving it marched over with
his Company, guided by some Negroes, until he came to a River which ran into
the South Sea, which by relation and Mercator's Maps, may be Tomobonda, or the
Creek of Ventura, where he cut down Timber, built him a Frigate, entered the
South-Seas, went to the Isle of Pearls, lay there 10 days, and there
inteicepted in two Spanish Ships 60000 pound weight of Gold, and 200000 pound
weight of Silver in Ingots, with diverse other rich Commodities; and after that
returned safely again to the Main Land, where rowing up the same Stream where
his Frigate was built, he was discovered by some feathers plucked from certain
Fowl they had killed for their Provision, which swam upon the River down the
Current; and though by this means he was taken and returned not into his
Country, nor yet his hidden Vessel; yet it is an Adventure that deserves a
Remembrance from all such as are Lovers of their Countries Honor, and it is
held in admiration by the Spanish Writers that have made mention thereof.

Andalusia Nova.
Andalusia Nova is the second; the chief Cities are Santa Margarita, and Santa
Sperita.

Nova Granada.
Nova Granada is the third; the chief City is Jungia, a pleasant and strong
Town directly seated under the Equator; the next is St. Foy, an Archbishops
See, and a Court of Justice.

Cartagena.
Cartagena is the fourth, accounted a fruitful Soil: but therein is found a
Tree, that whosoever touches does hardly escape poisoning: the chief City is
Cartagena; which our Countryman Sir Frances Drake in Anno 1585 surprised;
where besides inestimable sums of Moneys, he took with him from hence 240
pieces of Ordnance.

Guiana, second Province.
Guiana is the second Province, directly situated under the Equinoctial Line,
and is the fruitfullest part of Peruana: The Inhabitants in Wintertime
dwelling in Trees, for fear of Inundations, on which they built many pretty
Villages and artificial Mansions: it is watered with two goodly Rivers; the one
has the name of Orinoque or rather Raliana, borrowing the same from Sir Walter
Rawleigh, who first of all to any purpose, made a plenary Survey of this
Country, with the Commodities and situation thereof in An. 1595. and found
this River navigable for great Ships of burden 1000 miles, and for Boats and
Pinnaces 2000 miles. The other River is called Orellana, or the Amazons,
discovered 1543. the which is found navigable 6000 miles, and 200 miles broad
at the entrance into the Sea.

Manoa, the golden City.
The chief City of this Country (and if Spanish Writers may herein be believed,
the chiefest City of the World) is here found and called Manoa, or as Diego
Ordas the Discoverer called it, el Dorado, or the golden, from the abundance of
Gold, both in Coin, Plate, Armor, and other Furniture, which he there saw.
This Discoverer or Traveller, (for by that name the truth of his wondrous
Relation may be the better considered) is said to have entered into the City at
Noon, and to have traveled all that day, and the next also until night,
through the Streets hereof, before he came to the Kings Palace, which
peradventure was the policy of those people; as I have seen it to be in
Constantinople in Anno 1621. when as the Duke of Avarascah coming with a great
Train in Embassy from the King of Poland to Sultan Osman, the then Great Turk,
after his unfortunate Expedition to Poland, caused him and his whole Train to
be led a whole afternoon through the most eminent Streets of that City, when he
first entered the same, and so to his appointed Lodging, whereas an hours easy
walk to him that bad known the direct way, would easily have served the turn;
perchance imagining this a fit way to demonstrate to the Ambassador the beauty
and vastness of that City, together with his own Greatness in ostentation, and
to recover that Honor and Repute which he had a little before lost by the
Insolency and Cowardice of his Soldiers in his said Expedition thither.

Peru the third Province.
The third Province is Peru, which above all others in America, abounds in Gold
and Silver, the Mine whereof in diverse places is better stored with Metals than
with Earth: the chief City whereof is St. Michael, the first Colony the
Spaniards placed there, and fortified by Piscaro a famous Spanish Captain, who
subdued the Country, took the King thereof prisoner, and had for a ransom for
his Liberty and Life, a house piled up on all sides with refined Gold and
Silver, in estimation about ten millions; which when he had received, most
perfidiously contrary to his Oath and Promise slew him: by which appears the
wonderful Riches of this Country. Besides which the Soil is luxuriant in all
manner of Grain, fortunate in the Civility of her Inhabitants, frequency of
Cities, and salubrity of Air; and abundantly stored with that Herb Tobacco,
from hence brought first into England by Sir Francis Drake's Mariners, in Anno
1585. R^la Pl^ta.
In this Country is also now found that famous River called of Plate, being 150
Miles broad at the Embesheur, and above 2000 Miles long: and on this Stream is
found certain Fig Trees; the part toward the River bearing Fruit in Winter,
and the other part thereof toward the Land bearing fruit in Summer.

Brasilia, the 4 Province.
Brasilia is the fourth, affording a Soil fat by nature and always flourishing,
yielding great store of Sugars, and wonderful rich in Mines, and hence our
Red-wood which is here used by Dyers called Brazile does come: the Trees
whereof are found of that bigness, that whole Families live in an arm of one of
them, every Tree being as populous as many of our Country-Villages, which is
the reason that few Cities are found in this Country, yet along the Sea coast
some Cities are of late built by the Spaniards, and by them fortified, where
the Dutch have lately got some footing, and taken Todos los Santos, and thence
marched to Fernand-Buck, whence that Wood comes so well known to Dyers by that
name, where report says, they are now settled, and daily get ground in that
Continent.

Chilo the 5th Province.
The fifth is Chilo, taking its name, as some would have it, from the exceeding
cold there found, so that the Rivers are here observed to run in the day, but
by night to stand still, or at leastwise to move very slowly: this Country
boasts of 5 or 6 Towns inhabited by Spaniards, the Town called the Imperial,
being a Colony of the Spaniards, is found to be the principal.

This Country bordereth upon the Straights of Magellan, through which Sir
Francis Drake passed in his Worlds Incompassment; many of the Ports and Bays
herein, owing him that honor due to this Adventure, for the Names they now are
known by: which Voyage finished by him in 2 years and half, as the Relation of
Diego Nunio his Pilot testifies, made profit to himself and Merchants of
London his Partners and fellow Adventurers, according to an account made up at
his return, all Charges paid and discharged, which I have seen subscribed under
his own hand, 47 l. for one pound; so that he who adventured with him in this
Voyage 100 l. had 4700 l for the same; by which may be gathered the benefit
that redounded thereby, though accompanied with many rubs, delays, and dangers.
Having thus run over the main Continent of this World's Division, let us see
what Islands of note belong thereunto.

Isles of Solomon.
First, in the South Seas are found the Islands of Solomon, 18 in number, and
imagined by the Discoverer, in An. 1567. to be the Land of Ophir, to which
Solomon sent for his Gold; but in this he was deceived: the next are the
Islands of Thieves, of no account, therefore I pass over them, and in the next
place peruse the Islands in the Virginian Ocean; Margarita.
the first worthy of mention is Margarita, deficient both in Corn, Grass, Trees,
and Water; yet the abundance of precious Stones here found makes some amends
for these defects, from whence the name of Margarita is imposed on it.

Trinidado.
The next is Trinidado, discovered by Columbus in An. 1497. being famoused for
the best Tobacco, which by some Nations carries the name of this Island.

Bacaloes.
The next are the Isles of Bacaloes, lying against the influx of Caneda, and owe
the first discovery to Sebastian Cabot, 1447. by some termed Terra Nova, well
known for the great quantity of Fish taken on this Coast, as I have noted in
the passage of that part of America.

Beriquen.
The next is the Island of Beriquen, the North part affording plenty of Gold,
and the South part of Vital Provisions; the Cities here are St. John's, built
and inhabited by the Spaniards 1527. and Porto Rico, ruined by Henry Earl of
Cumberland 1597. and whose Walls were then first mounted by my deceased Uncle
Captain Tho. Roberts, to whose worth and valor I owe here this remembrance.

Jamaica
The next is Jamaica, once very populous, insomuch that the Spaniards here slew
60000 living Souls, and the women beholding their cruelty, did kill their
Children before they had given them life, that the issues of their bodies might
not serve so cruel a Nation. The Towns of note are Crestana and Sevil,
acknowledging Columbus for its first discoverer.

Cuba.
The next is Cuba, made known by Columbus his second Navigation, it abounds
with Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, Aloes, Cinnamon, Sugar; the Earth producing Brass
of excellent perfection, but the Gold somewhat drossie: here is the famous Road
Havana, a staple of Indian and Spanish Merchandise, and where the King of
Spain's Navy rides till the time of the year, and the convenience of the wind
join together to wast them homeward.

Luca.
The next is the Lucay Islands, 400 in number, who glory in the matchless beauty
of their Women, and mourn for the loss of a million of the Inhabitants murdered
by the blood thirsty Spaniards at their first discovery thereof.

Hispaniola.
Hispaniola is the next, now lamenting the loss of three millions of her
Inhabitants, butchered by her new Spanish Masters, enjoying a temperate Air, a
fertile Soil, rich Mines, Amber and Sugars; it excels all other the Islands
of the Seas, especially in three Prerogatives: First, in the fineness of the
Gold, which is here dug more pure and unmixed; Secondly, in the increase of
the Sugar-Cane, which here is found oftentimes in one Cane to fill up twenty,
and sometimes thirty measures of Liquor; Thirdly, in the goodness of the Soil
for Tillage, the Corn here yielding an hundredfold; and in sixteen days, Herbs
and Roots are found to ripen, and to be fit for meat: This fertility is
ascribed to four Rivers running East, West, North, and South, and all four
springing from one Mountain standing in the very Center of this Islands, the
Chief Town here is St. Dominico, ransackt by Sir Francis Drake, 1585. Barbados.
Barmudos.
Besides which Islands inhabited by the Spaniards, there are belonging to this
division of the World, some that are inhabited by the English, as the Barbados,
Barmudos, and others, in which certain Colonies of English have planted
themselves, which is found agreeable with the English Constitution, and being
well fortified and peopled, may in time prove main instruments of sharing with
the Spaniards in his American Dominions. And thus briefly stands the present
state of this newfound Climate, least acquainted to our Nation, and only
subject to the will and power of the Spanish Sceptar, who challenges the
Sovereignty and Rule of this vast Country, the Trade whereof is only permitted
to his Subjects, and debarred from all others; save what is obtained by force
or strength, and purchased by Colonies planted where the Spaniard is neitheir
known nor seated.

Barbados.
The Island of Barbados contains in length about 28 miles English, and 14 in
breadth, the which being measured is found 126000 Acres, lying South-East and
North-West, and is naturally fortified with Rocks and Sholes on the North and
East Side, where no Ships may anchor nor come in, only in two or three places;
small Boats may go out and in to fish, or the like. But for the South-East and
Westerly part of it, it is all along a Road, where Ships may Anchor and Ride;
but more especially, and with greater safety in four chief places, or Bays
thereof.

The principal Road or Bay is called Carlisle Bay, and lies near South-West of
the Island, near the middle of it, and is a good Road for shipping, where 500
Ships of any Burden may safely Anchor from all but South and Westerly winds,
which very seldom in these parts happen; for the wind here generally blows from
East Northerly and Southerly. Wherefore it is, that we call the East-part of
the Island, the Windward, and the West-part the Leeward. Here lies also the
chief Town for Trade, formerly called the Bridge, but now St. Michael's; and
has two Forts and a Platform between them, answering each to the other, for
the preservation and defense of the said Town, and command of the Road.

The first and chiefest Fort is called Charles Fort, standing on Needham's
Point, and lies out in the Sea, and to Windward of the Bay and Town; so that an
Enemy keeping out of command of this Fort, cannot probably come in to do the
shipping or Town any Injury; for that they must come full in or against the
Wind. This Fort is built strong with Stone and Lime, and has 17 great Guns,
and capable of more, being sufficiently garrisoned and commanded by a Captain.

The Platform joins to the Windward part of the Town, and is capable of 15
great Guns; and the other Fort lies and joins to the Leeward part of the Town,
the which is capable of 25 great Guns.

The Town consists of several Streets and Lanes, being about 30 Chains in
length, and 15 in breadth; and has many fair and large Buildings, most of them
are boarded on the outside; some of them Plastered, and many the fairest and
best are built with Stone, and with Brick.

The second Road and Town is lately called Charles Town, situate on Oysten's
Bay, and lies about two Leagues to the Windward of St. Michael's; and has also
two Forts, and one Platform; the two Forts stand to Windward and Leeward of the
Town and Road, and the Platform in the middle: And although this Town be not a
place of much resort for shipping, yet are there many considerable Storehouses
for Trade.

The third Road and Town is lately called St. James, but formerly the Holl, and
is about two leagues to Leeward of St. Michael's; has only one Platform, being
otherwise well fortified with Brest-works. And although few Ships come to Ride
here, yet in this Town is maintained a great Trade with the Inhabitants
adjacent.

The fourth Road and Town was lately called Spieght's Bay, but now Little
Bristol, which lies about four leagues to Leeward of St. Michael's, and has
two Forts. To this place come many Ships, especially from the City of Bristol,
which here Ride, and Unload and Reload, and is the second and next greatest
place of Trade to St. Michael's in the whole Island.

There are several other Islands which lie to the Leeward of this, known in
general by the Crely Islands. They have also their particular Names, etc. with
which their Latitude and Longitude may be seen in the Map. Some whereof are
inhabited by the English, as Mevis, Monserat, Antegua, and St. Christopher's,
and others by the Dutch and French, and some others of them by the Native Crely
Indians.

The main Land (or Terra firma) next to these Islands is called Guiana, and
lies Southerly about 100 leagues from hence. On which Continent the English
have a Colony planted within the River Serenam.

This Island is divided into 11 Parishes, and has 14 Churches and Chapels, and
is subdivided into diverse Plantations, some small, and others great; where are
many fair and large Buildings made of Stone, and others boarded and plaistered,
the which generally are pleasant Habitations, and delightfully situated; some
having Prospects into the Sea, and others on the Land.

The Inhabitants of this Island are English, Scotch, and Irish, and some few of
the Dutch and French Nation, who formerly lived here a time of servitude, and
now dwell as Freemen, some by their Trade, and others on Plantations; and some
few Jews live here and trade also as Merchants, they having obtained License
from the King so to do. Besides Mallatoes and Negroes, which are here kept and
accounted for slaves; the number of which (some few years since, upon search
were found to be 60000 Persons, viz.) 40000 Whites, and 20000 Blacks.

The standing Militia of this Island that are always ready on all occasions to
meet together, and which at other times are often, and well disciplined,
consists of two Regiments of Horse, and five Regiments of Foot, wherein several
Companies have near 200 in a Company, and more than 100 Horse in a Troop.

The Government is not contrary, but agreeable to the Laws of England; only
some particular Laws are made proper for this place by the Governor (or
Deputy) and his Council; which usually are seven in number, and an Assembly
that consists of 22 persons, chosen by the Free holders, two out of every
Parish.

The Religion outwardly professed, or that which has the greatest show or
appearance, is the Protestant Religion, yet without the exercise of any
coercive Power upon the Conscience; for here is neither Bishops Court, nor
Power given to Priest or Prelate, whereby they may exercise authority over the
Consciences of others, though different in Opinion: So that the Jews, and
others of different Judgments (they yielding obedience to the Civil Laws) are
protected, and live peaceably and quietly in this place.

Concerning Coins, all sorts of Moneys of Gold and Silver do pass here, but
none coined. The value of foreign Coins appear as follows. The Spanish Pistol
at twenty shillings Sterling. The Double Pistol at forty shillings Sterling,
and the lesser proportionable. The Pieces of Eight at six shillings, the half
and quarter proportionable. A Dutch Rider of Gold at eight and twenty shillings
Sterling, the half proportionable. The Rix-Dollar at six shilling Sterling. A
Cross Dollar at five shillings nine pence. A Duccatoon of Flanders at seven
shillings Sterling, the half and quarter proportionable. A French Pistol of
Gold at twenty shillings Sterling, the half proportionable. A French Crown of
Gold at ten shillings Sterling. A French Lewis of Silver at six shillings
Sterling, the half and quarter proportionable. A quarter Descue two shillings,
the half one shilling. The Portugal Crusado of four hundred Rees at five
shillings Sterling, the half and quarter proportionable. The Old Testoon at one
shilling six pence Sterling. The Shilling, Sixpence, and Threepence of
New England Coin, to pass here at that value.
Provided, the said several Coins have their just due and weight, pureness,
allay, and fineness.

But that which is most used in Payments are Pieces of Eight of Peru, which are
as current, and go at the same value, as Sevil, or Mexico, which will produce
this bad effect. That Money Sterling, and Coins of the better sorts will not be
imported; and these sorts which are already here, will either be horded up, or
transported, and that because the base Money of Peru is here held in equal
value with Mexico, etc. whose real value is from 4 s. 4 d. to 4 s. 8 d. and the
Peru from 2 s. 6 d. to 3 s.

Concerning Accounts, they are kept in Muscovado Sugar, according to which all
the other Country Commodities are regulated.

Concerning Interest, ten in the Hundred is accounted reasonable; but no Law
being made, they take from 10 to 30 per cent. and some more.

Concerning Weights and Measures, they are according to the Standard of
England, and only differ in that they buy and sell by the single 100 l. instead
of the 112. And the measure for all sorts of Commodities, Linen and Woollen,
is the Yard; only in Salt they allow 84 pound to the Bushel, and for all sorts
of Grain 56 pound to the Bushel.

The growth of this Island and parts adjacent, as for Trade, is, Sugar, Ginger,
Indico, Cotton-Wooll; also Tobacco, Logwood, Fustick, and Lignum vitae: but of
these four last no quantity now to be had here; but in the Leeward Islands
greater store. For the first four, every one makes as they please; that is to
say, few so good as they might, (especially if intended to pay away) here being
no Law of compulsion in the case. In some places of this Island Sugars will
require five weeks to Cure in, and in other places near the Sea, three weeks
the soonest; but some will make payment of it in three or four days Curing,
etc. which if refused by the Merchant, he may stay one year's time the longer,
besides the Charges of a Suit in Law e're he get it. This cannot well be
remedied, because the Laws are made by Freeholders which are Planters, no
Merchant being capable of being chose into the Assembly unless he have to Acres
of Land, etc.

The first four mentioned Commodities receive prejudice in their product by
abundance of Rain or Drought, when more than usual happen in their proper
Seasons. Also violent winds lodge the Sugarcanes, whereby the quantity is
lessened, and the goodness abated.

The chief season for Exportation is from January to September, or October,
when comes in the wet season, that makes the ways not Cartable, etc. and
usually puts an end both of making and transporting.

Wines of all sorts are here imported and vended, but of French and Portugal
the greatest quantities, viz. of Madera Wines come in about 1300 Tuns yearly,
of Spanish about 300 Tuns, and of French Wines about 700 Tuns per annum,
besides Brandies and English Spirits; but of these now few quantities Imported,
by reason of the general use and virtue of the Spirit of Sugarcanes called
Rum, which by the meaner fort, as servants and slaves, is not only drunk in
great abundance, but also much thereof is hence transported to Virginia,
Barmudos, and New England, etc.

Salted Meats, as Beef, Pork, Fish, etc. from Ireland, New England, Virginia,
Barmudos, Newfound-Land, etc. Also Pease, Flower, Butter, Cheese, and Bisquet.
Likewise Timber, Board, Pipe and Hogshead Staves, etc. Also Negro-slaves from
Guinny, and live Cattle, as Bulls, Cows, Astenegoes, and Horses from the Cape
de Verde Islands, New England, etc. And from England Servants, and all other
Commodities fit for Plantations, and for Apparel, etc. of all which, great
quantities are hither brought and sold.

Concerning Drapery, that is here chiefly in use and vendible, which is in
England, and although by reason of a constant temperate warmth, Stuffs in great
quantities are made use of, yet sine Broad Cloth is much worn here, and in good
request. And for Linnens, etc. all sorts are here worn, as in England, but more
especially of the finest. Together with Shoes, Stockings, Hats, and all other
manner of Apparel, is here used as in England.

Coppers and Stills for boiling of Sugar, and making of Rum, with all other
Necessaries belonging to Plantations, to Sugar-works, and Windmills; as all
kind of Iron-work and Brass is here vendible; also Fire-stones to set Coppers
with, and New Castle Coals for Smiths, etc.

Here is no Excise nor Custom payable on any Commodities imported or exported,
save only on Liquors, as Wines and Brandy, Beer and Cider; Spanish and Portugal
Wines at present pay for Excise 270 pounds of Muscovado Sugar per Tun, and
French 200 pound, Brandy 3 pound of Sugar per Gallon, Beer 54 pound per Tun,
and Cider the like. And this Duty is sometimes more, and sometimes less; and
all Ships which come to Trade here, pay half a pound of Powder for each Tun
entered at.

Factorage, or Factory Provision, is 10 per cent. 5 per cent. for Sails, and 5
for Returns, together with 3 per cent. for Storehouse room; this is the
ordinary rate; but some agree to have their business done cheaper.

No Prohibition for Exportation or Importation of any Commodity, only the
Governor's consent is to be asked, if any will export Provisions, as Corn,
etc. that is the growth of the Island.

The shipping which comes and trades to this Island, belongs generally to
England, some few small Vessels belong to this place, and pass to and fro here,
and to the Leeward Islands, and some belongs to New England, Barmudos, etc. The
number of Vessels which come hither to Trade in one whole year (namely in
1660.) is found to be 201 Ships of all sorts, as Ketches, Sloops, Barques, etc.
and contain in burden 15505 Tuns, according as they are here entered, which is
at the least three pound less than their true burden. Great part of which
Ships reload for England, and many go for New England, Barmudos, Virginia,
Guinny, and other places almost empty, and with but little of this Country
Growth.

No other fishing then for present spending, such fresh fish is taken round the
Island, of diverse sorts great quantities.

The usual freight, or Rate for Tunnage from hence for London, is about 4 and 5
l. per Tun; sometimes when Ships are plentiful, at 3 l. and when scarce, at 6
and 7 l. the Tun.

No public Office of Assurance, and seldom any private Contracts.

Seldom any Exchange from hence to any other place, sometimes Sugar is here
received, and Bills given for England for Money.

Cracas.
Cracas lies 4 Leagues from the Seaside, is pleasantly situated, and
inhabited by at least 250 Families, beautified with a fair Church, three
Convents, two of Friars, one of Mersedes, the other of Dominicans, and one of
Conception Nuns; an Hospital and a Chapel dedicated to St. Maurice; the Town
accommodated with a fresh River, whose Original is not above a furlong distant,
which is divided into two little Rivulets entering the Town, and there so
subdivided, that scarce a house but is supplied with a branch thereof.

The Inhabitants are some Gentlemen and Merchants, but for the most part such
as live upon their Cattle, or rather upon their Hides; and their Plantations of
Caquo, which of late years are grown very considerable; the passage to this
place from the Port or Seaside is very difficult, by reason of the many steep
Rocks (some as high as St. Paul's-Steeple London,) and narrow passages, where
but one Horse can go at a time, and often in great danger of tumbling from
those narrow passages down the steep descent, which often proves the loss of
those that travel that way.

The Port belonging to this place is open, lying to the Northward, where Ships
may ride in 14. fathom water, within call of the shore, secured by two little
Forts, in both are 14 or 15 Guns, two of Brass, the rest of Iron, and
constantly guarded by 16 Soldiers apiece, who are paid by the King of Spain,
besides the Inhabitants adjacent, which are about sixty Families, are ready in
Arms upon beat of Drum to secure the place, which are usually alarmed upon the
approach of any Ship, Within half a mile of this Port are several Plantations
of Coquo, some belonging to the Indians, but most to the Spaniards their
Masters, for whom they work three days in the week, and the rest of the time
for themselves.

Moneys.
The Moneys is the Piece (...), and parts thereof.

Weight.
Their weights is the Livre or Pound, which is divided into 16 ounces, of which
Livre they make the Rove containing 25 Livres, 4 Roves makes a Kintal, one
Kintal is 106 pound Averdupoise.

Measures.
Their long Measure for all Commodities is the Vara, which is two per cent.
bigger than that of Sevil in Spain, 104 of these Varas make 100 Yards in
London. The Measure for liquid Commodities is the Quartilia, containing one and
a half of that of Sevil, called the old Quartilia, and is about the Winchester
Quart. The measure for Corn, Salt, etc. is the Hanake, bigger than that of
Sevil, as 100 to 170.

The Commodities for Exportation.
The Commodities here for Merchandise are first Neat Hides dried, sent from
hence at least 30000 Hides yearly, esteemed the largest and best in all the
West Indies, brought hither on Mules from the adjacenr Countries within 150
miles distant; are sold here by the Hide, of which are threesorts, Bull Hides,
being the largest and best, sold from 14 to 20 Ryals the Hide; Ox Hides sold
at 2 Ryals less, Cow Hides never sold for above 8 Ryals a piece: All sorts of
these Hides are sold very cheap up in the Country, in many places not above 4
Ryals the Hide. Tallow shipped 1000 Roves yearly; they kill their Cattle for the
skin and Tallow, and the fat between the skin and the flesh, of which they make
a kind of Oil or Butter, which serve them instead of Butter for many uses, as
frying fish, etc. the flesh of the Beast (being of no value) is left for the
Fowls of the Air and wild Beasts to feed on. The next Commodity here in plenty
is Coquo, sent hence in seed, between 12 and sixteen thousand Hanakes yearly;
sold here sometimes by measure, and other while by weight, 110 pound going to
the Hanake, sold from 10 to 1^ pieces of Eight the Hanake. The manner of
planting Coquo is as we plant Fruit Trees, which bear in four years after
planted; comes to be as large as our Apple Trees, and last as long; bears fruit
all the year, is commonly gathered after every full Moon, but in greatest
plenty in June, July, August, and January: The Coquo grows in a Cod, about
the bigness of an Indifferent Cucumber, in which is contained from 14 to 20
seeds of Coquo about the bigness of an ordinary Bean. Here is transported of
Tobacco 500 Potaco's yearly (the Potaco is 100 Pound) called Governation
Tobacco, because growing within the Government of this place; sold for here
about six pieces of Eight the Rove. Goat Skins 3 or 4000 yearly; Sarsaparilla,
Wheat, Sugar, Indico, of which great quantities have and might be made, but at
present neglected; for that of late years they find a greater benefit by their
planting of Coquo.

Commodities Imported.
The Commodities they stand in need of from other Nations, are all sorts of
Clothing, Wines, Strong Water, Oil, Almonds, Raisins of the Sun, Olives,
Capers, Estamenia's (a kind of Serge) of Ampudia and Toledo; Silk Stockings,
Ribonds, Raxa's, a kind of Cloth of Castile; of English Commodities, Serges,
all kinds of Norwich Stuffs; all sorts of Stockings; and indeed no Stuffs in
England wearable but are here saleable; also Saffron, Copperas, Allom,
Brimstone, all kinds of French and Holland Linen; all kinds of Silks.

Customs.
The Custom is 1 Ryal upon a Hide, 4 Ryals upon a Hanake of Coquo: for all
Tobacco registered 12 Ryals upon the Potaco, but usually compounded for with the
Governor for half, and other Commodities of smaller value they compound with
the Governor, as well such as are Transported as Imported, excepting such as
are Registered, and then at the will of the Customer.

Their Trade.
They prohibit Trade with all Nations but their own, upon the penalty of being
Traitors, and loss of Goods, yet the Dutch of late years do put in here, under
pretense of wanting Provisions, and to water, which together with Bribes
procure a Trade with them. This place has no shipping of their own, but
visited from the Havana, Cartagena, and St. Domingo, with about six Ships
yearly, and many from Spain, which are laden hence with the Commodities of
this place, and in lieu thereof supply them with the Commodities of their own
and Foreign Nations.

The Trade of America by the Spaniards.
To give here a small touch of the traffic of this new World, is the principal
scope of my intention, but being shut up from the eyes of all Strangers, we
must be content till time produce it more apparently to live in ignorance: true
it is, that the Country abounding in Mines of Silver and Gold, and the soil
rich in bringing forth all Fruits, that from Spain have been hither
transplanted adds every day an increase to their present Traffic: the special
matter here sought out for is Gold and Silver, the Loadstone that attracts all
Merchants to adventure hither: and in their Mines the Inhabitants are set
continually to work, living poorly, and undergoing thus the punishment of their
ignorance and pusillanimity, in suffering themselves to be so easily overcome,
and so basely subjected; out of which Mines the King has the part of all
extracted, which in the Emperor Charles the Fifth's time amounted but to five
hundred thousand Crowns of Gold yearly; but since, it has been found that the
Kings of Spain have had thence sometimes ten, sometimes fifteen, and sometimes
seventeen millions of Gold yearly. The Merchants carry thither Spanish Wines,
Woollen and Linen Cloth, and other Merchandises of Europe, and (if report may
gain credit) do make returns thence above one hundred profit for another, in
Spices, Sugars, some Drugs, and in Gold and Silver Ingots in great abundance,
as well for the accounts of private Machants, as for the account of the King
himself, so that it does appear in the Records kept in the Custom-house of
Sevil, that in these seventy-four years last past, there has come from this
India into Spain two hundred and sixty millions of Gold, which has been the
mover of all those Broils and Wars that have been set afoot in Europe by the
Kings of Spain, it being affirmed without contradiction, that by means thereof,
Philip the Second during his reign did spend more than all his Predecessors,
being in number sixty-two, that have reigned before him in this Kingdom before
they shook off the Roman yoke; for he alone spent more than an hundred millions
that came out of this India.

This Country also gives employment to many Ships of great burden, to carry
their Sugars, Ginger, Cottons, Fernandbuck, and such other Commodities that are
here found daily to increase by the industry of the Spaniards, which by good
Government may come in time to a great height, and had not the Sword of these
Blood-suckers ended so many millions of Lives in so short a time, Trade might
have seen a greater harvest, and a more profitable crop by their industry and
labor.

It will not be further useful for me to insist upon other particulars of
Traffic in this Continent in matter of Coins, of Weights and Measures; for in
all these they follow the Rules observed in Sevil, where the Rendezvous of
those Ships are made, that go and come into these parts; and so leaving this
new discovered Division of the World, I will cross the Main Ocean, and with a
somewhat better Survey, I will observe the needful Occurrents of Trade in
AFRICA, my Second Part of this Model, and of the World.

OF AFRICA, AND THE Provinces and Cities of Trade THEREOF.
CHAP. XIV.
Africa, and the Provinces thereof.
AFRICA I make to be my second Division of the World, which is found to be a
Peninsula, almost encompassed round, having the Red Sea on the East, the
Atlantique Ocean on the West, the Southern Ocean on the South, and the
Mediterranean on the North; and where the Sea is defective, to make it a
complete Island, there is a little Isthmus of 20 leagues that tieth it to Asia,
which sundry Princes in former ages intended to trench through, to have the
benefit of both those Seas united, but have desisted, as finding the Sea in the
Red Sea Gulf to be higher than the Land of Egypt, by nature all flat, level,
and plain, and so might thereby overflow and drown all Egypt.

Divided into eight parts.
Africa is at this day usually divided into eight parts, which are, 1. Barbary.
2. Numidia. 3. Lybia. 4. Negrita. 5. Aethiopia Interior. 6. Aethiopia Exterior.
7. Egypt, and 8. The Islands thereof.


Barbary 1.
And first, Barbary is now divided into four Kingdoms, which are, first, Tunis;
second, Argier; third, Fesse; and fourth, Morocco; the Commodities these
Countries send abroad, I shall speak of when I come to these particular places.

CHAP. XV. Of TUNIS, and the Trade thereof.
Description of Tunis.
THE Kingdom of Tunis contains sundry Cities of Trade, viz. Bona, Biserta,
Tripolis, Africa, and (which is the principal) the City of Tunis it self: Which
is situate near unto a Lake, some seven miles in length (and not much less in
breadth) extending almost to the Castles of Goletta, whereby this Port
(commonly called the Port of Goletta) is strongly guarded, being about eight
miles distant from this City. Near unto which was seated that famous City of
Carthage, who contended with Rome for the Mastery of the World, and challenged
the priority in Africa, as Queen and Supreme Lady thereof; not only seen in
here Ruins, and known by her vast extent; And from whose ashes sprung up
Tunis, which is almost 4 English miles in circuit within the Walls, and with
the Suburbs will make in compass about 7 miles: The Streets being generally
very narrow, it is exceeding populous; as appeared by that terrible devastation
in the year 1643, and part of 44, wherein there died of the Plague in the space
of about 15 months (if Vox Populi may be credited) no less than one hundred
thousand persons: And yet so great a multitude in a year or two after were
scarcely missed: The natives are for the greater part Moors and Andaluzes
(which are of the Race of those Moors, which by thousands were banished from
Spain) who profess the Mohammedan Religion.

Government.
The great Turk is acknowledged for their Protector, who every three years, and
sometimes oftener, do send hither a Bashaw, who representing his person, is as
it were a Viceroy sent by him to recover in his Tribute from the Moors of this
Country, and to pay off his Janissaries, which are about 400 in number: And
these keep in subjection the whole City and some adjacent Towns; the Government
chiefly appertaining to the Dey (or Captain General, for so the word does
import) who is chosen by the Turks: There is also a Duan, or Council of State,
who consult about the affairs of the whole Kingdom, yet have not absolute power
to determine of any thing, without the consent and approbation of the Dey, who
rules them as he pleases.

Buildings.
Their Houses (being built of Stone) are for the most part made after a square
form, and flat at the top, there being a Courtyard in the midst, for the
conveying of light into the adjacent rooms; Some few of their Houses are
magnificent; and their Churches generally, the small, are superficially
beautiful: which are held to be so sacred, that none that are not Musselman
(that is, true Believers according to the Mohammedan account) are permitted to
set foot therein; if they do, there is no remedy, but they must either turn
from, or burn for their Religion.

This Kingdom is much bettered and enriched by the labor of the Andaluzes, who
have here built many Cities and Temples according to their superstitious use,
planted Vines, Oranges, Limons, Figs, Dates, Almonds and Olives; and thereby
have much peopled and prosited the whole Country.

Port.
The Port is found to be very safe and secure (excepting only when a ^ wind
blows hard, which makes a great Sea) and withal so large, that many hundred
Sail may ride at Anchor; the ground likewise being very good.

Coins.
The Coins passable here are of three kinds of metal, viz. Gold, Silver and
Copper. Those of Gold are usually but of three sorts, namely the Sultany, which
commonly passes at 90 Aspers, (52 whereof go to a Spanish Dollar or Ryal of
(...)) the Venice Chickeen at 2 Ryals of (...) of Spain; and the Spanish
Pistolet at 3 Ryals of (...). But these Gold Coins do vary much in their value
according to men's necessities, and the plenty and scarcity thereof. Sultanies
have passed sometimes at 100 Aspers apiece for a long while together: Likewise
the Spanish Pistolet has been at 3 and the Venice Chickeen at 2 Ryals of 8/^.
The reason why these do often rise so high, is principally the Mahometans going
to Mecha, (to visit the Sepulcher of their false Prophet) who for their light
carriage are very inquisitive after Gold: But they chiefly desire Sultanies,
which in diverse places go current for 2 Ryals of (...) a piece: Sometimes also
they enquire after Spanish Pistolets, but seldom or never after Venice
Chickeens, for they are not passable in those parts: Yet this last sort is much
made use of for guilding, the old ones being accounted the best.

The Silver Coins are of two sorts, viz. the Spanish Ryal of 8/^, and the Asper
of this place; which latter notwithstanding has some mixture of Brass in it;
and of late years they have been so falsified by the Jews, that at present they
are called in, which cannot but occasion a great detriment to many.

Accounts.
Their Accounts are commonly kept in Dollars (or Ryals of (...)) and Aspers.

Exportation of Money.
Exportation of Money is sometimes limited ( viz. such a quantity at a shipping
as the Dey pleases) and often prohibited; yet seldom is this Prohibition so
strict, but by means of a Present you may transport what you please: yet take
this observation, That the Dollars here are generally lighter than in other
parts, the reason supposed to be the Jews clipping of them.

Weights.
Their common Weight is a Cantar, or 100 pound, being about two pounds bigger
than our 112 pound of England. So that their pound weight has been found to
make near 16 ounces Troy, and produces in Ligorn, the common Scale of passage
from Christendom, 150 pound. This Cantar contains 100 pounds, each pound is
divided into 16 ounces, and each ounce into 8 Tamins. And hereby is weighed all
sorts of Commodities, except Silver, Gold, Pearl, etc. which are weighed by a
Carot Weight and Mitigals, as shall be showed in another place more convenient.

In weighing of Cloves 5 pound per Cantor is usually allowed for Tret; and for
Nutmegs and Pepper 5 pound per cent. for Tret and Bag together.

Measures of length.
Their Measure of length is the Pike: whereof there are three sorts; the first
being called the Cloth-Pike, that is 26 inches English, by which are measured
all sorts of Woollen Cloth, and Stuffs: By the second (termed the Silk-Pike)
which is a gray or 1/18 part less than the Cloth-Pike, are measured Silks,
Sattens, Velvets, and the like. By the third sort, which is called the
Linnen-Pike, is measured only Linen and Dimity, etc. and is part less than the
Silk-Pike.

Dry Meaures.
Their dry Measures are, 1. The Coffice, which contains about ten English
bushels, and does commonly hold out 5 Sacks of Ligorn, and somewhat better.
Secondly, The Weab, 18 whereof make a Coffice. And thirdly, The Saw, 12 whereof
make a Weab.

Liquid Measures.
Their liquid Measure is of two sorts, viz. the Wine-Meetar,, and the
Oyl-Meetar; the latter whereof being just twice as big as the former, contains
near five English Gallons.

Commodities.
The principal Commodities that this place does afford are Hides, Wool, Wax,
Honey, Oil, Corn, Dates, Raisins, Anniseeds, Estrich Feathers, and Spunges, etc.

The Commodities vended here, are English and Venice Cloth, Lead, Shot, Deal
boards, Perpetuanoes, Latten-Plates, Sea horse Teeth, Cloves, Pepper, Ginger,
Saffron, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Tartar, Alum, Spanish Wool, Sassaperilla,
Cocheneel, Gold-thread di Genoa, Cotton Yarn and Wool, French Canvas, Gumlock,
Madder, Iron, Wire, Iron of Bilbo, Genoa, and Venice Paper, Damask and Satin
of Luca, etc.

Customs.
The Custom of this Country upon all Commodities imported (excepting Lead, Shot
and Iron, which pay no Custom at all) is 9 per cent, upon the real value sold:
whereof lest the Merchant should defraud the Customers, a Broker has been
formerly appointed continually to attend on the Merchants, to keep an exact
account of what Goods they receive and sell, and to what value: But of late
years this has been discontinued, confiding (as it should seem) more in the
English, than heretofore they were wont: Yet still there are Officers appointed
to take an Account of all Goods come ashore in general; and before you can
expose them to sale, an exact Account of every Commodity in particular. Other
charges of Goods Imported, besides freight (of which there is no certain rate)
are about 8 per cent. more, viz. 2 per cent. Gonsolage, 5 per cent. Provision
and Brokerage, and about 1 per cent. for petty charges.

Customs on Goods Exported (excepting Hides, Wax, and Wools, which pay no
Custom) is 5 per cent.

Contra-banda Commodities.
All Edible things, as Corn, Pease, Beans, Oil, Butter, Honey, Dates, etc. and
the like, are Contra-banda Commodities. Yet not seldom by the help of Presents,
License may be procured for Transportation thereof: Importation of all Goods is
allowed of.

To conclude, This place is of no great importance for Commerce, vending but a
small quantity of Goods; wherewith having for some years past been glutted,
(this Market being soon over-cloyed) has been found to yield little benefit to
the late Traders; and less encouragement to the English Factory, whom (if more
than one house be settled) this place will even starve, if they be honest: for
no great quantity of any Commodity is to be provided.

CHAP. XVI. Of ARGIER, and the Trade thereof.
Argier and the Trade thereof. Tremesin.
ARGIER contains only two Towns of note, Tremesin once the principal of a
Kingdom, and Argier the principal now of this Country, not found to be very
spacious in its self, but strong, and of late much fortified; enriched not only
by the labor of the Moors banished out of Spain, but also by the spoils of
many Merchants of all Nations, brought thither as the retreat and receptacle of
all Turkish and Moorish Pirates, which do much infest the Mediterranean Seas,
and of late years have found the way out of the Straights of Gibraltar into the
Canary Islands, and into sundry other Countries bordering upon the Ocean. In it
are accounted eighty thousand souls, the utmost part of them living by
Piracies. Merchandising is not much in use in this City; yet some of the
Inhabitants are found to detest this common ill-gotten Gain, by Piracy and
Theft: and these are observed to maintain some Trade with other Nations along
the Coast. What points necessary thereto, according as I noted there in 1619. I
shall here set down: and first their Commodities vended thence to foreign parts,
are such as follows:

Commodities of A^gier
The Commodities this Kingdom affords is, Barbary Horses, Estrich Feathers,
Honey, Wax, Raisins, Figs, Dates, Oils, Almonds, Castile Soap, Brass, Copper,
and some Drugs: and lastly, excellent Piratical Rascals, in great quantity, and
poor miserable Christian captives of all Nations too too many, God give them
comfort, patience, and release in due time, if it be his Blessed Will.

Coins of Argier.
Their Coins passing current here in Trade is the Double, which is accounted to
hold correspondence in value with the English Shilling, or rather two Spanish
Rials single.

Four Doubles is 1 ^/8, called there an Osian.

Five Doubles and 35 Aspers is a Pistolet of Spain.

Seven Doubles is accounted a Sultany or Chequeen, the common piece of Gold
found current in all Barbary.

Fifty Aspers is accounted to make a Double; and these are the usual Coins
passable in all this Coast belonging to this Kingdom.

Weights of Argier.
The 100 l. or Rotolos here is 120 l. English, so that their 84 l makes 100 l.
Sutle, and 94 l. or Rotolos is 112 l. English, according to the custom of
Valentia in Spain, from whence it is conceived they have drawn this original of
Weights: they are observed to have two several Weights, the proportion being 10
l. of the small making. 6 l. of the gross.

But here sundry Commodities are found to be weighed by sundry Cantars, as
Iron, Lead, Yarn, and all Woolls are weighed by a Cantar of 150 Rotolos of the
Rotolos above specified.

Raisins, Figs, Butter, Honey, Dates, Oil, Soap by the Cantar of 166 Rotolos
abovesaid.

Almonds, Cheese, Cottons, by the Cantar of 110 Rotolos.

Brass, Copper, Wax, and all Drugs by the Cantar of 100 Rotolos.

And Flax is weighed by the Cantar to contain 200 Rotolos.

Gold, Silver, Pearls and Gems are weighed by the mitigal, which is worth there
9 doubler, and is 72 gr. English, and the soltany, chequeen or hungar weighs 52
gr. English, being accounted equal to Angel Gold, and worth in England circa 3
l. 11 s. per ounce, Troy Weight, or thereabouts.

Measures of length.
They use in Argier two picos or measures, the Turkish and Morisco, the Morisco
pics being the measure of the Country, and is of the Turkish, by which is sold
all Linen only.

The Turkish pico is divided into 16 parts, and every part is called a Robo,
and is (...) part of an English-yard, which with the allowance of an inch,
according to our custom in England, has been found to make 1 picos turkisco,
and by which all Silk Stuffs and Woollens are sold in this place.

Dry Measures.
Their dry measure is called a Tarry, which heaped up, as they use it, is 5
gallons English, and so has it been found to produce in Corn, Salt, and some
such Commodities.

Accounts in Argier.
They keep their account in doubles and ossians, and some in soltanies and
aspers, the coins of Barbary, 4 doubles making an ossian, and 50 aspers making
a double.

Customs of Argier.
Their Customs are here 10 per cent. as in Tunis, and paid upon the Commodity
according to the value sold, and permission given to land; and if not sold, to
be shipped again free of all duties (as I said before) in the Kingdom of Tunis.
Clearing of a Ship in Argier.
And it is to be noted, a Ship entering here and Anchoring, must either land her
Sails or her Rudder for prevention of running away without license; which must
be obtained in Duano, which is the common assembly of the Bashaw, who is
Commander for the Grand Seignior, and of the principal Moors of the Kingdom and
City, and then paying these duties with license she is dismissed, viz. to the
Kaiffa 28 doubles, to the Almaine 31 doubles, to the Captain Anchorage 15
doubles, to the Bashaw 8 doubles, to his Chiouse 4 doubles, to his Almin 8
doubles, to his Chouse 4 doubles, to the Bashaw Sorman 2 doubles, to the
Druggerman 8 doubles, to the Sackagie 8 doubles; to the Consuls duty 42 doubles
which in all make 162 doubles. And so much shall serve for Argier; now I sail
along the Coast, and observe some Maritime Towns of note there seated.

CHAP. XVII. Of ORAN, and the Trade thereof.
Oran and the Trade thereof.
ORAN is seated upon this Shore also, and of late in possession of the
Spaniards, whose immunities to such as come hither to reside have made the
place noted for some Traffic, especially for the Commodities of this Country,
which hence are transported into Spain and Portugal, such as are Horses, Wax,
and some years Corn in a great measure, as I have noted before.

Coins of Oran.
The Coins current of Barbary, and which pass currently here, are those
indifferently named before, and the Coins of the opposite shores of Spain.

The Weights in use in Oran.
It is found they have here four several weights: First, A quintar of 5 roves of
20 l. to a rove, which is 100 l. or rotolos: Secondly, A quintar of Spices of 4
roves of 25 l. per rove, which is 100 rotolos: Thirdly, A quintar for Corn,
every quintar being only 6 rotolos: And lastly, A quintar for Cotton-wool,
every quintar being 15 rotolos, the 100 l. of London makes in the first 90
rotolos; in the second 133 rotolos; in the third for Corn 48 rotolos; and in
the last 58 rotolos.

Measures of Oran.
The Measures of ORAN are found to be principally two, the one being the pico
Morisco, the proper measure of the Country, agreeing with the measure of
Argier before mentioned, and the other the Vare of Spain here used in Cloth,
Silk, and such like, by the Spaniards.

CHAP. XVIII. Of UNA and the Trade thereof.
Una and the Trade thereof.
UNA is also seated upon this Coast, and depends for the most part, in matter
of Trade, upon the inland Inhabitants; affording for Transportation the common
Commodities of Barbary; and by reason of the situation little known to our
Nation, therefore I shall the more briefly pass over the same.

Coins of Una.
The Coins before mentioned are here current, only with little alteration, as
also the same is found to be in Bona (anciently Hippona, the seat of St.
Augustine that learned Father) in Cola, Tabaracha, Bugia, Constantine, and
other Towns of Trade upon this Coast, therefore I will omit the repetition
thereof, having all a reference in Trade one to the other.

Weights of Una.
But in weights they much differ; for here is found in use three several
Quintals composed of one l. or Rotolo, one for Cotton-wool, another for Spices,
and the third for Corn; thus agreeing with London.

The 100 l. of London makes 63 Rotolos for weight of Wool.

The 100 l. of London makes 72 Rotolos for weight of Spices.

The 100 l. of London makes 91 Rotolos in the weight of Corn.

All which is to be observed by him that trades into this Port, in the sale of
these and the like Commodities.

Measures of Una.
The measure of length is here the pico Morisco, which generally is used in all
Commodities and contains 26 inches English circa.

CHAP. XIX. The Trade in general of ARGIER and TUNIS.
The general Trade of Argier and Tunis.
THough these two Kingdoms of TUNIS and ARGIER do afford many fair Towns
according to the manner of this Country, yet it is not found that the same
does produce many Merchants of quality or of great consideration. This tract of
Land is found at present to belong to three several Inhabitants, the Moors as
Proprietors enjoy the principal part; and these are found within themselves to
acknowledge several Sovereigns, which not seldom are at variance, sometimes
amongst themselves, sometimes with their neighbors; and because of the liberty
given here for entertainment and protection to all Nations; not only these
Towns do harbor Levents, which we call Pirates. and they call natural Turks,
but also Christians of all Countries which hence with robberies infest these
adjoining Mediterranean Seas, add joining themselves with the abovesaid
Levents, make up a dissolute and resolute company of Sea-farers and Pirates;
and because these are not sufficient to work any matters of moment alone to
make their strength the greater, and their force the stronger, there is of
their own accord added thereto the Tagarins, a poor, desperate and naked
rascality, and the Spanish, Moors, or Moorish Spaniards of late years banished
from the Kingdom of Spain, who willingly some in purse, and some in person,
undertake these designs to be revenged of their banishment from their native
Countries, their case herein being most miserable; for whilst they lived in
Spain they were accounted for Moors, and now being amongst the Moors are still
doubted as Christians.

These last and some other Inhabitants of these Cities of Tunis and Argier, do
still profess more civility than the common sort, and have some relics of
that honesty left them, which peradventure they brought with them hither out of
Europe; and these are only they that in these Cities profess Merchandising, and
are found to use some Trade along this Coast from one part to another, and so
to Marselia and Ligorn, Towns seated on the Christian opposite shore, enjoying
many privileges and immunities for Merchants of what Nation soever.

The Spaniards inhabiting in this Coast in sundry good and well fortified
Towns, are the second that here bear sway; the Country for some certain miles
in circuit overawed by their Garrisons pay them Contribution; and it is
supposed that the charges in maintaining these exceeds the gain yielded
thereby, and here is but little Trade found.

The third sort I account the Genoese and the French Nations, who upon this
Coast by permission of the State, do pay certain yearly Pensions, for admission
of Trade, and have built themselves Fortresses and Castles for the defense of
their Estates and Persons, and Shipping; and these are now found the only
Merchants inhabiting this Coast: here they have their scales for the
Coral-fishing; for Honey, Wax, Corn, Hides, Horses, Spunges, and many other
Commodities, which the Contrymen willingly for love of their Spanish Plate
do bring them in, and here Traffic is made upon good terms and sure guard,
buying and selling as they list to inhanse or debase the Commodities the either
buy or fell: by which a great gain is yearly made unto them.

The Piratical Trade of Tunis and Argier.
And this is as much as I conceive necessary in this point of Merchantile
Traffic in these two Kingdoms and Cities of Tunis and Argier: but there is
here a Piratical Trade also much practiced by the people of these two places,
who set out Vessels in partnerships and shares, to take Prizes or Gonimas, as
they term them, which is ever performed by all manner of advantages without
faith or promise either kept or regarded; which spoils have been so great and
their booties so beneficial, that the desperate spirits of many of sundry
Nations have come hither in hope to raise by rapine and theft, what else by
honest courses they could not elsewhere compass: their manner of setting forth
these Ships is upon a small cost, and done with little charge, considering the
frugality in diet used in these Countries, and their division at their return
is commonly allotted, (as I observed in these parts when for some time I abode
amongst them, and is still continued) for the body of the Vessel, for the
Victuallers and setters out, and for the Captain and his company; and this is
truly and exactly made in species and kind, for they hardly admit a Commodity
taken, or Slaves captivated to be sold at the Market, and the dividend to be
made in Money: but they (as I have often seen) will divide it in kind, as if a
bag of Pepper, then by dishfuls, or a piece of Cloth or Linen, then by
proportional shares, according to their gross capacity, which custom I
understand is since by their better judgment rectified, and Merchants Ships
warned by their losses of latter days, to go better armed, manned and provided;
and seeing their prizes come in thinner, they are more provident in their
division, though more venturous in their thefts. Argier in this kind has been
able to set out near 300 sail little and great in those times, now not a
quarter so many: and Tunis then had 20 in 31 good sail, now it has not a
dozen: so that I may conclude their Trade decreaseth and daily diminishes,
which God of his goodness grant it may still do, to the Merchants comfort, and
the Mariners joy: and thus leaving these two Piratical Kingdoms and Cities,
with this Maritime Coast.

Of Sally and the Trade thereof.
Sally is divided by a River into two Towns, called the Old and New; inhabited
by the race of those Moors which were banished out of Spain, which profess the
Mohammedan Religion: It is commanded by a strong Castle well fortified, which
commands the Harbor; Ships may ride in the open road without command; in fine,
to 30 fathom water good Anchoring, all Vessels not drawing above 10 foot water
may enter over the Bar into the Creek or Harbor, where they lie in safety
fastened ashore: the Harbor will hold at least 100 Sail. Merchants for the
most part that trade to this place, will not venture to carry their Goods on
shore without a Protection from the Governor, nor hardly then neither, because
of the perfidiousness of the people; and therefore for the greater security
trade on Shipboard with the Merchants of the Town, which are for the most part
Jews of the worst sort.

Their Coin.
They Coin Money in the Town, of Gold, Silver and Copper; their Gold is the
Ducate, worth about 8 s. Sterling; their Silver is the Blanckhil, worth about 2
d. being the 48. part of their Ducate; their Copper Coin are Fluces, passing
for the 20. part of the Blanckhil, or the 10. part of a penny Surling. All
Coins of Spain, the French Crown, the Venice Chequin are payable here; and
indeed the Coin of all Nations of Gold and Silver are here passable by weight
for their value.

Weight.
Their Weights are those for the most as in Spain.

Measures.
Their Measure for Corn is an Armudo, about 5 to our Bushel. Their long Measure
a Brace about 18 Inches.

Their Commodities are chiefly Cow-Hides, Goat Skins, Wax, Honey, Oil, Dates.

Commodities carried thither are several sorts of Cloth, both Linen and
Woollen; great quantities of Fire-lock Muskets, Pistols, Knives, and Iron-work
of all sorts.

CHAP. XX. Of the Kingdom of FESSE, and the Provinces thereof.
Fesse, and the Provinces thereof.
FESSE is is divided into 7 Provinces, which borrows their names from the
Towns seated therein; the first is Hamlisnon, seated in the mountainous part of
this Kingdom; the second is Seuta, now in the possession of the Spaniard,
having a Town of this name strongly by them fortified; the third is Tangier, a
City also fortified and belonging likewise to them; the fourth is Mehenes; the
fifth Arguer; the sixth is Alcaser, (near to which the three Kings, Sebastian
of Portugal, Mahomet of Fesse, and Abdelmelech of Morocco, competitors for this
Kingdom, were slain in one day, together with many others of eminent quality;
and Stuckley that famous infamous English Rebel in An. 1578.) and seventh FESSE
the Metropolis, which for its greatness merits a more serious consideration.

CHAP. XXI. Of the City FESSE, and the Trade thereof.
City of Fesse, and the Trade thereof.
THis City bears the name of Fesse, from the abundance of Gold, (as Writers
record) that was found in digging the Foundation thereof; it is beautified with
many goodly Buildings both public and private; it is divided by the River Sabu
into three parts, containing in all 82000 Households, having 700 Moschs or
Temples, 50 of them being adorned with Pillars of Alabaster and Jasper; and one
seated in the heart of the City called Carucen, is the most sumptuous,
containing a mile in compass, in breadth cantaining 17 Arches, in length 120,
and born up by two thousand five hundred white Marble Pillars, under the
chiefest Arch (where the Tribunal is kept) hangs a most huge Lamp of Silver,
encompassed with 110 lesser; under every the other Arches hang also very great
Lamps, in each of which burn 150 Lights: it has 31 Gates great and high; the
Roof is 150 yards long, and 80 yards broad, and round about are diverse Porches
containing 40 yards in length, and 30 in breadth, under which are the public
Storehouses of the Town: about the Walls are Pulpits of diverse sorts, wherein
the Masters of their Law read to the people such things as they imagine
appertain to their salvation: the Revenues thereof in Anno 1526, was 200
Ducates a day of old rent, accounted 100 l. sterling; until the late Civil Wars
it was a City of great Traffic, and many Merchants of diverse Nations resorted
hither, and were allowed a public Meeting Place for their Commerce, and
lodging for their residence, being in form of a Court or Exchange, enclosed
with a strong Wall, with 12 Gates, and limited with 15 Streets for several
Nations to meet for their business, and for the laying up of their Commodities;
and every night for security of their Goods and Persons, the same was kept
guarded at the Cities charge, resembling the Besistens or Canes now in use in
Turkey and other Southern Countries.

There is here also diverse Colleges where the Sciences are taught, amongst
which Madorac is the chief, and accounted for one of the excellentest Pieces
for Workmanship in all Barbary! It has three Cloisters of admirable beauty,
supported with eight squares Pillars of diverse colors; the Roof curiously
carved, and the Arches of Mosaique of Gold and Azure; the Gates are of Brass
fair wrought, and the Doors of the private Chambers of in-laid work: It is
recorded that this College did cost the Founder King Abuchenen, 480 thousand
Sultanies in Gold, which is in English Money 192 thousand pound; which would
hardly in these days, were it now to be built, perform the twentieth part
thereof, and this was not above 150 years past; and about that time Henry the
Seventh King of England did build that sumptuous Chapel in Westminster; which
as I have been informed, did in those days co^ 7448 l. and let it be judged by
Artists, how much more would build the fellow of it in these our days.

They have also here for the commodity and pleasure of the Citizens 600
Conduits, from whence almost every house is served with water; besides what
goes to their religious uses, at the entries of their Temples and Moschs: but
I have staid too long in surveying this City, I will now see what Commodities
and Merchandise this Kingdom affords.

Commodities in the Kingdom of Fesse.
The Commodities found in general, as well in the Kingdom of Fesse as of
Morocco, and found transportable for Merchandise, is Fruits of all kinds, such
as is principally of Dates, Almonds, Figs, Raisins, Olives; also Honey, Wax,
Gold, and sundry sorts of Hides, and Skins, especially that excellent sort of
Cordovant from this Kingdom of Morocco called Maroquins, famoused throughout
Spain, France, and Italy; also Corn, Horses, Wools, whereof the Inhabitants are
observed of late days to make some Cloth: here is found also for Merchandise
fabricated here some sorts of Stuffs of Silks, as Sattins, Taffataes, and some
sorts of Linen, much in use in this Country, made partly of Cotton, and
partly of Flax, and diverse other Commodities.

Moneys of Fesse and Morocco.
The Moneys of this Kingdom, and generally of all the Kingdoms of Morocco, is
the Xeriff or Ducate in Gold, deriving the name thereof from the Xeriffs, who
within these few years made conquest of these Kingdoms, under Pretext and
color of the Sanctity of their Religion, and is accounted to be about ten
shillings sterling Money, divided into 8 parts, and esteemed each part, which
may be compared to be about 14 d. in 15 d. sterling.

Accounts in Fesse and Morocco.
They keep their Accounts in these places by Ducates, or old Xeriffs, now almost
out of use, divided into 8 parts, accounted in common value, but 12 d. every,
though worth more, as above is declared.

Weights in Fesse.
Their Weight here is two, one used in all ordinary Commodities, which is the
Rorolo, containing (.) ounces or drams, it having been found by observation,
that the 100 l. Averdupois, London, has made here 64 Rotolos, and 100 Rotolos
is here a Cantar. The second Weight is here the Mitigal, used in the weighing
of Silver, Gold, Pearl, Musk, and the like, agreeing with the Mitigal used in
Argier and Tunis spoken of before.

Measures in Fesse.
The common Measure for length is here the Covado, 12 whereof is accounted to a
Cane: and it has been observed by Barbary Merchants hither trading, that the
100 Yards of London make here about 181 or 182 Covadoes.

Customs of Fesse and Morocco.
The Customs of Fesse and Morocco are paid at the entrance thereinto, as is
likewise due at the entrance of any other the Cities of this Kingdom, and is by
the Subjects Natives upon all Commodities paid two in the hundred, and by all
Strangers ten in the hundred, collected for what is sold or landed without
leave, for Exportation again if once landed; which causes diverse of our
Merchants bound for those parts to make their Ships their Shops, and
consequently land so much of their Commodities as they imagine their Market
will vend, and no more. But because the Kingdom of Morocco obeys the same
Rules in matters of Trade, I will speak a word of that place likewise, and then
survey the Trade of them both together as they are known now to us, to be as it
were but one, though indeed different Kingdoms,

CHAP. XXII. Of the Kingdom of MOROCCO, and the Provinces thereof.
Morocco and the Provinces thereof.
THE Kingdom of Morocco, once of great splendour, is now divided into six
Provinces, the first Tangovista, having a Town also of that name: Fisidet is
the second, which gives name likewise to a Province; the third is Massa, the
principal of a Province abounding in Amber. Alarach is the fourth, fortified
and kept by the only Garrison of this Country. The fifth is Taradant, in times
past the second in this Kingdom, and the principal for Traffic, ruined by the
late Wars, whereunto yet the resort is commonly made by many English and French
for Commerce. The sixth and last is Morocco the Metropolis, of which a word
according to my intended Method.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the City MOROCCO, and the Trade thereof.
City of Morocco and the Trade thereof.
MOROCCO is the chief City of this Kingdom, and in times past was accounted the
Metropolis of all Barbary, as once containing one hundred thousand households,
but now inferior to Fesse in beauty, spaciousness and populousness: it is
strongly walled about, and within adorned with many private and public
Edifices, the chief being the Castle or Arsenal, and the Churches, or Moschs;
one whereof is bigger, though not so beautiful as that of Fesse, seated in the
midst of the City, and built by Hali their King, augmented 50 fathom in
spaciousness by Abdullmumen and Mansor his Son, with many exquisite Pillars
brought from Spain; he also covered the same with Lead, and made a Cistern of
the same greatness, as this Temple was to receive the Rainwater that came
therefrom; besides which he made therein a Tower of Masonry in form of the
Roman Colossus, equal in height to the famous Tower in Bolonia, which being
ascended, the Hills of Asaffi, being 130 miles distant, may be easily
discerned. The Castle is also very large and strong, of the bigness of a
reasonable Town, in the midst whereof is a Temple, which has a Tower, whereon
is fixed a Spindle of Iron, passing through three great round Globes made of
pure Gold, and weighing 130 thousand Barbary Ducates, which is 58500 l.
sterling, which diverse Kings have gone about to take down and convert into
Money; but have all desisted, by reason of some strange misfortune that has
been inflicted on them, so that the common people imagine they are kept by a
Guard of Spirits.

They have here also a Burse for Merchants, which is now taken up by Artisans,
the late Civil Wars having eclipsed the glory of the famous Trade that was
seated in this Country, which in its former splendor was found to have
several Streets for several Artsmen, and no one Artsman permitted to make his
abiding but amongst those of his own Profession.

Commodities of Morocco.
The Commodities of this Kingdom are the same as in the Kingdom of Fesse, spoken
of before, save that the same abounds more in Sugars, especially in Taradant,
where diverse Merchants are found to reside purposely for that Commodity, from
whence it is Exported into other Regions.

Coins of Morocco.
The Coins current is also the Xeriff common with Fesse, and all these parts of
Barbary, and by some called the Ducate of Gold, having eight divisions or
parts, esteemed to be about nine shillings and four pence sterling, each worth
fourteen pence sterling.

Weights of Morocco.
They are found here to have two several Quintals, one that does accord with the
Quintal of Fesse, specified formerly; and the other which does agree with the
Quintal of Sevil, which may be seen more at large in the ensuing Tract, and
there it may be observed, how the same does agree with the weight of London,
and other places; besides which it is observable, that sundry Commodities are
weighed by this Quintal, yet comprehending more or less Rotolos, according to
the custom in sale of that Commodity, which the Merchants must learn to know.

Measure of Morocco.
The Measure of length here is also Covado, agreeing with that of Fesse, as you
shall find in the Chapter before touched.

Customs of Morocco.
The Customs of Morocco are the same as specified in the Kingdom of Fesse, at
the entrado 2 per cent. by the Subject, and 10 per cent. by the Merchant
stranger: Barbary Merchants.
But the Civil Wars have given a period to that famous Traffic here maintained
by the Barbary Merchants of London, which from this Kingdom had its original,
and which flourished in the days of Queen Elizabeth; the faction, dissension,
and banding for this Kingdom and Fesse, overthrew that Company, The Original of
the Turkey and East India Company.
from whose ashes and dissolution, arose the Society of Merchants trading into
the Levant Seas, known by the name of the Turkey Company, which now we find to
be grown to that height; that (without comparison) it is the most flourishing
and most beneficial Company to the Commonwealth of any in England of all other
whatsoever; into whose Patent was at first inserted the Eastern-Indies, as only
proper to their Navigation, which within few years after being by way of Turkey
better discovered, and gathering thereby new strength, it was in the beginning
of King James's Reign incorporated a Society by it self; and for encouragement
to Adventurers in consideration of the length of the Voyage, and of the great
charges and dangers incident thereto, it was permitted that all men of what
Quality and Profession soever, might be Adventurers therein, and be admitted
thereunto, contrary to the Custom and Privilege of the Turkey, and said
Barbary Company, and of all other Societies of Merchants, who admit not any to
be a Member thereof, but such as are mere Merchants, and none others.

The Trade general of Barbary.
The Trade of these Countries by reason of their discontent is almost come now
to nothing, every Town and Province for the most part acknowledging a several
Sovereign; and where Peace and Unity is wanting, Trade must decay. Some good
Ports these two Kingdoms are found to enjoy for Traffic, as Tituan within the
Streights, Tangier and Ceuta at the Streights mouth, Larache, Maxinara, Sali
the old and new, a second Argier, and sure receptacle for Pirates, lately
reduced to better conformity with the English Subjects by the valor of some
English, under the fortunate and happy conduct of Captain William Rainsborough,
to whose worth Powe this particular remembrance: Assasse, Mogador, and Santa
Crux, with some others; and lastly, Taradant the only Mart of all these
Countries, seated upon the River of Sens, Taradant.
in a spacious Plain between the Mountain Atlas and the Sea, abounding with
Sugar, and all other kind of Provision; the good regard and continual abode
that Mahomet Xeriffe, one of their late Sovereigns made in this place, has
greatly augmented and ennobled this Town; the Observations upon the present
Trade thereof, I am constrained by reason of my ignorance, to refer to another
hand.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Numidia and Lybia, and the Provinces thereof.
Of Numidia and Lybia.
NUmidia has on the East Egypt, on the West the Atlantique Ocean. on the
North Atlas, on the South Lybea: It will not be material to relate the
Provinces, for in them are found but few Towns, by reason of the yearly
progress of the Inhabitants from place to place in Families and Tribes; the
Country abounding in Dates, the food here of Man and Beast.

Lybia.
Lybia has on the East Nilus, on the West the Atlantique Ocean, on the North
Numidia, and on the South the Land of Negroes; the Country altogether sandy,
barren, and a Desert, the Inhabitants altogether Heathenish, and therefore not
worthy the conversation of a civil Merchant, or the residence of any Commerce.

CHAP. XXV. Of NEGRITA, or the Land of Negroes, and the Trade thereof.
Negrita and the Trade thereof.
THis Land of Blackmoors, has on the East Aethiopia Superior, on the West the
Atlantique Ocean, on the North Lybia, on the South Manicongo; in this tract of
ground is accounted twenty five Kingdoms or Provinces, through which runs
the famous River of Niger or Sanega, in whose overflowing consists the
welfare of the Inhabitants; even as in Egypt it does by the Inundation of
Nilus; for this (as that) increases for forty days, and decreaseth for forty
days more, during which time the Inhabitants fail over the whole Land in Boats
and Barges.

Tombutu.
This whole Tract principally now acknowledges three Sovereigns, which is the
Kingdom of Tombutu, the Kingdom of Borneo, and the Kingdom of Goaga; each
Kingdom giving name to a City the principal residence of the Kings. The City of
Tombutu lies beyond the River of Sanega or Niger, wherein is found a Trade
driven by many French, Dutch and English Merchants; the manner thereof, and the
matter wherewith I shall hereafter as well as I can particularize. Goago.
Four hundred miles from Tombutu is the City of Goaga, wherein are found eminent
Merchants, and precious and sumptuous Merchandise of all sorts. Borneo.
Borneo is the third, the Inhabitants whereof are better versed in breeding of
Cattle, than in the Art of Commerce, and better read in Mars than Mercury.

Commodities thereof.
The Commodities of these Countries, are Corn, Sugars, Cattle, Horses, Rice,
Fruits, Gold in Sand, which they term Siga, and we Tibur; and also in Ingots
without Sovereign stamp or character, and is distinguished by its fineness and
goodness, which the Inhabitants by way of Exchange do Barter with their
Neighbors and other foreign Nations, against Clothes, Linnens, Callico's,
Basins of Copper, Iron-work, Sword-blades, Hand-Guns, Glasses, Beads, and such
like, and principally against Salt, which of all other Commodities this
Country is most defective in, and in some places affords not, and therefore
pays for it at an excessive dear price to Strangers.

The Trade of Guiney and Benin, and the Golden Coast.
The Trade of all this Tract, such as it is now in these days known to our
Nation, is comprised along the Seacoast, which the Portugals by reason of
their former Plantation here, and rich Commerce, have entitled the Golden
Coast, and we in common appellation, term the Trade of the Coast of Genin and
Benin, two of the principal Provinces Maritime, that are found included within
the Circuits of these three beforementioned Kingdoms: which Trade that it may
be a little better understood, I shall more particularly survey, according to
some Observations made by some hands thereon.

The Portugals the first Traders into Guiney and Benin.
In the beginning and discovery of this maritime Coast, (for thereto I intend to
apply the Trade of this Country) the Portugals were the first that ranged this
Shore, and had some small knowledge of their Commodities and of the manner of
trading with them, who partly by fair means, and partly by Constraint got
footing in this Seacoast, building Forts in some, and placing Garrisons and
Factories in others, which then was found so Golden and beneficial to that
Country, that it is conceived this only thing (as what will not Gold attract)
drew them to search further the Maritime Coast of this Tract all along to Cape
bona Esperansa, and so consequently thereby unto the East Indies: fair quarter
and courteous usage being then perceived in these Forts and Towns thus
subjected to the Portugals, drew the Inhabitants and Contrymen to a fair and
ordinary commutation and exchanging of Commodities with them, which according
to the custom of that Kingdom, was maintained by Factors appointed for the
King's particular account in every Port and Town, as if he intended to make the
profits of Merchandising to defray the charges of his Conquest and Garrisons,
furnishing them with Salt, Iron, Tin, Copper, Basins, Knives, Cloth, Linen,
and other European Commodities; receiving in exchange partly the Commodities
proper for their nourishment, such as was Cattle, Corn, Rice, and the like; and
principally Commodities beneficial, as Gold it self in great abundance both in
Sand and Ingots melted, which gave a quickening and life to the further
discoveries of those Countries and continuance of the Trade, which is found
there maintained to this day, though in a far lesser manner.

Who showed the way to English and others.
The English and other Nations afterward desirous to share in this rich Trade,
failed within a short time likewise hither; and because they had not such
Places and Forts for their Ware houses, and the Protection of their Persons and
Goods, therefore would not, or else might not with safety land their
Commodities without danger of the falsehood of the Portugals, or treachery of
the Inhabitants: therefore at first failing hither were compelled to Anchor
along the Coast nearest to the best Towns, and of greatest concourse, and
signify to the Inhabitants the Commodities they had brought to utter, drew at
length by their fair demeanor and courteous usage the Moors to come aboard
their Ships, and bring their Gold with them; the manner of which Trade (as
being different from any other Country) I shall briefly set down.

The manner of the usual Trade of Guiney and Benin.
In the morning betimes, having for the most part then the Wind off the shore,
and calm weather, the Moors came aboard in their Canoes and Scuts to traffic.
some for themselves, and some which they call Tolkens or Factors for others,
who carry at their Girdles a Purse, wherein small Clouts or Papers containing
sometimes 10 several men's Gold are wrapped and laid up; which though it should
be of one and the same weight and goodness, they notwithstanding readily
distinguish, and having made their Barters for Cloth, Linnens, or the like, at
noon return with the Sea-turn, or as they call it, the Brise, again to the
shore; and besides their Bargains covenanted, these Factors have some small
thing for themselves as the reward of their pains by way of Brokage or
Factorage, which they called by the name of Dachio.

The undermining tricks of Guiney and Benin.
But in process of time the Netherlanders frequenting this Coast, and well
acquainted with the manner of this English Traffic; and coming into the same
parts where the English traded and were known, were the first that spoiled this
Golden Trade, partly by their sinister dealing, and partly by their undermining
and fraudulent tricks; for they coming to Anchor together with the English to
sell their Commodities, and finding that the English vended more Wares, and had
a larger Traffic by the concourse of the native Merchants from ashore, with
these Tolkens abovementioned, than they had, hired these Pilots, Boat-men and
Tolkens (that were thus employed, to carry their Passengers and Merchants
aboard) underhand to carry them aboard their Dutch Ships, and not aboard the
English, and so to trade with them only; which the English at last perceiving
and smelling out their craft, were by the same craft compelled to prevent the
same; so that by this means the one out-vying the other, these fellows for
their good will and Brokage have by this means drawn the duty or rather
courtesy of Dachia, to 6 in 7 per cent. to the prejudice of all Traders upon
this Coast: but this rested not here, for this dealing drew on a greater
inconvenience in their Trade, for when the Flemmings had first been the Authors
of this ill custom or courtesy of Dachio to these Boat-men and Tolkens, which
necessarily were by all succeeding European Merchants to be imitated, or their
Voyage lost, and their Commodities remain unsold: It was found that many
Merchant Moors, Inlandmen, coming to the Seaside to buy Wares of them,
bringing great store of Gold with them for Traffic, and having diverse Slaves,
some 20, some 30, and some more according to their means and Trade, to carry
back those Wares they had thus bought on Shipboard, and these Moorish
Merchants taking their Lodgings in the Houses of these Tolkens, and using to
acquaint them with their full Commissions and Intents, and then receiving of
them their Gold, repaired aboard the Ships to Trade and Barter; and if the
Moorish Merchants were not skilled in the Portugal Tongue, those Tolkens would
presently tell the Flemmings, and desire them not to speak Morisco to them,
because their Merchants were such as dwelt far within the Land; thereby giving
them to understand that they meant by this Watchword to deceive him, and
afterward to share those so ill-gotten purchases amongst them: and it did, nor
does it seldom fall out, but that the Merchant Moor, not accustomed to the Sea,
lies Sea-sick aboard, all the while the knavish Tolken makes his Bargain for
him with the crafty Dutch, conniving at the Flemmings great inhansed prices of
his Commodities, to draw the greater gain and more Gold from the Moor; whom
sometimes he cozens by stealing some of his Gold, and put it into his mouth,
ears, or otherwise; which the Moor finding by the Scale and Weight to want,
adds some more knavery thereto, by blowing into the Christians Scale and
Balance to make it weight; and when all these his intended Bargains are
finished, and the Moor again landed, the Tolkens and Boats-men return again
aboard to divide the cozened profit and ill-gotten gain between them, wherein
it may be imagined that the Flemming for his part of the knavery and connivance
must have a share of the gains; which has proved such a hindrance and
detriment to the English and other Christians that Trade upon this Coast, that
unless they also connive at the Tolkens Villainy and deceit as the Dutch do,
their Voyage will be lost, and their Commodities to their prejudice remain
unsold; this is in brief the manner of their Trade, the means now follow.

Customs of the Golden Coast of Guiney and B^in
As for their Customs due to the Kings and Sovereigns upon this Coast, it is
found to vary in diverse Ports and Havens, and only paid by Inhabitants in case
the Christian bring not his Goods ashore to sell, every Haven having a peculiar
Officer, and every Merchant that comes with an intent to buy Wares at a
Port-Town, pays a Toll or small Custom for his Person, though he buy nothing;
and that no deceit may be used in the Collector, there is ever a Sen or some
near Kinsman of that Prince, joined in Authority with the said Collector, or
Customer; and if the Merchant buy any Commodities aboard a Ship for less than
two ounces of Gold at a time, then he must compound with the Customer for the
Custom as he can at his pleasure, as that which is the Customers own profit,
fee, and wages: but if he buy above two ounces of Gold which they call a Benda,
then the Custom is an Angel of Gold for every Benda, as I am given to
understand.

The Coins current in Guiney and B^nin.
I have showed that Coins acknowledging any Sovereignty by stamp are not here in
use, but Gold passable either in Sands or Ingots, according to the fineness and
goodness is the current Coin passable, which our Merchants very well
distinguish by 24 artificial Needles made by allay of Metals, from the lowest
sort of Gold to the finest of 24 Carots fine, having exact Rules for the
valuation thereof, accordingly as the same is found either in fineness or
courseness: neither use they any Money, or any kind of minted Coin wherewith to
pay each other; but when any Commodity is bought, the payment thereof is made
with Gold, and that likewise by weight; and it must be a very small parcel that
has not some kind of weight to distinguish and weigh it withal, and they pay
each other with four square pieces of Gold, weighing some a grain, and some
half a grain: Kacorawns.
and about Mina a Castle of the Portugals, they pay each other with Kacorawns,
which is Gold drawn out into Wire, and cut afterward into small pieces for all
trivial Commodities; and in other places with little pieces of Iron of a finger
in length, with some Characters stamped thereon; and in some places they have
not the Art of melting their Gold, but sell it, or rather pay it one to another
in Sand by weight, according as they shall agree both in the value and in the
quantity.

The weights of Guiney and Benin.
The Weights are made of Copper of diverse sorts, and have little round Copper
Scales, like a hollow Orange Pill for Gold.

A Bend^ is the greatest weight, and weighs two ounces.

A Benda Offa is half a Benda, and is an ounce.

Asseva is two Pesos and a half.

Egebba is two Pesos, and accounted half an ounce, or the fourth part of a
Benda.

Seron is accounted for one Peso and a half.

Eusanno is accounted a Peso.

Quienta is three quarters of a Peso.

Each Peso is held a Loot.

Mediataba is a quarter of a Peso.

Agiraque is half a Peso, so that by those that have made the trial of their
weights with ours, they have found them to be in every pound Troy a Peso and a
half in every pound heavier than our Troy pound used in England; and this
weight is the Rule for their Gold in passing for Commodities: Coins of many
parts of this Coast.
where note, that all Countries have not in this and other these large Coasts
Moneys current of Metal as we have in Christendom; for in some parts of
Aethiopia their Money is Pepper, in Tombutu and about the River Niger, their
Money is Cockles or Shellfish, in Azanah their Money is Porcellette, in
Bengala Porcelete and Metal together, as in China they use Porcelette for
Money, and in some other places of India, Paper stamped with the King's Seal
passes for current Money; and in some places the Barks of certain Trees called
Gelsamora, and in Congo and many places of these Countries Lumach, and in
Angela, Beads of Glass, and such like in many other places.

Measures of Guiney and Benin
Their Measure for length in Cloth or other Commodities, is a Jactam, which is
accounted with us 12 foot, or two fathom, which they cut the one from the
other, and in that sort sell their Linen the one to the other; and those two
fathom by trial of the Dutch make a stork and three quarters, but in Woollen
they never measure above pieces of one handful broad, which they so cut off and
use for Girdles, which they wear about their middles, and sell it among
themselves in this manner in these pieces abovesaid, and use no other kind of
measure which they call a Paw, which is 1 d. English.

The manner of accounting.
The Inhabitants of this Coast at the first trading here of the Portugals, were
very rude and ignorant, and were easily beguiled in all the Commodities which
they sold them; and not only took in good part the badness of the Ware they
received, but were also deceived in their measure; the Portugals by this means
putting off their rotten Linnens, rusty Knives, broken and patched Basins,
pieced Kettles, and such like, and these at what measure, value, weight, and
quantity they pleased for their Gold: but the times are now altered, and they
by their usual sufferings in this kind by the Portugals, made the more wary,
provident and circumspect in their Traffic with the English, French, and
Dutch: so that in those Commodities which they buy or barter, either for their
own use, or for Merchandise, they are found to have as good judgment in them as
the Sellers themselves.

Their ignorance in Trade may be judged by their ignorance in Accompting and
Reckoning, for when they have past the number of Ten, they rehearse so many
words one after another for one number, that they are so puzzled and cumbred
therewith, that they cannot tell how to get out, and so sit buzzing so long,
till at last they have lost their Tale, and forgot their number, and so are
forced to begin to tell again: but since they began to trade with the English,
and were to reckon above the number of Ten, for they use no more amongst them,
they reckon on till they come to Ten, and then take one of their fingers into
their hands, and then tell to Ten again; and then take another finger into
their hand, and so proceed till they have both their hands full, which in all
makes one hundred, then they mark that up, and then begin to tell as at the
first, and use the same order as before.

To conclude this Traffic, and to leave this Coast, I hear not in these days
that the English frequenting that Coast, or that the French or Dutch make any
great benefit thereby: for the present subtilty of the Inhabitants, perceiving
how their Gold is sought eagerly after by them and all Nations, can now adays
set such a rate thereon by this their manner of Exchange and Barter, and that
by being so often beguiled by others, they are now grown more wary and
circumspect in their Bargaining, and are as ready to beguile the Beguilers, as
to be beguiled themselves; for they look now narrowly both to their Measure and
the goodness of their Commodity; and though at the first they knew no
distinction of Christians, but took the Portugals and all white men to be of
one Nation; yet since they know each Nation, and are acquainted with their
particular manners and manner of dealing, having ever hitherto from the
beginning found the fai^est and squarest Trade with the English, therefore when
they come, they are the best welcome to them, and speed best of any other
Nations whatsoever with them.

Sugar Trade.
I willingly omit here to speak of the Sugar Trade, and of the plenty of Sugar
Canes growing upon this Coast: the King of Bortugal here in certain places
farming the fool Trade thereof to certain his own Subjects, with a strict
proviso, that the same be sold to none other but to his own Subjects, and that
Provision to be sent only for Lisbon, to gain a great Custom thereby imposed
thereon; therefore the Portugal being here the only buyer and ingrosser, the
Inhabitants must and are enforced to fell only to them, and at what reasonable
rate they best can agree upon; and this restraint of this Commodity has drawn
the Dutch to build and fortify in some places upon this Coast, as now of late
they have done at Mina opposite to the Spaniard, where they are at continual
variance, the River only parting them.

CHAP. XXVI. Aethiopia Superior and Inferior, and the Provinces thereof.
Aethiopia superior.
AEThiopia the Superior is known to us by the name of Abasine, and
comprehends many large Provinces and Kingdoms, and contains the Springs of
three famous Rivers, Abas, T^iasis and Nilus, arising out of the Lake Zembre;
being for the most part Christians, and commanded by that so much renowned
Emperor Prester John; Commodities of Aethiopia superior.
affording for Commodities to the neighbor Regions, Rice, Barley, Pease,
Sugars, Minerals of all sorts, Goats, Sheep, and Oxen: but because these Towns
of these Provinces are for the most part in Land, they afford no great matter
of Trade, and as little known to our Nation, I willingly omit them.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Aethiopia Inferior, and the Provinces thereof.
Aethiopia inferior.
AEThiopia Inferior, has the Red Sea on the East, the Ethiopian Ocean on the
West, the Land of Negro's on the North, and the Southern Ocean on the South,
commonly di^ided into these parts, Aian, Zanbar, Monomotapa, Caffaria,
Monicongo.

Aian.
In Aian, are upon the Seacoasts these three Cities much frequented by
Merchants, Arar, Zeila, Barbera, the second of which was sacked by the
Portugals in Anno 1516. Commodities of Aian.
and is found to abound with Flesh, Honey, Wax, Corn, Gold, Ivory and Cattle;
especially Sheep in plenty.

Zanibar.
Zanibar contains 15 Towns that give names to 15 several Kingdoms, Quiloa.
the chief for Trade is Quiloa, where the Portugals have Forts built and
fortified Anno 1509. Mosambique.
Mosambique also fortified by them. Soffola.
Soffola, which for the abundance of Ivory and Gold is conceived to be the Land
of Ophir, to which Solomon sent by his three years Voyage.

Monomotapa.
Monomotapa contains also sundry Provinces environed almost round with waters,
and abounding with Mines of Gold, accounted to contain above 2000, Manica.
Boro. Quitiana.
the principal being three, Monica, Brro, and Quitiana; Elephants Teeth.
which yields not any Commodity else save Elephants Teeth, to procure which, it
is supposed 5000 are yearly slain in these Kingdoms.

Caffaria.
Capharia, has nothing famous in it, Cape Bona Spei.
save that famous and noted head-land Cape bona speranza, discovered by the
Portugals in Anno 1497.

Manicongo.
Manicongo was discovered by the Portugals 1486, and by them then converted to
the Popish Religion, which the Inhabitants soon forsook, as peradventure seeing
that that Religion was made the Cloak of their Conquest, yielding yearly 30000
Slaves in sale to the Portugals, which they carry to Brasile to work in their
Silver Mines; the Trade of the principal of these it is fit I should in this
place more particularly handle.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Mosambique, and the Trade thereof.
Mosambique, and the Trade thereof.
THe Seacoast affording the prime places of Traffic known to our Countrymen
in this large Tract of Land beforementioned, and especially from
Cape-bona-esperanze, to the entrance of the Red Sea, which now comes to be
handled, it will not be fitting I should wholly omit the Trade thereof, before
I have better surveyed the same, together with those Towns of Traffic as are
found to be there most eminent, and therewith relate the manner how, and the
matter whereof this Trade is here maintained and preserved; I will then include
the Trade of this whole Coast under the Title of Mosambique, as being the
principal Town of Negotiation found along this shore, having Soffola on the
one side thereof, and Quiloa on the other side: all which being fortisied by
the Portugals, the first Christian Discoverers thereof, give yet that liberty
and freedom to the Country Inhabitants and others to exercise the same that
would, and considering their manner of Traffic, it is seen plentifully stored
both with the native Commodities of the Coast it self, and of the Inland
Countries; there are here found the Towns of Cuama, Sena, Macava, Brava,
Melinda, and others along this shore, seated some on the Coast of Abex, and
some on the Coast of Melinda; but Quiloa for the commodiousness of the River,
and the passage into the Main Continent, having but a short cut into the Lake
of Zaflan, in which there arises a great River, that runs into Nilus, and
so to Cairo, and therefore the same is accounted the principal City for
eminency and concourse of people, though for Traffic this and the rest give
place (if the Spanish Relations be true) to Mosambique, wherein is found the
first Fortress that was built by the Portugals on this Coast and Seas.

Mosambique then is not only the name of an Island, but also of a Kingdom,
seated between Monomotapa and Quiloa; the Island is sound to have a pretty Town
seated upon it, and together with the Islands of Saint George, and Saint Jacob,
makes a large, fair and secure Haven for Ships of the greatest burden, fit to
receive and harbor all Vessels, that come and go, both to and from India to
Christendom; and although this Island nor Kingdom are not very great, yet they
are very rich, and most abounding of all the Countries of this Coast of
Mosambique; the Island whereon the Town is situated, is inhabited now by two
manner of People, Christians and Mahometans; the Christians account themselves
Portugals, or of the Portugal Race, who are the keepers of a strong Castle
seated therein, from whence also all other their Castles and Forts seated in
this Tract are supplied with their necessaries; Soffola.
especially Soffola, where the richest Mine of Gold of all this Coast lies, and
there the Portugal Ships do use to harbor in Wintertime, when they are not
able to sail either backward or forward otherwise to accomplish their desired
Voyage; and there likewise the Indian Ships are accustomed to take in Victuals
and fresh Water; and by the only discovery of this place, the Portugals first
found out the way to India; for here they met with Pilots that were able to
instruct them in the manner of the Navigation of these Seas, and were expert in
the Maritime Coasts thereof; they have no sweet Water in the Town, nor in the
Castle, though it be imagined to be the strongest in India, but have many
Cisterns round about it, wherein a years Provision of Water is ever found,
which they fetch from the Continent from a place called Cabasar. The Captain of
Mosambique the greatest Merchant.
The Captain of this Castle is still sound to be the greatest merchant here, for
he keeps a Factor in Soffola and another in Quilola, and yearly sends Barks
for Trade along the Coast, who commonly for some good service performed has
this place and Command assigned him for three years, which is conceived to be
worth 400 thousand Ducates, and afterward he is to go into India, and upon his
own charge to serve there at the Command of the Viceroy for the King of
Portugal other three years, and then may depart for Spain if he please, besides
whom none may hence trade for India, but the Inhabitants Portugals and who are
also enjoined to be married men, for such as are unmarried may not stay here by
special privilege from the King, granted to those that inhabit here, to the
end, that the Island should be peopled, and thereby kept safeguarded and
maintained, and for this immunity they are only bound in time of need to defend
the Castle, and are accounted as the Garrison thereof, though it is found that
the Governor and his family only lies therein, and the Townsmen by turns,
having the warding and watching thereof committed to their charge and trust.

Navigation of India.
Their Navigation is hence into India but once a year, which is in the month of
April and continues till the midst of September, because that throughout the
whole Country of India, they must sail with Monsons, which are certain current
constant winds, which have a settled course of blowing throughout the year,
whereby they make their account to go and come from the one place to the other,
and in thirty days they may sail from Mosambique to India, and they are then
forced to stay in India till the month of August, when as then the wind or
Monson comes again, to serve them for Mosambique and this Coast, in every
which year the Captain abovesaid has ever a Ship for his own account going and
coming into India.

Commodities of the Coast of Mosambique.
As for the Commodities which this Country and Coast are found principally to
afford to the Merchant for Transportation, it is chiefly Gold, for near
Soffalla is a very rich Mine, and within the Land, the samous Mine of Angela,
the richest in the World, is said to be seated, beside; the rich Mines of
Monomotapa, where in a River running thereby is found Sand of Gold in great
plenty, which is accounted the finest and best, and called by the Portugals,
Bolongorn Oro^mpo. The Kings of Portugal great Merchants.
The King of Portugal having ever a special Factor resident in Mosambique,
trading for his account, keeping correspondence with other his Factors, and
sending Merchandise from one place to another; for by this means the Kings of
Portugal, the first Navigators into these parts, so far honored Merchandising,
that they held it no disparagement to raise thus some estate, the better to
perform and accomplish these long and chargeable Navigations, and hence it grew
that they bringing these Indian Commodities into Europe, for their own account
did by Commissioners contract with private Merchants for the same in Lisbon,
and other places; Regal Contracts.
which hence from this Authority were termed Regal Contracts. The other
Commodities of this Country, besides Gold in Sand, and Ingots, are,
Ambergreese, Ebony-wood, Ivory, Elephants-teeth, and many slaves, both men and
women, which hence are carried principally to India, as being reputed the
strongest Moors in all the East Countries, and are put throughout India to the
hardest labor and loathsomest drudgery.

Coins, Measures, and Weights in Mosambique and the Coast.
In order here, according to my intended method, for the Explanation of the
Trade of this place and Country, I should lay down the Coins current here, and
their valuation, their Measures of length, and their Weights used in
Merchandising; but because that by the Collection I have made, and the
Observation that I have noted, the Portugals at their first Conquest here,
brought with them their own Species and Coins, as also their own Weights and
Measures, as a testimony of their Regality and Sovereignty, and that the
particulars thereof shall be more at large showed in its due place, when I come
to handle the Trade of Lisbon from whence the same had its original; I shall,
to avoid needless repetition, desire the Reader to be reserred thereunto, and
so leaving this large Coast with this slender Survey, I shall proceed to what
does rest behind of Africa, which is better known unto us, and wherewith our
Nation is more familiarly acquainted.

CHAP. XXIX. Of EGYPT, and the Provinces thereof.
Egypt and the Trade thereof.
EGYPT on the East is bounded with the Red Sea, on the West with Cyrene, on
the North with the Mediterranean Sea, and on the South with Habasia: Nilus.
This Country is watered by the fruitful River Nilus, which for the more
benefit of the spreading Plains divides it self into seven Channels, and begins
about the fifteenth of June to rise and swell above his banks, and for forty
days does so continue, and within forty days again collecteth it self into its
own limits: all the Towns here are seated on the tops of Hills, which during
this flood appear to strangers like Islands; Intercourse and Commerce being all
this time preserved by Boats, Skiffs, and Lighters, instead of Camels and
Horses; this River is in length 3000 miles, and when it is found not to swell,
it portendeth some fatal accident either to Country or Srvereign.

Alexandria.
In this Country are found these famous Towns for Traffic. Alexandria, built
by Alexander the Great, the most eminent Sea. Port of all Egypt, and whither
before the discovery of the Indies was the Scale of those Commodities which
since we find to come thence, and then most frequented by the Venetians, who
had almost the sole Trade of the Commodities of India and Egypt in their own
hands, and from them dispersed and transported through Europe, and who to this
day yet keep a Consul there for the Protection of their Merchants,

Damiata.
The next is Damiata, seated at the entrance of one of the Channels of Nilus,
the Command whereof cost much blood in the days of those Wars in the Holy Land
by the Western Christians.

Suesa.
The next is Sues, a Haven of consequence standing at the North end of the
Red Sea, wherein the Great Turk keeps a Station for his Galleys, commonly built
in Cairo, and afterward carried thither by Camels to command his Dominions in
those parts.

Rossetta.
The next is Rosseta, seated on the principal Channel of Nilus, and in a
triangle from the two abovenamed Cities of Alexandria and Cairo, serving for a
Scale for both.

Cairo.
The last and most principal is Cairo, the chief of this Country containing
18000. Streets, and each Street being every night locked up and barred, which
makes the City impregnable, of which more hereafter. The Trade of Egypt in
times past settled in Alexandria.
I find some Authors to have left for a remembrance behind them, a touch of the
Trade of this Country in times past practiced by the commodiousness of the
Red-Seas, which enters into the heart of this Country; and because that
Galuano relates the beginning, continuance, and period of this Trade, I will
briefly follow his words. P^ol. Philadelphus then 277 years before the
Incarnation, was the first that gave beginning, and set afoot this Navigation,
bringing the Spices, Drugs, and Commodities of Arabia and India through the
Red Sea into Egypt to the Port of Alexandria, where the Venetians as then the
only famous Merchants of Christendom, brought up the same, and were the first
that this way dispersed it through Europe, Africa and Asia. Casir in the
Red Sea.
Casir being then the principal Haven Town in the Red Sea, whence their Voyage
to India was set forth and begun, and where the same afterward was ended,
Coptus.
and from thence by Land these Commodities were conveyed to Coptus, a Town now
altogether inhabited by Jacobite Christians, and so thence down the River Nile
to Alexandria in the Mediterranean Sea, by which Traffic this City became so
rich and eminent, that the Custom-house there yielded to Ptol. Aalates 7
millions of Gold: and afterward when the Romans came to be Lords of Egypt,
they found it to yield them fifteen millions. These last augmented this Trade,
and sent into India every year by the testimony of Pliny an hundred and twenty
Sail of Ships, whose Lading was outward bound worth 120000 Crowns, and it
produced in profit at the return homeward, for every Crown, a hundred. But when
the Vandals, Lombards, Goths and Moors had rent asunder the Roman Empire, all
Commerce in these parts between these Nations began to cease; but when the
inconvenience and discommodity thereof was sensibly discerned and perceived, it
was begun again and set afoot anew by other Princes that coveted this rich
Trade, And removed to Caffa in the Euxine Sea.
conveying the Indian Commodities afterward with great difficulty, partly by
Land, and partly by Water to Capha in the Black-Sea, as then belonging to the
Genoese; but this by reason of the long way and dangerous passage, being found
too tedious and prejudicial, Then to Trabesond, Sarmachand, etc.
Trade (which is ever found to have a secret Genius and hidden course of it
self) was removed for these and other causes to Trabesond, which was then
conceived the fittest Mart-Town, then Sarmachand in Zagethai had it, where the
Indian, Persian and Turkish Merchants met to barter their Commodities; the
Turks thence conveying the same to Damasco, Baruti and Aleppo, from which last
place the Venetians again transported these Commodities to Venice, making that
City thereby the common Emporium of Christendom; and lastly, in Anno 1300, the
Soltans of Egypt restored the passage by the Red Sea, and the Venetians
resetled their Factors in Alexandria, which continued for two hundred years,
until the Portugals. Spaniards, English, and lastly, the Dutch, found a new way
by the backside of Africa, to convey the same to their own homes, whereby the
great Trade which the Egyptians, and principally the Venetians had to
themselves for many years, came thus to nothing, and the Traffic of Alexandria
and Red Sea thereby is now decayed, and become altogether unfrequented, as at
this day we find it, subsisting only by the native Commodities thereof; in
which nature it is fittest I should now survey the same.

CHAP. XXX. Of ALEXANDRIA, and the Trade thereof.
Alexandria and the Trade thereof.
ALEXANDRIA is said to be built by Alexander the Great, and was called by the
Turks the Lords thereof Scanderia, and which in the Nicene Council was ordained
to be one of the four Patriarchal Cities; it is yet the fairest and best
Maritime Port of this whole Country, and has yet some relics of that Trade
it erst enjoyed, as I have noted before; and because it is the principal of
this Region for Merchandising, I hold it proper to comprehend under this
Chapter the greater part of the Trade universally of Egypt and the
neighboring Cities.

Commodities of. Egypt.
The Commodities of Egypt, besides what comes hither out of Arabia; Persia and
India, is Rice, Corn, Flax, Hemp, Honey, Wax, Balsom, Dates, some Drugs, and
some few Spices, and in especial it yields abundance of Palm Trees, The
excellency of the Palm Tree.
which are of very strange properties, for they are found to grow in couples,
male and female, both thrust forth cods full of seed, but the female is only
fruitful, and that not except growing by the male, and having his seed mixed
with hers; the pith of these Trees are excellent meat: of the branches they
make necessary uses in their houses, of the leaves, baskets, mats and fans; of
the outward husk of the cod, cordage; of the inward, brushes; the fruit is like
a Fig, serving the Inhabitants, sometimes dried in the Sun as bread, and green
as meat: and finally it is said to yield whatsoever is necessary to the life of
Man.

Wrights of Alexandria.
The Weights in use in Cairo, Alexandria, and generally throughout all Egypt
for Trade, are found to be of four sorts, the first is the weight called the
quintar of Zera, the second the quintar Forfor; the third the quintar Zaidin,
and the fourth the quintar Mina; which because of their former great Trade with
Venice, I will first compare with the weights of that City, and then apply the
same to the weight of our own Country,

1 Zera.
One quintar of Zera has been found to make of Venetia gross 200 l. and subtle
312 l. and in London 212 l. Averdupois.

2 Forfori.
One quintar of Forfori has been observed to make in Venice 140 l. subtle, and
gross 87 l. and in London 93 l. Averdopois.

3 Zaidin.
One quintar Zaidin, has made by observation in Venetia 127 l. gross, and 200
l. subtle, and in London 134 l. Averdupois.

4 Mina.
One quintar Mina, proper only to Alexandria, has made in Venetia 250 l.
subtle, 155 l. gross, and in London 167 l. Averdupois. Whereas note, that the
first three quintars are accounted by Rotolos, but the Quintar of Mina contains
in Alexandria 20 ounces to the Mina, and in Cairo 16 ounces to the Mina: And
also observe, that Amber, Musk, and some other fine Commodities are sold by a
Metalico or Dram, and also by the Peso, whereof 1 is a Metalico; 50 Metalicoes
is here a Mark in Gold or Silver weight, and 42 Metalicoes our English Mark
weight of 8 ounces Troy. Again, note, that

One Rotolo Zerai makes Venetia subtle 3 l. 1 ounce.

One Rotolo Forfori makes Venetia 1 l. 5 ounces.

One Rotolo Zaidin makes Venetia subtle 2 l, gross 1 l. 3 ^/4 ounce.

One Mina makes in Venetia subtle 2 ^/4 l. and gross 1 l.

Now let us observe how these weights are found to accord one with another, and
so with Venetia.

One quintar Zerai, which is the general quintar of Egypt, makes 2 quintars
and 16 Rotolos of Forfori in Alexandria.

Again, one quintar Zerai makes one quintar and 56 Rotolos of Zaidin, and
makes 120 Minas of Alexandria.

One Rotolo Zera makes 2 Rotolo 1 ounce and 4^/5^ Forfori.

Again, one Rotolo Zeri makes one Rot. 6 9/25 ounces of Zaidin.

One quintar Forfori makes 46 Rot. 3 ounces Zerai.

And one quintar Forfori makes 20 Rot. 11 23/27 ounces Zaidin.

One quintar Forfori makes 55 Minas.

And one Rotolo Forfori makes 111 ounces Zerai, and 6 ounces Zaidin.

One quintar Zaidin makes 64 Rot. 2 ounces of Zerai.

One quintar Zaidin makes one quintar 28 Rot. 5 ounces Forfori.

One quintar Zaidin makes 76 Minas 11 ounces.

One Rotolo Zaidin makes 7 7/10 ounces Zera.

And again, one Rot. Zaidin makes one Rot. 4 ounces Forfori.

And one Rotolo Zaidin makes one and 3 quarters ounces Minas.

One quintar Minas makes one quintar 2 Rotolos Forfori.

And one quintar Minas makes one quintar 30 Rotolos Zaidin.

And one Mina makes ten ounces Zera.

And again, one Mina makes one Rot. 9 ounces Forfori.

And lastly, one Mina makes one Rot. three ounces Zaidin.

The variety of these weights will excuse this tedious repetition, which I was
enforced to perform for the better understanding of the same; and for the
shortening of my present survey of the Trade of Egypt, Weights of Egypt and
sundry Cities in Barbary, to the 100 l. Averdupois.
I will here reduce not only the weights abovenamed, but also the weights of
some of the principal Cities of Traffic upon this Coast to the 100 l. subtle
Averdupois of London, which has been observed to make by: Zera quintar 48 Rot.
In Cairo and all Egypt. Forfoai quintar 108 Zaidin quintar 75 Minas quintar 54
Tripoli suria 25 Rot. whereof 100 makes a quintar, Achria 17 Rot. the 100 makes
a quintar Tamperan. Aleppo common 21 Rot. the 100 whereof is a quintar. Tripoli
Barbary 62 Rot. the 100 whereof is a quintar. Oran common with 91 Rot. the
quintar is 5 Roves of 20 Rot. Oran for Spices 133 Rot. the quintar is 4. Roves.
Oran for Corn 48 Rot. each quintar 6 Rotolos. Oran for Cotton 59 Rot. each
quintar 15 Rot. Una in Barbary 63 Rot. for Cotton Woolls. Una 72 Rot. for
Spices. Una 90 Rot. for Corn. Fras 153 Rot. the quintar is 100. Baruti 20 Rot.
the quintar is 100 Rot. Argier Thunes Cathaia 84 Rot. the quintar is 100 Rot.
Cyprus 19 Rot. Famagosto 4 per cent. more. Suus in Barbary 90 Rot. 100 Rot. to
a quintar.

When I come to handle those particular places, I shall do the same more exact,
for the better satisfaction of the Reader.

Measures in Egypt.
The Measures of length in Cairo, Alexandria, and in general through Egypt, are
found to be of two sorts, the one the Pico Barbaresco, or proper measure of the
Country, serving for Cloth, Linen and other Commodities, being 25 inches
English: The other the Pico Turchesco, serving for Silks, Cloth of Gold, and
fine Stuffs, which is 22 inches English, and with Venetia they are found to
render, viz.

100 braces of Silk in Venetia, make here Barbaresco Pico 116.

100 braces of Cloth in Venetia, make here Barbaresco 124.

But I have found some observations that have noted, that the 100 Yards of
London have made here and in these other Cities in Barbary thus, in 100 Yards
in London have made in Alexandria 165 pic. Baruti 148 pic. Tripoli Barbariae
165 pic. Damasco 148 pic. Bugia 210 pic. Tripolia Suria 149 pic. Rama 151 pic.
Tangier Bursa in Natolia 150 pic. Amano 133 pic. Sidon 151 pic. Gira 165 pic.
Salonica 145 pic. Achria 151 pic. Aleppo 133 pic. Argier Thunes Oran Bona
Morocco 181 cov. Una

And forasmuch as Cairo is the Metropolis of Egypt, it will be proper I should
travel thither, and survey a little the present Trade and estate thereof,
before I leave this COMMERCE.

CHAP. XXXI. Of CAIRO and the Trade thereof.
Cairo and the Trade thereof.
I Willingly omit the present Trade of Rosetto, Damietta, and some others of
lesser note comprehended within the limits of Egypt, and also (here pass over
to a fitter place) the present Trade of Sues in the Red Sea, till I come to
survey that Gulf and the neighboring Towns of Zebit, Mecca, Aden and others,
and now content my self to consider the present state of the place and
condition of Traffic of Cairo, as it is found at this day under the Scepter of
the Grand Seignior.

Misraim.
Cairo is then commonly reputed to be one of the greatest and most famous
Cities of the World, called by the Arabians el Cahair, seated in a beautiful
Plain near the Mountain Mucatun, and about two miles distant from the famous
River of Nilus, environed with stately Walls, and fortified with Iron Gates,
having therein many fair, large and long Streets, where are seen placed by
themselves each Trade and Occupation, and some Streets wholly beautified with
Colleges for the studious, Palaces for the honorable, Temples for the
religious, and Caens or Burses for the Merchants and Negotiators; the principal
of which is called Caen Haleli, formerly the residence only of Persia
Merchants, now admitting of other Nations, built in manner of a King's Palace,
having three stories one above another; the lower only containing Warehouses
for the keeping of heavy and bulky Commodities, the middlemost for Spices,
Perfumes, and richer Merchandise, and the uppermost for Lodgings for those
Merchants that have their Warehouses therein; near which, and round about the
same, the richest Shopkeepers are found to have their dwelling; and where in
times past the principal Merchants of Christendom had a place of residence
appointed for their Factors and Agents.

This City is surrounded with sundry large and spacious Suburbs, which is
peculiar to sundry Artizans and Artists, the principal Suburbs is called
Bullach, distant two miles from the Walls of the City, and stretching it self
along the Banks of the River of Nile, beautisied with many fair buildings, and
is now the common residence of the principal Merchants of this City: and here
are all such Commodities landed, as either comes out of the Mediterranean Sea,
by any the Channels of Nilus up this River, or out of Arabia, or other
Countries down this stream; here lies all the Vessels moored* either to lade or
unlade; and here do the Officers reside, which receive the Customs of all Goods
coming by Water from either Damietta, Rosetra, or Alexandria, which in it self
is but small, the principal Custom and Duty being paid by these Merchants, and
collected by the Agents of the Customers at these Maritime Ports abovesaid: but
those Commodities that come out of the firm Land do here pay the said entire
Customs, as shall be mentioned hereafter.

Merchants of six sorts in Cairo.
This City is inhabited by six sorts of Merchants, each of them trading by so
many distinct ways; Egyptian I reckon the first, ever accounted expert
Merchants, but never adventhring out of his own Country, who buy from other
foreign Nations their Commodities in gross, and supply the necessities of their
own Country by retail.

Arabian or Moor is the next, here esteemed the greatest and most eminent
Merchants; for these are they who are found to furnish all Egypt with the
Spices and Gems of India, and the Drugs of Arabia, Importing the same by Camels
and Dromedaries from Goa, Ormus Aden, Zebit, Dangula, Mecca, and other places
from and about the Red Sea: and in return thereof Exporting hence the Drugs of
Egypt, and such other Commodities as are brought hither by those Nations
neighboring, principally upon and about the Mediterranean Sea. The principal
Commodities accounted and fittest for them is the excellent Gold of this
Country called the Soltanies and Sheraffie, which Egypt in great plenty
affords.

Merchants I account the Christians of Europe, as principally the French and
Venetians, who have here their Consuls and Vice-Consuls for the Preservation of
their Trade, and Protection of their Nation, by certain Capitulations agreed
upon between their Sovereigns and the Grand Seignior in Constantinople, paying
such Duties and Customs here as their said Capitulations do nominate; and these
thus furnish Egypt with Levantine Commodities, and generally with all the
Fabrics and Wares of the growth of Europe; and these carry hence in returns
these Commodities brought hither both out of Arabia and India, and the native
Commodities of this Country.

Turks I account the next, whose Emperor swayeth the Scepter of this rich
Country, and who in respect of their easy Customs reap a peculiar benefit by
the Trade of this place; but the most eminent of them residing far hence and in
Constantinople, and their adventure proving dangerous and hazardable, by reason
of the Incursions of the Malta and Florentine Galleys, joining thereto the dull
temper of that Nation generally in matter of Commerce, and the ill success
their grand Gallions have of late years had, does much divert their minds from
any eager pursuit of that so rich a Traffic.

Jews here resident I account the fifth, who by reason of their general
knowledge in Trade, and their general correspondence in all these Countries
beforementioned, partake of all the Commerce and Traffic practiced by these
several persons; for from Venice, Constantinople, Ormus, Goa, and other eminent
places of Traffic, they are found to adventure and to have adventures; they
travel and return with the Arabian into India and Arabia, they traffic here
both in gross and retail; and besides their subtilty in driving of bargains and
making of contracts between man and man as Brokers, they are here found to be
of all Professions, and are the Professors of all Arts.

Armenian, Grecian and Coptie, all Christians, who in their way set the wheel
of Trade on work, by being some Shopkeepers, some Artificers, and some
Merchants, principally trading by Caravans to and from Aleppo, Damascus, Amman
and Baruti, and in the Commodities of those Countries of Armenia, Georgia and
Persia, they carry the principal swayand stroke; all which considered, what
does the place want to make it absolute, but only what it has lost? which is
the vast Trade of India, which of late years the Portugals, English and
Flemming has deprived them of; which I leave them to sorrow for, as for a
thing past remedy.

Commodities of Grand Cairo and Egypt.
The Commodities that this Country and place principally affords to these
Merchants, whereby their Commerce is now preserved to them, is Flax, and all
sorts of Pulse, abounding in the Province of Sahid, where the Pharaohs resided;
Fruits, Rice, Balsam, etc. abounding in Eriffic, where the Ptolemies resided;
Cottons, Sugars, and some Drugs, etc. abounding in Marrema, where the Romans
and Graecians resided; and all these annually foretold by the Inundation of the
Rivor Nilus, discerned by a Pillar seated in the Island Michias opposite to the
City of Cairo, beginning ever to increase about the 15 of June, so continuing
40 days increasing, and 40 days decreasing, as I said before; the height of the
increase giving assured testimony of that years abundance and plenty, at the
end whereof a solemn days feast is kept to Nilus, in which it is oftentimes
seen the Egyptian to spend as much in jollity, as with great pain and industry
he has gathered the whole year before with penury, Revenues of Egypt.
out of this plenty and abundance is yearly drawn for Revenue of this Kingdom
three millions of Sheraffies, in value 8 shillings Sterling apiece, the one
whereof is now adays sent to the Grand Seignior (by Land and Caravan, for fear
of surprizal at Sea by the Florentine or Malta Galleys;) the second Million is
spent in the pay of the Militia and Soldiery of this Country; and the third
rebounds to the benefit of the Bassa, here resident for the Grand Seignior, for
the maintenance of his own Court and Dependents.

Their principal parts for Traffic in the Mediterranean Sea is Alexandria, as
before I noted, accounted a free Port for Friend or Enemy; the Harbor
cammanded by a Castle, and the entrance guided by an eminent Watch Tower to
give light to Sailers: the Customs of which place is farmed by Jews at 20
thousand Medins per diem, 30 Medins accounted for a Ryal of eight Spanish,
which here may be valued 5 shillings Sterling, the which by the year may amount
to 55 thousand pound Sterling. Customs of Alexandria.
All Goods entering here pay the Custom in species, or compounded for at 10 in
the hundred, only Moneys entering pay but one and half per cent. but outward all
Commodities pay 11 per cent. but this is to be accounted the Soldans Custom,
and called the great Custom: the other Customs raised here is as much, or very
near as much more, as he shall find to his cost that tradeth into these parts,
whereto for better trial I will refer him.

Merchants of Cairo.
Now for the Trade in general of Cairo, the Merchants thereof are found at this
day in some sort to have the relics of that former great Trade which they
lost out of the Red Sea; for hence they send by Caravans sundry European
Commodities thither, especially at the time when the yearly Caravan departs
hence for Mecca, and Medina Talnabi, the Sepulcher of their false Prophet
Mahomet, which arriving at Sues in the Red Sea, is there found to have a
general dispersion, some going for the City of Assuan, which is commodiously
seated upon their River. Nile, and upon the borders of the Kingdom of Nubia,
which hence sits it self with the Commodities both of Asia and Europe, and is
equally distant between Cairo and the City of Suachen or Suasuem, once the
principal Port of this Kingdom, situated on the Red Sea, but now in the
subjection of the great Emperor of the Abassins: from which is commodious
Navigation to Brava, Melinda, Quiloa. and other places along the Coast of Abex
and Mosambique, as I have mentioned before. And because it is the principal
Town of trading on Africa side in the Rea-Sea, I hold it here worthy a better
and more serious survey.

CHAP. XXXII. SUACHEN on the Red Sea, and the Trade thereof.
Suachen on the Red Sea, and the Trade thereof. Suachen famous for four
excellencies needful in Trade.
SUACHEN is one of the richest Cities of the Orient, situated within the
Arabique Gulf in the Coast of Aethiopia sub Aegypto, and amongst all the famous
Cities of Trade in the Orient this is accounted equal, if not superior to them
in four things; the first in the goodness and security of the Haven; the second
in the facility and good service for lading and unlading of Ships; the third in
the Traffic with very strange and remote People and Countries, and of diverse
behaviors; the fourth in the strength and situation of the City: As for the
goodness and security of the Port, Nature has so made it, that it is defended
from all storms whatsoever; the Haven is capacious and large, of smooth Tides,
the ground good, and able in circuit to hold 300 great Sail of burden, with
water at all times, from six to twelve fathom; the Ships are laden round about
the whole circumference of the City, casting only a plank into the Merchants
Warehouses where their Wares are kept; and the Galleys fastening themselves to
the stones and doors of their houses, set their Prows over the Streets, and by
them as by Bridges they are commodiously laden or unladen; and secondly, as
touching the Traffic and Navigation thereof, few Cities can in these parts be
compared with it; for this City is found to have Traffic with all India intra
and extra Gangem, that is, Cambaia, Tanacerim, Pegu, Mallacca, and with the
Arabic, with Judea, Cairo and Alexandria, as I said above, and with all
Aethiopia and the Land of Abexi; from whence it gathers great abundance of
Gold and Ivory: Thirdly, For the situation of it; for it is such as if Nature
had framed it purposely for a Royal Mart; for it is an Island round in form,
encompassed with many sholds and flats, for defense of the Port and City,
occupying and taking up the whole body of the Island, so that it may as
properly be termed an Island of a City, as a City in an Island; for there is no
one foot of waste ground upon the whole Island, but is employed in Housing and
Magazines: the manner of Trade here, as far as I have gathered is thus:

It is now the principal Port-Town in these Seas belonging to Prester Jean,
from whose Court called Dombia, it is twenty five days journey by Caravan; and
the concourse of Merchants is here so great, that twenty Caravans are yearly
found to set out hence toward several parts of the neighboring Regions.

Commodities of Suachen.
The Commodities they carry, are all kind of Indian Clothing, and also of our
English Commodities, as Broad Cloths, Kersies, Lead, and Tin; likewise Velvets,
Damasks, Sattins, Taffetteas, and all other sorts of Silk Stuffs; their colors
more desired are reds, greens, viol^ts, murries, and other light colors.

Measures of Suachen.
Their Measure is called a ( --) about half a Yard, and Cloth that is worth in
Suachen 4 Ryals of 1/^ is there worth 8 Ryals, and the price of Kersies is half
the price of Broad-cloth; Velvets of China are here worth 10 8/^ the said
measure, and Italian Velvets are match more worth, but not so profitable to the
Merchants, as being much dea^er; Sattins of Florence are worth 10 8/^, Damasks
of the best fort worth from 8 to 10 8/^ Taffetta's 3 8/^, and all colors well
sold, excepting yellow and black, which are out of use in these Countries.

Weights of Suachen.
Their Weight is the Rotolo, which is about 16 ounces Averdupois, the Rotolo is
four Wakies, and 360 Rotolos make here a weight called a Bahar.

The Commodities here abounding are these, Civet in great quantity, and worth a
8/^ a Wai^a, Elephants Teeth also plenty, worth thirty ^ the Bahar, Wax worth 1
^ the 100 Rotolo's; Gold worth 60 8/^ the Rotolo, Tin worth 1 ^ the Rotolo, and
Lead much more; but the Turk will not suffer any to be brought hither through
his Dominions, for they hold it a contrabanda Commodity: from Grand Caire there
goes always in August a great Caravan for these parts, and likewise another in
November, and the Commodities they earry thence is Broad Cloths, Kersies,
Velvets, Satins, Damasks and Silks of all sorts, and from Cairo to Dombia this
way is fifty days travel by Caravan, and no more, which hence is easily
performed.

Now forasmuch as I find not on the Arabian side of the Red Sea any other Town
of eminence in Trade besides this, and that from Cape guarda fue along the
Coast, I find none other worthy my detention, I will hence sail down to the
bottom of this Gulf, and willingly pass by in silence the famous Port Town of
(^) the place conceived where the Israelites passed on dry foot over, or rather
throw this Sea, when they were pursued by their envious Enemies the Egyptians,
who therein found their death the reward of their hatred; and perusing the
same, survey the now famous Port of Sues, the present station of the Grand
Signior's Fleet, that aweth this Sea, and the neighboring Regions thereof.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of SUES, and the Trade thereof.
Sues in the Red Sea.
SUES is now the relics of that ancient Heroes, to which place Cleopatra
carried her Galleys by Land after the defeat of Mark Anthony her beloved,
accounted fifteen leagues from the nearest branch of Nilus running to Cairo; it
is strengthened by a strong late Fortification raised by the Turks, not only
for defense of the Town, but in defense of those his Galleys here kept to
command these Seas, and his Maritime Coasts on both sides the Gulf; and here it
was that several Egyptian Soltans intended to dig a Channel, and thereby join
the commodity of this Sea to the Mediterranean, but all of them desisting ere
the work was brought to perfection, the relics whereof in many places remain
yet to be seen, the Divine Pro ^idence having given bounds to Seas, which the
wit and power of man, though Princes, cannot transpose or alter. This place
would long since have given way to the envy of time by decay and ruin, had it
not been for that relic of Trade which is here preserved by a few inhabiting
Merchants, and the station for the great Turks Galleys, which he is enforced to
build on the Mediterranean Sea, for want here of wood and fit materials, and
thence convey the same hither by Camels and Dromedaries in several pieces,
where afterward they are set up and accordingly employed, sometimes mastering
the Portugals and other Kings his neighbors, and sometimes again being by them
mastered, according to the fortune of War; other Subject of Trade I find not
here material, therefore in silence pass it over. And having thus then briefly
run through the principal places of Trade, comprised within the Limits of
Egypt, and noted the concordancy of the weights and measures used commonly
throughout this whole Country, both with Venice the former greater Traders
hither, and with ours in England; before I come to the Coins current of this
Country, it will not be improper I should infert a Concordancy of the weights
of this place with some other neighboring Countries, according as I have
gathered them out of the works of Alexander de Pasi, a Venetian Merchant, which
here for many years resided.

CHAP. XXXIV. Egypt Weight compared with the Weights of sundry other Countries.
Egypt Weight, compared with the Weights of sundry other Countries. The
several Commodities weighed by the several weights in Egypt.
I Have noted before, how that in Egypt are used four several Weights proper to
several sorts of Commodities; the Cantar Forfori is used in several sorts of
Spices coming from Cairo; the Cantar Zero is the greatest and most common in
use for all such Commodities as are sold here by Christian Merchants; the
Cantar Laidin is only used in Flax, Hemp, etc. and the last in the Cantar Mina,
most used in Damietta, for Cloves, Maces, Cinnamon, Musk, and some sorts of
Spices; the Observations made thereon, with some other eminent Cities, are
these:

Egypt weights compared with Tripoli in Suria.
A Cantar of Tripoli in Suria is thus found to accord with Egypt. A Cantar
Forfori is in Tripoli 1 Cantar 24 Rotolos. A Cantar Laidin is in Tripoli -- 33
Rotolos. A Cantar Zeroi is in Tripoli -- 52 Rotolos. A Cantar Mena is in
Tripoli -- 42 Rotolos.


And note, that from Egypt is sent to Tripoli in Suria, some Spices, Sugars,
Rice, Cassia, Salt, etc. and from Tripoli is sent to Egypt, white Soap, Dates,
and some other Commodities.

Egypt weights compared with Cyprus.
The Weight of Cyprus is thus observed with Egypt. The Cantar of Cyprus makes
in Egypt 5 Cantar: 20 Rotol. Forfor. 2 Cantar: 30 Rotol. Zoroi.
And the Cantar Forfori is in Cyprus 19 Rotolo 2/4 A Cantar Laidin is in Cyprus
26 Rotolos. A Cantar Zeroi is in Cyprus 42 Rotolos. A hundred Mino is in Cyprus
33 Rotolos.


And note that from Egypt is brought to Cyprus, some Spices, Cassia, Rice,
Flax, Salt, Fish, and some other Goods and from Cyprus is brought to Egypt,
Honey, Melasso, Sugars, Cottons, Chamblets, Grograms, and some other
Commodities.

Egypt weights compared with Rhodes.
Rhodes is thus found to accord with Egypt. The Cantar Forfori is in Rhodes 18
Rotolos. The Cantar Laidin is in Rhodes 25 Rotolos. The hundred Mino is in
Rhodes 32 Rotolos. The Cantar of Rhodes is in Egypt 2 Cantar 56 Rot. Zeroi.


And note, that Rhodes sends to Egypt, Honey, Wax, Oils, Raisins, and some
Fruits, and from Egypt is sent to Rhodes some Spices, Cassia, Sugars, Rice,
Cow-hides, Flax and salted Fish.

Egypt weights compared with Scio and Smyrna.
Egypt is thus found to agree in Weight with Scio and Smyrna. The Cantar of
Scio is in Egypt 1 Cantar 11 Rotolos Forfori. The Cantar Zeroi is in Scio 1
Cantar 95 Rotolos. The Cantar Forfori is in Scio 89 Rotolos. The Cantar Laidin
is in Scio 1 Cantar 24 Rotolos.


And note, that from Scio is sent for Egypt, Wax, Honey, Mastick, white Soap,
Cottons; and from Egypt to Scio and Smyrna is sent Cassia, Rice, Flax, Sugar
and Sugar Candid, Ox and Buffolo-hides, salted Fish, etc.

Egypt weights compared with Candia.
Egypt with Candy is thus found to accord in Weight. The 1000 l. gross of
Candia makes 3 Cantar 63 Rotol. Zero. The 1000 l. sotile of Candia makes 3
Cant. 57 Rot. Zero. The Cantar Zeroi makes Candia sotile 274 l. The Cantar
Forfori makes in Candia sotile 125 l. The Cantar Laidin makes in Candia gross
115 l. The hundred of Meno makes in Candia sotile 220 l.


And note, that from Candia is sent to Egypt, Honey, Wax, Cheese, Candia
Wines, and some other Commodities: And from Egypt is sent to Candia, some
Spices, Rice, Cassia, Sugar ^did, Flax, and some other Commodities.

Egypt weights compared with Cania.
Egypt is thus found to accord with Cania. The 1000 l gross of Cania is in
Egypt 6 Cantar 33 in 35 Zero. The Cantar Zero is in Cania sotile 278 l. The
Cantar Forfori is in Cania sotile 127 in 128 l. The Cantar Laidin is in Cania
gross 100 l. The hundred Mina is in Cania sotile 221 l. in 223 l.


And note, that the Commodities transported for Merchandise are the same as is
above rehearsed in Candia.

Egypt weight compated with Brussia, Natolia.
Egypt is thus found to accord in weights with Brussia in Natolia. The Cantar
Zera is in Brussio 1 Cantar 77 Rotolos. The Cantar Forfori is in Brussia 82
Rot. The Cantar Laidin is in Brussia 1 Cantar 14 Rot. The hundred Meno is in
Brussia 1 Cantar 42 Rotolos.


And note, That from Brussia is sent to Egypt, Wax, Honey, Carpet, Silk,
Civet, and other Com^odities, and from Egypt those Commodities mentioned
heretofore.

Egypt weights compared with Constantinople.
Egypt is thus found to accord with Constantinople in Weights. The Cantar Zero
is in Constantinople 1 Cantar 77 Rotolos. The Cantar Forfori is in
Constantinople 82 Rot. The Cantar Laidin is in Constantinople 1 Cantar 14 Rot.
The hundred of Meno is in Constantinople 1 Cantar 42 Rotolos.


And note, That the Commodities accord with the precedent of Brussia.

Egypt weight compared with Corfu.
Egypt is thus found to accord with the Island of Corfu. The 1000 l. sotile
Corfu is in Egypt 4 Cant. 27 Rot. Zero. The Cantar Forfori is in Corfu sotile
108 l. The Cantar Laidin is in Corfu sotile 150 l. gross 126 l. The hundred
Meno is in Corfu sotile 187 l. The Cantar Zero is in Corfu sotile 234 l.


And note, that from Egypt to Corfu, and the parts adjoining, is sent Cassia,
Pepper, Cloves, Cinnamon, and some other Spices, Sugars, Rice, Flax, Ox and
Buffello-hides, and other Commodities of Egypt; and from Corfu is sent to
Egypt, Wax, Honey, etc.

Egypt weights compared with Rhagusa in Slavonia.
Egypt is thus found to accord with Rhagusa in Slavonia. The Cantar Forfori is
in Rhagusa 120 l. The Cantar Laidin is in Rhagusa 166 l. The Cantar Zero is in
Rhagusa 163 l. The hundred of Meno is in Rhagusa 208 l.


The Commodities are the same as above mentioned in Corfu.

Egypt weight compared with Catarro in Dalmatia.
Egypt is sound in weight to agree thus with Catarro. The Cantar Forfori is in
Catarro 108 l. The Cantar Zero is in Catarro 234 l. The Cantar Laidin is in
Catarro 150 l. gross 126 l. The Cantar Meno is in Catarro 187 l.


And note, that the Commodities are the same as is mentioned in Corfu.

Egypt weights compared with Spollato in Istria.
Egypt is found to agree with Spollato thus in weight. The Cantar Forfori is
in Spollato 144 l. sotile. The Cantar Laidin is in Spollato sotile 200 l. gross
126 l. The Cantar Zero is in Spollato sotile 312 l. in 316 l. The hundred Meno
is sotile Spollato 250 l.


Note, the Commodities are the same mentioned in Corfu and Gulf of Venetia.

Egypt weights compared with Ancona.
Egypt is found in weight thus to agree with Ancona. The Cantar Zero is in
Ancona 268 l. The Cantar Fofori is in Ancona 124 l. The Cantar Laidin is in
Ancona 172 l. The hundred Meno is in Ancona 215 l.


And note, That the Commodities of Egypt are nominated before, and from Ancona
is sent to Egypt, white Soap, Oils, Nuts, and the common Commodities of the
Kingdom of Naples.

Egypt weights compared with Apulia.
Egypt is found in weight to agree with Apulia thus. The Cantar Zero is in
Apulia 1 Cant. 7 Rot. The Cantar Forfori is in Apulia 48 Rot. or 155 l. The
Cantar Laidin is in Apulia 68 Rot. or 188 l. The hundred Meno is in Apulia 85
Rot. or 235 l.


These weights are found in this manner also to agree with Naples, and has the
Commodities transportable for Merchandise, as is mentioned before in Ancona.

Egypt weights compared with Sicilia.
Egypt is found in weight thus to agree with Sicilia. The Cantar Forfori is in
Sicilia 55 Rotolos or 138 l. The Cantar Forfori is in Sicilia 1 Cantar 29 Rot.
or 300 l. The Cantar Laidin is in Sicilia 77 Rot. or 192 l. The hundred Meno is
in Sicilia 96 Rot. or 240 l.


And note, That from Sicilia is sent to Egypt, Melassus of Sugars, Nuts,
Cheese, and Brimstone, Pumice-stones, and from Egypt is sent to Sicilia the
Commodities abovenamed of Egypt.

Egypt weight compared with Tunis and Tripoli in Barbaria.
Egypt is found to agree with Tunis and Tripoli in Barbary thus. The Cantar of
Tunis is 1 Cantar 17 Rotolos Forfori. The Cantar Forfori in Tunis and Tripoli
85 Rotolos The Cantar Laidin is in Tunis and Tripoli 1 Cantar 19 Rot. The
Cantar Zero is in Tunis and Tripoli 1 Cantar 84 Rot. The hundred Meno is in
Tunis and Tripoli 1 Cantar 47 Rot.


And from Egypt is sent to Tunis and Tripoli some sorts of Spices, as Pepper,
Cloves, Cinnamon, Cassia, Benjamin, Musk, Ambergreece, Civer, Storax, Camphora,
Flax, and such like. It rests yet to make the knowledge of these several
weights in themselves perfect, that I should show what Commodities are weighed
by each of them, and afterward show in brief how they are found to accord with
other principal places of Traffic not here abovementioned.

The agreement of the Cantar Forfori with other Countries.
The Cantar Forfori is the weight wherewith in Egypt Merchants do buy and sell
Pepper, Ginger and Green Ginger, Lache, red and white Sandal, Incense, Myrrh,
Zedoaria, Gum Arabic, Semensine, Assa faetida, Mirabolans, Indico, Sugars of
all sorts, Sal Armoniack, Elephants Teeth, and the like; agreeing thus with
other Countries of Trade. Cantar Forfori, that is, 100 Rotolos is in Rhodes 17
Rotolos. Cyprus 18 Rotolos. Petras 108 l. Salonica 109 l. Zara 116 l. Fiume 140
l. Ancona 120 l. Riconati 223 l. Pesaro 124 l. Arminio 116 l. Lansano 123 l.
Apulia 132 l. Acquila 124 l. The Cantar Forfori of Egypt, is in Sicilia 134 l.
which are 54 Rotolos. Calabria 131 l. which are 47 Rot. Naples 121 l. which are
47 Rot. Rome 117 l. Florence 112 l. now all one Pisa 124 l. Genoa sotile 133 l.
Lucca 123 l. Bolonia 116 l. Millan 129 l. Cremona 132 l. Piedmont 129 l. Geneva
88 l. Lions 98 l. Avignon 102 l. Barcelona 98 l. Majorca 100 l. Marselia 105 l.
Valencia 120 l. Sevil 90 l. Lisbon 79 l. Bona and Bugia 83 Rot. London 81 l.
Bruges 92 l.

The agreement of the Cantar Meno with other Countries.
The weight called Meno is accounted by Hundred, and not by the Cantar, which is
also peculiar to some Commodities only, and thereby is weighed Cloves, Maces
and Fust of Clove^, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cubebs, Long Pepper, Aloes, Epatica,
Boras, in past and in gain, Cardamon, Spikenard, Costus, sweet and bitter,
Sarcacole, Ammoniac, Opponax, Storax, Calamint, Turbit, Spodium, Ermodatili,
Mumia, Benjoin, Laccia, Euphorbio, Lignum Aloes, Rhubarb, Manna, and other such
like are sold by this weight, the hundred whereof make of the Cantar Forfori
180 Rotolos, and makes in The 100 Rot. Meno does make in Venetia soteli 250 l.
Petrasse 184 l. Corfu 187 l. Rome 211 l. Ricanti 220 l. Lanfano 215 l. Acquila
223 l. Fermo 223 l. Rhagusa 208 l. Piedmont 229 l. Savoy 157 l. Avignon 181 l.
Marselia 187 l. Majorca 179 Granado 148 l. Sevil 158 l. Lisbon 142 l. Tunis 148
l. Salerno 135 l. Ancona 215 l. Pesari 220 l. Bolonia 208 l. Florence 219 l.
Milan 229 l. Cremona 232 l. Genoa 238 l. Verona 225 l. Geneva 157 l. Lions 175
l. Paris 169 l. Barcelona 178 l. Valencia 208 l. Cades 164 l. Tripol. Barb. 148
l. London 166 l. In Flanders 173 l.

The agreement of Cantar Zero with other Countries.
The next is the Cantar Zero, by which is sold Cassia and not any other Spice,
also Tin, Lead, Brass, and some other Commodities, the which is found to make
in The Cantar Zero does make in Venetia gr. 200 l. Venetia soteli 316 l.
Salonica 177 Rot. Petrasse 140 l. Fiume 312 l. Pulia 108 l. Lansano 268 l.
Ricante 275 l. Pesaro 275 l. Barcelona 219 l. Majorca 223 Valencia 227 l. Sevil
198 l. Lisbon 250 l. Tunis 186 Rome 266 l. Ancona 268 l. Florence 273 l. Genoa
297 l. Lucca 276 l. Millan 287 l. Sicilia 120 l. Piedmont 287 l. Marselia 231
l. Cades 200 l. London 223 l. Flanders 215 l. Tripol. Barb. 116 Granado 178

And this is as much as I have collected concerning the several Weights of
Egypt used constantly in Cairo, Alexandria, Damietta, and other principal
places of that Country, which by reason of the diversity, as being fourfold,
have proved the more tedious and intricate; wherein if Error be found by the
trial of him that shall have cause to make an Experiment, I shall (I hope) find
the more favorable construction of this my pains taken, wishing that I could
have thus enlarged my self in the Measures of these Countries, and the
agreement thereof with the other places before-named, wherein (being defective)
I must crave to refer the Reader to him that is herein better acquainted, and
therefore next to the Coins current.

Coins current in Egypt.
The Coins current of this Country are in Traffic of Merchandise, partly
foreign, and partly domestic; the foreign is the Spanish Ryal of Eight, which
they call here the Piastre and Dollar, and worth in common 80 and sometimes 90
Aspers, which is the domestic Coin of this Country, and the Maidin which is
the common Silver Coin of all the Grand Signiors Dominions. Three A or Aspers
make a Maidin, and 30 Maidins make a Dollar; the Gold Coin, here is the
Soltane, Xeriffe and Chequeen, all of one value, little differing, accounted 8
shillings Sterling; but rising and falling in Aspers according to the plenty of
Gold.

The Accounts kept in Egypt.
Their Accounts are here diversely kept, the Inhabitants for the most part
accounting by Aspers 80 Aspers to a Dollar; and some by Ducates of Pargo,
accounting that three Ducates of Venice make one Ducate of Pargo; besides
which, there is also in use an Italian Ducate 10 per cent. less.

The Cusloms of Alexandria, Damietta and Egypt.
The Customs of Alexandria, Damietta and Rosetta is 10 per cent. as I noted
before, upon all Commodities inward and outward, and paid in kind or Species,
but upon Moneys brought in it is only per cent. and very strictly looked into
and exacted, but the Bashaw governing here for the Grand Seignor, being ever a
principal man, and far remote from the Imperial Port of Constantinople, lays in
many Towns of this Kingdom what custom he pleases; and though it be held now to
be but 10 per cent. which is the old and ancient Custom of Egypt, yet the
Merchant that tradeth here, shall find ere his Goods be sold, and the Moneys in
his Purse, accounting the Consoledge and other Duties, to be adove 22 or 23 per
cent. the place being much subject to Anuenus and Mangaries, and the
Custom-house being farmed to Jews, add thereto the greatest deceit they can
possible to raise the daily Customs of the place, Alexandria it self paying in
this manner 20 thousand Medins a day by Farm, 54750 l.
which at the rate of 30 Medins to a Ryal of ^/^ Spanish, and the Ryal of ^/^
accounted at 5 shillings Sterling, amounts to 54750 l. per annum.

I should in the next place Survey the general Trade of Egypt, as it is
observed and found to be at this day, but by reason I have in many places of
the beforementioned Chapters particularly handled the principal parts thereof,
and noted the most eminent Nations that at this present do hither Traffic, I
shall the more willingly pass over the same in silence, and only now observe,
that besides the French and Venetians, not any other European Christians are
found here to traffic, and the English have given over all Trade into this
Country, by reason they are furnished with all the Commodities that this place
did formerly yield, at the first hand from India, and what else they want,
being Commodities either of Arabia or Egypt, they furnish themselves from
Aleppo, where many English are resident: But here are found Consuls for both
the Venetion and French Nations, which continue still some Trade hither, as
indeed more proper for them, wanting the Trade of India which the English
enjoy, of which I have made mention before, and therefore leaving Egypt, and
with it the firm land, I shall take leave now to view the Islands that belong
to Africa by modern Cosmographers.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Island of Madagascar.
Madagascar.
I Find belonging to Africa many Islands, which are found to afford many notable
Commodities for Merchandise, which for brevities sake I will only touch, that
the Factor may know whence those Commodities do come which are found amongst
us. Madagascar, Otherwise S. Lawrence.
otherwise called the Island St. Lawrence, giving name to a Town, the principal
of that Island, was discovered by the Portugals Anno 1506: The Inhabitants
willingly permit no man to land upon their Country for traffic sake; it
yields Cloves, Ginger, and some Silver, to the Inhabitants own use, but not
for Exportation, and their Moneys in use are the Gloss-Beads of Cambaia, which
in Merchandise and Barter currently pass amongst them.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Island of Zocotara.
Zocotara.
THE Island of Zocotara lies in the mouth of the Red Sea, 10 degrees North from
the Equator, wherein the Portugals have fortified two Towns for Traffic; it is
replenished with Drugs for Physic, and especially, with that so excellent and
well known in Christendom, by the name of Aloes Zocatrina, which is sold there
by a Quintal, which (by observation) makes in England 93 l.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Island of Saint Thomas.
St. Thomas.
SAint Thomas Island lies just under the Equinoctial Line; the prime City is
Povoasan, Inhabited principally by Portugals and Negro's, abounding only in
Sugar, which here grows in Canes, and are made so that yearly 50 great Ships
are here laden with that Commodity for Spain and Portugal, whereto I am not
able to add any other material point of Trade, because of my ignorance therein.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Islands of the Canaries, and the Trade thereof.
Canaries.
THese Islands are seven in number, and under the command of the Spaniard,
formerly called The Fortunate Islands. They abound in Sugars, whereof great
quantity of Marmalade, and other Conserves are made; in Birds, which hereof
take their names, excellent in Singing; in Wines, which hence are known by
these Islands names, excellent in taste; and in Woad, found excellent for dying.

The Trade thereof.
To these Islands is now found and practiced some small Trade by the English; to
which place they import some Seys, Serges, Bays, Linnens, and such like, and
export thence Woad, and Sugars and Wines of the growth of these Islands; which
last is vended thence into England and Holland above two thousand Tuns yearly,
to the great enriching of the Inhabitants.

Weights, Measures, etc. concur with Sevil.
Their Weights, Measures, and Coins, are altogether concurrent with the Weights,
Measures, and Coins current in Sevil, to which place it was annexed by the
Spaniards the first discoverers, therefore I shall not need to say ought here
further thereof.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Assores, commonly Tercera Islands.
Island A^ called Tercera.
THE Tercera Islands were first discovered by the Flemmings, and a while bare
their names; upon which is placed the Meridian Line, dividing the East from the
West part of the World; it only abounds in Oad or Woad used by Dyers, and is
now in the hands of the Spaniards, and in special use to them in their Voyage
to the East or West Indies, and affording them for refreshment good Water, and
store of Goats flesh. Other matter of Trade it affords not; therefore this
shall serve to have said of the Islands, willingly omitting the Hesperides, the
Gorgades, the Princes Islands, and others of lesser moment, and proceed in my
MAP to view the Trade of ASIA, somewhat better known to us than AFRICA.

OF ASIA, AND THE Provinces and Cities of Trade THEREOF.
CHAP. XL. Of ASIA, and the Provinces thereof.
Asia.
ASIA, the Third Division of the World, is separated from EUROPE by the Egean
Propontis, and Euxine Sea, by Paulus Maeotis, Tanais, Duina; and from AFRICA by
the Red Sea, and the Egyptian Isthmus, as I remembered in the beginning of this
Work. Five notable things in Asia.
Five notable things have made this Country famous, and have given it the
Garland of Supremacy over all the other parts of the World. First, the Creation
of Mankind: Secondly, the Birth of our Savior; his Miracles wrought, and place
of his sufferance: Thirdly, the Actions memorized by the holy Penmen of the
Old and New Testament: Fourthly, the famous Monarchies of the Babylonians,
Assyrians, Persians and Medes: And Fifthly, being the common Mother of us all,
from whence innumerable troops of men issued to people the other parts of the
uninhabited World, of which see other Authors further at large.

The Principal Regions of ASIA, are, 1. Anatolia. 2. Syria. 3. Palestina. 4.
Armenia. 5. Arabia. 6. Media. 7. Assyria. 8. Mesopotamia. 9. Chaldea. 10.
Persia. 11. Parthia. 12. Tartaria. 13. China. 14. India. 15. The Islands
thereof.


And of these in brief according to my first intention.

CHAP. XLI. Of Anatolia, or Natolia in general.
Anatolia.
ANatolia is limited on the East with the River Euphrates; on the West with
Thracius Bosphorus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Egean; on the North with
Pontus Euxinus; on the South with the Rhodian and Lycian Seas. In this Country
was anciently accounted 4000 Cities and Towns, those seven famous amongst the
rest, to whom St. John dedicated his Revelation; but now the ruins of them are
hardly to be seen, and the Provinces that are found in this Region are these:
First, Cilicia; Secondly, Pamphilia; Thirdly, Lycia; Fourthly, Caria; Fifthly,
Ionia; Sixthly, Lydia; Seventhly, Molis; Eighthly, Phrygia minor; Ninthly,
Phrygid major; Tenthly, Bithynia; Eleventhly, Pontus; Twelfthly, Paphlagonia;
Thirteenthly, Galatia; Fourteenthly, Cappadocia; Fifteenthly, Lycaonia;
Sixteenthly, Pisidia, and Armenia major. Of these in order.

CHAP. XLII. Of Cilicia, and the Cities thereof.
Cilicia and the Cities thereof.
CIlicia is not found at this day to have any Town of note or consequence in
it, save Alexandria, built by Alexander the Great; Scanderone, or Alexandretta.
and to distinguish it from, Alexandria in Egypt, is named Alexandretta, now
known to (...) by the name of Scanderone, a famous Haven Town, serving for the
scale to Aleppo, for all such shipping as come thither, either out of the Ocean
or Mediterranean, and where the English, French and Venetians have their
Vice-Consuls to protect their Merchants Goods and Ships, and where all
Merchandise are either landed or laden that go to or from Aleppo; of which, it
will be more proper that I enlarge when I come to speak of Aleppo, which is
seated in Syria, as I shall show hereafter.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Pamphilia, Lycia, and Caria.
Pamphilia, Lycia, and Caria.
ALL these have not any thing now worthy note in them, conducing to Trade and
Merchandising, save the abundance of those Goats, upon whom grows that Wool
whereof is made the Chamlets and Grograms, of which I shall have cause to speak
more at large, when I come to treat of the Trade of Angora; and in the interim
it is to be noted, that these Provinces having lost their former names, are now
known to us by the name of Garamania, and are at this present under the command
of the Grand Signior.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Ionia, and the Cities thereof.
Ionia, and the Cities thereof. Ephesus.
IOnia is the next Province, wherein is that ancient famous City of Ephesus
much ruined from its ancient recorded beauty, famous for the direction of an
Epistle by Saint Paul to the Inhabitants hereof: famous also for the Temple of
Diana: and lastly, famous for the burial of St. John the Evangelist, who went
here alive into the grave. But this City is now become a poor Village, and
retains no monument of her pride, that I could find in Anno 1624. but a porch
of a Grecian Church of black Marble, wherein is excellently engraven the life
of our Savior Christ, much admired by all Artists.

Smyrna.
But now the only City of Trade in this Province is Smyrna, one of the places
that strove for the birth of Homer, and wherein was found one of those Churches
whereto St. John dedicated his Revelation, seated in the bottom of a Bay or
Gulf, known to our Seamen by the name of the Gulf of Smyrna; and where there
is a Consul resident for the English, as also for the French and Venetians to
protect their Merchants and Trade, where in Anno 1619. in matter of Traffic, I
noted these things.

CHAP. XLV. Of Smyrna, and the Trade thereof.
Smyrna, and the Trade thereof.
THE principal Trade of this City was within these few years transported hither
from the Island Scio, where the Consuls abovesaid had their residence, and from
thence are entitled Consuls of Scio and Smyrna, but by reason that scale both
for sales and investments had then a dependency upon this, it was found more
proper and less chargeable to remove their abode and warehouse hither, and by
that means this became the principal Port, the goodness of the Harbor much
furthering the same, being both under the command of the Grand Signior, and
within these latter years much enriched by the trade of English, French, and
Dutch; the Venetians drive great trade here under French Colors still.

Commodities of Smryna.
The Commodities that are found here to abound, and that are hence transported
into other Countries of Christendom, are Cotton Woolls, which in great plenty
grow in the adjoining Plains of this City; also Galls for Diers, Anniseeds,
Cordovants, Wax, Cotton, and Grogram Yarn, Cute, Carpets, Grograms, Chamlets,
M^hairs, and some Fruits and Drugs; raw Persia Silk is likewise hither brought
by Land from Persia; and all other Commodities found in Turkey, or of that
growth is here to be had, and the Commodities here vended from England are
Cloths of Suffolk, Essex, and Gloucester, Kersies of Yorkshire and Hampshire,
Lead, Tin, Callicoes, Pepper, Indico, and other Spices, which within these late
years we had formerly from this and other places of Turkey, and which now, by
the commodity of the East India Trade and Navigation, we carry to them; and
from Venice is brought some Cloth, Paper, Silks, Velvets, etc. and from France
some few Cloths and Paper, etc. great store of Bullion, which never returns
into Christendom more, carried the greater part by the Armenians and Persians
to their native Countries, and there melted down into a light Standard.

The Coins of Smyrna, and Accounts.
The Coins current of Smyrna are those of Constantinople, and generally those of
all that Empire, which I shall show when I treat of that City, and for that
cause here omit it; and their Accounts they also keep here in the same nature
with them, and therefore refer you to that place in both these Particulars.

Weights usual of Smyrna.
The Weights of Smyrna and Scio, for they agree both in one, is the Quintar,
which contains 100 Rotolo's, or 42 Oaks, and every Oak being 400 drams, and
every Lodro being 176 drams, and the pound Averdupois has been found to be 148
drams, and the Quintal of 42 Oaks abovesaid, which produces 119 l. English,
but in many Commodities it is found to answer but 117 l. so that in circa 9
drams is 1 ounce English Averdupois.

They have here in use two Measures, one for Linen and another for Woollen,
but because they nearly agree with Constantinople, I will refer the same to
that place.

Measures of Smyrna and Scio Customs of Smyrna and Scio by the English.
The Customs paid by the English here and throughout all Turkey, by virtue of
their Capitulations with the Great Turk, is only three per Centum; and
oftentimes the Custom house of Scio and of Smyrna is in one man's hands; and
though by their Capitulations it is so agreed, that those Goods that have once
paid Custom in one port, should not pay any more being thence Exported to any
other place of his Dominions, and that Commands have been granted to that end
by the Grand Signior at several times; yet the justice of that Country is so
defective in this particular, that the Commodities landed in Smyrna, and paying
their three per Centum, and afterward transported to Constantinople, pay there
again another three per Centum, or compound with the Customer, which sometimes
is done at 1 per Centum, and sometimes at less: By Venetians and French.
Note, that here, as in all parts of Turkey, the Venetians, French and Dutch
pay five per cent. two per cent. more than the English, which is grounded upon
their Capitulations with the Emperor.

Port-charges of a Ship.
The Port-charges of clearing a Ship in Smyrna is paid in Commodities of our
Country, and was to that end thus at first regulated; but since converted into
payment by money, as to the Cadie who is to have five Pico of Venice Cloth, and
a bundle of Cony-Skins for a vest, which in the infancy of our English Trade
was here found to be much requested.

The Cadies Servant to have 3 Pico English Cloth.

The Cadies Caya to have 3 Pico of Ditto.

The Cadies Scrivan to have a Chicquine in Gold.

The Cadies Pages to have 2 Dollars.

The Mosur Eashaw to have 1 Pico Cloth.

The Cadies Janisaries to have a Chicquine.

All which Charges amount in circas to 68 Dollars.

To conclude, The Trade of this Port is most noted for the abundance of
Cottons, which hence is transported to England, France, Holland, and Italy,
estimated yearly to be about 20000 Quintals, and is found here to grow in the
adjoining Plains, which they do sow as we do Corn, the stalk being no bigger
than that of Wheat, but stronger and tougher, bearing a head round and bearded,
and hard as a stone, which when it is ripe it breaks, and is delivered of a
soft white Bombast or Cotton mixed with Seed, which they separate with an
Instrument, selling the Wool, but reserving the Seed for the next Harvest. See
more of this Trade in Cyprus and Constantinople, to which I refer the Enquirer.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Lydia, Eolis, Phrygia Minor and Major.
Lydia, Eolis, Phrygia.
ON the North-East of Ionia is Lydia, famous only for the two Rivers, Castrus
abounding with Swans, and Meander with Windings, from hence termed Meanders;
The first Merchants.
and if some Authors may be worthy of credit, the Natives were anciently the
first known Men that gave beginning to Merchandise, and exercised buying and
selling, and proved the original of the Tuscans, whose supreme Duke continues
the same to this day, and is one of the greatest and most eminent Merchants in
the World.

In Eolis are seated the two Misia Provinces, which hold not any thing note
worthy.

Minor.
In Phrygia minor is not found any thing at present worthy in Trade to stay the
course of my Pen; Troy's ruins ruined.
it affords the place where the ancient and famous City of Troy was seated,
which cost the Grecians ten years Siege to take it, with the loss of 860000
Trojans, and 666000 Grecians; but in Anno 1620, I hardly saw the relics of
this mighty Fabric, though I traced it for many miles, and gave ear to all the
ridiculous fables of those poor Grecians that inhabit thereabouts in many
Villages which lie within the compass of her ancient walls, from Mount Ida to
the River Scamander, now only a Brook not two foot deep; so that, what Ovid
said of old; I found by experience verified, Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit, etc.

Major. Gardion. Midium.
In Phrygia major, does not remain any thing note worthy, save a remembrance
that Gordion the seat of Gordius was here found in Alexander's time who cut
that knot with his Sword which he saw he could not otherwise undo; also Midium,
the seat of Midas, whose covetous petition was granted by Bacchus, to convert
all into Gold that he handled, and so had like to have eaten Gold for Meat, had
not his after-wit mastred his covetous appetite, and made him to his repentance
see his error, and acknowledge it; and falling again to a second oversight in
judgment, as the first was an error in desire, he preferred Pan's Pipe before
Apollo's Harp, and was rewarded for his small skill in Music with a comely
pair of Asses Ears: Colosso.
also in this Province stood Colosso, to whom St. Paul writ one of his Epistles;
and Pessinuns, where the Goddess Cybele was worshipped, which being brought
into Rome, would not stir further than the entrance of the River Tyber, which
the Romans much wondered, because the Dominion of the World was prophesied to
that City that had the custody thereof; but the Vestal Claudias Girdle
performed that which all the strength of Rome could not, and she haled up both
the Ship and Goddess, to the wonder of the Citizens at that time, and of all
the World ever since, though far greater miracles are found to be reported of
that City, and the holy Inhabitants thereof at this day, if the said reports
might gain that credit now, as this miracle then did.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Bithinia, and the Cities thereof.
Bithinia, and the Cities thereof.
ON the North-side of the Phrygias is seated Bithinia, which is famoused, First,
for the Victory of Alexander against the Persians, of whom he slew 20000;
Secondly, for Mount Stella, where Pompey overthrew Mithridates; and Tamberlain
with 800000 Tartarians encountered Bajazet with 500000, where 200000 lost. their
lives, and Baja^et in his pride of heart taken and penned up in an Iron Cage,
against whose bars he beat out his brains; Thirdly, for Nice, where the first
General Council was held Anno 314, to repel the Arrian Heresy; and, Fourthly,
Chalcedon, where the fourth General Council was assembled to repel the
Nestorian Heretie, where yet in Anno 1620, the Inhabitants do show to strangers
the place of this Assembly by tradition in manner of an Oval Circle built
purposely for this occasion; and Lastly, here is Bursis, by some Prusa, the
seat of the Ottoman Kings in Asia till they gained Adrianople in Europe, which
was done by Mahomet the First: Of the Trade thereof, a word in my passage.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Bursia in Bithinia, and the Trade thereof.
Bursia, and the Trade thereof.
BURSIA seated in the bottom of a Bay, known to the Turk by the name of The
Gulf of Bursia, being a fair City, and anciently the Seat of the Mohammedan
Kings, is now inhabited by Turks, Jews, and Greeks; who by reason of their
neighborhood, and in the way from Smyrna to Constantinople for
Land-Travellers, is found to have some Merchants of quality, and affords
quantity of Persian Commodities, as brought hither from Eusdrom, and other
bordering Towns of Armenia and Persia, principally occasioned by the Immunities
that have been granted by several Princes that have here resided, to the
Inhabitants thereof: but because the Venetians are found at present to be the
prime traders hither, it will not be amiss that for the weights and measures of
the place we should by ruled by their observations, which thence may easily be
reduced to ours.

Commodities of Bursia.
Their Commodities afforded to foreign Countries are the same as Constantinople,
only some Fabrics I have seen to have been in my time there made of Silks by
Moors that have been banished out of Spain, and come hither to reside, as
Damasks, Taffeta's, and Stripped Stuffs, and such like; also Commodities which
the earth has produced, as Anniseeds, Galls, and Sugars.

Coins and Weights of Bursia.
Their Coins are the same current in Constantinople.

100 Rotolos make Venice sotile 176 l. and Venice gross 112 l.

The Ocha of Bursia is Venice sotile 4 l.

The Rot. of Bursia is Venice sotile 9 ounces, and gross 1 l. 1 ounce 1 h.

The 100 drams make sotile Venetia 1 l. which is 72 metalichi.

The 100 Kilats of Turkey make in Venetia 87 Kill. Gold weight 7 metalich. makes
ounce 1 Gold weight in Venetia.

And by the English the same is observed to be within 2 per cent. to agree with
the weight of Constantinople, as shall be showed hereafter.

Measures of Bursia.
There are found here several Picoes, which with the Brace of Venetia is found
thus to agree.

Braces 100 of Cloth, Scarlet and fine Cloth makes 108 Picoes Cloth here.

Braces 100 of course Cloth common makes 114 Picoes in Bursia.

Braces 100 of Cloth of Gold makes in Bursia 102 Picoes.

Braces 1000 of Linnens is found to make in Bursia 772 Picoes.

And this is noted to be a greater Pico than the rest: but by the observation
of some English they find only 2 Picoes, one for Cloth and the other for
Grograms, and do agree with those of Constantinople.

Customs of Bursia.
There is no Custom due upon Goods in Bursia, it being accounted an Inland Town;
but if sent thence to Smyrna or to Constantinople, and exported out of the
Grand Signior's Dominions, it is liable to a Custom, according to the
Capitulations or Privilege granted to that Nation that transporteth the same:
but if those Commodities bought in Bursia being carried to Smyrna or
Constantinople, and there sold, it pays no Customs, but a small Duty for
Registring, and quitting at the Custom-houses of both the said places, as has
been practiced by diverse Merchants. In this Town of late years some English
have resided, and do find a fair and friendly quarter with the Inhabitants; but
they are accounted as Subfactors to those resident in Constantinople and
Smyrna, therefore I shall not need to say further of this place.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Pontus, and the Cities thereof.
Pontus.
ON the North-side of Bithinia is Pontus, wherein is found the Ruins of Tomos
to which Ovid was banished, and Pithius, where Chrysostom lived in exile: here
also ruled Mithridates, who for 40 years withstood the Romans, not more
excellent in War than Learning and Memory, who spoke 22 Languages, and invented
that Counterpoison for him named Mithridate; and who at last by the Rebellion
of his Son, and the Valor of L. Sylla, Pompey's Pillar.
Lucullus and Pompey, was vanquished; the last of which erected a Pillar upon a
small Island at the entrance of the Black or Euxine Sea, which at this day is
known by his name, and showed by the Inhabitants to Strangers as a Trophy of
his Victories in these Parts.

CHAP. L. Of Paphlagonia and Galatia, and the Cities thereof.
Paphlagonia and Galatia.
IN Paphlagonia I find not any City notable for Trade, or other thing
note-worthy: and as for Galatia, it is observed that to the People of this
Province did St. Paul dedicate one of his Epistles; Angora.
and here is also seated the City of Ancira, now commonly Angora, famous for the
infinite store of Grograms, Mohairs, and Chamlets, that are made here and
sabricated, and from hence transported to Constantinople, being 16 days Journey
distant; and to Aleppo, having a like remoteness; and from thence again
Exported into all the Countries of Europe.

In this place the Venetians have a Factory to provide them the said
Commodities, and the English in imitation thereof about 1624. did first send
thither two Factors from Constantinople, to furnish themselves with these
Commodities at the first hand: Grograms Trade.
but some of the Yarn, called hence Grogram Yarn, (and not Camels Hair, some
vainly conceive) being lately brought into England, ingenious Workmen were here
found that invented therewith Tames, and many other Stuffs, to the great decay
and prejudice of the Grogram Trade of this Country, and of such as lived
thereupon in Angora; whereupon the Inhabitants in Anno 1630. petitioned the
Duana of Constantinople, that this Yarn might not be Exported out of the
Kingdom until it were put into work, and made into Stuffs, which was granted
them; but the Farmers of the Grand Signior's Customs at Constantinople
conniving thereat, and suffering the same to be Exported, paying double Custom,
which is 6 per Cent. and so it continued till 1634. at what time a second
stricter Prohibition with Consiscation was proclaimed and nearly looked into,
so that what quantity is now found to come thence, is by indirect means, and
not otherwise, if possible thereby again to give life to the Grogram Trade, and
the makers thereof in these parts.

There was of late years an offer made by the Venetian Ambassadors resident at
Constantinople, to Export 500 of the Goats that bear this Wool to Venetia,
thereby in time to bring this Commodity in request in their Signiory; but the
Turks perceiving their drift, denied the same, lest his Subjects and Country
might futurely be deprived of the benefit of so excellent a Commodity: had our
Ancestors foreseen the like discommodity that would have ensued by the
Exportation of English Sheep into Spain, it may be conceived it would never
have been in those days permitted.

Weights and Measures of Angora.
The Weights and Measures of this place are the same as are found in
Constantinople, the Gregram Pico having from this Town its original, and is the
proper Pico of this Country and City; whereby all Grograms, Mohairs, and
Chamblets, are measured and sold throughout all Turkey, and is in Grograms
found in England to answer proportionally as 24 Pico, being a piece of ordinary
Grograms to make 16 Yards London: for their Moneys and Accounts, they are found
to be the same as in Constantinople; vide there.

CHAP. LI. Of Cappadocia, and the Cities thereof.
Cappadocia.
ON the East Side of Galatia is Cappadocia, the chief City is Erzyrum, situate
on the Confines of Armenia, being held the rendezvous for the Turkish Militia
in their expeditions to Persia, and the place where when the War is ended they
are dismissed; here is the entrance into the Dominions of the Grand Signior,
and though Wars happen between the Turks and the Persians, yet these barbarous
Nations are so careful of Merchants, and the preservation of Commerce, that the
Merchants of both Countries, though otherwise the Provinces be at variance, may
here enter and transport their Merchandise into one another Country, paying a
small Custom as acknowledgment to the Prince, carrying a Tescary or Certificate
thereof with them to such other places whither they go, which in it self
protects their Goods and Persons from danger or Confiscation, or other duties;
so that it is an ordinary thing (...) see Persia Merchants with great Estates
in Aloppo and Constantinople in the hottest of the Wars between their two
Sovereigns, to the shame, and contrary to the custom of many Christian Princes,
who first prey upon the Merchants that inhabit their Countries, making a War
upon their Estates and Persons, before they meddle with, or happily hardly
publish their intentions to their Sovereigns; the ancient Tibarenean Custom
being now out of use in Christendom, who are said never to wage War against any
Enemy, but they faithfully certified them beforehand both of the time and place
of their intent and Fight; and as it may be conjectured, gave first a fair
dismission to the Subjects of their Enemies, and consequently to their
Merchants.

Amasia. Trabesond.
Here is also Amasia; where the Grand Signior's eldest Son is seen to abide
after his Circumcision, till the time of his Father's Death, and the beginning
of his Reign: And Trabesond, formerly an Imperial Seat, now a small City seated
upon the Euxine or Black Sea, having a reasonable good Harbor, and where the
Grand Signior maintains certain Galleys to scour these Coasts: Here is found
a great Trade in Summer for Fish, which to me did much resemble the English
Herring, which they take upon this Coast in good quantity, and is by the
Inhabitants, who are for the most part Armenians, pickled and salted, and so
preserved and sent into Cassa, Constantinople, and other parts. Mineral Salt.
Their manner of salting, and the matter wherewith is likewise as strange; for
the Country affording not our common known Bay Salt, there is a Mountain within
some leagues of this City, out of which with ease they dig a Stone, to the eye
appearing black and no way transparent; but beaten in Marble Mortars with them
in use, it becomes very white, and is found to preserve all Meats as well as
Salt de Bay, and for Merchandise is carried thence to Constantinople and other
Countries, and sold in the Stone unbeaten by the Rotolo, Oache, or Quintar.

In this Country did inhabit the Amazonian Viragoes; Penthesilia, one of their
Queens, came with Troops to assist the Trojans; and long after, Thalestris,
another of the Queens, came to Hircania to be Alexander's Bedfellow, having
now no memory extant of this Feminine Government.

CHAP. LII. Of Liconia, Pisidia, and Armenia minor.
Liconia, Pisidia. Armenia.
IN Liconia is found the City of Iconium, the Regal Seat of the Aladine Sultans,
the ruin of Lystra where Timothy was born, and Paul and Barnabas healing a
Cripple, were adored for Mercury and Jupiter.

In Pisidia was the famous Battle fought between Cyrus and Artaxerxes, where
Cyrus lost his life and the victory; and out of which Xenophon made that
notable retreat with his Grecians, in despite of 20000 which followed him at
the heels.

Ararat. Commodities of Anatolia.
In Armenia minor is seated the Mountain Ararat, on whose top the Ark is said to
rest after the Deluge. And thus much shall serve to have said of Natolia, which
in general for Merchandise does yield these Commodities; Galls, Carpets, Oils,
Wines, Cottons, Woolls and Cotton Yarn, Grograms, Grogram Yarn, Sheeps Wool,
Hides raw and salted, and dry Cordovants, Aniseeds, Goats Wool, Soap, Silk,
Cummin-seed, Muscadines, Cute, Raisins, etc. And thus much in general of
Natolia, which ere I leave, a word of Trabesond.

CHAP. LIII. Of Trabesond and the Trade thereof.
Trabesond.
TRabesond, formerly the Seat of an Empire, now a Province of the Grand
Seignior, is inhabited by Jews and Greeks, but principally by Armenians; the
Coins are those common with all Turkey.

Weights in Trabesond.
There is found in Trabesond in use two weights, one for Spices, Drugs, and fine
Commodities, which is the same with the weight of Genoa, which they here
brought into use in their great Trade into this City from Gallata Caffa, and
other places subject in those days to their Government; the other for gross
Commodities is the Rotolo, 100 whereof is the Cantar, agreeing with that common
Rotolo of Constantinople, vide there more.

Measures of Trabesond.
Their common measure is a Pico agreeing near with Constantinople, making about
26 Inche^ English.

CHAP. LIVE. Of Syria in general, and the parts thereof.
Syria.
SYria has on the East Euphrates, on the West the Mediterranean Sea; on the
South Palestine, on the North Cilicia, watered with Euphrates, which anciently
passed through the Garden of Eden; Euphrates.
and having its source in the Mountains of Armenia, running at this day by
Babylon or Bagdet, disgorgeth it self into the Persian Sea, and Orontis which
arising on Mount Libanus saluteth the walls of Silutia, and disembogueth in the
Mediterranean, and is divided into three Provinces, viz. Phoenicia, Coelosyria,
and Syrophoenicia; of which in order.

CHAP. LV. Of Phoenicia, and the Cities thereof.
Phoenicia, and the Cities thereof.
IN Phoenicia is seated the City of Ptolemais, or Acris, or Acon, famous for so
many Christian Armies that have in times past besieged it; and which likewise
added same to our Kings, Richard Coeur de Lion, and Edward the first; in which
place the Venetians and French have some Trade for Wax, Hides, Corn, Silk, and
therefore following the Observations made by them in matters of weights and
measures, I find the same to be thus accorded.

CHAP. LVI. Of Acria, commonly S. John de Acria, and the Trade thereof.
Acria and the trade thereof.
ACria, being seated in the bottom of the Mediterranean, and now struggling with
its own ruins, has yet by reason of its small but commodious Harbor some
Trade maintained by the French, but principally by Venetians; who in small
Vessels coast these parts, and pick up some of the Astan Commodities out of
these Villages and Towns bordering upon the Seacoasts, as both in this place,
Tripoly, Sidon, etc. the agreements of their weights and measures observed by
Venetians, I will insert.

Weights of Acria.
The Cantar of Acria, commonly called by them the Cantar Tambaran, makes sotile
in Venice 900 l. which produces in England 603 l.

Measures of Acria.
Rotolo 1 makes sotile pounds in Venetia 9 l.

Braces 100 of Cloth of Gold and Silk is in Acria 108 pic. Braces 100, of Cloth
Woollen of Venetia is in Acria 115 Picos.

Coins.
Their Coins are generally the same with all the Dominions of the Grand Signior,
which I shall declare coming to treat of Constantinople the Metropolis of that
Empire, and of Aleppo the principal City of Trade in this Country, therefore
shall not need here to insist further thereupon.

CHAP. LVII. Of Sidon and the Trade thereof.
Sidon.
SIDON is now limited within a narrower compass than its ancient bounds,
commanded by the Emir or Prince of the Drusians, the offspring of Christians,
but now hardly professing any Religion at all; it is seated upon the same shore
as Acria, and where the French and Venetians maintain Consuls, and is better
known to us than Acria: and where by their means al Western Christians find a
reasonable favorable protection in their Trade.

Commodities of Sidon.
The Country does principally abound in Corn, which some years is hence
distributed and dispersed to Marselia, Ligorn, and other parts of Christendom,
with Galls, Wool, Wax, etc.

Coins common in Sidon.
Their Coins are principally Rials of 8/^ Spanish and Chickquins in Gold, the
Rial accounted for 72 Aspers, and the Chickquin 108 Aspers, but the valuation
alters according to the occasions of the state and course of traffic,
therefore no great confidence can be given thereunto.

Weights of Sidon.
Their weights is the Dram and Rotolo current in these parts of Asia, 650 drams,
making the Rotol. 4 l. 5 ounces English. Rotolos 100 is their Cantar qu. 433 l.
English. Rotolo 1 is accounted to make there also 12 ounces. Rotolos 110 makes
Rotolos 100 common in Aleppo. Rotolos 115 makes Rotolos 100 common in Cyprus.


Measures of Sidon.
Their measures are these --

In this Tract lies the place where Tire was seated, now devoured by the
incroaching Sea, of whose ancient Traffic see the 66 Chapter; and also
Sarepta, where Elias who had formerly lived in Mount Carmel nigh adjoining, was
sustained in a Famine by a Widow, whose Son he raised from death: other matters
of consequence have not fallen out within my reading in this circuit, therefore
hence I will travel to the next Province.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Syrophoenicia and the Cities thereof.
Syrophoenicia.
SYrophoenicia has been better beautified with Cities than now it is, the Wars
of Princes and Time has given a period to many, of which Antioch was famous
both for being the Metropolis of all Syria, and the place where the Disciples
of our Savior were first called Christians, now nothing but the ruins to be
seen upon those large Plains, which does lead from Alexandretta to Aleppo; it
comprehends the famous City of Baruti, which deserves a regard for the
present Trade thereof.

CHAP. LIX. Gf Baruti and the Trade thereof.
Baruti and the trade thereof.
BAruti formerly called Julia Felix, is a famous Mart Town, yet much inferior
in Trade to what it has formerly been; near this Town is that noted Valley
where it is said Saint George by killing of a Dragon delivered the Kings
Daughter; in memorial whereof there was a Castle and Oratory here built and
consecrated to him, and whose name it bore, whose ruins do yet appear, if the
Inhabitants may be believed; it is now the common passage for all those
Caravans that travel from Aleppo, Damasco and Jerusalem to Cairo and Mecca, and
thereby made a place of great concourse of Merchants. Coins current in Baruti.
It is subject to the Grand Seignior, and therefore his Coins in Silver and Gold
are the current Coins thereof, partaking of those that are current in the
neighboring Countries, as all bordering Towns are found to be The English have
no Scale or residence here; but the Venetians who pry with more Industry into
these parts, find here a profitable Traffic, therefore in the weights and
Measures thereof we must sail by their Observations.

Weights of Baruti.
The Cantar containing 100 Rotolos of Baruti makes sotile Venetia weight 750 l.
and of gross 475 l. and of English 502 l. The Rotolo makes Venetia sutle 7 l.
gross 4 l. 9 ounces, English 5 l. the Cantar or 100 Rotolos of Baruti is in
Aleppo 96 Rotolos, the common weight and 90 Rotolos of Silk weight.

Measures of Baruti.
Measures of Baruti is the Pico, 100 whereof makes in Venetia 86 Braces, and
the 100 Braces of Venetia of Woollen Cloth makes in Baruti 112 or 113 Picos,
which is in England (^) Yards.

Amano and the trade thereof.
The Town of Amano lies also in this Syrophoenicia, and is found to be a Town
of great Trade and consluence of Merchants of Arabia, Persia, and Turkey; but
because I find the weights and measures thereof to accord with the same that
are found in use in Aleppo, and their Coins the common current Coins of Turkey,
I shall refer the Reader to Aleppo, and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LX. Of Coelosyria and the Cities thereof
Coelosyria.
CElosyria does not now afford many Cities of note, Hierapolis was here famous
for the Temple and Worship of the Syrian goddess; but now Damascus is tho
principal Scale and City of this Province, which requires for the Trade thereof
a longer discourse, than my Information can guide me; however, what I have
gathered I shall here willingly insert.

CHAP. LXI. Of Damascus and the Trade thereof.
Damascus and trade thereof.
DAmascus is so pleasantly seated, that the Impostor Mahomet would never enter
into it, lest forgetting by the ravishing pleasures of the place, the business
(as he said) he was sent for, and make this his Paradise; it is seated in a
very fruitful soil; bearing Grapes all the year long, and girt with curious and
odoriferous Gardens; being also famous first, for her founders, who were
Abraham's servants; Secondly, for the Temple of Zacharias; and Thirdly, for the
conversion of Paul, who here first preached, and escaping the traps of his
Enemies, was let down the walls of the house by a basket. And in matter of
Trade it still continues a place where all Commodities of Turkey, Arabia, and
India are brought into, where Caravans of the Nations do pass through, going
from Constantinople, Bagdet, and Aleppo, to Egypt, Mecha or India, and so
again back.

Coins of Damasco.
The current Coins of this City are those common with all Syria, Aleppo being
the principal, where you may see further for the Moneys of the place.

Weights of Damasco
The Damasco Cantar is in Venetia sotile 600 l. gross 380 l. which is Averdupois
402 l. yet observed to make in some Commodities 416 l. English, so that by the
said Venetian Calculation which I sail by (because of their residence there,
and their great traffic thither) 100 l. gross Venetia, should render 26
Rotolos, and the 100 l. sotile 16 Rotolos. Damascino Rotolo 1. makes Venice
sotile 6 l. gross 3 l. 9 ounces; Peso 100 Damascino are Metallichi 66 ^/^
sotile Venice 1 l. Metallichi 100 Damas. gives in Venetia silver weight 15
ounces; Killats 100 Damasco gives silver weight in Venetia 90 Kill. Killats 100
Damasco gives by Spice weight in Venetia 106 Kill. Cantar. 7 of, Damasco gives
in Rhodes Cantar one, Cantar one Damasco gives in Genoa 550 l.

Measures of Damasco.
Measures of length is the Pico, which is accounted about 27 inches, agreeing
thus with other places. Pico 100 Damasco makes Venetia measure of Cloth 87
brac. makes in Genoa 24 Canes of 10 Palms every Cane. makes in Florence 24
Canes.
Braces 100 of Cloth in Venetia gives here 112 Pico. Braces 100 of Silk Venetia
gives here 106 Pico.
Pico one Damasco makes scarcely Brace of Venetia.


Commodities of Damasco.
The Commodities coming hence are Cottons of Syria, Saffron, Steel, excellent
blades for Swords and Knives, wrought and Raw Silks, of this growth of this
Country, Oil, Honey, Wax, Balsam, Almonds, Dates, some Drugs, Rice, which here
are noted plentiful, besides the commodities here found and higher brought from
other Regions, which I need not here nominate.

Tares upon all Commodities in Damasco.
There is used in Damascus in the buying and selling of diverse Commoditiies a
certain Tare and Allowance to be given over and above the weight, from the
buyer to the seller, most especially practiced in bargains of Spices and Drugs,
which as I find them observed by others, I think good here to show; as in
Ginger 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Maces 5 per cent. 105 Cinnamon 5 per cent. 105
Cloves 5 per cent. 105 Indico 5 per cent. 105 Myrrh 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Sugar
Candied 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Wormseed 5 per cent. 105 Rot. Zedoaria 5 per cent.
105 Spikenard 5 per cent. 105 Gallingal 5 per cent. 105 Nutmegs 5 per cent. 105
Lack 5 per cent. 105 Long Pepper 5 per cent. 105 Cocheneel 5 per cent. 105
Green Ginger 0 per cent. 000 Sugars 0 per cent. 000 Mirabolans 5 per cent. 105
Aloes Epatica 5 per cent. 105 Cardamum 5 per cent. 105 Turbit 5 per cent. 105
Silk 10 per cent. 110 Ambergreece 10 per cent. 110 And many others which the
Merchants must learn.

All these Commodities are found to have these certain Tares, besides the Bags,
Canisters, Boxes, Churls and the like, by the Custom and practice of the place,
and forasmuch as this City is an Inland Town, wherein a Bashaw is found to
command for the Grand Seignior; there is here a Custom imposed upon all Goods
entering and issuing to Foreiners and Merchant Strangers 3 1/^ per cent, which
is paid in Money and not in the same Species, according to the Customs of
Alexandria before specified.

Agreement of the weight of Damasco with other places of Trade.
And to conclude the Trade of this place, I will insert an old observation
fallen into my hands, made upon the weights here, and the agreement thereof
with other Countries, the certainty whereof I will refer to trial.

The Cantar of Damasco making, as I said before, 100 Rotolos, makes in The
Cantar of Damasco by observation has made in Alexandria 428 Rot. forfori.
Constantinople 341 Rot. Venice sotile 600 l. Ditto gross. 380 l. Ancona 517 l.
Florenca 525 l. Rhagusa 500 l. Naples 566 l. Sicilia 576 l. Idem 203 Rot.
Millan 552 l. Genoa 570 l. Valentia 400 l. The agreement of the Rotolo of
Damasco with some other places.
The Rot. Damasco is in Valentia 4 l. 11 ounces, and1 l. Val. is 120 drams.
Genoa 5 l. 8 ounces, 1 l. Genoa is 105 drams here. Millan 5 l. 6 ounces, 1 l.
Millan is 208 drams. Sicilia 5 l. 9 ounces. Naples 5 l. 6 ounces, and 1 l.
Naples. Rhagusa 5 l. and 1 l. Rhagusa. Florence 5 l. 3 ounces and 1 l. Florenco
is 112 dr.

The truth of these Observations I must leave to the trial of the more expert,
and give you a touch of what I have gathered in the matter of agreement of
measures of length. The agreement of the Pico of Damasco with some other places.
100 Braces of Cloth in Florence have made in Damasco 99 Picos. 100 Picos of
Damasco have made in Naples 28 Canes. 100 Picos of Damasco have made in Sicilia
28 Canes. 100 Picos of Damasco have made in Millan 87 Braces. 100 Canes of Silk
in Genoa have made in Damasco 37 Picos. 100 Picos of Damasco have made in
Venice of Cloth 87 Braces. 100 Braces of Venice Silk have made in Damasco 106
Picos.


And forasmuch as the English, French, and Dutch are not found at present to
have any Trade hither, and that the Venetians are the only Western Christian
Merchants that here reside, and have here a Consul for the protection of them
and their Trade and Goods, it will fit me best to borrow some of their
Observations, and observe the Trade they now drive to this City.

The Trade of the Venetians to Damasco.
The Commodities which the Venetians then carry hither for Merchandise are
woollen Cloths, Honey, Almonds, Tin, Quicksilver, Lead, Latten Wire, Iron Wire,
Latten Plates, Brimstone, Allons, Mastich, Coral, Saffron, Flemish Beads and
Bracelets, Crystal Looking-Glasses, Linen of diverse sorts, coarse Canvas,
some few Furs, Sugars of Cyprus, writing Paper, Velvets, T^ffata's Damasks, and
Sattins, some Noremberg Wares, Coral Beads, and many such European Commodities.

The Commodities that they find here to make returns of, are these. Raw Silk of
this Countries growth, and of Persia, Ardasse and Lege, Belledine, Trippoli,
Bodovin, Baias and others; also some Spices and some Drugs, as Ginger, Cloves,
Maces, Sandal, Incense, Myrrh, Nurmegs, Indico, Gallingal, Long Pepper,
Mirabolans, Ammoniac, Aloes, Epatica, Cardamon, Turbit, Sanguis Draconis, Sugar
Candied, Wormseed, Zedoaria, Spikenard, Cinnamon, Tutia, Cottons, and some
Cotton Yarn, Benjamin, Assa foetida, Manna, Camphire, Cassia, and the like, of
which some are found to be sold by the Cantar of Damasco, and some by the
Rotolo: also observe,

That Musk, Ambergreece and Pearl is sold by the Metalico, which is 1 dram, and
Sivet is sold by a weight called Ongia, being 10 drams, which makes 6 2/^
Metalicos, which makes sotile in Venice 1 ounce 1 sacc. and 5 Carots.

The Rotolo is accounted here 600 drams, but Lege and Ardasse is here sold by a
Rotolo of 680 drams, which is 7 l. sotile Venice; but Damasco Silk, and all
Silk of the growth of the Country is sold by the Rotolo of the place of 600
drams.

These notes the Venetians have made upon their weights and measures.

1 Cantar Damasco is sotile Venice 600 l. and gross 380 l.

1 Rot. Damasco is sotile 6 l. and gross 3 l. 9 ounces.

100 Drams Damasco is 66 Mitigal sotile Venice 1 l. and of the silver weight in
Venice 10 ounces and 5 Carots.

100 Drams makes silver weight in Venice 12 Marc. 6 ounces and.

100 Mitigal Damasco is in Venice 15 ounces and 5 Carats.

100 Carats Damasco is silver weight in Venice 91 Carats.

1 dram Damascin is 24 Carats Damascin, the which 24 Carats is one Mitiga.
Damascino.

Again, e contra.

The 1000 l. gross in Venice makes in Damasco 293 Rotolos.

The 1000 l. sotile in Venice is in Damasco 166 Rotolos.

So that the 100 l. gross is 26 Rotol. Damascine, and the 100 l. sotile is 16
Rotol Damascine.

Measures of Damasco.
As for the Measure of Damasco there is but one here in use, and is common to
all Commodities, both Linen, Silk, and Woollen, which is the Pico, which by
the calculation of the Venetians I find thus, 100 Pico in Damasco is in Venice
Cloth measure Braces 87, thereby estimating the said Pico to be almost of Brace
Venetian.

100 Braces of Cloth in Venice makes in Damasco 111 in 112 Pico.

100 Braces of Silk in Venice makes in Damasco 106 in 107 Pico; and how they
agree with the measures of England and other places, I have showed before;
therefore leaving Damasco Trade to the judgment of better experienced, and
finding the Caravan of Aleppo ready to depart, I am called thither, where by
the way observing some relics not here worth mentioning, and where arriving
you shall find in the next leaf what I have there observed in the matter and
manner of the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Aleppo, and the Trade thereof.
Aleppo and the trade thereof.
ALeppo, called in the 2 Samuel 8, 3. Aram sobab, is now the most Famous City in
all the Grand Seignior's Dominions, for the wonderful confluence of Merchants
of all Nations and Countries, that come hither to traffic: It is pleasantly
seated upon a Plain, in the midst whereof does rise a small Hill, whereupon is
built a strong Castle that commands the whole City: It has in it many Canes
for Lodgings and Warehouses for Merchants, which resembling small Forts being
shut with Iron Gates, defend the Merchants, and their Goods from all wrong or
theft; their Streets are shut with Doors every night at each end, in the manner
of Cairo, and thereby every Street becomes a defensible place by it self.

There are of all Eastern, Southern, and Western Nations Merchants found
therein, many of which enjoy several immunities and privileges, granted them
by their particular capitulations from the Grand Seignior who is Lord hereof:
the English, Venetians, and French, are found to be great Traders hither, each
bringing hither their native Commodities, and here exchange them for Arabian,
Persian and Indian Drugs, Gems, Spices, and such like Commodities, amongst
which the English are most eminent, by reason that they not only furnish this
City with the native Commodities of England; but also with such as come to them
from India and Persia by Sea, and which in former days were from hence brought
into England.

Scanderone.
This City is seated about 100 English miles from the Sea, Alexandretta or
Scanderone being the Sea Port and Road whereto all shipping, either out of the
Ocean or Mediterranean come to lade and unlade their Goods, and are hence
transported by Camels to Aleppo; which Scale was formerly in Tripoli, which is
a more commodious Port, and nearer in distance; but the way being found more
craggy, rugged, and dangerous, by reason of the insolency of the Arabians, it
was by all Christians disused, and by consent the same was here settled.

Commodities of Aleppo.
The Commodities which are found in this City, are commonly all the Commodities
of Asis and Africa, as Spices of all sorts, Drugs of all sorts, Silks of
Persia, Gems of India, Spices of Arabia, and the common Commodities proper to
the Country, as Grograms, Grogram Yarn, Galls, Cottons, and Cotton Yarn, Silk
of Tripoli, Bocai, Bedovine, add Damasco, and other sorts in great quantity.

Weights of Aleppo.
The Weights used here in particular, is the Dram and Rotolo, as in most parts
of Turkey; but the Rotolo is found in many Commodities to differ in Drams,
according to the custom in weight of the place and commodity.

The Cantar is also found to disagree in Rotolo, according to the common and
usual weight of commodities, which I will declare, thereby to show first how
they accord with England, and other places of Trade, and then how they agree
amongst themselves.

And first Silk of Persia is sold by the Wesno, which is 30 Nether, and 1
Nether is 120 Grains, and every Grain is 30 Drams, by which account the Wesno
amounts to 3600 Drams, and 7 Wesno's make a Cole.

But the common weight better known to us in the Rotolo, which of Ardesse and
Lege is 680 Drams, of Belledine 700 Drams, and so changing in other sorts of
Commodities, which the Factor is to take notice of.

The Rotolo is also divided into 12 ounces, and ounce 1 is drams 60, drams 3600
is accounted a Wesno.

Drams 2400 is a Botman, which is the weight by which Silk is sold in
Constantinople, and makes there 6 Oaks.

Cantar 2 is Rotolos, 100, making near 481 l. Averdupois.

Rotolo 1 is Averdupois 4, 13 ounces accounted and found sometimes 4 l. 14
ounces; so that 112 l. Averdupois, is found hereby to be Rotolos 22, ounces 8.

Rotolos 100 common weight, is 494 l. 8 ounces Averdupois, which is above 4 l.
15 ounces, and so is sometimes found to produce in some Commodities.

A Wesno of Silver is 100 Drams, which is 68 Lire of Venetia, and it is found
that 11 full weight, makes a Wesno of Silver here.

Silver, Gold, Gems, etc. are sold by the Mitigal, which is 1 drams, which is
Carot 24 English, or Grains 96.

Wesnos redvced into Rotolos in Aleppo.
Wesno's of Aleppo are in buying of Silk thus reduced into Rotolo's and drams
following. Wesno 1 is Rotolos 5 Drams 200 5 26 320 10 52 630 20 105 600 30 158
560 40 211 520 50 264 480 60 317 440 70 370 400 80 423 360 90 476 320 100 529
280 Which may be enlarged to a greater number, having purposely here inserted
the same for the benefit of the ignorant and Learner.

Aleppo with Venetia.
Now forasmuch as the Venetians have been accounted the first Christian Traders
into this City, let us observe the agreements in weights of this place and
Venetia,

Cantar 1 makes sotile Venetia 720 l. gross, 456 l. which this way be reduced
to English weight is 482 l. Averdupois.

Rotol. 1 Venetia sotile l. 7, ounces 2, sache 2 gross l. 4. ounce 6.

Gross Venetia 1000 l. is in Aleppo, Cantar. 2. Rot. 19.

Sotile Venetia 1000 l. is in Aleppo, Cantar. 1, Rot. 40; so that 100 l. gross,
is Rotol. 21, and 100 l. sotile is 14 Rotolos.

Cantar 1 has produced in Florence 660 l.

Aleppo notes of weighing
Now it will be necessary to note some Observations upon Commodities weighed in
Aleppo, with the tares and allowances by custom of the place given to the buyer.

Indico.
All sorts of Indico is sold by the Churl, which is 27 Rotolo of 720 drams,
Churls 2, makes a Chest, allowing in account 327 l. to a Churl of neat Indico,
and there is allowed to the buyer 3 ounces per Churl for dust, and 3 ounces for
single shirt, and 6 ounces for double.

Silks.
Silk of all sorts has allowance for heads of skeins if course, 100 in 130
drams per Wesno; if fine 60 drams notwithstanding.

Musk.
Musk being bought by the Mitigal out of the Cod gives no allowance, in the Cod
20 per cent.

Drugs.
Drugs of the growth of this Country are sold by the Rotolo of 720 drams, and
pays no Custom; but of the growth of foreign parts, by Rotolo 600 drams, and
pays great Custom; as are Camphire, Aloes Socotrina.

Silk of Damasco.
Silk also of these Countries, as Damascus, Tripoli, Bacas, gives no allowance
in tare being clean Silk.

Oppion is sold drams 110 for 100 drams, the 10 drams being allowed for tare in
that commodity.

Spices.
Spices of all sorts are sold by the Rotolo of 720 drams, and if the same be
ungarbled, the allowance is 132 for 100; but if garbled, 110 for 100
notwithstanding, as in Cloves, Maces, Cinnamon, etc.

Galls.
Galls have allowance for dust 2 per cent. and briefly observe these
commodities give these tares to the Buyer, Aloes, Epaticum with the skin, and
Aloes Socotrina, Assa foetida with the skin, Bdellium gives 20 in 120: Spices.
Cinnamon, Cubebs, Cassia fistula, Oculus Indi, Galbanum, Maces, Oppion,
Rhubarb, Manna, etc. 10 per 100; Camphora, Lignum Aloes, Nutmegs, etc. 5 per
105.

Note, that forasmuch as no English Merchants are permitted to trade in Turkey
but the Levant Company, and that this Company are incorporated by special
Privileges in London, by the favor of his Majesty of England, the orders of
that Company by the Traders hither to other the Ports of Turkey is to be
observed, according to their established Acts and Ordinances, whereto I refer
the Enquirer for further Information.

Coins of Aleppo.
The Coins current of Aleppo are the same, common with all the Dominions of the
great Turk; The passable here is

The Soltany is medines 80, aspers 120, sh. 16.

The Lion dollar, med. 50, asp. 80, sh. 10.

The Ducat, med. 40, asp. 60, sh. 7.

Rials of ^/^ have passed 6 per cent. better than Lion dollars, and (...) has
passed for a Soltany; but this rule holds not in these days, for the Wars and
Troubles of that Country have altered these Observations.

Shes. 1 is medin. 5, or aspers 8, and the med. 8 shes.

But these rules following are more certain and found true.

8/^ is found to weigh 42 grains, the single Rot. 26 gr.

The Crown or single Pistolet found to weigh 53 grains.

The Soltany, Hungar, or Chequin to weigh 54 grains.

And the Mitigal is found to weigh 72 grains.

Accounts in Aleppo.
Their Accounts are kept as by a common consent throughout the principal places
of Traffic in Turkey in dollars and aspers; the dollar containing 80 asp. at
what rate otherwise soever the same do pass amongst all Christians that are
Merchants, and here resident; yet it is found that the account of the Country
(as proper to the Revenues and Treasure of the Grand Seignior, and practiced by
the Receivers of his Estate) is kept in aspers, wherein they account to
thousands, ten thousand and hundred thousand aspers, and so by a cargo or load
of aspers which they account to be 100 thousand aspers, and at 80 aspers per
dollar amount to 1250 dollars, or 312 l. 10 shillings Sterling.

Measures in Aleppo.
There is found in Aleppo but one measure or Pico, which is 27 inches English,
or of a yard, and is the same for Linen and Woollen, and does agree with the
Venetian brace, used there (...) Cloth of Gold and Silk; and the 100 braces of
Cloth in Venetia is found to render here 106 Picos.

There is also a Pico found for Grograms, Chamblets, and Mohairs, but this is
the proper Pico^ Angora the Staple of that commodity, and is found to be but 2
Inches English incirca less, as I have more at large noted in that place.

Customs in Aleppo.
As for the Customs of this place, they are as in Constantinople, for the
English Nation 3 per cent. with some innovations crept in by the corruption of
customers and Foreigners which here are found to be Jews; and which in this
point are loath to derogate from the common manner of almost all customers and
Foreigners in the world: but the last agreement between Mustap^ Aga the
Customer and the Consul of the English was thus, Kersies rated at Medines 14^
per piece, at 3 per cent. Broad-cloths rated at Medines 120 per cloth at 3 per
cent. Cony-skins the bundle 50 skins at 14 dol. Tin rated at 55 Rot. per chest.
and 32 dol. is 157 dol. Indico at Medines 587 per chest. Galls at 12 dol. per
Rot. Silk at Medines 6 per Rot. Grograms the Ball at 33 dol. Fillades per
quintal at 33 dol. Cotton-wooll per cent. -- 33 dol. Quilts at 50 dol. per
Ball. Botanos at Ball 80 dol. Cordovants at Ball 8 dol. Turmerick at Medines 80
per Rot. Gumdragant at Ball 60 dol.


Note, that all Spice, as Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace and Cinnamon, pays 21 per cent.
but to be rated at 14 per cent. less than the same cost, as being commodities
of India properly. Nutmegs valued at Medines -- 60 Cloves per Rot. at -- 160
Maces per Rot. at -- 220 Cinnamon per Rotolo at -- 30


Pepper owes but half Custom, and therefore rate it at ^/^ less than it cost,
and then pay 21 per cent.

The general Trade of Aleppo surveyed in its particular colors. The English
the prime traders to Aleppo
Before I leave this place, it will be needful that I do more particularly
survey the body of the great Trade which is seen exercised here at this day;
and first for the Trade of the English as the most eminent, it is found that
this place does yearly vend about 6000 English Cloths of several sorts, about
600 Quintals of Tin, some Furs, Kersies, and other English Commodities, besides
100 thousand Rials of (...) brought yearly hither by them in ready moneys to be
invested in raw Silk, Drugs, and other commodities of this Country: they have
here to this end a Consul, who is entitled of Syria and Cyprus, who has here
the pre-eminence of all other Christian Consuls resident; and in returns of
this estate, carry hence great quantity of raw Persia Silk termed and known to
us by the name of Ardasse and Lege, and also Bedovin, Castravan, Beledin,
Baias, and other sort of the growth of this Country; also they carry hence
great quantities of Galls of Tocat, some Drugs of Arabia, great quantity of
Grogram Yarn and Grograms, Cottons and Cotton Yarn, and other commodities of
this place; which investments were formerly in a large nature in Drugs, Spices
and Gems, with which now the English furnish themselves at the first hand from
India, etc. and though otherwise thus their ^eturns are thereby shortened, yet
having a greater part of their returns in these sorts of Silks abovesaid, it
has herein found a fair enlargement for the abatement made in Spices.
Scanderone.
The scale of this City is Alexandretta, as I noted before, commonly Scanderone,
whereto all Ships come that have business here; and here likewise the English
have a Factory entitled a Vice-Consul, for the effecting and preservation of
their affairs here, and for the landing or lading of all Goods coming in or
going out from this City; and where also to the same end the Venetians and
French have likewise their particular Vice-Consuls to manage the public Trade
of their several Nations.

The Venatians the second.
The Venetians I account the next Merchants of consequence here resident, who
bring hither great quantity of Cloths Venice-making, and other of several
sorts, some German Commodities, as Latten Plates, Wire, shaven Latten, Steel,
Iron, Silks wrought, as Sattins, Damasks, Velvets, Taffeta's, Paper, and some
Rials of Eight, and Venetian Chiqueens in Gold, with Crystal Looking-Glasses,
Quicksilver and other Commodities. And hence in return thereof Export Silks,
raw of all sorts, Cotton Wool and Cotton Yarn, Grograms, M^bairs, Chamblets,
sundry sorts of Drugs, Spices, Gems, and Galls, Indico, and other such.

The French the third.
The French are the next of note that Trade hither, having to that end also a
Consul in Aleppo, and Vice-Consul in Alexandretta, and who carry hither some
few Cloths of Languedoc, and of Rials of Plate a great quantity, which every
small Bark is found to bring hither from Marselia the only French Port
hither-trading; in return whereof they used some years past to carry hence
abundance of raw Silk of all sorts, to the import sometimes of 600 in 800 Bales
upon a Vessel: but this their Trade by sundry losses occasioned is now decayed,
and their Ships are only laden with Galls, Cotton Woolls, Cotton Yarn,
Grograms, some Drugs, Spices, Callicoes, and such.

These are then the only three Christian Nations that have any Trade of moment
here, the Trade driven here by the Dutch not worthy consideration; besides
which this Town is found to be the great Magazine of all Persia, India and
Arabia Commodities; the Merchants whereof come hither in great Troops and
Caravans, with their Camels laden with the rich Wares of those several
Countries, and make their returns in the Commodities of Europe above named,
which they buy and barter with the English, French and Venetians, which here
have their residence as aforesaid. To conclude then the Trade of this place,
and to omit nothing that I have judged proper for the demonstration thereof, I
will insert the Observations made here by experience in the weights and
measures of this place, with the weights and measures of some other places of
Trade in the Levant.

The agreement of the Cantar of Aleppo with other places.
It is before noted, that in Aleppo there is but one Quintar accounted as the
common Cantar of the place, by which all Commodities are both bought and sold;
yet it is to be noted withal, that from this Quintar are many other Cantars
derived, varying according to the custom practiced in the weight of some
special Commodities, as I have before likewise noted: now this Cantar
consists of 100 Rotolo's; the common Rotolo here, which is also accounted 600
drams, though as I have there observed, several Commodities are weighed by a
several Rotolo, some consisting of 600, some 680, some 700, and some 720 drams:
therefore to explain this point, it has been observed, that the common Cantar
of Aleppo, containing 100 Rotolo's, and each Rotolo containing 600 drams, have
made in these Countries following: The 100 Rotolo of 680 drams is in Naples 633
l. 6 l. 8 ounces. Venetia sotile 720 l. 7 l. 2 ounces. 2 saob. Venetia gross
456 l. 4 l. 9 ounces. Florence 626 l. 6 l. 3 ounces. Genoa sotile 624 l. 6 l.
10 ounces. Sicilia 691 l. 6 l. 10 ounces. Millan 662 l. 6 l. 7 ounces.

The agreement of the 100 Pico's of Aleppo with other places.
I have noted the measure here in general for all Commodities to be the Pico in
Cloth, the 100 Pico's has been found thus to concord with other Countries. have
made in 100 Pico. Venice Cloth 94 braces. Venice Silk 100 braces. Florence 107
braces. Genoa 28 1/^ Canes. Millan 81 braces. Sicilia 31 Canes 1 Palm.

And thus much is what I conceive needful to have said concerning the Trade of
this famous City of Aleppo.

CHAP. LXIII. Of Tripoli, and the Trade thereof.
Tripoli in Syria, and the Trade thereof.
THE next and last of note in this Country is Tripoli, and to distinguish it
from that in Barbary commonly called (in Syria;) it has in former times been a
fair Town, and enjoyed a fair and common Harbor, and now ruined, and has (as
I said before) of late days been accounted for the Port and Scale of Aleppo,
where our Ships ever laded and unladed, but since their removal to Scanderone
it is of little Commerce: some Venetians are here found to reside, and who pick
out hence some small Trade with the Inhabitants of the Country, who afford
them Silk here growing, some Cotton Yarn and Cotton Wool, some Drugs, Corn,
and other Commodities.

Weights of Tripoli.
Their weight agrees with that of Damasco, which is Rotolo 100, and is a Cantar
Damascino, which is Venetia sotile 600 l. gross 380 l. which this way should be
English 402 l. but it has been found to yield 416 l Averdupois, drams 52 is an
ounce.

Ounces 12 is a Rotolo, which has been found to be 4 l. 2 ounces of
Averdupois, and ounces 8 is an Oak, which has been observed to make out 42 l.
Averdupois

Measures of Tripoli.
Their measure being a Pico is somewhat less than 27 inches English

Coins in Tripoli.
Their Money is generally the same with all Turkey, but thus accounted: Aspers 2
is a Medin. Aspers 40 is R. ^. Aspers 160 is a R. ^. Aspers 140 is a Dollar
Lion. Aspers 240 is a Sultany.


And thus much shall serve for Tripoli in Syria.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Palestina and the Cities thereof.
Palestine.
THE next Country in order is Palestina, having on the East Euphrates, on the
West the Mediterranean Sea; on the North Phaenicia; and on the South Arabia:
this Country has so often changed its name, that it has been called by six
several names; 1. Cana^ 2. The Land of Promise, 3. Israel, 4. Judaea, 5.
Palestina, and lastly, the Holy Land; and no^ divided into four parts, Galilea,
Judea, Idumea, and Samaria.

Galilea.
In Galilea is not found any City either of Note or Trading, though in times
past it was samous for many, as Bethsaida the Birthplace of Peter, Andrew, and
Philip; and Nazareth, second to none, where the Virgin Mary was saluted with
those joyful Tidings by an Angel: Jordan.
In this Country arises the two Spring-heads of Jordan, Jor, and Dan, of which
two that united River does derive its name.

Samaria.
Neither does Samaria now afford any City of Commerce, though many notable
places were there found in the flourishing days of the Israelites.

Idumea.
Idumea is also destitute of Trading, though it have the commodious Seaport
Joppa in (...) where our Western Pilgrims are seen to land and foot it to
Jerusalem; where also in time past, Jonah took shipping to fly to Tarsus, and
where Peter lying in the house of one Simon (...) Tanner, was in a Vision
taught the Conversion of the Gentiles: here also was Gasa, where the Persians
did hoard up in the greatness of their Empire the Customs and Tributes of their
Westen Dominions: take what I find in Trade here worthy observation.

CHAP. LXV. Of Gasa, and the Trade thereof.
Gasa, and tho Trade thereof.
GAsa has been more famous and beautiful than now it is, and renowned through
Europe both for a good Seaport and a good defense to the Western Christians in
their Wa^ here against the Saladin and Soldans of Egypt, and for a good Seat
of Trade; but all these good things were too good for those Nations that have
since been Masters thereof: for the goodness of the Port is spoiled by Rubbish,
the goodness of the Walls ruined by the Wars, and the goodness of the Scale in
Trade decayed by the neighboring Towns situated upon this Coast. It is seated
in the bottom of all the Mediterranean Sea, and sees yet a little Trade by the
benefit of a Creek capable to receive small Vessels, wherein the Venetians and
French pick out some Trade with their ready Money: It is a Station common to
those Caravans that by Land travel from Damasco, Aleppo, or Constantinople to
Cairo, and so back again; and these Caravans keeping their settled times of
progress and regress, are the cause of some Traffic here maintained: The
barrenness of the neighboring Deserts drive some hither to inhabit, which
makes the Town to be better peopled than otherwise it happily would be, thereby
enlarging the Commerce of the place. What Observations therein I have learned,
I must acknowledge due to the endeavors of a Venetian Merchant who much
frequented these parts, which is, Commodities of Gasa.
the Commodities of this City are those proper of the Country, and as the place
partaketh as a confine Town of Egypt and Judea, so it must be understood that
it does participate of the Commodities for Merchandise proper to both of them,
as Cottons, Cotton Yarn, Silks, some Drugs, some Spices, and the like.

Coins of Gasa.
The Coins here current I need not nominate, neither yet the manner of keeping
of Merchants Accounts here; for as seated in the Dominions of the Grand
Signior; the Coins and Accounts are the same common with Constantinople and
other parts of Turkey.

Weights of Gasa.
The Weight of Gasa is found to be only one, composed of the Rotolo, and 100
Rotolo's making their Cantar; which Cantar by the said Observations make in
Venetia 800 l. sotile, and the 1000 l. gross in Venetia has made here 191 Rot.
and the 1000 l. sotile Venetia has made here 125 Rotolo's: But because I find
a Countryman of our own to have made a differing Observation from this in the
point of Weight, which is, that the Cantar of Gasa will make in London 536 l.
Averdupois; I will leave the Experiment to that hand that shall have cause to
make a further trial.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Tyrus, and the ancient Trade thereof.
Of Tyrus, and the ancient Trade thereof.
TYrus lies also in this Tract, or to say more properly and more truly, did
once lie in this Tract, which for its great splendour in Traffic in times past
deserves here the commemoration thereof, which I will insert as I find it
noted by the Prophet Ezekiel in chap. 26. and 27. the greatness and amplitude
of which Trade now ruined and altogether desolate, serving for example to all
eminent Cities of Traffic, that the Merchants Inhabitants of those places
forget not God the giver of that plenty and abundance; nor yet abuse the same
to their own destruction, as is showed there it was to the Tyrians. Tyrus then
in the height of its greatness is recorded ^o have a very great Trade, and so
large that it served for a general Mart to all the World, and that all Nations
were furnished with their Merchandise and Commodities thence, which wonderfully
enriched the City, and increased the power of the Citizens; so that she is
there termed the strong and renowned City of the Sea, and which was mightily
inhabited by Seamen and Merchants, whose power and greatness in Navigation and
Trade is described by many particulars in that Chapter; as First, That her
Ship-Timber was of the Fir trees of Hermonhill, and the Masts thereof were of
Cedar, and brought from Lebanon, and the Oars thereof were of the Oaks of
Bashan; the Sails thereof were fine imbroidered Linen brought from Egypt, and
the coverings (or as Seamen term it their awnings) were of blew Silk and
Purple, brought from the Isles of Elishah: their Mariners were the Inhabitants
of Sidon and Arvad, and their Ship-Masters and Pilots were the wisest of the
City, and their Car^enters, Shipwrights and Calkers were the ancients of Gebal,
and the wise men thereof; and all the Ships of the Sea with their M^iners
negotiated in her in the Traffic of Merchandise. Now those that traded hither,
and were the Merchants thereof, and the Commodities for which they traded is
also recor^ed there, for the Merchants of Tarshish brought hither to the Fairs
all rich Commodities, as Si^ver, Iron, Tin, Lead: The Merchants of Graecia,
Italy and Cappadocia, fur^ished it with Slaves for labor, and with all manner
of vessels of Brass. The Merchants of Togarmah brought hither to her Marts
Horses and Mules for carriage. The Merchants of Dedan brought Unicorns Horns
and Elephants Teeth. The Merchants of Aram brought to her Fairs Emerald, Coral,
Pearls, fine Linen, and Purple imbroidered Works. The Merchants of Israel
brought Honey, Balm, Oil, and Wheat. The Merchants of Damasco brought Wines,
Woolls, and multitude of other rich Wares. The Merchants of Dan and Javan
brought Iron-work, Cassia, Calamus,. The Merchants of Arabia furnished it with
Cattle. Of Sheba and Ramah with Spices and precious Stones and Gold. And to
conclude, all the Nations of those Regions were accounted the Merchants that
did traffic thither with all the riches of their several Countries, and
furnished the same with the best of their Seamen, and the principal of their
Ships for Navigation: but the Holy Prophet in lieu of their then greatness,
prophesied their future misery; instead of their then riches, prophesied their
future poverty, which is there recorded to have fallen deservedly upon this
City, and their Inhabitants, for glorying in their own strength and opulence,
and for deriding of the holy City of Jerusalem, by rejoicing at the visitation
and fall which God had been pleased to afflict her withal; so that many years
past the said Prophecy has been in her fulfilled, as now we see it in these
days to be; for many Nations have risen up against it, and the waves of the Se^
have devoured it; the riches thereof are robbed, and the Merchandise thereof
are spoiled the Nations that have known the splendour of it, are risen up in
astonishment at it, the waten have covered it; and in fine, the same is brought
to nothing, and shall never hereafter have a being, which is fully accomplished
in every particular: Therefore let each flourishing City of Trade, and every
Merchant exercising traffic, take warning by their ruin and desolation, and by
their just and faithful dealing and upright conversation, endeavor to divert
the wrath of God from the Cities of their Habitations; and having the sin of
the Tyrians ever in remembrance, they may thereby hope to avoid their
Punishment.

Now as for the Country of Judea, I find not that it affords any eminent City
of Trade in these our days, though otherwise it be famous in Scripture in times
past, both for the City of Bethleem, where our Savior Christ was born, and
where it was found the Innocents did suffe for him ere he suffered for them;
Jericho.
and also for the City of Jericho, destroyed by the sounding of Rams horns;
Jerusalem.
and lastly, for Jerusalem the City of the Lord, built by Melchisedeck. Prince
and Priest of Salem, in the Country of the Jebusites; but since that time
having been laid waste diverse times, and having again found new re-edifiers, is
now of little consequence: Here w^ that most magnificent Temple built by
Solomon, and the famous Temple of the Sepulcher (...) by Helena Daughter to
Coilus a British King, and Mother to Constantine the Great; the ruins thereof
is yet much resorted unto both by Protestants and Papists, though for sundry
ends; which place affords now not any Trade to any Nation save to the Jews,
who farm of the Grand Signior this abovesaid Temple at 80000 Sultanies yearly,
and every Pilgrim or other Christian entering, must pay 9 Sultanies to the said
Farmers for admittance; so that the posterity of those Jews make an an
unrighteous gain and traffic by his death, whom unrighteoush their
Forefathers occasioned to die.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Armenia, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.
Armenia.
ARmenia has on the East Media, and the Caspian Sea; on the West Euphrates and
the Euxine Sea; on the North Tartary; on the South Mesopotamia; the wh^
Country is divided into three Provinces; First, Colchis; Secondly, Georgia;
Thirdly, T^comania.

Colchis.
Colchis lies on the Euaeine Sea, the Inhabitants thereof being Christians;
hence did Jason in the days of old steal the Golden Fleece; Dioscuria.
and here is also seen the ruins of that famous City Dioscuria, where by reason
of the many Foreign Merchants from all Co^treys that here frequented, three
hundred Languages were commonly spoken and practiced.

Georgia.
Neither can I find in Georgia, erst called Iberia, any City of Note for
Trading. Turcomania.
Tucomania being also as barren in this kind. It is observed by sundry Authors,
that out of this Province is derived the Name and Original of the Turks, who
here had their offspring, and who within these three hundred years last past,
have made themselves potent by their Armies, The Kingdoms under the Turk.
and to the ruin of many Kingdoms, the present Grand Signior Sultan Amurath,
who in Anno 1623, at my being at Constantionople was proclaimed Emperor of
that Nat^, has under his Dominions and Commands in chief as Sovereign of all
these Countries; First, in Europe he has Dacia, Grecia, all the Aegean
Islands, and Taurica Chersonesus; in Asia he has the Provinces before already
described; also Arabia, Syria, Media, Mesopotamia, Rhodes, Cyprus, and other
Islands; and Iastly, in Africa he has Egypt and the Kingdom of T^ and Argier,
and many others of lesser consequence. And thus leaving Armenia, my nert step
is to Arabia, which comes now to be handled.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Arabia and the Provinces thereof.
Arabia.
ARabia is bounded on the East with the Persian Gulf, on the West with the
Red Sea, on the North with Mesopotamia and Palestina, on the South with the
Ocean; the Inhabitahts are extremely addicted to Thest, this Trade being found
to be the best part of their maintenance, the Country is divided into three
parts, Arabia Deserta, Pe^osa, and Felix. Deserta.
Arabia Deserta is the place where the people of Israel wandered for forty ^ears
under the command of Moses: Bolsora.
the most eminent City of this Province is Bolsora, hereto by reason that it
serves for a through-fare from Arabia to Aleppo and Damascus, sound a City of
great concourse of many Merchants, and which does principally consist ^re upon
the Commodities brought hither from other Countries, as of India, and other
parts Arabia, than of any found here to be transported into other Countries,
the further Trade treof by reason of my ignorance I omit.

This Country by reason of the thievish lives of the Inhabitants, and the
general barrenness at infertility thereof, some Authors have observed in the
course of their Trade and Merchdizing, that the sandy Deserts are the Seas of
the Arabian Merchants, the wild Arabs the Pirates, and their Camels their
Ships, usually carrying 600 pound for an ordinary burthe, and so we find them
do in the carriage of our Goods and Wares from Scanderone to Al^o, and so back
again, a Camel's load being accounted ten Cloths Suffolk, which by Statute w^h
640 l. which with the packing may be 700 l. or else two barrels or Chests of
Tin found to incirca 600 l. and so in other commodities.

Petrosa.
Arabia Petrosa I find not any City of Trading: Ezion Geber on the Coast of the
Re^ea, where Solomon's Navy kept station before the setting out and at their
return from Oph, was once a famous place, and of great Traffic, though now it
lies buried in its own rui^s.

Felix.
Avabia Felix, Merchants should be better welcome, were the Inhabitants so
beneficial to ^ei^ Traffic as their Commodities might be made; for it is
esteemed the richest and pleasant^ part of all Arabia, and indeed of all Asia,
abounding with Gold, Pearls, Balsam, Myrrh, Frarincense, and many other
precious Drugs.

Medina Talnabi and Mecha.
H^ are those two notably noted Towns of Medina and Mecha, the one the
birthplace, the other he burying place of Mahomet (who in his younger years
was a Merchant, and in his elder a cunning Sophister) where Christians are
forbidden to enter, lest they should ^ee (as some Authors allege) the
absurdities of the Mohammedan Adoration of their great Prophet's Sepulore, whose
Body enclosed in an Iron Chest, is said by an Adamant to be drawn up to the
roof the Temple where it hangs; but herein many of them are and have been for
a long time ^eceived, for my self and other Merchants that have for some term
of time resided in Turk^ and specially in Constantinople, know by experience
that the Grand Signior does yearly send Carpet, or rather Tomb-cloth of green
Velvet, to cover the said Sepulcher, the old being then taken away, and
accounted the Fees and vails of their Priests and Clergymen that atten:
thereon, who cut the same into several pieces, and sell it to the Supersticious
at extrem rates for precious relics; the Tomb it self being seated in a
Temple built in Mecha, of nogreat magnificence or beauty, save the cost daily
bestowed thereupon in Lamps of Silver and Gold, wherein there is Balsam and
other such rich Odours, Ointments, and Oils conti^ually burned, and is seated
on the firm ground, and not in the Air, as above is said, and inclosod within
an Iron-grate, wherein some by favor are permitted to enter, from some of whom
I have had this relation, as is by diverse Turks that I have known and that have
seen it and reported it to be so, and no otherwise: this large circuit of
ground has not afforded me muda matter of Trade worthy observation that
hitherto has come to my hands; the most pertinent and eminent places are
Mocha, the Seaport of the said Mecha abovenamed, and Aden both on the
Red Sea; of the Trade whereof a word, so far forth as I have gathered, and then
I will conclude.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Mocha, and the Trade thereof.
Mocha, and the Trade thereof.
MOcha, or Muchi, as some name it, is seated in the Red Sea, almost opposite to
Zuachen that famous City of Trade on the African shore, and serves as the Port
and Scale to Me^ha, the birthplace of Mahomet the famous Prophet of these
Countrymen, much here res^rted unto by Turks, Moors, Arabians, and other
Nations professing this superstitious Religion; it is frequented by diverse
Merchants, especially Arabians and Egyptians, that take it in their way to
Aden, Ormus; India, or the like; and also much frequented by Maho^etan
Pilgrims, who in blind devotion come this way to Mecha to pay their Vows to
their ungodly Patron.

Coins in Mocha
It is subject to the Grand Signior, and acknowledges his Coins for current in
this place in matter of Trade, which is the Asper common with all Turkey.

Whereof 60 is here accounted for a Rial of 8/^ Spanish.

An hundred is accounted for a Soltany, Chequin or Xeriff.

The common Gold here current 8 sh. Sterling.

Weights in Mocha.
Their weights here used partake also somewhat of the common weight in
appellation (...) throughout all Turkey, which is the dram, 10 whereof are
accounted here an ounce. 14 Ounces is a Rotolo. 24 Rotol. is a Fracello, which
is 25 l. 12 ounces English 15 Fracellos makes a Cantar; or as they term it. 1
Babar, making English incirca, 386 l.


Measures in Mocha.
The Measure here is the Pico, accounted incirca 26 inches English, other notes
have fallen into my hand of this place, therefore hence I will bend my course
to Aden.

CHAP. LXX. Of Aden, and the Trade thereof.
Aden, and the Trade thereof.
ADen is the strongest and fairest Town of Arabia Foelix, situated in a Valley,
and i^ompassed most part with Hills of Marble, upon which it is conceived it
never rainen; it lies on the North side of the entrance of the Read-Sea,
reaching 60 miles further inward than the opposite Cape Gardefu^ it is
fortified with five strong Castles, kept by Garrisons and within late years
surprised by the Bashaw of Egypt for the Grand Signior, in whose obe^ence it
now quietly remains by the death and slaughter of the natural Sovereign
there^ It is now by the industry of man from a firm Land become an Island, and
yet command by a strong Castle, the residence of the Governor seated on an
adjoining hill.

It is accounted to have 6000 houses in it, inhabited by sundry Nations, or
more p^perly a miscellany of Indians, Persians, Aethiopians, Arabians, and
Turks, which here do re^de for the benefi^ of that great Trade and Commerce
that is exercised in this City. The Portug^lt had once got the possession
thereof, and were Masters of it for some few years: but finding the charge of
the Garrison to exceed the benefit afforded by the Trade and neighboring
c^fines, they willingly surrendered the place to a Moor; who paying them for
some years certa^ Tribute, they seated as a Sovereign to command the same, who
ruled here till the Turks come to be Masters thereof.

This City is now the principal Magazine for the Commodities of Persia, India,
and Ar^bia, and affording naturally great store of Drugs, as Myrrh, Balsam,
Manna, and many sorts of Spices: The heat of this place is so excessive in the
day time, that all the b^rgains and contracts made here among Merchants, are
done by night, as the coolest season to effect the same.

Now for the Coins here current, the Weights and Measures here in use, and
other needful further Observations of the Trade of this place, I am enforced to
be silent in, and refer the same to the more experienced, to be hereafter
added, as occasion shall serve here unto.

CHAP LXXI. Of Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Chaldea, and the Cities thereof.
Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Chaldea.
A Ssyria has on the East Media, on the West Mesopotamia, on the North Armenia
minor, on the fouth a part of Persia; in which I find no City at present of any
note: here is seen to this day the ruins of that Niniv^h, whose walls were of
three days journey in compass about, one hundred foot high, and thirty foot
broad, and beautified with 1500 Towers of 200 foot-high; through which ran that
famous River of Euphrates, and to which place was Jonas sent to preach; here
being 120000 persons sound so ignorant in the things of God, that they are said
in Scripture not to know the right hand from the left.

Mesopotamia.
In Mesopotamia is seated Caramit, a famous Town and Bashaw-like of the Grand
Signior, whose Commerce is unknown unto us by reason of its situation; in
Genesis 12. it is called Padan Haran, and is the place where Abraham dwelt
after he had lest Ur; and in this Country was Abraham born, and to which place
he sent his Servant to choose a Wife for his Son Isaac; Paradise.
and here in some Authors opinion (which in this description I followed) did
Paradise stand.

Chaldea.
In Chaldea we find many Cities to have been of old, and amongst others Babel,
famous for the confusion of Languages that here happened in building that
stupendous Edifice, which was raised 5164 paces high, and which had its basis
and circumference equal to that height; Babylon, now Badgate.
it is now much lessened of its ancient greatness, and from Babel it became
first Babylon, and now Badgate, a Bashaw-like of the Grand Signior, through
which runs the River Euphrates, which is in part the cause of her present
traffic which daily is found to be maintained by the help of Aleppo, where is
kept (by the intercourse of Merchants, and the Commodity of Caravans, and
intelligence of Pigeons carrying Letters) a neighbour-like Commerce; Badgate
oftentimes vending into the Land, what Aleppo do receive by Seas.

CHAP LXXII. Of Babylon, now Badgate, and the Trade thereof.
Babylon, and the Trade thereof
BAbylon, now Badgate, was at first founded by Nimrod, but never finished till
that warlike Semiramis took it in hand, whose Walls were 60 miles in circuit,
200 foot high, and 75 broad, seated upon the River Euphrates, in those days a
fair and beautiful City, now having almost lost all that splendour and glory it
then justly boasted of: many famous accidents have here happened; here died
Alexander the Great, after which his body lay eight days ere his ambitious
Captains could have leisure to give it a fitting burial; here it is also said
that when this place was taken by Zopyrus the Macedonian with his Grecians, it
was full three days ere one part thereof took notice of the conquest, since
which it has been subject to several Sovereigns; and it is at this day a Town
of very great Traffic, between which and Aleppo are many Caravans found to
travel with many thousand Camels laden with sundry Commodities; the rich
Commodities of India brought from Ormus by Sea to Balsara, seated as the
Maritime Port of the City in the Persian Gulf, and so up the River Euphrates
hither, and hence to Aleppo, Damasco, and other Countries, which again returns
them in exchange the Commodities of Turkey, Egypt, and Europe.

Pigeons Letter, or news Carriers.
In this Country, and generally through many parts of Turkey they have a custom
to give advice of their affairs by Pigeons, who serve Merchants here for Posts;
and hereby the English are found in Aleppo to have advice from Alexandretta,
which is accounted 100 miles, in 24 hours, and hereby the Caravans here
traveling, give from time to time advice of their journeys and success, which
is done in this manner: when the Hen Dove sits and has young, they take the
Cock Pigeon and put him into a Cage, whom (when he is by the Garavan carried a
days journey off) they set at liberty, and he straight flies home to his mate;
when by degrees they are thus perfectly taught; the Carriers and Merchants on
any accident fasten a Letter about one of their Necks, and they being freed
without any stay hasten to the place from whence they were brought, and such as
at home do watch their return, (climb their hole and take away their Letter)
are certified of the mind of their friends, or any other tidings after a very
speedy manner.

Commodities of Babylon.
The Commodities of this place, are the common Commodities before nominated in
Aleppo, Coins of Babylon.
and their Coins current, are the same that are found throughout Turkey, as
subject to one and the same Sovereign; but the Coins of Persia are found here
likewise to pass current for their value, and so does also their Gold without
exception; it being a received custom in Trade, That frontier Towns of Trade
admit the Coins of the bordering Inhabitants and Regions.

Weights of Babylon.
The weights of Babylon known amongst us is the Dram, Mitigal, Rotolo, and
Cantar.

Their Rotolo has been observed to make 1 l. 10 ounces English, and our 112 l.
English has made here 68 Rotolo's.

Their measure in length common in this place is the Pico found to be by trial
about 27 inches English.

To conclude this Countries Relation; from hence came the three Wise men called
of the East, who worshipped Christ and presented him with gifts, and the
Inhabitants hereof are said to be the first inventers of Astronomy and
Astrology; and therefore hence have all such the title of Childeans; and for
other matter of Trade, here is only found the famous Town of Mosull, situated
on the River Euphrates, abounding with the Forests of Galls, so much required
and requested by diverse throughout the World: and now to MEDIA.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of Media, and the Provinces thereof.
Media, and the Cities thereof.
MEdia is limited on the East with Parthia; on the West with Armenia, on the
South with Persia, on the North with the Caspian Sea; being absolutely the
greatest Sea of all others that has no Commerce with the Ocean, by some called
the Hircanian Sea, and by some the Sea Bacchu, of a Town of that name thereon
bordering.

Sultania.
The chief Cities of this Country are Sultania, famous for the fair Mosque in
the East: Sumachia, the strongest of all the rest, taken by the Turks in Anno
1578, and now the seat of 2 Turkish Bashaw; Eres, Ardovile, Shervan, Bacchu,
and some others; Tauris.
and lastly, the most eminent Tauris; of the trade hereof see hereafter.

Likewise in this Tract is comprehended the Province of Albania, now Zairia,
little beholding to the industry or labor of the Husbandman, yet of its own
accord yielding for once sowing, most times two, and sometimes there reapings:
Derbent.
the chief City is Caucasiae Portae, built hard upon the Hill Caucasus, one of
the best fortified Towns of the East, now called Derbent, a strong City
environed with two walls, and fortified with Iron Gates; yet nevertheless taken
it was by the Grand Signior in his last wars against the Persians, under whose
command it now remains, being now accounted one of the Keys of this Kingdom,
and the common entrance into Persia; and lastly, in this Country Phidon an
Argive in Anno Mundi 3146. is said to find out the use of weights and measures;
which knowledge and concordance by this Tract I covet to obtain.

The weights of Derbent is the Mo^e, which is 3 l. 11 ounces Venice sotile.
And to conclude, a word of the Trade of this Country in the general; I find
that the Moscovia Company were the first that sought the knowledge thereof in
these parts; for upon their discovery of Moscovia they traded down the River
Volga to Astracan, and thence in Barks sailed with their English Commodities to
Bacchu, Derbent, and other places on the Caspian Sea, and since some of the
East India Company have more narrowly traced it, and have observed the same
more particularly: the principal Commodities proceeding hence is the raw Silk
made at Gilan, Zahaspa, Rastiguan, Chiulfal, and others, now known unto us by
the name of Persia, Ardasse, and Lege Silks; and from this last the dealers in
Silk here are throughout Asia commonly termed Chiulfallins.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of Tauris, and the Trade thereof.
Tauris, and the Trade thereof.
TAuris is the Metropolis of Media, and the Summer seat of the Persian Sophies,
containing 16 miles in compass and including 100 thousand Inhabitants; it has
within late years been three times conquered by the Turks and has as often
again returned to the Persians, under whom now it rests: first, by Selimus,
then by Solomon the Magnificent, and lastly, by Osman General to Amurath the
third; it is now in the possession of the Persian, and strongly fortified, and
seated in a cold, yet wholesome Country, the Inhabitants more addicted to
making of Silk, than to the Sword; distant six days journey from the Caspian
Sea; and indeed encompassed by several great Towns of note, whose manual
labors are famoused over the World, as first Eres, whence came the fine Silk
called the Mamodean, now out of use; Gilan and Bilan.
the Gilan abounding with Lege Silk; Sumachia.
Sumachia, abounding in excellent Carpets, whereto the people wholly addict
themselves; Arasse.
then Arasse, the most eminent and opulent City in the Trade of Merchandise
throughout all Servania, partly by the abundant growth of Silk there nourished,
and hence called Arasse, vulgarly Ardasse 2000 sums yearly going hence to
Aleppo in Syria) and partly by the growth thereof; Galls, Cottons, Wool,
Allom, some Spices, Drugs, and sundry other Commodities; so that to make this
place the happy Scale of Merchandise, Nature having played he^ part, there
wants only peace between the Kings of Persia and Turkey, which at present is
denied them: the further manner of Trade of that place, I am constrained for
want of due information to omit, and refer what I have thereof collected to
Persia.

CHAP. LXXV. Of Persia, and the Provinces thereof.
Persia and the Provinces thereof.
PErsia is bounded on the East with the River Indus; on the West with Tygris
and the Persian Gulf; on the North with the Caspian Sea, and the River Oxus;
and on the South with the main Ocean; the People are much addicted to
Hospitality and Poetry; in their Complements Lordly, in their Apparel
fantastical, in their Expenses magnificent, and in their Lives lovers of
Learning, Nobility, and Peace.

This Empire contains these several Provinces. 1 Persis. 2 Susiana. 3
Caramania. 4 Gedrosia. 5 Drangiania. 6 Arica. 7 Arachosia. 8 Parapomisus. 9
Saccha. 10 Hircania. 11 Ormus.


Of all which in brief, and no further than may concern my present purpose.

Persis Far.
In Persis now called Far, having the Gulf of Persia to the South limit,
Caramania for the East, Susiana for the West, and Media for the North, was
seated Persepolis the ancient Seat of this Empire, which Alexander at the
request of his Curtisan Ladies commanded to be set on fire, but afterward
repenting him of so great a folly and so unworthy an act, he re-edified it,
though yet now having lost much of its former beauty; and giving place to the
famous City of Casbin, the residence of the present Sophies, brought hither
from Tauris by Sophie Tamas.

Commodities of Persia.
The Commodities that this Country is in general found to afford for
Merchandise, are Silks of all sorts raw, growing plentifully in 1 Bilan, 2
Gilan, 3 Aras; some precious Stones, many sorts of Drugs, wrought Silks,
Chamlets, Carpets, Shashes, Callico's, and many excellent Arms used in War both
for Horse and Man, which is here so well tempered in the framing and making
(with some virtuous Simples) that it makes it both hard and excellent for use,
and preserves the same clean from any rust or perishing.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of Casbin and the Trade thereof.
Casbin and the Trade thereof.
CAsbin is now accounted the Metropolis of Persia, and sometimes the residence
of the Sophies, hither removed from Tauris, as I said before; it is accounted a
days journey about on Horseback, well walled and fortified with a strong Fort,
and beautified with two fair Seraglio's, the Walls whereof are made of Red
Marble, and paved with Mosaique Work; the chief Street hereof is called the
Attimidan, in figure apiece, each angle being mile in length, encompassed
with Scaffolds for the people to sit and behold the King and his Nobles at
their Exercises of shooting, riding, running, and the like; this City is seated
in a goodly fertile Plain of three or four days journey in length, which is
furnished with near two thousand Villages to supply the necessary uses thereof,
which did much enrich this place before the removal of the Persian's Court to
Hispahan which is fourteen days journey further into the East; Three
Excellencies in Casbin.
Three places herein do much adorn and beautify this place; First, the
Attimidan aforesaid; Secondly, the King's Palace, which is so brave a Fabric,
and so richly furnished, that Europe can hardly match it; And lastly, the
Bassars which are many in number, which are in the manner of our Pawns in
London, where are to be sold all manner of Persia, India, Turkey, Moscovian,
and Arabia Commodities, Commodities of Casbin.
as all rich Gems, Jewels, Drugs, Spices, Silk, wrought in Damasks; Velvets, and
raw, transported into other Countries; the Attimidan serving the Merchants for
an Exchange or place of meeting, where every day is seen a continual Fair,
where all manner of Commodities are sold both for Back and Belly; also
Goldsmiths, Exchangers of Money; and all other Professions, who come hither and
display their Commodities, as to some public Mart. And the Moneys and current
Coins here passable amongst Merchants, I refer to the chief City of Persia,
Hispahan, the present residence of the Persian Monarch; and I am informed that
the Weights and Measures thereof do also agree therewith, so shall not need to
enlarge my self further in that particular.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of Balsara and the Trade thereof.
Balsara, and the Trade thereof.
BAlsara lies in the bottom of the Persian Gulf, and is seated on the mouth
of the River Euphrates, serving as a Magazine for all the Commodities of
Arabia, India, Turkey, and Persia, and as a thorough-fare for all Merchants
traveling from one of those Countries to another, but especially for such as
here take shipping to the Isle of Ormus, India, Arabia, etc. This Town was of
late years subject to the Persian, but now in obedience to the Great Turk, and
is the last of his Dominions this way: and here it is observed that the Water
does ebb and flow, as with us in England, and in no place else adjoining upon
the Ocean Seas; the Indraught may be imagined to be the cause, as it is
observed the like in Venice.

It has been noted in matter of Trade here, that there is paid for every Sum
of Goods carried from Bagdate hither by Water, six Sehids, and from Balsara to
Bagdate two Medins per Wesnoe, and 100 Wesnoes from Balsara to Ormus, cost
carriage 20 Lairins, and the like back from Ormus to Balsara.

Hither always come the Syria Caravans that are bound for India, and end their
Landtravel, and imbark themselves and Goods for the great Marts of Ormus and
Cambaia, and here returning they conclude their Sea-Navigation, and begin their
Land-Peregrination, for Turkey, etc.

Customs paid at Balsara.
The Customs payable at Balsara as the last Port of the Grand Seignior's
Dominions, who, conquered the same from the Persians in Anno 1550, is 1 in
every 14 Sehids for gross Commodities, but it is 1 per 20 or 5 per cent. upon
Cloths, Silks, and fine Goods, but here is a Tare of 3 in 10 Wesnoes allowed
both in Spices, Drugs, etc. for dust, and upon Silks, for waste heads, and the
like.

Prices of Commodities in Balsara.
The prices of Commodities ruled some years past thus here.

The Wesno of Maces was worth in Balsara 13 Ducates.

The Wesno of Nutmegs was worth 6 Ducates.

The Wesno of Soap was worth 15 Sehids.

The Wesno of Almonds was 24 Sehids.

The Wesno of Galls was worth 10 Larins, and for this weight of Wesno, it is
found that 16 Wesnoes of Balsara make a Kintar of Aleppo common weight, but the
100 Wesnoes in the weight of Silk of Rotol, 680 dr. in Aleppo makes Silk Rot.
529 dr. 28.

Weights used in Balsara.
The Weight common here in the sale of Commodities besides this Wesno is the
Maund, which is 100 Rotolo's, which have been observed to have made 500 l.
English, which is 5 l. a Rotolo; but I have met with an Observation on this
place made by some English that have traveled hither, that the 112 l. has
made 19 Maunds 2 Rotolo's, which must be 5 l. 4 ounces English; the difference
I refer to be rectified by the better experienced.

Measures of Balsara. Cus^stan.
Their Measure is found to be about 26 inches English.

To proceed to the next Province in Persia, it is Cusestan, situated Eastward
from Persia, called in Scripture Havilah, having in it Susa, a City where
sometimes the Persian Monarch abides in Winter, as being more Southerly than
Echatana; and lastly, Casan, of which a word.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of Casan and the Trade thereof.
Casan and the Trade thereof.
CAsan is a principal, fair and famous City in this Country, but much troubled
with excessive heat by reason of its situation in a pleasant and large Plain;
it consists altogether of Merchandising, and the greatest Trade of all the
Inland Country is found herein, and most especially frequented by Indian
Merchants; Commodities of Casan.
the Inhabitants are in general addicted to all curious Manufactures, and
Fabrics, as in weaving of Shashes, Turbants, and Girdlas, in making also of
Velvets, Sattins, Damasks, curious and fine Ormusius, and Carpets; and indeed
it is accounted the very Magazine of all the Persian Cities, for these
Commodities; here is also to be sold all manner of Drugs, Spices, Pearls,
Diamonds, Rubies, and Turquoises, and all sorts of Silks, both raw and wrought,
so that the Author (who in this Relation I follow) is verily persuaded that
there is more Silk yearly brought into Casan, than there is of broad Cloth
brought into London. Policy of Casan.
The civil Policy of this City is also commendable, an idle person not being
permitted to live amongst them, and the Children after six years old, are
presently set to work; here being a Law to the shame of Christendom, That every
Inhabitant must yearly give up his name to the Magistrate, therewith declaring
how and in what manner he lives, what Art he exercises, and if he be found in
a falsehood, he is beaten on the feet, or else employed in some public slavery,
to the example of others: and for other notes of Trading, see Hispahan in
Parthia.

Caramania.
Caramania is the third Province, the chief Cities are Gadil, Cobin, and
Caraman, Famous for the excellent Fabrics here made, Cloth of Gold, and for
the best Cymitars in the World; and here it was that Alexander being returned
out of India, kept his Bacchanalian feasts.

Gedrosia, etc.
In Gedrosia, Drangiana or Sigestan, Aria now Sablestan, Aracosia now Cabul,
Paraphmisas, Saca and Flircania, I find not any thing worthy the survey,
therefore I willingly pass them over, and close these Provinces with the City
of Sciras, which is comprehended in this Tract.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of Sciras and the Trade thereof.
Sciras, and the Trade thereof.
SCiras, in times past Persepolis, built by Perseus, who gave the name of
Persians to the Inhabitants, was for a long time the Seat-Royal of this Empire,
for which cause Alexander (as is before mentioned) at the request of his
Curtizan Lais, commanded it to be set on fire, but afterward repenting him of
so great an Oversight, he re-edified the same: Bindamir
it is situated on the banks of the famous River Bindamir, which courseth
through the Kingdom of Persia and Lar, and so emptieth it self into the Persian
Gulf, and stands just in the roadway which leads from Hispahan to Ormus; it
shows yet many eminent signs and monuments of its former glory; as two very
great Gates twelve miles distant asunder, showing what the circuit was in the
time of the Monarchy; also the ruins of a goodly Palace and Castle built by
Cyrus, having a threefold Wall, beautified with many Spires and Turrets; the
first twenty four foot high, the second forty eight foot high, the last ninety
foot high, all of Freestone, and formed in a square with twelve Gates of Brass
on each Angle, with Pales of Brass set before them curiously wrought,
testifying the magnificence of the Founder. It is now accounted one of the most
famous Cities of the East, both for Traffic of Merchandise, and for excellent
Armor and Furniture of War, which the Inhabitants here with wonderful cuisning
and art do make of Iron and Steel, and the juice of certain Herbs, of much more
notable temper and beauty, than are those which are made with us in Europe.

The Coins. here in use being proper to the whole Kingdom, and the Weights and
Measures not found differing from the same used in Ormus, the prime Port of
this whole Kingdom, I shall not need here further to insist thereupon; and
therefore from hence accompanying the Caravan, I in the next place survey the
said famous Port of Ormus.

CHAP. LXXX. Of Ormus, and the Trade thereof.
Ormus and the Trade thereof.
THE last Province of this Country is accounted to be the Island and
Territories of Ormus, twelve miles from the Continent, small in compass, and
very barren, yet famous throughout the World for the great Trade there
exercised by the Indians, Persians, and Arabians, and other Nations, the King
thereof some years past was a Mohammedan, and drew, by the Customs of this City
140000 Xeriffs yearly, since which it became tributary to the Portugals, who
fortified the same in Anno 1506; and for the excellency thereof the Arablans
use to say proverbially. Si terrarum Orbis, quaqua patet, annulus esset,
Illius Ormusum gemma decusque foret.
If all the World should be a Ring, the Stone
And Gem thereof were Ormus Isle alone.


Ormus restored to the Persians by the English valor.
Since which time by the valor of our English East India Companies Arms, this
Island has been reduced to the subjection of the King of Persia, to whom it is
now obedient, and still enjoys the former splendid Trade to all the parts of
the East; here are found the Spices and precious Gems of India; the Tapestries,
Carpets; and Shashes of Persia, the Grograms, Moheirs, and Chamblets of Turkey,
the Drugs of Arabia; and lastly, the Moneys called the Larins of Persia, which
are here accounted as a great and special Merchandise, all which be excellent
helps to make this place a famous Mart and Magazine of all Eastern Commodities.
Orders of Caravans from Syria to Balsara.
Now the cause that in part moves this great Trade hither, and the great
concourse of Merchants into this Island, is that twice yearly there comes a
great company of people over land out of Syria, Aleppo, and other those parts,
which are called Caffiles or Caravans, with all the Commodities of the
Mediterranean Seas, which in their journeys observe this order; They have first
a Captain, and certain hundreds of Janisaries or Soldiers, which convey and
conduct the said Caffila or Caravan until they come to Balsara, from whence
they travel by water to Ormus; and this twice yearly happens, in April and in
September; which constant times of their departure thence thus known, their
number is oftentimes augmented to 6000, in 10000 persons, with their Mules,
Camels, and Dromedaries, passing by Babylon, now Bagdate, and so to Balsara as
is abovesaid; and in this same nature they travel at certain set times, in
their return hence for Aleppo, carrying with them all manner of Merchandise of
this place, fitting either for Turkey or the Mediterranean Sea; and in which
Caravans all Nations are found freely to travel, excepting the King of Spain's
Subjects, which are very narrowly looked into, though notwithstanding they are
found oftentimes to pass in the names of Venetians, French, and other Nations,
so that when these Caravans do come to Ormus, against their coming there is
general preparation made by all other Merchants of that Country, for to have
Commodities in readiness to barter and exchange with them. The Island it self
is but small and barren, and composed only of a Salt Rock, whereof their houses
and walls are made; and in Summer it is found so excessive hot, that the
Inhabitants are forced to lie and sleep in wooden Cisterns made for the
purpose, full of water, and all naked, both men and women lying clean under
water, their heads only excepted; yet they have no fresh water in the Island,
but what they fetch from other Islands in the Sea near there adjoining, which
they also keep in Cisterns for their use, as is accustomed in some parts of
Spain in Jars, or, as they term them, in Tenajos. At the last reduction of this
Town to the Scepter of Persia by the aid of the English, they had many
Immunities of Trade granted them, and to be here free of all Custom, and
withal to draw the one half of all the Customs thereof; but that good service
was soon forgotten, and they have now only the honor of the good service for
their pains and reward, and nothing else.

Jasques. Gombrone.
To this City and Island I must add the two only Seaports of consequence on
this Coast, appertaining to the Crown of Persia which are Jasques and Gombrone,
in which the English have their Factories and residence, and is the place where
their Ships do lade and unlade their burdens for this Kingdom, and where also
the Goods and Commodities bound for Hispahan, Casbin, Sciras, Casan, and
Tatiris, and generally for the whole Empire, are landed, and here laden upon
Camels, Dromedaries, and Horses into those places; and because that I find that
the Coins, Measures, and Weights of this place do somewhat differ from them
passable and at use in Spahan, and more within the Land, I have thought it
needful here to insert the same, according as I have gathered them from those
that have frequented the places abovementioned, referring the Reader for what
is here omitted to Spahan it self, the Metropolis of this Empire in the
following Chapter.

Coins current in Gombrone, and Jasqu's, and Ormus.
The Coins then here in use and valuation are these: 1 Bessee of Copper is 4
Cosbegs. 1 Shahee of Silver is 2 Bessees, which is 4 d. Sterling, or 10
Cosbegs, 1 Mamothy Silver is 2 Shahees, which is 8 d. Ster. or 29 Cosbegs. 1
Abashee of Silver is 2 Mamothis, which is 16 d. Ster. or 40 Cosbegs. 1 Asar of
gold is 20 Shahees or 6 shil. 8 d. Sterling. 1 Toman of Gold is 10 Asars, which
is 66 shil, 8 d. Ster. and this Toman is accounted 50 Abashces, or 2000 Cosbegs.


These are the general Coins current throughout Persia; to these I must add
those in use in these parts abovementioned: The Rial of 8/^ Spanish is here a
Commodity, bought and sold, and the common estimation thereof is here 130
Cosbegs, or 13 Shahees, and somewhat more, which accounted at 4 d. per. Shahee,
is little more than 4 shil. 4.d Sterling. Again, this Rial of Eight passes
here for 5 Larrees, which Larrees are 10 d. Ster. and by this account the Rial
of ^/8 is 4 shil. 4 d. Sterling.

1 Larrce is 5 Saddees, each Saddee being not fully 2 d. Ster. and each Saddee
accounted here for 40 Flosses; so that the Larree is here 220 Flosses, and
every of ^/8 is here at Gombrone and Jasques 1155 Flosses.

Weights of Ormus, Gombrone, and Jasques.
The common weight here and throughout Persia is the dram, 96 drams making 16
ounces Averdupois; so that 6 drams makes the said ounce, and 1200 drams being a
Maundshaw, or as we may call it, the King's Maund, which has been found to
make in England 12 l. Averdupois: In weighing of Silk they observe the
Maund-Tauris, which is the Maund-shaw or 600 drams, and 5 Maund-Tauris is
accounted here for 1 Maund of Sarrot, which by this computation should make
3000 drams, or 500 l. Averdupois, 36 Maund Shaws or 72 Maunds Tauris is a load
of Silk, which is by the said calculation 43200 drams, which is 7200 ounces
English, making Silk pounds 300 l. Averdupois, which is about two Coals of
Aleppo of 46 ^/^ Rotolos per Peer.

Measures of Ormus, Jasques, and Gombrone.
Their measure in use here as throughout all Persia is not found much to vary,
they have in general two, which they term the Coveda, the short and the long;
the long Coveda is somewhat longer than the English Yard, accounted by some 37
inches; and at Sciras and in some other Cities it is found to be 38 inches, by
which all Cloths, Kersies, and Outlandish Monufactures are sold. The short
Coveda is proper only for the Manufactures of Persia, accounted to hold out 27
inches, and found agreeable to the Pico used in Constantinople and Aleppo. And
thus leaving Ormus and the said Port-Towns of Jasques and Combrone, I will
hence travel to Parthia, wherein I find Hispahan the Metropolis of Persia
seated.

Parthia.
The next Country subject to the Crown of Persia is Parthia, bounded on the
East with Aria, on the West with Media, on the South with Caramania, and on the
North with Hircania, and is now in the Persian tongue called Erache.

The chief Cities that are found in this Tract are Guerde, Irsdie, and last
Hispahan, formerly Hecatomoyle, the residence of the present Sophie, and
accounted of that bigness, that the Persians hyperbolically call it, Half the
World; under which I will comprehend the general Trade of Persia, so far forth
as I have found it observed.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of HISPAHAN and the Trade thereof.
Hispahan and the Trade thereof.
HISPAHAN in times past was called Hecatompolis, or the City of 100 Gates,
which name it may well still retain, seeing that the Walls thereof contain a
reasonable days journey on Horseback, it is now become the greatest City in
all the Persian Dominions, and so much the more populous and magnisicent, as
being the common residence of the Persian Sophies; it is strong by situation,
defended by a high Wall, deep Ditches, and a goodly Castle; on the West Side
stand two stately Palaces or Seraglio's, for the King and his Women, far
exceeding in state and magnificence all other the proud buildings of this City.
The Walls are of red Marble, and pargetted with diverse colors, and all the
Palace is paved with chequered and fretted work, and on the same is spread
curious Carpets both of Silk and Gold; the Windows are of Alabaster, of white
and other spotted Marble; the posts and wickets of massy Ivory chequered with
glistering black Ebony, so curiously wrought in winding knots, as may easilier
stay than satisfle the Eyes. of the wondering beholder; to which is added a
pleasant Garden, wherein is seen a thousand Fountains, Brooks, and lesser
Rivulets; and also what may else be wanting, to make it fit for so great a
Monarch.

The Inhabitants of this City do all their affairs on Horseback, both public
and private, going from place to place, they confer one with another on
Horseback; and so do the Merchants buy and fell and negotiate; the difference
here between the Gentleman and the slave being, that the slave never rides,
nor the Gentleman never goes on foot.

It is not questionable, but that this City, the splendour of all Persia, the
continual residence of the Kings, and inhabited by so many eminent persons, as
always attend this Monarch, but that it is of great Trade and concourse of
Merchants, and furnished not only with all the native Commodities of Persia,
but also of those of Arabia, Turkey, India, and China, hither, brought in great
abundance to be exchanged for the native Commodities of this place: and though
it want the commodiousness of the Sea, yet by Caravans it is supplied with all
those things that are conducible either to beauty, necessity, or ornament. The
Caspian Sea afford; it the Commodities of Turkey, Russia, and Moscovia, and
Jasques with Ormus; his two Seaports in India afford it the Commodities of
India and Arabia; all other Commodities from either the Turk or Mogul is
supplied by Caravans, Dromedaries and Camels; which has cost by late
observations in portage and carriage of Commodities thus:

Carriage of Commodities by Caravans.
The carriage of 100 Maunds of wares from Sciras to Hispahan costeth 70 S^hids,
and from Spahan to Casan 60 Sehids, from Hispahan to Ormus by Sciras 120
Sehids, and from Hispahan to Tauris 40 Sehids.

Prices common of Commodities in Spahan.
The common Commodities of Hispahan I have already nominated, and though all
Commodities in general are subject to rise and fall in price amongst Merchants,
yet the Maund of Cotton is here at 12 Sehids, the Maund of Rice 7 Best, the
Maund of Dragant 2 Best, of Enap 2 Best, of Non 3 Best, of Laghem 4 Best,
of Anil 40 Mambodies, and the Catree of Sugar is worth 400 Tomans, which is (^)
pound English.

Coins current in Persia.
Their Coins current in Hispahan, and generally throughout all the Kingdom of
the Sophie are of several sorts, partly of Brass, partly of Silver, and partly
of Gold. The principal whereof is the Toman, which formerly has been accounted
to be worth 6 l. Sterling, since 4 l. and by reason of the late wars imbased,
and worth now only 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. at Seaside Sterling, and by some accounted 3
l. 12 s. 6 d.

This Toman is worth 200 Shaheds or Shahees, 14 or 15 ^/^ Span. or 10 Asures,
which have been accounted 4 l. ster. a piece, a Mamothy of silver, is 2 Bestees
of Copper.

The Rial of (...) Span. is here accounted for 12 Shahees, and 1 Cosbeg, or 5
Lorins.

The Lion Dollar current in these parts to 10 Shahees, every Shahee is 4 d.
sterling, or 50 Deniers here in account,

A Rupias, which is the Coin of the Mogul, is Abashees, 4, which is 2 s. 3 d
sterling.

A Mamothy is 9 Cosbegs or 32 Doors, or 100 Deniers.

A Bestee of Copper is 4 Cosbegs, or 20 Deniers.

An Abaisee of Silver is 2 Mamothies, or 20 Shahees, or 200 Deniers.

A Chequin of Gold, Xeriff or Solton is 18 Shahees; yet in some places of
Persia they pass for 20 Shahees, and in some for 24 Shahees.

An Asure of Gold is 20 Shahees, and 10 Asures is a Tomano 3 l 6 s. 8 d.
sterling.

A Larin is 5 Shahees, and in some places only 5 about 10 d. or 10 d. sterling,
here 25 Cosbegs.

A Fonan is 9 Cupans.

A Mitigal is 32 or 34 Shahees.

A Sadee is 40 Flosses.

A Shahee is 10 Cosbegs.

A Mitigal is 33, and in some places 34 Shahees.

A Tanger is 12 Pulls, which is Shahees.

Accounts kept in Persia.
They here keep their Accounts in sundry Species and denominations, some in
Xeriff, some in Spanish Rials, and some in Tomans, and some in Shahees: The
common Account is thus distinguished. The Abashee is 200 Deniers, or 20
Shahees. Mamothy is 100 Deniers, or 10 Shahees. Sadon is 50 Deniers, or 5
Shahees. Viste is 20 Deniers, or 2 Shahees. Cosbeg is 5 Deniers.

And those that keep their Accounts in Shahees only, they reckon them to
hundred thousands, and hundred thousands, as the proper known Coin of the
Country; and this manner has seemed the best to our English there resident,
which they account 60 Shahees for 20 s. sterling.

Weights current in Persia.
The weights of Persia are consistent of three sorts, of the Dram, the Mitigal,
and the Mand or Mandshow.

The Dram is the least, 100 whereof makes 66 Mitigals.

The Mitigal is the next, 100 whereof makes 150 Drams.

The Mand or Mandeshaw is the greatest, and makes 1200 Mitigals, or else 1800
Drams; which has made by the observation of some Factors that have resided
there 14 l. 9 ounces Averdupois.

The sum or Cargo of Silk is accounted here 36 Mandshaws: which accounted as
above, makes English 524 l, Averdupois, and is great pounds of 24 ounces
incirca 350 l. But the East India Company find it to be 300 great silk pounds
and no more, by often trial: But it is to be noted that these Mandeshaws are
found to differ in many Provinces and Cities in Persia, and the bordering
Countries, and does differ in many Commodities; but the Mandeshaw common of
Persia is 1200 drams for silk.

The Mandeshaw of Tauris is but 600 drams.

The Mandeshaw of Syrrat is 5 Maunds of Tauris abovenamed.

The Maund of Hispahan is accounted one and half Mand of Siras, besides which
they have these weights in some places;

1 Dubba is counted 5 Maunds.

1 Sherway is counted 50 Maunds.

1 Rellaii is counted 7 Maunds.

1 Maund is counted by observation pounds English.

In Tauris also before-named, a City in times past of great Trade, in this
Country they have (...) Maunds, the one of silk, which has made by a
Florentines observation 5^ l. Florence, and another for all other Commodities;
the 100 whereof has made there by the said observation 264 l. Florence.

Measures used in Persia.
The Measures of length used in Persia is of two sorts, and both of them called
a Covedo; a long and a short. The long accounted to be 37 inches English
measure. The Short accounted to be 27 inches English measure.
agreeable to the Pico of Turkey.

This is what I find observable in the particular Trade of Persia; I will now
view it as it stands in the general parts thereof.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Trade in general of Persia.
The Trade in general of Persia.
THE Trade of Persia, as it is found subsistent in these days, consists more
by an Inland than a Maritime Traffic; for if the large extent of the Sophie's
Dominions be well considered, and the neighboring Regions whereon it
bordereth, it will be found that it wants many things to make it eminent. It
is plentifully supplied of Commodities, and those also of excellency, as of
Silver in great quantity, raw Silk in abundance, and of some Drugs naturally
grown: but when the industry of the Natives is surveyed, it will be soon
discerned that the costly, rare and rich Carpets here made, the curious and
fine Cotton Cloths here wrought, for their Turbants, Girdles, Shashes,
Shireing, and the like, interwoven with Silk, and not seldom with Silver and
Gold; and the daily use thereof not only in Persia it self, but throughout
India, Arabia and Turkey; witness to the World the ingeniousness of this
Nation: The greatest want and impediment of Trade that they have here is of
Seaports and Havens, of which they are much scanted. They enjoyed once a large
tract of Landlying along the Caspian Sea, from Darbrnt on the one side,
bordering on the Turks, to Deristan on the other, bordering on the Tartars; but
of late days the same is much shortened, for the Grand Seignior has laid
Tauris, one of his Metropolitan Cities for his limits, and the Tartar has
entered as far as Minerdon, so that he has only left him upon this Sea the
Ports of Gilan and Pismir, that are of any consequence, wherein much Trading is
not exercised, by reason of the ill neighborhood of the Turks, Muscovites, and
Tartarians, coasting the Caspian Sea. In the Persian Gulf he did enjoy the
commodious and famous Town and Port of Balsara, taken from him by the Turks
about 60 years past, and Ormus in the entrance of that Gulf is but lately
reduced to his Scepter by the valor of the English, though anciently belonging
to his Crown. Jasques and Combrone Ports belonging to the Persian, and where
the English resort to.
The Ports of Jasques and Combrone, being the only two Seaports he enjoys upon
the Continent of any quality, to which and Ormus all the Trade of Persia toward
India is observed to be driven, and to which the Portugals, Dutch, and English
resort for their Silks, and other rich Commodities of Persia; and where each of
them have Factories and residency for the Trade of this Country: and now on
each side of Persia by Land-ward he is environed by three mighty and powerful
Nations, with whom he is sometimes in Wars, and sometimes in Peace, the Mogul's
Country and Tartar on the one side, and the Turks on the other. For the Trade
thereof; it is observed, that Persia yielding yearly incirca 12000 Coals of
Silk, which is the prime Commodity of this Kingdom, growing principally and
made at Gilan, Bilan, Mahmody, and Arasse, (which last affords that sort of
Silk which we call vulgarly Ardasse) the one third part of which is conceived
to be vended into Turkey, transported by Camels into Aleppo, Damasco,
Constantinople, Brussia in Natolia, and of late days to Smyrna, and from thence
conveyed for the most part into Europe, especially to England, France, and
Italy, where the same is spent and consumed; in return of which they have from
Syria, and those parts principally Rials of (...) Spanish, some Gold and some
sorts of Cloth, Woollen and Silk Stuffs brought thither out of Venice,
Marselia; and London. Another third part of the said Silk is carried to and
spent in Agra and the Dominions of the Mogul, into Ormus, Jasques, etc. and
thence by the Indians and Arabians into Sarmacand, and other the Dominions of
the great Tartar, and into Astracan, and other the Dominions of the Moscovite,
in return whereof they have the Spices of India, the Drugs of Arabia, the rich
Furrs of Russia, and the precious Gems of Cathai, and other the Commodities of
Tartaria; and the other third part is imagined to be spent for their own use
and clothing at home in their own Country; so that by virtue of this sole
Commodity which this Country thus abundantly affords, and which is sought
after by all other Nations, (and the curiosity and luxury of this Nation in
general) they have the Commodities of all other Countries in return thereof
brought unto them. Diverse Propositions have been made, and diverse Inventions
proposed, and sundry Treaties have been set on foot, only to compass the sole
Trade of these Silks of Persia, with the Sophie himself, who alone challenges
a propriety therein throughout his whole Dominions. The Dutch have more than
once thrust at it, and to have it delivered at Astracan, and so to be conveyed
against the stream of Volga into Moscovia, and so to Holland: but the Sum and
Stock required was so vast to compass and manage it, and the propositions and
passage so difficult and dangerous, that they gave it over with this opinion of
the World, that they endeavored to swim against too great a stream, and that
they had some plot to set it afoot, and never intended to go through with it,
or otherwise were not able to compass the same; since which the Duke of (^)
has put on for a branch only thereof: but when the account came to be made up,
his means was too mean to go through with that small proposed part he aimed at:
and lastly, the English East-India-Company, (as Merchants measuring their
Actions with the weight of their Purses) have more prosperously succeeded; and
in Hispahan have contracted with the Sophie for a round quantity, who have
Merchant-like performed on their parts the conditions agreed upon, so far to
his good liking, that by his late Ambassador in England, the whole yearly
growth was tendered and offered to them; but his ill performance in the lesser,
made them question the like in the greater; and therefore to their honor
refused it. Now as concerning the lesser parts of the Countries Traffic, which
consists in the Manufactures of this Kingdom; I pass them over in silence as
being of lesser consequence, and hasten to Tartary the next Country, bordering
upon the Persians.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of Tartary and the Provinces thereof.
Tartaria.
TArtary is bounded on the East with the Eastern Ocean, on the West with
Moscovis and Moldavia, on the North with the frozen Ocean, on the South with
the Caspian Sea, the Hill Taurus, and the wall of China: It is divided into
these Provinces, Precopensis, Asistica, Antiqua, Zagathai, and Cathaia.

Procopensis.
In Tartaria-Procopensis is found the ancient City of Crim, the Seat of
Tartarian Rulers, whence this Nation had their Original and Name: also Oksacou,
the residence of the present Princes; and lastly Caffa, the only Seaport of
consequence in these parts, of the Trade whereof it will be needful I should
speak a word.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of Caffa, and the Trade thereof.
Caffa and the Trade of it.
CAffa, anciently Theodosia, seated commodiously for Traffic in the bottom of
the Black Sea, was by Mahomet the Great taken from the Genoese, and is the
present Scale for all Commodities that pass by Sea from Constantinople,
Trabesond, Podalia, and W^l^chia by Danubius, and such other places to Tartary,
Muscovia, etc. The Country affords great abundance of Cow-Hides, Wax, Honey,
and a kind of pickled Fish much resembling the English Herring here caught upon
this Coast: also it sends to Constantinople some Butter sowed up in Oxe-Hides
of all colors, and sluttishly made, which serves for provision there to the
Slaves, and the meanest sort of people inhabiting this large City; also thence
the Grand Seignior has his principal Timber for the building of his Galleys,
Ships, and such other like provisions.

Caffa does in matters of Merchandise and Trade retain still much of the
Customs of the Genoese, to whom for a long time it was subject; and so does
Thana, Sorgat, and other principal Cities bordering upon the Black Sea, which I
will in brief touch, so far as I have gathered the same when I lived in Turkey.

Coins current in Caffa
First then, the Coins of Caffa are the same as are current throughout Turkey,
save that the neighborhood of Tartaria and Muscovia makes the Coins of those
places and Kingdoms likewise pass current there, as it is found in all frontier
Towns which border upon two Nations, and that are either free of themselves, or
subject to other; therefore for the same I will reset the Reader to the Coins
current in those bordering Countries.

The weight of Caffa.
Their weight is a Rotolo, 100 whereof makes a Cantar, which answers in
Averdupois weight to 70 l. English; which said Cantar is divided into several
divisions, according to the Commodity bought or sold thereby; as sometimes to
Batmas, accounting 7 Batmas to a Cantar, and 12 Rotolo's to a Batma, and then a
Cantar is but 90 Rotolo's: and sometimes to Sommas and Saggies, as 124 Saggies
makes a Somma, and ten Somma's make a Cantar of 100 Rotolo's abovesaid; and
Silk is sold by this Somma, and 20 Somma's to a Draught, which is 2 Cantars,
and is English about 140 l. and in Venetia sotile weight 112 l. circa.

The Measures of Caffa.
Their measure so far as I could learn is but one, which is the Pico, the 100
whereof made in Venetia by trial of a friend, silk- Braces 130, and this Pico
is divided into 8 Rups, as at Constantinople.

Accounts in Caffa.
They have also a Coin which is called a Somma, in which their Accounts are
kept, and to which other Coins current are reduced; and the same is divided to
Saggis, which they account by 45 Saggis to a Somma, and 4 Sommes to a Soltany
or Chequin; and thus much shall serve for the Trade of Caffa.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of Astracan and the Trade thereof.
Astracan and the Trade thereof.
ASTRACAN is in Tartaria Asiatica, as I shall show hereafter, seated in the
Emboshure of the River Volga, having 70 months, and receives the Trade of all
the Caspian-Sea, into which the said River enters; it has a very great
confluence of Merchants, who by the benefit of that Sea have here a very great
Trade, Volga bringing it all the Commodities of Muscovia, Russia, and Tartaria;
and this Sea the commodities of Persia, Arabia and other Provinces abutting
thereupon; it is situate in an Island of 12 leagues compass, defended by a
wooden Castle and earthen Walls, taken by the Muscovites in Anno 1552. from the
Tartarians: it is all Winter shut up by the immeasurable cold, and all Traffic
over and upon this great stream is performed on dry foot.

The Coins here current, by reason of my ignorance I must refer to the better
experienced.

The Weights of Astracan.
Their weights are here two, a gross for gross Commodities, and a sotile for
fine Commodities; the gross Cattar has been observed to have in England
yielded 268 l. the small Cantar has made English 103 l. now in both these
Cantars there is accounted 20 Rotolo's to a Lib, and 5 Libs to a Cantar, and 12
Tochats to a Rotolo; which by the ingenious may easily be reduced to the sotile
English pound, therefore I pass it over, and come in the next place to the
measuras.

Measures of Astracan,
The common measure is a Pico, and the 100 thereof has made by observation in
Venetia 126 Braces of Cloth measure, which is in England about ( --) inches.

Corn and Wine.
Corn and all other grain is sold by a measure called the Chistetto, which in
Venetia comes to make 8 Staios.

Wine and liquid Commodities is sold by the Butt; which is 46 Mistaties, and
which also renders in Venetia 3 Bigonso.

Tartaria Asiatica.
In Tartaria Asiatica there are few Cities; for the Inhabitants by borders or
tribes travel with their substance from one place to another; yet in this Tract
is found Casan, and Astracan aforementioned, which is a very great Town of
Commerce, considering these Regions, commodiously seated, (as I said before) on
the mouth of the River Volga, by which there is a passage sound from the
Caspian-Sea in some seasons of the year up to Mosco, and by which way (as I
noted in the trade of Persia) some Merchants of Christendom more than once
intended to transport the silks, and other the riches of Persia to Muscovia,
and so to Europe; but the design proved dangerous and chargeable, by reason of
such potent Princes that border upon that River; and by reason that the same
must pass against the current stream, which in Winter is not found passable by
reason of the Frost, by which and other discouragements the design was given
over and fell to nothing.

Tartaria antiqua.
In Tartaria Antiqua, I find not any thing worthy of note, nor yet City of
import, the Inhabitants living like Vagabonds; Rhubarb,
only it affords Rhubarb, which is so excellent in Physic by its proper
nature, that the whole World is beholding to these Barbarians for the same as a
Cure for many Diseases.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Of Zagathai and Cathai, and the Provinces thereof.
Zagachai.
ZAgathai contains sundry Provinces, and but few Cities; Sarmacand.
the most famous is Sarmacand, which gave both Cradle and Grave to mighty
Tamberlain, from whom the Great Moguls boast themselves to be lineally
descended,

Cathai.
But Cathai is esteemed the richest and civilest Kingdom of all Tartary, the
which is furnished with sundry great and populous Cities, Cambalu.
especially Cambalu, the residence of the Great Cham, and where Merchants of all
Nations are found to reside and Traffic to; as I shall show hereafter.

Commodities of Cathai.
This Country is found to abound with Rice, Grain, Wool, Hemp, Rhuharb, Coral,
and abundance of Silks, both growing and brought hither from China and other
Countries, amounting to two thousand Carts yearly; the City is held to be 30
miles about in compass, and is replenished with all Artsmen ( Astrologers being
here in great reputation) which may (considering their number found here,
being, as some write, 5000) be more properly termed Fortunetellers, or Gypsies;
but these Countries resemble in customs the Muscovite and Chinois, none being
permitted to search into their Cities and manners, except they come either as
Ambassadors or Merchants; yet what I have gathered of the Trade of this
Country, I will include under the title of Cambalu, the principal City of this
Empire.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of Cambalu, and the Trade thereof.
Cambalu and the Trade thereof.
CAmbalu, the Metropolis of Cathai, as Sarmacand is of Zagathai, is seated on
the North-East bordering of this Country, containing both the old and new
City, through which does run the famous River of Polisanga; it is accounted 28
miles in compass, or rather in square, each Angle containing 7 miles, and in
every square is placed three principal Gates which incloseth the Town with
Earthen Walls or Rampires of 10 paces in thickness, and every Gate
comprehending a sumptuous Palace, and every Angle having also an excellent
Palace, where the Armours of the Garrison Soldiers are kept, which is 1000
Soldiers at every Gate,

The Buildings are squared out proportionably, and every Street is drawn out to
a line, so that every Gate yields a free prospect through the City to the
opposite Gate, beautified on each side with stately Edifices and Houses for the
Honorable of this Country.

In the midst of this City is a sumptuous Palace, wherein the Grand Cham
resideth, with all his Queens and Children, and wherein is placed a Bell, which
is tolled at certain hours of the Evening, after which may no man stir out of
doors, until the beginning of the day following; the largeness, rarities,
curiosity, and richness of this Palace, the partitions allowed his Queens, and
Lodgings appointed for his Children, and their daily Attendants, and the Order,
Beauty, and Manner thereof, I willingly omit, as not pertinent to my present
purpose.

Without this City Walls are accounted 12 Suburbs of 3 or 4 miles long
adjoining to each of the aforesaid 12 Gates, and here all Merchants, Strangers,
and Foreigners do abide, each Nation having a several Cane or Storehouse,
where they both lodge, and exercise their Merchandise, and traffic one with
another for the Commodities of these several Countries: The confluence of
Merchants here cannot choose but be wonderful, seeing it is reported that the
City is so populous, that the Cham maintains 5000 Astrologers here daily,
besides many thousands of Soldiers both of Horse and Foot, that 12000 Horse is
accounted but as his ordinary and daily Guard; Exendu, and the largeness
thereof.
besides which, the near neighborhood of Exendu, the principal place of the
Grand Cham, seated not many days Journey hence, where Merchants are not
permitted to enter, is built in a four square figure, every side extending
eight miles in length; within this Quadrant is another, whose sides are six
miles long; and within that another of four miles square, which is accounted
the very Palace it self; and between which several walls are found, Walks,
Gardens, Orchards, Fish Ponds, places for all manner of Courtly and Military
Exercises, and also Parks, Forests, and Chases, for all manner of Pleasures and
Game, and the infinite number of Attendants and Servitours, that of necessity
is required to wait upon so great a Prince, with the Officers thereto
belonging, cannot but much increase the Trade and Commerce of this City and
place.

As for the Trade of this City of Cambalu, and generally of all Tartaria, it is
observed, that the Country, (though in a large Tract) extending it self upon
the North Ocean, yet by reason of the long continued colds and frosts, the
Inhabitants have but little benefit thereof, however it may be conceived, that
the Molucco's, Japans, and other Islanders thereabout in the season of the
year, have here a great Traffic, and that hence these Tartarians are furnished
with the Spices of India the Gems of Pegu, and Bengala, and peradventure with
other the Drugs of Arabia^ but upon the Caspian Sea, they are the Masters of
many good Seaports, besides Astracan which of late they have lost to the
Muscovite, as Zahaspa Cosmi, Melmesuach, and others; by which is conveyed to
them the Silks, Tapestries, Carpets, Arms, and excellent Manufactures of
Persia, and in the Black-Sea, besides Capha, now in subjection to the Turks,
they enjoy the brave Ports of Curaropo, Asow, and others, serving to convey
unto them the Commodities of Turkey, Trabesond, Podolia, Walacia, and other
Countries bordering upon the famous River of Danubius.

Now for the other parts of this large Empire, it bordereth on the one side
with Muscovia, with whom it is now in peace, though not seldom at debate, from
whence by the benefit of Traffic, which I find observed not to be of any great
consequence, they have rich Furs and other the Commodities of this Country.

But where it bordereth upon China, which is for a very large extent of ground,
by some Author; accounted 400 leagues, the common report of the strict Laws and
Customs of that Nation (to debar entrance to all Strangers) should persuade me
of little Traffic that way; yet I find it observed by some late Travelers,
whose Relation herein is questionable, That the City of Cambalu receives
yearly thence by way of Traffic 10000 Carts laden with Silks and Stuffs of the
China Fabric; the truth thereof I refer to the censure of the Reader.

Coins current in Cambalu, and through Tartaria, of the bark of Mulberry-trees.
As for the Moneys current in this large Territory, I find it to be diversely
made, yet neither of Gold nor of Silver coined, but of the middle Bark of the
Mulbery Tree, which being made firm, and cut into diverse and round pieces great
and little, they imprint the King's mark thereupon, and from this mean Stuff
the Emperor causes a huge mass of Moneys to be yearly made at Cambalu, which
suffices for his whole Empire, and no Man under pain of death may coin or
spend any other Money, or refuse it in all his Kingdoms and Dominions; whereby
it comes to pass, That Merchants often coming hither from far and remote
Countries, bring with them Gold, Silver, Pearl, and precious Stones, and
receive the King's Money for them; and because the same is not current in their
Country, they therewith buy in this Empire other the Commodities here found,
which they carry hence away with them: the King also pays his stipends,
Officers and Armies with the said Moneys, and buyeth whasoever else he needs
with the same, so that no Prince in the World can exceed him in Treasure, which
is at so easy a rate provided and procured.

Of Coral polished.
Besides which, I find it observed in some parts of this large Country subject
to some subordinate Kings, in subjection to the Great Cham, that they use in
some places pieces of polisht Coral, in stead of Money; and in others they have
certain twigs of Gold in lieu of Money, which is distinguished by weight into
several parcels, without stamp or character, and this is accounted in matters
of consequence: Of Salt in Loaves hardened.
but they have a lesser Coin (if I may so term it) made of Salt, which they boil
in Caldrons for a certain time, which congealed they make into lumps, like our
Peny-loaves, which being made solid is signed with the Prince's Stamp, and
passes thus current amongst them, and wherewith they provide themselves of all
necessaries; In some others I find also that they use Porcelan for Money, and
weighed pieces of Gold; for in some Countries of this Empire Silver Mines are
not found, and they give in proportion one ounce of Gold for five ounces of
Silver; neither is it found in many places of this Country that they have the
use of Letters; therefore the Merchants make their Contracts and Obligations in
Tallies of Wood, the half whereof the one keeps, and the other the other
half: which being aftetwards paid and satisfied, the said Tally is restored;
not much unlike the custom of Tallies in England. And thus much shall serve to
have said of the Trade in general of this Country; the strange Customs,
Manners, and Forms of Government hinder all further particular knowledge of
Trade to our European Merchants: therefore leaving thus this Empire and City,
(contented with this short Survey) I proceed to India, of late years become
somewhat better known to Europe and to our Nation.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of INDIA, and the Provinces thereof.
The East India is commonly divided into two Parts, viz. The one is India
within Ganges, or that part thereof which lies on the Westside of the River of
Ganges, which contains 15 Provinces. 1. Dulsinda. 2. Pendab. 3. Mandao. 4.
Delly. 5. Agra. 6. Sanga. 7. Cambaia. 8. Decon. 9. Canara. 10. Malabar 11.
Narsinga 12. Oristan 13 Botanter 14. Patanaw 15. Bengala
In which is Places of Note, 1. Caximir, Cascimir, or Chusmur, 2. Roree, 3.
Nigara, 4. Seftan, 5. Multan, 6. Duckee. 1. Labor, 2. Saltan-paure. 3. Athee.
1. Mandac, 2. Molton, 3. Scernus, Polymbothy. 1. Delly, 2. Tremel, 3. Doceti.
1. Fatapore, 2. Agra, 3. Hendee, 4. Biani. 1. Azmere, 2. Citor.
The Province of 1. Sinda, in which is found 1. Tata, 2. Lawribander, 3.
Calwalla, 4. R. Redempore, 5. Nuraquemire. 2. Guzarat, in which is found 1.
Diu, 2. Sauran, 3. Boldra, 4. Ardovat, 5. Madabat, 6. Saringa, 7. Periano, 8.
Sarkeff. 3. Cambaia, in which is, 1. Cambaio, 2. Barocho. 3. Swalley, 4. Surat,
5. Neriand, 6. Doman, 7. Campanel, 8. Dacaiotote, 9. Netherby, 10. Bandore, 11.
Tanai.
In which is Places of Note, 1. Bidoe, 2. Visapore, 3. Danagar. 4. Decan, 5.
Syntacora, 6. Goa, 7. Chaul, 8. Balagnate, 9. Brampore, 10. Sara. 1. Melinda,
2. Onor, 3. Baticalia, 4. Mangalor, 5. Mayendre, 6. Lispor, 7. Solsettee.
Is divided into seven Provinces, viz. 1. Cononor. 2. Callicut. 3. Cranganor. 4.
Cochin. 5. Cai-Colam 6. Conlax. 7. Travancor
where is 1. The City of Cononor, 2. Cata, 3. Peripatan, 4. Marabia, 5.
Tramopatan, 6. Main. 1. Pandarane, 2. Tanor, 3 Partangale, 4. Chatua, 5. Chale,
6. Capacote, 7. Calicut. 1. Cranganor, a City of that Name. 1. Augmale, 2.
Cochin. 1 Caia-Colam, the chief town 1 The City of Coulan. 1 Travancer, the
chief City, 2. Qualicare.
In which is of Note, 1. Cael, 2. Golconda, 3. Chamdagrin, 4. Prepeti, 5.
Chahambaram, 6. Madura, 7. Gingi, 8. Tanaor, 9. Moliapur, 10. Choromandel, 11.
Casta, 12. Negapatan, 13. Tarnassari, 14. Bisnagar, 15. Penegardo, 16.
Narsinga, the chief City. 1. Oristan, 2. Cateoba, 3. Angeli, 4. Bacalli, 5.
Sinnergan, 6. Senerpate. 1. Bottia, 2. Clamur, 3. Kucares, 4. Couche, 5.
Gouren, 6. Rame, 7. Recan, 8. Tripura. 1. Patane, 2. Banaras, 3. Siripur, 4.
Ciandecan.
1. Bengala the City, 2. Gouro, 3. Catigan, 4. Taxd^, 5. Porow Crande, 6. Poror
Pequeno. 2. The Islands in the Gulf of Bengala, are,
The other is India without Ganges, or that part thereof which lies on the
East Side the River of Ganges, which contains six Provinces. 1. Brama. 2.
Couchin-China 3. Cambaia 4. Jangoma 5. Siam 6. Pegu.
Where is Places of Note, 1. Melintay, 2. Miranda, 3. Bacan 4. Cavilan, 5. Pro^,
6. Tangu, 7. Ana, 8. Brema. 1. The City of Couchin-China. 1. Campa, 2. Cambaia,
3. Gudurmuch, 4. Coul.
In which is the Provinces, 1. Jangoma, 2, Lonea, 3. Curroy,
In which is 1. The Kingdom of Malaca, where is the City of 1. Malaca,
Sincapura, 3. Polazimbilam, 2. Jor, alias Johor, a City so called in that
Kingdom, 3. Kingdom is Patana, where is the City of Patane, 4. The Kingdom of
Siam, where is 1. Socotai, 2 Quedoa. 3. Tana, 4. Lugar, 5. Calantam, 6. Siam,
5. The Kingdom of Mountay, where is the City of Odia, alias Udie.
Is divided into five Kingdoms, viz. 1. Verma, the chief City thereof is Verma.
2. Machin. the chief City thereof so called. 3 Orachan, the chief Towns therein
are. 1. Dianga, 2. Sundina, 3. Arachan. 4. Martuan, the principal City therein
so called. 5. Pegu, in which is 1. Cosmi, 2. Jocabel, 3. Diun, 4. Coilan, 5.
Lanagon, 6. Dala, 7. Siluamped, 8. Mecao, 9. Siriangh, 10. Pegu, the principal
City.



India and the Provinces thereof.
INdia is bounded on the East with China, on the West with the River Indus, on
the North with Tartaria abovementioned, on the South with the Ocean, taking his
name of Indus, a famous River here running 1000 miles ere it meet the Ocean; it
lay after the conquest thereof by Alexander the Great for many years
undiscovered, the Merchants only thereof were found to bring their native
Commodities to Sarmacand, and Cambalu aforementioned, to exchange against such
Commodities as those Countries afforded, as to the common Empories, and
likewise to Ormus, where they provided themselves of all Egyptian and Arabian
Commodities, by which means knowledge was got of their Countries; but the great
worth and wealth thereof was not fully known and discovered to us till of late
years, by the Navigation first of the Portugals; then of the Dutch and English,
this Country became better surveyed, Commodities of India.
finding that the same afforded and abounded in all manner of Minerals, ( Lead
and Copper only excepted) with all manner of Cattle ( Horse excepted;) with all
manner of precious Stones, with all manner of Spices, some Drugs, and other
Commodities, as in their particular Provinces shall be more particularly
remembered.

Ganges.
The famous River Ganges runs through this Country, to which the Indians go
in Pilgrimage, as if the water washed in or drunk could bring Salvation to
them: this divides India into two parts, called India intra Gangem, and India
extra Gangem, both which include many large Provinces and Kingdoms; and first
India intra Gangem has nine principal Kingdoms, which I will briefly,
following some Authors opinions, pass cursorily through.

1. Narsinga.
First Narsinga, the chief City Maleaper; or St. Thomas where they hold the Body
of this Apostle was burnt, though the Spaniards hold his Body was found under I
know not how many fathom of ground in Calamana, by devout Friars, that after
the religious receipt of the Sacrament of their Wafer-God, dug for him and
found it; vide Mafe Jesuit. 2. Malavar.
The second is Malavar, 3. Ballasia. Conanor.
and the third Ballasia, in which are found three famous Mart-Towns, Cochin and
Calicute, and Conanor: the last having a large and safe Haven, commodious for
the Trade of these Countries, distant from Calicute 30 miles, and Calicute
distant from Cochin 80 miles: Calicute, by reason of its great concourse of
Merchants is here a famous Mart, and extends it self for three miles all
along the shore, principally affording to Christendom that sort of Pepper,
taking its name hence of Calicute Pepper, also Callicoes Cloth, and the other
sort of Pepper of the name of this Country of Malavar.

4. Cambaia
The fourth is Cambaia, a Famous Kingdom, very rich and populous, the chief City
is also of the same name, and one of the richest of these Countries, containing
800000 persons.

5. Mandao.
The fifth is Mandao, wherein is the City of Mandao, being 30 miles in compass,
which held out a Siege of 12 years against the Mogul, who is King hereof, as
likewise of those former Provinces named.

6. Bengala. 7. Aristan.
The sixth and seventh is Bengala and Aristan, where is found the Cities of
Cattigan and Satigan, and principally for Trade that of Bengala, on the Banks
of a Gulf known by that name; and Orissa inhabited by Christians of St. Thomas
so called, because he converted them.

8. Canora.
The eighth is Canora, under the command of the Mogul; the most Famous Cities
are Ultabat, Lispor, Melinda, etc.

9. Dellia.
The ninth is Dellia, the chief City being Dellie, the sometimes residence of
the great Mogul, the other famous Cities are Tremel, Fatabar, and Chesmer,
famous for the study here of Magic: all these mighty Provinces have been
conquered by the Great Mogul's Forces within these 90 years, to the
astonishment of all India.

India extra Gangem.
India extra Gangem contains 12 potent Kingdoms, and all under the command of
the potent Kings of Barma, which cursorily I will also run over.

1. Macin.
The first is Macin, Lignum vitae.
famous for that Sweet-wood which this Country does produce, called Aloes or
Lignum vitoe, valued at its weight in pure Silver, serviceable only here for
the pompous Funerals of great Princes; the chief City is the said Macin.

2. Aracan
The second is Aracan, Ava.
wherein is the City of Ava, which through the World is so famous for the
abundance of Gems.

3. Cambaia.
The third is Cambaia, famous for this City of Cambaia, a place of great
Traffic, which affords plenty of Gold, Silver, Aloes, and many other
Commodities of great worth.

4. Couchin-China.
The fourth is Couchin China, abounds with the like Commodities brought to
Couchin-China, the chief City of this Kingdom; and much frequented by Merchants
of all Countries for Porcelane and China-dishes here made, and much in esteem
and use in these Countries.

5. Barma.
The fifth is Barma, made famous only within 60 years, for the Princes hereof
have vanquished all the former Kingdoms, and made them Tributaries to this
Kingdom and this Scepter.

6. Siam.
The sixth is Siam, once the Lady of all India, now subject to Barma: the
principal Cities are Mollacia, in compass 20 Miles, a Town of great resort for
Merchants for the Traffic of Spices, and now in subjection to the Portugals.
The next is Siam, situate on the River Mean, which every year overfloweth the
Country for 120 miles: and lastly, Odin, on the River Cuipomo, on which 200000
Boats are found daily to be set on work, and contains 400000 Families; and is
now known the residence of that Famous and Fortunate King of Barma,
beforementioned.

7. Pegu.
The seventh is Pegu, which gives name to a principal City, having a rich soil
and harborous Seashore; the principal known Haven is Martaban; and here is
also Lasmin a City of great Commerce. This Country has suffered much by Sword,
Pestilence, and Famine within these late years, and is now, as the rest, a
Province of this aforesaid powerful King of Barma.

Now having thus surveyed India in the general and in gross, as it is divided
into Kingdoms and Provinces, it will be requisite it should next be surveyed in
the particular, so far as it may concern our present purpose, which is the
Commerce and Trade thereof; so far forth as it is at this day known to our
Nation, wherein I could wish my Experience better to show the particulars
thereof, in consideration of the large extent of ground that is comprised under
this name of India, stretching it self from Taurus to the Ocean one way, and
from China to Persia, which is near 4000 miles another way, at which place it
will be fittest for me to begin my Trade, and see what may be observed therein.
Yet before I enter into this discovery, and give a particular relation of such
materials, wherewith Trade is in it self practiced through this large tract of
Lands, Islands, and Seas; and before I show the matter wherewith this Trade is
in all this Country driven, it will not be improper I should also see who they
principally are that manage this Trade, and to whom this great Traffic
appertains, either as they are Natives and here born, or as they are
Strangers and here are induced to reside, attracted thereto by the sole motive
of the great Commerce and rich Commodities found either naturally here growing,
or artificially here made and produced.

Commodities of India in general.
This Country then, as I said before, abounds in the general with all manner
of Minerals, Copper and Lead excepted; with all sorts of Cattle, Horses
excepted; with all manner of Spices, with many sorts of Drugs, Cotton, Cloth,
precious Stones, etc. to which may be added the want of Wine and Wheat that
here they have, that so this Country may be beholding in some sort to others,
as others are for her commodities to this. These being then the prime
Commodities wherewith Trade is here maintained, I will note the Traders and
native Merchants that are here resident, which properly I may account to be of
five several sorts, all acknowledging several Rites, Religions, and Customs;
and therefore partake of so many several forms and manners in the managing of
their Affairs of Merchandising. The Merchants in general trading in India.
The Gentile Merchants are the first, and are found of great Eminency in some
parts of this Tract. The native Christians converted by the discipline of St.
Thomas, are the second, who in many places are found to manage a great and
ample Trade through this Country; the third are the Mahometans, Persians, and
Tartarians, especially since the great Victories of the Mogul, found here also
of great quality and estate. The fourth are the Jews, who live straglingly
dispersed over and through all parts of this Country, and in every Prince's
Dominions exercise the same. The fifth are Moors and Arabians, who some 200
years past seized on some Haven-Towns here along this Coast, driving the
Natives into the Inland parts, and at this day are seen to be very great
Merchants. The sixth are the Portugals, who possessing some few Sea-Towns
commodious for Traffic, brag of the conquest of the whole Country, which they
are in no more possibility entirely to conquer and possess, than the French
were to subdue Spain when they were possessed of the Fort of Perpignan; or the
English to be Masters of France, when they were only Sovereigns of Callis. And
now to the Cities of this Tract, where at this day is found a Trade to be
practiced, and first of Diu.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of DIU, and the Trade thereof.
Diu and the Trade there of.
THE Town and Island of Diu lies about 20 Leagues from the Famous River Indus,
and not far distant from the firm Land: It is now subject to the Portugals. who
have conquered both the Island and Town from the King of Cambaia, and so
fortified it, as it is conceived to be now invincible. This Town has a very
good and great Haven, and therein is found a great concourse of Merchants of
all Nations, as Turks, Persians, Arabians, Armenians, and others of sundry
Countries; and because of the continual Traffic thereof, it is accounted the
best and most profitable Revenue the King of Spain has in all India, for that
the Banians; Gusurates, Rumo's, and Persians, which Traffic in Cambaia, and
from thence to the Red Sea and Mecca, do both discharge their Wares and take in
their Lading here at Diu, by reason of the commodious situation thereof, as
lying at the entrance of Cambaia, and from Diu it is shipped and sent to Cambaia,
and so brought back again to Diu.

Commodities of Diu, and that Coast.
The Commodities of this place and this Coast, are first, fine Cotton-Linnen of
sundry sorts, which they call Jorims, Sluyers, and Lamparads, and which we call
by the general name of Callicoes, also Cocos, Oil, India Nuts, Butter, Pitch,
Tar, Sugar candied, Iron good store, and most excellent and fair Leather, which
is artificially wrought with Silks of all colors both flowers and personages;
and which is in India much esteemed to lay upon Beds and Tables, instead of
Carpets and Coverlets: they make also here all sorts of curious Dseks,
Cupboards, Chests, Boxes, Standishes, and a thousand such like devices in Wood,
gilded with variety of colors, wrought with Imagery and Mother of Pearl,
which are carried hence throughout all India; but especially to Goa and Cochin,
against the time that the Portugal Ships come thither to take in their Lading
to go homeward.

Other observations of the further Trade of this place I refer to Goa, the
Metropolis of India in possession of the Portugals, to which all the other
Forts possessed by the Portugals, in some sort have a reference in the matter
and manner of their Trade.

CHAP. XC. Of Cambaia, and the Trade thereof.
Of Cambaia, and the Trade thereof.
CAmbaia, the principal City of the Kingdom so called, is a fair and large
City, and contained some years past 800000 persons; it is seated on the
enclosure of the Famous River Indus, and there the River inlargeth it self to a
great breadth, till it come to the Isles of Vacas, having the Island of Diu on
the one side, and the Cities of Deman and Surrat on the other: it is absolutely
the greatest City of Trade in these parts, and therein is a Factory seated for
the Traffic in these Countries of the English and Dutch East India Companies:
Here is also found a great concurrency of Merchants as well of Christians, as
of Persians, Arabians, and Armenians, but the Natives which are called the
Gusurates and Banians, are esteemed the greatest and most politic Merchants of
all India, and held in subtlety equal with any Nation under the Sun.

Commodities of Cambaia.
The Commodities for Traffic that this Country either naturally affords, or
is artificially here fabricated, is Corn, Rice, and such Grain; Butter and Oil,
wherewith for their abundance they furnish all the Countries round about them;
also great quantity of Cotton Linnens are here made, which we term Callicoes of
all sorts, called by them Canequins, Boffetta's, Jarins, Cantares, and others
of sundry kinds of making, from the very coarsest wherewith they make their
Sails for Shipping, to the finest, which are by us known by the name of Callico
Lawns: Also here are made sundry fine Carpets called Alcatiffes and Banquies;
also many sorts of Coverlets, called Codorins; also many Manufactures of Wood
carved and imbellisht, some with Mother of Pearl, and some with Silver, and
such like; also here are found sundry sorts of precious stones, as Spinals,
Rubies, Granads, Jacinths, Amethysts, Chrysolites, Amber, Agats, Jaspes; also
sundry Drugs, as Opium, Camphora, Bangue, and Sandal-wood, Sugars, and lastly
and principally Anil or Indico is here growing, prepared and made ready, and
from hence carried throughout the whole World: the principal places in this
Country affording the same is, Bianny, Fetterbarre, Sherkis, Lahore, and other
places thereabouts.

Surrat and Baroche, and the Trade thereof.
To this place I should add the famous Port of Surrat and Baroche, being as is
Cambaia under the subjection of the Great Mogul, and seated in this Tract,
which because in matters of Traffic I do not find to vary from the former, I
willingly omit, and therefore comprehend them under this Chapter and Title,
proceeding to the current Coins, Weights, and Measures found in use and
practiced in these Cities, as in subjection to one and the same Prince, who is
Sovereignt hereof.

Coins of Cambaia and Mogul's Country.
The ancient current and general Coin of this Country is the Mahmudy, stamped
by that Famous King Mahmood in the first conquest of these Countries, which was
accounted for ( --) Res of Portugal, and by the English there resident
estimated 12 d. sterling. But the Grand Mogul being the last Conqueror,
prohibited the said coins of Mahmudis, and therefore at this day they are found
very scarce, yet most frequent in Gusurat. The most current Coin now throughout
his Territories being the Ruppie, of which there are diverse sorts, which are,

The Casanna Ruppia which is the common Ruppia, worth in India Mahomudy, and
estimated incirca 2 s. 3 d. sterling.

The Jacquiree Ruppie, 5 of which makes 6 Casanna Ruppies.

The Soway Ruppie -- 4 whereof makes 5 Casanna Ruppies.

The Hondee Ruppie, of equal value with the Casanna Ruppie abovesaid; Accounts
kept in Surrat and Cambaia.
and in these last do the Merchants of Gusurat keep their accounts: Besides
which, they have for smaller Coins current these.

The Pice, accounting 24 to the Mamody, which is 10 d. sterling.

The Shahee, accounted to the 16 Picos, or 10 Cosbegs.

And some there are that keep their accounts in Mahomodis, accounting 2
Mahomody to be one Hondee or Casanna Ruppie, being thus estimated for 2 s. 6 d.
sterling, as 2 Ruppies are accounted for 1 ^ Spanish, though indeed not found
always of that value, for the Ruppie is here observed with the right of a
Prince's coin, and the ^ for a merchandise or commodity, rising and falling:
the said Ruppia in Agra is found to pass for 84 Pices, but this is thus most
current in Amadever, Lahoro, and other the places where the Christians of
Europe and others do provide and buy their Indico, etc. and there two of the
said Ruppia's make in ordinary payment for Merchandise 1 ^ Spanish.

Weights in Cambaia, Surrat, Agra. and the Mogul's Dominions.
There is generally found throughout the Dominions of the Great Mogul two
several weights, the one proper to Silk, and the other for all Merchandise
besides, and both of these have their foundation upon a weight of Copper,
called, as the Coin aforesaid, the Pice.

A Pice in Silk is accounted 5 Mitigals.

A Mitigal is (^) about 13 d. 10 Troy.

A Pice of Silk is also accounted for 2 Tolls, 1 Toll is 12 Masses.

A Sear, of which there is a small and great; the small Sear is ordinarily used
in Silk, and accounted 30 Tolls.

Now for the common weight for all other Commodities, I will begin with the
Sear, which varies here in several parts of this Country.

A Sear of Surrat is 18 Pices weight of Copper money, which is 13 ounces
Averdupois.

A Sear of Agra, called the Sear Acoberg, is 30 Pices, which is 22 ounces
Averdupois.

A Sear of Agra, called the Sear Janquery, is 36 Pices, being the common Sear
of all India, and double the Surrat Sear, which is 26 ounces.

A Sear of Puttana and Ganges is 37 Pices, and those that have made a strict
calculation, have found that 22 common Pices makes 16 ounces Averdupois.

They have also in use in these Countries two Maunds.

A Maund small of Surrat is 40 Sears of Surrat, and the said Maund is 33 l.
Averdupois.

But they have for some Commodities another Maund in Surrat about 27 l.
Averdupois.

A Candil of Surrat, Cambaia, etc is 20 of the said Maunds.

Sears 40 makes a small Maund of 33 l. English.

Sears 40 great make a great Maund of 54 3/^ l. English, and some have observed
it to be 55 l. English; and this is the Maund of Agra.

Amadever.
In Amadever this difference is found in the said weight.

A Maund is 40 Sear, which is 18 Pices, and 33 l. English.

And the 100 Maunds of Amadever is 63 Maunds of Agra.

For Gold, Silver, Musk, Civet, Bezoar-stone, they have another weight which
they call the Toll, being 12 Masses, and is 7 d. 16 grain Troy weight in
England, as has been observed both by the English and Portugal Merchants.

It is not to be questioned, but that this so large tract of Country must admit
of more diversity of Weights, which I am enforced to pass over in silence by
reason of my ignorance, and refer what is here omitted to the better
experienced.

Measures in Cambaia, Surrat, Agra and Mogul's Country.
There is used in these parts two common measures, and both called a Covato, a
short and long Covado.

The short Covado of Surrat, Cambaia, etc. used in the sales of many
Commodities, as Linen and Silk is 27 inches English.

The long Covado of Surrat used for woollen cloth is 35 inches.

But in Agra, Labor, Dilly, Brampore, etc. the ordinary and common Covado is
found to hold 32 inches, and called in some places of this Country Elahy.

At Puttana they have a Covado of 38 inches, and by the observation of some, it
has been found that 1 ^/3 Covado of Puttana is 5 Covado's of Agra, which makes
four Yards English.

And note, That in all the Moguls Country they use no concave measures for any
grain or liquid commodities, but sell the same by weight, in the same nature as
they do all ponderous and massy commodities,

They measure their ground and days journeys by a measure which they call a
Corso, which is one thousand five hundred Geometrical paces, and is accounted
in common estimation of our late Travelers a mile and a half English.

Lahore.
In this tract and belonging to this Prince are many famous Towns of Trade, the
chiefest is Lahore, famous for the Indico there growing, and prepared; and for
that admirable High way to Agra of twenty days journey, beset on each side with
Mulberry-trees, and whence there departs yearly above twelve thousand Camels
laden with Spices to Hispahan, which are brought hither from India.

Amadabar.
The next principal town is Amadabar, famous in these parts for the great trade
and excellent situation thereof, as being the most eminent City of the
Gusurates. Tutta.
Neither is Tutta here to be forgotten, though an Island Town, yet seated on the
famous River of Indus, and having dependency and belonging thereunto:
Lowribander.
and that excellent Port of Lowribander, three days journey distant from it, on
the shore commonly entitled the Coast of Sindie, wherein it has been observed
by our European Navigators, that Ships may safely ride without receiving harm
by the Worms, which do much hurt in SURAT, and all along the coast of India.

CHAP. XCI. Of GOA, and the Trade thereof.
Goa, and the trade thereof.
GOA is the Metropolis of India, I mean of those that are under the command of
the Portugal or Spaniard, where the Viceroy, Archbishop, and the King his
Consul, and Chancery do reside; here is also the Staple of all India
Commodities, whereto Merchants of Arabia, Armenia, Persia, Cambaia, Bengala,
Pegu, Siam, Malacca, Java, Molucco, China, and of sund^y other Countries do
resort: It is seated in an Island of three miles circuit, but is but little
distant from the firm Land; the Port is capacious of good Ships, but if they
exceed 200 Tuns, they unlade short of the Town a place called Bardes, well
built with fair houses both public and private, after the Portugal manner, and
has in it many Cloisters, Churches, and Priories; but is not fortified with
any walls, but the contrived and continued buildings of the houses, serves both
for the defense and enclosure: in the heart of the City is a Street called the
Leilon, where a daily assembly is made from 7 to 9 in the morning, not only of
Merchants from all parts, but also of Gentry; and during the said hours the
said Street is replenished with all Commodities and Merchandise from all the
aforementioned Kingdoms, set forth in manner of our Fairs in England; which daily
is thus practiced, and wherein the rich Commodities of those Countries are
vended and put to sale; besides which, there are particular Streets where the
native Indians do dwell together, being found to be here great Merchants, and
for the most part inhabit near together, especially such as are found to be of
one and the same Art and Profession, being bound by the strict Laws of this
Country, every man to marry within his own and the same Trade, and to bring up
likewise their children in their own and the same Profession; which law (being
strictly observed) gives great perfection to all Arts here practiced: Their
Winter begins here the last of April, continuing till September, and is called
Winter, not for the cold, but for the continual rains that are found all this
time; the rest of the time is accounted Summer, which is without rain, and the
pleasantest of all other seasons upon this Coast.

Commodities of Goa.
The Commodities natural of this place are not observable^ the Island small, and
the firm Land plentiful in Palm trees, Cocus, and the like: the City is the
common Staple for all India Commodities, brought hither by others, and here
bartered and exchanged for other; but of it self not affording any of note or
consequence.

Coins current in Goa.
They have here two sorts of Moneys, a good, and a bad, and therefore in all
contracts they are as well to bargain for the money that is to be received, as
for the commodity that is to be sold: but because this place is neighboured
with sundry great Nations that traffic hither; it will be fit I should enlarge
my self a little further on this subject.

The common moneys here current is called the Pardaus Xeraphin, Coined here,
and worth 300 Res of Portugals, and is as much as three Testons, which is
English money about four shillings six pence sterling.

One Pardon is five Tanga's, which is an imaginary coin, and is in both sorts
of the coins in use, as accounting five Tanga's bad money, being the same in
worth as four Tanga's of good money.

One Tanga's is worth four good Ventins, and five bad Ventins, a coin also
imaginary, and not real, and is worth seventy five Basaruco's.

A Vintin is worth 15 bad Basaruco's, and 18 good Basaruco's, which is the
lowest and smallest coin here in use.

Tree Basaruco's is worth two Res of Portugal money, and by this account, the
Pardu Sheraphin is worth 375 Basaruco's: and these are all the proper coins of
Goa: the other here current are.

The Persia Larins, a coin of very fine silver, and worth 110 Basaruco's.

The Pagode of gold worth about 10 Tanga's, is, 8 s. sterling.

The Venetiander of gold, worth 2 Pardaus Sheraphin.

The St Thomas of gold, worth 8 Tanga's.

The Rial of ^ called Pardaus de Reales, worth commonly 440 Res of Portugal;
but these and the Larins of Persia may here be accounted for Commodities,
rising and falling in price, as the occasions of Merchants enforce them.

Sheraff^
But note, that all moneys are here paid and received by the hands of Sheraffs,
as is the manner in Turkey and other Eastern Countries, who make good the loss
and damage either in tale or goodness for a small consideration, and by the
Portugals termed Cernidors.

Weights of Goa.
The weights common in Goa, and along the coast of India, that is subject to the
Crown of Spain, are diverse; the usual known is as in Portugal the Quintal and
the Rove; and this is most in use for all European Commodities.

But they have in use another, proper for Honey, Sugar, Butter, which is called
the Maund, being 12 l. of the weight abovementioned.

Another proper only to Pepper, and other such Indian Spices, they have, which
they call the Bahar, accounted three Quintals and a half of Portugal weight,
which by reason of the mere concordancy that it has with the hundred of
London, I shall not need to say any thing further thereof.

Measures of Goa.
The measure of length is the same as is used in Lisborn.

The measure of Grain, Rice, and such like Commodities is called a Medida,
being about a sp^ high, and half a finger broad, 24 whereof is accounted a
Maund.

Maunds 20, is accounted one Candil, which is about 14 Bushels English, and by
this measure they account their Tunnage in shipping; yet it is found, that some
sort of Rice is here sold by the Fardo, being round bundles wrapped in straw, and
bound about with cords, and these should weigh by the custom of the place 3
Maunds.

There is upon this coast a great trade in use for Pearls, which because it is
of great moment in this and other places of India, it will be fit I should show
the manner thereof.

The order how they fish, and trade for Pearls.
The fishing for Pearls begins yearly in March and April, and continues but
50 days; but yet they fish not always in one place every year, but change their
places by certain appointed and settled orders amongst the principal that have
the oversight thereof.

Now when the time of this fishing draws near, then they send very good
Diverse that go purposely to discover where the greatest heaps of Oysters are
under water, and on the shore opposite to that place, there they set up and
plant a Village with Houses, and a Bazaro or marketplace, of stone and other
materials, which stands as long as the fishing time lasts; and is for that
time furnished with all things necessary, which now and then happens to be
near unto places inhabited, and now and then afar off, according to the place
appointed for that years fishing.

The fishermen themselves are for the most part Christians, natives of that
Country; neither is any other debarred from this fishing that will, paying a
certain tribute or acknowledgment to the King of Spain, and to the Jesuits who
have sundry Churches upon that coast: now during the said Fishing, there are
always maintained three or four Fasts or Galliots armed to defend the fishers
from injuries and Rovers The order of which fishing is observed to be thus:

There are commonly three or four Barks, and their companies that make
consortship together, much resembling our English Pilot-boats, having eight or
ten men in a boat, and in the morning they go out together from the shore, and
anchor in 15 or 18 fathom water, which is the ordinary depths of this whole
coast; and being thus moored to their Anchor, they cast a Rope into the Sea,
and at the end of that rope usually make fast a great stone, and then they have
in readiness, a Diver, who has his nose and his ears well stopped and anointed
with Oil, and a basket fastened about his neck, or under his left arm; then he
sinketh down by the said rope to the bottom of the Sea, and as fast as he can
be fills the said basket, and being full, he then shakes the rope, and his
fellows that hold the other end, and are in their Bark, instantly hale him up
with his filled basket, and in this wise they go one by one until they have
laden their said boat with Oysters; and in the evening returning a shore to the
Village, every company makes their own heap or mount of Oysters by themselves,
one distant from another in such wise, that there is seen a great long row of
mounts or heaps of Oysters, which remain untouched until such time as the
fishing be ended; and at the end whereof every company sits down about their
mount or heap, and fall to opening of them, which they may easily do, because
that then they be both dry, dead, and brittle; and if every Oyster should prove
to have Pearls in them, it would prove a very good purchase unto them: but many
are found to have no Pearls at all in them; therefore when their fishing is
done, they then perceive whether their said fishing and gathering proves good
or bad.

Now there are certain men expert in the choice and distinction of Pearls,
which here they call Chittini, which set and make the price of Pearls,
according to their carracts, each carract being four grains, and these with an
instrument of Copper having holes therein of several greatness serving to
distinguish the sorts, to which also they consider their beauty and goodness,
and then thereof make four several sorts. The first sort be the round Pearls,
which they call Aia or Unia of Portugal, because the Portugals by them: The
second sort, which are not round, are called Aia of Bengala: the third sort,
which are not so good as the second, they call Aia of Canora, that is to say,
the Kingdom of Bisnagar: The fourth and last, and indeed the worst sort, they
call Aia of Cambaia: and thus the price being by the men set thereon, according
to their sorts, goodness, and greatness, there are Merchants of every Country
which are ready with their Moneys in their hands to buy them; so that in few
days, all the said parcels are bought up, according to the said prices set upon
them, altering according to the carract, beauty, and shape thereof. And this is
the manner of the fishing, and dispersing of the Pearls throughout India, and
thence through the World, so far forth as I thought good to insert the same in
this place.

CHAP. XCII. Of the Trade in general practiced along the Coast of India.
The general Trade of the Coast of India.
THE Coast of India known in these Regions, is only so accounted from the
Islands called las Vachas, or from the Town of Daman to the Cape of Comarin,
not above 200 miles in length, wherein besides the Metropolis Goa, are found
sundry others in subjection to the Crown of Portugal; as first Daman to the
North of Goa; then Basain, then Chaul, Dabul, and then Goa: and to the
Southward, which some call the Coast of Malabar, they hold Romes, Onor,
Barselor, Mangalor, Cananor, Calicut, Craganor, Cochin, Coulon, and Cape de
Comeri, which is accounted the last end of the Coast of Malabar and India: For
the better understanding the Trade of these Sea ports, it will be needful I
should somewhat more particularly survey the same.

Daman. Basasen. Chaul.
First then, It is to be understood, that the Northern part of this Coast is
held the wholesome and purest Air for habitation, the principal places being
Daman, Basasen, and Chaul, which are found in themselves to have good Havens,
whereto great Traffic is maintained throughout India; the Country hereabouts
abounding in Rice, Pease, and other grains, Butter and Oil of Nuts, also Cotton
Cloth great quantity, especially Baroches, taking the name from a City of this
Coast; and in Chaul is found very great concourse of Merchants and Traffic to
Ormus, Cambaia, Sinde, Masquate, Bengala, having therein many rich Merchants,
and Ships of great burden; and here is also made diverse kinds of Silk, Stuffs,
as Grograms, Sattim, Taffata's, and such like in such abundance, that India,
and all other places bordering, are served therewith, and beholding thereto,
which brings a great Trade to the said City of Chaul, for they bring in the raw
Silk of China, and being here spun, woven, and wrought, carry it out again, and
distribute it throughout India, and the neighboring Countries; here also they
make fair and excellent wrought Bedsteds, Boxes, Desks, Stools, and other
wooden Arts, which bring them great profit, and make this place famous
throughout these parts.

Coast of Malabar, and the Trade thereof.
As for the Coast of Malabar, Onor is of good esteem, where there is a great
quantity of Pepper yearly laden by the Portugal's Factors, accounted the best
and fullest Berry in all India, the Country hereabouts belonging to a Queen
rich in Pepper, who sells the said Commodity only to the Portugals; but
receives her money six months beforehand, and at the season delivers the
said contracted Pepper, which by the Portugals is housed in their Fort, which
(by her leave) they have here built, till their shipping come to fetch it away,
which is commonly but once a year.

Cananor.
Cananor is held the best Fort they have upon all this Coast, and does abound
with Rice and Pepper, and near the Fort is a fair Town which is plentifully
stored with all the Commodities of this Coast and Shore, especially abounding
in all manner of Victuals and provision, and Masts for Ships of all sizes and
sorts.

Calicut.
Calicut was once the most famous Town of Trade of all this shore, and gave
name not only to the sorts of Pepper that here grow, but also to that sort or
Cotton Cloth that was first hence transported for Europe, but the Emperor the
then Sovereign, Cochin.
being Enemy to the King of Cochin, with whom the Portugals at their first
arrival here sided, and prospered, by that means overthrew the great Traffic
of Calicut, and advanced the Traffic of Cochin, whose Sovereign by means of
the Trade is now become a mighty and rich Prince in this Country, the City of
Cochin it self thereby so enlarged, enriched, and so well inhabited by
Portugals, who are in part the new Masters, by native Malabars and other
Nations, and seated upon a pleasant River, and enjoying the commodity of a good
Channel and Haven; that it is accounted in these parts for Trade and concourse
of Merchants the only second to Goa: here is laden yearly great quantity of
Pepper, and a course sort of Cinnamon, vulgarly called de Matte, nothing
comparable to Cinnamon of Zelan accounted the best; and hither come all the
Portugal Ships to lade homewards, after that they have unladen their European
Commodities in Goa, which adds much to the Trade of this City. Two Commodities
hither imported do much enrich this place. 1. The great store of Silk that
comes hither raw from China to be wrought, and next the great store of Sugar
that comes from Bengala to be spent, for which the married Citizens are found
to pay no custom to the King of Cochin, though for all others they pay 4 per
cent. but the stranger and unmarried pay at Cochin nothing to the King; but to
the Portugal 8 per cent. The manner of the farming the Pepper in India by the
Portugals.
And because this great Traffic for Pepper is only peculiar to some private
Merchants or Farmers authorized by the Kings of Spain, it will not be unproper
I should here relate the manner thereof: It is to be understood then that the
Kings of Portugal, the first European Traders into these parts, in all their
Navigations and Discoveries, ever added the benefit of Commerce toward the
supportation of the expenses of their Conquests; and having here built for
convenience of Trade, and protection of their Merchants, and Subjects, many
Fortresses and Castles; they ever so settled them, that the commodiousness of
the Haven, Port or Harbor, joined to the native Commodities of the place,
might add means and fair inducements to make by Traffic their conquests
profitable. This Coast then being found to abound with Pepper, a principal
Commodity then requested in Europe, designed it to be converted to his peculiar
profit, by all the provident ways of a circumspect Merchant; Chi cr^po abrazia
poca stringe.
but Princes that will embrace all, sometimes grasp but a little; for the same
could not be so profitably contrived, considering the distance of way, length
of time, and trust to be committed to Factors, Captains of Forts, and others;
but he found himself to come far short of his expectation in this point,
whereupon he was advised to let out the same to Farm, and contracted it at
certain conditions to certain great and eminent Merchants, who should stand in
his place strongly and amply privileged, and should enjoy a part of the gains
for themselves, and yet bring the greatest crop of their labors into his
coffers; hereupon it was first let out for five years, the Farmers and
Contracters binding themselves to send such a stock to India in ready money, as
would extend for 30 thousand Quintals of Pepper yearly, conceived to be in
those days as much as all Europe could annually vend in that Commodity; but
then the King was bound to send his Ships to India to lade the same, in number
five Ships of sufficient burden yearly; the Farmers bearing the adventure both
of their moneys outward, and of the said Pepper homeward, lading it in India
into the said Ships at their own costs and charges, all which brought into
Portugal, they were to deliver to the King at the price of 12 Ducats per
Quintal, and what was either cast away, lost, or taken, was to be born by the
Farmers; the King paying for no more than what was thus fairly laid on land
into his storehouse at Lisbon, neither yet paid he ready money for the same,
but paid them with their own money when the Pepper was sold; so that the King
without disbursement or hazard, had and has a certain great gain without the
loss of a penny, in consideration whereof the Farmers have many great and
strong Immunities and Privileges; as first, that no man upon pain of death, of
what estate or condition soever he be; may any ways deal or Trade in Pepper but
themselves, which is still strictly observed; Secondly, that they may not upon
any occasion or necessity whatsoever, diminish or lessen the said ordinary
stock of money, nor the King his said stint of shipping; neither hinder not
let them in any sort concerning the lading thereof, which is also strictly
looked into; for though the Pepper were for the King's own Person or proper
account, yet must the Farmer's Pepper be first laden; Thirdly, that the
Viceroy, and all other the Officers and Captains in India shall give them all
assistance, help and favor, with safe keeping, guarding and watching the same,
with all other needful offices as shall be by them required, for the safety and
benefit of the said Pepper: The Ships of Pepper depart from Cochin about the
months of December and January.
Fourthly, that for the lading and providing thereof, the said Farmers may send
their Factors into India with their servants and assistants of what Nation
soever they be, ( English, French, and Spaniards only excepted) and that unto
every place to see the same laden and dispatched away: and in later times it is
observed, that they have also farmed of the King the Ships and their
fraightment, with large conditions to build them, and make the provision of all
necessaries for them, and all at their own adventures; and if the Ship come
safe home, they give the King in lieu of license a certain sum of money for
every Ship, and annually do furnish these five Ships at their own charges: but
for such Soldiers as are appointed to go in them, they are bound to fail for
the King and at his charge, and have but only their meat and drink at the
Farmers charges, the Officers and Sailers being placed therein by the King's
Admirality; which the Farmers may not once deny or refuse; so that the King
adventureth nothing, neither in Pepper nor in Ships; but only if the Ships be
cast away, he loses the Money that he should have, and otherwise gain by the
Farm of every Ship, if it had returned safe; and the profit of the Pepper that
should have been delivered him at a certain price, which is the cause now that
the King does not send out his Fleets to meet and wast them from the Flemish
Islands, as for long time he was accustomed to do; and the King is found so
nearly to look to this Farm, that he will not abate the Farmers a penny, how
great soever their losses happen otherwise to be. And thus much shall serve for
Goa and the Trade of Portugal in India; now in the next place I will come to
the Coast of Chormandel.

CHAP. XCIII. Of Musulipatan, and the Trade thereof, with the Coast of
Chormandel.
Musulipatan, and the Trade of the Coast Chormandel.
THE Coast of Chormandel beginnneth from the Cape Negapatan to the Town of
Musulipatan, between which said places is found a place called St. Thomas,
where the Apostle Thomas is said to have preached salvation to these Nations,
and whose Tomb is had still in great reverence to this day among the Native
Christians of this Country: besides which is found the Towns of Petipoli and
Armagon, where the English of late have settled Factories that have dependency
on the Factory of Musulipatan; under which therefore I will include the Trade
of this Coast.

Musulipatan by reason of the commodious situation, is the most eminent place
of Trade of this Coast, where the English have to that purpose planted a
Factory, both for providing and lading hence the Commodities of this Country;
this place is seated on the same Coast, or rather Istmus, as Goa is with the
Cities beforementioned, which are seated to the Eastward, as the Coast of
Malabar is to the Westward: the pleasantness of the adjoining River running
down from Bisnagar the Metropolis of this Country, and the goodness of the
Haven, with the wholesomness of the Soil and the temperancy of the Air, adds
much to the excellency of it in matter of Trade and concurrency of Merchants;
to which if we add the industry of the Inhabitants and the fruitfulness of the
Country bearing many Commodities naturally, it is not to be reckoned as the
least or the worst part of Trading in India.

Commodities of the Coast of Chormandel.
From this place and Coast then is found a great Trade to be driven into
Bengala, Pegu, Siam, Malacca, and to India; and the principal Commodities that
this City is noted to be famous for, are those excellent fine Cotton Linnens,
made here in in great abundance, and of all colors, and interwoven with diverse
sorts of Loom-works and Flowers, very fine and cunningly wrought, and therefore
much worn in India, and better esteemed there than Silk, as indeed being both
found finer and richer, and used by the greatest women in those parts for their
clothing, wherein is found interlaced oftentimes threads of Silver and Gold, and
diverse others rare fabrics of Cotton, etc.

Coins current in Musilapatan and Coast of Chormandel.
The current usual Coins in Musulipatan, Armagon, Petiboli, St. Thomas, and all
along the Coast is the Pagode of Gold, and the Mahomody and Fanan of Silver,
and are thus valued: A Pagode is worth 15 Fanans, or in English 8 s. sterling.
A Fanan is 9 Cashees, or as some call them Cupans about 6 d. sterling. A Mamody
is 32 Pices, or as in some places they are called Docres. A Rial of ^ Spanish
is here 5 Mamodies or 9 Fanans, or 5 s. And 10 Rials ^ is here current for 6,
and sometimes for 6 Pagods. And 10 R. ^ are called in these parts a Sear
incirca 50 s. sterling.


Armagon.
But in Armagon it is observed they have this difference. Rials of ^ 11 are
accounted for 8 Pagods. One Pagode is accounted worth 20 Fanans. And 5 Pagodes
here are accounted but 4 in Musulipatan.


The Pagode by this account may be said to be in value about 8 d. sterling,
equivalent with the Chequin of Venice, or the Xeriff of Egypt, or Sultany of
Turkey, and the Mamody accounted for 12 d. sterling, and the Fanans about 6 d.
or 7 d. per piece.

Weights current in Musulapatan, and Coast of Chormandel.
Their common Weight used along this Coast is the Candil, which in gross Goods
is most accounted for 20 Maunds.

A Maund is 40 Sear or 22 Masies, or 26 l. 14 ounces English.

A Sear is 17 Kashee, which thus answers with England.

The Sear is twofold, the small Sear is of 16 Mass, and found to be about 10
l. English, or as some observe it 10 l. and the great Sear is accounted as
above.

And the Candil of 20 Maunds of 26 l. 14 ounce Averdupois, brings it to be
English pound Sotile 538 l. incirca.

But this finds some disagreement with the weight of Petiboli, for their Candil
is 20 Maunds, found to be but 26 l. English, in all 520 l.

A Maund is here counted for 5 Visko, 5 l. 3 ounces English.

One Visco (or as the Portugals call it Fisco) is accounted 8 Sears, which is
found to be 10 ounces Averdupois incirca.

Further Observations I find not of the Trade of Mesulapatan, saving that the
Governor of this City, having settled a Trade with the English, and that they
should pay for Custom 4 per cent. he afterward raised the same to be 12 per
cent. till Anno 1614. one Floris, and other English surprised the chief
Customer being the Governor's Son, and brought him aboard their Ship then in
Port, who thereupon came to a new composition, restored the overplus taken,
and settled it for the future at the first agreed rate of 4 per cent. as now it
stands.

CHAP. XCIV. Of Satagan the Metropolis of Bengala, and the Trade of that Coast
and the River Ganges.
Satagan, and the Trade of the Coast of Bengala.
AT the ending of the Coast of Coromandel, begins this Coast of Bengala,
through the middle whereof the famous River Ganges runs, making a large Bay or
Gulf, which carries the name of the Gulf of Bengala: This Country is under
the Command of the Gre^ Mogul, whose Coins are here current; the holy and
reverent opinion that the Gentiles through all India have of this River, and
the concourse of Pilgrims thereto, for devotion sake, adds much to the Traffic
of Satagan, the chief City of this Country, which is pleasantly seated on
another fair and large River, whose imbosure is not far distant from the
imbosure of Ganges, and upon which Boats sail by the violence of the current a
hundred miles in fifteen hours without the help of Sails or Oars, and when the
Tide turns, it is found to be so violent, that the Sallers are forced to make
fast their Boats to certain Trees fixed on the shore side, for they are not
able to make way against the stream and current thereof. At the entrance of
this River is a place called Butter, which the Inhabitants of the Country and
Mechants there do yearly build in form of a Village, of straw, branches of
trees, reeds, and the like, and is of great largeness, to which they bring all
manner of Merchandise, to meet the Ships which at certain set times with the
Moonsoons come hither for Trade, who are not able to go higher for want of
water; and when the Ships are gone with the change of the Moonsoon, and that
years Trading past, they then burn their said Town and Houses, and carry up
their Goods and Merchandise to the City of Satagan; whither also all small
Barks and Boats do go to lade and unlade.

Commodities of the Coast of Bengala.
It is observable that thirty or forty sail of great Ships of sundry Countries
and Nations do here yearly at this time find lading; the principal Commodities
of this place and the Coast, being Rice here growing in great abundance; Cloth
of Cotton of infinite sorts, made here in great quantity, Lacca good store,
great plenty of Sugars, Myrabolans both dried and preserved, Long Pepper, Oil
of Zerseline, and many other Commodities; the City in it self is a fair City,
and abounding with rich Merchants that trade to Pegu, Musulipatan, Summatra,
and sometimes to Cambaia, and the Red Sea; their time of Traffic, by reason of
the heat, is for the most part by night, and when they have once burned their
Town of Butter, as has been noted, they then hire Galliots and Boats, and
therewith transport their Commodities up the River from one Town to another,
situated upon the same, where every day is found in one or other a public Fair
and Market, so that their whole life is still in motion and agitation,
providing in one place and putting off in another, here buying and there
selling.

Weights and Measures of the Coast of Bengala.
The Portugals are found to have some Trade hither, but those that reside here
are not subject to much government, but make their will their law; only two
Forts they hold upon this Coast, the one they call Porto Grande, the other
Porto Piquenom, whereto there is driven an orderly Trade, and thereby that
Nation is kept within some order and discipline.

As for the Coins current here, the Weights and Measures here in use, I must
omit them by reason of my ignorance therein, and therefore shall refer them to
the better skilled.

Custom in India for Debtors
Before I leave this Coast, I must not forget a strange Custom, not only here
much used, but also along the Coast of Malabar, and in many other parts of
India, which is thus; If a Debtor break the day of payment with his Creditor,
and oftentimes disappoint him, then he goes to the principal of the Bramenes,
and receives of him a Rod, with which he approaches to the Debtor, and making
a circle about him, charge him in the name of the King and the said Bran^en,
not to depart till he has satisfied the Debt, which if he do not, he must then
starve in the place; for if he depart, the King will cause him to be executed;
and this is in use in many great parts of India, but especially where the
Bramans are reverenced; it is daily seen practiced amongst Merchants the
Natives of these places.

CHAP. XCV. Of Pegu, and the Coast thereof with the Trade.
Pegu, and the Trade of the Coast thereof.
IN order having passed the Coast and Gulf of Bengala, the next in this Tract
is the Seacoast of Aracan, Pegu, and Sian, stretching it self to the Island
and Fort of Malacca, of which according to the Observations in Trade, as I have
collected, I will in brief touch.

Aracan.
The first on this Coast and Shore is Aracan, situated upon the River of Cosmin,
which passes through some part of Bengala, and enters into that Gulf at this
City, by which commodious situation it is found plentifully stored as well with
the Commodities of that Country, as the natural Commodities of the place it
self.

Macoa.
The next is Macoa, seated upon one of the mouths of that great and famous River
Martaban, which by ten mouths issuing into the Sea, gives a great supply to
this Country of all the Commodities that are found in India, from whence this
mighty River has its source.

Pegu.
The third is Pegu it self, giving name to the whole Coast seated in like manner
upon one of the said mouths, which as being the principal Seat of the Princes
of this Country, I will a little more particularly survey.

River of Martaban.
The mavelous great Tides, and violent current of this great River is not here
to be omitted as appertaining to Trade; for it is found to be in it self so
swift, that neither Wind nor Oar can make head or way against it; and because
it is found to keep a constant course of ebbing and flowing, therefore in their
sailing they still observe the Tides thereof, and when those Tides are at
highest, there are certain stations on the banks whereto their Boats, Galliots,
and Barges are fastened, until the Tide do again serve their turn to proceed on
their Voyage: this one thing more I find wonderful here, that these Tides come
not in by a constant continued pace or measure, but come rushing in at the
first with a great violence, with a hideous noise and roaring, such as in some
lesser sort is seen in the River of Rouen, and in our River of Severn, in
England.

As for the City of Pegu it self it is divided into two parts, in the one the
King and his Nobility resideth, lately built and richly beautified, and
therefore called the New Town; the other part inhabited only by Merchants,
Artificers, Seamen, and such like, and called the old Town; every House in the
old Town where Merchants do reside, has a place built strongly of Brick, which
as a Warehouse serves his occasion, called by them Godon, especially to
prevent firing, which this Town is much subject to by reason of the combustible
matter it is made of; the New Town is walled about, and is a perfect square,
having twenty Gates, five in each angle, ditched about and watered, wherein
many Crocodiles are kept for watch of the place by night; the Walls are
beautified with many Turrets for Sentinels, gilded with Gold; the Streets are
very fair, straight as a line, and so broad as fifteen Horsemen may ride abrest
on both sides; at each man's door are set Palm Trees, which growing makes a
fair show, and thereby all Passengers may walk daily in the shadow from one
Street to another, to prevent the extraordinary heat of the place and Climate:
The greatest Trade that is found at this day exercised in Pegu, is from the
Coast of Cormandel with Pintado's, Cotton, Cloth, and other Bombasins much in
request here; but it is to be noted, that these Ships must depart that Coast by
the sixth of September, and take the Monsione wind, otherwise they lose their
Voyage for that year: From Bengala also comes hither sundry Ships with Cotton
Cloth and other such wearing Commodities, which taking also the season of the
wind arriveth here when the Cormondel Ships are ready to depart. The principal
Harbor or Port where these Ships do ride is called Cosmin, and the place where
the greatest Ships do Anchor to lade and unlade their Goods. From Mecca come
also sundry Ships laden with Woollen Cloth, Damasks, Velvets, and Chickens.
From Malacca come many small Vessels laden with Pepper, Sanders, Porcelan of
China, Camphora, and other Commodities. From Summatra come also sundry Ships
with Pepper and other Wares; all which Goods are very strictly looked into for
payment of the King's Customs at landing, which is here paid in kind, and
amounts unto twelve per cent. and the King does hold it for a great affront
to be wronged of a penny of it: Rubies, Saphirs and Spinals paying here no
Custom in or out, as being the proper Commodities of this Country.

For the effecting of the Trade and Commerce of this place, there is ordained
eight Brokers o^ Tareghes by the King's Authority, who are bound to sell and
vend all the Goods and Merchandise coming to Pegu, for all men's account of what
Nation soever they be, having two per cent. for their Brokerage, and are liable
to make good the debts they make, which no Merchant there resident can avoid;
for they will have the said two per cent. by the King's Authority granted them,
whether their help be taken or not.

In like manner, there are ordained certain Brokers for the buying of all the
Commodities bought in Pegu, wherein is found amongst them such candid dealing,
that a stranger can hardly be wronged or abused, if he have but so much
discretion to provide such Goods as may be proper for the Country whither he
sends them.

Strange manner of buying and selling in Pegu.
The Commodities native of this place and Country are these, Gold, Silver,
Rubies, Saphirs, Spinals dug at Caplan, six days journey from Av^ in this
Kingdom, great store of Benjamin, Long Pepper, Lead, Lacca, Rice, Niperwine and
Sugar; and many other Commodities. The manner of their bargaining, as being
contrary to the custom and use in most parts of the World, is here worth
observing; all their bargains by their Law must be made publicly and in open
assemblies of and before all standers by, who because they should yet not know
what is bidden or demanded for any Commodity, the Brok^rs either buyer or
seller having seen the Commodity, and liking of it, puts his hand under a
cloth and touches the parties hand interessed, and by nipping, touching and
pinching of certain joints of each others hands, they know what is bidden and
demanded without words speaking, which these Brokers again with the other hand
covered in like manner, give notice of to the party who sets him on work, and
either so orders him to proceed to bid more or less, or else to give over; and
after this manner are all their C^tracts here made, and afterward by the said
Broker registered accordingly in leaves of Trees, which with them is used as
Paper with us.

Maids let out to serve both by day and night service to Merchants
And when any strangers and foreign Merchants arrive here, these Brokers are
bound by their place to provide them a house, Magazine, and lodging, whilst
they are here resident; and when the house is taken, the Governor of the Town
sends to know how long time he intends to stay with them, and withal appoints
certain Maids of the Town to go to him, that out of them he may make choice of
one whilst he remains there, and then having chosen one to his mind, he
contracts with her friends for her use for the said time at an easy rate,
which done, he brings her to his house or lodging, and she serves him
willingly in all his affairs both by day and night, as both his slave and wife;
but then he must take care that during that time he keeps not company with
any other woman; for so he might incur a greater danger and peril of his life
by the Law of the Country. Now when the time of his residence is expired, he
pays the Parents of the Maid the price agreed for, and departs quietly
away, and she returns with credit to her friends, being as well esteemed of
as ever she was before; and if afterward this Maid chance to marry, though with
the principallest of the Country, and that the aforesaid stranger should again
return hither to trade, he may again demand his w^man, and he shall have her by
the Law of the Country, without the resistance of her husband, or any shame
unto him, and she remains by the stranger as long as he abides there; and he
traveling from thence, she goes home to her husband again, which amongst them
is held for a most sure and inviolable Law and Custom.

Coins current in Pegu.
The Coin current here and throughout all this Coast is called Gansa, which is
made of Copper and Lead, and is not the proper money of the King, but every man
may stamp it that will, and that is able, because it has its just value in
stuff and materials; there is much counterfeiting of this Coin, but it is soon
discerned by the Brokers, Tellers of Money, who readily spy it out, and
therefore not passable, nor will it be taken by any; with this money Gansa you
may buy Gold, Silver, Rubies, Drugs, Spices, and all Commodities; and no other
Money is current amongst them.

This Gansa goes by a weight called a Biso, and this name of Bise, goes for
the account of the weight, and therefore a Bise of a Gansa is accounted by
strangers there trading 8/^ or 2 s. 6 d. sterling; and albeit that Gold and
Silver, as all other Commodites do rise and fall, yet this Bise never alters
in value or estimation. Every Bise makes a hundred Gansaes of weight, and so
it does come to pass that the number of the money is Bisa.

Martaven.
In this Country is also seated the Town of Martaven, a place of great
Traffic, and the last of this Coast; the Inhabitants whereof are wonderful
expert in making of hard Wa^, which hence is dispersed throughout India, and
into many places of Europe; here is also made those great earthens Jars or
vessels which serve them to keep Water, Oil, or any other liquor, and are much
used in India, and aboard their Ships in stead of Cask, Barrels, and such
Vessels, and throughout all these Countries are called of the name of the place
Maatavanas, and in some places by the Portugals Benajos.

CHAP. XCVI. Of Siam, and the Trade of the Coast thereof.
Of Siam, and the Trade of the Coast thereof.
UNder the title of Siam, I will comprehend the City of Tenaserim, a famous Town
of Traffic, and the Metropolis of a Kingdom; also Pattana, another City on
this Coast, not far distan: from Siam it self, being a place where the English
Merchants have a residence, and hold a Factory; and lastly, Siam as the
principal, and as one upon whom the rest have a dependency, both in matter of
Government and Trade. This City then of Siam some years past (as appears by
relation of that worthy Merchant Ralph Fitch, and others) was the prime of all
these and the neighboring Regions; but being for twenty one months besieged by
the King of Pegu, who after four months march encompassed it with a million and
four hundred thousand Soldiers, at length by means of treason and not of
strength gained it, drove the King thereof to that desperation, that he
poisoned himself with all his wives and children; The fortune of Siam and Pegu.
since which time it has obeyed several Princes, and been subject to sundry
Masters, according to the various chance of war, and of this Country, which in
one Age is seen here so divers^y to alter into sundry shapes; for a petty King
which now commands one only Town or Province, in a few years comes to be a
great Emperor over several Kingdoms; and peradventure that great Emperor who
now commanded so many several Nations, within few years after is glad to rule
over a small Province, City, or Island: which the Princes of Pegu and Siam have
of late years to their great grief found too true by experience.

The City of Siam is yet notwithstanding the former suffered calamity, a place
of great Traffic, not only hence to Couchin-China, Macau, Cantor, Malacca,
Cambaia, and the Islands Summatra, Borneo, Banda, and others by Sea, but also
is much augmented by the inland Trade thereof, partly to Martavan, Tenaserim,
and others, which are seated on the same Land, but as seated on the backside
thereof, and as enjoying thereby the Commodity of another Sea, but the same is
found proper for Trade by its own commodious situation, River Menan.
being on the banks of that great and famous River Menan, which runs hither
through, or rather thwarteth India, arising in the lake of Chiama, as they term
it, at least 22 degrees from this City, where it issues into the Sea, and is
here found about the month of March so to over-swell his banks, and the
neighboring Country, that it covers the earth for 120 miles in compass, and
therefore the Inhabitants are said to retire themselves during this Inundation
to the upper part of their houses, so purposely made to avoid the inconveniency
of the waters, every house then having a Boat or Frigot belonging thereto, by
which means they converse together, and traffic, as on dry shore, till the
said River return to her wonted Channel again.

The Kings of this Country, as indeed of all these Regions, are for the most
part Merchants, who gave the English admittance to trade and residence here
about 1612; upon whom he bestowed also a fair House for their abode, and
Warehouses to lay up their Merchandise; where since for some years they have
continued, but of late years have left it off and discontinued, upon the little
benefit this Scale and Country afforded them.

Commodities of Siam and Pattana.
The principal Commodities of this City and Coast, are Cotton Linnens of several
sorts, and that excellent Wine or distilled Liquor, called here by the name of
Nipe, made of Cocos or India Nuts, and hence transported into all parts of
India, and the adjoining Regions: here is also great quantity of Benjamin, and
of Lac, wherewith the hard Wax is made that is brought hence into sundry parts
of the World, also that costly Wood called by the Portugals Palo Dangula, and
Calamba, which being good, is weighed against Silver and Gold; for rich
Perfumes, and the Wood Sapon used by Dyers; also here is Camphora in great
plenty, Bezoar Stones and Gold in some measure good store; also here is found
Diamonds, Nutmegs, and some other Spices, which the Country of it self
affords for the maintenance of the Trade thereof.

Coins current in Siam and the Coast.
The Coins here current, as I am informed, are these following: The first is a
Tail, which is worth 4 Ticals, or seventeen shillings ten pence, or eighteen
shillings sterling. A Tical is accounted 4 Mass, or 4 s. 4 d. incirca sterling.
A Mass is accounted 4 Copans, about 13 d. sterling. A Copan is accounted 750
Cashe, or 3 d. sterling. A Tail is 16 Mass, and accounted worth 14 Rials of
Eight Spanish. And 20 Tail is a Cattee worth 48 Rials of ^ Spanish. And 1 Tail
of Siam is worth 2 Tails of Japan.


Coins at Pattana.
And note, that in Pattana, and elsewhere on this Coast, Coins find little
alteration in current prices and rates, except upon some extraordinary
occasions, when some of these Species are sought out, and provided by Merchants
to transport into other places, where the same do turn them better to benefit;
And note, that at Pattana, A Mass is as above worth 4 Copans. A Copan worth 4
Conderies. A Conderie is 100 Cashe,
which is 800 Cashe, which is 50 more than at Siam, as is abovementioned.

The Measures and Weights are not come to my knowledge.

So leaving Siam and the Trade of this Coast, I shall repair to Malacca,
inhabited and fortified by the Portugals, and of great consequence in these
parts.

CHAP. XCVII. Of Malacca, and the Trade thereof.
Malacca, and the Trade thereof.
MAlacca is the next Country to the aforementioned Siam, seated between the Coasts
of Siam and Pegu, upon the utmost bound of a long tract of Land, on which is
found the City of Malacca in obedience to the Portugal, and conquered by them
1511, and accounted the most profitable command of all India next after Ormus,
which of late they have lost, and of Mosambique: It is commodiously seated on
the River Gasa, which is here 10 miles broad, (as some write) and is accounted
the Staple for all India and China Commodities, and has a very great Traffic
to China, Moluccos, Banda, Java, Summatra, and all the Islands bordering
thereabouts, as also to Siam, Pegu, Bengala, Coast of Chormandel, and other the
parts of India, whereby many Ships are found daily to be employed, coming in
and going out, there lading and unlading, selling, buying, and bartering the
Commodities of these Countries together; the Country affording of it self no
Commodities to preserve Trade, but all other Countries afford to this (by
reason of its proper situation for Trade) their native Commodities; a Ship or
two coming hither yearly from Lisbon to traffic, which thence departs 30
days sooner than the rest, for India, and is at her return found commonly the
richest that frequent these Countries: Monsons at Malacca.
And here it is observable in Navigation, that the Monsons or Trade winds here
continue West and North-west from the end of August to the end of October, and
in November begin the Northerly and North-easterly winds, which blow till the
beginning of April, and from M^ till the end of August, the South and
South-west rule, according to which, the Trader hither must direct his Trade
and course, and take the proper season both for his coming and going.

When Albuquerk the Vice-King of Portugal took this City, finding it inhabited
and frequented by Merchants of sundry Nations, he established Magistrates for
both the Ethnicks, Moors, and Christians, with appeal only reserved to the
highest Sovereign the Conqueror: one remarkable passage in this conquest I
cannot omit, which was, That an Inhabitant of this place, of eminent note in
this City, fighting naked in defense of himself and of his native Country, was
found to be wounded with many deep and wide wounds; but on his arm be wore a
chain, whereto was fastened the bone of a Javan Beast, called a Cabal, by
virtue whereof, notwithstanding all those wounds which were many and large, he
lost not one drop of blood; but when that chain was taken from him, his veins
suddenly and at once emptied themselves both of blood and life together. The
riches and greatness of the place may by this particular then happening be
considered, when as the King's Tenths in the Sack thereof come to 200000
Ducates of Gold, the Soldiers and Adventurers satisfied, besides the concealed
and pilfered booty, there found and shared by them.

Coins of the Ci^y Malacca.
The current Coins are not as yet come to my knowledge, therefore I refer the
same to the better experienced.

Weights used in Malacca.
The Weights here common in use, (as far forth as I have collected) is the
Cattee Bahar, and Pecul, wherein I find the Observations made hereupon to
disagree; some making but one Bahar to be here in use, and some two sorts of
Bahars, as thus:

One Bahar to be 100 Cattees of Malacca, and each Cattee to be 4 Cattees of
Cantar and Couchin-china, which is 21 l. English, which thus estimated, must be
590 l. English.

A second Bahar they account to be 200 Cattees of Malacca, which here are 302
China Cattees, and thus estimated, the same should be 400 l. English.

Again, They have a weight called the Pecul, which is 100 Cattees of China, and
makes 132 l. English; but if this observation be found true by trial, the
Cattee must be more than 21 l. English, which I refer to the better
experienced: this is the late observation of some of our Merchants trading into
these parts; but by the observation of the Portugals, I find the weight to be
thus:

Weights of Malacca.
In Malacca they say are two sorts of weights used, a great and small, which is
composed of the Bahar.

A Bahar great weight is 200 Cattees, or 3 Pices.

One Pice is 66 Cattees.

A Cattee is 26 Tails.

A Tail is 1 ounce Lisbon weight.

And by this great Bahar they weigh Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs, Sanders, Indico;
Alum, Sanguis Draconis, Palo Dangula, Camphora, and many other Commodities.

The small Bahar is also 200 Cattees.

A Cattee is 22 Tails.

A Tail is almost an ounce Portugal weight.

And by this small Bahar they weigh Quicksilver, Copper, Vermilion, Ivory,
Silk, Musk, Amber, Lignum Aloes, Tin, Lead, Benjamin, Verdet, and other
Commodities, etc.

Again, Some observe, that a Tail of Malacca is 16 Masses.

And 10 Masses is an ounce Averdupois, and 1 ounces is 16 ^ Masses, by which
Masses they sell Bezoar Stones, and some other Commodities.

I should here proceed to survey the Trade of this remaining Tract and Coast,
especially that of Cambaia, Couchin-China, and others; but little having fallen
into my hand of the Trade exercised there, I willingly omit the same, and next
proceed to look only upon the Traffic of China it self, and then to the
Islands belonging to Asia.

CHAP. XCVIII. Of China, and the Provinces thereof.
China, and the Provinces thereof.
CHINA has on the East, Mare del Zur; on the West, India; on the North, a Wall
extending 1000 miles in length, between the Chinois and the Tartarians; and on
the South, the Ocean.

The Trade of this Country is accounted very great, the situation of the place,
the temperature of the air, the disposition of the Inhabitants, the peace which
formerly they enjoyed amongst them concur to enlarge the same; the many
Navigable Rivers, and the excellent Fabrics here wrought, add to make it
eminent, Commodities of China.
and the Commodities that it yields to maintain the same, are these; Barley,
Rice, Wool, Cottons, Olives, Vines, Flax, Silk raw and wrought into infinite
sorts of Stuffs, all kinds of metal, Gold especially; Silver and Copper is
brought from Japan, etc. Fruits, Honey, Wax, Sugars, Rhubarb, China Roots,
Purslain Dishes, Camphire, Ginger, all kinds of Spices, Musk, Civet, Amber, and
infinite abundance of Salt, which Commodity only in the Town of Cantor yields
Custom to the Prince yearly 180000 Ducats.

The greatness of China.
This Kingdom contains 15 large Provinces, each Province having a Metropolis,
besides many Cities of lesser note; so that in the whole Tract of this Country
is accounted to be 30 Kingdoms, and therein Writers have mentioned to be 1597
Cities and great Towns walled, 1154 Castles, 4200 Boroughs without Walls,
wherein Soldiers are quartered, besides an infinite number of Villages and
Hamlets; Quinsay:
the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom being vulgarly called Quinsay, Pequin, and
is said to contain in circuit 100 miles, having in the midst thereof a Lake of
30 miles compass, in which are two fair Islands, and in them two magnificent
Palaces, adorned with all necessaries, either for Majesty or Convenience: the
Lake is nourished with diverse Rivers, on which is counted 12000 Bridges, and in
many Cities here seated on the banks of great and famous navigable Rivers, are
found oftentimes ten thousand Sail of great and small Vessels; Nanquin.
the King himself having in the City of Nanquin (accounted the second in this
Kingdom) seated upon a fair and large River (if Writers relations may have
credit) Ten thousand Sail belonging to the King of China in one River.
ten thousand Sail of Ships of his own, and the City being nine leagues from the
Sea, the whole distance is found to be, as it were, wholly employed and taken
up with Vessels and Boats; for therein the Inhabitants make their abode, dwell,
negotiate, and remove at their pleasure, from one place and City to another.

It is confidently affirmed by all modern Travelers that have been here, that
the Inhabitants are not permitted to issue out of this Kingdom, nor yet
strangers to enter into it; and though for the commodiousness of Traffic this
strict Law find some toleration for a certain limited time for the Natives to
trade abroad, yet is it most nearly looked into on the behalf of strangers, that
would enter into their Country; therefore (this considered) though the motives
of Trade and Commerce be many; yet this inviolable custom so severely executed,
hinde^ justly the particulars I should in this place set down of the Trade of
this Mighty Empire; howsoever it is observed, that the Japaners and some
neighboring Islanders, as also the Portugals, and some other Christians, have
(by the favor of the great Maritime Commanders in this Country, and their own
fair deportment) procured a License of Trade in Canton, Maccau, Nanquin, and
some other Seaports; but with such strict limitations, as that in some Cities
it is death for them to lie or abide at night either in the Town or in the
Suburbs, but aboard their own Ships, and in Canton, where they find the most
courteous usage, they may not upon pain of death abide one night within the
City Walls; but as in the morning their names are registered at their entering
into the City, so they come at night and blot out the same with their own
hands: I can then but afford a taste of the whole Trade, by a little that I
have observed out of the Collections of others, which must serve for a model to
the frame and foundation of what is practiced in other Cities throughout this
Empire, which I will comprehend under the Title of Maccau, most frequented by
our Nations.

CHAP. XCIX. Of Maccau, and the Trade thereof.
Maccau, and the Trade thereof.
THE Island and Town of Maccau, (as the place best known upon this Coast to our
Nation,) is seated on the North side of a Bay, which is at the mouth of the
great River of Canton, which runs out of the Lake of Quinsay spoken of
before, opposite to which stands the great City of Canton, which I mentioned,
as the place where is found the present Staple of all the Commodities of China;
and thither do Merchants of all parts frequent to buy and barter for other
Commodities, with the restrictions and limitations above specified: and as for
Maccau, it is inhabited by Portugals intermixed with the natural Chinese; the
principal of their Commerce being with the Inhabitants of Canton, from whence
all the Commodities of China are found to issue; and here the Portugals at the
arrival of their Ships, do choose out a Factor amongst themselves, who is
permitted in all their behalfs to go to trade for them at C^ton, but in the
night he is to abide in the Suburbs under severe punishment, as I have before
remembered.

A particular Ship yearly touching here from Goa to Japan.
Here is found a Ship to come yearly out of India, by a particular license of
the King of Spain; the Captain's place is ever bestowed upon a Person of
Quality, in reward of some former service, as indeed all the Captains places of
the Fortresses of India are; from Maccau the said Ship then (having dispatched
her business) does sail to Japan, and there fully discharged her lading, and
thence returns again to Maccau, and from thence to Malacca, and so to Goa in
India; and though this Voyage of Japan is ever granted by particular license to
some one in particular, yet to Maccau and Malacca any Merchant may go that
will; but none may yet lade or unlade in either place, before such time as the
Ships termed of the Kings are fully dispatched and laden, and are ready to
depart for India: it is recorded by some Portugals, that this Captain's place
may be worth to him for his part 200000 Ducates, and that the said Ship is
commonly 1500 Tuns in burden, and that the Voyage continues for three years
from India, and so back; for in April they set sail from Goa to Malacca, where
they abide some season for the winds or Monsons, which at certain times blow
certain set months together; and then from Malacca they sail hither to Maccau,
where they stay at least nine months for the said Monsons, and then sail to
Japan, where they must stay likewise certain months for the dispatch of their
business; and the Monsons to return again to Maccau, where again they stay, as
in their Voyage outward: so that by these delays the time of three years is
fully expired, before they have ended their Voyage to and from Japan; and all
the time of this Captain's residence either in Maccau or Japan, he is there
accounted the chief Ruler and Governor of the place, having the like power as
their Viceroy in Goa, and as the several Captains in their Forts; for that
when the one departs from Maccau to Japan, there comes another from Goa to
Maccau, to make the same Voyage after the other has performed his; and when he
returns again from Japan to Maccau, the other saileth to Japan, and so the
first continues Governor again at Maccau, until he departs from thence to
Malacca, and so to India; and by this means, there is always found a Portugal
Governor at Maccau.

Commodities of Maccau and Canton.
The Commodities in general of China I have mentioned before, the particular and
principal Commodities of Canton and Maccau, are Silks raw, and Silk wrought;
the raw is found to be of three several sorts, First Lankin, which is the best;
the second is Fuscan; the third and worst is Lankam; and these are known to us
in Europe, and bear price there commonly about 145 or 150 8/8 Spanish, the Pico
of Lankin, the Fuscan is worth 140 or 145 8/8, and the Lankan is worth 70 or 75
8/8, and all these are counted unspun Silk; but the spun Lankin is worth from
150 to 170 8/8 the Pico; the spun Fuscan is worth 130 or 135 8/8, and the spun
Lankam of Canton 80 8/8 the Pico; and these I thought good to mention, as being
the principal Commodity vended out of these Countries to other places.

Commodities fit for China.
The Commodities then wherewith the Portugals do drive this Trade, and which
they carry to Maccao from India, is principally ^/8 Rials of Eight, which in
China is cut into pieces, and so paid out, as I shall show hereafter in payment
of Merchandise; also Wines of Spain and India, Olive Oil, Velvets, which of all
other sorts of Silk Stuffs they cannot make, and fine Woollen, Scarlet Cloth,
whereof they have none, nor yet can they make any, although they have
materials, as Sheep and Wool plenty; also Looking-glasses, and all sorts of
Drinking-glasses, and Crystal, Ivory, Elephants-teeth, and sundry other
Commodities.

The Weights, Coins, and Measures, in Maccao in China.
32 Vals make a Tola of Surat, and 3 Tola's 3 Vals make a Tay or Tayel in
Maccao, and 1 Tay is 1 ounce and 11/16 of an ounce Averdupois.

The Weights in China, for Gold, Silver, Musk, Ambergreece, etc. are as
follows.
Tays, or Tayels, and by some called Tans, Mass, Condreens, Cash, Avo's; they
usually set down two figures or ciphers for Avo's; for the latter thereof there
is no denomination that I could be informed of, but do account 10 Avo's to 1
Cash, 10 Cash to 1 Condreen, 10 Condreens to 1 Mass, 10 Mass to 1 Tay, and 16
Tays or Tayels to 1 Cattee.

1 Tay is 1 ounce, and 11/16 of an ounce Averdupois.

The weights for all gross Goods, or Commodities, go amongst the Portuguez in
Macca, by the Denomination of Pecu or Pecul, and Bahar.
100 Cattees make 1 Pecul, each Pecul 128 Rotolo's of the Portuguez, which
after the rate of 20 ounce Averdupois to a Cattee, by the balance is 2087
ounce, and pounds English 130 15/32 parts of a pound, but generally it is
accounted 132 pound, 32 or 133, and others make it by reducing the weights 131
l. ^/4 Averdupois, But this difference may grow or accrue by reason of some
computing, and weighing by the Dotchen, or Stilyard, and others by the Balance
18 Cattees, or 24 Rotolo's, is 1 Maund of Goa and Macao by the balance; but by
the Dotchen it is no less than 18 Cattees, 300 Cattees is a Bahar, which at 21
ounces to the Cattee (as it is ordinarily reckoned) is but 393 pound, although
it is generally accounted 396 pound, but then the Cattee must be more than 21
ounces, and it is by my own experience but 20 ounces; but this difference may
be by one weighing by the Dotchen of Stilyard, and the other by the Balance,
as in like manner it is with the Pecul, the Dotchen making more, the Balance
less; 100 Tays in Plate of the Alloy of the Rials of Eight, worth but 92 Tays
of Plate Saysee or Soma, which is the highest Alloy, and reduced to that
fineness by the Chinese themselves, unless it be in some of the bars of Silver
which the Spaniards bring out of the West Indies, through the South Seas to the
Manilla's, one of the Philippine Islands, thence transported to Maccao in
China: 100 Tays in Plate of the Alloy of Rials of Eight Sevil is worth 115 Tays
in Plate Currente, otherwise called small Bars of Silver of Japan.

If you agree when you buy Gold to pay in Plate Currentee, which is Silver of
Japan, you must allow 17 per cent. to correspond with the Rials of Eight. But
if you agree to pay for your Loass of Gold (which the Portuguez call Pan de
Ore) in Rials of Eight, then you have no more to do but to weigh the Rials of
Eight, and so reduce them into Tays.

The Loaf or Pan de Ore, poize about 12 ounces Averdupois, little more or less.

One Rial of Eight of Sevil, or Mexico. Plate Rials by the Balance, is 7 Mass,
3 Condreens, 3 Cash. Plate Rials by the Dotchen, is 7 Mass, 4 Condreens. Plate
Currentee or of Japan, by the Balance, is 8 Mass, 4 Condreens, 2 Cash, 9
Avo's. Plate Currentee or of Japan, by the Dotchen, is 8 Mass, 5 Condreens.
Plate Saysee or Soma, by the Balance, is 6 Mass, 7 Condreens, 4 Cash, 3 ^/10
Avo's. Plate Saisee or Soma, by the Dotchen, is 6 Mass, 8 Condreens, 0 Cash, 8
Avo's. 100 Rials of Eight, Sevil or Mexico. 73 Tays, 3 Mass by the Balance.
100 Rials of Eight, Sevil or Mexico. 74 Tays by the Dotchen.

A Tay or Tayel is by the nearest calculation that can be made, 1 Rial of
Eight, and 3/2 parts of a Rial, a very small matter less.

By the preceding account to receive by the Dotchen, and pay out by the
Balance, there will be gained in the 74 Tays, or 100 Rials of Eight, received
by the Dotchen 7 Mass.

And on the contrary to receive by the Balance, and to pay out by the Dotchen,
there will be lost in the 73 Tays 3 Mass, or 100 Rials of Eight 7 Mass.

733 Cash is one Rial of Eight by the Balance, and is so ordinarily accounted,
in making up, and reducing of accounts, or casting up of any Sum.

Note, that 5 Maunds and 8 Rottolo's of Goa, or of any of the Portugal Towns in
India, is 1 Pecu or Pecul, and 3 Maunds 26 Sear of Surat, after the rate of 27
Sear Surat to the Maund Goa, is 1 Pecul and 132 l. English nearest.

So that the difference (as already said) which arises in the Pecul from 130
l. 15/32 parts of a pound; to 132, and 133 l. English, is by weighing by the
Balance or Stilyard, the Stilyard or Dotchen making more, the Balance less.

The Covid or Maccao, is rather a very small matter more than less than 3
quarters of our Yard and 2 Inches or more, rather 29 Inches of an Inch nearest,
which Covid is used by the Portuguez.

The Chinese have another Covid or Measure, consisting of between 14 11/12 of
an Inch, and 14 6/7 of an Inch, which is divided into 10 parts, and each of
those are subdivided into 10 other parts. The Covid or Measure of the
Chinchoses, a Province of China, bordering upon the Province of Canton, and
Eastward of Maccao, is but just 12 Inches of our measure, and is the parts of
Chinese Covid or Measure nearest.

As for Coins, there is none in the Southern parts, but if you buy any thing,
after you have agreed for it, you cut off of the Rial of Eight so many Mass,
Condreens, etc. as you agree for, and so weigh it by the Dotchen, which every
one carries about him.

Having thus done with the main Continent of Asia, and cursorily surveyed the
particular Trade of some of the most eminent Cities of the Kingdoms therein
contained; being constrained by reason of the remoteness of these places, and
want of better information, to let the same pass not so perfect as otherwise I
could wish for and desire, I shall willingly in what is here by me omitted,
crave the advices of the better experienced; and that they would add by their
knowledge and trial what is either here defective, or altogether left out: and
thus leaving the Continent (according to my method) I will in brief run through
some of those Islands which merit observation, and survey the Trade thereof as
amply as my Adviso's will give me leave.

CHAP. C. Of the Islands of Asia, and the Trade thereof.
Islands of Asia, and the Trade thereof.
THE Islands of Asia are either in the Oriental Seas, as Japan, Zeilan,
Moluccoes, Javas, Summatra, Barneo, the Philippines, and others: or in the
Mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes, Cyprus, etc. of the Trade whereof a word, before
I conclude this Commerce of Asia.

CHAP. CI. Of the Island of Japan, and the Trade thereof.
Island of Japan, and the Trade thereof.
JApan is situated over against Canton in China, having in length 600 miles,
but narrow in breadth, in some places 90, and in some but 30 miles: it obeys 66
several Sovereigns, the King of Tense holding the principal authority,
commanding 50 of the 66 above mentioned Kingdoms; every King, Lord, and Master
having full power and authority over the goods and lives of the subjects,
servants and children subject unto him. It was discovered by the Portugal, Anno
1542. and since is much frequented by Jesuits, who in great numbers have
settled themselves here, and are found to exercise Trade and Commerce, as
cunningly and subtly as any Jew elsewhere in the world.

Their chief Towns are Osacaia, Bunguin, Meaco, and are the principal Ports
frequented by Merchants Strangers: the Commodities of this place and Islands,
is Silver in some good measure dug up here, and carried hence by Merchants
to China to exchange for Silks; and principally Rice, which is found here
growing in such abundance, that the King or Emperor draws Two millions of
Ducates yearly out of that which is gathered from his own Possessions, which he
has received at his own Demesne; Firando.
and at Firando, one of the Islands of Japan, the English have settled a Factory
for Trade in 1613. by Captain Sari's labor and industry.

The civil Wars that continually vex these Islands, hinder an exact survey of
the materials, whereby their Trade is driven; yet so far as I have collected, I
will here insert.

Coins current in Japan.
Their Moneys current for the most part through these Islands are thus termed,
and with some small difference have this value.

Their Silver Coins current is a Tail, a Mass, and a Condery.

A Tail is a of 8/^, or 5 s. sterling, or Tail of Siam; and this Tail is 10
Mass, or 100 Conderies.

A Mass is 10 Conderies, or 6 d. sterling.

And in some places the ^/^ passes for 74 Condories only, and no more.

Their Gold is coined into two small Bars of two several sorts, the one is
called an Iehebo, worth about 15 in 16 Mass of Silver; the other is called a
Coban, worth from 60 to 68 Mass, which may be valued from 30 s. to 34 s.
sterling. The Wars that continually vex this Country is the cause of this
unconstant rate and price thereof.

Weights in Japan.
The Weights in use in Japan is the Pecul and the Cattee. A Pecul is 10 Cattees.
A Cattee is accounted by some 21 ounces, and by some 20 ounces Averdupois;
so that a Pecul is about 130 or 131 l. English.

Measure of length in Japan.
Their Measure of length is an Incken or Tattamy, which is 2 yards English; 25
yards being 12 Tattamies.

Measure of Rice and Grain in Japan.
Their measure for Rice is thus accounted: A Gant is 3 Cocas, being as much as
three English Ale-Pints. An Ickgoga is 100 Ganta's. One Ickmagog is 1000
Ickgoga's. One Managoga is 10000 Ickmagogs.


CHAP. CII. Of Zeilan, and the Trade thereof.
Island Zeilan, and the Trade thereof.
ZEilan lies in the gulf of Bengala, in length 250, and in breadth 140 miles;
found so fruitful, that the grass grows, and the trees bear fruit all the
year long without intermission: it is commanded in chief by the great Mogul;
the principal Towns are Zeilan, the Metropolis of the Island, and Columbo,
fortified by the Portugals; and as it is conceived commanding over the best
harbor in India.

Commodities of the Island Zeilan.
For Commodities it has many, and almost all things that are found in India,
through all the several Provinces and places thereof; first, it has Nutmegs,
Cloves, and Pepper-Trees good store, and the best Cinnamon in all India, which
is here had and found growing in whole woods, and hence dispersed into all
parts of the World: also it affords all kinds of precious Stones, (except
Diamonds) as Saphirs, Rubies, Topazes, Spinals, Granati; also a plentiful
fishing for Pearl, yet not accounted so good as at Bareim by Ormus; it has
likewise Mines of Gold, Silver, and other metals; also Iron, Flax, Brimstone,
Ivory bones, and sundry other Commodities. Adam's Hill the Zeilans Paradise,
Here is also a Hill of that great height, that the Inhabitants hold it the
highest in India, and call it Adam's Hill, upon which they say Paradise stood,
and that Adam was there created; whose footsteps, if they may be believed, do
remain yet engraven there in the Rock, and go not out: but the Inhabitanis
being most active in their bodies, may be imagined to be so also with their
tongues; for throughout India they practice nothing but juggling and Hocus
Pocus, and other feats of Activity; Zeilaners excellent Tumblers.
being the most excellent managers of Hobyhorses, and tumbling, by which Trade
they get money throughout all the neighboring Regions; and therefore not
surveying this their Traffic further, I will leave them to their Come aloft
Jack, Pass and repass, and pass my self over to the next Islands, being those
famous of the Moluccoes, the only Islands of all India, affording in such store
and plenty that excellent and admirable Spice, known to us by the name of
Cloves.

CHAP. CIII. Of the Moluccoes, and the Trade thereof.
Islands Moluccoes, and the Trade thereof.
THE Moluccoes are five in number, Molucco, Tarnate, Tider, Ge^olo, and Macian,
to which may be added for nearness in the situation, Banda, and seventy other
lesser Islands, which submit themselves and their delicious Commodities to the
King of Terenate, at present the most powerful through all these Islands.
Commodities of the Moluccoes.
These Islands are sound to have for Commodities some Nutmegs, especially in
Banda, also some Maces; Cloves abundance.
but the principal Commodities of all these Islands is the delicate Spice, known
to us by the name of Cloves, and found here growing in so great abundance, that
it is apparent the whole World is furnished from hence; and all Merchants
coming hither, and frequenting these Islands, are found only to come for this
Commodity, and for nothing else. Amboina Islands.
In this number I may also reckon the Amboina Islands, as the Island Amboina it
self, Polerone, Polloway, Lantore, and Rosington, abounding with the self-same
Commodity, and of late years made infamous, The matchless villainy of the Dutch
in the Ambolna Isles.
by the bloody slaughter, and butcherly tyrannical torture and death of some
English Factors, by the Machiavilian and matchless villainy of the Dutch; the
Actors of which have all of them, or the most part, come to untimely and fatal
ends, (if reports be true,) thereby showing the manifest judgment of GOD is
punishing their villainies and wickedness, when as they thought themselves safe
and free from the hands and justice of Man; and for those that as yet are
living, I leave them to the terror of their guilty Consciences, and without
repentance to their due Punishment in the world to come; where an uncorrupted
and impartial Governor and Fiscal shall examine their Amboina Proceedings
truly, and reward them according to their merits. Some of these Islands are now
by them commanded, having driven out the Inhabitants, and by death cut off the
interest of the English, who were jointly partners with them both in their
Conquest and Trade; and now there is none left to the English but Polerone,
originally theirs, yet now due to them by a second composition and agreement,
who coming of late to take possession thereof, found that those barbarous (...)
wicked Dutchmen resident in the neighboring Islands, had cut down and killed
all the Clove-Trees, and other of worth there growing, thereby depriving the
English of all their expected benefit, by the last but prejudicial composition.

Coins current in Molucco, Banda, Amboina, etc.
The Coins current in Moluccoes, Amboina, Banda, etc. and other Islands, I find
not any settled in use amongst them; the Spanish is the most usual in their
payment for Commdities, and for the most part they use no other Coins but it:
but I find, that according to the innocence of the times past, they barter and
sell one Commodity for another, which is yet the most usual custom amongst them.

Weights of Molucco, Amboina, etc.
Their common weight in use is the Bahar and Cattee.

The Bahar of Amboina of Cloves is 200 Cattees, and is English 625 l. which is
the great Bahar.

This great Bahar is 50 Barrotes, every Barrote being 12 l. Averdupois.

They have also in some of these Islands a greater Bahar, being ten times the
former quantity, making 6250 l. English.

A Cattee is 100 Rials of ^/^ almost 6 l. English.

Ten Cattees of Mace is called a small Bahar of Maces, and of the value of 10
Rials of Eight.

100 Cattees of Nutmegs is a small Babar of Nuts, and is of the aforesaid value
of 10 Rials of Eight.

100 Cattees of Maces is called a Great Bahar of Maces.

And 1000 of Nutmegs is accounted a Great Bahar of Nutmegs.

And note, that 10 Bahars of Nuts is accounted for one Bahar of Maces usually
throughout al^ the Islands.

A Cattee of Maces being commonly worth one 8/^.

And 10 Cattees of Nutmegs commonly worth but also 1 8/^.

The Inhabitants finding now their native Commodities requested by all other
Nations, who come from far Regions to traffic with them for the same, have
daily learned new experiments of Traffic and Commerce; and whereas in former
time they exchanged their Cloves, etc. for Cotton cloth, and such like to
cloth them, which yet is in some use amongst them; yet now they begin to know
the worth of Silver, and the value of the Rial of Eight, and how the has power
to bring and provide to them all other necessaries whatsoever.

Measures of Molucco, Banda, Ambiona, etc.
The Measure of length is distinguished by Fathoms and Cubits, borrowed from
their late Masters the Dutch and Portugals.

Dry Measures in Moluccoes, etc.
But their dry measures for Corn, Grain, Rice, etc. is called a Canton, making
about 5^/^ pints English.

A Quoian is their greatest measure, and is 800 Cantons.

It is to be noted here, that the Islands of Moluccoes were first discovered by
the Portugals in their Navigations to these parts, and afterward finding them
rich in Cloves, by little and little got footing therein, partly by fair means,
but principally by building of Forts and Castles in diverse of them for the
better obtainment and preservation of the brave Trade of these Islands: but of
late years the Hollanders envying this their engrossing of this rich Commodity,
endeavored to supplant them, or in default of means and power to effect that,
so to plant themselves, that they might partake and share with them in the
Cloves, Nutmegs, and Maces, the only Commodities these Islands are found to
produce, which by their policy, valor, and craft, at length has so well
succeeded with them, that now they are Masters and Commanders over many Forts
and strong Castles in these Islands; Dutch Forts and Trade in Amboina.
as Mallayo, Tallucco, and Tacuma, in the principal Island of Ternate, at
Mariero in Tidoro, at Nassaw in Timor, Mauritas and Tabiliola in Machian, and
which is entirely the Hollanders, 2 in Banda, 2 in Amboina, Barnefelt, in
Bachian, and sundry others, seated here and there through the most convenient
and best Ports for Trade and shipping in all these Islands; so that now being
become more strong, potent, and daring, they have coped with the Portugals in
diverse encounters by Sea and Land, sometimes winning and sometimes losing,
according to both their force and fortunes: in all their occasions, adding
violence to Trade, trading peaceably where they cannot otherwise choose, and
robbing and pilfering when and where they cannot otherwise make up their mouths
to profit; in which practice of Trade and Thievery or thievish Trade, I leave
them and those Islands, and come next to Java.

CHAP. CIV. Of Javas, and the Trade thereof.
Javas and the Trade thereof.
IN this Tract is found Java major and Java minor, the greater being in compass
3000, and the lesser 2000 miles; the nearness of these two Islands to the
Equator, makes these Countries so wonderful fertile, that they are termed the
Epitome of the World. The chief Cities here are Palauban, Mega, Pegar, Agaim,
and Ballambua; and in the lesser Java, Bosnia, Samara, Limbri, and others, but
their principal Trade is driven at Sunda, Calapa, Bantam, Jacatra, now baptized
by the Dutch Batavia, and lastly, Japarra; in which three last, the English
have residence and Factories.

Commodities of Java Islands.
The Commodities of these Islands, is Rice in abundance, Oxen, Kine, Hogs,
Sheep, Indian Nuts, and all Provisions for food; also all kind of Spices, as
Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace, which the native Merchants transport to Malacca and
other neighboring Islands in great measure; also Pepper in great quantity,
esteemed far better than that of India or Malabar, principally growing about
the Straights of Sunda, of which there is yearly laden hence about ten thousand
Quintals English; it has also much Frankincense, Benjamin, Camphora; also
Diamonds, and many other precious Stones, which are found therein.

Commodities of India fit for Javas
The fittest and most proper Commodities for these Islands Trade, are diverse and
different sorts and colors of Cotton Linnens, which are made at Cambaia,
Cormandel, and Bengala, called Serasses, Sarampurus, Cassus, Sateposas, black
Cannequins, red Turrias, and diverse other sorts found made in the places
abovesaid.

Batavia alias Jacatra.
Here the Hollanders are found to be Masters of Jacatra, of late years called by
them Batavia, the best and greatest Port of their Trade and rendezvous in these
parts, where by little and little they have so fortified themselves, that they
prescribe Laws to the Inhabitants, and endeavor to debar both English and all
other from enjoying any benefit of the Trade thereof.

Coins current in Java Sunda, Bantam, Jacatra
In Sunda (which I account here as the principal Mart Town, and in a manner the
greatest in Java major) they have no other kind of money than certain Copper
pieces minted, which they call Caixa, in the middle whereof is a hole to hang
them on strings, for commonly they put 200 or a 1000 upon one string, wherewith
they make their payments, as by this following account.

A Satta is 200 Caixas.

Five Satta's is 1000 Caixa's, which is a Crusado, Portugal money, or about 6
shilling sterling.

Accounts in Java, Bantam. Jacatra.
The Merchants of Europe here resident keep their accounts, in ^/^ and pence,
accounting 60 pence, to the ^/^ Spanish.

Weights in Java, Bantam, Jacatra, Japatra, Sunda.
The weight at Bantam, Jacatra, Japarra., and at Sunda, is the Picul, the
Cattee, and Babar.

A Cattee being less than the Cattee of Maccau, contains but 20 ounces English,
and the other 20 ounces.

A Picul is 100 Cattees, and consequently is 125 l. English.

A Bahar is 330 Cattees of China, of 20 ounces as abovesaid, and may make in
England 412 l.

Measures in Java, Bantam. Jacatra, Japatra, Sunda.
Their Measure for length is ( --)

Their dry measures for Grain, Rice, and Pepper, is a Timbam, and contain ten
Sacks, principally used in Pepper and Rice, consisting of five Piculs; so that
by this computation each Sack should contain in weight 62 l. English, two Sacks
for a Picul,

Prices of Commodities in Javas
The common prices of Commodities as I find them here observed, are Pepper of
Sunda, is sold by the Sack, weighing a Picul, or 45 Cattees of China, each
Cattee being 20 ounces, at 5000 Caixa's, and when it is at highest at 6 or 7000
Caixa's; Maces, Cloves, Nutmegs, white and black Benjamin and Camphora, are
sold by the Bahar, good Mace commonly sold for 120 thousand Caixa's; the Bahar
and good Cloves after the same rate, but bad and foul Cloves, are sold at 70 or
80000 Caixa's the Bahar; Nutmegs commonly sold for 20 or 25 thousand Caixa's
the Bahar, white and black Benjamin sold for 150 or 180 thousand Caixa's, and
if extraordinary good, 200 thousand the Bahar; but how far these agree with the
now common current rates, I refer to the better experienced.

CHAP. CV. Of Summatra, and the Trade thereof.
Summatra and the Trade thereof.
SUmmatra, anciently Traprobana, and Solomon's supposed Ophir; was esteemed the
biggest Island in the World, but modern experience has found the contrary,
being only 700 miles long, and 200 miles broad: Commodities of the Island
Summatra.
The Equator cutteth through it, so that the Sun's vicinity makes it abound in
several precious Commodities for Traffic, as first it has Pepper in
abundance, whereof above twenty. Ships of burden is hence yearly laden; also
Ginger, Alces, Cassia, raw Silk, Gold and Silver, Brass, and some other Drugs.
This Island is subject to many Princes, the principal whereof are the Kings of
Pedor and Achin; it is here a custom that the Natives do eat their slain
Enemies, and did erst account their Skulls for a great treasure which they
exchanged for other necessaries, he being accounted the richest man that has
most store of them in his house; this custom is almost extinguished, for the
Trade of Merchants from other Countries thither, of late years having brought
Silver and Gold in request amongst them, has made them since know better.

Rarities found in Summatra.
In this Island is found a Hill of Brimstone continually burning, and two very
strange and admirable Fountains, the one yielding pure and excellent Balsamum,
and the other most excellent Oil.

The chief Cities of this Island, is Daren, Pasen, and Androgede, the
habitation of so many Kings, Achin, Tico, Jambe, and Priaman, English Factories
in Java.
but the principal places and parts for Trade known to the Europeans, are Dachem
or Achin, Ticko, Jambe and Priaman, all maritime and good harbors; where the
English are found to have residence and Factories; also Pedir, Campar and
Manancabo, to the which the Portugals generally do trade; but the Inhabitants
for the most part transporting the native Commedities of this their Island to
Malucca, which is not distant above twenty miles off, are not much troubled
with the Portugals Commerce; though in lieu of them the Dutch have of late got
footing and built Fortresses, to their as great trouble, vexation and slavery.

Coins current in Summatra, Achin Priaman, etc.
Within these few years these Islanders were not known to have any Coins current
in payment for Merchandise amongst them, but the Skulls of their slain Enemies,
as I said before, which they accounted as their greatest treasures, and with
which their barters and exchanges for things necessary were made; but now of
late the Kings of Achin, in imitation of other adjoining Princes, and so the
near neighborhood of Malacca, now in possession of the Portugals, have coined
moneys, which in these days are observed to be these:

A Mass, which is here accounted for 4 Cappans, which is 12 d. sterling.

A Tail is 16 Masses, or 3 ^/^, or sterling money 16 s.

A Cattee is 8 Tails in ordinary account, and worth 25 ^ Spanish, or 6 l. 8 s.
sterling, and sometimes in exchange from hence to other adjacent parts, they
account 7 and 7 Tails to one Cattee.

Accounts kept in Java
In other parts of this Island, as Jambe, Ticho, and Priaman, they have no Coins
of their own, but the most current is the Spanish ^, in which the Europeans
keep their accounts, and for distinction divide it to be 60 Deniers or Pence to
a ^.

Weights of Summatra; Achin, Priaman, Jambe.
The common through all Summatra is a Bahar, but yet found to vary in many
places, and consists of Cattees, which in greatness also vary, and from
thence comes the difference; but in Achin, Priamam, Ticcou, and Jambe, where
the English reside, the Bahar is found to be in each of these places 200
Cattees; every Cattee is 29 ounces English, so that by this computation the
Bahar must make 360 l. English sotile.

Measures in Summatra.
The measures here in use are ( --)

CHAP. CVI. Of Borneo Island, and the Trade thereof.
Borneo Island, and the trade thereof.
THe next Island in this Tract is Borneo, and is equally divided by the
Aequinoctial into two parts, putting as it were a bound between the Dominions
of the King of Borneo on the North-side, and of Laus on the South, in compass
accounted above 2200 miles, and held the greatest of all this Ocean.

Commodities of Borneo Island.
The Country does yield in great abundance, the wood which we call Camphora;
also that wood known by the Portugals by the name of Polo d' Aguila; and also
that costly sweat wood which is called Collamba, which being good is weighed
against Silver and Gold: also here is found some. Gold, Diamonds, Nutmegs,
Maces, Agarick, and other Spices; and great abundance of that excellent
Antidote, which in Europe is called the Bezoar-stone.

Towns of Borneo Island.
It is plentifully stored with many fair Towns and Harbors, as Cabura,
Taioparra, Tamorutas and Borneo, the Metropolis and most magnificent above all
the rest, containing 25 thousand Inhabitants, and seated in a Marish of the
Sea, after the manner of Venice. Secodana and Benicrmasa English Factories in
Borneo.
Also Secodana, where many Diamonds are found, and where the English some years
past had a factory and residence, as also the same in Beniermasa, another good
Port in this Island.

I have not met with the Coins current here in payment for Merchandise, nor yet
with the Weights and Measures in use in this Island; therefore must refer the
same to the better experienced, and to the Traders thither.

CHAP. CVII. Of Celebs Island, and the Trade thereof.
Island Celebs, and the Trade thereof.
THE Island of Celebs is the next in this Tract, nor far distant from Borneo
Island, through part of which runs the Equator, yielding by the vicinity of
the Sun the same Commodities proper to Summatra, Borneo, Gilolo and others,
seated under the same line; it is subject to several Princes, and enjoys some
eminent Towns frequented by European Merchants, for the sake of their rich
Commodities, as Durati, Mamaio, Tubon and Maccasar the English Factory in
Celebs.
Maccasar, the chiefest Port for the Trade and Commerce of this Island, and
where the English have a residence and factory, and following their
observations made in this place, I find,

Coins current in Celebs and Maccasar.
Their Coins current here in use are found to be the Mass, Cupan and Tail thus
valued.

A Tail is accounted for 16 Masses in current value, and is reckoned to be
worth 15 Rials of Eight.

A Mass is a Gold Coin, as is the Tail, and wants somewhat of 5 s. or a Rial of
^/8 Spanish.

And this Mass is 4 Cuppans, each Cuppan esteemed to be about 14 d. sterling
money; and by this calculation the Tail should make sterling, 3 l. 14 s. 8 d.
and by the account of ^/8 at 5 s. sterling, the Tail is 3 l. 15 s. sterling.

Weights in Celebs and Maccasar.
The common weights in use are the Ganton, Zicoyan, and Mass, thus agreeing with
the English weight Averdupois.

The Ganton is both a weight and measure, in weight it is found to be about 5
l. English, and in measure about two English Gallons.

A Mass in weight is 40 Gantons, which is 200 l. English, or 80 Gallons English.

A Zicoyan is 20 Masses in weight, which is 4000 l. English, or 800 Cantons of
this place.

To proceed to the rest of the Islands in these Seas, is a work past my skill,
or I think most men's else, considering the multitude thereof, Philippi^.
the Philippines being discovered by the Spaniards in Anno 1564, being in number
110 thousand, as some Authors report. Over against China are also found 7448
Islands, and about India 127000 great and small more, which in many places
stand so nigh one to another, that they seem not only to such as are afar off
to touch and to be all one firm land, but whosoever passes between them, may
with his hands touch the boughs of the Trees, both on the one and on the other
side. Many Commodities are found growing upon these Islands, with which the
Inhabitants of many of them, maintain a Traffic with their Neighbors; the
knowledge whereof I leave to the better experienced.

The Portugals the first Masters of the Trade of East India 1498.
Now forasmuch as Portugals, Dutch, and English have of late years discovered
those Countries of India, and that some of them have since settled themselves
by Forts and Castles there: It will not be improper I should here survey their
strengths and holds built for defense, and their Factory settled for Traffic
throughout this Continent of Asia, and the Islands thereof. The Portugals then
were the first that brake the Ice, and in Anno 1498. departing from Lisbon,
under Command of Vasco di Gamma, doubled the Cape of Bona Esperance, which has
proved so successful to them since that time, that they have mastered,
conquered and fortified themselves beyond that Cape in Soffala, Quiloa,
Mosambique, Mombasa, and in Ormus in the Persian Gulf, lately again lost. In
India they have the Castles and Towns of Diu, Daman, Basain, Ch^, Goa, Honor,
Barsola, Mongalor, Cananor, Cronganor, Cochin and Colan. In Silon they have
Collumbe, bragging of one of the best Ports of the World; on the Coast of
Chormandel, they hold Negapatam and St. Thomas: In Bengala they have Porto
Pequenio, and Porto Grande, and Serapure; also Serone, Molucca; and some holds
in the Molucca Islands, Macao, and Nungasark in Japan, and diverse others; in
all which they are found to be both strong, powerful, and great, and Masters of
all the rich Traffic of these places, which thus for 100 year very near, they
have both peaceably and quietly enjoyed at their own terms and condition, till
the Dutch disturbed them, who seconded them in the Trade of India, who were the
ne^, who envying that this rich stream should only run his current to Lisbon,
and that all the p^cious Commodities of India should first salute Portugal, The
Holllandors became sharers in 1595.
set out from Amsterdam in Anno 1595, and have since so well played their cards,
and pleaded, as some allege, so strongly with Ca^non Law and steel Arguments,
that within 30 years they have found themselves to be Maste^ and Commanders in
these Countries and Seas of 28 Forts and Castles, and of 44 or 4^ Factories,
for the preservation and prosecution of their Trade and Government, the names
and draughts of which, some of their own Nation have published to their no
little honor, and no small estimation; so that it may be imagined that their
flood and the Spaniards ebb, (...) in few years bring the Indies to be more
theirs than the ^ortugals, notwithstanding their so long possession.

The English Nation the last Traders into Iudia, in An. 1600.
The English Nation are the last and least in this Trade and discovery, for they
imitating only the Portugals and Dutch in the due Rules of the prosecution of a
Trade, but not in the prosecution of the Natives; begun their discoveries in
Anno 1600, under the Command of Sir James Lacaster, with four Ships, the
Dragon, Hector, Asenton, and Susan, whose endeavors have (...) by the blessing
of God, and the good Government of that Company so well succeeded, the they
have sent forth above 30 Fleets or Voyages; and have settled their residence
and Factia in 20 or 24 several places of note, as at Ormus and Jasques, in the
entrance of the Pers^ Gulf, under the Persian Monarch at Cambaia, Surrat and
Agria, and other places in the Gre^ Mogul's Country, at Musulapan, Armagon,
Petipoly, Pottana, Siam, and other places (...) the Coast of Chormandel, and
the Continent of Asia: at Achin, Ticko, Jambe, and Priani^, on the Island
Summatra, at Bantam, Jacatra and Japarra on the Island of Java, at Socod^ and
Benlermasa, on the Island Borneo; at Mogassar in the Island of Celebs, at
Pulleron on the Island Banda, at Firando in Japan; and lastly in Amboina,
Hitto, and other of the Moluccaes, which they quietly enjoyed, until the
traitorous and bloody-minded Dutch did butcherly betray their lives, purposely
to deprive them of that Trade, and to satisfy their unsatiable
blood-thirstiness; as (...) extant by the passages of that Act in several
Languages in the World.

These are then the only three European Nations that now contend and share
among^ them the Traffic and Commodities of these Eastern Countries; the
Portugals making Lisbe^ the scale of the East India Commodities; the Hollander
making their Amsterdam the Staple for their parts, and the English London for
their Emporium; which within these late years, notwithstanding their sundry
crosses and losses, is increased to that height and eminency, that these
Merchants do not only furnish Italy, but also Constantinople, Aleppo, Smyrna,
and other parts of Turkey, with all those Indian Commodities, which within less
than these twenty years, they brought from thence into England, to the
prejudice of Syria and Egypt, and to the enriching of the English Subjects in
general; as has been most judiciously and at large demonstrated by the Right
Honorable Sir D. D. in several particulars; as First, by the Royal founders
thereof; Secondly, by the equity and justice of the Trade; Thirdly, by the
honor arising thereby to the English Nation, in the strength added to the Navy
Royal of this Land: Fourthly, by the former fortunate success of it, and the
profit that may be yet reaped thereby to the whole Kingdom, and to the
fellowship of that Society; besides the increase of Mariners, and of Arts and
Knowledge; Fifthly, by far discoveries and hopes of propagation of Religion in
those yet Heathenish Countries.

But leaving thus the Indian Islands, and the further survey thereof to those
late Masters of that Trade, I will proceed in what is yet resting to pass
through, as belonging to Asia, which are the Islands of Cyprus and Rhodes,
soated in the Mediterranean Sea, to which I shall now hasten.

CHAP. CVIII. Of Cyprus Island, and the Trade thereof.
Island Cyprus and the Trade thereof.
THE Island of Cyprus is accounted also belonging unto Asia, and situated in the
Syrian Sea; in length 200 Miles, in breadth 65; and is 60 Miles distant from
the shore of Cilicia, and 100 from the Land of Syria.

This Island is said to afford materials to build a Ship from the Keel to the
Top-Sail, and fitted for the Sea, either as a Merchant's Vessel for
transportation of Goods, or as a Prince's for Warfare.

Commodities of Cyprus
It affords also these Commodities, as Wine, Oil, Corn, Sugars, Cottons,
Honey, Wool, Turpentine, Allem, Verdigrease, Salt, Grograms, and other
Commodities.

The chief Cities of this Island are Paphos, Famagusta, Nicotia, Lescara,
Salines, and some others; In which Island the English have a Factory, for the
only Trade of Cottons here in use; English Consul of Cyprus.
and the English Consul resident in Aleppo carries the Title of Consul of Syria
and of Cyprus, in which place he has a Vice-Consul to supply his occasions for
the preservation and maintenance of the English Trade hither; which are the
only Company of Merchants called the Levant or Turkey Company, as included
within their privileges.

Coins at Cyprus.
The Moneys of this Island current I need not mention, nor yet their Accounts,
as being the Coins of the Grand Seigniors, and their Accounts kept after the
same denomination as in Constantinople.

Weights of Cyprus.
The weight in use through this Island is the Dram, 750 whereof is the Rotolo,
and 100 whereof make a Cantar, which is accounted 4 per cent. greater than the
common Canvar of Aleppo; and is by Calculation of such as have resided there 80
ounces Averdupois, or 5 l. the Aleppo Fotolo, yielding by this computation 4 l.
13 ounces, or 77 ounces: and the Quintal or Cantar of Cyprus by this account
should be 500 l. sotile; but I find some observations made, that upon some
Commodities that the 100 Rotolo's of Cyprus have made in London 510 and 512 l.
The Rotolo of Cyprus contains 750 drams: and the Rotolo of Aleppo is accounted
720 drams, and 62 drams make 1 ounce, and 6 ounces make here an Oak: Note
Famagusta.
But note, That the Cantar of Famagusta is 4 per cent. greater than this general
Cantar of the Island, which is above 1 ounce per Rotolo.

This common Cantar of Cyprus, I find thus to respond with the City of Venice,
and other places.

Rotolo's 100 of Cyprus make sotile Venice 780 l. and of gross 480 l. which by
this computation should be about 522 l. English: But I imagine this is
accounted the Cantar of Famagusta, which is 8 per cent. greater than that of
Aleppo, which deducted, being 42 l. there rests 480 l. Averdupois, the weight
rendered of Aleppo; so that Rotolo's 21 incirca, make 100 l. gross, and Rotolo's
13 do make 100 l. sotile, and Rotolo 1 is 7 sotile, or 4 l. 8 ounces gross of
Venice weight.

Weights of Cyprus compared with other placos.
Again, I find these observations made on the weights of Cyprus, for Cottons,
viz. 100 Rotolo's of Cyprus Cottons has made in Venice 750 l. which is 30 l.
less than the aforesaid notes which are meant of Famagusta, and has made in
Naples 671 l. Bolonia 627 l. Montpelier 678 l. Barcelona 564 l. Sevil 589 l.
Paris 448 l. Marseli 567 l. Genoa 710 l. Florence 656 l. Milan 678 l. Avignon
570 l. Bruges 555 l. Rome 631 l. London 506 l.

The truth whereof I refer to the trial of the experienced.

Measures of Cyprus.
Measures of length are here two forts: first, the Pico, by which is sold all
woollen Cloth, and Silk accounted 26 inches, and the Brace, by which is sold
Linen, being 1/16 longer than the Pico abovesaid.

The 100 Pico's rendering in Venice 125 Woollen Braces, and 116 of Silk Braces.

Of Wine.
Wine is sold here by the Cuss, 7 Cusses make 6 Fetches of Venetians, which is
a Candie Barrel; so that a Cuss and a half, and a Zant jarre, are of one and
the same bigness.

Of Oil.
Oil is sold by the Rotolo, which weighs 2 Oaks, which is accounted for 1000
drams.

Of Grain.
Grain is sold by a measure called the Moose, which weighs 40 Oaks, and 2
Mooses, or 100 Oaks make one Staio in Venetia.

Of Salt.
Salt is sold by the Moose; 1000 Mooses here of Salt, make 14 Mooses in the
account of Venetia.

Also some Grain is sold by the Coffino, 100 whereof making 24 in 25 Stera's of
Venetia, which is (^) Bushels English.

Island Rhodes seated amongst the Isles Archipelago.
In this part of Asia (following the opinion of Authors) is the Island of Rhodes
seated, formerly the habitation of the Knights of St. John, now a Beyque of the
Turks, and where for the commodiousness of the Port, there is maintained a
Squadron of his Galleys yearly employed, to clear and protect those Seas:
matter of Trade presenting here, I have here willingly omitted, and placed the
same amongst the Islands of the Archipelago; to which place I refer the Reader,
and who desires to see further thereof.

CHAP. CIX. Of the Trade in general of Asia, as it is found at this day.
Of the trade in general of Asia.
TO conclude then the Trade and Traffic of Asia in general; it is comprehended
within a few principal Cities thereof: as first in the Grand Seignior's
Dominions in Aleppe, Smyrna, Constantinople, Alexandria, Balsara, and Baruti,
and Damasco: in Persia, Dominions, in Scirus, Ormus, Casbin, Gilan, and
Hispahan: and in India and these Coasts, at Goa, Malacca, Siam, Pegu, Cochin,
Calicut, Mesulapatan, and the Islands of Java, Japan, Summatra, Molucco's: in
Tartaria, in Astraca, Capha, Sarmacand, and Cambalu, etc. The Turkish Nation
affords not many Merchants of note; yet some are found that from Constantinople
do drive a Trade by Sea to Venice, Cairo, Trapesond, Capoa, and some few other
places: and some again that with Caravans by Land drive a Trade from Aleppo,
Damasco, and Egypt to the Red Sea, and to Mecha; but these I may more properly
account Arabians than natural Turks, who in general have been esteemed in times
past, and yet are more industrious and better versed in manual Arts, than in
the mystery of Merchandising: but now they have all well near lost that
attribute, and wholly addict themselves by reason of their Grand Seignior's
tyranny, to no further Trade than what necessity does for the most part compel
them, therefore not much worth here further consideration.

But those several Nations inhabiting the large Coast of India, Persia, and
these abovementioned Islands, are found to be more addicted thereto and of
greater eminency, and are found by their Traffic and Commerce to have raised
to themselves Estates in these Countries equal to many of our European Dukes
and greatest Earls, whereof the Gusurats and Canarins, the frugal and proper
Inhabitants of India, are accounted the chiefest and principal, occasioned
partly by their excellent subtilty in accounts and numbering, and partly by the
late Navigations and Commerce of the Europeans, Arabians, and other remoter
Nations amongst them, who bring them (for the most part) no other Commodity but
Plate and Silver in Rials of, which they there exchange for the rich
Commodities of India, as their Cloves, Maces, N^megs, Pepper, Diamonds,
Emeralds, Rubies, Pearls, and such other the precious Wares of these Countries.

The Persian Nation challenge also a large share in this Trade of Asia,
occasioned by their excellent and industrious Fabrics, and their natural
plenty of raw Silks, which from them is abundantly transported and spread over
all the world, and their sumptuous adorning and curiosity of living, drawing to
them by exchange the Riches and Commodities of India and China, and other
places.

The Arabians (as possessing a great part of Asia) may not here be omitted,
amongst which are found many eminent Merchants, not only trading by Camels with
Caravans from Turkey into Egypt, and other places, and into the Red Sea, but
also from Aleppo to Babylon, Balsara, and so to the Persian Gulf; and also by
Sea, not only on the Coast of Si^dy, India, Chormandel, Siam, Pegu, and the
Islands aforesaid, where many Mohammedan Princes are found to bear rule; but
also at Suachem, Melinda, Brava, and Quiloa, and many other parts and Ports of
Africa.

Neither amongst all these abovementioned Nations, which are found in the
general to afford Merchants of Eminency and Note, and to have a Country for
particular residence to themselves, and where their Princes do bear
Sovereignty, are the Nation of the Jews to be omitted or forgotten, who (though
by the Curse of the Almighty) are scattered and dispersed as it were over the
face of the whole Earth, and are permitted (with some limitations and
restrictions) their abode in several Countries, paying for their liberty and
freedom of residence and Commerce, both great and large annual Contributions in
sundry places; yet by their ingeniousness in Trade, and their expertness in
Arts, and their subtilty in the valuation of Princes Coins, and their Skill in
Accounts, they are found in all these aforementioned Countries to be both eminent
and rich Merchants, trading as well by Land as by Sea through all these
aforementioned Countries, and by their Craft and Art raising to themselves
eminence and great Estates thereby.

I should here give a share of this Asian Trade to the Chinoese, Tartarians,
and other great Nations: but my Ignorance herein does silence me.

Therefore it shall content me to have surveyed it in the general, and to have
left behind me what Observations I have been able to collect of the Traffic
and Traders of those vast and large Territories and Countries, knowing that
their strange Customs, and the manner of their Laws and Government debar all
easy access into their Dominions; and what others must not dare to see, I must
not dare to offer to recount.

To conclude then, having thus run over and surveyed the general Commerce and
Traffic of ASIA, I will now turn my self toward EUROPE, the last division of
the World, and of this Work, and as the best known to us, and the best reputed
of us.

OF EUROPE, AND THE Provinces and Cities of Trade THEREOF.
CHAP. CX. Of EUROPE the last Division of the World here handled, and the
Kingdoms thereof.
Europe 15 parts.
EUROPE, which I have willingly omitted as last and principal, comes now to be
surveyed, that the Trade thereof may the better appear in her particular
Provinces and Cities, should be in prerogative of worth the chief and first;
but following the custom of Merchants, I show the best last, and the worst
first.

Europe then is divided into these Provinces and Islands. 1 Spain. 2 France. 3
Italy. 4 Belgia. 5 Germany. 6 Denmark. 7 Norway. 8 Sweden. 9 Muscovia. 10
Poland. 11 Hungary. 12 Dacia. 13 Slavonia. 14 Graecia.


The Islands of Europe are dispersed through these Seas. 1 Greek Seas. 2 Egean
Seas. 3 Cretan Seas. 4 Ionian Seas. 5 Adriatic Seas. 6 Mediterranean Seas. 7
British Seas. 8 Northern Seas.


Of all which in order, and of each of these Divisions in order.

CHAP. CXI. Of SPAIN, and the Cities thereof.
Spain.
SPAIN, the most Western Continent of Europe, is environed on all sides with
the Seas, except toward France, from which it is separated by the Pyrenaean
Mountains, and the Fortress of Pampelona on the North-west, and Perpignan on
the South-east.

Commodities of Spain.
The Commodities that this Country yields for Merchandise, are Wines, Sugars,
Oils, Metals, Liquorish, Rice, Silks, Wool, Cork, Rosin, Steel, Oranges,
Limons, Raisins, Almonds, etc. Anniseeds, Anchoves, Soda, Barillia, Figs,
Tunny-fish, Iron, Shumack, Saffron, Soap, Coriander, Honey, Wax, etc.

Spain is found at this day to be divided into twelve Provinces, which formerly
were petty Kingdoms, viz. 1. Leon and Oviedo, 2. Navarre, 3. Corduba, 4.
Gallicia, 5. Biscay, 6. Toledo, 7. Mur^ia, 8. Castile, 9. Portugal, 10
Valentia, 11. Catalonia, 12. Aragon. Of which in order, with their Cities of
note and traffic.

Leon 1. Oviedo 2.
In Leon and Oviedo I find no City of Trade memorable, the City of Leon being
the principal, and is the Principality belonging to the Princes of Spain, under
the name of Asturia^.

Navarra 2.
In Navarre is of note, the City of Pampelona, famous for her Fortification, and
not for her Negotiation.

Corduba 4.
Corduba is accounted the most fertile soil of all Spain, and has Corduba for
a principal City, from whence comes that excellent Cordovant Leather known to
us. 2. Marchena, a principal breeder of the best Genets in Spain: also 3.
Medina Sidonia, whose Duke was principal Commander of that pretended Invincible
Armado 1588. Also Lucardi Barameda, a great Haven-town, Xeres, which yields the
Wines known, Sherry Sacks, because the Spaniards are found to pronounce x as sh
in English: and also Sevil, which requires (according to my Method) for her
worth and eminency of Trade a Chapter by it self.

CHAP. XCIII. Of SEVIL, and the Trade thereof,
SEVIL is accounted the fairest City of all Spain, in compass six miles,
environed with beautiful Walls, and adorned with many stately buildings; as
Palaces, Churches, and Monasteries; one whereof is endowed with 25000 Crowns
annual rent. The River Baetis divides it into two parts, yet joined by a
stately Bridge: from hence the Spaniards set out toward the Western India, and
hither return again to unlade the riches of those Western parts of the World,
which principally are found to be Silver, Tobacco, Ginger, Cottons, Sugars,
Brasil, and Ferinand Bucquewood, and some Drugs. Here is 30000 Gene^s
maintained continually for the King of Spain his service; and the Trade of this
place is of that greatness, that some are of opinion, the Customs of this Town
only is worth unto the King half a million of Gold yearly; and the Archbishop
of Sevil is held so rich, that his rent amounts to 100000 Crowns yearly, and
has under his Jurisdiction 2000 small Villages, and consequently in his whole
Diocese 2000 Benefices, besides Frieries, Nunneries and Hospitals, and esteemed
the next in degree to him of Toledo: The rarities of this place I willingly
omit as well known to out Nation.

Accounts, kept in Sevil and Madera.
In Sevil, Madera, etc. the Merchants keep their Accounts by Marvedies, of which
375 are esteemed to make a Ducate of Exxo 11 Rials, every Rial being 37 Mal.
and so is but 374 Mal. But our English there resident keep their Accounts in
Rials of 34. Mal. the Rial.

Coins of Sevil.
Their current moneys are these.

A Ducate of Gold of Sevil is worth 375 Marvedies accounted 5 s. 6 d. sterling.

A Rial of Castile is worth in Sevil 34 Marvedies, and is so worth throughout
all Spain, which is accounted 6 d. sterling money.

A Dobra current is worth of Carlin money ^1/^7 Marvedies; every 1000 Dobras
are 80 V. 883 Marvedies, and is accounted in Merchandise 71 Mar. and is worth
in Valentia at even hand 4 Sold. 7. Den. 1/10 of Valentia money without charges
of Exch.

A Dobra of Castile is worth 375 Marvedies, or is above a Ducate of Gold.

A Castilian of Merchandise is worth 485 Marvedies, about 7 s. ster. Vide
moneys in Castile current in all Spain.

Exchanges in Sevil.
Their Exxo are made upon the imaginary Ducate of 375 Mar. payable in Banco with
five per centum, which is the Banco's salary, or without the Banco to be paid
without the same; and this Ducate is commonly termed Ducato de Oro, or de Peso;
and is worth, as above, 375 Marvedies. In Sevil they make their payments as
following, if you say in Ducate di Oro, o^ de Castilia upon Banco, those are
then paid in Banco without loss at all; but if you say to be paid in so many
Ducates Doro in Pistolets forth of Banco, they will pay in the said money; but
if it be said to pay in Carlins, it will cost, and sometime per centum loss.
But because I have at large in the Tract of Exchanges in the Chapters 294 and
426 treated of the Exchange of this place, therefore I will (to avoid
repetition) refer the Reader thereunto for further and ampler satisfaction.

Weights of Sevil.
There is used in Sevil three Weights or Kintars: As first, the smaller which
comprehends 112 l. of four Roves of 28 pound a Rove.

The next is of 120 l. of four Roves of 30 l. to a Rove.

The last is the great, of 144 l of 4 Roves of 30 l. a Rove, which last is
accounted the common Kintar of Sevil, upon which these observations have been
made; which for the certainty I refer to trial: 100 l. in Sevil have been found
to make in London 102 l. Marselia 113 Venetia Sotile 152 Venetia Gross 96
Steilia 56 Lisbon 90 Florence 129 Antwerp 98 Lion 97 Dantzick 117 Genoa Gross
100 Spanish Wool.
Wool of Sevil is commonly here bought about Michaelmas, and they pay (...)
ready money, (...) at Christmas, and have from March to May for payment of the
rest, of which here is great quantity provided.

Raw Silk.
Silk is bought at Almeria, commonly worth 28 Pesanti the l. Morisco, which is
18 s. Florence, for which place it is bought, and this it will cost 1020 Mar.
the said pound which is 30 Rials, which is performed between June and October,
the best time being from July to August by reason of the heat; for after that
the weight of Silk will increase.

And as for other Commodities here found besides Wool and Silk, it cannot
properly be said to be the Commodities of the place, but for the most are
comprehended under the natural Commodities imported from the West Indies, of
which this is the principal Port and Scale in Europe, and as a Country
entirely challenged by the Spaniards.

Measures of Sevil.
Their common Measure in Sevil is the Vare, which has been observed, The 100
Vares to make in London else 74 Anvers 123 Frankford 154 Dantzick 102 Vienna
107 Lions a. 75 Paris al. 70 Genoav Pal. 336 Rouen al 74 Lisbon V. 74 Madera
Br. 76 Venetia 133 Lucca 148 Florence 151 Millan 170

Of Oil.
Oil is bought here by the Rove, 64 Roves is in Venetia one Miaria, 40 or 41
Roves make a Pipe, a Rove is 8 Somer, a Somer is 4 Quartiles, and a Quartile is
of a Stoop of Antwerp, and 2 Pipes or 81 Roves is 25 or 26 Florence Barrels, or
252 Gall. Gallons of English measure, but Sevil Gage is accounted but of these
Pipes 236 Gallons, at 118 Gallons the Pipe.

Of Corn.
Corn is measured and sold by the Cassise, which is 28 Staos of Florence, and
makes Bushels English (^)

St. Lucar.
Note, that St. Lucar is the Seaport of this City, whereto all Ships of burden
do first come and there lade and unlade, and where the Officers of the
Custom-house do come aboard to take notice of the Goodsboth landed and laden
for the City of Sevil, where the Customhouse is.

Customs of Sevil.
The Customs of Sevil are great, and arise upon some Goods to 10, 15, 20, and
upon most to 25 per cent. which I must refer to the better experienced; only it
is noted by some, that have treated of the Kings of Spain's Revenues, that the
Custom-house yearly of this City does yield him, as I said before, half a
Million of Gold.

Andalusia.
To proceed, in the precinct of Corduba lies Andalusia, wherein I find Sevil to
be seated. Secondly Granado, wherein the City of Granado, Malaga, and Almeria,
principal Cities are situated: And lastly, Estremadura, wherein I find only
Merida for a City of note, but not of Trade: Granada. Malaga.
therefore a word of the two former, Granada and Malaga, better known to the
English.

CHAP. CXIII. Of Granado, and the Trade thereof.
GRanado is the ordinary Parliament and Court of Justice for all the Southern
parts of Spain, as Valladolid is for the North; and therefore it may be
imagined, Where Lawyers are found to abound, little Trade is commonly
concurrent; it is of it self a stately Town, and curiously built all of
Freestone; it is fenced with a strong Wall, having twelve Gates, and 130
Turrets; the Palace of the late Moorish Kings is the prime and most magnificent
building of this City, it it seated within the Land, and has Motril for the
next Port, the neighborhood of Almeria and Malaga, both Maritime Ports, hinder
much the Trade thereof, therefore I shall insist the lesser upon the Trade of
this City, which principally depends upon the R^ Silk made here, and upon the
Fabrics wrought thereof.

Weights used in Granado.
The Weight here used is the Cantar, of 100 l. which has been observed by some
English to make 118 l. Averdupois, and by some Venetians to have made there 111
l. Gross, and 175 l. Sotile.

The Measure is as at Malaga.

CHAP. CXIV. Of Malaga, and the Trade thereof.
MAlaga is seated on the Mediterranean shore, abounding in Raisins and Wines
that are known by that name, and thence vented to our colder Climate, which
makes this Town famous for its plenty therein; where touching Anno 1617. I
noted this observation, Coins in Malaga.
Their Moneys are general with all Spain, the principal being

A Rial, which is 34 Marvedies, and is 6 d. sterling.

A Pistolet of Gold is 23 Rials, and the double being 47 Rials.

Customs of Malaga.
Their Customs upon Merchandise here differ; for Sugar, Almonds, Wine, and Oils
are found to pay Custom outward -- 7 per cent.

Cochineal, and other such fine Commodities -- 10.

All Commodities which are found to issue out else -- 5.

All Commodities transported from Port to Port -- 2.

Weights of Malaga.
Their Weight is the 100 l. divided into four parts of 25 l. which they call the
Rove, and every pound is 16 ounces, and 1 ounce makes 16 drams, and each dram
28 grains: and this 100 l. or Kintar has been found to make 112 l. 5 ounces
English; but yet I find some the have made observations upon this place
allege, That the 100 l. of Malaga will yield i^ London 105 l

Measures of Malaga.
Their measure of length is a Vare, which is 27 inches by Rule.

Their liquid Measure for Wine and Oil is a Rove, and divided into 8 Sombres:
25 Ro^ makes a Pipe; and is 100 Gallons English.

Of Corn.
Their Grain Measure is a Hanock, and is divided into twelve Almodes; this Hand
is of a Bushel and twelve Gallons English, which weighs by heap 144 l. and by
str^ 29 l. English.

Almeria.
Note, That Almeria agrees in Weights and Measures with Malaga abovenamed.

Gallicia.
In Galicia, I find only St. James of Compostella famous for the Sepulcher of
St. James, which is worshipped with incredible devotion; Q. Baiona.
Baiona, commonly called the Groine, whereto some Trade is driven by the
Merchants of England, principally of Bristol, which I briefly thus anatomize.

The Coins are the same, as used throughout Spain.

Here is in use two Quintals, the one proper to Iron, which is London 122 l.
and the other called the Sutle Quintal, which is 108 l. and the Measure here in
use is as in Bi^ following.

Biscay, and the Trade thereof.
In Biscay, I find Bilboa and St. Sebastians, two noted Towns for Trading, much
frequented by Merchants, whereupon I have gathered these Observations of the
Trade of these places.

The Coins are here current with all Spain, which is a Spanish Rial,
distinguished into white Quarties, four to a Rial, and 4 black Quartiles to a
single Rial, and accounted by 34 Mar^dies to the said Rial.

Weights of Bilboa.
There is here in use two Quintars, the one proper to the Iron here made, which
produces in London 158 l. and the other being the Sutle 100 l. produces here
about 111 to 112 l.

Measures of Bilboa.
Their Measure here of length is the Vare; 100 yards is here 109 Vares, and the
100 Flemish Else, whereby Bays are bought in England, is here 80 Vares.

Corn is here sold by the Hanega, and five Hanegaes have been observed to make
a Quarter English.

Customs of Bilboa.
The Customs here are 2 per centum, and valued as they shall be sold, and not
paid till sold: but note, That no Commodities pay here any Custom but what is
either to be eaten, drunken, or burned: and if a Merchant hap to make a bad
debt of above 500 l. the Custom thereof is not paid all.

Toledo.
In Toledo is the City of Toledo, famous for its Archbishopric, whose Rents
look as high as 300000 Crowns yearly; it is seated in the center of Spain, but
of no great consequence in matter of Trade, known to us, as improper for the
same by its situation, being an Inland City, and over-traded by Shurchmen.

In Murcia there are three Towns of note, Murcia.
Murcia the first, as principal of the Province; Cartagena.
Cartagena the second, as having a most excellent Haven, and agreeing in
Weights and Measures with Alicant; that is the third, that has choice Wines
and good Trading by its commodious situation. Of the two former I cannot say
much: in the latter having lived some years, I observed these Rules in the
course and Trade of the place.

CHAP. CXV. Of Alicant, and the Trade thereof.
Alicant, and the Trade thereof.
ALicant, seated on the Mediterranean Shore, as Malaga, Almeria, and Cartagena
are, is of late years become (by reason of its commodious Road) to be the Scale
of the City of Valentia, where the principal Merchants thereof reside, and have
here their Factors and Respondents that negotiate their Affairs for them: it
affords Wines, Raisins, Licoris, Soda Barillia, Basse ropes, Soaps, hence
called Alicant Soaps, Aniseeds, and such.

Coins of Alicant.
The Moneys are those of Valentia, see there farther.

Accounts kept.
Merchants keep their Accounts here in Livers, Solds and Deniers; twelve
Deniers make a Soldo, twenty shillings a Liver, which is accounted to be five
shillings ster^ as the Soldo threepence, and the Denier a farthing.

Weights of Alicant.
Their known great Weight is a Cargo, which is 10 Roves of 24 l. and of 36 l. to
the Rove: the Rove of 24 l. being 18 ounces, and the Rove of 36 l. being twelve
ounces, by which is sold Pepper, Rice, Almonds, Cloves, Spices and other
Commodities of value.

All gross Commodities are weighed by 24. l. to the Rove, and four to the
Quintal, the Cargo making 280 l. Averdupois, and the Quintal making 96 l. in
England.

All Sugars, Drugs, and Tin, is weighed by a small Quintal, which is 120 l. of
twelve ounces to the pound, which is about 18 or 20 per centum less than the
English 112 l.

Soda Barillia carried hence to Venetia to make Glasses, and to Marselia to
make hard Shap, has been found to make a Cantar 133 lib. of Provence: A
general rule in Alicant Weights.
but because this diversity of Weights may seem troublesome to be understood,
observe this general Rule, 96 l. of 18 ounces is 144 l. of 12 ounces, and is
the great Quintal; 80 l. of 18 ounces is 120 l. of twelve ounces, and is the
small Quintal; the difference found is 16 l. of 18 ounces per libram, and 24 l.
of twelve ounces l. from the great to the small Quintal.

Measures of Alicant.
Their common Measure is the Vare, which is less than the English yard.

Their Wine Measure is a Cantaro, which is about 12 quarts English.

Their Corn Measure is a Cassise, about 3 bushels English.

Custom.
Their Custom is 11 Deniers per centum Liver, which is 4 per cent. and is
payable 8 Deniers to the Duana, and 3 Deniers Sisa, which is paid as well by
the buyer as the seller, and as often as any goods are either bought, sold, or
bartered, so often is the said Custom paid by buyer and seller 9 per cent. see
Valentia farther.

Castile.
The next is Castile, the most prevalent Province of all Spain, and whence the
Spainiards entitle themselves Castilians, and to which all the other are
united, either by conquest or intermarriages; it is divided into the New and
Old, Segovia.
in which is first the City of Segovia, whence comes our fine Segovia Cloth,
made by Woolls that first had their original from our English Sheep. Valladolid.
Secondly, Valladolid, an University, which yields no Commodity but English
Papistical Fugitives. Burges.
Next Burges, famous as contending with Toledo for the Primateship of Spain.
Salamanca.
Next Salamanca, the most Famous Academy of all Spain; these are in Old Castile.
In New Castile are found these Cities; Madrid.
first Madrid, the Seat of the Kings of Spain, and from a little Village become
a populous and large City: Alcala.
Secondly, Alcala: Thirdly, Alcantara: Escurial.
And lastly the Escurial, built by Philip the Second, and which cost four
Millions the Sructure. In this Tract, I have not observed any eminent City of
Trading, yet because the whole Country of Spain in general has in many things
a dependency upon the rules and orders in matter of Trade belonging hereunto; I
will therefore, to shorten my work, as well in the succeeding as in some
precedings Towns, give you a Touch of the Trade hereof under the Title of
Madrid or Castile.

CHAP. CXVI. Of Madrid in Castile and the Trade thereof.
Castilia, and the Trade thereof. Coins of Castilia.
THE general Coins of Castile I account as the general Coins passing throughout
Spain, which is to be considered when I treat of the Trade of any City under
the subjection of the Key of Spain.

In the then Court of Spain, being commonly in Madrid in Castilia, the Ducate
is worth (...) Marvedies, and is called by some a Dobra of Castile.

A Castiliano is worth 485 Marvedies.

A Florin of Castile is worth 265 Marvedies, almost four shillings sterling.

Quento.
A Ducate Count or Quento of Marvedies is a million,

A Count or Quento of Marvedies is Ducates 2666, and at Dobra it is worth 2739
57/78 (...) which is sterling 733 l. 6. 8 d.

A Rial single of Castile is worth 34 Marvedies, which is 6 d. sterling.

A Quento of Marvedies is worth 3258 Rials and 3 Marvedies.

A Crown of Castile is worth 323 Marvedies, but of them you need not make
payment but of 600 only.

The Ducate of Spain has 11 Rials of Plate, and every Rial, as I said before,
34 Marve^, and every Ducate 374 Marvedies, which is 5 s. 6 d. English, the Rial
6 d. and the Mar^ less than our farthing: the single Pistolet of Gold 11 Rials
being 400 Marvedies which is according to 6 d. a Rial 5. s. 10 Esterling.

Exchanges in Castilla.
In Castilia they that give money upon Exchange, do agree to be paid in Ducates
of Gold, (...) their worth in Gold or Silver; for if they should not do so,
they should be paid in base (...) ney, which would prove to be more than five
per cent. loss. The orders of the Fairs in (...) are thus.

Fairs of Castilia.
The first is the Fair of May, and is made in Medino del Campo, and begins the
first of (...) and lasts 50 days.

The second is the Fair of August, and is made in Medina di Riosecco, and
begins the first (...) August, and lasts 30 days.

The third is the Fair of October, made in Medina del Campo, and begins the
first of November, lasting 50 days.

The fourth is the Fair of Villa Lion, begins the first day of Lent, and
lasts twenty day^ but is no Fair of Exchange; the time expired, there may no
Goods be sold, nor payment made upon pain of forfeiture of the Goods and
Moneys. And it is to be noted, that the L^ters be there fifteen days before the
time.

The payments.
The payments upon all the Fairs they make in Banco, not saying forth, and they
are to rec^in Ducates de Oro, in Oro largo, and forth of Banco; where they say
forth of Banco and (...) ready money, there is gotten thereby one per cent. and
when they say Ducates of Gold, or (...) worth, it is understood in Marvedies,
375 for a Ducate, and when they say forth of the Fair, (...) understood for
ready money; and this shall suffice to have said of Castilia in general: and a
for the custom and manner of their Exchanges here practiced, see the Chapter
426, of the fachange of Spain, at the end of this Tract.

Portugal.
In Portugal, once a Famous Kingdom, (and the rather for the fortunate
discoveries made in the Eastern Indies by the Inhabitants there is many fair
Towns of Trading, but all of the^ giving precedence to Lisbon, the Metropolis
of this Kingdom; I shall willingly therefore (...) the rest, and enlarge my
self thereupon: Commodities of Portugal.
The general commodities this Country abounds is are these, Honey, Wine, Oil,
Alum, Fruits, Fish, white Marble, Salt, etc. and those many other Commodities,
that it is now in great abundance found to yield, are the proper Commodities of
the East Indies such as are Pepper, Cloves, Sugars, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cottons,
Calli^, the Gems of India, the Spices and Drugs of Arabia, and the Silks and
Fabrics of Persia and China, which though here to be had, yet I have here
omitted the mentioning, as not being the native Commodities of Portugal.

CHAP. CXVII. Of Libon, and the Trade thereof.
Lisbon and Trade thereof.
LIsbon is accounted to be seven miles in compass, and to contain 20000
families, having 67 Towers upon the Walls, and 22 Gates to the Sea-ward, and 16
to the Continent: it is seated upon the River Tagus, accounted most famous and
commodious for Traffic and Commerce, from hence the Portugals set out to the
East Indies, and hither do return again with all those Spices, Drugs, and other
the rich Merchandise, which East India, Arabia, Persia and China do afford: at
the entrance of the River Duero stands Porto also, a Town of good Trade, where
the Galiies used in times past to land the Merchandise, and therefore is called
Porta Gallorum, by which means some Authors do infer the whole Country took
its name of Portugal. But to proceed to Lisbon, I will note what I have
observed thereupon in matter of Traffic according to my proposed Theme.

Coins of Portugal.
The Coins in Portugal found current are these:

A Croisado of Gold, is worth 400 Reas.

A Ducate of Portugal is 10 Reals, which is 400 Reas, which is five shillings
sterling.

A Rial is 40 Res or 6 d. sterling, a mill Reas is 22 Rials.

A Testoon is 2 Rials, or 100 Res, or 15 d. sterling.

A Vintin is 20 Res, or 3 d. sterling.

A Mirle of Gold is 1000 Res, which is 2 Ducates.

A single Rial Spanish, is 2 Vintins, or 4 Res.

Weights of Portugal.
Their Weights are these, a small and a great, the great Cantar is divided into
four Roves, and each Root is 32 Reals, which is 128 l. at 14 ounces per l.
which has been found to make in Florence 149 l. their small Quintar for Pepper
and Ginger is near 112 l. English, the Rove or Quatern is 2^ l. the great
Quintal holds 15 in 16 per cent. more than the English 112 l.

The King has a Quintar for his Contractation house to sell the Spices of
India, by which is 150 l. of Florence, and is about 114 l. English, the great
Cantar of Lisbon making in Florence 170 or 130 l. English, but all fine Goods
is by custom of the place to be sold by the said Kings-Beam.

These Observations upon 100 l. small of Lisbon, have been made in and yield.
The 100 l. small of Lisbon does yield in London 113 li. Marselia 126 l. Venetia
sotile 168. Venetia gross 106 3/^. Sicilia 63. Florence 149. Antwerp 107. Lions
119 ^/^. Sevil 110. Dantzick 130. Genoa 162. Aleppo 23 Rials. Aleppo Silk 24,
6. Irip. Soria. 27, 6. Irip. Barbaria 98 l. Baruti 22. Alex. Zera 51, 3. Alex.
Forsia 117, 6. Seio. 102, 10. Constantinople 93, 6. Rhodes 20, 7. Acria 18, 3.
Babilonia 15, 10 Ma. Balsera 4, 5 Ma. Ormus 113. Which for trial I refer to the
experienced.

Measures of length in Portugal.
Their Measures of length, dry and liquid here used are these; first their
Measure of Cloth is the Coveda, which is near of an English Yard; the Measure
Linen is the Vare, and i^ an Ell, less nail of the English measure, by which
may be made the computation for other Countries, and by some found to be 8 per
centum less.

Of Corn in Portugal.
The Measure of Corn, is the Alquier, three Alquiers is a bushel, 1 is 8 Gallons
Winchester Measure, and five Alquiers is a Hannep of Spanish Measure.

Of Salt in Portugal.
The Measure of Salt is called the Muy, and 60 Alquiers makes a Muy, and 2 Muyes
and 15 Alquiers is a Tun of Bristol water-measure, which is 10 Gallons
Winchester, and 40 of those Measures do make a Tun.

Note, that 4 Alquiers of Lisbon make a Fanega, or Hannep in Andalusia, by some
observations, which Fanega is 2 Staios and somewhat more of Florence, in such
manner that a Sta^ o^ Florence may be accounted half a Fanega, and an Alquier
of Lisbon may be accounted half a Staio of Florence, which makes (^) Gal. Eng.

Customs of Lisbon.
The Customs is inwards 23 per centum, that is, to the Dechima 10 per cent. to
the Si^e 10 per cent. and to the Consolado 3 per cent. and the Customs outward
is only 3 per centum.

Observations upon the dry Measures of Lisbon.
These observations have been also made upon Measures of this place; 22 Alquiers
of Lisbon have made in Sicilia upon Corn 1 general Salmo, Alquiers 3 have made
in Marselia one Mina; and it is to be understood, that the Muy of Corn and Salt
are all alike, but that there is given one in 24 more upon Salt, because the
Salt loses and not the Corn. The (...) of Wine in Lisbon is 52 Almudin, and
one Almudin is 13 Chanate, etc. which is in E^gland (^) Gallons.

Valentia.
The next Province is Valentia, giving name, or taking it from a City of the
same name, the principal of this Province which is seated some two miles from
the Sea, where there a found an open Road called La Grevo, and not capable of
great Ships, nor indeed safe for Ships of any noted burden, therefore is
Alicant become the principal Scale for this City; i^ which place having resided
for some time Anno 1617. I shall touch the Trade thereof as observed by me in
those days.

CHAP. CXVIII. Of Valentia, and the Trade thereof.
Valentia and the Trade thereof.
VALENTIA, the principal City of the Province of Valentia, gives Rules to all
the adjoining places, as well for matter of Trade as Judicature, wherein is
vented yearly great quantity of Pepper, Tin, Lead, Baies, Linnens, Fish, as
Pilchards, Herrings, and Ne^land fish, and such other like Commodities, having
their Moneys current, Weights and Measur^ as follows.

Coins of Valentia,
A Liver of Valentia is worth 20 Sold. of that money, and is 5 s. Sterling.

A Ducate of Gold is 21 Sold. of the said money.

A Castiliano is 27 Sold. and 4 Deniers of the same money.

A Liver of Valentia is worth 365 Marvedies of Castilia, and changing them at
Naples for Valentia 18 sold. 4 Deniers, which with the charges comes even,
because a Ducate of Carlins is worth at Naples after the rate of sold. 18 Den.
3, and this because your money is at 15 pe^ centum.

Their greatest money is a piece of 6 sold. which is three Rials Castile, then
have they three sold. which ^ Rials, and the half of three sold. which is 18
Deniers, which is 1 sold. every soldo is 12 Deniers, and 24 Deniers is a Rial
Castiliano, which is 6. d. sterling.

Accounts in Valentia.
Their Accounts are kept by Liver, Sold. and Deniers. 12 Deniers accounted to a
sold. and 20 sold. to a Liver, which is 10 Rials Castile, 50 souls French and
5. s. sterling.

Weights of Valentia.
The Weights are these and thus distinguished.

The greatest Weight is a Cargo or Load, which is 360 l. of Valentia, and has
been sound to increase 3 or 4 per centum after the Weight of Florence. Cargo
fine Ditto gross.
This Cargo is accounted to be 12 Reves as well of sine as gross goods; a Rove
subtle being 30 l. and by this Weight is weighed Corn, Sugar, Oil, Spice, and
other fine goods.

A Rove Gross is 36 l. and by this is weighed Wool, and such other gross goods.

A Quintar as well the small as great is four Roves, which makes 120 l. of fine
goods and 144 l. of gross goods, in which observe this true Rule for all the
Weights of Valentia.

Note in weights.
98 l. of 18 ounces to the l. is 144 l. of 12 ounces to a pound, and is
accounted the great Kintar, and

80 l. of 11 ounces to the l. is 120 l. of 12 ounces per. l. the small Cantar:
so that the difference is 16 l. of 18 ounces, and 24 l. of twelve ounces from
the great to the small; and these two Weights have been observed to yield in
other Cities of Trade after this manner. Subtle l. Gross l. 100 l. Subtle does
produce the first Row. 100 l. Gross does produce in the second London 96 115
Marselia 107 128 Venetia sotile 140 168 Sicilia 54 64 Lisbon 84 102 Florence
122 147 Antwerp 92 110 Lions 101 122 Sevil 94 113 Dantzick 110 133 Malage 26
Rials 31 Rials. Barcelona 104 l. 125 l. Majorque 102 124 Paris 102 124 St.
Maloes 105 128 Aleppo 196 Rials 234 Tripoli Syria 234 Rials 249 Baruti 188 224
Alexand. zera 445 532 Scio 876 105 Constantinople 79 95 Rhodes 17 21 Genoa 133
163

Measures of Valentia.
Their Measures are these following:

Four Palms of Valentia make a Vare, which is 1 Braces of Florence, and is 1
parts of an English Yard; 100 Vares after this account may be in London 83 in
85 Yards.

Of Corn.
Corn is sold by the Caffiso in Valentia, which is twelve Barsellas which weigh
10 Roves of 36 l. la Rove of twelve ounces per l. which is in Florence 7
Staios, and 37 Barsellas is there 24 Staios, which is a Mayo, Barsellas 17
making a general Salmo in Sicilia; and is of the measure of Corn in England (^)
Gallons.

Of Salt.
Salt is also sold by the Caffiso, which weighs 18 l. of the Gross weight of
Valentia, eight Caffises making one Modino in Juice, and one Caffise making 3
bushels English.

Of Wines
Wine is sold by the Cantaro, which is a pitcher, and contains twelve quarts of
English Measures. Note, that 1480 Salms of Wheat in Sicilia have made in
Valentia 1480 Saffici.

Commodities of Valentia.
This Country affords, as I said before, hard Soap commonly worth 80 Rials a
Kintar, rising and falling as Oils are in request.

Aniseeds are worth 24 Rials the Rove, and daily is transported for France and
England.

Barillia is used in making Glasses, and hard Soaps; and worth 16 to 18 Rials
per centum.

Denia.
Raisins of Denia, a small Village, anciently a famous Town of this Province;
not so well esteemed as Malaga Fruit, is sold here at 18 Rials per cent. and I
have paid here for a whole Ships lading of 200 Tuns, Anno 1618. 24 Rials per
cent. proving commonly best when dearest.

Almonds are here also plenty, worth commonly 12 Ducates a Cargo, which is 220
l. English which 280 l.

Customs in Valentia.
Customs here paid is 9 per cent. 4 by the buyer, and 4 by the seller, and as
often as any Commodity is bought or sold, so often is this Custom paid, being 8
Deniers Duana and 3 Deniers Sisa; and if any Goods come in to be shipped out
again (commonly called a Transito) the general Duty of four Deniers per l. is
only paid and no more.

Their payments in Customs and all other ways are in Valentia money, and worth
3 per cent. to be converted into Spanish Rials.

There is also a Duty called a Mottahecos, which is a pound of Pepper on each
Quintar, and so upon other fine Goods: And this is as much as I remember
needful in this Argument, and so I will proceed to the next Province which is
Catalonia; and as for the Exchanges here practiced, see farther in the 291 and
426 Chapters.

Catalonia.
In Catalonia is only famous, the City of Barcelona the principal of this
Province, where having good cause of the remembrance of my being here, by
reason of my imprisonment in the Inquisition, Anno 1618. I must according to my
Method afford the Cities Traffic, a (...) of observation, in acknowledgment of
their love and pains in my Release; moved thereto, partly by the affection I
had gained with many the chief Merchants, but especially left the same might
deter other English from coming to traffic and inhabit amongst them, and
furnish their necessities with English Commodities which they seem much to
desire, and oftentime much stand in need of.

CHAP. CXIX. Of Barcelona, and the Trade thereof.
Barcelona.
BArcelona is seated on the Mediterranean shore, and entering into that Gulf
which is so terrible to Navigators, in these parts called The Gulf of Lions.
It has a reasonable commodious and safe Harbor, and the Citizens do winterly
enlarge and lengthen the same by adding to their Mould, that Ships of burden
may come within the same: what I obserred here Anno 1618. I will briefly
declare.

Coins in Barcelona.
Their Moneys current in Merchandise, besides the Rial of Castile, is a Liver
which passe^ here at 20 sold. and a Ducate of Gold of Castile is worth 24 sold.
of the said money, and the soldo is twelve Deniers of that money, wherein they
are found to keep their Accounts.

Weights in Barcelona.
Their Cantar is a 100 l. which is English 92 l. or thereabouts, and has made
by observation In Florence 123 l. Genoa 130 l. Valentia 106 l. Marselia 104 l.
Venetia Sotle 140 l.

Measures of length.
Their Measure is a Can consisting of eight Palms, and has been found to make
the Braces in Florence, and in England found to produce 1 Yards English, and in
Naples (...) been found to make 6 Palms.

Of Corn.
Corn is sold by a Measure called the Quarter, one Salmo is four Quarters, sold
always (...) of all Customs, 2 Quarters making a Cargo or load, which is
accounted 360 l. as is that (...) mentioned aforegoing in Valentia.

Woolls are sold by the Rove, which is 30 l. making 26 l. of Venetia gross,
whither the same is commonly transported, and in Florence 36 l.

All gross Goods are sold by the Cargo, accounted 3 Kintars, which is 440 l.
Sutle of Ven^ and 278 l. gross there, which is 372 l. in Florence, and has
been found to make English 3000^ Averdupois.

Tortosa.
In this Province lies also Tortosa a fine small City, but the principal of the
Inhabitants ^ing accounted as Moors, were some years before my being here
banished this Country, (...) therefore most places lie waste, and many Villages
are here along found without Inhabit^ and the Grounds to want Laborers.

Aragon.
The next Province is Aragon, wherein is Tarragon, a fine and handsome City, but
(...) the banishment of many of the Inhabitants, as above is said, now made
poor: in my (...) there in 1618. I found it most to consist in making of Silk,
here bought and carried to Irlentia to be wrought: Saragosa.
The principal City hereof is Saragosa, which should challenge a (...)
particular relation, as being commodiously seated for Traffic on the banks of
the River (...) Ebro, but being an University, it were too great an honor for
an inland Town to prod^ famous Scholars and eminent Merchants; yet in the
current Coins, it is observed to rule as (...) V^dentia: and because there is
found practiced here a great Exchange, I have inserted (...) same by it self,
Chapter 292 in the end of this Tract, with all circumstances thereunto
appe^taining. And these are all the principal Cities of Traffic found at this
day comprised (...) the Kingdom of Spain.

CHAP. CXX. Of the Weights and Measures of Spain reduced to the English hundred.
Weights of Spain reduced to the 100 l. of England.
THE principal Cities of Spain and Portugal thus surveyed; it will not be
unworthy our observation, first to see how the Weights and Measures of some
other lesser Cities here omitted concur with the Weights and Measures of
England, and then take a general view of the Trade which is in general found in
the compass of those Kingdoms, now united and subject to the Crown of Castilia.
First then, to begin with the weights of Spain and Portugal, I will reduce them
to the subtle 100 l. of London, which by observation has been found to make
in. Sevil 108 l. by great Quintar of 144 l. of four Roves of 36 l. smaller
Quintar of 112 l. of 4 Roves of 28 l. by lesser Quintar of 120 l. of 4 Roves of
30 l.
Granado and Almeria bona 104 l. is the pound of 16 ounces. 89 l. is of Silk
and Copper of 18 ounces. 52 l. great weight for Flesh 32 ounces.
Castilia Medina del Campo 98 l. Burgos 89 Rot. Aragon and Barcelona 102 l. 92
l. great weight for Woollen. 126 l. small weight for Saffron.
Valentia 102 l. by Quintar of 4 Roves of 30 l. for Spices. 129 l. by Quintar
of 4 Roves of 36 l. the Cargo, is those Quintars of 360 l. and the greater of
432 l. The 100 l. of London.

Leon 105 l. Saragos^ 108 l. and by the small Quintar 126 l. Savalon^ and
Salanico 126 l. Viliaco 77 l.


Note here, that the Islands of the Canaries, and all the Islands of Spain use
the weights of Sevil as foresaid; now for the Kingdom of Portugal 100 l. London
makes in. Portugal Rot. 104 l. the great Quintar of 128 l. the small Quintar of
112 l. containing each 4 Roves of 32 l. and 28 l.



Note here, that there is allowance made four upon the hundred upon Sugars, and
two and 3 per cent. upon Cotton Woolls, and such like, the small Quintar is the
weight of the Contractation-house of the Indies: All Spice is weighed thereby,
but all are weighed by the great Quintal, and reduced upon the lesser Quintar,
one Quintar of Wax is one Quintar, and half of 112 l. is 168 l. Madera 104
Rotolos. Cape Verd. 104 Rot. Saint Thomas 104 Rot. Guinea 104 Rot. Maroc^ in
Barbary 104 Rot.
or Pounds by the Quintar of 128 l. Feas and Suus in Barbary 92 l. Calicut 77
Aracoles.
Note here, they sell by the Baccar or Bahar, being at Lisbon four Quintars of
112 l. and observe, That the Bahar is 4 Quintars for 120 Aracoles. The Bahar or
Bahor is 20 Faracoles of 32 l. per Rove, which at Lisbon is 5 Quintals great.
480 Aracoles.

Whereby it may be discerned, that as Sevil has given the weight to the
West Indies discovered by the Spaniard, so has not Lisbon but in part given
the weight to the East Indies, who had amongst themselves there an eminent
Trade, and consequently their Weight and Measure peculiar to themselves, before
the Portugal discovered the same.

Measures of Spain reduced to 100 yards in London.
As for the Measures of both these Kingdoms, as I have done with the Weight in
reducing it to the London 100 l. subtle, so will I reduce the Measures thereof
to the 100 yards of London which rendereth in The 100 Yards of London is in
Castilia 111 Vares of 4 quartos, and every quarte 2 Palms. Toledo 111 Vares
Cades 108 Vares. Ditto for Silk 148 Else. Andalusia 109 Vares, Aragon 57 Canes.
Saragosa 44 Canes. Morocco 181 Covad. Both these of 12 to o^ Cove. Cap dalgier
141 Covad. Sivilia 109 Vares. Granado 109 Vares. Barcelona 57 Canes. Valentia
97 Canes. Lisbon 82 Vares. Ditto for 109 Vares. Ditto for Silk 96 Covades.

CHAP. CXXI. Of the Trade in general of Portugal, and the Kingdom of Spain.
Of the Trade in general of Portugal and Spain.
THE Navigations and discoveries of the Spaniards and Portugals into the East
and West Indies, though they carried to the world at first the specious colors
of Piety and Religion, by planting their Superstition in these Heathen
Countries; yet Ambition and Profit was doubtless the secret design of their
intendments. Portugal, whose Kings first sought those unknown Regions of the
East Indies, and seeking discovered, and discovering in part conquered,
presently made strict Laws and Prohibitions for any of his Subjects to trade
for certain the riche^ Commodities thereof but himself, and thereupon settled
his Contrataction-house in Lisbon, where those Commodities should be sold,
weighed, and delivered, and these bargains being made by Commissioners
appointed by him, were first from them called Royal Contracts; and thus for a
long time it continued, till his Subjects having made further and ampler
discoveries of those Regions, for their better encouragement, and to induce his
People to those Navigations, be permitted them afterward an ampler and larger
liberty of that Trade, reserving certain partic^lar Commodities only to his own
use and benefit; neither did it otherwise appear in the camage of those who
were discoverers of the West Indies, which we find to be the Spaniards; see
though there wanted not fair and plausible demonstrations of winning the Souls
of those pooe People, yet by millions they were slaughtered, butchered, and
slain, making a devastation in the Country of those innocent Inhabitants, as
if there had been no way to the eternal life of the So^ but by a present death
of the body, aiming thereby, as may be conjectured, particularly at the
possession only of their Estates, which by many deaths and torments was drawn
from the^ and converted to their own and their Soverains Treasury, as appears
(to the scandal of their Religion and of their King) in sundry of their own
Authors published in many Languages These two Countries then thus discovered,
and thus by rapine gotten and settled, and since united together under one
King, have afforded the present matter of Trade of all Spain and Portugal,
which before that time afforded not any Commodities almost whereby Trade might
be as much as discerned, much less maintained; and now Lisbon for the East, and
Sevil for the West Indies, is become the Staple for all the rich Commodities
those two Countries do afford, and so continued till England and Holland by
their late Navigation shared with them in the ^fick and riches thereof, which
yet are seen to be but as petty branches coming from the principal channel; but
the West Indies affording to them great quantity of Silver by the Mines
thereof, which now is found so abundantly plentiful in the world, may be called
indeed and in effect their best Commodity, which ever since its first coinage,
they have maintained in its prime weight and sineness, which many of their
Politicians have gone about at several times to inhanse, as if it would have
proved a great benefit to their Commonwealth; but wiser judgments have
discovered, that the raising of these moneys in Spain would prove altogether
prejudicial to that State; for all these Commodities that are brought to them,
which for the most part they stand in great need of, being necessary either for
back or belly, would soon vanish, did not these their moneys allure and attract
them; and contrariwise it may be hence imagined, and I think granted, that what
other Princes soever does inhanse his Silver, or the moneys of his Country, it
must needs prove to his own proper prejudice and the Spaniards gain, because
they raise and inhanse a Commodity which is not theirs really, but transported
to them at second hand by Merchants and others, and of which though happily
possessing some small Silver Mines of their own, yet the gross is still his, so
far forth as his quantity and abundance exceeds theirs.

As for the other Commodities which those Countries afford, ours and many other
Nations were with the same from Alexandria and Venice at first supplied, and
then hence, but now having found the way to the Spring head, we daign not to
buy of them at the second hand, except such, of which their Princes reserve to
themselves a peculiar interest, either by farming the same to their Subjects,
or keeping the same in their own hands, or by excluding all other Nation from
the Trade thereof, and these we and others are constrained to have from them,
in which number may be accounted Sugars, Tobacco, Ginger, and some other Drugs,
and the Commodities of the West Indies in general.

Now for the Inhabitants both of Spain and Portugal, they are in general lovers
of Merchandising and Traffic, neither so much despising it as the French, nor
yet so much addicted thereto as the Italians, yet more willingly adventuring
their Estates at Sea than them, who herein are found to distrust the Providence
of Almighty God in a lawful calling, and prefer their own wisdom and providence
on Land before the protection of the Almighty at Sea. And as they are
well-wishers to Trade, so are they found in a large measure to practice it in
such Cities as occasion and Commodities do either present or permit; for both
in Sevil and Lisbon are found Merchants of great eminency, but yet are such as
for the most part bend their Traffic into both the Indies and no where else,
except peradventure a little to Antwerp in Flanders, and into Naples, and
Sicilia in the Mediterranean Seas, and which seldom are noted to adventure
their estates, or have any. Factors resident but where their King is Chief and
Sovereign. The Raw Silks, Wines; and Fruits of this Kingdom are the prime
Commodities of import it now yields, as also Olives, Raisins, Figs, Almonds,
etc. which the English fetch from them in great abundance; so that it is of
late years observed, that the Planters of these Fruits, and their Wine
Merchants, have by our over-greedy purchasing of these Commodities, raised to
themselves fair Estates.

Two things I observed during my abode here, that are great lets and
impediments to the Trade of this Nation, the one is the banishment of the Moors
that here in great numbers Inhabited, who painfully and industriously manured
their land, and by their labor and thrifty living reised to their Landlords
and to themselves good and great estates, the which now for many thousand
thousand Acres lie wast and desolate, whole Towns and Villages being
depopulate, and the Lords Castles and Manors appearing ruined and decayed,
want the pains of these poor People that gave their Lords and Lordships means
of subsistency. The second is the residence of many Genoa Merchants amongst
them, who are found in good number to abide in every good City, especially on
the Sea coasts, whose skill and acuteness in Trade far surpassing the natural
Spaniards or Portugals, and who by means of their wealth and continual practice
of Exchanges are found to devour that bread which the Inhabitants might
otherwise be sufficiently sed with; and by reason that the King of Spain is
ever engaged to their Commonwealth for great and vast Sums at interest, he is
their Debtor not only for their moneys, but a so for their favor, which by
many immunities throughout his Kingdom, he is found continually to requite
them: and amongst the rest it is observed, That there is no Genoa Merchant
resident in Spain in any part, but has a particular License to export the
Rials and Plate of this Kingdom to a certain round Sum yearly, which they
seldom use really to do, but sell the same to other Nations, that are
constrained to make their returns in Plate for want of other more beneficial
commodities; which for the certain profit it is found ever to yield in other
Countries, is often preferred before all the other Commodities of this Kingdom.
A third reason of hinderance I might add hereto, which is tho current Coin
wherein all Commodities are sold and bought; for in many parts of this Kingdom,
being for the most part base and of Copper and Brass, which to convert into
Rials and good money is found to cost the change in some places 5, in some 10,
in some 15, in some 20 per cent. which is the first penny. The great Customs
also paid in many parts of this Kingdom, is likewise a great let and hinderer
of Trading in general; which wherefoever the same is by the Sovereign levied,
will in a short time and insensibly devour and con^ume a flourishing Traffic,
and enforce the suffering Merchant either totally to give over, or bend his
Trade where he shall find the burden thereof lighter and more easily to be
born and endured. Now as for Commodities which other Nations are found to bring
unto them, and of which they stand in need partly to supply their own
necessities, and partly to maintain their West India Traffic; as this England
brings them great store of Newlandish fish, Irish Salmon, Pilchards, Herrings,
Lead, Tin, Calves-skins, Baies, Says, Serges, and other English Manufactures;
and in return have only thence Wines, Fruits, Oils, some Indico and Sugars,
Ginger, and the like India Commodities. East Country furnishes them with
Corn, Cordage Masts, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Fir-boards, and other Timber, and only
return thence the Commodities abovenamed; only it is ever lawful to him that
brings Corn to carry out Rials of Plate in return thereof. France sends them
Corn, Linnens, Paper, and some petty Manufactures, and returns thence Plate,
Wine, Fruits, and some India Spices. Italy affords them some Manufactures of
Silk, and has in return some raw Silk, Segovia Woolls, Barillia, and such
like: and herein is comprehended the general Traffic of Spain at this time: so
passing the Pyrenaeans, I will enter into France.

CHAP. CXXII. Of FRANCE, and the Provinces and Cities thereof,
France, and the Provinces thereof
FRANCE is accounted one of the most Eminent Kingdoms of Europe, and it is the
best that can subsist without the help of others; it is bounded on the North
with the British Ocean, on the West with the Aquitain Sea, on the South with
the Mediterranean Sea, on the South. East with the Alps, on the East with the
River Rhine, and an imaginary line drawn from Strasburg to Callais.

Commodities of France.
This Country affords for Merchandise to her Neighbors three natural notable
Commodities, Corn, Wine, and Salt; the Farm of Salt only yearly bringing into
the King's coffen 100000 Crowns, besides which it yields Oils, Almonds,
Soaps, Canvas, Coral, Paper, Wool, Linen fine and course, Nuts, Beefs, and of
late some Stuffs and Cloth made of Woollen, etc.

There is reckoned in this Kingdom 25 Provinces; the notable Cities of Traffic
found therein, I shall orderly handle.

Aquitania.
The first Province is Aquitain, wherein are sound the noted Cities of Tholousa,
Bourdea^, and Rochel, of which a word in brief.

CHAP. CXXIII. Of Tholousa, and the Trade thereof.
Tholausa, and the Trade thereof.
THolousa is the Parliament seat of Aquitain, and stands on the banks of the
River Gur^, which hence runs to the Walls of Bordeaux and Blay, and so to
the Sea: It is very plentiful in Pastil or Woad, which hence is dispersed into
several Countries, the Country (...) affording any other notable Commodity
worth mentioning.

Coins and Accounts.
Their Moneys is the same as throughout all France, which in Parts the principal
City of this Kingdom, I shall handle; their Accounts also here kept, are as
through all France in general, in Livers or Franks, Souls, and Deniers, 12
Deniers to a Soul, 20 Souls to a Live or Frank.

Weights of Tholousa.
The 100 l. or Kintar of Tholousa has been observed in Woad for Diers to make
in England 124 l. and the Cargo by which the same is commonly sold to be 372 l.

Measures of Tholousa.
The Measure of this Country is called the Aulin, and makes in England 42
inches by the Rule.

Woad of Tholousa.
Note, That in Tholousa there is a Cantar also of 112 l. which is in use in all
other Commodities, Woad excepted, sold by the Cargo, as above is mentioned, and
is hence sent to Narbon, and thence dispersed into sundry parts of the
Mediterranean Seas.

CHAP. CXXIV. Of Bordeaux, and the Trade thereof.
Bordeaux, and the Trade thereof.
Bordeaux is seated upon the Banks of the River Geronde before mentioned,
plentifully abounding in those Wines, which being White and Claret, are known
by the names of this City: here is also near this City the little Village of le
Greve, which gives name to those Grave Wines, which we esteem so excellent; and
between this Town and Tholousa lie those rich grounds which yield those sweet
Wines by us known by the name of High Country, which the Inhabitants of
Bordeaux knowing their worth, would hinder the sale and exportation of theirs
of that growth, do therefore prohibit the same to be landed, or sold in their
Town till Christmas day in the morning, and then these High Country Merchants
are more busy in landing their Wines, than they are in attending their Mass;
that Gabor or Lighter being ever accounted free of Tax and Custom that first
sets her head aground, when their Mass Bell ringeth, and then it is lawful
for any man for that day to come aboard her, and be drunk gratis.

Here our English have had many privileges, and been esteemed as fellow
Citizens before all other strangers, but our last Wars to the Isle of Rhee have
made them here inferior to all others, and now pay double their former Customs
upon Wines, which in courtesy to the Dutch is abated them, and laid on the
English shoulders, which may be remedied if his Majesty please; it is otherwise
then for Prunes and Wines, a Town of no great Trade, for little Traffic is
here else driven; Moneys only are hither remitted to provide the same, but no
Commodities else vendible of import. In Anno 1611. I here learned the French
Tongue: after I had been for a while in Rochel, so I will note in brief, what I
observed thereupon in those my younger days.

Moneys and Accounts.
The Moneys current and Accounts kept are in Livers, Sold. Deniers, as
throughout all the Dominions of the French King.

Weights of Bordeaux.
Their Weights and Measures are as follows:

The Weight of Bordeaux is the Pound 100 whereof is the Quintar which has been
found to be 110 l. English, and the 100 l. in London is 90 l. here.

Measures of Bordeaux.
Their common Measure is an Auln, which is about English.

English subjection at Blay upon the River Geron.
From Bordeaux I will pass by Blay, where I will only note a subjection of our
English Ships, which here at their going up to Bordeaux, unlade all their
Artillery and Arms, which by many treaties between the Kings of England and
France has been covenanted to be disused, yet the insolency of the Captain of
Blay, scorning the commandments of his Sovereign and his treaties, holds still
the same in use to the great prejudice of our Merchants trading to Bordeaux.
And now to Rochel, the place of my first Education beyond Seas.

CHAP. CXXV. Of Rochel, and the Trade thereof.
Rochel, and the Trade thereof.
ROchel has been long time accounted the strongest and best fortified City in
France, and was till of late years in possession of the Protestants, and was
ever found as a Sanctuary for them in their greatest dangers; it is
commodiously seated for Trade on the Aquitain Ocean, the Sea every tide flowing
into the City, and carrying thereinto Ships of a reasonable burden: within
these late years the French King has besieged it, and after a long Siege
starved the Inhabitants, and by that means enforced the reduction, therefore
what Trade it now has I am ignorant of, but Anno 1611. there was a great
concourse of Merchants, as being the staple for all English Commodities for
these parts of France.

Their Coins current and form of Accounts are the same as throughout all
France, and their Weights are these.

Weights of Rochel.
The 100 l. of Rochel has made in London 96 l. English, and by observation in
Lions of poids de la ville 94 l.

Measure of Rochel.
The Measure is the Auln, common in name with all France, but in many places is
found to differ, roaking here 44 inches English.

From England is sent hither Butter, Calves-skins, Herrings, Newfound
land-fish, and some English Manufactures of Cloth, etc. and hence is returned a
small Wine, called a Rochel Wine, but more properly Cogniacke; also Salt from
the Isle of Rhee, Oleron, etc. and some Prunes and other Commodities.

Poictu.
Poictou is the next Province, the principal City hereof is Poictiers, famous
for the study of the Civil Law, and next to Paris for greatness in all France,
but of no note in matter of Trade.

Anjou.
Anjou is the next, yielding the best Wines in France, the principal Town is
Angiers and Saumar, the only Protestant University in France.

Main.
Main is the next, the principal Town is Man's.

Tourain.
Tourain is the next, the principal Cities are Blois, Ambois, and Tours, famous
for giving a beginning to the Protestants of France, and which is noted for
many excellent Fabrics and Manufactures of Silks here daily made, known to us
by the names of Taffaties, Plushes, and Tabies of Tours.

Britany.
Britany is the next, wherein is found Nants for the situation pleasant, Rhemes
a Parliament Seat; and lastly, St. Malo, seated commodiously for Trade upon the
British Ocean.

Locrams.
Giberoy a great Fair for these Countries, and Morlais affording that Linen in
great quantity known to us by the name of Locrams.

St. Maloes and Morlais.
St. Maloes and Morlais comprehending these three known sorts of Dowlas, Tregar,
and Grasscloth, also Noials for Sail-cloth, and some of other sorts here daily
bought up for ready moneys, and hence dispersed into Spain, England, Scotland,
and Ireland.

Normandy.
The next is Normandy, in which are found many principal Towns of Trade as being
commodiously seated by the neighborhood of the British Ocean; the chief is
Caen, Diep, Newhaven, Constance, and lastly, Rouen, under the Title whereof I
shall comprehend the Trade of the rest.

CHAP. CXXVI. Of Rouen, and the Trade thereof.
Rouen, and the Trade of Normandy.
ROuen seated on the Banks of the River Sein, and the Seat of the Parliament of
Normandy is one of the principal Cities of Traffic and Commerce in France,
having a great concourse of Merchants of all these Northern Kingdoms, and is
one of the three principal in France when Exchanges are used.

Commodities of Rouen.
The Commodities that are hence, and out of Normandy exported, are Linnens
course and fine, Buckrams, Paper, Cards, some Wines, and other petty
Manufactures.

The Commodities sent thither from England, principally Clothes of sundry
Countries, a Kerseys of Devonshire and Yorkshire, Bays of Coxal, Cotton of
Wales and Yorkshire; and of late, Pepper, Galls, Cotton, Yarn, and other Turkey
Commodities, also Lead, Tin, Fish, and some India Commodities.

The Notes of Trade observed there at my residence therein 1614. I shall
briefly touch as then noted the same.

Moneys and Acounts in Rouen.
The Monyes current and Accounts kept are the same as in general used throughout
France see farther in Paris.

Weights in Rouen.
The Kings Beam is here called the Viconte, which is 14 per Cent. greater than
our English 112 l. and some have found it to be 10 or 12 l. by which is weighed
all Commodities whatsoever; but I have often found that the 112 l. English has
made by Viconte 98 l. and by commce beam 101 l.

Measures in Rouen.
The Measure is here an Auln, by which all Commodities of Woollen and Linen is
measured, and is accounted 1 yards English, but those that have made trial
thereof find it is be 46 inches; but it is here to de noted, that in buying of
Linen Cloth of this Country, there is allowed in the account of Measure 24
Aulns for 20, and is called the Merchants Auln or measure, and by the same is
oftentimes here again sold in England, and it is found that Diep, Caen, and
some other Cities of Normandy afford also this over-measure in the sale of
Normandy Canvas here made, so that it may be said this place has a great and a
small Auln the one exceeding the other 20 per Cent. or 120 for 100, and the
smaller agreeing with (...) English Else. Fairs in Rouen.
Rouen is found to have 3 Fairs in a year, at two whereof there is liberty
given for fifteen days to buy and transport any Commodities in this City free
of all Customs and Ta^ provided the said Goods be laden and departed down the
said River to a certain limited (...) stance below the City, by fifteen days
after, otherwise to pay the Custom as is accustomed.

The Fair begins the 3d of February, and lasts fifteen days.

The second begins the morrow after Whitsunday, and lasts fifteen days.

The third is not accounted a free Fair for Customs as the former, and
begins the (...) day of October, and continues only eight days; where note,
that these days are accounted so many working days, Sundays and Holy Days
according to the Church of Rome excepted.

The English Hall of Rouen for sale of woollen Cloth.
Here is in this City a public Hall granted to the English for the Sale of all
English Woolls Cloth, whereto they are enjoined to carry the same, and have
certain set days to lay open and sell the same, and for the hire and custody
they pay a Duty of Halledge or Warehousdo^ they have had formerly here many
Immunities and Privileges, and were accounted as h^ Citizens; but the civil
wars of France, the insolency of the Inhabitants, and the great Authority of
their Court of Parliament, daily give new fashions and new Laws to the English
Merchants here resident.

This City is the prime of Trade in this part of France, and is accounted the
principal Northern Scale of Traffic in the French Dominions; for from hence
are exported great quantity, as I said before, of Buckrams, Canvas, fine and
course, playing Cards, Box Combs, Paper, Threal, Teasles for Clothworkers, and
some Plushes, and other Stuffs lately here made, and in fine all the principal
Commodities of Normandy, Paris, and those parts adjoining to the River Sein;
Exchanges of Rouen.
as for the Exchanges here used, see Lions in the Tract of Exchanges following,
which gives Rules thereto in Chapter 277 and Chapter 302.

The Isle of France.
The next division of this Kingdom is the Isle of France, which is in the heart
of the Friend Dominions, the principal City Paris, being the Metropolis of the
Kingdom here situated, wh^ though it consist not much in Trade, save what may
serve happily to feed and clothe the Court and Inhabitants, yet all the other
Cities taking hence the Rule of Government for Traffic, may challenge justly a
Chapter by it self.

CHAP. CXXVII. Of Paris and the Trade thereof.
Paris and the Trade thereof.
PAris, being the principal City of France, and the ordinary residence of the
King, is esteemed to be ten miles in compass, through which the River of Sein
does gently run, and so to Rouen, thence to the New Haven or Haure de Grace,
and thence to our British Oceam It is not of great consequence in matter of
Trade, as neither affording Commodities to be exported, nor yet venting store
of Commodities imported; though an ignorant Frenchman, which had not seen
further than this City, calls it the greatest in the world for the Trade found
therein, and for the multitude of Merchants, which I imagine he understood
Shopkeepers; some Cloth, Lend, Tin Baies, and Stockings it venteth from
England; Satins and other Silk; and Plushes from Italy; some small wares from
Germany, and that is all the most important: It is one of the three Cities in
France where Exchanges have been placed, Rouen and Lions being the other two;
and though I have diverse times been here, yet I could never find any remarkable
observations in Trade, which incleed is no where in France much practiced,
because of the base esteem the French Nation do hold of Merchants and
Merchandising, every Cobbler honoring his old Shoes with the Title of sa
Merchandise, with as great confidence as he that never handled any Commodity
but Silks or Jewels; in which foolish humor I will leave them, and come to my
purpose.

Paris giving rule in the matter of Coin to all other Cities of France, I have
purposely referred it here, to avoid the reiteration in any other City of this
Kingdom.

Coins of France.
The least piece then of Coin Current in France is a Denier, two whereof makes a
Double, and twelve thereof is a Souls, and Souls twenty make a Liver, which
some call a Frank, and thus in Livers, Souls, and Deniers their Accounts are
kept.

Accounts in France.
Their common Coins are pieces of 8 Sol, which is the of a French Crown in
Silver: a piece of 16 Sold. which is the quarter Crown, 4 of which makes 64
Sold. accounted for a French Crown, and 4 Solds which is of 3 Livers Turnois.
They have also pieces of 21 Sold. 4 Deniers being the (...) of the said Crown,
called by some Testons, and the and thereof, and as the quarter Crowns were at
first raised from 15 Sold to 16 Sold, and thereby the 60 Sold to 64 Sold, so
were the said Testons also in proportion raised accordingly. The Gold Coins are
only two, which is the common Crown, of 3 Livers or 60 Sold. and the Crown of
the Sun, being 3 Livers 16 Sold, or 76 Sol.

All which Coins in their first coinage, bare this true worth and value, and
then were conceived to hold equality with England: thus 10 Sold to make 12
pence sterling.

23 Sold to make 2 shillings sterling, which is their Liver.

60 Sold. to make 6 shillings, or 72 pence, which is the French Crown.

Note of Moneys inhansed lately in France.
But these inhansed to such rates as the necessities of the Prince or Commerce
enforce them, find net now any settled rate, but according to the will of the
payer and receiver, for he that sells, his Commodities in France now for ready
moneys, must contract it if he be wise at what rate he must have these Coins in
payment, lest he imagine he sell to good profit, and yet by experience find he
sells the same to a great loss and disadvantage.

And note, That since the writing of the abovesaid, the piece of 16 Sol. is
raised to 20 Sol. (...) on the whole, which I place here as a Caveat for such
as shall have occasion to traffic in these Kingdoms, that he be inquisitive
and circumspect to inform himself in the true worth and value thereofere he
part with his Commodities.

Weights of Paris.
The Quintal of Paris is 100 l. which has been found to produce in London near
100 l. subtle 2 per cent. more or less, which In Lions renders of 16 ounces 116
l. In Venetia sotile 144 l. 100 l. sotile in Venetia making in Paris 62 l. of
15 ounces per l. The Cargo or great Quintal in Paris is 300 l. of 12 ounces per
l, which makes in Florence 487 l. but the ordinary Quintal of 100 l.
before-named is of 15 ounces to a pound.

Wine is sold by the Cistern, 96 making a Tun, and each Cistern contains 8
Pints, so that it may be accounted two Cones of Florence, which is (^) Gallons
English, see London.

Measures of Paris.
They have two Measures in length, one for Silks, and another for Linnens, the
which are (^)

But note, that all Merchants selling Silk Stuffs in gross in Paris, the same
is sold by the Pound weight, which is better for the buyer, for thereby he
discerns the weight of the Silk he has for his Money.

Exchanges of Paris,
Paris does exchange with many places, which I here omit, and place the same
amongst the Exchanges in general in the Tract following at the end of this Book
in the Chapters 277 and 302.

The French not addicted to Trade.
It may be imagined, that this Kingdom, considering the Riches thereof, should
abound i^ Trade and Navigation; but the better sort of Men meddling not with
Traffic, as conceiving the same to be both ignoble and base, and consequently
unfit for them, leave the same to such whose spirits are elevated to that
ripeness, that they can but only be sorry for their erroneo^ opinions. Their
Navigation also is not far, the Marselicans greatest Voyage being to Turk^; and
the Inhabitants of Rochel, Saint Malo and Rochel, seldom sailing into any
Regions further than Spain, their ill success in America's Plantations
peradventure dissuading them; b^ he that shall wisely look into the beauty of
their Inland Towns, the Riches of the Country it self, and especially the
plenty of Corn, Wines, Linnens and Salt that France produces, and how much
these Commodities are prized and sought after by other Nations, will be more
willing to excuse the French for their so little desire to traffic into remove
Regions.

La Beause.
The next Province is la Beause, Orleans.
wherein is Orleans a pleasant City, and where the neatest and most Elegant
French Tongue is conceived to be spoken, seated on the Loire, but affording
little matter of Trade or Commerce, save that it is found to be a great
Through-Fair for all such Commodities as do enter into the heart of the
Country, as to Lions and other Cities, upon the River of Loire, and by this
way; and has a growth of good Wines about it,

Berry.
The next is Berry, Bourges.
wherein is Bourges seated as the prime and principal Town, who are much
addicted to Clothing, and where great abundance of Sheep are found to pasture
and feed.

The next is Bourbon, wherein is contained Burbon. Nevers. Mollins.
Bourbon, Nevers, and Mollins, wherein I never saw any Commodities worth
relation, save those excellent Instruments of Iron in small Cases here made in
great abundance, called Estuus, and dispersed thence over all Christendom.

Beavois.
The next is Beavois, the chief Town is Villa Franche.

Avergne.
The next is Avergne, the principal City is Cleremont.

Limosin.
The next is Limosin, the principal City is Limoges.

Perigort.
The next is Perigort, the chief Town is Perigeux.

Quercu.
The next is Quercu, the chief Town is Montalbon, one of the Cautionary Towns in
the Intestants possession, and now lately by the French King reduced to his
subjection.

Dauphine.
The next is Dauphine, honored with the Title of the Princes of France, Vienna.
wherein is found Vienna, excelling in the Art of making Sword-blades. Valentia.
Valentia, a fine City, watered with the Rhone; and lastly, Lions, once the
principal Town of Traffic in all these parts, where having occasion of
residence 1616. I noted these particulars following in Trade.

CHAP. CXXVIII. Of Lions and the Trade thereof.
Lions and the Trade thereof.
LIons has ever been accounted a Fanious Mart-Town, and doubtless before
Navigation had its perfection, a City of great Trade and Commerce; but for as
much as all Inland Towns must submit in this point to Maritime Cities, by
reason of the commodiousness of the Sea, which is the greatest furtherer of all
Traffic, so must this Town now give place to many others that exceed her in
the point of Traffic.

The Mart of Lions formerly in Geneva.
There Mart for Trade here settled was formerly holden in Geneva, and by Lewis
the Eleventh removed hither, for the enriching of his own Kingdom; and when
Pope Julius the Second had excommunicated Lewis the Twelfth, he commanded by
his Apostolical Authority that the same should be again removed to Geneva; but
his Holiness herein was not obeyed; for Trade must not be constrained, but
entreated, though by Popes which would command all things; and therefore
stirred not from hence, where yet it continues.

The Town is watered with the streams of Rhoane and Soane, which furthers it
much for carriage; it is most famous now for the many Fabrics of Silks here
wrought and hence dispersed through all France, and the Citizens to this end
have their Factors in Marselia, who trade for them to Aleppo in Syria, to
furnish them with that Commodity by land; also they trade for Florence, Lucca,
Millan, Mesina, and other parts of Italy, but it is only for raw Silks, and
some such Commodities as these places do afford. I resided here some years, and
found the greatest of their Trade to consist in Exchanges as the principal and
most proper Town of France, thereto the Bankers of Florence, Venetia, Lucca,
and Naples, have here their Factors purposely for this occasion.

From England is here vended some Bays, Tin, Lead, Cony-skins, and but few
Commodities else: and to our Country it affords not any commodity worth
mentioning; what I have observed, I shall only touch, and no more.

Coins and Accounts in Lions.
As for Coins current, and Accounts keeping, it is the same as throughout France.

There has been of long time in use an imaginary Coin here current in
Exchanges, called the Mark, which briefly to explain, is

An ancient Mark in Exchange in Lions.
A Mark of Gold is 65 Crowns of Mark, or 63 Crowns 11 s. 9 d. of Gold in Gold,
or 62 Crowns of Camera Vechia, of Rome; or 68, 14, 3 Ducates current of Venetia.

And they did use here to keep their Accounts by Crowns of Marks, Sold. and
Deniers, advising one Crown de Mark to be 20 Solds of Mark, but is 45 Sold
Turnois, by which Crown of Mark they did exchange by, as briefly for example.

They gave in Lions one Crown in Mark to have in Florence 57 or 58 Crowns,
according to the Cambio.

To have in Rome 56 Ducates of Camera more or less, as the Exchange went.

To have in Naples 72 Ducates of Carlins more or less, etc.

To have in Palermo or Messina 25 or 26 Carlins, etc.

To have in Spain 400 Marvedies, according to the rate of Exchange.

To have in Anvers so many gross as the Exchange did permit.

Exchange now of Lions
But this custom being now lost by the expulsion of the great Bankers out of
this Town in the days of Lewis the Twelfth, it is since reduced to Crowns of
the Sun of three Livers, by which imaginary (for so I call it now, as having
none to be found of that value and rate) Coin there is now made, and the common
and ordinary pieces thereof I will willingly here omit, as having mentioned the
same at the end of this Work in the Chapters 277 and 302, and other following,
where all the due circumstances of Exchanges and payments of moneys are
observed, whereto I refer the Reader.

Fairs of Lions
It is to be noted, That here is observed four Fairs, in which all payments
either By Exchange or for Merchandise are made, which run still from three
months to three months, wherein for so many days rescounters of payments are
made without any Money seen stirring from Man to Man, which is done in a
public place or Burse appointed to this purpose, as I have touched in the
Chapter of transferring of Bills of Debts and Specialties in my Factors Adviso:
the times and terms of which Fairs are these.

First, the Fair of Easter after the Octaves of Easter.

The second is the Fair of August, being the first Monday after our Ladies day
in August.

The third is the Fair of All Saints, the day after All Souls.

The fourth is the Fair of le Roys, the day after Epiphany, and every Fair
lasts fifteen days that are not Holy Days; all business is done in these
Fairs, and all Bills of Exchange are made and dated in one day, and two days
after they make the rate of the Exchange, which Fairs are counted by their
payments.

Terms of the Bills of Exchange in Lions.
The terms of their Bills of Exchange hence are these.

From Lions to Florence, Rome, and Venice, about 30 days, little more or less,
according as the Merchant makes the agreement every Fair, but all the
aforesaid places for one and the same day.

From Lions to Naples and Valentia, 5 days later than Florence.

From Lions to Anvers as Florence.

From Lions to Spain, that is, to Medina in Villalion, the Fair of All Saints,
and of the apparition of Lions, they exchange for the Fair of Villalion of
Middle-Lent, and the Fair of Easter of Lions for the Fair of May in Medina del
Campo, as you shall see more at large in the days of payment of Bills dated in
Lions, in the said place of the Exchanges of this place.

Weights in Lions.
They have in Lions three Beams, one used in the Custom-house, which is the
King's-Beam, which contains 100 l. the Quintal, and is greater than the second,
which is the Town weight by 8 per cent. by which all Goods pay Custom that are
ponderous.

The second is the Town-weight, and is 100 l. the cent. the pound thereof
containing sixteen ounces per l. upon which all Calculations are made.

The third is only the weight used for Silk and is 100 l. the cent. and the
Pound containing fifteen ounces per l. and called The Pound of Mark.

The 100 l. of the Town-weight is it whereby the Observations have been made
with other Countries, and which by trial has been found to render thus in
these places following. In London 96 l. Marselia 104 Venetia sot. 143 Ditto
gross 89 Sicilia 53 Lisbon 83 Florence 125 Antwerp 90 Sevil 92 Dantzick 109
Malaga 28 R. Rome 122 l. Millain 131 Paris 80 Genoa 135 Almeria 120 Bruges 114
Rochel 104 Diep 94 Rouen 92 And in Asia have made these. In Aleppo 19 R. Silk
R. 20,9 Tripoli 22 Ditto Barbar 81 l. Baruti 18 Alex. Zera. 43 Ditto Forfor. 96
Scios 86 Lod. Constantinople 78 Rhodes 17,2 R. Acria 15 Babylonia 13 Balsara
3,9 M. Ormus 93 l.

CHAP. CXXIX. How foreign Measures and Weights are compared with Lions.
I Find a French Merchant to have made these Observations upon the Trade of
Lions, which I refer to trial.

Millain with Lions.
100 l. in Millain to have made by trial in Lions 69 l. Silk-weight, the
Silk-brace in Mill^ to render in Lions ^/9 of an Auln.

The Cloth-brace there to render in Lions 4/7 of an Auln.

And 20 Sols of Millain caculated for 10 Sols Turnois.

Turin with Lions.
100 l. in Turin to render in Lions -- 77 l. Silk-weight.

The Ras, which is the Measure, to be of an Auln.

The Florin in money calculated for three Sols Turnois.

Genoa with Lions.
The 100 l. of Genoa to render in Lions 72 l. Silk-weight; 9 Palms of Genoa
making a C^, 1 Palm 1/24 of an Auln.

The Spanish Pistolet worth in Genoa then 11 l. 12 s. in Lions 7 l. 7 s.

The Crown of Gold in Gold of Italy worth in Genoa 1 l. 5 s.

Florence with Lions.
The 100 l. of Florence to be in Lions -- 76 Silk-weight, 4 Braces being there a
Cane, 100 Braces being 49 Aulns Lions.

The Crown of Gold of Florence calculated at 3 l. Turnois.

Lucca with Lions.
100 l. of Lucca subtle weight has rendered in Lioas 72 3/2 l. Silk weight.

100 l. of Lucca of Custom-house weight made -- 81 l.

The Pound of which place being composed of 12 ounces.

And 2 Braces of the said place made in Lions 1 Auln.

Bolonia with Lions.
100 l. of Bolonia have rendered in Lions 77 l Silk-weight,

The Brace of Bolonia has rendered 8/23 of an Auln of Lions.

The Liver thereof 20 Sols may be esteemed at 11 s. 3 d. Turnois.

Naples with Lions.
100 l. of Naples have made in Lions 68 l. of Silk weight.

8 Palnts make a Cane, and multiply the Palms by 4, to make them quarters, and
divide by 17, for 17 quarters is an Auln in Lions, which reduced into London
measure is.

The Ducate may be calculated for 48 s. Turnois, which is 4, 10 sterling.

Venetia with Lions.
The 100 l. Subtle of Venetia made in Lions 63 l. Silk-weight.

80 Braces of that place Silk make in Lions 43 Aulns.

The Ducate may be calculated at 50 Sol. Turnois, which is 5 s. sterling.

Mesina with Lions.
The 100 l. of Mesina renders at Lions l. of Silk-weight.

The 100 Braces of Mesina give in Lions Aulns.

The ounce of Mesina gives by calculation in Lions.

Bergamo with Lions.
The 100 l. of Bergamo is in Lions 68 l. Silk-weight.

The Brace of Bergamo is 5/3 of an Auln, mult. by 5. divid. by 9.

The Liver of Bergamo is 6 s. 6 dr. tur. which is ster. 7 d.

Mantua with Lions.
The 100 l. of Mantua are in Lions 65 l. Silk-weight.

The Brace is 8/25 of an Auln, multiply by 8, and divide by 15.

The Liver of Mantua is in Lions.

Modena with Lions.
The 100 l. of Modena are in Lions 77 l. Silk-weight.

The Braces are the same as in Mantua.

Antwerp with Lions.
The 100 l. of Antwerp are in Lions 102 l. Silk-weight.

The Else of Antwerp is 7/^ of an Auln, which is done by taking the and ^/4 of
the Sum, and add them, they make Aulns.

The Liver of gross may be calculated at 6 l. tur. 12 s. sterling.

The 100 l. of Subtle have made in Lions -- 96 l. Silk-weight.

London with Lions.
The 9 Yards in London make in Lions 7 Aulns, so that the Auln of Lions is 46
inches English.

The Liver or pound of London sterling. is 10 Livers Turnois.

Constantinople with Lions.
The Oak of Constantinople makes in Lions l. Silk-weight.

The Pico of Constantinople is 5/9 of an Auln, mult. by 5 div. by 9.

The Piastre of Doller may be calculated at 45 s. tur. 4 s. 6 d. sterling.

Aleppo with Lions.
The Rotolo of Aleppo has rendered in Lions 4 l. Silk-weight.

The Rotolo of Tripoli in Syria has made 4 l.

Spain with Lions.
The 100 l. of Valencia in Spain has made in Lions 73 l. Silk-weight. Almeria
117 Tortosa 72 Saragosa 73 And 130 Vares of Valentia has made in Lions 100
Aulns.

The weights of diverse Cities of France with Lions.
100 l. of Paris have made in Lions of Town-weight 116 l. Rouen have made in
Lions ditto 120 Thoulousa have made in Lions ditto 96 Marselia have made in
Lions ditto 94 Montpelier have made in Lions ditto 96 Rochel have made in Lions
ditto 94 Geneva have made in Lions ditto 130 Besanson have made in Lions ditto
116 Bourge in Bress make in Lions ditto 115 Avignion have made in Lions ditto
96

The Measure of Languedoc is a Cane, divided into 8 Palms, which Cane is 1; to
reduce Canes into Auins, you must add, and they make Aulns.

Now for as much as many other places that traffic in Silk, are found to
correspond with this Town; it will not be improper I should insert them briefly
here, as showing what the 100 l. of these several places make Silk weight, or
as they term it poids de mare in Lions of 15 ounces.

Padua 100 l. gives in Lions 73 l. Regio 100 78 Calabria 100 69 Cosensa 100 70
Raconis 100 66 Bavearre 100 gives 90 Aleppo Rotol. gives 4 Tripoli Rotol. gives
4 Ancona 100 gives 73 Placio 100 gives 72 Marselia 100 gives 85 Avignion 100
gives 68

Measures of Lions with other places.
Note that the 100 l. of Marc or Silk weight in the payment at Lions makes 108
l. of the Town-weight of Lions, the former being fifteen Ounces to a Pound, and
the latter being of 16 Ounces to a Pound.

For the Measure of the length at Lions, I find this Observation to have been
made, that The 100 Aulns in Lions makes in London 98 else. Anvers 163.
Frankford 204 Dantzick 136 Vienna 142 Paris 93 2/^ Rouen 85 Lisbon 98 Sevil 132
Madera 101 Venetia 177 Lucca 196 Florence 200 Millan 226 Genoa 472. palm. Spain
135 Var. Rome 130 Braces. Naples 50 Canes. Which I refer to Trial of the
experienced; and thus much shall serve to have said (...) Lions.

Languedoc.
The next Province is Languedoc; wherein is found Narbone, Nismes, and
Montpelier, three good Cities, and which afford of late days, by the industry
of the Inhabitants, some Serges, Says, and some fine Cloth, of this Country
making; and here also grows that excellent W^ which takes his name from the
Town of Frontiniack: Beveaire.
and here also is that small Village Beveaire, having in July a Fair or Mart
famous in these parts, and resembled at my there being 1618. our Sturbridge,
besides which they have yearly there other Fairs, but of no great consequence.

Provence.
The next Province is Provence, wherein is Arles, in times past the Seat of some
Roman Eperours. Brignol, whence our Prunes of Brignol come, known to us by the
name Prunels from Brignol, whereas in the Language of this Country the g is
not pronounced. Aix the Parliament Seat; and lastly, Thollon, the best Haven in
France, and most capacious, and Mars^ famous in Trade for these Countries, of
which a word in passing, and first of Thollon.

CHAP. CXXX. Of Thollon, and the Trade thereof.
Thollon, and the Trade thereof.
THollon, enjoying a fair and capacious Haven, and esteemed the best, largest,
and safe^ in the Mediterranean Sea, is seated ten Leagues to the Eastward of
Marselia, where^ the King does keep a Custom-house for Provence, as having not
so much power to settle one i^ Marselia, by the privilege or insolency of the
Inhabitants, who endeavor still thus to maintain that little liberty they
have. It abounds only in Oils, which are hence laden i^ great abundance, and
dispersed into other Countries, as England, Holland; and some Almonds, which we
call Provence Almonds: Some Salt is here laden and brought from the Is^ of
Eres, about three leagues hence, being the proper Merchandise of the King, who
ha^ Factors for the Sale thereof in every City and Town in France. In this
place the Moneys are the same as through all France, and the Weights and
Measures not much differing from those of Marselia, which I will there more
succinctly handle, and only will show the manner of buying and providing here
of Oils, as I have observed my self here at diverse times during my abode in
this Town and Country.

Provence Oils how bought and cast up.
Oils of Provence are here and throughout all Provence bought by the Milrowl or
Milroe, fourteen of which are accounted to a Tun of Oil of 252 Gallons, yet if
carefully looked unto at the buying, and the same truly measured, 13 Milroes
will make the said Tun; the same is sold commonly here by the Florin an
Imaginary Coin, and in value 12 Sol Turnois; the Milroe of Oil is commonly
worth 26 to 30 Florins; the Cask of this place cost ordinarily 18 Sold per
Milroe, and the Custom outward is 10 Sol per Milroe, and the Custom of the
place gives 3 per 100 provision; and 1 per cent. for brokerage thereof. Now to
reduce all charges to a constant rate, it has been observed and found true by
my self and others, that if 18 shillings 6 pence sterling be accounted for
every Florin, Measures for Oils.
that a Milroe of Oil shall cost the first penny; so much will the Tun of Oil
stand in clear aboard of all accustomed charges.

But for as much as this Rule holds only in Thollon, I will insert the
particulars thereof, how it is found to accord with our Measure and Weight in
England, because it is a Staple and most requested Commodity, and the principal
Commodity that this Country does afford.

The common measure then is a Scandal, and of which it is found that 4 Scandals
make 1 Milroe, every Scandal being 4 Gallons English, and 31 l. Averdupois.

1 Milroe is 17 Gallons English, and is 126 l. English.

2 Milroes is a Charge, which is 34 Gallons, or 252 l. English.

4 Charges makes a Butt, which is a Tun, or 126 Gallons English, and has been
found to make 1008 l. Averdupois.

The Custom hereof is a Crown of 3 l. Tur, upon every 100 Milroes, and every
Crown is accounted 5 Florius, or 60 Sols.

For Wine.
Wine is here sold by the same Milroe, as above is said.

Almonds are sold by the Cargo of 300 l. Marselia Weight.

For Corn.
Corn is sold by the Muyd and Mynots, 24 Mynots make a Muyd, and 1 Muyd is
about 8 quarters English.

Commodities of Provence.
Provence does afford many Commodities for Merchandising, which hence is
transported into several Countries; as first Oil, as above, made and gathered
in November and December, shipped for England, Spain, and Italy.

Also great quantity of Wools for Clothing, bought up in May, June, and July,
by Milanois, Ginoese, Piedmontois and Montpelerians, which commonly bears 14 in
16 the 100 foul, and being washed and cleansed, there is lost in the cleansing
and clearing sometimes the one half thereof.

Also great quantity of Scarlet-grain, and powder of Grain, gathered in the
Heaths and Fields by the poor people, and brought by them to the Lords of their
Territories, from the month of May to the month of August, and is worth green
about 5 in 6 l. tur. per l, but being dried diminishes at least thereof.

Also Almonds are here in great abundance found growing, gathered in September
and October, called (as is before noted) Provence Almonds for distinction sake,
and are commonly worth from 12 to 15 Crowns the Cargo.

Also here is yellow Wax in good quantity, bought in October and November,
worth commonly from 40 to 50 l. per cent.

Also here is Honey bought in November and December, worth commonly about 22 in
23 Cro, the Cantar. besides which, here are many Bed-Coverlets, and Wastcoats
made and quilted of Satin, Taffeta, and Callico, and hence dispersed into
several Countries. To conclude, there may be laden in Thollon, Marsclia, and
generally throughout all Provence, from 1500 to 2000 Tuns of Oil yearly, about
400 Quintals of Almonds, about 1800 to 2000 Quintals of Wool, about 200
Quintals of Honey, and but little Wax, as being for the most part spent in
their own Country, principally in their Churches.

Customs paid in Provence.
The Customs upon all Commodities of the growth of France, pay in the
Exportation but a small acknowledgement, but all other Commodities pay 5 per
cent. but for Spices and all other Commodities that are brought in from the
Levant, there is lately placed thereon throughout all Provence a Custom of ten
per cent. and thus much for Thollon.

CHAP. CXXXI. Of Marselia, and the Trade thereof.
Marselia and the Trade thereof.
THE principal seat of Trade in Provence is Marselia, famous for the great
concourse of Merchants, and for the Commerce that it maintains with Turkey,
Barbary, Spain, France, Italy, Flanders, and England; it is commodiously
situated on the Mediterranean Sea, enjoying an excellent Haven, and a
reasonable Road for Shipping of all sorts; it wants to make it a perfect
course for Exchanges, which here is supplied by the current of Lions, and
governed only thereby, to which place each Fair some Partidoes are made, not by
the rules of other places, but by the rule of interest from the date of the
Bill, to the time of the next succeding Fair there.

It vents from England some Baies, Clothes, Lead and Tin, Pilchars, Herring,
white and red, and yearly about 2000 in 3000 Tuns of Newland-fish which the
English bring thither, and they also supply it with Muscovia Commodities, as
African Hides, above ten thousand pair yearly, Tallow 2000 Quintals, Wax 1000
Quintals, besides other Commodities of England, as Calve-skins, Hides, Salmon,
and some fish. It affords not any Commodity to be sent abroad, save some
Oils, Wines, Woolls, Almonds, and Verdigreece, and all others are hither
imported from other Countries, as such as Alexandria, Aleppo, Acria,
Constantinople, Naples, ^gorn, or the Coasts of Spain do yield; the main
support of their Trade is the plenty of Spanish Rials, and the license here for
Exportation, which is the only means whereby the Trade of Turkey is preserved
to them; for from hence I have seen 100 thousand Rials of ^. ship^ publicly
upon a small Vessel of 160 Tuns for Scanderoone, which has been thence
returned in rich Silks, Drugs, and Spices. But of late days their success in
Trade has proved so bad, and their losses by Pirates so great and so many, that
the Town and Merchants have lost much of their former splendor and same, their
great Vessels are now become small Barks, and the great Merchants of Lions,
Paris, Limoges, Taures, and other parts of France, who had here their Factors
for to continue this Trade, have recalled them after the sustentation of great
losse^, the payment of great Sums, for the maintenance of their Ambassador in
Constantinople; and especially the late inhansement of their Moneys, which is
the ruin and overthrow of all C^merce whatsoever.

In this place I resided for some years, and therefore will note briefly what I
observed needful to my present subject.

Coins in Marselia.
The Moneys current, and the Accounts kept accord in all particulars with Paris,
sometim^ alteration is found in Coins by means of the great Trade, and that
because both Italian and Spanish Coins are here current; these become sometimes
a Merchandise, and are requested and inhansed according as occasion for
Transportation does require, which is more in Winter that in Summer, by reason
of their general voyages made into Turkey, from September to Match, and
commonly not after.

Weights in Marselia.
The Pound of Marselia is 16 ounces, and 100 l. is the Quintal, 300 l. or three
Quintals make with them a Cargo.

The 100 l. in Marselia has been found to produce in these Cities following:
In London 88 l. Venetia sotile 134 l. Venetia gro. 84 Sicilia 50 l. Lisbon 79
l. Florence 114 l. Anvers 86 l. Lions 95 l. Sevil 88 l. Malaga 24 Roves.
Dantzick 104 l. Aleppo 18 R. Ditto Silk 19 Tripoli 211 Ditto Barbar. 762 Baruti
175 Alex. Zera 416 Scio 1110 Constantinople 745 Acria 146. Babylonia 125. M.
Balsara 36

Weights agreed with other places.
These Observations I have found true by my own experience. Rotolo of Aleppo,
gave in Marselia 5 l. 6 ounces. Rotolo of Damasco gave 4 l. Rotolo of Tripoli
in Syria 4 l. Rotolo of Mantua 5 l. Cantaro of Genoa 118 l. Cantaro of Civita
Veccia in Allom 130 l. Cantaro of Alicant in Barsilia 133 l. Rotolos 100 l.
Malta in Olives 200 l. Loderos 100 l. of Constantinople 135 l. Cantaro of
Sardinia in Cheese 100 l. Cantaro of Zant in Currants 116 l. Cargo of Valentia
in Pepper 320 l. Cantaro of Argier 150 l. Rotolo of Cyprus in Cottons 5 l.
Cantaro of Valentia in Cochineal 88 l. Hundred of London, 112 l. gave in Tin
125 l. And the 120 l. English, Stannery in Tin made 134 l.

These Towns are said to agree with Marselia in their Quintal.

Measures of Marselia.
First, Lepanto 100 l. Arches 100 l. Candia Sotile 100 l. Petras 100 l. Rochel
100 l. Tholosa 100 l. Montpelier 100 l. Avignion 100 l. which I refer to trial
of him that shall have occasion, because I question the truth of some of them.

The Measures of length is the Cane, which is divided into eight Palms, the
Cane making 2 yards English.

Corn is sold by the Mine, the Sack of Pisa and Legorn is found to be 1 Mines
of Marselia.

Customs in Marselia.
The Customs here out and in are 1 per cent. but the City by reason of cleansing
the Harbor, and some Ships set out against Pirates, have made the 1 inwards 3
per cent. and only 1 out, this is meant of Commodities of the growth of the
Country; but in Spices brought in, as Pepper, Ginger, Indico, or such as come
not out of the Levant, but, as they call it, out of the Ponent, or out of the
West-Seas, it pays the King's Custom, which is now about 15 per cent. besides
the City's Custom above named; and thus much for Marselia.

Avignion.
The next Province is that of Avignion, the principal City thereof called by
that name, it is, a fair Town, and seated upon the River of Rhone, but has no
Trade that I could observe though I have often been there; it is subject to the
Pope, and he permitting Jews to inhabit here, are found the principal Pedlers,
for Merchants I cannot call them. The City is said to have 7 Palaces, 7
Parishes, 7 Monasteries, 7 Nunneries, 7 Inns, and 7 Gates, and other things of
note I observe not; and as for Commerce, the Weights and Measures differ not
much from Marselia, and the great Custom here paid is some prejudice to
Passengers and Merchandise that passes from Provence to Lions, or from Lions
to Marselia

Orange.
The next Province is Orange, the capital City here bearing that name, belonging
to the Prince of Orange; a strong Town, and sweetly seated near upon the Rhone;
here all Protestant Passengers are really welcomed, and Papists narrowly looked
unto, in requital of the contrary courtesy practiced at Avignion, not above
six leagues off.

Picardy.
The next is Picardy, wherein I find Amiens and Abbeville for fair Towns, but of
little or no Traffic: Calais.
Calais also the Inlet of France is strong, but has sent away its Trading
with the Staple, which by the English was planted and continued here for 200
years; whilst it was in possession of the English, the French Kings were
accustomed to have the same put daily into their remembrance till it was
regained; and were it not, that the Merchant Adventurers make mention thereof,
in their Oath taken at the entrance into that Brotherhood, it is almost forgot
that ever it was English; which I the rather mention here, that some noble
English heart would daily put our Sovereign in mind thereof till it return
again to be English; in the mean time a word of the Trade thereof.

CHAP. CXXXII. Of Calais, and the Trade thereof.
Calais and the Trade thereof
CAlais formerly was the great Staple for the Woolls of England, and settled
here A^ 1347. by Edward the Third, to make good his Conquest after eleven
months siege, b^ afterward it was hence removed, and this place lost by Queen
Mary, Anno 1557. after 20^ years possession of the English, and was by our then
Kings of England ever called the Key the gave their Armies entrance into
France; the place is not now of any great noted Traffic, though it and Bullen
be accounted the best Maritime Ports in Picardy, opposite to Dover, from whence
this is seven leagues distant.

The Coins here current are those in general of France.

Weights of Calais.
The Weights here in use are three.

First is the Weights proper of the Town, the 100 l. whereof is in London about
92 l.

The second is called the Merchants Weight, the 100 l. whereof make in London
113 l. and the 100 subtle of London is here 88 l.

The third is called the English Wool hundred, or Staple hundred, 100 l.
whereof is in London about 89 l. or 90 l. about 3 per cent. different from the
Town-weight.

The Measures used here is the Auln, and makes in London (^) inches.

Champaign.
The next is Champaign, wherein is Rhemes the principal City, where the Kings of
France are anointed, and where there is a College for the entertainment of the
English Fugitives, Jesuits I mean.

Burgundy.
The next is Burgundy, famous for Dijon, which is notable through France for
good Mustard, a note worthy our Tukesbury.

Bress.
The next is Bress, Chastilion being the principal City, and the last that I
shall handle appe^taining to the King of France, or under his Government.

Besanson.
The next in order according to my Method is the Franche Comte, the principal
City thereof is Besanson, which in time past strove for precedence of Trade
with Lions, but being an Inland Town she has lost that honor, the Inhabitants
of this Country bringing home great and more honorable Titles, as famoused
abroad for good Soldiers, known by the name of Walloons, and now is under the
command of Spain. The Exchanges of Placentia was once here seated from Cambray,
but the Merchants being not well used, returned to Placentia.

100 l. Besanson is 112 l. English.

Lorain.
The next is Lorain, the principal City is Nants, yielding plenty of Corn and
Wine, store of fresh water Fish and Salt, and famous in that it was the Dukedom
of Godfrey, Surnamed of Bulloign, which won Jerusalem from the Saracens, and
was the first Christian Crowned Kitz of that Kingdom: And now to Savoy, as
partaking with the French in the Trade as well as in their Garb.

CHAP. CXXXIII. Of Savoy, and the Provinces thereof.
Savoy, and the Cities thereof.
THE Dukedom of Savoy comprehends only this Duchy and the Principality of
Piedmont; in the former is Cambray, the residency of the Duke, when he is in
these parts: in the latter is Nisa and Villa-Franca, two Seaports, but not
capacious nor safe for Ships of burden; next Aste, a great Mart for all
Italian Commodities: and lastly, Turin, the principal City where the Duke of
Savoy holds his Court and Residence; and because in these latter years of War
between England and France, our English Factors from Marselia fled hither for
succor, entertainment and protection, which they bountifully had of the late
Duke; I must not pass over the Trade thereof without remembrance, nor be
unmindful of that bounteous welcome they found at his Highness hands.

CHAP. CXXXIV. Of Turin, and the Trade thereof.
Turin and the Trade thereof.
TUrin being the capital City of Piedmont, having Nisa, and Villa-Franca for
Seaports, has had many furtherances to make it a great City of Traffic: for
the Duke at several times, but lastly at the coming of the English hither from
Marselia, made a Cavidal, or stock for Trade of 300000 Crowns, wherein he
caused many of his Nobles to enter and become Partners, but when the Stock was
made, and published in England and in other Countries, this Dukedom was not
found to give vent to any Commodities of consequence, some Fish and Calve-skins
excepted, wherewith to invest the said Stock: notwithstanding he gave
commandment that the English should be kindly entertained both at Nisa and
Villa-Franca, and appointed certain Lodgings and Warehouses for them and their
Wares; but Peace ensuing shortly after with France, the Factors again returned
to Marselia with due acknowledgment of their Royal entertainment: the main
obstacle in Trade here being the too near neighborhood of Genoa the rich, and
of Legorn the free, which neither of the two Towns formerly mentioned can
equalize.

Coins of Savoy.
The Moneys commonly current in Savoy are the Moneys of Italy and France, as
neighboring, and the Florin of the Country, accounted three Sold. Turnois,
which is 3 d. English.

Their 100 l. makes in London about 82 l. and 77 l. in Lions, and in Venetia
gross 66. in 67 l. in Florence or Pisa 135 l.

Accounts in Savoy.
Their Accounts are kept in Livers Sold. and Deniers, as in France; but in Nisa
they account by Florins and Grosses, a Crown of Sold. of France is 4 flor. 2
gross.

Their Measure is a Ras both of Cloth and Silk, which is half an Auln of Lions,
and 23 inches English by the Rule.

This Country affords for Merchandise, Rice and Corn, in abundance, and some
Silk wrought here, and some other Commodities, but of no great consequence, nor
worthy mentioning; therefore I will forbear to treat further of this Dukedom,
and end my French Commerce.

Weights of France reduced to London 100 l.
Before I leave France, and therewith Savoy, who do in all things partake with
the Garb and manner of the French, and till I enter into Italy, having thus
surveyed some particular Towns of eminency therein; It will be worthy notice to
collect the Weights and Measures of such as we have omitted, and so view the
general Trade of France; which I will begin in the Weights, and reduce the same
to the 100 l. subtle of London, which is observed. The 100 l. of London has
made in Paris by Kings-beam 89 l. Diep 91 Burgoin 91 Roan by Vicount 88 by
ordinary weight 92 weighed by the same and account 4 l. per cent. over.
Avignion 312 l. Calais 107 by Merchants weight 88 English Wool weight 110
Marselia 112 Aquimort 98 Mirabel 98 Abbeville 91 Bourdeaux 91 Lions by ordinary
weight 107 by Silk-weight 98 by Customers weight 90 Toulouse 112 Montpelier 112
Rochel 112 Ditto by small weight 115 Genoa 98 by great weight 82 S. Anthony 123
Calsada 98

For further instruction, here I may refer the ingenious to the large Work of
Monsieur Sav^na, who has comprised all the Trading of France into a Volume of
too great a bu^k for me to peruse it more accurately.

Measures of France reduced to the 100 yards of London.
In like manner, to abbreviate my labor, you will see that the 100 Yards of
London make in these Towns following; In Rouen 77 Aulns. Avignion 80 Orleans 48
Canes. Marselia Silk 48 Ditto for woollen 44 Paris, Rochel 78 Aulns. Lions for
Linen 80 Ditto for Silk 115 Aulns. Provence 48 Canes. Geneva 80 Stabs. Nants,
Abbeville 110 Aulns.

And so for the most part the same are found through all France, the abovesaid
places only excepted.

CHAP. CXXXV. Of the Trade in general of France.
The general Trade of France.
FRom the particular Trade of the Cities of France, let us view the Trade in
general of this Kingdom, and we shall not find it of any great consequence, for
here it is found that the Gentlemen do not meddle with Traffic because they
think such Traffic, ignoble and base, and so unfit for them; which error the
French no less dearly buy than do some English, to which Kingdom of late days
they have in some sort blowed over that opinion, though some of the better
judgments of England are reformed in that point, and find it a most worthy,
Excellent and profitable Calling: but as the French are found to neglect
Merchandising, so a^ they less studious in their Navigations than their
neighbors, either Spaniards, Dutch, or English; which I imagine proceeds not
out of a desire to attempt, or courage to perform, but because they abound with
all things both for plentiful food, and rich attire; and if they want any
thing, strangers gladly bring it to them, allured by four principal Commodities
which do much enrich the Inhabitants, which is Wines, Linnens, Salt, and Corn,
being the prime Commodities of that Kingdom; yet it is found that the
Marselians Trade and Navigate in Egypt, Aleppo, and Constantinople, and the
Normans and Britains, into England, Spain, Ireland, and Netherland: in time of
Wars they have also some small Vessels at Sea, more fit for piracy and theft
than for any great War of moment; and their success has been so ill in their
Colonies in America, that it has quite disheartened them from seconding their
attempts.

Three Cities here carry the greatest fame in Trade, Marselia, for the Levant,
Rouen for the English Channel, and Rochel for he Ocean, this last subsisting by
the growth of their White and Claret Wines of Bourdeaux: Roan by their petty
manufactures of Cards, Pins, Combs, Paper, and Canvas: and Marselia by the
Trade of Turkey, wherein are found Factors that do employ the Estates of many
Merchants resident within Lions, and other inland Towns of France, which gives
life to most of their Traffic and Navigation in these parts. Now it is to be
observed, that England brings them Newland fish, Herrings, Pilchers, Lead, Tin,
Cloths, Kersies, Cottons, or F^zes; and have in return Wines from Bourdeaux,
Oils, and Almonds, from Marselia, and Pepper, Canvas, Buckrams, from Rouen and
Locrams from Morlais; the East Country and Holland brings them Cordage, Tar,
Pitch, Rosin, Masts, and Fir-Timber, and returns Wines from Bourdeaux, and
Paper, Canvas from Rouen, and Salt from Eres: Spain brings them foam Spices,
and they return them Corn, and Linnens: Italy brings them some Silk fabrics,
etc. and they return them Oils, Cloth, Linen, and the like: Turkey affords them
Cotton Wool, Raw Silk, Cotton Yarn, Hides, Sheep woolls, etc. and they send
thither Rials of Plate, Woollen Cloth, and little else; and this is the gross
of the present Trade of France.

CHAP. CXXXVI. Of Geneva, and the Trade thereof.
Geneva and the Trade thereof.
GEneva being a fair City, and wholly in possession of Protestants, is a
Nursery of Learning, and withal no stepdame to Trade: It is seated
commodiously, to that end upon the River Rhme, which within 16 leagues after
saluteth the Walls of Lions, and serves out of Switzerland to convey many
sorts of Merchandise to it, and to transport the same thence to Lions, Valence,
Avignion, Arles, to Provence, and Languedoc.

Coins in Geneva and accounts.
Their Moneys are as in France, and keep their Accounts in Livers Sold. and
Deniers Turnois, and here also is current the Coins of the United Cantons of
Switzers, and the Coins of Savoy.

Weights of Geneva.
The 100 l. here renders in London 107 l. and by some is found to agree with the
gross of Venice, and making of Venice sotile 158 l. incirca.

Measures of Geneva.
The Stab renders in London (^) and 60 Else here has been found to make in
Venetia 100 braces Cloth-measure, and 106 braces Silk-measure.

But it is time that I should forsake these petty Provinces and Travel over the
Alps, and come into Italy, which is my next Task.

CHAP. CXXXVII. Of Italy, and the Provinces thereof.
Italy and the Provinces thereof.
ITaly is girded round with the Ionian, Tyrrhenian, and Adriatic Seas, except
it be toward France and Germany, from which it is parted by the Alps.

The Country in general for Merchandising yields Rice, Silks, Velvets,
Sattins, Taffeties, Grograms, Rashes, Bustians, Armor, Allom, Glasses of all
sorts, as I shall mention in the particular Kingdoms and Provinces thereof.

Italy has ever afforded eminent and ingenious Merchants, yet such as merit
not really in all things that Title, because that their Trade consists more
in Exchanges, which is a branch of Merchandising, than in Adventures, which is
the principal point which gives the Title to all Bargainers, it being a common
speech, though unmerchant-like, yea unchristian-like among them, That they are
loath to trust God with their Estates at Sea, when they may have the same safe
on shore; as if then it were out of his reach or Protection.

Italy is now divided into 10 Provinces, which afford many principal Cities of
Trade, which following my intended Method, I will handle in order. 1. The
Kingdom of Naples. 2. The Papacy. 3. The Commonwealth of Venetia. 4. The
Dukedom of Florence. 5. The Dukedom of Milan. 6. The Dukedom of Mantua. 7. The
Dukedom of Urbin. 8. The Principality of Parma. 9. The State of Genoa. 10. The
State of Lucca.


In each of which are found many notable Towns of Traffic, which as belonging
unto several Princes, will require a more particular Survey, than if otherwise
it were commanded by one sole Sovereign; and first of the Kingdom of Naples.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. Of Naples and the Cities thereof.
Naples and the commodities thereof.
THe Kingdom of Naples is accounted the richest of Italy, abounding in several
Commodities for Merchandising, as in Mines of diverse Metals, in choice and rich
Wines, in Saffron, Silks, raw and wrought, in Oils, Brimstone, Anniseeds,
Argals, etc. Here I have seen one field yielding at one and the same time three
several crops, the ground bearing Corn, having Mulberry trees intermixed, and
Vines planted at the foot of each Mulberry, which have made excellent Wines,
and this I have observed for twenty miles riding together on each hand of the
way, which must needs be pleasant to the beholders, and profitable to the
enjoye^ and owners.

The Kingdom of Naples is divided into sundry Provinces, which I will only
nominate: as first,

Terra di Lavoro.
Terra di Lavoro, wherein is found Capua, whose pleasures did effeminate
Hannibal, C^, where one of the Sybills resided, near which is Lacus Avernus,
the stink whereof killed Birds as they fly over it, Baca, Nola and Puteilo;
famous in times past for many Antiquite and Baths, which in Anno 1619. I
curiously visited for diverse days, in search of shado^ Staio of Gaeta is 43 l.
of that weight.
The next principal Town is Gaeta, well fortified by the Spaniards, and where
Buth^ that ransacked Rome lies interred; but the principle of this Kingdom is
Naples, of which,

CHAP. CXXXIX. Of Naples, and the Trade thereof.
Naples and the Trade thereof.
NAPLES the Metropolis of this Kingdom, once called Parthenope, and now
Neapolis, fortified with for strong Castles in possession of the Spaniards,
Castle Capedna, Castle Ermo, Castle Ov^, a^ Castle Novo. It venteth out of
England, Baies, Says, Serges, Fustians, Lead, Tin, Pilchu^ Newland-fish, red
and white Herring, some Cloth and other Commodities; it consists m^ of
Gentry, few eminent Merchants Natives are here found; the Taxes laid upon
Merch^dises being so great, that it ruins all Commerce, yet what I observed
here in Anno 1619. I shall relate.

Coins of Naples.
The current Coins of Naples where then,

A Ducate of Gold large is worth in Naples 11 Carlins.

A Ducate of Carlins is worth only ten Carlins, so that 100 Ducates of Gold,
are worth (...) Ducates of Carlins.

One Ounce is worth six Ducates.

A Ducate of Carlins is worth five Tarries.

A Tarry is worth 20 grains

A Carlin is worth 10 grains.

Account keeping.
Their accounts are kept in Naples by Ducates, Tarries and Grains, five Tarries
making a Ducate, and twenty Grains a Tarry; but these are accounted Ducates
current, every 110 Duc^ current, make 100 Ducates of Gold.

Weights of Naples.
The Weights of Naples are the Cantar and the 100. Their Cantar of Naples is 100
R^tolos, which is 2 l. 9 ounces Naples, and by which they weigh all their gross
goods, which is in Florence 32 ounces, and 285 l. and is 196 l. Averdupois. But
the 100 l. has been obse^ to produce. in Florence 90 l. in Rome 93 l. in
London 71 l. in Lions 68 l. in Venetia 106 l. Ditto gross 82 l. 1. l. subtle is
in Venice subtle 15 ounces. 1. l. subtle is in Venice gross. 9 ounces. 58

Note, That in Gaeta is used another Quintar for some Commodities gross goods,
which has been found to render in Legorn 254 l. and in Naples all gross goods
are weighed by the great Cantar, and all fine goods by the hundred.

Measures in Naples.
Their Measure is a Cone divided into 8 Palms, which is in Florence after the
opinion of some 3 Braces just, and it has been observed in the measure of
these two places, That 46 Braces of Satin made at Naples: 12 Canes, so that in
Stuffs the Cane of Florence, makes in Naples 8 ^/32 Palms, and consequently
Braces 48 made in Naples 13 Canes 3 Palms.

Nine Palms of Naples are in Lions just two Aulns, so that of the Cane makes
English 81 inches by rule, which is somewhat more then 2 yards English, without
the inch, and some have sound it to be 2 yards: 12 Canes in Naples have made in
Lions 21 Aulns, so that 1 Aulns have made a Cane in Naples.

Corn, etc.
Many Commodities are sold by the Salmo, and 16 Tomolos is a Salmo, which Tomolo
is two Statios of Florence, and in England (^) Gallons.

Oil.
Oil in Calabria is sold by the Migliot, which is 132 ounces or 11 l. and it
requires 2 Migliots to make a Staio of Naples.

Note, that four Salmo in Oil in Naples have made 40 Staios, which are in
Venice 40 Mars, which are in England (^) Gallons.

But Naples is more famous amongst Bankers for Exchanges, than amongst
Merchants for any eminent Trade, therefore it is needful I annex the Exchanges
thereof, according to the custom practiced in this place, which you shall find
in the 284 and 343 Chapters at large, with all circumstances thereunto
belonging.

Customs of Naples.
The Customs of this Kingdom do differ upon several Commodities, as some pay 2,
some 4 per cent. and some more and some less, according to the will of the
Vice-King here, commanding for the King of Spain, which by the Merchants is
more precisely to be learned.

Abruzzo.
The next Province is Abdruzzo, wherein is Salerne, famous for Physic here
taught; next Rhegium, opposite to Messina, and in that Vare; Tarento.
the next Tarento, where grow great quantities of Olives, and whereof Oil in
abundance is made.

Otranto.
The next is the Province of Otranto, wherein is found Brandusie, the most
famous Havens in these Seas Otranto and Gallipoli, affording great abundance of
Oils and Cattle; which last pay for Tribute to the Spaniards 100 thousand
Ducates yearly; and for the Oils they are known to us by the name of Apulia
Oils, being the last Province comprised in this Country, and the former Cities
standing in Calabria, it will not be amiss to insert two or three words of the
Trade thereof.

CHAP. CXL. Of Calabria and the Trade thereof.
Calabria, and the Trade thereof.
IN Calabria is seated Tarento, Brandusie, and Rhegium, which abounding in Oils
and Cattle, especially Oils, which many English Ships do lade in these parts
yearly, I will note what I observed therein.

Coins of Calabria.
Their Moneys are the same as in Naples, and current throughout the Kingdom.

Weights of Calabria.
Their Weight is the Quintal of 100 l. which has made In Venetia sot. 106 l.
Venetia gro. 82 London 73

100 l. in Calabria has made in Venetia sot l. 12 ounces.

The Cantar of Naples is also sometimes used for gross Goods, and is found to
be in Venice gross 186 l. and observed to have made in London, 196 l.

Measures of Calabria.
Their Measures of length is a Cane divided into 8 Palms, and has made
cloth-measure in Venice 3 Bra. and in London (^) Inches.

Of Oil.
Millioto, of Oil here is 132 ounces, which is 11 l. abovesaid, and it wants
2 l. of making a Staio in Naples

The But of Oil in Calabria is 5500 Rot. which makes in Naples 43 in 44 Sta.
which is about 25 Caf. and thus much shall serve for Calabria; a word for
Apulia.

CHAP. CXLI. Of Apulia, and the Trade thereof.
Apulid, and the Trade thereof.
APulia, comprehending some of the aforesaid Cities, also Lechi, Barri, and
Manfredonia the principel, abounding in Corn, Oil, Almonds, Olives, Galls,
Wines, and other Commodities are sold thus.

Measures of Corn.
Corn is sold by the Tomolo, which is two Staios of Florence, a Cargo of Corn
being 36 Tomolos makes in Flor. 72 Sta. and English (^) Gallons

Barley is also sold by the Tomolo, but of a lesser size, as containing 1
Staio, a Cargo making also 36 Tomolos, which reduced to Florence measure is 48
Staios, and is English (^) Gallons.

Their Tomolo of Wheat is 36 Rotolos, which are 2 l. 9 ou. per Rotolo of
Naples; which Tomolo comes to be in Flor. 100 l. 6 ou.

But the Tomolo of Barley is 48 Rotolos, which is more than that of Wheat, the
Cargo making 3 Moyas of Florence.

Of Almonds.
Almonds are sometimes sold by the Cantaro, and commonly worth here 26 Taries
the Contar, and sometimes by the Tomolo; and of the Abrogino Almonds there goes
20 Tomolos to a Cantar, and of the common sort of Almonds 22 Tomolos.

Of Oil.
A But of Oil or Wine of Apulia holds here 12 Barrels, which have been found to
make in Florence 10 Barrels, and is in England (^) Gallons.

Oils in Apulia are sold by the 1000 l. which commonly cost about 20 Tar. and
yet sometimes found to be measured by the Salmo, accounted for 10 Staios, each
Staio weighing 18 R^tolos, so that this way the Salmo of Oil comes to be 180
Rotolos, which reckoned in Florence, at 2 l. ^ou. per Rotolo, makes Florence
weight 465 l. and English (^) Pounds, commonly worth from 18 to 22 Tares a
Measure, which comes to produce about 5 or 5 Barrels in Florence.

This Staio of Oil weighs 49 l of the weight of Apulia.

Galls are here sold by the Cantaro, and is 196 l. of Averdupois.

Of Olives.
Olives are sold by the Tomolo, about 5 Carl. a Tomolo, in the time of
gathering, which is in June and July, which are put in Sacks of 6 or 6 Tomolos,
and each Tomolo of Olive weighs about 16 Rotolos.

Of Wine.
A Salmo of Wine is accounted to make 3 Bar. of Florence, and is commonly worth
to Carlins a Salmo, and held to be incirca 14 ser. of Venice measure.

A Car. or Cargo of Corn of Apulia, has been observed to make 34 Fanegs in
Calais, and in Lisbon 145 Alquiers of Tomolos, 36 of Naples per Car. and 57
Chilos of Constantinople.

But I have staid too long here, I will pass to the next Principality, which is
the Papacy.

CHAP. CXLII. Of the Papacy, and the Cities of Trade therein
Papacy, and the Trade thereof
THE Papacy contains four Provinces: First Romandiola; Secondly, Marca
Anconitana; Thirdly, Ducato Spoletano; and fourthly, St. Peter's Patrimony. And
first then in R^mandiola, are many principal Cities, and great Towns, of which
the first is Bollonia the chief University of Italy; Ferrara, famous for the
Iron Mines about it, and within whose jurisdiction stands Modena and Rhegium,
two fair Cities; and last, Ravenna, once beautified with a fair Haven, now
choked by Age and Rubbish: Of the Trade of these a word and in order.

CHAP. CXLIII. Of Bollonia, and the Trade thereof.
Bollonia, and the Trade thereof.
BOllonia, under the command of the Pope, is an University much frequented by
Students of the Civil Law; it is seated within Land, and is well known in
matters of Exchanges, as I shall show in due place, and has those Moneys
current that acknowledge the Pop^'s Stamp, as I shall declare in Rome.

Accounts in Bollonia.
Their Accounts are kept in Livers Sold. and Deniers, 12 Deniers to a Sol, and
20 Sols to a Liver, the Liver may be accounted to be incirca 13 d. Sterling
Money, and some are found to keep their Accounts in Duccatons, Sols, and
Deniers, cast up by 12 and by 20 as above is said.

Weights of Bollonia.
Their Weights common in use are these.

Their Quintal is 100 l. which makes In London 80 l. Rome 100 Milan 106
Florence 104 Genoa 133 Lions 77 Venetia sot 120 Venetia gr. 75

1000 l. in Bollonia have given in Venetia subtle 1320 l. gross 750 l. so that
the 1 l. has rendered their gross 9 Ounces, subtle 14 Ounces 2 Sach.

Measures in Bollonia.
The Measure is a Brace, and is found to be about 25 inches English, 100 Braces
here have made in Venetia Cloth-measure 96 Braces, and of Silk 90 Braces.

Corn.
Corn is here sold by the Corbe, 100 whereof makes 92 Staios in Venetia, and
100 Corbes in Wine make Amfora Venetiana 12 and 2 Quarters, and in dry Measures
17 Quarters, and in London (^) Gallons.

Commodities of Bollonia.
From hence are accustomed to come to other parts, Corn, Almonds, Oils, raw
Silks, and sundry sorts of wrought Satins, Taffetaes, and other, called hence
Bollonia Silk, and of Bollonia making; and to conclude this place, here are
found many eminent Exchanges, the course of which Exchanging, you shall find in
the general Exchanges here practiced, vide Chapter 296.

CHAP. CXLIV. Of Ferrara, and the Trade thereof.
Ferrara, and the Trade thereof.
FErrara is the next principal City of Trade in this Circuit, famous for the
Iron mines about it, seated on the Banks of the River Po, and accounted one of
the pleasantest Cities in Italy; for in the midst thereof is a fair Green, into
which open about twenty Streets, of half a Mile in length, and so even and
uniform, that thence the utmost ends thereof may be discerned; it affords
Wines, Oils, Olives, Iron, Steel, and some Manufactures of Silk.

The Moneys are as at Rome, to which this City appertains, admitting but of
very little difference in the Rates current thereof.

Weights of Ferrara.
The Quintal of Ferrara is 100 l. which makes Venetia sot. 112 l. and Venetia
gr. 72 l. in London incirca 75 l. Averdupois, and the 100 l. sutt. Venice makes
here 87 l. and the 100 l. gr. 138 l.

Measures of Ferrara.
The Measure is a Brace, 100 Braces makes in London 72 yards.

Their Wine Measure is a Mastello, 11 whereof make an Amfora of Venetia, and is
in England (^) vide London.

Their Corn Measure is a Stare, 100 Stares makes in Venetia 37 Star. and so
much shall serve for Ferrara and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. CXLV. Of Modena, and the Trade thereof.
Modena.
MOdena is the next City seated in this Tract, yielding many Fabrics of Silks,
which it disperseth to its neighboring Towns.

Accounts in Modena.
Their Accounts are kept in Livres, Sold, Deniers, 12 Deniers to a Sold, and 20
Sol to a Livre.

Weights in Modena.
Their Quintal is 100 l. which renders In Lions 77 l. London 72 l. Venetia
sotile 109 l. Venetia gross 72 l. Florence 98 l.

Measures in Modena.
The Measure is the Brace, the same as in Mantua, and 1 per Cent. longer than
the Brace of Ferr^ra, and by observation it has been found that the 100 Braces
of Modena have made 118 in Florence. Corn is here sold by the Staro, 100
whereof makes 93 or 94 Stares in Venetia, and one Staio of Modena has made 2
Staios in Florence, and has made in Venice three Quarts, and six Quarterols.

CHAP. CXLVI. Of Rimno, and the Trade thereof.
Rimno, and the Trade thereof.
RImno, anciently Ariminum, seated on the Mouth of the River Rubicon, affords
much Silk, which it partly sends abroad, and partly converts here into Stuffs,
also some Wines, Oils, Corn: The Coins current as in Rome, as being subject to
the Papacy, and the Accounts are kept in their same denomination.

Weights.
The Quintal is the 100 l. which makes in London 81 l. and some have made
Experience, that it makes in Venice gross 76.

Measures.
Their Measure is the Brace, and is in London 27 inches bare.

Their Corn Measure is a Stare, 100 making 210 in Venetia, and their Wine
Measure is a Some, which makes in London 10 Gallons.

CHAP. CXLVII. Of Ravenna, and the Trade thereof.
Ravenna, and the Trade thereof.
RAvenna is seated on the Adriatic Sea, and once beautified with one of the
fairest Have in the World, where Augustus Caesar always kept a Navy manned, to
defend these parts of the Empire, now choked up with mud and rubbish: The
Neighborhood of Venetia, which Senators have as well followed Mercury by
Merchandising, as Mars by Arms, keeps this City from any notable Commerce, yet
I will note what I have observed hereupon both in matter of Weights and
Measures.

Weights of Ravenna.
The Quintal of Ravenna is 100 l. which gives Venetia sotile 118 l. in London 78
l. and the gross 100 l. of Venetia, made here 133 l.

Measures of Ravenna.
The Measure is a Brace, 100 Braces of Cloth in Venice, is here 112, 100 Braces
of Silk in Venice is here 106.

Corn is sold by the Stare, 100 whereof makes in Venice 66 Staio, so that 3
Staros Rave^ have made the two Staios of Venetia; and these are the chief
Cities of Romandiola.

Loretto.
The next Province is Marco Anconitana, wherein is famous, first Loretto, for
the Pilmmage to our Lady Church, brought hither, if you will believe it,
through the Air from Palest^ whereunto, a great Trade is driven by the
superstitious Papists; next is Adria, which gave name to those Seas; next
Recanti and Ancona, two fair Cities, and of great Concourse of Merchant of
which first.

CHAP. CXLVIII. Of Recanti, and the Trade thereof.
Recanti in Istria.
REcanti, olim Aelia Recina, as some Authors allege, is a fair City, affording
Corn, Oil, and some Silk for Merchandise.

Weights.
The Weights thereof being 100 l. gives in London 75 l. And in Florence 96 l. In
Venetia sotile 112 l. In Venetia gross 72 l.

Measures.
Their Measure is a Brace, 94 whereof make Venetia Brace 100 l. Oil is sold here
by the Miare, which is the same as that in Venetia.

CHAP. CXLIX. Of Ancona, and the Trade thereof.
Ancona, and the Trade thereof.
ANcona is a fair City, seated on the Hill Cinerius, which shoots into the
Adriatic Sea, like a Promontory, having a commodious Haven built by Trajanus
the Emperor, it is fruitful as the rest of this Country, affording principally,
Corns, Wines and Oils.

Weights.
The Quintal of Ancona is 100 l. and makes in London -- 78 l. In Venetia gross
73 l. In Venetia sotile 116 l. In Florence 98 l.

Measures of Ancona.
Their Measure here is a Brace, 106 whereof have made in Venice 100 Braces, 10
Cones of Cloth in Florence have made here 37 Braces.

Corn is here sold by the Staro, 6 have made a sum in Florence.

Spoleto.
The next Province is the Duchy of Spoleto, the principal City bearing the Name
of Spalata, whereof is not any thing in Merchandising worthy the note that I
find; and their Weights and Measures do in all points agree with Venetia.

Civitaveccia.
The last part of this Country is Saint Peter's Patrimony, wherein are principal
Cities of Commerce, Civitaveccia, which has a pretty Harbor, and near which
the Alum is made, which we call Romish or Roche, and here the Pope does for
Trade sake, allow a Gentleman the Title of Causul for the English Nation, to
see that the Mariners, who are apt enough to give Offense, be not wronged or
abused, at whose hands in Anno 1619. going thence as a Merchant to Rome, I
sound all Courtesies and Friendship, and passing through Pollidor, a pretty
Town in the Christmas Hely-days, I came to Rome, where what I did observe in
matter of Trade, besides the Devotion of the season and time, I shall in the
next Chapter declare.

CHAP. CL. Of Rome, and the Trade thereof.
Rome, and the Trade thereof.
THis City in her ancient Splendour, was fifty Miles in circuit, and had 750
Towers, that beautified her Walls, and inhabited by 463000 Families, but now
the compass exceeds not ten Miles, and a third part thereof is also waste
Ground, and has two third parts of the Inhabitants Clergy men and Courtesans,
which latter are here accounted to be 40000, and pay 30000 Ducats, yearly
Tribute, which does maintain Civitaveccia two Galleys furnished, known by the
Names of the Saburrahs, as the place of their abode in Rome; but leaving this
private Trade to the Virgin Friars, I come to the public Commerce of this
City, which according to my observation is following.

Rome and the Territory thereof affords for Merchandise, Corn, Wine, Oil,
Silk, Gloves, Alum, Lute-strings, Kid-skins, and some Fabrics made of Silk:
And from England, it receives Lead, Tin, Bays Says, Stuffs, Pilchards,
Herrings white and red, Newland fish, Calves-skins, Salt, Salmon, Tallow, Wax,
etc. which are landed at Civitaveccia and thence transported by Boats and Birks
to Rome, along the so much famoused River of Tiber, which passes through the
same.

Coins in Rome.
The Coins of all Italy pass here current, but the principal of this Country
that are current is the Ducat, or as they call it, the Crown of Gold, which is
worth 11 Julios or Paulos.

The Crown of Silver is worth 10 Julios or Paulos, which is 100 Baioches, or
400 Quatrins.

The Julio is worth 10 Baioches or 40 Quatrins.

The Baioche is worth 10 Quatrins, or 1 Sold. 4 Den. small Money of Rome.

Accounts in Rome.
Their Accounts are kept in Crowns, Julios, Baioches and Quatrins as above, and
sorne in Ducats of Camera or Destampe, of which 97, 11, 3. make 100 of Gold.

Weights in Rome.
Their Quintal in Rome is 100, and makes in London -- 80 l. and with other
Countries is found to be in Venetia sotile -- 119 l. In Naples 106 l. Venetia
gross 75 l. Florence 102 l. Genoa 110 l.

But note, that of these Quintars of 100 l. is framed two different Weights,
with allowances given thereupon, as in sale of Spices and such like.

The Quintar thereof is accounted to be of the abovesaid Weight 160 l. And the
second for the Weight of gross Goods accounted to be 250 l. to the Quintar,
which is to be observed in the sale of a Commodity, and therefore the Commodity
and the Weight whereby it is sold is to be observed.

Measures in Rome.
They use also two Measures in length, the one for Linen and Woollen, called
the Cane, divided into 8 Palms, and 30 Canes is 100 Braces, Venetia; the other
which they call the Brace, which is 3 Palms of the said Cane, which Brace
renders in Flerence 1 Brace, the first making in London (^) inches, and the
latter (^) inches.

Corn is sold by a Measure, called the Rugio, which renders in Genoa 1 Mins,
and in Florence 8 St^ios, and is 412 l. of Rome, and is in England (^) gallons.

But by reason of the great occasion that Clergymen from most parts of Europe
have to use Money in this City, the Exchanges thereof are most worthy
observation, therefore I have handled the same in the 278 and 326 Chapters,
with all circumstances thereunto belonging, to which I refer you.

From Rome I will take my way to Venetia, and to that Republic, and see what
is there more worthy in matters of Commerce.

CHAP. CLI. Of the Commonwealth of Venetia, and the Cities of Trade therein.
Venetia, and the Trade thereof.
THE Commonwealth of Venetia, contains these Provinces, La Marca Trevigiana,
Fri^ Histria, part of Dalmatia, and the Islands of Candy, Corfu, Cephalonia,
Ithaca, Z^, Lucaia, Cythera, etc. In which I find these principal Cities of
Trade, first Treviso, next Pal^ a famous University for Physic; next Vicentia,
next Bressia, which is accounted the second for greatness in Lombardy; next
Verona, also a fair City of Crema, a strong Fort, Aquilegia, once of great
circuit, now devoured by the Neighborhood of Venetia, Parma a modern Town
built by the Venetians within these late years, next is Cape de Istria, Pola,
and some others, of lesser Note; and last of all, the Metropolis of all this
Commonwealth, which is Venice it self of these, or as many as have gathered any
Observation, I shall declare.

CHAP. CLII. Of Treviso, and the Trade thereof.
Treviso, and the Trade thereof.
TREVISO is the principal City of that Province, which to the Venetians is
known by Marca Trevigiana, and commodiously seated for an Inland-Trade, the
chief City Venetians depriving all the rest of any eminent Honor in matter of
Traffic, therefore herein I shall be the briefer; and first,

For their Coins current, and their Accounts kept, I willingly omit the same,
as to be found more at large under the Title of Venetia.

As for the Weights and Measures thereof, it will not be improper that I set
here the agree ments thereof with Venetia, as being seated within that
Commonwealth.

Weights of Treviso.
Treviso is found then to have two several Weights, a gross and subtle, in the
same mann^ as Venetia, which thus agree together.

100 l. gross in Treviso, makes gross in Venetia 92 l.

100 l. subtle in Treviso, makes subtle in Venetia 112 l.

100 l. subtle Venetia, gives in Treviso subtle 89 l.

100 l. subtle Venetia, gives in Treviso gross 58 l.

100 l. subtle Treviso, makes gross in Venetia 70 l.

All which considered, the thousands are found thus to accord.

Measures of Treviso.
1000 l. subtle Treviso, is 1125 l. subtle Venetia.

1000 l. gross Treviso, is 1080 l. gross Venetia, and backward.

1000 l. gross Venetia, is 926 l. gross Treviso.

1000 l. subtle Venetia, is 890 l. subtle Treviso.

1 l. subtle Treviso, is subtle Venetia 13 Ounces.

1 l. gross Treviso, is gross Venetia 13 Ounces.

1 l. subtle Venetia, is subtle in Treviso 10 Ounces.

1 l. gross Venetia, is gross in Treviso 11 Ounces.

The Measures of length in Treviso is only the Brace.

The 100 Cloth Braces in Venetia, is 100 Braces in Treviso.

The 100 Silk Braces in Venetia, is 94 Braces in Treviso.

Oil is sold here by the Miare.

Corn by the Staio, the 100 here are 109 in Venetia.

Wine is sold by the Cara, which consists of 10 Consi, which according to the
Measure of Venetia is 17 Quarts, the next is Padua.

CHAP. CLIII. Of Padua, and the Trade thereof.
Padua, and the Trade thereof.
PADUA is a famous University, especially for Physic, which affords not much
matter of Trade; yet observing my intended Method, I will place here the
Concordancy of their Weights and Measures with the Capital City Venetia.

Weights of Padua.
Padua is found to have a gross Quintal, and a sotile Quintal, as the City of
Venetia has, and found thus to agree together.

The 100 l. subtle of Padua, is 112 subtle in Venetia.

The 1000 l. gross of Padua, is 1020 l. gross in Venetia.

The 1000 l. subtle in Padua, is 1125 subtle in Venetia.

The 1000 l. subtle in Venetia, is 889 subtle in Padua.

Measures of Padua.
The Brace in Padua, is the same as at Treviso aforesaid.

Corn is sold by the Stare, three here makes one Stare in Venetia.

Wine is sold by the Cara, one whereof here is 18 Quarts in Venetia.

Oil by the Miaro, which is here 1185 l. gross in Padua; for other occurrences
it is to be reserred to Venice.

CHAP. CLIV. Of Vicentia, and the Trade thereof.
Vicentia, and the Trade thereof.
VICENTIA would be in matter of Trade of greater Note, were she not so near
neighbor to, and under the Authority of Venetia, for which cause I shall be
the briefer, and thus is found to agree therewith.

Weights of Vicentia.
The Weights hereof do precisely accord with Padua abovementioned.

Measures.
The Measures of Vicentia are only one which is the Brace, which is thus found
to accord.

100 Braces of Silk in Venice, is in Vicentia 92 Braces.

100 Braces of Cloth make in Vicentia 98 Braces.

Corn is sold by the Staio, 100 whereof do make in Venetia 33 Staio.

Wine is sold by the Caro, which in Venetia is 18 Quarts.

Oil is sold by the Miaro, which are 40 Miri, which makes gross weight in
Venetia 1210 l. and gross of Vicentia 1185 l.

Here is made a fine kind of Raw Silk, and dispersed abroad, fit for Silk
Stuffs, called by the name of Vicentia Silk, 100 l. thereof is 93 l. in
Florence.

CHAP. CLV. Of Bressia, and the Trade thereof.
Bressia, and the Trade thereof.
THE next is Bressia, seated likewise in this Province, more famous in her
Archbishop, who is an Earl, Marquess, and a Duke, than in any matter of Trade,
yet according to my intended Method begun, I will compare the Weights and
Measures thereof with Venice.

Weights of Bressia:
Bressia has but one Quintal, which contains 100 l. of the said place.

The 100 l. of Bress, is subtle Venetia 108 l. and gross 66 l.

The 100 l. gross Venetia, is 147 l. and 1000 l. subtle, is 92 l. here.

The 1 l. of Bressia, is subtle Venetia 13 Ounces.

Measures of Bressia.
The Brace of Bressia, agrees with the Cloth Brace of Venice.

Con^ is here sold by the Soma, and makes two Staio in Venetia.

CHAP. CLVI. Of Verona, and the Trade thereof.
Verona.
VErona is a fair City, and famous in times past for many notable things here
performed, which I willingly omit, but in matters of Commerce, I find the
Weights and Measures thus to accord with Venetia.

Weights in Verona.
Verona is found to have two Quinta^s, a gross and subtle. The 100 gross in
Verona, is 108 l. gross in Venetia. The 100 l. subtle in Verona is 110 l.
subtle in Venetia. So that the 100 subtle in Venetia, makes subtle Verona 90 l.
And the 100 l. gross in Venetia, makes subtle in Verona 145 l.

Measures in Verona.
The Brace of Verona agrees with the Silk Brace in Venetia.

Corn is sold by the Minali, 100 whereof is in Venice 45 Staios.

Wine is sold by the Brenta, which is in Venetia, 6 Sechi, and a Cara of Wine,
is in Venetia 17 Quarts.

Oil is sold by the Miaro, which is 1210 l. gross, and 1738 l. subtle in
Venetia, making 139 Basses, which are 8 Brentas and 11 Basses: where it is to
be noted, that 3 Basses of Verena, is 1 Miri in Venetia.

CHAP. CLVII. Of Crema, and the Trade thereof.
Crema and its Trade.
CRema, is a strong Fort, bordering upon Millan, where the State of Venetia
hold a Custom-House for the collection of their Customs upon such Goods as go
from these parts either (...) Millan it self, or thence by transit^ to Lions,
or other places.

Weights in Crema.
The Quintal of Crema, is the 100 l. thus agreeing with Venice, 100 l. subtle
Venice, is in Crema 92 l. and 100 l. gross 147 l. in 150 l. 100 l. in Crema, is
subtle Venetia 108 l. and gros Venetia 66 in 67 l.

Measures in Crema.
The Measure for length is the Brace, which is found to be two per Cent. less
than the Clo^ Brace in Venetia: whither now it is now high time I should repair
to, and survey the Traffic thereof, as at this day it is found and observed.

CHAP. CLVIII. Of Venice, and the Trade thereof.
Venetia, and the Trade thereof.
VEnice is the Principal City of this Republic, and is seated in the bottom of
the Adriatic Sea, or Venetian Gulf, upon 72 Islands, and distant from the main
Land five Miles, defended against the Fury of the Sea, by a Bank extending 20
Leagues in length, through which there is passage broken in seven places for
Boats, but no ways for Ships, but at Mallamecco, and the Castles of Lio, which
are found to be strongly fortified: it is accounted to be eight Miles in
compass, and has for convenience of passage near 4000 Bridges, and 12000
Boats, as some of oct modern Travelers have observed. It is the only place
where Policy, Warfare, and Mercha^zing have kissed together, for the most part
of those Clarissimos which here boast of their Qu^lity, Greatness, or Wisdom,
have either in themselves, or in their Ancestors, had their Original from
Traffic and Merchandising, many of whom enjoying this Title of Noble Families,
I have known in Constantinople and other parts as Merchants and Factors, who in
their Youth exercising this Art, do afterward, as their genius leads them,
either become Captains and Proveditors in Castles, Forts, or Cities, or
Ambassadors, and so employed into Foreign States, or lastly, Sen^ at home
governing the Commonwealth; but their worth being in it self sufficiently known
to the World, I shall descend to the subject in hand.

This City then has for many years had the sole Commerce and Traffic of all
the Mediter^nean Seas, and not content therewith, have made that City the
common Mart of all the Conmodities of Arabia, Persia, India, and those Eastern
rich Countries by their great Trade to Alexandria and Cairo, which continued
for many years; and when the Grecian Empire was both in its height, and in its
descent, they managed the sole Trade thereof, till the State of Genoa did look
thereinto, and by their Power and Might at Sea, shared with them therein: but
the P^tugal finding the way to India by the Cape of Bona Speransa, and the
English and Dutch Mochants following those Leaders, now bring those rich
Commodities that way straight to their own homes, which in former times they
were constrained to have from this City at a far dearer rate, and at a second
hand, since which times their Customs have been decayed, their Ships rotted,
and their Mariners, the pride of their Commonwealth, were all become Poltrones,
and the worst accounted in all those Seas, until the Turks Wars with Candy have
made them again expert in Sea Affairs; as may appear by the many Fights, and
several considerable Overthrows given to the Grand Seignior's Navies, as lately
in the year 1656, and their keeping of the City and Port of Candy, for the
space of so many years, against all the Opposition the Turk has made against
it.

This City now serves in matters of Trade, for an Inlet into Austria, and Upper
Germany, which this way it yet fits with some Spice, Drugs, and other Arabian
Commodities, which in part is brought thither from Alexandria, Aleppo, and
Constantinople, where they still have Consuls and Factors, and partly by a
second hand from England, now thereby bringing to them those Commodities which
a few years past we had and fetched from them, as from the only City and prime
Merchants of Europe.

Commodities of Venetia.
The Commodities here found and afforded are not many, nor of much worth, as
some Cloth of Gold and Silver, Corns, Wines, Oils, Rice, VVoollen-Cloth, Paper,
Anniseeds, Argal, Glasses for looking and for drinking, Quicksilver which they
have from Germany, some Silks raw and wrought.

The Commodities sent hither from England is Lead, Tin, Baies, Furrs,
Perpetuanos, Serges, Says, and some Cleth, Indico, Pepper, Ginger, Maces,
Cloves, Nutmegs, etc Herrings, white and red, Pilchards, Newland Fish, salted
Salmon, and such like. It serves in these days for a Mart for the Commodities
of Istria, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Austria, Upper Germania, and the Adriatic
Seas, and serves these Parts again with such Commodities as are either brought
hither by the English, Dutch, and French from their several Countries, or from
Alexandria, Aleppo, Smyrna, the Archipelago, and Constantinople, where they
also drive a considerable Trade.

Weights of Venetia.
There is found to be in Venetia four kinds of Weights, which thus are
distinguished and found to accord.

The greatest is called the Gross Pound, and 100 l. wherewith all Wool, Brass,
Metals, Fish, Flesh, and other gross Goods are weighed.

The second is the Gold Weight, used for Gold, Silver, and Jewels only, called
the Mark, which contains 8 Ounces, every Ounce contains 144 Carats, every Carat
is 4 Grains.

The third is used in Gold and Silver Thread, and in nothing else.

The fourth is the Pound, and the 100 l. subtle, wherewith all Silks, Spices,
Drugs, Cottons, Cotton yarn, and such like fine Goods are weighed by, which
thus are amongst them found to accord and agree.

100 l. gross, is 158 subtle; 633 l. gross, is 1000 l. subtle.

100 l. subtle, is 63 gross; 1000 l. gross, is 1580 l. subtle.

1 l. gross, is subtle 1 l. 6 Ounces; 5 Sazi, 18 Carats.

1 l. sotile, is gross 7 Ounces, 2 Sazi, 16 Carats.

1 l. sotile, is 12 Ounces; the 1 Ounce, is 6 Sazi; and 1 Sazi, is 1 Dram,
which is 3 Sec.

100 l. of Silver or Gold Thread, is subtle 116 l. 8 Ounces.

1 Mark of Gold, is subtle 9 Ounces; Sazi 2.

Where note, That a Mark of Gold, is 8 Ounces; 1 Ounce, is 4 Quarters; 1
Quarter, is 36 Carats; and 1 Carats, is 4 Grains, so that 144 Carats, is 1 Mark.

Also note, That in Venetia there is bought and sold diverse Commodities, some
by Balance, and some by Stalero, as well in the gross, as in the subtle Weight;
and that the Balance Weight, is greater than the Stalero Weight 2 l. per Cent.
by the Hundred, more than by the Pound; and the subtle Weight of the Balance,
is greater than of the Stalero subtle two Pound per Cent. by the Hundred, than
by the Pound Weight.

Weights of Venetia agreeing with other Countries.
Now let us observe how these two Weights, the sotile and gross, respond with
the Weight of other Countries.

The 100 l. subtle have been observed to make the first Row to the left hand,
and the 100 l. gross the next Row.

The 100 l. subtle makes in the first row, and the 100 l. gross makes in the
second row thus. Alexandria Zera 31 Rot. 50 Rot. Alexandria Forf. 71 R. 112 R.
Aleppo 14 R. 21 R. Archipelago 77 l. 121 l. Anvers 64 l. 102 l. Almeria 55 R.
90 R. Ancona 86 l. 136 l. Bergamo 90 l. 145 l. Bollonia 83 l. 132 l. Baruti 13
R. 20 R. Cyprus 13 R. 21 R. Constantinople 56 R. 84 R. Candia l. l. Corfu 75 l.
117 l. Cremona 96 l. 151 l. Damascus 16 R. 26 R. Ferrara 102 l. 139 l. Florence
87 l. 138. l. Lions 70 l. 110 l. London 64 l. 106 l. Lisbon 59 l. 92 l. Millan
92 l. 150 l. Mantua 93 l. 150 l. Marselia 70 l. 112 l. Malleca 57 l. 90 l.
Naples Rema 94 l. 149 l. Naples Romania 78 l. 121 l. Parma 90 l. 148 l.
Placentia 92 l. 150 l. Paris 70 l. 112 l. Roma 84 l. 132 l. Ravenna 84 l. 133
l. Ragusa 83 l. 131 l. Scio and Smyrna 62 R. 98 R. Sevilia 63 l. 98 l. Tripoli
Barbaria 59 R. 93 R. Turin 92 l. 148 l. Verona 90 l. 145 l. Zant 63 l. 100 l.

How far these may come near to truth, I must refer to trial, therefore I
deliver them ha^ as I received them upon trust.

Measures in Venetia, of length.
The Measures of Venetia are two, and both called the Brace.

The first is the Silk Brace, by which is measured all Stuffs of Silk, Damasks,
Sattins, Clothed Gold, of Silver, etc.

The second is the Cloth-Brace, by which is measured all Cloths and Stuffs made
of W^ which is greater than the former 6 per Centum.

Upon which last Braces 100 has been made this Concordance with the Measures
of other Countries.

100 Braces in Venice London 55 Else. Antwerp 92. Frankford 115. Dantzick 76.
Vienna 80. Lions 56 Aulns. Paris 52. Rouen 48. Lisbon 55. Var. Sevil 75 Madera
57 v. Lucques 111 Br. Florence 113. Millan 124. Genoa 267 Pal.

The liquid Measures are these:

Of Wines.
Wines are sold in Venetia two ways, either in gross, or by retail; the gross
by the Amphora and Bigonsa, and by retail, by the Quart, the Sachio, and Lire;
where note, That the Amphora is four Bigonsa, and the Bigonsa is 4 Quarts, and
1 Quart is 4 Sachi, and 1 Sachi is 4 Liras or pounds, but buying the same in
gross, that is by the Amphora and the Sachi, 1 Amphora is ^4 Quarts, and 1
Bigonsa is 3 Quarts and half.

Of Oil.
Oil is here also sold two ways, first by Measures, and next by the Weight of
the Staliero; the Measure is called the Miaro, and is 40 Mire, and by the gross
Weight is 120 l. and 1 Mira makes by measure 25 l. and by weight makes 30 l. 3
ounces.

Of Corn.
Corn is sold by the Staio, which is 132 l. gross Venetia, and in Florence 175
l. which is divided to 4/4; and to 8/8, and to 16/16 parts, by which is made
the Scandalios, the being 32 l. the 16 l. the 1/16 8 l. of gross.

Accounts in Venetia.
Their Accounts are kept in Venetia diverse ways, as by some in Ducates and
Grosses, at Livers 6 and 4 sold per Ducate, accounting 24 Gross to a Ducate.

Others again by Livers, Sols, and Gross, which are valued at 10 Ducates the
Liver, accounting 20 Sold. to the Liver, and 12 Deniers gross to a Sold.

Exchanges of Venetia.
The Exchanges made in Venice I have inserted in the 281 and 368 Chapters,
together with all circumstances thereto belonging; where by the way it is to be
noted, That in time past the goodness of their Moneys both in payment for
Merchandise, and in payment for Bills of Exchange, was alike and of equal
goodness and value; but these wise Senators fearing to lose what they cannot
keep, I mean, that little Trade they yet hold, in comparison of what they had
lost, by their providence and circumspection, set a distinction between the
Moneys payable for commodities, Difference bet^een money in banco and out of
banco in Venice 20 per centum.
which they term their current Moneys and out of banco, and between their Moneys
paid by Bills of Exchange, which they term in banco, which has had its
original upon such unfit grounds, that the very naming thereof, and the
particular circumstances of this difference is dishonorable to this Republic;
which therefore I will omit, only thus far the necessity thereof is to be
remembered, and to be well known and understood by all Merchants and Exchangers
that Trade and Traffic to this City, that the difference now at this time
holds in proportion between 20 and 21 per cent. so that it does appear to all
men that reside here, or have any commerce into this City, that their payment
made in banco, and by Bills of Exchange, is accounted better by near 21 per
cent. than the payments made for Commodities bought and sold between Merchant
and Merchant.

Customs of Venetia.
The Customs of Venice are several, altering upon many Commodities; and though
the wisdom of this Republic do manifestly discern a great diminution of their
Customs in general, yet it so falls out that they impose still greater, as it
were endeavoring thus to make up the annual rents thereof, as of late they
have done upon Currants, under pretense, that if the English will come and lade
them in the Port of Venice, or otherwise come thither laden, they are then
freed of a new Impost, which is lately levied in Zant upon a Commodity: but
they being of the condition of many Princes, that finding their Country
enriched with an eminent commerce and a plentiful Trade, never leave imposing
new Customs and Imposts thereon, till the Trade, and Customs, and Imposts, and
all other the benefits thereof are slipped out of their fingers, and fled for
protection to some other more friendly and neighboring State, or place, where
the same finds a greater ease, and a lesser charge; and that have Venice,
Anvers, Lions, and Genoa, lost that famous Trade, which for many years has
made those Cities renowned; and by their fall and easy Customs have Leghorn,
Marselia, Amsterdam, and London risen to that height wherein they are now found
to be, which if the Prince thereof do wisely cherish, and content themselves
with a reasonable Duty, such as Trade in it self may well bear, and the Trader
live, and ceherfully proceed in his Negotiations, they may see their Countreies
daily to flourish, and grow both rich and renowned thereby; otherwise Trad^
will insensibly she from them, the Merchants will give it over, or find out new
paths and divert it into some other place; Shipping will in an Age rot and
perish, and Navigation will quickly be forgotten, and these Kingdoms must have
other Nations to supply them at the second hand, and by strangers Shipping,
with those necessary Commodities which the Country stands in need of, and the
same both at dear rates, and to the too late Repentance of the State it self,
as may now be verified by this of Venetia, who would with many Millions redeem
that lost Trade, and would with free liberty of Customs entertain that
Commerce, which themselves peradventure by their too great Customs and Imposts
levied thereon by little and little in times past, have of their own accord
wilfully or willingly lost, and thrust from them, as I shall declare further in
the Trade of Leghorn, and other places which have of themselves no commodity to
maintain a Traffic, yet have all things, and want nothing that all other
Countreies can afford, only by the benefit and commodity of an easy light duty
of Custom imposed upon Merchandise by the liberty and freedom of the place and
Traders thereinto; and forasmuch as this State have by their wisdom made of
late days diverse subtle Decrees for the benefit of their own Traffic, and for
the regaining of their lost Trade, which are in themselves prejudicial to many
other Nations, but principally to the English, I hold it not improper in this
place to mention some of the principal thereof, that thereby if any the able
furtherers of the English Traffic shall happen (...) peruse this Tract, fit
remedies may be enacted to meet these Decrees, Injurious Decrees of Venice
against the Trade of the English in the Levant Seas.
which I may call particularly injurious to the English Subject and Merchant,
and tending to draw the whole Trade of the Levant Seas to the City of Venice
only, to the general prejudice of the Shipping of his Majesty of England,
Trafficking in those Seas, which I conclude under (...) Points.

1. First, they have considered the late great Exportation of Currants out of
Zant and Zeffalonia (two Islands of their Signiory) into England, and that the
principal Trade of the English into their Signiory, is only for this Fruit,
therefore they have of late levied a^ Imposition of ten Ducates upon every
thousand of Currants bought and shipped from the said Islands, and of later
times have also enforced the payment of the said Impost at Venice, which
formerly and at first was free, and have discharged their own Subjects thereof,
to the special damage and prejudice of the English.

2. Secondly, they have to burden the Trade of the English thither, or rather
seeing a^ the Trade of that Fruit wholly sought out and coveted by the English,
to which end they use to vent in those Islands some few English Commodities;
they have I say, of late, burdened the Native Commodities of England brought
into these Islands with new Impost, a levying upon an English Cloth 7 Ducates,
upon 100 weight of Tin 2 Ducates, and upon a Kersey 2 Ducates, and so upon all
other English Commodities, thereby to enforce all Commdities of England to be
brought into the City of Venice; and though sometimes English Merchants find it
necessary in those Seas to transfer some English Goods out of one English
Vessel into another, and yet not land the same, when as Ships do happen to meet
together and to be bound for several Ports, yet the same is not permitted them
unless they pay the said Impost abovementioned, as if the said Goods were there
really landed and sold, contrary to the common Custom of the Mediterranean Seas.

3. Thirdly, they have prohibited, that any Turkey Commodities should be landed
their out of English Shipping, or any other Commodities that are afterward to
be shipped for the Kingdom of England, which for the convenience of English
Shipping, the English Mercha^ Trading in those Seas have often occasion of: but
they do compel the English first to send such Goods and Wares to the City of
Venice, purposely there to pay the duty of Custom and the duty of Cottimo,
before they will suffer them to ship the same for England.

4. They have made an Act for the employment of their own Shipping and
Mariners, and for the restraint of all Foreiners, that no Commodities of the
parts of Turkey may be brought into any the Seigniory of the State of Venice,
but only in Venetian Shipping; wherein they have been found to have been so
strict and severe, that if any English Ships happen to be Fraighted either by
their own Subjects, or by the Merchants of any other Nation when any of their
own Shipping are in Port, or happen to come into the Port, or within the space
of twenty days after, upon the firming of a bare Protest against the said Ship
so Fraighted, they have no law nor remedy left them in Law to recover any
Fraight-Money, due for the said Goods so laden by them.

5. Fifthly, they will not permit nor suffer any English Ship to relade at
Venice, except they come first fully laden thither, neither will they suffer
freedom of Trade from Venice to any parts of the Levant for the English Nation,
neither in their own nor yet in the Shipping belonging to the Venetians, but do
straightly prohibit and forbid it, as also they do prohibit the bringing of
some particular Commodities by any whatsoever, themselves and their Subjects
only excepted.

6. To these I might add some others, but I will conclude it with this last
point of slight and fallacious subtilty some years past, when as the Seigniory
of Venice had here a permission from His Majesty of England to contract with
diverse Merchants for their Ships to serve against the Spaniards in the Gulf of
Venice; when the said service was performed, and that they came to receive
their contracted payment; they raised their Moneys 12 per centum above the rate
of the same at the time of their agreement; by which rate His Majesty's
Subjects came to lose a great Sum of Money by the said service, to their great
prejudice, and to the great dishonor of that so Honorable Seigniory.

Having by these few particulars given the ingenious Reader a taste of these
present policies Enacted by this State of late for the support of their
decaying Trade, and also given a touch of the Subtilties used by them to
preserve that little that is yet remaining, and their Endeavors to augment the
same, I will now in a word view the State of the present Traffic of this City.

The present Trade of Venice surveyed.
It is not to be questioned, but that this City has in all Ages afforded many
eminent Merchants, and has not been ashamed to make Merchandising a prop and
supportation to their Nobility, who amongst them are entitled Clarissimi, so
that this their School of Commerce has afforded such apt Scholars, and which
have so notably profited therein, that they have with as much honor worn the
Gown, as valiantly handled the Sword; and he that shall heedfully peruse their
Histories, shall find that not a few of them, have with general approbation
both of their Subjects and Neighbors, struct the principal stroke in the
Government of that Dukedom. The fit situation of their City, the large extent
of their maritim Coasts, the common aptness and addiction of the Citizens, have
much furthered the great Traffic of the same; what it has been in times past,
when their Potency and Opulency was at the highest and when they set out and
gave employment both in War and Peace to 300 Sail of Galleys, besides all other
sort of Vessels; I refer to their own Histories. Their then rich Trade to Egypt
for the Commodities of India, Arabia, and to Constantinople and Aleppo for the
Commodities of Grecia, Armenia and Persia, to Germany, France, Flanders and
England, for the Commodities of those Countries, must needs make this City
famous for the Traffic thereof; but their covetous Appetite, that could not be
satisfied with this Fame, and the great Wealth, each in particular drew
thereby, envied to themselves that Honor, which all other Cities of the World
was constrained to give them; for their great Customs imposed, joined with the
accidents of that age and time, brought them to the present State of Traffic
wherein now they are found to be, which is at present comprehended within a
narrow scantling, for their Trade to Egypt is vanished, and seen only in the
relics thereof, for though in Alexandria and Cairo they maintain Consuls,
serving in outward appearance for the protection of their Merchants, yet indeed
they serve to little purpose, as having lost the former famous Trade of
Alexandria and Cairo in Sidon, Acria, Smyrna, and other places of Turkey; they
have their Consuls, as also their Agent in Constantinople, and Consul in
Aleppo, which now are the principal who give Life to their Designs, as indeed
the places where their Trade is of greatest Eminency, yet it is not so great
but may be fathomed within a small Line: and as many things have notably
concurred in the loss of their former Traffic abroad and in other Kingdoms (as
the discovery of India by the Portugal, the subversion of the Greek Empire by
the Turks, and the favorable Countenance of some of the late Kings of England
to their own Subjects, for their encouragement in Trade, and their general
inclinations thereto) so they in themselves have been chiefly wanting to
themselves, and have suffered a loss to fall insensibly upon them; that has
been the greatest Ruin of their Traffic, comprised within Mystery the of these
their new Imposts, and the decay of the Shipping and Navigators, which that
Prince must ever carefully avoid, that would have his Country and Subjects
thrive thereby; and having now lost all their Trade to all other places (the
Dominions of the Great Turk only excepted) their Ships and Galleys are decayed,
and their Mariners fled from them, some sparks are seen yet to remain; but the
great Fire of their mighty Traffic being extinguished, it will not be needful
for me to rake the Ashes, and observe further that little Coal that is yet
resting unconsumed amongst them.

CHAP. CLIX. Of Florence, and the Cities of that Kingdom.
Florence, and the Provinces thereof.
THE Dukedom of Florence contains the greater part of Tuscany, and now may be
said to be comprehended under the Signiory of the Great Duke, with the
Republic of Pisa and Siena, the principal marine Port whereof is Leghorn,
which may be accounted the best and one of the greatest Towns of Trade in all
the Mediterranean Seas, not only thus continued and preserved by the Industry
of the Inhabitants alone, but of other Nations, which by reason of the great
Immunities and Privileges of this place, and the freedom given to Strangers and
Merchants, and principally because all sorts of Merchandise may be here landed
free of all Customs, Duties and Imposts, this Scale is grown to that height,
that it is famous throughout all the Mediterranean and Ocean Seas.

In this Republic, I find only four Cities of Consequence that challenge in
matter of Commerce my Observation, which is, Florence it self the principal
City of this Dukedom; next Siena, then Pisa, and lastly the above mentioned
Town of Leghorn.

Commodities of Tuscany.
These Countries afford for Merchandise, some Marble, Rice, Wines, Oils,
quantity of Silks, both raw and wrought in Stuffs, famous for their Fabrics
throughout Europe, as Satins, Taffaties, Velvets, Grograms, Plushes, and the
like, called commonly of Florence. From England is here vended, Pepper, Cloves,
Maces, Indico, Callicoes, as being East India Commodities, and Lead, Tin,
Cloth^, Bays, Serges, Perpetuanos, as Native, and the English also bring hither
Herrings white and red, pickled Salmon, Newland Fish, Pilchards, Calves-Skins,
and many other Commodities.

The Duke of Florence, a great Merchant.
The Duke of Florence has ever been found to be a great lover of Merchants and
Merchandising, and is conceived to be at this day the greatest Merchant in
Europe, forgetting not that his Ancestors did raise themselves by Traffic to
the greatness and height he now does hold; and to this end is found in Leghorn
a Stock properly running in Trade for his Account, which is employed in
Traffic, as occasion of Profit upon Merchandise does present it self.

The Estate of the Great Duke of Tuscany, and the Trade thereof.
Cosmi the Second, was the first Duke of Florence that had the Title of Great
Duke of Tusca^y conferred upon him, being crowned in the Court of Rome, with
that Title given to him and his Heirs for ever, by Pope Pius the Fifth, in the
year 1570. Since which, the Great Dukes Successors have desired of succeeding
Popes, the Title of King, but it has been always obstructed by the Kings of
Spain, who would endure no King in Italy but himself, and refused by the Pope
as too Lordly a Title.

This Duke and his Predecessors, have ever been found to be great Lovers of
Merchants and Merchandising, knowing that his Predecessors raised themselves by
Traffic to the greatness he now does hold.

His Territories are separated on the East, from the Lands of the Church by the
River Pisco, on the West, from the Commonwealth of Genoa by the River Macra; on
the North, from Romandiola, and Marca Anconitano by the Appenine Hills; are
bounded on the South, by the Tyrrhenian Sea, being about 260 Miles in length,
and in some places as much in breadth. The Country between Florence and Leghorn
(being about fifty Miles) is full of spacious Fields, and fruitful Valleys,
here and there a pleasant Mountain equalizing them for fertility, abundantly
furnished with all sorts of delicious Wines, and beautified with many delicate
Cities and Towns, and in a word, plentifully stored with all the Benedictions
of Nature: The Inhabitants profess the Reman Catholic Religion, and are
governed by the Civil Law. The Great Duke^ Dominions may be fitly divided into
four Parts, viz. The Cities and Territories; first of Florence, 2. Pisa, 3.
Siena, 4. and lastly, the Islands situated in the Tyrrhenian Sea.

The Estate of Florence, takes up the North Part of the Great Duke's
Dominions, being bounded on the South by the Territories of Pisa and Siena, and
on the North with the Appenine Hills, so called from Florence, the principal
City for Beauty and Trade within this Territory. Nicholas Machiavel (that
unhappy Man) was once Secretary to the Duke of Florence; who but for publishing
that which was frequently practiced by Princes, has intailed an edium upon his
Name (for ought any knows) to all Posterity. But to our Business next to be
handled, which is the Description and Trade of Florence.

CHAP. CLX. Of Florence, and the Trade thereof.
Florence, and the Trade thereof.
THE City of Florence is seated near the confluence of the two Rivers, Arne and
Chian, and is a very fair City, and abounding with public and private
Buildings of great Beauty, and therefore by some supposed to be called
Florentia a situ Florenti; it is in compass six Miles, and is the Residence of
the Duke, who here has a sumptuous Palace: the greatest part of the Trade
thereof does consist in Fabrics of Silks that here are made, and are hence
properly called, and in the Exchanges here are used and practiced by Bankers,
for all Parts of Europe, the Inhabitants having lost the honor of
Merchandising, which anciently they had, when eminent Factors from hence were
sent into Flanders and England, and to other Countries to reside, who managed a
very great Trade, now totally decayed. What I have found from others, or
observed my self 1619. when I was here, I shall set down for the present
occurrences of the place.

Accounts in Florence.
The Merchants do here keep their Accounts in Livres, Sold and Deniers, 12
Deniers making a Sol, and 20 Sol a Livre; and others again in Crowns, Sol and
Deniers of Gold, of Livres 7 per Crown, accounting 12 Deniers to a Sol, and 20
Sol to a Crown, but all their Commodities are sold by Lavres, Sold, and Deniers
of their Moneys, and to reduce Livres into Crowns, multiplied by 2, and divided
by 15, because 15 half Livres make a Crown, and to reduce the said Livres into
Ducats, 1/7 is to be taken.

Coins current in Florence.
The Coins current, are the Ducats of Florence and the Picols.

The Ducat is worth 7 Livres, or 70 Bolognini.

The Crown is worth 7 Livres in Picholi, whereas the Custom is different from
other Countries, wherein the Crown of Gold is not found to have any constant
Rate with the current Money of the place, and is adjusted therewith according
to the Rate of the Exchange.

The Livre is 20 Sold, and accounted to be 9 d. sterling.

The Ducat being 7 Livres, is accounted there 5 s. 3 d. sterling.

The Seudo, or Crown of 7 Livres, is consequently 5 s. 7 sterling.

The Livre is also divided to 12 Craches, whereof 8 is a Julio, which is 6 d.
sterling; 5 Quatrins is a Crach, and 60 Craches makes a Livre.

Weights of Florence.
Diverse Observations have been made upon the Weights of Florence, which is 100
l. or Quintel of 12 Ounces to a Pound; the most noted I will here insert, and
refer the truth to him that has a cause of trial, because I have received them
upon trust.

The 100 l. then has been found to produce in these places.

The 100 l. of Florence has rendered in Anvers 73 l. Lions 76 Dantzick 88
Venetia sotile 114 Venetia gross 71 Siena 103 Pulia 104 Lucca 102 Bollonia 95
Farrara 101 Padua 117 Millan 103 Cremona 113 Roma 98 Genoa 108 Marselia 91
Barcellona 71 Valentia 96 Granado. 66 Sevil 75 Lisbon 92 Paris subtle 90 Paris
gross 112 Brussia 78 London 78 Ancona 98 Majorca 92 Sicilia sotile Rot. 44 and
gross R. 48 Tunis 100 Aleppo -- R. 15 R. Ditto Silk 16 Tripoli Soria 19 Ditto
Barbaria 67 Baruti 152 Alex. Zera 162 Alex. Forfori 81 6 Scio and Smyrna 71
Constantinople 64 Rhodes 14 3 Acria 12 8 Babylonia 10 10 Balsara 500 M. Ormus
75 10

Measures of Florence.
As of Weights formerly compared, so do I find the Brace of this place whereby
all Commodities are measured, and upon the 100 Braces of Florence has been
made these Observations, and to make The Cane is 4 Braces, and the 100 Braces
are in London 49 Else Anvers 81 Frankford 102 Dantzick 67 Vienna 71 Lions 49
Paris 46 Aulns Rouen 42 Lisbon 49 Vares Sevil 24 Madera 50 Venice 88 Braces
Lucca 97 Millan 112 Genoa 235

Note, that all Wrought Silks are here bought by the pound weight, and not by
the Cane no^ Brace abovementioned.

Of Wine.
Wine is sold by the Cogno, which are 10 Barrels, and 1 Barrel is 40 Metadels,
or 20 Bottles, or Flasks, each Bottle being 2 Metadels, the Barrel is to weigh
120 l.

Of Oil.
Oil is sold by the Orcio, which is a Barrel, and contains 32 Metadels, which
ought to weigh 85 l.

Of Corn.
Grain is sold by the Moggio, and is Staio 24, and the Staio is 50 l.

Of Salt.
Salt is also sold by the Staio, which weighs 72 l.

Agreement of dry Measures of Florence.
The agreement of the Staio of Corn, I find thus computed with other Cities.

Staios 3 of Corn in Florence, is 1 Sache of Venetia.

Staios 3 in Florence, make 1 Sache in Pisa.

Staios 2 in Florence, make in Plombino 1 Staio.

Staios 8 in Florence, make in Rome 1 Rotulo.

Staios 10 in Florence, make in Palermo a general Salmo.

Staios 13 in Florence, make in Misnia a gross Salmo.

Staios 1 in Florennce, is in Naples 1 Tomolo, 16 Tom. is a Salm. there.

Staios 6 in Florence, is in Ancona 1 Somo of Corn.

Moggio 1 in Florence, is in Arles 10 Sesterces.

Staios 3 in Florence, is in Marselia 2 Mines.

Staios 60 in Florence, is in Britany a Tun of Corn.

I have been the larger in the Weights and Measures of Florence, because I
shall have occasion to accord other Cities to this; and therefore to make this
the more absolute, I have added the following concordancy of the dry Measures
of this place with other Countries following which I refer to the better
experienced for due trial.

CHAP. CLXI. Of the dry Measures of several Cities in Italy, with other Cities
in the Mediterranean Seas.
Agreement of dry Measures in sundry Cities of Italy, etc.
NOW forasmuch as I find it very difficult to accord so many Cities in the
Measures of Corn, Salt, Wine, etc. I will here add what I have collected
therein, which properly may best follow the preceding agreement of the dry
Measure of Florence.

First then, a Mine of Corn in Avignon, is 1 Staio of Pisa.

An Anne of Lions, is 8 Staios of Florence, which Anne of Lions is there
accounted 6 Buccets.

A Quarter of England, is 11 Staios of Florence.

A Moggio of Grain in Florence, is 3 Annes in Lions, which Moggio is accounted
10 Sesterce there, and the same in Provence.

Alquiers, 104 of Portugal, are 40 Buccets of Lions.

1 Muy of Orleans, and 12 in 13 Mines, makes 13 Buccets of Lions.

1 Tun of Grain either in Picardy or Normandy to be laden aboard their Ships,
is 16 Mines. which are 2 in Moggios, which are 24 Mines, and the 24 Mines
there, are 3 Moggio of Florence, and 1 Mine of the said places is 3 Staios
incirca of Florence.

1 Tun of Corn laden in Britany, is accounted to hold and make 60 Staios of
Florence.

1 Fanega in Calais, is 2 Staios of Florence.

1 Salmo, general of Sicilia, is in Portugal Alquiers 22.

The said Salmo of Sicilia, is 11 Staios in Florence.

The gross Salmo of Sicilia, is 17 per Cent. greater than the general.

The Salmo of Calabria, is 6 Tumelles of Naples.

The Tomolo of Naples, is 2 Staios of Florence.

The Carro of Apulia, is 3 Moggio of Florence.

Alquiers 4 of Lisbon, are 1 Fanega in Andalusia.

1 Fanega, is 2 Staios of Florence, and a little more; so that the Staio of
Florence may be accounted the Fanaga and Alquier of Lisbon 2 Staio.

One Moggio of Florence, makes in Arles 4 Sesterces.

And in Marselia does make 2 Sesterces.

The Staio of Venice comes to make one Sack of Pica, or little less.

The Mine of Corn of Genoua, are 4 Staio of Florence.

The Sesterces 5 of Grain in Avignon, are one Salmo of Sicilia.

A Car of Corn in Padua, is in Calais 34 Fanega, and makes in Lisbon 145
Alquiers of 36 Tomolos of Naples the Carro.

The 500 Retibe of Corn in Alexandria, is in Leghorn 1090 Sacks.

The Staio 63 of Corn of Ferrara, makes just a Carro, and this Carro makes in
Constantinople 57 Cassise.

The Retibe of Alexandria, is in Legborn 6 Staios.

The Cill^a of Chavella, is 3 Staios of Florence.

1 Tun of Grain in Britany, is 60 Staios of Florence.

The Cassise of Corn in Valentia in Spain, is of a general Salm of Sicilia.

Sesterces 10 of Arles, is in Florence one Moggio.

And as for the Tomilo of Naples, I find this Observation in the agreement
thereof. 36 Tomolos of Naples, which is 1 Carr, have made in Venice 22 Stai.
Istria 22. Segnia 68 Quart. In all Dalmatia 22 Stai. Ragusa 19. Catarro 22.
Fermo Marca 9 ^/1 Somo. Corfu 14 Mosa. Candia 97 Mesn. Canea 14 Moza.
Alexandria 7 Rob. Tripoli Barbaria 5 Cassise and 3 Jubes Zerbe 5 Caf. Millan 3
Mos. Parma 45 Sta. Modena 26 Rimene 10. Cesena 13 Ravenna 34 Forli 21. Ferrara
62. Mantua 56. Bollonia 24 Corbe. Florence 80 Stai. Genoua 16 Mine. Padua 34
Stai. Treviso 20. Vicentia 34. Verona 50 Min. Bressia 12 Some. Bergamo 19 Stai.
Cremona 11 Some. Mirandela 26 Stai.

For other particulars of these Measures, I have observed the same in such
other place as my Collections permitted.

As for the Exchanges of Florence, which are here found daily practiced for
great Sums, I refer the particulars thereof to the 282 and 400 Chapters of this
Tract, with all the Circumstances thereunto belonging, and therefore hence come
to Pisa, the second City of Trade in Tuscany.

CHAP. CLXII. Of Pisa, and the Trade thereof.
THE Second Part of the Great Duke's Dominions, is the City and Territory of
Pisa, bounded on the South by the Seacoast, on the East, by Siena, and on the
West by the Genoese. The Pisans were in former times very considerable, having
under them the Islands of Corsica, Sardinia, and the Baleares, and did at once
War with the Venetians and Genoese; they were at last conquered by the Duke of
Millan, and the Duke of Genoa; the first taking the City of Pisa, and sold it
to the Florentines about the year 1410. and the latter seized upon the Town of
Leghorn, and sold it to the same Customers for 120000 Ducats about the same
time. These two being the only places of Trade within this Territory worthy
taking notice of, and chiefly the Town of Leghorn. But first of the City of
Pisa.

Pisa, and the Trade thereof.
Pisa is the second City in the Dukedom of Tuscany, seated in the entrance of
the River Ar^ into the Sea, which comes down from Florence, and waters the
Walls thereof.

Here is the Custom-house, placed by the Florentine for all Goods that are
landed at Leghorn, and enter into his Country, or laden in Florence, and going
this way out of his Country; so that though Leghorn be free of all Customs, yet
the Duke losing little thereby save what the Town it self can vent, which is
but small, for it is but as a Scale and Port-Town to this City, and the rest of
his Territories.

Here is also kept his Principal Courts of Justice, and the Knights of Saint
Stephen have here their Alberge, thereby keeping his Subjects from going to
Malta to be there enrolled; the Duke by these means using his best Art to make
this City to have some splendor, which by the strict subjection of the
Inhabitants the City otherwise is wholly deprived of.

Those goodly Buildings which it yet shows, testifies its ancient
Magnificence, and many things Anno 1619. I observed therein of Note, though
improper to the subject, which bears in many places the Relics of that
Greatness it once had, by its Command over diverse Provinces, and the Wars it
maintained for a long time together against both the Venetians and Genoese; but
to my Business.

Weights.
The Moneys, Weights, and Measures, and Accounts of Florence, are here only in
use, and therefore I shall not need to reiterate.

Measures.
Only the Corn Measure is a Sacco, which is 3 Staios of Florence.

The Wine Measure is a Barrel Cornuto, which is 1 Bar. Florence, so that 7 Bar.
Cornuto, is 10 Bar. in Florence, which is in Candia 45 Mistate, and makes in
Naples Cogno 1, which 1 1 But.

For Custom of the place, this has been observed, that a Bag of Pepper from
landing at Leghorn to the dispatch in the Custom-House here, is about a Crown
of Gold, per Bale, and Herrings, English, have Charges from the arrival at
Leghorn, until dispatched in the Custom-House of Pisa, 15 Sold of Gold the Bar.
of 4000 Herrings; and the like for other Commodities in general.

The Customs of this place is ordinarily 4 Cratches per Liver.

CHAP. CLXIII. Of Siena, and the Trade thereof.
THE third Part of the Great Duke's Dominions is the City and Territory of
Siena, sit^ated between the Lands of the Church, and the Territory of Pisa.
They were sometimes under the Command of the Emperor, then a free
Commonwealth; and after that under the Spaniards, then in the hands of the
French, and again in possession of the Spaniards, by whom it was made over unto
Cosmi Duke of Florence (all but the Port-Towns, which he thought good to keep
in his own possession) about the year 1558. whose Successors have been since
very careful in keeping thereof, as a place of great Concernment, beside they
being a good addition to the Greatness and Strength of his Territories; and
once looked on a rival to Florence it self in the Government of Tuscany. The
chief and only place of Trade within that part of this Territory under the
great Duke, is the City of Siena; of which briefly follows.

Siena, and the Trade thereof.
This City has been of more note and greater consequence in times past, but
falling under the command of the Florentine, they deprived them of all their
Trade and ancient glory; it is an Inland-Town, adorned with beautiful both
Public and Private Buildings, their great Church has the Monuments reserved
of all the Popes, and of our famous Countryman Sir John Hawkwood, who did the
Florentine such good and valiant service, that they have here honored his
memory with a stately Monument: here is observed to be spoken the best Tuscan
Language in Italy; and further I could not note material, Anno 1619.

Accounts here and the Moneys Current are the same as in Florence.

Weights in Siena.
In Siena they have two Quintals, the one of 100 l. wherewith all fine Goods are
weighed, being incirca 3 per cent. less than 100 l. of Florence.

The other is for Woolls and some gross Commodities, which contains 150 l. of
the former 100.

Measures in Siena.
The Braces and Measures agree with Florence formerly mentioned, other Notes of
Trade in this Dukedom I have not met withal, therefore will pass hence to the
Dukedom of Millan, and will omit the rest to Legorn, the only Seaport of note
belonging hereunto.

The Port-Towns within the Territory of Siena are 1. Plombino. 2. Port
Tellamon. 3. Orbitelo. 4. Monte Argentoriana. 5. Porta Herculis. 6. Porta
Longone. These are only worth taking notice of for Trading.

The fourth and last part of the Great Duke's Dominions are the Islands in the
Tuscan or Tyrrhenian Seas. 1. Elba. 2. Giglio. 3. Capraria. 4. Galienaria. 5.
Gorgona. 6. Troja. These are only worth the mentioning as to our business of
Trade.

CHAP. CXLIV. Of the Dukedom of Millan.
Dukedom of Millan.
THE Dukedom of Millan being under the command of the Spaniard, is rich in
Natures gifts, as esteemed the Garden of Italy, affording plenty of Corn, Rice,
Wines, Oils, Silks Raw and Wrought, and sundry other Commodities; it has
therein also many fair Cities, the principal whereof are,

First, Millan the principal of the whole Duchy. Secondly, Pavia. Thirdly,
Alexandria de la Pallia. Fourthly, Cremona. And fifthly, Como: of as many of
which as is needful, I shall touch the particulars.

CHAP. CXLV. Of Millan, and the Trade thereof.
Millan and the Trade thereof.
MIllan is a fair City, and the greatest of Lombardy, the Castle whereof is
accounted impregnable; it is very populous, and contains seven Miles in
Circuit: it is furnished in matter of Trade with many great Merchants, or
rather, as I may more properly call them, Shopkeepers, abounding in many rich
Manufactures of Silks and Iron for Sword-blades, for Cannons, Muskets, and
Pistols, etc. as Silk-Stockings, Chamlet, Fustians, Gold-Thread, and sundry
other Commodities here dispersed into Savoy, France, and other adjoining
Countries.

Accounts in Millan.
Their Accounts are kept in Millan by Pounds, Shillings, and Pence.

Or as they call them, Livres, Sol, and Deniers; 12 Deniers make a Sol, and 20
Sols a Livre, which Livre may be sterling. 12 pence, as I shall show in the Tract
of Exchanges, in 280 and 410 Chapters.

Coins in Millan.
The Coins Current in Millan are these:

A Ducate of Gold of Millan is incirca 100 Sol of that Money.

A Crown of Gold of the Sun is worth about 96 or 98 Sol.

A Crown of Gold Italian is 5 Livres, and 6 Sol Imperial.

A Ducate of Gold of Livres 5 and 18 Sol is Livres 6 Imperial.

A Ducace Imperial is esteemed 4 Livres.

A Ducate of Millan, or Imperial of Livres 4 per Duc. and so they count it in
Exchange, the which they pay in Crowns of Italy at 101 Sol per Duc.

Note, that the Crown in Millan runs in Merchandise for Sol 110 and the Ducate
for the same.

Note also, that the Imperial Coins are the current of this Country, but
French, Italian, and Spanish, pass here also in Merchandise, as being placed
between the two former, and subject to the last.

Weights in Millan.
The Weight of Millan is the Pound, and the 100 l. which is the Quintal, which
100 l. is In Venetia sotile 108 l. Venetia gross 66 Florentia 97 Genoua 106
Lions 69 London 70

Measures of Millan.
In Millan they have two Braces, the Cloth, and the Silk, upon the 100 Braces
Silk has been made these Observations, and to have made In London 43 Else.
Antwerp 72 Frankfort 90 Dantzick 60 Vienna 63 Lions 44 Aulns. Paris 41 Genoua
207 Palm. Rouen 37 Auln. Lisbon 43 Var. Sevil 58 Madera 44 Venetia 78 Brac.
Lucques 86 Florence 88

Exchanges of Millan.
Which I refer to the experience of him that shall have occasion to make trial
herein farther, and so I will proceed to Cremona; as for the Exchanges here
practiced I refer you to the general Chapter thereof in the end of this Tract,
viz. 280 and 410 Chapters.

CHAP. CLXVI. Of Cremona, and the Trade thereof.
Cremona, and the Trade thereof.
CRemona is the second City of Trade in this Duchy, which endeavors by the
Industry of the Inhabitants to imitate and second Millan in her Manufactures of
Silk, Gold-Thread, etc.

Weights.
Their common Weight is the Pound and the 100 l. which has by trial been found
to make in Venctia Sotile 104 l. and by the Gross of Venetia 65 in 66 l. in
Florence 86 l.

Measures.
Their Measure is the Brace, agreeing the same as that of Florence.

Oil is sold by the Carigas, 18 thereof is 1000 l. Venetia in Oil, Carrigas 15
are accounted for a 1000 l. of Cheese in Venetia.

Carigas 11 are accounted of Honey 8 Staios of Venetia.

CHAP. CLXVII. Of Como, and the Trade thereof.
Como, and the Trade thereof.
COmo is made more famous by the Lake whereon it is seated, being 50 Miles
about, than by the Trade thereof, though it may well be imagined the same does
add a good furtherance thereto by the benefit and commodity thereof, and by
Transporting Wares to Neighboring places seated thereabout.

Weights.
The Weight thereof is the Pound, and 100 l. which has been observed to produce
in Venice Subtle 108, and Gross 67 l. which in London is 72 l. Averdupois, or
thereabout.

Measures.
Their Measure is a Brace accounted to be,

Corn is sold by the Mosa, which are here 14 Pesos, and every Peso is 10 l. at
^0 oun. per l. which in Venetia is 378 l. Subtle, which is 305 l. Gross, so
that the said 14 Pesos is in Venetia 1 Staios; And thus have I done with the
Duchy of Millan, and proceed to Mantua, and the Dukedom.

CHAP. CLXVIII. Of Mantua, and the Trade thereof.
Mantua and the Trade thereof.
MAntua has some other Cities of quality subject thereto, but being debarred
from the Sea, and environed with potent Neighbors that hinder the Commerce
thereof; I will therefore reduce what I have collected more-worthy to the City
of Mantua it self, which is a very fair and strong Town, environed on three
parts with a Lake of good breadth, and with a strong Wall on the rest; through
this Lake runs a River that leads into the Po, which is a famous stream in
these parts, and much enricheth this Country, and furthers the Trade of this
Duchy.

Commodities of Mantua.
The chief Commodities of this Dukedom are certain Fabrics of Silks, such as
are Taffetaes, Sattins, Camlets watered, and the like.

Accounts in Mantua.
Their Accounts are kept in Livres, Sols, and Deniers, 12 Deniers make a Sol,
and 20 Sols a Livre, 5 of which Livres make a Ducate of Gold large 9. 12 Sol
making a Ducatoon of Mantua, or 115 Sols of Millan, which is accounted (^)
Sterling.

Weights in Mantua.
They weigh in Mantua by a Peso, and by the 1000 l. 25 l. being the Peso, and
100 l. the Quintal, which has made in Venice Subtle 108 l. and Venice Gross 66
l. in Florence 98 l. and in London by Observation of some, 71 l. Averdupois.

Measures in Mantua.
Their Measure of length is the Brace, which does agree with the Cloth- brace of
Venice within a small matter.

Corn is sold by the Staio, 100 whereof are in Venetia 40 Staios, and 1 Staios
weighs about 80 l. of Mantua weight.

Aste, a Fair.
In this Dukedom is also Aste, where is yearly kept a great and notable Fair for
many sorts of Merchandise, where many Immunities are granted to Merchants,
during the time that the said Fair does continue, and is held in the beginning
of September: and thus much I have observed of this Duchy.

CHAP. CLXIX. Of Urbin, and the Trade thereof.
Vrbin, and the Trade thereof.
URbin is a fair City, seated on the bottom of the Appennine, where it has for
Seaports Pisauro and Fano, the English here do enjoy many Immunities, and
sundry Privileges, the original whereof did arise in the Reign of Henry VI. of
England, who created the Duke of this place a Knight of the Noble Order of the
Garter; and he to requite the Honor to himself done, returned it thus to the
said King his Subjects. It now affords the common Commodities of other parts
of Italy, which it also follows in matter of Trade.

Accounts in Vrbin.
Their Accounts are here kept in Livres, Sols, and Deniers, 12 Deniers making a
Soldo, and 20 Sols a Livre.

The Current Coins of this place are the Roman, and do as in most parts of
these Italian Principalities partake one another Coins, which passes Current
with some small distinction from one City to another.

Weights.
The weight is here the Pound, and the Quintal being 100 l. which produces in
Venetia Subtle 112, and Gross 72 l. and has produced in London 77 l.
Averdupois.

Measures in Vrbin.
Their Measure of length is the Brace, the 100 Braces of Cloth in Venice
rendering here 94 Braces, and the 100 Braces of Silk rendering here 102 in 103
Braces, which is in England (^) Inches.

CHAP. CLXX. Of Parma, and the Trade thereof.
Parma, and the Trade thereof.
PArma, the chief City of this Principality, affording the Commodities common
with the rest of Italy, does over and above afford that excellent Cheese known
through Europe by the name of Parmesane; it is not noted for any eminency in
Trade, the greatest fame that of late it obtained, was by being subject to that
Alexander Farnese who was Duke thereof, and made such a noise in the
Netherlands, during his Regency there, to his Masters great Expense, but to
little purpose. Accounts in Parma.
For Trade, observe, That their Accounts are kept in Livres, Sols and Deniers,
12 Deniers to the Sold, and 20 Sols to the Livre, which is (^) Sterling.

The Coins current of Parma are;

Weights in Parma.
The Weight is the Pound of 12 Ounces, and 100 l. to a Quintal, which is in
England about 60 l. and in Venice sotile.

Measures in Parma.
Their Measure is the Brace, agreeing with the Brace of Florence; and now to
Placentia, also subject to this Principality.

CHAP. CLXXI. Of Placentia, and the Trade thereof.
Placentia, and the Trade thereof.
PLacentia is a commodious City for Trade, and seated properly to that end upon
the River Po, affording the ordinary Commodities of Italy, but in nothing so
famous as for the Fairs in Exchanges here quarterly hept, to which place all
Italy, Germany, and other Countries do make their Exchanges, rather for the
Fairs, than for any Commodities wherein they intend to have the said Moneys
invested, and for the Moneys of the Country there is no account had therein
thereof, but only of that wherein the Exchanges is made, which is called the
Crown of Marque, wherein only Bankers and Exchangers do keep the account of
this City, and of those Crowns, Accounts in Placentia.
their Accounts are framed in Crowns, Sols and Deniers of Marque, as I have more
at large treated of in several Chapters of Exchanges, vide 276 and 382, and
others following, which by reason of the great concurrency I have there amply
specified, and to which I refer you.

Weights in Placentia.
The weight of Placentia is the Pound, and 100 l. the Quintal, which 100 l. is
in Venice gross, 66 l. Venice subtle, 108 l. and by that computation in London
subtle, Pound 72 l. incirce.

Measures in Placentia.
The Measure is a Brace, which is 27 Inches English; in this Principality is
Mirandola accounted, of which a word passando.

CHAP. CLXXII. Of Mirandola, and the Trade thereof.
Mirandola, and the Trade thereof.
MIrandola, being a City also belonging to this Principality, I thought good to
insert in my way what I have observed in the Weights and the Measures thereof.

Weights.
The Weight of Mirandola is the l. 12 Ounces, 100 l. whereof is a Quintal, and
found to be Averdupois 75 l.

Measures.
The Measure is the Brace, found to be 26 Inches English, and so much for
Mirandole, and now to Legorn, therewith to finish the Trade and Commerce of
Tuscany, and of these petty Dukedoms.

CHAP. CLXXIII. Of Legorn, and the Trade thereof.
Legorn, and the Trade thereof.
LEgorn is situated on a sandy Plain, close to the Seaside, it has an inward
Mould where the Grand Duke of Tuscany's Galleys are kept, and some small
Vessels permitted to Ride, and is accounted the strongest modern City in the
Mediterranean Seas, purchased not many years past for 120000 Ducates of the
Genoese, by the Duke of Tuscany, who reedifying, or rather building a new City
to the old, new fortified and walled the same, giving safe Conduct to all Men
of what quality and degree soever to live here, so that at the first it was a
Sanctuary for all Thieves, Pirates, Murderers, and wicked Rascals; and because
here was also granted a liberty in Conscience, the Town was also stored with
all Religions: but as the City became populous, and Merchants being granted a
freedom in Customs, the place became in a short time to be filled with
Inhabitants; and to add to these Immunities, there were Dwellings for seven
years given to any that would come hither to reside, and all such should be
free from all Arrests or Punishments for Acts committed in all other Countries,
of what nature soever they were found to be; and by these means at first, and
since by the encouragement of the Great Duke of Tuscany, it is become one of
the principal Towns of Trade in all those Seas, and is properly accounted the
Scale of the Florentine Dominions. In matters of Commerce it is ruled by Pisa
and Florence, which are the principal Cities of this Duchy, and which yield
the Commodities that drives the Traffic of this place; the principal Notes
that I observed at my being in this place in several Voyages, are as follows.

Accounts in Legorn.
Their Accounts are kept in Livres, Sols and Deniers, 12 Denters to a Soldo, and
20 Soldo accounted to a Livre, which is Nine Pence Sterling.

Coins in Florence.
Their Moneys are those of Florence, which current is the Ducate of 10 Julios,
or of seven Livres, which is five Shillings three Pence Sterling, and a Scudo
or Crown of Gold is 7 Livres, and one Crown of Gold, in Gold, or as they say,
De Oro in Oro, is 8 Livres.

Also Note, That 12 Craches make a Livre, which is 9 d.

8 Craches make a Julio, which is 6 d. Sterling.

5 Quadrins make a Crache, ^0 Quadrins a Livre.

3 Quadrins make a Sol.

Mote, That the Craches are Silver, and the Quadrine Copper.

To bring Ducates of Florence of seven Livres the Ducate into Crowns of Gold of
Florence of 7 Jul. per Crown, Divide by 15, and Subtract the Quotient from the
sum divided, and the remainder is your demand.

Again, to bring Crowns of Gold of Florence of 7 Jul. into Ducates of 7 Livres,
divide by 4, and the Quotient added to the sum divided will answer your desire.

There is ever found between the Moneys of Florence and the Money of Legorn, a
Lagio, which being both subject to one Prince is conceived by some, that the
same may be removed by Merchants if they would endeavor it, but they that are
well versed in the Trade of this place hold the contrary Opinion, therefore I
will omit the Reasons given on both sides, and advise him that has Moneys in
Florence, and is resident in Legorn, to make the best use thereof, and take the
benefit of the Lagio as the current rate will permit him, till the business may
be better rectified, and the Controversy by an equality may be decided and
determined.

Weights in Florence.
The Weights are the same as in Florence, the Pound 12 Ounces, and the Quintal
is 100 l. which is English 75 l. but some Commodities are found to be sold by
the Quintal of 150 l. which is 113 l. English, and some by a Quintal of 160 l.
as Fish, Woolls, and which is 121 l. English, the English 112 l. making about
147 l. of this place. 112 l. of London is 146 l. Legorn.


Note that 150 l. is here a Kintar of Allom, and is 113 l.

151 l. makes a Kintar of Sugar, is 114 l. English.

1^0 l. makes a Kintar of Fish, is 121 l. English.

100 l. is a Kintar of all other Commodities, and is 75 11/12 l. English, and
is 108 l. in Genoua.

Measures in Florence.
The Measure of this place is the Brace, 4 Braces making a Cane, 50 Canes is 200
Braces, and found to agree with the English; 1 Brace of Florence is 23 Inches
English (of 12 to a Foot) so that 100 Braces makes ^0 Yards, 48 Else.

Their Corn and Salt measure is a Stare, 3 Stares is a Sack, and 3 Sacks is a
Salmo: or 41 Stares is a Salmo, and this Salmo i^ accounted a London Quarter.

Also they have another Measure called a Maggio, which is 8 Sacks or 24 Stares
is a Maggio, and a Stare of good Corn has been noted to weigh 50 l. in Legorn.

English Commodities vended in Ligorn.
From England is vended here Bays, Says, Serges, Cloths, Perpetuanoes, Lead,
Tin, Calves-Skins, Hides, Oistracan-Hides, Salt, Salmon, Pilchards, Cavear,
Herrings, Tallow, also Pepper, Ginger, Mace, Cloves, Nutmegs, Indico, and such
Indian Commodities.

Commodities of Tuscany.
This place being the greatest Scale of Trade in Tuscany, is found hence to be
sent into other parts, Oils, Wines, Silks Raw and Wrought, Rice, Anniseeds,
Argal, and all other Italian and Turkish Commodities.

Custom in the Port of Legorn.
All Goods entering here to be Sold are not liable to the payment of Custom for a
year, but if kept a full year, do then pay a Custom; and if Sale present not in
that time, the Merchant may Ship the same out again without Charges: but if for
the advance of his Commodity he send the same into other parts of the Duchy of
Tuscany, then the Custom is to be paid at Pisa, as is there mentioned, to which
I refer the Inquirer; and leaving Tuscany, I will pass over to Genoua.

CHAP. CLXXIV. Of Genoua, and the Trade thereof.
Genoua, and the Trade thereof.
THE State of Genoua comprehends Finali, Sarasena, and Noli, Cities of small
import, the Metropolis Genoua being the Mistress of this Republic, being
accounted eight Miles in Compass, and inhabited by the greatest Money-Mongers
or Usurers in the World, who if they would not distrust God with their Wealth
by Sea, would easily become and be accounted famous Merchants; their Usury is
excessive, and has more than once brought the King of Spain into their Books
for vast sums of Money; but he having the trick of failing in his Payments, and
performance, has been observed to have satisfied them in blanco, in lieu of
being paid in banco; but I refer this to them that are constrained to suffer,
and to draw to my Observations, being such as I have gathered upon this City.

This City would prove the most Famous in all these Seas for Trading, were not
the Inhabitants such noted Politicians, and great biters by Exchange, that no
Strangers can live among them, for they envy the great Commerce practiced in
Legorn, their Neighbor, and yet may exceed Legorn, would their greedy
Covetousness permit them, and suffer Merchants to bring their Goods thither
upon small Charges: but that Sovereign must not expect a plentiful Trade, that
will have also a great Custom paid upon all Goods; and he that desires to lose
the Traffic of his Country, needs no other way to do it, but by imposing heavy
Customs upon Merchants, and their Commodities: but to their better
considerations I refer this point, and publish to the World their own common
Proverb, which admits hardly any Merchants to live or their amongst them,
Genoua fatta per noi, their City is only made for themselves.

Accounts in Genoua.
In Genoua they keep their Accounts in Livres, Sols, and Deniers current, the
Denier being 12 to a Sol, and 20 Sol to a Livre; which is 120 Rays of Portugal,
and 16 d. Sterling.

Moneys in Genoua.
Their Current Moneys are diverse, as bordering upon so many Neighbors, the most
Current is the Deniers, 12 to a Soldo. Soldo 4 make a Cavalet. Cavalets 5, or
Sols 20 make a Livre, which is 16 d. Sterling. Livres 4, Sold 8 is a Crown.
Sold 7 Den. 6 is a Spanish Rial of 6. d. Sterling. Sold 90 is a Crown of Gold.
Ducate in Silver is 4 Livres, 16 S. l. being 6 s. 5 d. Sterling. Ducate Current
is 4 Livres, Sterling 5 s. 4 d. circa. Ducate of Gold is 68 Sold of Gold. Lire
3 Sols 1 makes a Rial of Eight. Lire 4, 13, 4 of Genoua has made 1 Ducate in
Legorn.


Weights in Genoua.
Their Weight is the Pound of 12 Ounces, and the Quintal is 100 l. ditto, which
is called the Subtle Quintar, and the Gross Quintar is 150 l. thereof is 157 l.
subtle Venice, and this Gross Quintar agrees with the Gross Weight of Venice,
between which two places these Notes have been observed, that 100 l. Subtle
Genoua makes Subtle in Venetia 105 l.

100 l. Gross Genoua is Gross Venetia 100 l. Subtle 157 l.

The said 100 l. has made in London 71 l. circa, and 92 Legorn.

And the 150 l. their Gross Quintar is London 105 l. circa.

And the 112 l. London has made here 143 l.

And by proof 100 l. in Florence has made here 109 l.

The Gross Quintar is 150 l. of 18 Ounces per l. by which is sold Cottons, and
Cotton-Yar^, Cummin, and Anniseeds, Honey, Rice, Brass, Lead, Tin, Soap, and
Woolls, and some other Commodities.

Measures in Genoua.
Their Measure of length is the Cane containing 9 Palms, which 9 Palms have made
4 Braces of Florence, and the Measure is for Silks and Stuffs, but 10 Palms in
Linen makes a Cane, and is in Florence 4 Braces, and the said Cane by
observation has made in Venice 3 Braces of Cloth, and 3 11/16 of Silk Braces,
and upon the 100 Palms have been made these observations, and to have rendered
In London 27 Yards. Anvers 34 Else. Frankford 43 Dantzick 23 Vienna 30 Lions 21
Aulns. Paris 19 Rouen 18 Lisbon 20 Vares. Sevil 28 Madera 21 Venice 37 Braces.
Lucca 41 1/20 Florence 42 Millan 47

1 Cane is in Barcelona 1 Canes.

9 Palms in Genoua is in Florence 1 1/16 Canes.

1 Cane in Genoua is in London 2 Yards.

Note that it has been observed, that five Palms has made almost an Ell
English, or 25 Palms 6 Else and, and 100 Palms thus is 26 Else, and 50 Yards
have made here 17 Canes.

Of Corn.
Corn is here sold by the Mine, whereof 64 make the 100 Saches at Pisa, and 100
Mines make 137 Staios in Venetia, and the Mine pays 6 Sols for Custom in
Genoua, and weighs 170 l. and half a Mine is called a Corno, the quarter of
Harwich measure has made here 2 Mines, but the London quarter not so much.

Of Oil.
Oil is sold by the Barrel, 7 Barrels making a Neapolitan But, called here
Botta dimena.

Of Wine.
Wine is sold by the Meserole, and 5 Meseroles is a Botta dimena, and 2 bar.
make 1 Meserole, which is also 100 Pints, so that 500 Pints of Wine make a
Botta dimena.

All Goods entering into Genoua pays for Consolato of the River 6 Deniers per
Livre, and is by the Buyer, according to the price bought, if a Contract be not
made with the Seller for discharging of it.

And he that Lands Commodities here in his own name, and cannot make sale
thereof, has had formerly leave to carry the same out again without paying any
Charges; but this Privilege is now disannulled.

Many Silk Fabrics are here made common with all Italy, the principal being
Velvets, watered Chamlets, etc. sold by the Pound weight, as is usual through
Italy.

Exchanges.
This City is famous for the Exchanges here practiced, as does more fully appear
in the Chapter of the Exchanges here in use, vide Chapter 279, and so forward,
where all Circumstances are inserted. And now to Lucca.

CHAP. CLXXV. Of Lucca, and the Trade thereof.
Lucca, and the Trade thereof.
LUcca is the principal City of this Republic, and is pleasantly seated on the
River Serchio, in compass about three Miles in a Plain, the Walls being adorned
with Trees, make the City appear to the Travelers to be in a Wood, till
approaching near, the Bulwarks give testimony of her strength, and that these
Trees are planted on the Walls, where the Citizens in Summer walk for shade* It
does wholly consist upon the Fabrics here made of Silk, such as is Damasks,
Satins, Tassaties, etc. which hence is vended in Foreign Countries, which are
all sold by the Pound weight, according as it is accustomed in Italy, and as
for other matters in Trade, what I observed in 1619. is thus.

Accounts in Lucca.
Their Accounts are kept diverse ways, some in Livres, Sols, and Deniers of
Picoli, as in Florence 12 Deniers to a Sol, and 20 Sols to a Livre; some again
in Crowns, Sols and Deniers of Gold, of Livres 7 per Crown, accounted by 12 and
20, as is abovesaid, but Silks are sold by so many Ducates the Pound; so that
to reduce Ducates into Crowns, the number of Ducates is to be multiplied by
four, and divide the Product by 71, adding what may rest with the Ducates, and
they shall be Crowns of 7 Livres.

Note, that to bring Ducates of Florence, or as they term them, Piastres, of
seven Livres the Ducate, into Crowns of Gold of Florence, of 7 per Crown,
divide by 15, and subtract the Quotient from the sum divided, and the remainder
is the demand.

Again, to bring Crowns of Gold of Florence, of 7 into Ducates of 7 Livres,
divide by 14, and the Quotient added to the sum divided will answer your desire.

Again, to bring Livres of Lucca into Crowns of Lucca or Ducates of Florence;
take the sum of Livres, and add as many more unto them, the Product being
divided by 15, then the same are Crowns of Lucca of 7 Livres; I say, Livres for
Crowns and Ducates of Florence, of 7 Livres per Ducate, for that the Crown of
Lucca and Ducate of Florence are all one in value, but in the Livre of Lucca
and in that of Florence is some difference, because the Livre of Florence is 7
per cent. greater than that of Lucca. Note also, that 75 Bolonins make a
Florence Ducate of 7 Livres, and 79 Bolonins make a Lucca Ducate, by which they
account in sale of Silk.

The Crown is commonly thus charactered C. The Piastre or Ducate is thus D. The
Livre is thus L. The Sol is thus, and the Denier d.

Moneys in Lucca.
Their Moneys common is that of Florence Current, called Bolonini, the Crown of
Gold is 7 Livres, 10 Sol in Picoli as at Florence.

The Ducatoon is worth 7 Livres, and is called the Crown of Silver, but the
Exchanges are made by Ducatoons, Sols, Deniers, as more fully does appear in
the 283 Chapter of Exchanges practiced in this City, to which in that
particular I refer you.

Weights in Lucca.
They have in Lucca two weights, one of the Balance weight, whereby all Goods
are bought and sold, and the other whereby Merchants do pay the Customs,
wherein is about 12 per cent. difference. The Balance pound is 12 ounces, 100
l. whereof has made in Lins 72 l. The Customers pound is also 12 ounces, 100
l. thereof has rendered in Lions by trial 81 l.

The Balance 100 has made in Florence 97 l.

Measures in Lucca.
The Measure of Lucca is a Brace, which is 23 Inches of London, and two Braces
has made an Auln of Lions, and upon this 100 Braces have been made these
Observations, that it renders In London 50 Else. Antwerp 83 Frankford 104
Dantzick 69 Vienna 72 Lions 50 Aulns. Paris 47 Rouen 43 Lisbon 50 Vare. Sevil
67 Vare. Madera 51 Vare. Venetia 90 Braces. Florence 102 Braces. Millan 115
Braces. Genoua 240 Palms.

Accounts of Sale of Silks in Lucca.
Silks have been thus sold in Lucca.

Damasks were sold at 4 Ducates and 18 Sold the Pound.

Sattins were sold at 4 Ducates, and 14 Sold the Pound.

Rich Taffeta sold at 4 Ducates 16 Sols the Pound.

It is here to be noted, That in Lucca there is paid more for the colors than
for Blacks, therefore the Custom is to add for the colors that are in the
parcel to the Weight, reducing them all to one Weight and Price, as if they
were all Blacks: where also is to be observed, That Crimsons and Carnations pay
to Livres over and above the before mentioned, but being mixed with other
colors, and that either the Ground or the Flower (as in Damath) be of another
color, then they pay but the half of 10 Livres besides the abovementioned or
fourth in Weight.

Moreover for the most part of those Silks made here, they are generally
reduced to 7 Braces per l. either Sattins, Double-Taffataes, or Damasks, and if
they pass 7 Braces, they are held advantageous to the Buyer in the Measure; if
under 7 Braces, they are held the richer, and of less advantage to the Buyer;
the principal observations may be collected to lie in the richness of the
color, and the goodness of the Silk.

CHAP. CLXXVI. Of the Weights of Italy reduced to the Weight of London.
Weights of Italy reduced to London.
HAving thus run through many particular Cities of Trade in Italy, and therewith
noted the particular observations that have come into my Hands, appertaining to
the Trade of those places, I judge it expedient ere I leave it, to Collect
herein the Weights and Measures of these and other Cities, as I find them
observed by industrious Hands; and because they are there calculated to the
Stadard of sundry places one of another, I hold it fitting to reduce them to
the English, wherefore I will take the London 100 l. Subtle for the
denomination which I intended here to make use of, which I have noted to make
according to these Observations: The 100 l. of London has made in Rome 227 l.
Florence 121 of 12 Ounces. Bollonia 51 of 30 Ounces. Millan 137 of 12 Ounces
most used. Pavia 137 of 12 Ounces being 13 of the other. Cremona 58 of 28
Ounces for Flesh. Recanti 132 Ditto Gold-Thread 108 Verona 86 for Gold-thread
137 l. Bressia 177 for Venice-Gold 131 Naples 115 for Venice-Gold 129 Savoy 132
by small Weight 188 Carpi, Mirandola 141 l. incirca. Parma, Placentia Lucca,
Mantua Friuli, Carmia Aquilla, Crema Como, Piedmont Raviano 127 l. Fuensa
Modena Rimno Ravenna Ragusa Candia 123 l. for Gold-thread. Or else 81 Rot. the
100 is a Cantar.

Measures of Italy reduced to London.
The Weights thus reduced, I will also in the same method reduce the Measures of
Italy to the English-Yard, the 100 whereof is found to answer in these places
thus.

The 100 Yards of London are in Venetia Woollen 135 brac. Istria 135 Piran Silk
142 Florence Silk 163 For Woollen 155 Else. Rome 44 canes. Ditto for Woollen
140 bra. Lucca 160 Ragusa 160 Ferrara 142 Mantua 142 Ancona 142 Bolognia 142
Modena 142 Parato 142 Cesena 142 Carpi 142 Mirandola 142 Verona 139 Ditto Cloth
Gold 144 Ditto Cloth 115 Trevira 135 Bergamo 135 Urbino 135 Pesaro 137 Ditto
for Cloth 142 Calabria 44 canes. Candia 144 pich. Parma 145 br. Ditto for Cloth
121 Ravenna 155 Corfu 155 Genes 163 Ditto for Silk 384 pal. Woollen at 9 pal. 81
can. Linen at 10 pal. 38 Vicentia Woollen 131 bra. Ditto for Silk 107 Naples
145 canes. Ditto for Silk 44 Padua Cloth 135 bra. Ditto for Silk 109 Millan for
Linen 160 Ditto for Silk 188 Ravenna 149 Bressia 135 Croma 135 Recanti 135
Cremona 135 Lacaia 135 Palermo 45 canes. Puglia for Cloth 41 Ditto for Silks 44
Zara 149

These are such as I have collected, the truth whereof I must refer to the
better Experienced; for I am not ignorant, that some of these agree not with
the particular recited Chapters of the Trade of the said places, yet
notwithstanding, finding a reasonable ground of the said Observations by other
Judgments, I have willingly passed them here in the same manner, which I reser
to better trial.

CHAP. CLXXVII. Of the Trade in general of Italy.
The Trade in general of Italy observed
NOw having run through the principal places of Traffic in Italy, in the
particular, let us note a word or two in the general, concerning not only the
Traders, but also Navigatioa, which is seen in many places to be a means
whereby Trade it self is preserved and performed.

In Italy then not only the Gentlemen, but even the Princes entitled do profess
themselves to be Merchants, without any indignity to their quality or place,
which many of our Country Gentiles and Nobles (with leave may I speak it)
foolishly disdain, and only permit retailing of Goods to Men of the inferior
sort, and Shop keepers, but retain yet the gross ever in their own and Servants
hands, and by this course they are found not only to keep the Patrimonies
descended to them by their Ancestors, but also are daily found to increase the
same, while our Gentlemen prodigal in Expense, and ashamed to make honest Gain,
and exercise an honest Calling, oftentimes not only destroy their Families, but
ruin themselves, and not seldom their Posterities. Among the Merchants of Italy
then, the Venetians are the chief, who in times past enjoined every Ship thence
departing in Trade to carry one of their Gentlemen or Clarissimo, who was
allowed him his Diet and Passage; but this wisdom of their Ancestors is now
laid aside, and the charges thereof which is still collected, is in every such
Vessel begged by some poor Clarissimo or other, so that their Traffic and
Navigation is thereby much decayed, and the Mariners and most expert of their
Seamen employed in their shipping are for the most part Grecians.

The Florentine is the next, the Duke whereof is here to be remembered, who is
the most eminent Merchant, and here not seldom imploys his own and others Ships
for Corn, Salt, or other necessary Provisions for his Dukedom and his own
store, thereby encouraging his Subjects to Trade and adventure abroad: two
principal things are observed which do much enrich the Merchants of Italy, the
first is their frequent Exchanging, wherein they are the best versed in the
World, the other is the Trade of their Silks, wrought by the industry of the
Silkworm, which wrought into fabrics are thence dispersed throughout Europe,
and some parts of Asia, but these are fetched from them by others, and not
Exported by themselves, partly by the over great affection that they have to
their native Homes, and the little defire they have to Travel abroad, but
principally for want of good Ships of burden, for excepting some few Vessels
in Venetia, Naples, and Legorn, all the Merchants of Italy cannot show a Ship
of 100 Tuns.

Naples is a large and rich Country, and Genoa rich, though of little extent,
yet the great number of Nobility in the former, and the great Usury practiced
in the latter, has reduced them to a neglect of all Trade, except what the
bosom of their Country does naturally vend, that they Traffic with; and these
being in themselves rich, induce other Nations to bring them those few things
they want; for though Italy as it now stands, acknowledges many Sovereigns,
yet one Country supplying another, stands in need of little from Foreigners, so
that it may be said, while they have Peace they have Plenty; some Provisions of
Fish, Corn, and Cloth, England does furnish them, and in return have only their
Silk Fabrics, Oils, and some few other Commodities, so that putting aside the
Trade driven thither by the English, as being of greatest consequence, the
Trade of the Spaniard, French, or Dutch, is but small, and but of little moment
amongst them; which in particular may be thus surveyed; for Venice I have given
you the Anatomy of the Trade thereof, now in the wane, and almost at the last
breath, save where it is preserved by their new devised Edicts, and the natural
growing Currants, and by their small Trade to Constantinople, Cairo, and Aleppo
by Sea, and to Austria, Dalmatia, Istria, Italy, and into the upper Germany by
Land: The next part of this Trade of Italy is challenged by Naples, which in it
self affords rich Silks, Corn, Oil, and Wines, with which they seem to be
contented, for they covet not much to Traffic among themselves, nor yet with
others further than for their meat, and drink, and clothing, which to the
poorer sort is most wanting.

The Papacy. Her share in the Trade of Italy is not worth the nomination, no
more is Mantua, Urbin, and those other petty Signiories. The Tuscans rightly
demand a part, and it shall be granted them, both in their Florentine Fabrics,
and in their privileged Town of Legorn, but I may fear it will not last long,
for the Dukes growing both rich and covetous, and daily encroaching upon those
Liberties, at first liberally given to Strangers Merchants in Legorn, and who
every day are seen to lay some new petty Duties upon the Goods there: as for
Genoa, were they as truly wise for the good of their Commonwealth as they are
found to be to themselves, they are of ability to do better, and to have that
Trade their Neighbors now deprive them of. Milan likewise struggles for
interest herein; and shall have it by my consent, but it shall be only in their
Iron works, which the Cantons serve themselves with, and in their Fabrics of
Silk, which Lions does help them to vend. Lucca may be offended in my silence,
but this Cities Peace may further that Trade, which otherwise her own or her
Neighbors Wars would utterly ruin, you may see then of how many parts and
members this rich and pleasant Italy is composed, and how the Trade thereof
stands at this instant; it enjoys a general peaceable and quiet inland
Traffic, consisting for the most part more of branches bred within her own
Bowels, than of foreign helps; their natural growing Corn, Silk, Grain, and Oil,
induce them thereto, and the benefit practiced by Exchangers induce the rich to
use that Trade only and no other, wherein I will for this time leave them, and
in the next place turn my Head and Hand to the Surveying of the Netherlands.

CHAP. CLXXVIII. Of Flanders, and the Netherlands, or the Seventeen Provinces,
and their Cities.
The Seventeen Provinces and the Cities thereof
I Will here for good Method sake in the first place take a view of the 17
Provinces, which are found this Day to contain 4 Dukedoms, 1. Limburg, 2.
Luxenburg, 3. Gelderland, 4. Brabant; then 1. Marquisate, which is of the Holy
Empire; next 7 Earldoms, which are 1. Flanders, 2. Artois, 3. Heinault, 4,
Nemurs, 5. Zutphen, 6. Holland, 7. Zeland; and lastly 5 Baronies, 1.
Westfriezland, 2. Utrecht, 3. Overysel, 4. Machlin, and 5. Groaning, of all
which briefly.

Limburg.
In the Duchy of Limburg, Liege.
which I account the first Province, is Liege or Luyck as the principal City,
whose Trade I must refer to the better experienced in these Countries, and the
like for the City of Limburg seated on the River Weser.

Luxenburg.
In the Duchy of Luxenburg, the chief City being Luxenburg, seated on the River
of Elze, in this Country is the famous Waters of Spaw, where many sick Men are
found to drive a great healthful but costly Traffic: Sedan.
here is also Sedan, the Seat of the Duke of Bulloin, but of small Commerce.

Gelderland.
In the Duchy of Gelderland Nimeguen.
the chief City is Nimeguen, seated on the Branch of the Rhine, called the
Whale, and does much abound in Cattle, as affording fit Pasturage thereto.

Brabant.
In the Duchy of Brabant, I find noted many principal Cities, Lovain.
as first Lovain, Bruxels.
the second Bruxels, the third is Bergen ap Zome, Mastricht.
the fourth Mastricht, Breda.
the fifth Breda, in all which is found by the industry of the Inhabitants a
reasonable Traffic; but being ignorant in many necessary particulars, I will
also refer it to the more learned and better experienced,

Marquisate Antwerp.
In the Marquisate is found Antwerp, by which all the former Cities are governed
in Trade, which by reason of the greatness of the Traffic in times past, was
therein accounted the first and principal of the known World, wherein I shall
observe according to my former method, these necessary particulars of Traffic
following.

CHAP. CLXXIX. Of Antwerp, and the Trade thereof.
Antwerp, and the Trade thereof.
ANtwerp is accounted the principal City of Trade that is subject to the
Archduke in all these parts, and having had the Prerogative above all others
in times past; neither yet to this Day, being so decayed, but that in many
particulars it gives Rule to all, or the most of the neighboring Cities round
about, which considered, to abbreviate my task, I think it will not be improper
that I comprehend the Trade of all those Provinces that are under the
Government in this Circuit to this particular City.

Antwerp then being seated upon the River of Scheld, which by eight Channels
cut, runs through this City, is conceived to be eight Miles in compass; some
of these Channels being able to hold 100 great Ships, which made the same more
commodious for the Transport and Carriage of Wares to any part thereof. The
former and ancient Trade of this City was great and eminent, and occasioned, as
some have observed, by three means, and had its decays also by three occasions.
First, by reason of two free Marts holden yearly, continuing five and forty
days, during which time, no Man either in his Person or in his Goods could be
Arrested or molested for either Debt or otherwise. Secondly, by reason that the
King of Portugal having discovered the East Indies in Anno 1500, and diverted
the course of Trade driven by the Venetians from Alexandria, and the Red Sea to
his Port of Lisbon, kept here his Factors, and sent hither those Indian
Commodities to seek their vent, and this first drew the English
Merchant-Adventurers from Bruges hither to reside. The third was the Wars that
fell between the French and Charles the Fifth, which brought hither many
Gentlemen from Villages and petty Towns for safety sake here to reside and
build. Now as the causes of her rising have been noted to be three, so the
causes of the loss of that Trade may be reduced also to three.

First, the Wars here, and in general in these Provinces between the Spaniards
and the Dutch Nation, wherein this City suffered pillaging, and endured the
command of new Laws.

Secondly, the abrogation of part of those Privileges that were granted here to
the English Merchant-Adventurers and others, that the new and great Customs
imposed upon their Goods and Merchandise.

Thirdly, the Navigation of the English and Dutch to the East Indies, whereby
the Portugal Factors decreasing thereby, and the City of London in England, and
Amsterdam in Holland increasing thereby, were also sharers in the India Trade
and Commodities, leaving by this means this City bare, and to subsist upon the
Traffic of her own Inhabitants, in that nature as now the same is found to be.

Accounts in Antwerp.
Their Accounts are here kept by Livers, Sol and Deniers, which they term
Pounds, Shillings and Pence of grosses, 12 grosses making a Sol, and 20 Sol a
Liver or Pound Flemish, which may be accounted 12 Shillings Sterling, or by
their computation 240 grosses, by which Species they do make their Exchanges
with all other Cities.

Coins in Antwerp.
The Current Moneys here, and in general, through all the Arch-Duke's Countries
are, besides the Spanish and Imperial, these current are Doits, four makes a
Stiver, and ten Stivers a Shillings Sterling, two Blanks makes a Stiver and
half.

Stivers 6 makes a Shilling Flemish.

Stivers 28 makes a Guilder, which is three Shillings four Pence Flemish.

Shillings 20 makes a Pound, which is 6 Guilders.

Pounds 100 Flemish makes 60 Pound English, so that 20 Stivers is or may be
computed for two Shillings Sterling, and one Pound Flemish for 12 Shillings
Sterling, and then 20 Shillings Sterling is 33 Shillings 4 Pence Flemish.

Weights in Antwerp.
The Weight of this Country is the Pound of 16 Ounces, and the 100 l. of that
Pound which is their Quintar, which rendereth in London 104 l. The conceived
original of our Tret in London.
and thereupon it comes as some imagine that upon Spices the tret of 4 l. upon
104 l. was allowed here to the Buyer; for the English being supplied hence in
those days with their Spices, found the 100 l. there to give here in the City
of London 104 l. and made that allowance here willingly, as desiring the 100 l.
there, would yield them a neat 100 l. here, and take the same by the Factory
without further allowance or garble, which was not then in use.

Many observations have been made upon the weight and measure of this City,
which being reduced into a general Table by Mr. Malines, and the same being
there accorded with all the principal Cities in the World, I will refer you
thereunto for larger satisfaction, and content my self according to my method
to insert the same as I find it, with some other particular places, because I
have found some errors in the said Concordance.

Weights of Antwerp compared with that of other places.
The Weights then in use in Antwerp, being the 160 l. neat, have been observed
to have rendered thus, In London 104 l. Marselia 115. Venice sotile 155 Ditto
gross 97 Sicilia 68 Lisbon 84 Florence 132 Lions 110 Sevil 101 Dantzick 120
Ormus 108 Rot. Aleppo common 228 R. Ditto silk weight 240 R. Tripoly Soria 272
R. Tripoly Barbaria 97 R. Baruti 219 R. Alexandria Zeroi 519 R. Alexandria
Forsia 1165 R. Constantinople 92 R. Rhodes 201 R. Acria 181 R. Babylon 156 R.

And what other inlargements are here wanting, I willingly omit, and refer the
same to Lex Mercatoria.

Measures of Antwerp, compared with those of other Countries.
Now in the same manner it will be needful I do calculate the Measures of
Antwerp, which is the Ell, which also by observation has made in these places.

Acria 115 pico. Aleppo 108 pico. Argier 136 covad. Alexandria 124 pico.
Amsterdam 101 else. Barcelona 43 canes. Bruges 98 else. Candia 108 pico.
Castile 78 vares. Constantinople 113 pico. Corfu 116 braces. Damasco 111 pico.
Dantzick 122 else. Florence Cloth 116 else. Ditto for Silk 102 braces. Genoa
122 braces. Hamburgh 122 else. Holland 103 else. Lisbon long 63 vares. London
for Linen 60 else. Ditto for Woollen 75 yards. Ditto for Frises 59 goads. Lucca
120 braces. Millan for Silk 141 braces. Naples for Silk 33 can. Paris 59 aulns.
Rouen 58 aulns. Sevil 83 vares. Venice for Woollen 101 braces. Ditto for Silk
108 Valentia 73 canes. Urbin 101 braces.

Note that this is for the common Measure of Antwerp, besides which they use
another El for Silk, and these Else make of that but 98 Else. The other Measure
of sundry Commodities here in use are these.

Of Beer.
Beer is sold in Antwerp by the Barrel, which is accounted throughout Flanders
and Brabant to be 54 Stoops, the 81 whereof is in Dantzick a Fat, and contains
there 180 Stoops; but 50 Stoops of Antwerp make the Barrel of Lubeck, and the
English Gallon of Beer is 2 Stoops of Flanders, and 1 Stoops of Amsterdam.

Of Corn.
Corn is here sold by a Measure called the Vertule, and 37 Vertules is a Last
of Corn in Ansterdam, and 10 Quarters in London; vide there further.

Of Wine.
Wine is sold by the Ame, the Stoop and the But, and is found thus to accord
together; 1 A^ is 50 Stoops, and one Stoop is six Pound, and a But is 152
Stoops; so that by this Rule 6 Ame which is 300 Stoops, or 1800 l. is in London
252 Gallons, so that the Ame is by this Calculation found to be 42 Gallons, and
the Stoop is about 3 quarters of London Wine-measure, or as some account it
about 7 Pints; vide London for more certainty.

Exchanges of Antwerp.
The Exchanges practiced in this place are great, and for very great sums of
Money, especially when as the King of Spain has any general disbursements in
this Country, by reason of his continual Armies here in Action, maintained
against the Dutch, the particulars whereof I have inserted in the end of this
Tract, in the Chapter 289 and in the Chapter 435, and some others following,
where I have at large declared the Practice and Use among the Machants of that
place, in the Calculation thereof, whereto I refer the inquisitive.

As for the general present Trade of this Country, I shall comprise it with the
Trade of the Netherlands, in the 181 Chapter following.

The first Earldom accounted one of the Seventeen Provinces is Flanders, so
called peradventure, a flando, as lying open to the Winds, divided into
Imperialem Gallicam, and T^t^nicam.

Gaunt.
The chief City of Trade therein is first Gaunt, whose Wall is seven Miles in
Compass, the two Rivers of Scheld and Ley running through the same; and makes
in it 26 Islands, which are joined together by an hundred Bridges, and had not
her often Seditions ruinated her Beauties, she might have been Queen of all the
Cities of Europe; and here John Duke of Lancaster was born, commonly in
Histories called John of Gaunt.

Bruges.
The second City is Bruges, once the most famous Mart-Town of Europe, where
sundry Nations for many years kept both their Magazines and Factors, for the
sale and providing of all the principal Commodities of the World, now much
decayed of its former Splendor by reason of the removal of the English
Merchant Adventurers, and of other Nations to Antwerp, about the year 1503. It
is seated about three Leagues from the Sea upon a fair and deep artificial
Channel, filled with the Waters of all the neighboring and adjoining Streams
and Fountains, which Channels in this Country are very frequent by reason of
the level of the ground in general, which does both further the Traffic of the
Cities, and enricheth the Inhabitants.

There is in this Country accounted four principal Seaports, which gives
entrance by Sea into this part of Flanders.

Dunkirk.
The first is Dunkirk, the Inhabitants whereof do in times of War infest the
Seas by the name of Freebooters, and because most of their Wars are with the
Dutch, whom they account Heretics, the Jesuits and other the Romish religious
rabblement of this place, join with these Pirates, and bestow thus the Charity
of the ignorant Secular toward the Ruin and Rapine of their fellow Countrymen
and Christians, an evident testimony of the goodness and zeal of their devout
Orders. Possessed by the English, and fortified Anno 1657 and 58. Commanded by
Lockhart, who published his Declaration as follows: Old Jacobus's at 15
Guilders. The new ones or Carolus's 14 Guilders. English Shillings 13 Stivers
or Pence. half Crowns 32 Stivers and 1 half. Gold Spanish Pistols 11 Guilders.
Gold Rials 8 Guilders. Gold Sovereigns 18 Guilders. Gold double Ducates 12
Guilders. Gold French Crowns 5 Guilders 10 Stivers or Pence. Gold Hungary
Ducates 6 Guilders. Gold Albertine 7 Guilders 10 Stivers. Gold Reinis-Guilders
3 Guilders 15 Stivers. Gold Riders of Zealand 7 Guilders 10 Stivers. The double
ones and half accordingly. Gold Flemish Crowns 4 Guilders 16 Stivers. Italian
Pistols 9 Guilders 12 Stivers. Gold Crown of Liege 3 Guilders 10 Stivers.
Silver Ducatoons 3 Guilders 15 Stivers. Flemish or sealed Pattacoons 3
Guilders. Silver Lewis's 3 Guilders. Holland Rix-Dollars 3 Guilders. The half,
etc. accordingly. Cardicues of weight 1 Guilder. French Testoons of weight 19
Stivers. French Silver Franks or Livres of weight 1 Guilder, 7 Stivers. The
half and quarter accordingly. Flemish Shillings 7 Stivers and, the Shilling
accordingly. Zealand Shillings 7 Stivers. Flemish Stooters 2 Stivers and.
Flemish ten Stuyvers 12 Stivers. Flemish 5 Stuyvers 6 Stivers. Flemish Stivers
and marked pieces at 1 Stiver, or 4 Farthings.


As also all Flemish and French Farthings are hereby declared to be good; but
those of Liege, and all others for Bullion, provided that no Man be obliged to
take more of the said. Flemish and French Farthings, than after the proportion
of five Pence in ten Shillings, or six Guilders.

And whosoever shall presume either to pay out, or receive the forementioned
pieces of Moneys at higher rates than those here expressed, shall forfeit the
said pieces of Moneys, and four times the value thereof.

Scluse.
The second is Scluse, seated at the Mouth of the Channel of Bruges, commanding
a fair Haven capable of 500 Sail of good Ships, and is now subject to the
States, and was taken from the Archduke Anno Dom. 1604. with whose welfare it
cannot stand to suffer the King of Spain to enjoy any safe and large Harbor in
those Seas, or adjoining Coasts.

Nieuport.
The third Port is Nieuport, famoused in these our days by the great Battle
fought near it Anno Dom. 1600. between the Archduke Albertus and the States,
the Victory being acknowledged to be gotten next under God, by the Valor and
Courage of the English and their valiant Commanders.

Ostend.
The fourth Seaport of this Country is Ostend, which held out a Siege against
the Archduke of three Years and three Months, which has made it for ever
famous to Posterity.

Lisle.
In this Country of Flanders, properly belonging to the French, and whose
Language is therein still used, is found the Cities of Lisle, accounted the
third Town of Traffic in all the Netherlands, and to the Inhabitants thereof,
some infer the first Invention of laying of Colors with Oil, of making of
Worsted-Says, and many other Stuffs, which to this day are seen to come thence.

Next is Doway an University.

Tournay.
Then Tournay, which was surprised and taken by our Henry VIII. Anno Dom. 1513.
to whom the Citizens paid 100000 Crowns for their Ransom, and it was restored
afterward to the French for the same 600000 Crowns, and from him finally taken
by Charles V.

Besides these, there are accounted in Flanders 35 Towns, and 1178 Villages of
lesse^ note, which I willingly pass over briefly, as intending to comprehend
the Trade thereof in a Chapter by it self.

Artois.
The second Earld om is Artois, containing twelve Towns of consequence, and 750
Villages, the chief whereof is,

The Town of Arras, whence our Tapestry and Cloths of Arras have had their
Invention and first Original.

S. Paul.
Then Saint Paul, the Earl thereof, Lewis of Luxenburg, played so often fast and
loose with Lewis XI. of France, with Edward IV. of England, and with Charles of
Burgundy, that he kept them for many Years at continual strife, which Duke
Charles at length requited with the loss of his Head and Earldom.

Heinault.
The next Earldom is Heinault, comprehending 950 Villages, and 24 Towns of Note.

Cambray.
The most eminent being Cambray, taken by the Spaniards from the French by the
Earl of Fuentes, Anno 1595. accounted a Free Town. Then Mons.

Beauvais.
The next is Beauvais, at a Pillar whereof begin all the ways leading into
France, made all of paved Stone by Brunhault the French Queen.

Namure.
The next Earldom is Namure containing 180 Villages, and but 4 Towns of Note.

Namure is the Principal: this Country has for Merchandise great store of
Grain of all sorts, and is enriched with Mines of Jasper, and all sorts of
Marble, and so abundant in Iron that it is incredible, making the Inhabitants
thereby both Wealthy and Laborious, and it is found moreover to produce a Coal
wonderful in Nature, as kindled by Water, and quenched by Oil.

Zutphen.
Zutphen is the next Earldom, being only a Town seated on the River Issel, of
good strength, taken from the Spaniard, Anno Dom. 1590. at the Siege whereof
was slain that Honorable Knight, Sir Philip Sidney, of whom was said, Digna
legi scribis, facis and dignissima scribi:
Scripta probant doctum te tua, facta probum.
Thou writ'st things worthy reading, and did do
Things that are even most worthy writing too:
Thy Works thy learning praise,
Thy Deeds thy goodness raise.


Holland.
The next Earldom is Holland, in Circuit 180 Miles, no part of which is distant
from the Seas three Hours Journey, and comprehends 400 Villages, and 23 Towns.

Dort.
The chief whereof is Dort, where Anno 1618. was held a National Synod against
the Arminians.

Harlem.
Secondly, Harlem, where Printing was invented.

Thirdly, Leyden, an University consisting of 41 Islands, to which there is
passage, partly by Boats, but principally by 40 wooden Bridges, and by 110 of
Stone, the rarity whereof, being the first City of consequence I noted in these
parts Anno 1625. I could not choose then but admire; and here in this Town is a
Castle said to be built by Hengist the Saxon at his return out of England, if
their Stories may be credited.

Delph.
The next Town is Delph, a place of Residence for the Merchant-Adventurers of
England, where I was, Anno 1625, admitted into that Society, whose Welfare I am
bound to desire, and whose Prosperity I wish may still increase: and tho these
Citizens have since upon some discontent forced them to remove to Roterdam; yet
considering the Town is composed altogether of Brewers, and that Men so
qualified are apt to forget themselves, it may be imagined they have since
slept upon it, and would peradventure regain their Companies at a greater
Charge than can by any but by their Wisdoms be imagined.

Alkmer.
The next is Alkmer, famous for the Defeat which the Duke d'Alva received before
it, to his great Loss of Reputation, and to this City's Honor.

Roterdam.
The next is Roterdam, famous for the Birth of Erasmus, and noted for Lovers of
the English Traffck, in giving lately free and worthy Privileges to the
Merchant-Adventurers of England, who from Delph lately removed hither to
reside, to the future Prejudice of those Brewers.

Amsterdam.
Lastly, Amsterdam has now the Honor of all these Countries for matter of
Commerce and Traffic; it has raised it self to that height of Trade by the
Industry, Policy and Wealth of the Inhabitants, that 1000 Sail of Ships have
been seen at one Tide to go in and out, and as one of their own has it, Quod
Tagus atque Hemus vehit and Pactolus, in unum
Vere, hunc congestum, dixeris esse locum.
What Tagus, Hemus and Pactolus bear,
You would conjecture to be heaped up here.


Now for the Manner and Matter of their Traffic, I shall note the same, such
as I have observed it at my Residency there, in 1625, abovementioned.

CHAP. CLXIII. Of Amsterdam, and the Trade thereof.
Amsterdam and the Trade thereof.
AMsterdam is now, by the late Addition of the New to the Old, a fair City,
strong and beautiful, the River Tay flowing like a large and calm Sea on the
North-side thereof, and the River Amster, of which and the Word Dam this City
is named, running from the South through three Lakes enters this City, and
passing through it, falls into the River Tay on the North-side.

This Town does consist of 5 principal Streets, through which the Water does
run, and are divided therewith, in which Ships, Barges and Boats of all kinds
are found both to come and go continually either to lade or unlade, which is
not only beneficial to the Inhabitants, but also commodious and beautiful.

The Trade of this City is much enlarged since the Passage of Antwerp was
stopped; and the Trade of the Inhabitants to the East and West Indies, occasioned
by their Industry, their Love to Navigation, and not the least by a great
Plenty of Moneys, which they deliver out at easy rates at Interest, as wanting
Land or other means to put out the same to better Benefit, nothing being loft
them but Commerce and Navigation to employ the same; and of late days England
and other neighboring Countries are found to have their Estate going at
Interest, according to the Custom of the place, which is 8 per cent. whereas in
their own Countries 4 and 5 per cent. is as much as the same will yield them.

But for the Coins, Weights and Measures, as I observed them I shall here
insert, and refer the rest to the better experienced.

Accounts in Amsterdam.
They keep their Accounts as in Antwerp, by which all these Parts were regulated
in former times for what concerned Traffic.

Moneys of Amsterdam and all the Netherlands.
Their Moneys have also a Correspondency with Antwerp Coins, but inhansed or
debased as they see occasion, by reason of their great yearly Disbursments, and
ordinarily the same is found to be as in the Account of Antwerp; so as that
their Livre or Pound, which is twenty shillings Flemish, may be accounted
twelve shillings sterling.

Florins 6 make that Pound of 20 stivers per Florin.

Stivers 120 make a Pound of Gross.

6 Stivers a Flemish shilling.

Stivers 5 are accounted as much as 6 d. sterling, or 5 Sold Turnois.

Stiver 1 is a Sold Turnois.

A Gross is 6 Deniers Turnois.

Carolus gulden is 20 stivers, 2 shillings sterling, or 20 sols Turnois.

Besides these, as the Current Moneys of the Country, All Coins of Europe do
pass here currently for their Value, and are received and paid in Payments for
Merchandise accordingly.

Weights of Amsterdam.
Their Weight is the Pound, 100 whereof makes their Quintal, which 100 or
Quintal is held in London to be incirca 111 l. English; yet some allege that
the same truly calculated will not produce above 108 l. subtle, and for the
Concordancy see further.

Measures in Amsterdam.
Their Measure is the Ell, which reduced to Yards English, is found to be 134
Else for 100 Yards of London, and the 100 Else of London are here 167 Else; so
that the 100 El^ here, makes in London about 74 Yards, or 60 Else incirca, and
40 Flemish Else make in England 24 Else.

Exchanges in Amsterdam.
In the Exchanges this place is governed by Antwerp, rising and falling
according to their present Occasions and the Value Current of their Moneys,
which is often inhansed and debased, it being very frequently observed in this
City, and the rest subject to the Netherlands or to the United Provinces, that
when they have occasion of great Receipts, they are decryed in value, and
raised again where they have occasions by their Wars or otherwise, of great
Disbursements, according to which diversity of needful Occasions, the Exchange
of the place is observed to alter, therefore therein cannot be prescribed any
direct Rules, tho for the most part it is found by common Difference to be
about 3 per cent. worse than the Exchanges practiced in Antwerp.

Weights of Amsterdam with other Cities.
Now for the 100 l. weight here in use, I find the same thus, by observation of
some Friends, to answer and agree with these Places, as In Antwerp 107 l.
Conixburgh 132 Constantinople 93 Rot. Copenhagen 102 l. Dantzick 126 Flanders
in general 117 Florence 133 Hamburgh 102 London 110 Lions ordinary 118 Mantua
155 Marselia 119 Melvin 131 Millan of 12 ounces 151 Stockholm 127 Venice subtle
167 Venice gross 103 Vienna 90 Naples 128 Noremberg 99 Paris 98 Portugal 113
Prague 93 Ragusa 140 Revel 126 Rouen by Viconte 97 Rochel small 118 Rome 139
Santomer 117 Saragosa 119 Sevil small weight 113 Sicilia 1^ ounces 161
Stralsont 98 Toulouse 118 Verona 95 Urbin 144

And thus much shall serve for the Concordancy of the Weights here used.

Measures of Amsterdam with other Cities.
The Measure of Length here in use is an Ell, which thus is found to make with
other places, I say the 100 Else do yield In Aleppo 106 Pico. Argier 135 Covad.
Alexandria 122 Pico. Antwerp 99 Else. Conixburg 123 Constantinople 111 Pico.
Florence for Silk 101 Brac. Genoua 120 Brace. Granado 82 Vares. Hamburgh 121
Else. Lisbon short 82 Vares. Rome 33 Canes. Valentia 72 Can. London 59 Else.
Ditto Woollen 73 Yards. Lions Linen 59 Auln^. Marselia Woollen 33 Can.
Middleburgh 99 Else. Millan Linen 118 Bra. Noremberg 118 Else. Paris 58 Auln^.
Prague Cloth 109 Else. Ragusa 118 Bra. Rouen 57 Aulns. Sevil 82 Vares.
Stockholm 123 Else.

Besides these Measures of Length, the Concave Measures are in use.

Corn is here sold by the Last, which contains 24 small Barrels, each Barrel 1
Muydens, or each Muyden contains 1 (...) Sacks, each Sack being three
Archetelings, which is 3 ^1/29 Shepels; so that the Last of Corn contains 108
Shepels, and this last is observed to make In Antwerp 37 Vertules Bourdeaux 38
Boiseaux. Bruges 17 Hoots. Cyprus 40 Medinos. Emden 55 Werps. Hamburgh 83
Shepels. Lisbon 225 Alquiers. London 10 Quarters. Pulia 36 Timans. Rhegium 42
Loops. Rouen 40 Mines. Rochel 128 Boiseax. Roterdam 87 Archetelings. Sevil 54
Henegas. Sicilia 38 Medinos. Venice 32 Stares. Sweden 23 Measures. Copenhagen
23 Barrels.

For the Measures of Wine, Oil, Beer, and other Liquid Commodities, I refer you
to Malines and others better experienced therein, and proceed forward to the
Description of the Remainder of the United Provinces.

Zealand.
Zealand is the next and last Earldom of the seventeen Provinces, consisting of
seven Islands, the remainder of 15 which the Seas are said to have devoured.

The chiefest Cities of the seven are these,

Middleburgh.
First Middleburgh, which from nothing grew great by the residence of the
English Merchant-Adventurers, and now, by their removal hence, is almost come
to nothing again; by this (...) and Stoad, and many other places, may easily be
discerned the Benefit that a Trade brings to (...) City or Country; therefore
my Prayers shall ever be, That London may never lose that great R^utation it
has gained by Commerce throughout the World.

Flushing.
The next, City is Flushing, famous in that it was the first that the
Low Country Men got from the Spaniard, and being cautionary to the English, Sir
Philip Sidney was the first Governor thereof.

Then Brill, Tergouse, Brever-haven, to all which my Curiosity led me in 1625.
in that my Northern Voyage.

West-Friesland.
West-Friesland is the first Barony, and accounted one of the seventeen
Provinces, wherein is found for principal Towns Lewardin.

Next Harlingham, then Zeutsen, and some other Seaports.

Vtrecht.
Utrecht is the next Barony, containing therein the Towns of Rhenen, Wicket,
Amsford, Montford, and Utrecht, the principal City, and a pleasant Bishopric;
it is accounted the most excellent Seat in all these Countries, whereto are
found many Ferries for Passages; for it is said, that a Man may easily go hence
in one day to any of 59 walled Towns equally distant from this City, or to any
of 26 Towns to dinner, and return again at night to bed, which is both strange
and true.

Overissel.
Overissel is the next, from whence come our Linens bearing this Name; the
chief (...) are Swall, Campen and Daventer.

Mailin.
Mailin is the next, famous in her famous Nunnery, where are sometimes found
1600 Nuns, who may, at their Pleasure, leave the Cloister and marry, as indeed
it is fittest for them.

Groining.
The last Province is Groining, The chief Towns being those of Old Haven and
Keykirk, and these be all the principal Cities of Traffic in the said
seventeen Provinces.

Now for the abbreviating of my Work, I have comprised in short the Weight,
Measures and Trade of this populous and rich Country thus according to my
intended Method.

Weights in general of the Netherlands reduced to the 100 l. in London.
The particular Weights and Measures of the chief Cities of these seventeen
Provinces for brevity sake I have thought good hereby themselves to reduce to
the Weight and Measure of London.

And first for the 100 l. Averdupois of England what it produces in these
Cities.

In Bruges 98 l. Gaunt 104 Audmarte 106 Amsterdam- 90 Ypres 104 Dixmude 104
Lisle or Lile 106 Flanders in general 106 Abbevil 90 Alder 87 Lovain 96 Malmes
95 Halste 104 Popperin 104 Doway 106 Holland 95 Tournay 104 St. Maur 106
Guelderland 95 Zeland 95 Walsond 95 Arschet 96 Barow ap Some 94 Brussels 96
Corterick 106 Hartegen bosh 96

Measures in general of the Netherlands reduced to the 100 yards of London.
The Reduction of their Measures to the English 100 Yards is thus found to
accord therewith, as the 100 Yards in London make. In Bruges 126 Else. Dunkirk
135 Gaunt 130 Honsooten 135 Audemarte 130 Ysingham 130 Bolduc 135 Damme 130
Brussels 135 Ypres 130 Lovain 135 Sluse 130 Liege 135 Mastricht 139 Covin 93
Lisle or Lile 125 Cambray 125 Amsterdam 134 Doway 125 Harlem 125 Henalt 126
Guelderland 139 Overissel 139 Middleburg 135 Flushing 138 Vere 125 Romerswald
132 Artois in general 131 Tourney 144 Holland in general 138

CHAP. CLXXXI. Of the Trade in general of Flanders, and of the Netherlands.
Of the Trade in general of the Netherlanders and Flanders.
NOW let us consider the general Trade and Navigation of Flanders, I mean first
that part thereof as is subject to the States, and called the Netherlands, and
then the Trade of Flanders, as at this day it is observed and found in
obedience to the Archduke. First then, these Netherlanders, or Dutchmen, are of
late years become notable Mariners, and have undertaken and fortunately
achieved many dangerous and long Navigations; every particular City having
both many and great Ships belonging thereunto: And in some places, where Houses
are dear and scarce, I have seen whole Families live in Lighters, and such
Vessels, wherein they eat, drink, and sleep, and have their continual
Habitation, their Children, like Water-Rats, seen continually dabling in the
Water, of which Element, for the most part, their Country is subsistent. They
are accounted better for Northern Designs and Voyages, by reason of their
Country's cold situation, than for Southern; yet their late Trade to the East
and West Indies, and their good Successes there, demonstrate they can also
accommodate themselves to the hotter Climates.

Their Trade is generally throughout the World, in imitation of their
Neighbors, the English, whose steps for many Years they have followed; only in
Turkey they have but small Traffic, by reason their Country wants those
Commodities that are fit and proper for that Empire, such as Cloths, Lead, Tin,
the main Staple of the English Trade thither.

As for their Judgment in Traffic it is singular, by reason their want of many
Necessaries both for Back and Belly, enforces them to pry nearer into Commerce
than other Nations that (...) in a more fruitful and fertile Country: and the
easy Rates that Money is to be found at interest, adds some help to their
Inventions. They were few Years past accounted of a heavy and duller temper;
but the Italians, who in foreseeing Wisdom and Providence, would be throughout
the World accounted for Promethei, were by them made Epimethei, as wise after
the deed, too late repenting. For when they came first to settle their Trade in
Flanders, they took young Youths of that Nation to be their Cashters, and to
copy their Letters, whereby they came to learn the Secrets of their Trade, and
afterward, to the Italians great Prejudice, exercised it themselves, and not
contented therewith, as it were thus depriving them of the Trade of Flanders,
but they followed them into Italy, and there living as sparingly as they, and
dispersing themselves into sundry Provinces and principal Towns, have given a
great blow to their great Traffic in Italy; and that which adds much to their
Knowledge and Gain, is, that they covet still to buy all Commodities at the
Wellhead (as Merchants say) and where that Commodity has its first original,
and where the same is cheapest, and then transport them not so much to their
own homes as elsewhere, where the same is dearest, and not shaming to retail
any Commodity by small Parts and Parcels, which both English Merchants and
Italians disdain to do in any Country whatsoever; by which means they are come
now to that height, that tho by nature they want all things, yet by Industry
and Merchandising, they not only supply their own Defects, but also many of
their Neighbors Wants and Necessities, as I could instance in sundry
particulars. Neither must I omit one Custom here used, and not found, I think,
elsewhere in the World, that whilst the Husband sports idly at home, their
Women are oft-times seen to be the Merchants, and, in some Provinces here, sail
from City to City, to compass their Affairs abroad, as they for the most part
are found to manage it at home: for in their Shops they sell all, and take
account of all; and it is no reproach to the Men to be never enquired after in
these Businesses of Trade, who take Moneys of their Wives for daily Expense,
and gladly so pass their time over in Idleness. Now for as much as Bruges has
been the City where in time past this great Traffic was cohabitant, it will
not be amiss a little to look back upon it and those Times, and see the Glory
of it in its Luster then, and the Decay thereof in its Ruin now.

The ancient Staple of Bruges.
It is recorded by Jabobus Marchantius, That Lud^vicus Crossus, Anno 1323,
granted a Staple to Bruges, which his Son Malanus confirmed: which Staple was a
Privilege of staying all Foreign Commodities in the place, except the Seller and
Bringer chose rather to return whence they caine. The original of Burses, of
places of meeting for Merchants, which in England is now termed the Exchange.
This City has an eminent Market place, with a public House for the meeting of
all Merchants at Noon and Evening; which House was called the Burse, of the
Houses of the ^tinct Family Bursa, bearing three Purses for their Arms,
engraven upon their Houses, from whence these Meeting places to this day are
called Burses in many Countries, which in London we know by the name of the
Royal Exchange and of Britains Burse. Fifteen Nations in the height of this
Trade, had each their several Houses or Colleges here, namely the Merchants of
England, Scotland, France, Castilia, Portugal, Arragon, Navar, Catalonia,
Biscaia, the Hans Towns of Germany, as Lubeck, Hamburg, Rostock, Dantzick,
Riga, Revel, and diverse other Cities. Then the Merchants of Venetia, Florence,
Genoua, Lucca, Millan, and others.

Now then, these Nations having by this means each here a Residence, supplied
this City of Bruges with the particular Commodities of their Countries, as
first, the Italians they brought Camlets, Grograms, Thread of Silk, Silver and
Gold, and Cloths made thereof; also Jewels, Wines of Candia, Allom, Brimstone,
Oils, Spices, and Drugs of all sorts, which they had by their Trade of Egypt,
India, Arabia and Grecia. 2. The French brought Salt, Wines White and Red,
Paper, Linens, and some Oils. The English, Wool, Lead, Tin, Beer, and some
Woollen Cloths, for Veils for Women used in those days. 4. The Scots brought
Skins of Sheep and Conies, and such like. 5. The Spaniards and Portuguese
brought Grain for Scarlet Die, Gold, Silver, Raw Silk, some Drugs and Spices.
6. The Germans, Danes and Pollacks brought Honey, Wax, Corn, Sa^petre, Wools,
Glass, Furs, Quicksilver, Rhemsh Wines, Timber for building, and the like. And
7. Flanders yielded to these Horse, Cattle, Butter, Cheese, Herrings, and other
Sea fish, VVoolles and Linen Cloths, Tapestry of great Beauty and Variety,
excellent Pictures, and other Manufactures. And by this great Concourse of
Nations, Flanders gave the name to all the Netherlands. To increase yet this
Trade, Bruges Anno. 1414. got a Privilege, That they who were Free of that City
by Gift, Buying, Birth, or Marriage, should be free from all Confiscation of
their Goods, which exceeds the Privileges of any other City in the
Netherlands: for those of (...) having the like, yet lose it upon any Force
offered to the Prince. This Trade thus continued till the year 1485. when it
began to decay, partly by the Narrowness and Unsafety of the Port of Sluice, and
the River leading from thence to Bruges; and partly by the Fame of the large
and commodious River Sceldis at Antwerp, and partly by the Civil Wars then
afoot in this Country: First then the Portuguese having taken Calicut in the
East Indies, carried the Spices of India to the Fairs of Antwerp, Anno 1503.
and contracting with that City drew the Fuggers and VVelfars, two potent German
Families of Merchants, thither. After which the Merchants of Florence, Lucca,
and the Spinolas of Genoua seated themselves there, as also the Merchant
Adventurers of England, Anno 1510. and many other Nations were invited thither
by the Privilege of Marriage Dowries, which became Shadows to many Frauds, for
when Husbands either brake in their lifetime, or be found Bankrupt at death,
the Wives are preferred to all Debtors in the Recovery of their Dowry. And thus
far he shows the Rising and Falling of the Trade of Bruges, and how it came
to be removed and settled in Antwerp; and how since also it has been lost and
departed thence, I have showed in another place: and this is as much as I have
thought good to insert of the Trade in general of Netherland, concluding, that
though the Country be of small extent, and be barren of rich Commodities either
to preserve or ma^ntain a Trade; yet the Industry of the Inhabitants has made
them potent, wealthy, and great Merchants; and now at this day they traffic to
all parts of the habitable World, with the Commodities of their own Countries,
which by their Endeavors and Pains they make and purchase to be as if
naturally and really the same were their own.

Now for the general Trade of Flanders, so far forth as it is in obedience to
the Archduke, or more properly to the Kings of Spain, it must be granted, that
it holds not any equality at this day with that part in subjection to the
States. Antwerp as the principal City, of which the Flemings did, and might
justly boast, is now, as then the chiefest; but the former Splendour is now and
long ago lost; for it had the Pre-eminence, and was one of the chief Cities of
Traffic in the World, but is now only the chief of this Jurisdiction. What it
could formerly herein challenge, it has now lost: For if the Trade thereof be
well observed, it will be discerned, it looks not so high by many Millions as
it did then, the Merchants, the Inhabitants, partal^e of one of the Qualities
of the Spaniard-Merchant, which they have since their reduction to that
Scepter, learned thence, and this is never or very seldom to traffic or
adventure their Estates into any other Princes Dominions, but where their Lord
is Sovereign. Which Rule found here, as in all Spain for the most part true,
and granted, it must be confessed their Trade cannot possbly be of any great
consequence: For such is the nature of a free and uncontrouled Commerce, that
no Country or Nation how remote or distant soever, can give limit or bound
thereto. Whereupon it may be inferred, and as by proof at this day it is found
observable, their general Traffic is small, and consists more by a laborious
Industry of the Inhab^tants at home, than by their great Adventures by Sea
abroad, their greatest Navigation extending but to Spain, and in some second
Adventures thence to India, and that for no great matter, and otherwise they
trouble not neither the East nor West, neither the North nor the South parts of
the World, no nor hardly as far as into France, England, or into the
Netherlands, the nearest Neighbors (when at Amity) for any great matter of
moment.

The principal means whereby their small Traffic is now maintained to them, is
by their several sorts of cunning and artificial Fabrics and Manufactures,
which every Town of any note is notable for, such as are Hangings of Arras,
Tapestry, some sorts of Stuffs of Silk, and of Woollen and Linen; and in
Exchanges to purchase which, the English, French, and other the neighboring
Nations bring them Woollen Cloths, and Wines, and some other needful Provisio
is which they want to supply their Occasions, and the Necessities of those
Armies as are for the most part seen to be sed, maintained and clothed in this
Country. Dunkirk their only and best Seaport, affords some Shipping, and so
poorly set on work by way of merchandising, that they find their best Traffic
to consist of Thievery and Boothalling against both their Friends and their
Enemies the Netherlanders, which yet they are so far unable really to set out
to any competency of strength, that the Jesuits and other the devouter Orders
of Friars, are oftentimes induced to set their helping hand thereto, this way
oftentimes spending in uncharitable Actions and Bloodshed the charitable Alms
of the poor and deluded Multitude: and how well this Trade has thriven with
these irreligious Ecclesiastical Orders, their great Losses by their Reports
sufficiently witness to the World.

So leaving the Antwerpians to endeavor the regaining of their lost Traffic,
and the Dunkirk Free-booters and their holy Partners to the recovery of their
late Damage by some more honest Commerce, I will here leave Flanders, and hence
travel further into this Continent, and survey the particular Trade of the
famous Empire of Germany.

CHAP. CLXXXII. Of Germany, and the Provinces thereof.
Germany, and the Provinces.
HAving briefly run through Flanders, and the United Provinces, and reduced the
Trade thereof into two principal Cities, that is to Antwerp for Flanders, and
the other Provin^es subject to the Spaniards; and to Amsterdam for Holland, and
the other Cities subject to the States. I must be constrained in a manner to
use the same method in the Survey of the Trade of Germany, reducing their
Traffic of the lesser to the greater Cities; the greatest being also not much
known to our Nation for any Eminency this way, as being inland, to which our
English (whose Traffic principally consists at Sea, and consequently in
Maritime Towns) have but little knowledge of, though otherwise eminent, as being
far distant from it. Germany bounded.
Germany then is bounded on the West with France and Belgium, on the North with
Demnark and her Seas, on the East with Prussia, Poland, and Hungary, and on the
South with the Alps.

Commodities of Germany.
This Country does afford to the Merchant for Transportation many notable
Commodities, as Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron and Lead, by their Mines; Corn,
Wines, Allom, Quicksilver; Arms of all sorts, diverse Manufactures, as Linen,
Woollen, Silks, etc. and sundry other Commodities.

Hans-Towns 72.
Three sorts of Cities are said to be contained in this Empire; the first are
those that are called Hans-Towns, which are such as enjoy large Privileges and
Immunities, and are thought to be about 72 in number, and for the most part are
found either to border upon the Seas, or be seated upon great and navigable
Rivers, being for the most part rich, and of reasonable Commerce and Trade, or
famous and noted for some one particular Art, Fabric or Manufacture.

Imperial Cities 60.
The second sort are called Imperial Cities, and accounted free in respect of
their great Prerogatives, as in coining of Moneys, and knowing no Lord, but
ruled by the Imperial Laws; for which they acknowledge and pay a Contribution
yearly to the Emperor, whom they account their Protector, and these are found
to be about 60 in number.

Principalities.
The third are such as are held by inheritance by some Princes, as are
Heidelberg, Vienna, and others, of which are accounted in this Empire incirca
(^) and may be called Principalities.

There is also found in this Empire conducing to Traffic (besides the lesser)
four great navigable Rivers, that enrich these Hans-Towns, Imperials and
Principalities, communicating the Commodities of one City to another, and at
last to the Seaports, where the same is last of all vended into foreign
Kingdoms.

Danubius.
The prime whereof is Danubius, which in running 1500 Miles, does receive above
60 navigable Rivers, and disgorgeth it self into the Euxine or Black-Sea.

Rhyne.
The second is the Rhyne, running 800 Miles through Germany and Belgia,
disgorgeth i^ self into the German Ocean; Albis.
taking in Albis, which is accounted navigable for 400 Miles, (and some others)
and is the third River of this Country.

Adera.
The fourth is Odera, running 300 Miles in length, issues out in the
Baltick-Sea. Besides which there are many others of note, as Weser, Emse and
others, in themselves found to be great Rivers, enriching diverse parts of this
Country, tho far inferior to the former.

East-Frisland.
Lastly, this Empire is found to contain 20 large Provinces, which by reason of
my little Insight therein, I will cursorily pass over, and refer the same
wherein I am defective to the better learned. East-Frisland is accounted the
first Province, wherein are found the Cities of Oldenberg, Ammerdam, and lastly
Emden, which, for its former eminency in Trade I cannot so slightly pass over
without a word of the Trade thereof.

CHAP. CLXXXIII. Of Emden, and the Trade thereof.
Emden, and the Trade thereof.
EMden has been in times past of far greater Trade than now it is: It was for
some years the Seat of the English Merchant-Adventurers, but the Civil Wars
about Religion, raised between the Citizens and their Count, was in part the
cause of the Decay of the Trade thereof. This City lies in the utmost border of
the Empire, and only divided by the River Emse from the Netherland: and by an
Inland Sea from West-Frisland, being one of those Provinces. In Summer it is
found a pleasant City, but in Winter as if drowned in the Seas, and all the
Fields covered with Water, makes it to appear as an Island in the Waters. As
for the Moneys current, and Form of Accounts kept here by Merchants, I omit
that to the place of the Coins and Accounts of Germany in general, but noted
hereafter. In the mean time it is to be observed, that the Weights and Measures
in use are these,

Weight of Emden.
The common Weight of Emden is the Pound of (^) the Quintal or 100 l. makes in
London.

Measure of Emden.
Their common Measure of Length is an Ell, wherewith they measure Linen,
Woollen, and Silks in general, the 100 whereof has been observed to make in
London 48 Else, and the 100 yards of London to have made there about 162 or 163
Else.

Corn is here measured by the Werp, 55 Werps make 10 Quarters of London, or a
Last of Amsterdam; but 61 Werps is here a Last, consisting of 4 Werps great of
15 Barrels the Werp.

Westphalia.
Westphalia is next, containing in it self a large Tract, and producing those
Acorns in abundance which feed their Swine, and which affords those Gammons
which are accounted so excellent a Dish. The Northern part of this Country is
Bremen, wherein is found the Town of Breme as the principal: then Clappenburgh,
Exenburgh belonging to the Duke of Saxony. Then Collonia, wherein is said to be
the Bodies of the three wise Men which came from the East to worship our
Savior. And this belongs to the Bishopric of Collen. Here is also Warendorp,
and some others belonging to the Bishop of Munster, and Boport, Engers,
Coblents, and Triers, belonging to the Bishop of Triers: of the principal of
which a word passando.

CHAP. CLXXXIV. Of Breme, and the Trade thereof.
Breme, and the Trade thereof.
BReme is one of the Hans-Towns, so called for the Freedom of the Traffic here
practiced, strongly fortified, five miles distant from the Sea, the River
Visurge serving to convey all Commodities hither, as running through the City,
Ossenbridge.
near which lies that small but well known Town of Ossenbridge, noted for the
great quantities of narrow Linen Cloth that is hence conveyed to England and
other Countries. It is reported that in this City the Custom was first raised
in swearing and inhansing new Comers by Bread and Salt, and of infranchising
them into their City, by paying a certain Mulct or Fine in good Liquor to the
rest of the Company, which is now a general received Custom in all the
Hans-Towns of Germany, and become part of the Traffic thereof.

Weights of Breme.
The common Weight of Breme is the Pound of (^) ounces, the 100 l. whereof has
rendered in London (^) pound.

Measures of Breme.
The common Measure for Length is the Ell, which agrees with the Ell above
mentioned in Emden. But in Ossenbridge it is found, that the 100 yards London
make 84 Else there incirea, and the 100 Else of London is here in Ossenbridge
about 105 Else.

CHAP. CLXXXV. Of Collen, and the Trade thereof.
Collen, and the Trade; thereof.
COllen, commonly for distinction called in Latin, Colonia Agrippina, is a very
fair City, whereto is found great Concourse of Merchants; near to this City did
Caesar, with incredible Expedition, make a Bridge over the River Rhyne, near
which the Town is at present situate, which more terrified the barbarous Enemy
than the Report of his Valor. The Archbishop of this City is the second
Especial Elector of the Empire and Chancellor of Italy. Here, 'us said, are
the Bodies of the three Wisemen which came from the East to worship our
Savior, vulgarly called the three Kings of Collen, whose Bodies were
translated, by Helena the Mother of Constantine, unto Constantinople; and from
thence, by Eustorfius Bishop of Millan, transported to Millan, finally brought
hither by Rinoldus Bishop of this place.

Weights of Collen.
The common Weight of Collen is the Pound of (^) the 100 l. whereof has been
observed to have made in London 110 l.

Measures of Collen.
The common Measure of Length is the Ell here in use; the 100 Else whereof have
been observed to make in London 60 Else.

Exchanges of Collen.
Here are great Exchanges practiced in this City as proper and fit thereunto, by
reason of the rich Bankers and Merchants that are found here to reside, the
which I have largely declared in Chap. 290. of Exchanges of this place, in the
end of this Work: wherefore it will be here needless to insert the same.

Cleveland.
The third Province is Cleveland, containing the Earldom of Cleve, the Dutchies
of Gulick and Berge; wherein are found the fair Cities of Cleve, Calker, Wesel,
Emrick, Aken, Gulick, Dulkins, and others, which I omit for Brevity.

Alsatia.
The fourth Province is Alsatia, wherein are found the Towns of Psaltberg,
Wesenberg, Colmar, and principally the famous City of Strasburg: of which a
Word.

CHAP. CLXXXVI. Of Strasburg, and the Trade thereof.
Strasburg, and the Trade thereof.
STra^burg is one of the Imperial Cities beforementioned, seated a Musket Shot
from the Rhine, whereto there is a Channel cut for conveyance of all
Commodities. There is here also a wooden Bridge over the Rhine, but of no great
Strength. The Circuit of the City may be abo^t 8 miles, well fortified, and is
famous for many Rarities, the principal being their Clock, which cost so many
years Labor to perfect, and the Steeple of the Cathedral Church is numbered
amongst the Seven Miracles of the World, for its excellent Structure and
Beauty. The Courtesy of the Inhabitants to Strangers is not to be forgotten:
And here they are accustomed at the City's cost to give all Handicrafts
entertainment, that they may either teach if expert, or learn if ignorant; by
which means they are found to have confluence of Artisans, which does both much
further their City's Stock, and enrich the Inhabitants.

Weights of Strasburg.
In Strasburg are found two Weights, gross and subtle, and by observation it
has been found, that the 100 l. subtle of London has made here incirca 70 in
71 l. of the gross weight for gross Goods of 16 ounces the Pound: and 107 l.
subtle weight of 12 ounces the Pound, by which they use to weigh all fine
Commodities, as Drugs and Spices, as Sugars, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon,
Almonds, Dates, and the like.

Measures of Strasburg.
The Measure of Length of Strasburg is the Ell, which is in London (^) inches.

The Coins current are the Bohemico gross or Blaphace, whichis three Crusters,
one Cruster is two Pence, and one Penny is two Hellers, and one Heller is two
Orchins, by which Coins they keep their Account. Vide further Chap. 206.

Franconia.
The fifth Province is Franconia, divided into eight Parts, the lower Palatine
is the first part, wherein are found Worms, Spiers and Heidelberg, the chief
City belonging to those Princes. Bacarac.
Bacarac, famous for the excellent Rhenish Wines here growing, Coub, Openham,
Frankendak, and others.

Wittenberg.
The second part is Wittenberg; the chief Towns are Toubing. Stutgard.
2 Stutgard the Duke's Seat. 3 Marlach, and others.

Auspach.
The third part is Auspach, Haibram, and others.

Baden.
The fourth is Baden, wherein the City Baden, Durlach, and others.

Ments.
The fifth is Mentz, wherein Lantsem, Being, and others.

Bainberg.
The sixth is Bainberg, a fair City, and some others.

Westberg.
The seventh is Westberg, a City, Arustine, and some others.

The eighth part belongs to the Emperor, Noremberg.
wherein is found Noremberg, the fairest and richest City of Germany, and seated
in the Center thereof: Frankfort.
and also here is Frankfort, seated on the River Menus, famous for the two
Book-marts here kept annually, in Mid-lent and Mid-September. A word of the
most eminent of these, before I proceed to the next Province.

CHAP. CLXXXVII. Of Worms, and the Trade thereof.
Worms, and the Trade thereof.
WOrms is a Town of great antiquity, and yet wants not Magnificence in her
Buildings On the West Side thereof grow in great abundance those Wines known to
us by the name of Rhenish. It is more famous for the many Imperial Parliaments
held here of old, than it is for Trade, therefore I shall not have cause to
insist much thereupon. Near to this City stands the City of Frankendale, a new,
modern, strong, fair and beautiful Piece, which has made it self famous in the
late Wars of these parts; these Coasts affording the most excellent Wines
abovementioned, here in great plenty abounding; and are sound to grow
especially on the West Side of the River, which is the prime Commodity of the
Inhabitants both of the City and Province. The Weights and Measures here are
found to accord with Spiers, to which I refer the Inquirer.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII. Of Spiers, and the Trade thereof.
Spiers, and the Trade thereof.
SPiers is half a mile from the Rhyne, seated in a Plain on the west side of
the said River, having more Antiquity than Beauty, and yet more Beauty than
Trade. Here the Imperial Chamber is held, in which Court the Differences of the
Empire are judged, and the Elect^s themselves may be called hither to Trial of
Law. The Weights and Measures are these,

Weights of Spiers.
First for the Weights of this place, the common is the Pound of 16 ounces, or
32 loots, of which are made two several Quintals, one of 100 l. another of 120
l. and the 100 l. here, is in London 111 l. and the 100 l. of London is about
88 l. here of 32 loots per pound.

Measures of Spiers.
The Measure of Length used, is the Ell, which is in London (^) inches.

CHAP. CLXXXIX. Of Heidelberg, and the Trade thereof.
Heidelberg, and the Trade thereof.
THE City of Heidelberg is seated in a Plain environed on three parts with high
Mountains, the fourth part open and beholding the River; from which it is a
mile distant, and to which it conveyeth all Commodities by a small River that
runs by the Walls thereof. This is an University, and the Seat of the
Palsgraves, and has not been much famoused for the Trade thereof. The Weights
and Measures here in use are these,

Weights of Heidelberg.
The Weight common in use here is the Pound of 16 ounces, of which are made
three several Hundreds or Quintars, the first of 100 l. for fine Goods, the
second of 120 l. for gross Goods, and the third of 132 l. for Provision of
Food, as Butter, Flesh, etc. The 100 l. has been found to make in London 108
l. and the 100 l. subtle makes then here about 92 or 93 l.

Measures of Heidelberg.
The Measure of Length is an Ell, which makes in London (^) inches

CHAP. CXC. Of Noremberg, and the Trade thereof.
Noremberg, and the Trade thereof.
NOremberg is seated in a barren Soil, yet this Defect is supplied by the
Industry of the Inhabitants. It is absolute and of it self, and accounted one
of the Imperial Cities of the Empire, and the richest of all the rest: the
Inhabitants by their subtle Inventions in manual Works, and cunning Arts, with
the Encouragement they daily give to Artificers, draw thereby the Riches of
other Countries to them. Every Child, tho but seven or eight years old, is here
put to work, and enabled thereby to get his own Livelihood; and by this means
is all Europe filled with the trivial Commodities of this Town, known by the
Name of Noremberg Ware, which makes this City rich, strong and powerful: their
Trade is not great otherwise, and the Weights and Measures in use are these.

Weights of Noremberg.
There is here but one Pound in use, as in Spiers, of which are also composed
two several Quintars agreeing with it, and, as there I mentioned, with London.

Measures of Noremberg.
Their Measure of Length is the Ell, both for Linen and Woollen, contrary to the
Custom of most Cities of Germany, the 100 Else whereof have been found to make
in London 63. Else, and the 100 Yards of London to have made here 138 Else.

Exchanges of Noremberg.
The Place is famous also for the great Exchanges practiced therein, which I
have at large handled in Chapter 298, with all Circumstances thereto belonging.

CHAP. CXCI. Of Frankfort, and the Trade thereof.
Frankfort, and the Trade thereof.
FRankfort is a Free City of the Empire, famous for the common Assemblies here
of the Electors for the choice of the Emperor, and for their two annual Fairs,
as also for many Parliaments of the Empire held here. It is seated upon the
Maene, which runs through the same, dividing the City into two parts, which
are united by a goodly Bridge. It is strongly encompassed with a double Wall,
and is seated in a large Plain, the Streets narrow, and the Houses built of
Timber and Clay: here is in this Town Sanctuary for Bankrupts for the space of
14 days, which is never without some Guests and Company, from some one
adjoining City or other: and if in those 14 days they cannot compound or
escape, then by all wiles they will get out of the Privileges thereof, and
entering in again, begin their 14 days over again; and thus are found to do for
six Months or a Year together. There is found, in their Marts or Fairs, a great
Trade and Concourse of Merchants, but it is principally famous for Books, which
from all parts of Europe are brought hither, printed and dispersed hence, the
Town consisting much upon Printing and other manual Arts. The Weights and
Measures in use are,

Weights of Frankfort.
The Weight of this Place is the Pound of 16 ounces, of which are made 3
several Hundreds or Quintals, which agree with that of Heidelberg
beforementioned; and as that also with London, Lipsick, Friburg, Ulm, Iffan,
Isuff, Basle, Costute and Domstetter, holding also in each of the said Towns
the same Concordancy, therefore here needs no further Repetition.

Measures of Frankfort.
Frankfort is found to have two several Measures of Length, the Woollen and
Linen Ell, differing about 2 per cent. so that the 100 Else for Linen here,
gives in London 48 Else, and the 100 Else in Woollen gives about 49 Else
London: and the 100 Yards of London renders here of Line^ 169 Else, and of
Woollen 168 incirca.

Exchanges of Frankfort.
The Exchanges here practiced are great, which I have handled in Chapter 298. at
large, with all due Circumstances.

Helvetia.
The sixth Province is Helvetia, wherein are contained the 13 Cantons of the
warlike Switsers, preserving their Liberties by their Valor, notwithstanding
their potent Neighbors. The chief of their Cities are Zurick. 2 Basil, an
University. 3 Constance, famous for the Council here held Anno 1414. 4 Berne. 5
Upbaden, the ordinary place for the common Assembly of the said Cantons. 6
Lucern, and others, and of the Trade of the principal of these, a word in
passing.

CHAP. CXCII. Of Zurick, and the Trade thereof.
Zurick, and the Trade thereof.
ZUrick is seated on the Lake Zeurisca, which divides the same into two parts,
which again is united by three fair Bridges, the middlemost serving as a
Meeting Place for Merchants: which Lake runs into the Brook Limachus, which
passes to Baden, and so into the Rhine, carrying Boats, by which Commodities
are transportable: the Weights and Meas^ in use are.

Weights of Zurick.
The Moneys current in the Swiss Cantons, I shall note in the place of the Coins
of the Empire: the Weight then here is, the Pound of 17 ounces, of which is
made the 100 l. and the 120 l. and it is found that the 100 l. subtle of London
turns here 93 l.

Measures of Zurick.
The Measure of Length is here an Ell, the 100 whereof renders in London 52
Else, or there abouts.

CHAP. CXCIII. Of Basil, and the Trade thereof.
Basil, and the Trade thereof.
BAsil lies upon the River of Rhyne, which divides it into the lesser and the
greater Bas^: it was once an Imperial City, but now is joined to the Cantons of
Switserland. It is a famous University, and much frequented by Students; the
Benefit of the Rhyne running hence through Germany, communicates the
Commodities of this City to all others seated thereupon.

Weights of Basil.
Basil is found in Weights to have but one Pound, equal with Frankfort and
Heidelburg, of which is composed three several Quintars, one of 100 l. another
of 120 l. and the third of 132 l. and agrees with London, as you shall find in
Heidelburg and Frankfort aforementioned.

Measures of Basil.
The Measure of Length of Basil is the Ell for Linen and Woollen, the 100 Else
whereof render in London 48 Else, and the 100 Yards of London has been
observed to give here 167 Else.

Valesia.
The seventh Province is Valesia, seated wholly amongst the Alps. Sittin is the
only walled Town of this Province.

Boetia.
Boetia is the eighth, in which is Chur the Metropolis of the Grisons, and here
is the Valtoli^ taken by the Spaniards 1622.

Suevia.
Suevia is the ninth, wherein are found the Cities of Ulm, 2 Ausbourg, 3
Norlinghen, 4 Ravensperg, and others, of some of which, as most notable, a word.

CHAP. CXCIV. Of Ausburg and the Trade thereof.
Ausburg, and the Trade thereof.
AUsburg is a Free City of the Empire, governed by a Senate of Citizens: it is
seated upon the Northern Mouth of the Alps, in a fruitful Plain of Corn and
Pastures, it is strong and well fortified, and beautified with many Houses of
Freestone of six or seven stories high. In this City lived those famous
Merchants of the Family of the Fuggers, who have built here many public
Buildings, and many private, which at a reasonable rate are let to the poorer
Inhabitants. Here is also a magnificent Building for the meeting of Merchants,
in manner of our Royal Exchange, called commonly the Berl. There are two small
Rivers which run through the Suburbs, and are commodious for Transportation of
Corn and VVines, which this Country of Schwaben or Suevia yields in great
Quantity. This City is also Famous for the Confession here made of their Faith
by the Protestant Princes, and delivered the Emperor, Anno (^)

Weights of Ausburg.
The Weight of Ausburg is the Pound of 16 ounces, the 100 l. being the Quintar,
makes in London 109 l. and this agrees with Munchen, VVesel, Norlinghen, and
some other places of Germany.

Measures of Ausburg.
The Measure of Length is here the Ell, found twofold, the one for VVoollen, the
other for Linen and Silk, which because it very nearly agrees with Frankfort,
of which I have made mention before, I pass the same over.

Bavaria.
Bavaria is the Tenth Province, the chief Towns are Munchen on the River Aser,
and the Duke's Seat, 2 Ingolstat an University, 3 Ratisbona, 4 Passave, 5
Salsburgh, and many other great Cities.

Northgoia.
Northgoia, or the Upper Palatinate is the Eleventh, and belongs totally to
the Palatines of the Rhine, the chief Towns are Amberg, whose Silver Mines
yield yearly 60000 Crowns rent to the Prince's Coffers. 2 Neuburg, and others.

Austria.
Austria is the Twelfth, wherein are found the famous Cities of Vienna seated
on Danubius, one of the most beautiful Towns of Germany, and walled, as Stories
say, with the Moneys that Leopold the Duke had for King Richard I. his Ransom,
being by him taken in his Return through Palestine. Gratse.
2 Gratse, from whence the present Emperors have their Name. 3 Santo Vitti the
Metropolis of Carinthia. 4 Newark the chief of Carniolo, and in Triolis are
found the Cities of Inspurg, Triol, Bolson, and Trent, famous for the Council
here held and concluded, after 40 years lingering and politic Delays.

CHAP. CXCV. Of Vienna, and the Trade thereof.
Vienna, and the Trade thereof.
VIenna is at present the Seat of the German Emperors, and is now the Bulwark
of this Country against the Incursions of the Turks, who have more than once in
vain attempted it; on the North-side runs the River Danow, which here
divides it self into three Arms, incompassing a good space of ground, and then
meeting again; and all this is again united by three Stone Bridges, one
containing 29 Arches, another 57 Arches, and a third 15 Arches, each Arch being
60 foot asunder. Here are many Merchants of great quality, who have their
Factors in Venetia, Florence and other parts of Italy, to supply them with the
Fabrics of Silks made there, such as are Sattins, Damasks, Taffeta, Velvets,
Cloth of Gold, and such like.

Weights of Vienna.
The Weight in use here is the Pound, which is in some Commodities divided into
32 Loots, in some into 128 Quints, and in somo into 512 Fennings, of which
Pound the Quintar is made, which is 100 l. which does render in London about
123 l. incirca, and therewith are found Idra and Erford to agree, the 100 l. of
London making here 81 l..

Measures in Vienna.
Their Measure for Length is two, one in Linen, and the other in VVoollen: the
100 Yards in London make here in Linen 103 Else, and in Cloth and Silk 113 Else.

Exchanges of Vienna.
There is here, as being the Court of the Emperor, a great Exchange in use, and
they are found to account and exchange by Rix Dollars of 8 s. Flemish, and by
Ducats of Gold of 12 s. Flemish.

Bohemia.
The Kingdom of Bohemia is the Thirteenth, wherein are accounted about 780
Cities, walled Towns and Castles, the chief whereof is Prague the Metropolis of
this Kingdom, 2 Eger, 3 Buates, 4 Melmuke, Pilsen and others, Preslau.
and in this Tract is found Preslau the chief City of Silesia, Gorlitse.
also Gorlitso the chief City of Lusatia, and Brin and Olmuts.
Olmuts the chief of Moravia; but the Trade of Bohemia I will comprise under
the Title of Prague here following, as being the Metropolis thereof.

CHAP. CXCVI. Of Prague, and the Trade thereof.
Prague, and the Trade thereof.
THE City of Prague includes three Towns, as new Prague, old Prague, and a City
inhabited by Jews, encompassed with one Wall neither strong nor beautiful: the
River Molda does run through the same, but is not navigable nor commodious for
Carriage or Transportation of Merchandise, to which the Inhabitants are not
much addicted, Corn and Wine being the prime Commodities the Country affords,
and Timber abundance, of which the Walls of their Houses are for the most part
made, and that in whole pieces as the same grow, and not so much as the Bark
thereof taken away.

Weights of Prague, and of Bohemia.
The Weight of Prague is the Pound of 16 ounces; the 100 l. subtle of London
has made here about 83 l. Pasau and Regenborge agreeing also therewith, as
does also the most part of this Country.

Measures of Prague, and of Bohemia.
Their Measure is the Ell, of which they have two, one in Linen, and the other
in Cloth and Silk; the 100 Yards of London has made in Linen 148 Else, and in
Woollen 160 Else.

Vide Coins current in Bohemia.

Brandenburg.
Brandenburg is the fourteenth, wherein are reckoned 50 Cities, and 64 walled
Towns, the chief of which is Brandenburg, then Frankfort, for distinction
called upon Oder: next Berlin, the residence of the Marquess, Havelburg seated
upon Havel, and many others of consequence, whereof little is come to my
Observation, therefore I will in silence pass them over.

Pomerania.
Pomerania is the fifteenth Province, wherein is found Statin the residence of
the Prince, and Metropolis of this Country; Wallen.
then Wallen, once the famous Mart-Town of all these Countries; the Russians,
Danes, Saxons and Vandals had here their particular Streets of abode for
Commence and Trade, but ruined by War, the Trade was removed to Lubeck, where
yet in some measure it is found to continue still.

Mecklenburg.
Mecklenburg is the sixteenth Province, wherein are found the Cities of
Malchan, Sternb^g, Wismar, and some others.

Saxony.
Saxony is the seventeenth Province, wherein are found many Cities of Note, the
principal is first Erford, one of the fairest in Germany. 2 Irne, an University
for Physicians. 3 Smalcald, famous for the Protestant League here made. 4
Dresden, seated on the Albis, and the Duke's Magazine for War, and Arms for
30000 Horse and Foot over in readiness at a days warning 5 Lipsick, an
University, which yearly does yield the Duke for Custom of Beer, drank and
transported 20000 l. sterling. 6 Wittenberg, an University, and the chief Seat
of the Elect^ of Saxony; and 7 Maidenburg, where it is said Luther studied
Divinity. Of some of these a word.

CHAP. CXCVII. Of Lipsick, and the Trade thereof.
Lipsick, and the Trade thereof.
LIpsick is seated in a Plain of most fruitful Corn ground, the Streets fair,
and the chief Houses built of Freestone of Roofs high: it is accounted also an
University, but found to be of no great Note, by reason of the Neighborhood of
Wittenberg: they have for some trespass lost those great Privileges they
formerly enjoyed, and therefore their Trade is not accounted great: they may
now neither fortify their Town, nor wind a Horn in the nightwatches, as other
Cities in Germany do, nor yet use Red Wax in their public Seals or Contracts,
which are all of them accounted in Germany Signs of Freedom. The Weights and
Measures in use are these:

Weights of Lipsick.
The Weight is the Pound, of which are made three Quintars, one of 100 l.
another of 120 l. and a third of 132 l. Vide more hereof in Frankfort and
Heidelberg, with which it is found to accord.

Measures of Lipsick.
Lipsick has two Measures, one for VVoollen and the other for Linen, 14 per
cent. difference: For the 100 Yards of London does make in VVoollen Commodities
100 Else, and in Linen 140 Else.

Accounts and Exchanges of Lipsick.
The Merchants here account by Marks of 32 gross, and the gross being 12 heller;
but they exchange by Florins of Breslow, 30 to have posito in Noremberg 32
Florins, and in Vienna 34 Florins.

CHAP. CXCVIII. Of Wittenberg, and the Trade thereof.
Wittenburgh, and the Trade thereof.
WIttenberg is seated on a plain sandy Ground, accounted an University, wherein
they proverbially say, A Man shall meet nothing but Whores, Scholars, and
Swine: which shows, that the Inhabitants have little Trade, as living for the
most part by the Students, and peradventure by the Flesh of Swine and Women;
but by what Weight and Measure the same is propertioned to them, I am to seek,
therefore refer the same to the next Merchant that shall have occasion to make
his Observation thereupon.

CHAP. CXCIX. Of Dresden, and the Trade thereof.
Dresden, and the Trade of Saxony.
DResden is a fair Town, and strongly fortified, in which the Elector of Saxony
keeps his Court; it is famous for the magnificent Stables and Armories which
the Duke keeps here in a continual readiness: the River Elve divides the Town
into two parts, the new and the old, which is very strong both by Art and
Nature, and accounted the strongest modern City in Germany: the Inhabitants are
much addicted to Trade, and the River does much further their Endeavors; but
Nature affording them a rich Soil, takes away much of their edg, for it is ever
found that the barren Soil affords the Inhabitants the greatest encouragement.
Their Weights and Measures are,

Weights of Saxony.
Dresden, Misen and all Saxony are found to have three Weights, and the 100 l.
of London made of Zigostatica, or the Princes weight, 96 l. of 16 ounces made
92 l. of Merchonts weight of 16 ounces, and 144 l. of the common weight of 12
ounces.

Measures of Saxony.
Their Measures of Length are two, agreeing with Lipsick abovementioned, on
which I need not further insist.

Brunswick.
Brunswick is the eighteenth Province, wherein is Brunswick the principal City;
secondly, Wolfiabolt, where the Duke commonly resideth; thirdly, Alberstade,
then Lunenberg, and some others of less note.

CHAP. CC. Of Brunswick, and the Trade thereof.
Brunswick and the Trade thereof.
BRunswick comprehends in one five several Cities, and is a Free Imperial Town,
strongly fortified, in some Places with two and in others with three Walls, and
encompassed with the River Ancor: the Inhabitants are found addicted to Trade
in the Morning, but their Intemperance at Night takes away all Thoughts
thereof; they are great Husbandmen, the Earth answering their Labors, which
yields them Plenty of Corn, both for their own and their Neighbors Wants, the
Earth yielding them rich Reward to their Labors, and their Afternoons hours
spent in Good-fellowship, makes me imagine there may be some Trade amongst
them; which in particular I permit the Reader in silence to conceive.

CHAP. CCI. Of Lunenburg, and the Trade thereof.
Lunenburg, and the Trade thereof.
LUnenburg is a Free Imperial City, over which the Duke of Lunenburg
challenges a Superiority: it is found to be fairly built of B^ick, and well
and strongly fortified for its Safeguard and Defense, with deep Ditches and
thick Mud Walls. Salt Fountain in Lunenbur
It is most famous for the natural Fountain of Salt here found, over which is
built a spacious House that contains fifty two Rooms, and every Room has eight
several Cauldrons of Lead, wherein is boiled eight Tun of Salt daily: the
Profit whereof is divided into three several parts, one part to the City, one
to the Duke of Lunenburg, and another to a Monastery, and some other adjoining
Earls: their Trade is not otherwise of very great consequence.

Hassia.
The nineteenth Province is Hassia, wherein are found the Cities of Dormstade,
Marburg an University, and some others.

Veteravia,
Veteravia is the twentieth Province, wherein are the Cities of Friburg, Hanau,
Dullinburg, Nassau, Catzenbogen, and some others of lesser note.

CHAP. CCII. Of Friburg, and the Trade thereof.
Friburg, and the Trade thereof.
FRiburg is of round Form, environed altogether with high Mountains, Silver
Mines of Friburg.
having within it many Vaults and Caves to go under ground, through which the
Citizens go out of the City by night, to work in the Silver-Mines found in
those adjoining Hills, and at certain hours are called back by the Sound of a
Bell; their Work is for the most part by night, and their Rest is by day, and
their Residence is noted to be more under ground than above in their Houses:
the Profits thereof belong half to the Citizens, and half to the Elector to
whom the Country appertains.

Weights of Friburg.
The Weight in use in Friburg is the Pound, of which are made three several
Quintars, one of 100 l. another of 120 l. and a third of 132 l. agreeing with
Frankfort, Heidelberg, and Lipsick, as before.

Measures of Friburg.
The long Measure is the Ell, which is (^) inches London.

In this Tract are also comprehended the three Imperial Cities of Stoad,
Hamburgh and L^beck, which acknowledging no Sovereign, being Free and
Hans-Towns, I shall here touch, and first of Stoad.

CHAP. CCIII. Of Stoad, and the Trade thereof.
Stoad, and the Trade thereof.
SToad is an ancient City, and one of the Free Cities of the Empire, and one of
those Sea-Towns, which, from the Privilege of Trassick with their Neighbors,
are called Hans-Towns, it is commodiously seated for Traffic upon the River
Elve, in which Stream they maintain certain Buoys to guide the entering Ships:
the English Merchant-Adventurers had for a while their Residence here, forced
thereto by the discourteous Usage of the Hamburghers; and before their Arrival
this Town was so poor that they sold the Privilege of Coining Moneys, and some
other such Rights to Hamburgh; by whose Company they grew rich, not without the
Envy and Impoverishment of the Hamburghers, who often attempted, tho in vain,
by Naval Force to forbid the arrival of the English at Stoad, whom as they had
grieved, having their Seat with them, as well by Exactions as prohibiting them
the free Exercise of their Religion: so then having seen and smarted for their
Error, they never left till partly by fair means, and partly by Threats, they
labored their Return, which afterward was performed, and where at this day
they hold their principal Court and Residence. The present Trade of Stoad is
but small, depending much upon the Privilege they have in Pre-emption and
choice of the Rhenish Wines passing by their City.

They keep their Accounts by Pounds, Shillings and Pence, but they have
Grashes, Ortals and Dollars, as I shall show hereafter. Coins of Stoad.
Their Coins current are these,

1 Stiver of their Money here and in Hamburgh is 2 pence.

32 Stivers make a Dollar, which is 5 s. 4 d. there.

4 Stivers, which are 8 d. make a Spanish Rial of 6 d. Sterling.

1 Rix Dollar is worth 33 Stivers, and is 4 s. 4 d. Sterling, or more.

1 Mark is 16 Stivers, or 2 s. 8 d. Flemish.

7 Marks make 20 s. I say 20 s. Flemish.

Weights of Stoad.
Their Weight is the Pound of 16 ounces, 100 l. is their Quintar, which has
made in London 107, and some have observed 109 l.

Measures of Stoad.
Their Measure is the Ell, as in Hamburgh following.

CHAP. CCIV. Of Hamburg and the Trade thereof.
Hamburg, and the Trade thereof.
HAMBURG is a Free City of the Empire, and one of them which enjoy the
privilege of a Hans-Town, and for the building and populousness much to be
praised: the Senate House is a beautiful Fabric, and the Exchange, where
Merchants do meet together, is likewise as pleasant. The Haven is guarded and
shut up with an Iron Chain, the City it self compassed with a deep ditch, and
on the East and North sides with a double ditch and wall. Water is conveyed
into the same from a hill distant some miles off; it is seated on a large
plain, and sandy soil, and adorned with nine Churcher, and six gates; on the
South side it is washed with the River Elve, which also puts a branch into
the Town; but on the North-east the River Alster runs by toward Stoad, from
which it is five miles distant, and falls into the Elve, the streets in
general are narrow, excepting one, which has the name of Broadstreet, and
their buildings is all of Brick; and all the beauty of their houses is in the
first entrance, which as in all the other Sea-bordering Cities, lying from
these parts toward Flanders, have for the most part broad and fair gates into
a large hall, the lower part whereof on both sides is used for a warehouse,
and in the upper part, lying to the view of the door their chief
houshould-stuff is placed, and especially their vessels of English Pewter,
which being kept bright, make a glittering show to them that pass by, so that
their Houses promise more beauty outwardly than they have inwardly. The present
Trade of this City is great, principally by reason of the residence of the
English Merchants, and some quantity of shipping of reasonable burden is found
belonging to the Citizens.

Weights of Hamburg.
The weight of Hamburg is the pound, of which is made the 120 pound, their
quintar divided into three denominations, the first of 12 stone, of 10 pound to
the stone, 300 pound thereof to the Skip pound, which is the second, and 20
Lispound of 15 pound to the said 300 pound, which is the third; so that it may
be more properly said to be two quintars, one of 120 pound, another of 300
pound.

Measures of Hamburg.
Their measure of length is an Ell, wherewith they measure both Linen, Woollen,
and Silk, the 100 whereof has been found to make in London about 48 else for
Linen, and the 100 yards of London has been found to yield here about 162 or
163 yards, agreeing with Embden and Brem^ before mentioned.

Exchange in Hamburg.
The Merchants here are found to exchange for London by the pound sterling, and
for all other places upon the Rix Dollar, of 54 s. Lapisto or 54 stivers.

Dollar.
A Dollar is here noted to be worth three whitpence, one whitpenny to be 18
shillings, one shilling to be 12 pence, and one penny two hellers.

Of Corn.
Corn is here measured by the Schepel, ninety making a Last, and 83 Schepels
making a Last of Corn in Amsterdam, or 10 quarters English.

CHAP. CCV. Of Lubeck, and the Trade thereof.
Lubeck, and the Trade thereof.
LUBECK is an Imperial and free City, and one of those that are accounted
Hans-Towns; it is seated on the top of a fair and spacious Hill, upon the very
crown whereof is a beautiful Church, from whence leads streets to all the
gates of the City. It is encompassed with a double wall, one of Brick, and
narrow, the other of earth and broad: In some parts there is also deep ditches
where Ships of a 1000 tuns are brought up to winter from Tremuren the Maritime
Port of this City, seated on the Baltic Sea, a mile distant from this Town;
the buildings hereof are very beautiful of Brick, having many pleasant walks
without the walls. The government of this Town is much commended for their
neatness, pleasant gardens, courteous carriage to strangers, civility of
manners, and strict execution of justice. Their water is conveyed hither by
pipes; and have each of them a Cock of water in his own house: also all the
poor inhabitants are constrained to live in a street by themselves, where they
are set on work, and provided for. This City adorned with ten Churches, one
whereof being a decayed Monastery, they have converted to an Armory of all
Ammunitions for war. S. Mary's the Cathedral Church being the principal, and
seated, as I said before, on the very summit of this hill, whereon the City
stands.

Beer of Lubeck famous.
The Trade of this City at present is great, partly by the industry of the
inhabitants, and partly by reason of the commodious situation of the place, and
the neighborhood of the Baltic Sea: the place of it self is famous for the
Beer made, and hence transported into other Regions, and by some used
medicinally, for bruises of the body and such like accidents, though by them in
use commonly both for their ordinary drink, and food and raiment.

Weights of Lubeck.
The common weight of Lubeck is a pound, of which is made a Centiner and a
Skip-pound, for 112 pound is the centiner or quintar; the stone 10 pound and 32
stone to the Skip pound, which is 320 pound, and the 20 Lispound of 16 pound
mark is also accounted for a Skip-pound, which is in London (^) pounds.

Measures of Lubeck.
The measure of length of Lubeck is the Ell, 120 else whereof makes in London 60
else, and the 100 yards London has made here 160 else incirca.

Of Corn.
In Lubeck Corn is measured by the Last, 96 Schepels making a Last which is 10
quarters of London, and 85 Schepels is found to make a Last in Amsterdam.

Lasts 7 of 18 Barrels in Lubeck is found to make 100 Sacks of Salt being 122
small Barrels for the 100 Sacks at Armuiden in Zeland, which is found to be 7
Lasts of 18 Barrels of Salt in London, but accounted by the weight in London to
make 11 Weyes, and it is accounted 40 Bushels to a Wey, water measure of ten
gallons.

of Beer.
Beer is here sold by the Barrel, which is 50 Stoops of Antwerp, and every
Stoop has been observed to hold about 7 pints of Beer measure in England,
which is about 44 Gallons.

CHAP. CCVI. Of the Coins current in general of Germany.
Coins current in Germany.
COnsidering the privilege of coining of moneys granted by the Emperors of
Germany to diverse Cities that are Imperial, and to sundry free Princes that are
comprehended within this Empire, it will prove an impossible labor to my
confessed ignorance, in particular to set down all the coins found current
therein; besides which, the sundry accidents of war, necessities, Trade, or the
like, inforceth an uncertainty in all certain Rules and Edicts published and
agreed upon for an uniform value to be conveyed in all moneys stamped for
current, through all this Empire; yet because I would not omit what I have in
this point gathered, I will here insert the same, and leave the truth to trial
and experience: And before I enter upon this particular of Coins, it will not
be amiss to see in what nature Accounts are kept in this country.

Accounts in Germany.
First then, I find their Accounts are kept by three principal denominations,
partly consisting of imaginary Coins: the first whereof is by Florins and
Crutchers, whereof sixty is accounted to a Florin: the second is by florins,
batches and crutchers, the Florin being accounted for 15 batches, and the batch
for 4 crutchers: the third is by florins, sold and deniers, 12 deniers being a
soldo, and 20 soldoes a florin; the florin may be valued at 3 shilliings 4
pence sterling, or 33 shillings 4 pence tarine, and the batch at 2 shillings
sterling; and in payments of Merchandise, note, that a florin is accounted for
a common silver guilden, of which there is no such Coin found, being merely
imaginary, as is the same Coin of marks of Collen and Lubeck, likewise
imaginary, or at least not now coined, nor in use.

Coins in Stoad, Hamburg, and Lubeck.
Now for the current Coins observe, that first in Stoad, Hamburg, and Lubeck
before named, the gold Rhenish guilden was worth, when these notes were taken,
28 silver misen gross, or worth 36 Lubeck shillings, and the Imperial Dollar
was worth 33 Lubeck shillings.

A common silver guilden was worth 28 Lubeck shillings.

A French Crown of gold was worth 44 Lubeck shillings.

An English Angel was worth two dollars and a quarter and 2 Lubeck shillings;
or to say otherwise, it was worth 12 Flemish shillings and 4 Lubeck shillings.

Lubeck s. 7 made an English shilling sterling.

Lubeck s. 6 made a Flemish shilling, and likewise a shilling of Hamburg.

In Hamburg they coin a piece of Gold called a Portegue, which is worth 4 pound
and 8 shillings of Hamburg, or 33 marks of Lubeck. Again.

Coins current in Embden.
At Embden, upon the confines of the Empire and the Low Countries, a silver
guilden of Emden was worth 20 stivers, an Imperial dollar 45 stivers, which
since I understand is worth 48 stivers, a dollar was worth 30 stivers, a French
Crown was worth 3 Flemish guild. and 6 stivers, and now 6 stivers as also 6
Lubeck shillings make one shilling Flemish, where by the way it is to be noted,
that Princes and Cities do coin gold and silver guildens, which are found often
in their value to differ from the Imperial guildens. Again,

Coins current in Breme, Oldenburg, etc.
At Breme, Oldenburg, and in those parts, they have current coins called groats,
and small pieces stamped, called copstacks, and a dollar was there worth 4
copstacks or 55 groats, a French Crown was worth 6 copstacks, and one copstack
10 stivers or 12 groats, and this groat was worth a little more than an English
penny, a sesting was worth half a Lubeck shilling, and they have here half
sestings.

Coins current in Brunswick.
At Brunswick, a dollar was 36 mariagross, which are of equal weight with 24
silver misen gross, also 9 mariagross make 8 Lubecks, the same doller was worth
18 spitzgrossen, whereof each was worth two maria groshe.

Coins current in Magdenburg, Misen, Lipsick, etc.
At Magdenberg, Lipsick, Misen and in all the Electorate of Saxony, and in the
neighboring Tenitories to the Confines of Bohemia, a doller was worth 24
silver grossen, which are the same at 18 Spitzgrossen, or 36 maria grossen.

A Rhemish Gold Guilden was worth 27 Silver gross, and the Philip Doller was of
the same value.

A common Silver Guilden was esteemed at 21 Silver gross.

A French Crown at 33 Silver gross.

A Spanish Pistolet at 32 Silver gross.

A half Milres at 36 Sil. gros. the Hungarian Ducate at 3 ounces.

A short and long Crusado at 35 Silv. gross.

A Rosenoble at 3 Dollers, the English Angel at 2 Dollers; the Silver gross was
worth more than 2 pence, and about 2 pence sterling.

And for the small Coins, a gross was worth 4 driers, and 1 drier 2 dribellers,
and 1 dribeller was worth a pfening and half, and 12 pfening made a gross, and
two schwerd grossen made one Schneberger.

Coins current through the upper parts of Germany.
In general through all the upper parts of Germany, a Doller was esteemed at 18
batsen, a silver guilden at 15, a Philip Doller at 20, a French Crown at 24, a
gold Crown of Italy at 24, a silver Italian Crown at 22 batsen, a Rhemish Gold
Guilden through higher Germany was worth 27 silver misen gross, a silver
Guilden there as in Saxony at 21 gross, the batson roay be accounted 3 pence
English, and 4 cretzers makes a bats, 4 pfening make a cretzer, and three
cretzers make a zwelver, and 20 zwelvers make 15 batsen, which is a common
silver guilden.

But I have noted before how subject these Coins are to be hoised in common
payment, which proceeds through diverse and sundry occasions, and this being
none of the least, that Merchant foreiners do carry out the Coins of the Empire
more than they do the Commodities of the Empire, and therefore to have good
moneys, are oftentimes contented to receive them at a higher rate than they
commonly do otherwise pass at.

The Coins of Bohemia.
The Kingdom of Bohemia, as also that of Hungary, have used the Coins of the
Empire in the same value as at first coined, by common consent of both those
Nations, but it is to be understood, that as well in those free Cities, and by
those free Princes, which have the privilege of coining, there is always
stamped certain small brass money that only passes current in their
Jurisdictions, and no farther; and those passing in the Kingdom of Bohemia are
found to be these; First, 3 potchandles make one cretzer, nine cretzers and one
potchandel make four wissgross, and 30 gross of Moravia or wisgross make a
Doller; also here Merchants reckon two hellers for a pfening, and six pfenings
for a gross, and 60 gross for a shock, and 40 gross for a mark.

The Coins of Switzerland.
In Switzerland it is found that diverse of the Cantons do coin moneys, which
pass current among themselves, the principal of which Mints are found to be in
Basil, Zurich, and Schaphusen, the common and usual whereof I will only note.

Their common coin is the Rappen munts, whereon is stamped a Crow Six of these
Rappens of Basil make a plapart, or three cretzers, and 20 plaparts, or 60
cretzers make a common guilden, and 3 pfening make a cretzer.

At Zurick it is found that 6 pfenings make a shilling, and may be worth a
penny sterling, and 3 pfenings make a sickerling; two great finfers of Basil
and one little finferlin makes a bats of Basil, and in like manner 5 finferlins
make a bats, and 5 finfers 2 bats.

But my work were endless to run through the particular coins current, and
stamped in every particular place of this Empire, therefore this shall suffice
for a taste of the variety; and whosoever carries any Merchandise into these
Countries, let him be sure to know the true worth of the moneys he receives
for the same, lest he prove in conclusion a loser by his Trafick.

CHAP. CCVII. The Weights of Germany reduced to the 100 l. of London.
Weights in general of Germany reduced to the 100 l. of London.
THe next thing in order to be handled is the Weights and Measures of the Cities
of Trade in this Empire, which I have in part touched already upon the
principal Towns, the rest, or as many as have come in my collections, I shall
here insert, the more ingenious and better skilled may add the rest. And first
for the weight, which here I have reduced to the 100 l. subtle of London, the
which is found to yield in l. The 100 l. of London does make in Noremberg 88
Collen 89 Constance 88 Ausburg 91 Spiers 88 Heidelberg 92 Lipsick 92 Friburg 92
Silesia 116 Vlm 92 Vienna 81 Statin 91 Erford 81 Ipsburg 81 Salsburg gross 79
Ditto small 108 Lubeck 92 Botsen 133 Costuts 92 Misen of 16 ounces, l. 96 Of 12
ounces the l. 142 Of Merchants weight 92 Munchen 91 Wessel 91 Saxony in general
96 Norlingen 91 Frankfort 92 Breslow 116 Canoli 83 Domstreder 92 Regenberg 83
Loosen 141 Offen 92 Basil 92 Pastow 83 Hamburg 92 Copenhagen 92 Basil 92 Zurick
94 Walloons country 104

CHAP. CCVIII. Of Measures of Germany reduced to the Measures of London.
Measures of Germany.
HAving done with their Weights in general, I will do the same for their long
Measures in general, which I will reduce to the 100 Yards of London, and note,
that the same has been observed to have produced in these Cities of Germany.

Embden 163 else. Lubeck 160 else. Munster 80 else. Collen 160 else. Erford 218
else. Frankfort 169 else cloth. Jenferr 80 stables. Noremberg 160 else. For
Silk 138 else. Vienna for linen 103 else. Ditto for Silk 113 else. Prague 148
else. Ditto for Silk 160 else. Vlm 160 else. Ditto for Woollen 128 else.
Lipsick 160 else cloth. Ossenbrig^ 84 else. Breme 163 else. Hamburg 163 else.
Basil 167 else. Bautson 148 else. Ditto for Silk 160 else. Halle 178 else.
Misen 160 else cloth. Ditto for Silk 138 else. Offnes long measure 159 else.
Ditto short measure 173 else. Zearech 155 else. Statin 141 else. Ocermond 141
else. Wismar 157 else. Gripswald 163 else.

The rest I willingly omit for brevity sake, and refer these to the trial of
the better experienced.

CHAP. CCIX. Of the Trade in general of Germany.
The general trade of Germany.
THe particular Trading of several Cities being thus observed, it will not be
amiss a little to look into the Trade in general of Germany, and therewith also
the Navigation of this Nation, by which we find, that in all Countries almost
the same is principally maintained. The Cities then found on the Seacoast on
the North-side of Germany, have very great ships; yet more fit for great
stowage and burden, than either for sail or defense; and therefore oftentimes
to this end fraighted by the Netherlanders. Neither can I attribute much
commendation to the German Mariner, for those Seas in good part, and the
Baltic Sea altogether, are found free of pirates and piracies, which is the
chief reason why their Ships are found in the general to be so ill armed,
either defensive or offensive, and in one thing they concur with the Dutch to
the shame of the Christians profession, that their is never found any Prayers
used aboard their Ships, neither morning or evening, contrary to the laudable
custom and godly exercise of our English Mariners, who constantly use Prayer
and Psalms, at least four times in four and twenty hours, which is at the
setting of the four quarterly watches of the day and night. These Maritime
Cities are for the most part either Hans-Towns or free Cities, because they
enjoyed of old in all neighbor Kingdoms, great priveleges of buying any
Commodities, as well of Strangers as Citizens, and of selling their own to
either at pleasure, and to bring in or carry out all Commodities by their own
Ships, with like immunities equal to Citizens in all the said Dominions, and no
less prejudicial to others, than advantageous to themselves; and in London they
were wont to dwell together in the house called the Still yard, and there
enjoyed these and many other privileges, which now for many years have lain
dead; partly by reason the English found not these or the like privileges in
these free Hans-towns; and partly, by reason they have found it more commodious
to make use of their own shipping, as in these days it is found they do.

Notwithstanding all this, yet it is observed, that the Germans in general
apply themselves very industriously to all Traffic by land, but the free
Cities on the Sea coasts do but coldly exercise it by Sea; Beer being found to
be spent and exported amongst themselves in an incredible measure and quantity,
with an extraordinary gain, and therefore noted for one of the prime
commodities of this Empire, bringing profit not only to private men, but also
to Princes and to free States, there being no Merchandise in the World that
more easily finds a buyer in Germany, than this: for other Commodities, it is
observable, that Germany sends into Italy Linens, Corn and Wax; it sends into
England Bords, Iron, Diaper, Rhenish Wines and Noremberg wares, which can
hardly be called commodities; into Spain they send Linens, Wax, Brass, Copper,
Cordage, Mas^s, Gunpowder: and this is their principal Exportation. Now for
their Importations, Italy returns them Silks of all kinds; England Lead, Tin,
and woollen Cloths; and Spain returns them Spanish Wines, Fruits, Oils, Salt,
some Woolls, and other commodities.

I formerly noted, That the English had their Staple at Embden, the Count
whereof used them well and courteously, but Wars growing between England and
Spain, the place grew dangerous for them: for their Goods were taken, and
themselves made Prisoners, even in the mouth of the Harbor; whereupon they
removed to Hamburg, where being oppressed with new impositions, and being
denied the exercise of their Religion, they removed also thence, and settled
their Staple at Stoad.

Then also our English had their Staple at Dantzick in Prusen, for the Kingdom
of Poland, but when the Dantzickers under pretense of the Suevian war, exacted
of them a Dollar for each woollen-cloth, and as much proportionably upon all
other commodities; and afterward, though the war being ended, yet would remit
nothing of the same; and withal, forbad the English, by a law decreed, to live
in Poland, the commodities whereof were only sold there, lest they should learn
the language, and find out the mystery of that trade and Country: And lastly,
when as they exacted as much weekly of an Englishman dwelling in their City, as
they did of a Jew dwelling there amongst them, the English thereupon made
agreement with the Senate of Melvin for a 11 years, to pay them six gross for
each cloth brought in, and accordingly for all other goods, and to pay as much
more in the City of Kettle to the Duke of Prusen, for his giving them free
passage to Melvin; and so by this means they settled their Staple in Melvin:
whereupon the Dantzickers being offended with the Citizens of Melvin, and the
Hamburgers no less with those of Stoad, procured all the free Cities by a
public writing to out law not only Melvin and Stoad for receiving the English
to the common prejudice of the rest, but also Ceningsberg, the seat of the Duke
of Prusen, and the free City of Lubeck, for favoring the English in this their
course, and for permitting them being strangers, to sell their goods to any
other than the Citizens of each several City. But how these difference; came
afterward to be reconciled, and their Staples removed thence, I have showed in
other places.

Trade of Prusen.
And being now entered to speak of the Trade of Prusen a German Province, but of
late years annexed to the Crown of Poland, which of it self is of great
importance, it will not be amiss to enlarge my self upon some particulars
thereof. The English then are found to bring thither great quantity of Tin,
Lead, and woollen cloths, and other commodities, and to bring thence hard and
liquid Pitch, Hemp, Flax, Cables, Masts for Ships, Boards, and Timber for
building Linen Cloth, Wax, Mineral Salt, which in Poland they dig out of pits
like great Stones, and the same being put to the fire, is made pure, and being
black his color is more durable, and less subject to giving again than our
boiled Salt. Also they bring thence Pine Ashes for making of Soap, commonly
known to us by the name of Sope-Ashes, and Corn in great quantity; yet the
English are found seldom to have need of their Corn for the use of England,
which many times of their own they transport to other Nations; but they buy it
as the free Cities do, to transport it to other Countries, which the Low
countrymen do also buy as well for themselves, as to serve Spain, and other
Countries therewith, so great a quantity thereof is hence dispersed into all
parts of Europe.

Amber.
Amber is also brought from thence, but not gathered neither at Melvin nor
Dantzick, as some imagine, but on the Seaside of Koningsperg, where, as I
said, the Duke of Prusen holds his Court, and so all along the coast of
Curland; where, howsoever it lies in great quantity on the sands of the Sea, it
is as safe as if it were locked up in Warehouses, since it is death for any to
take up the least piece thereof, and being only by the law accounted to be the
proper commodity of the Duke, to whom the same appertains. And this being as
much as I have thought requisite to handle concerning the Trade of Germany in
general, or of the Imperial Cities and He^-Tomns in particular, I will proceed
to the next Kingdom, which in order is Denmark, and to the principal Cities,
and particular Trade thereof.

CHAP. CCX. Of Denmark, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.
Denmark, and the Provinces thereof.
DEnmark has on the East Mare Balticum, on the West the German Ocean, on the
North Sweden, on the South Germany.

This Country does afford for Merchandise, Fish, Tallow, Hides, and having
abundance of Oxen, 50000 are said to be sent hence yearly to Germany; also
Buck-skins, Armor of all so^s, furniture for shipping, Boards, such as
Wainscot, Fir-wood, etc.

This Kingdom now contains Cimbrick, Chersonese, the Islands of the Baltic,
and part of S^dia, and first this Chersonese is divided into four Provinces.

Alsatia.
Alsatia is the first, wherein are found the Cities Niemunster and Bramsted,
and is the title of the second Son of Denmark.

Dithmars.
Dithmars is the second Province, wherein are found the Cities of Marn and
Meld^, the Inhabitants of this last is esteemed so wealthy, that they are said
to cover their houses which Copper.

Slesia.
Slesia is the third, wherein are of note Sleswick, 2 Gottorp. and 3 Londen a
Haven Town.

Jutland.
Jutland is the fourth, the Towns of note are Rincopen, 2 Nicopen, 3 Holn, and
4 Arhausen.

Baltic Islands.
The Baltic Islands are 35 in number, but of them 4 are sound to be of
principal note 1 S^land, 2 Fionia, 3 Bornholm, and 4 Fimeria, of which a word.

Seeland.
In Seeland is found thirteen Cities, Copenhagen.
the chief whereof is Haffen the Kings Seat, and the only University in Denmark,
known to other Nations by the name of Copenhagen, that is, Merca^rum Portus, or
the Merchants Haven: Elsinour.
Secondly, Elsinour, standing on the Seaside, in which Town the Merchants that
have passed, or are to pass the Sound, do pay their Customs to the King: And
thirdly, Rochilt, the Sepulcher of the Danish Kings; between this Island and
the firm land of Scandivonia is the passage called the Sound, toward Muscovia,
which did formerly yield unto this King a great yearly profit, but now much
decayed since the English found out the Northern passage into Russia. This
Sound is in breadth 3 miles, and commanded o^ Scandia side by the Castle of
Helsenburgh, and on this Island by that of Cronburg, both Castles of good
defense.

Fionia.
In Fionia is found eight Towns, the principal whereof Osel, Scomberg and others.

Bornholm.
In Bornholmia is a principal City Bornholm.

Fimeria.
In Fimeria is found the City of Peterborn, and is the Island in which that
famous Mathematician Ticho Brabe built an artificial Tower, wherein he studied
the Mathematics, and wherein are still reserved many of his rare Mathematical
Instruments.

Scandia.
Scandia is the last part of this Kingdom lying part of it on this side, and
part beyond the Artick Circle, so that the longest day in the more Northern
part is about three months, the Kingdoms of Norway, Swetland, and part of
Denmark; the part of it belonging to Denmark is divided into three Provinces, 1
Halandia, 2 Schona, and Blesida.

Halandia.
In Halandia is Halaneso.

Scania.
In Scania is the City of Londis a fair Haven, Falsgerbode and the Castle of
Elsimbourg, one of the Keys of the Sound before mentioned; and the Seas are
here said sometimes so to abound with Herrings, that Ships are scarce able with
wind and Oar to break through them; and the Country is the pleasantest of all
Denmark.

Blesida.
In Blesida is found the City of Malmogia, and the strong Castle of Colmar
against the Sweedlande^. The principal Trade of this Kingdom is contained in
Copenhagen and Elsinour, therefore under the title of these two I will
comprehend the Traffic of this Kingdom.

CHAP. CCXI. Of Copenhagen, and the Trade thereof.
Copenhagen, and the Trade thereof.
COPENHAGEN is the Seat of the Kings of Denmark in Winter, and may be
interpreted the Merchants Haven, on the East Side is the Kings Palace or
Castle, which bordereth on the Sea shore, where the Haven is found to be, the
Sea being not far distant from the North side thereof: the City is of a round
form, affording little beauty, as being but meanly built of wood and clay, and
the Castle of stone. Here are found some Merchants, yet for the mostipart of no
great eminence: for the Country affords no rich commodities that may allure
others thither, or serve to be transported to other regions, whereby a gain may
be expected.

The Coins of Copenhagen.
The Moneys of this Kingdom commonly current is the Dollar, and shilling; two
Danish shillings make one Lubeck shilling, and 66 Danish shillings accounted
for a Rix Dollar, which is five shillings Sterling.

Accounts in Denmark.
Their accounts are kept by marks of 16 shillings Danish.

Their exchanges are here practiced by the Rix Dollar above mentioned, the
common current Coin of these Countries.

Measures and Weights, etc.
Their Measures and Weights I will briefly observe by themselves, and therefore
hasten to Elsinour.

CHAP. CCXII. Of Elsinour, and the Trade thereof.
Elsinour, and the Trade thereof.
ELSINOVR, of it self is but a poor Village, but much frequented by Seamen by
reason of his neighborhood to that straight Sea called the Sound, where the
King of Denmark has laid so great Impositions upon all Ships and Goods coming
out or going into the Baltic Sea, as this sole profit surpasses far all the
Revenues of his Kingdom: the strong Castle of Cronburg lies in this Village
upon the mouth of this straight, to which on the other side of this narrow Sea
in the Kingdom of Norway, another Castle is opposite, called Elsburg, which two
are the keepers of this Straight, that no Ship can pass in, or come out of the
Baltic Sea without their leave; and consequently without due payment of this
Imposition. On the South side of Cronburg Castle is the largest Road for Ships,
toward the Baltic Sea, where the King is said to have his lodgings, which
cannot choose but be a delectable prospect to all men, but especially to him:
for Ships go in and out here by Fleets of a hundred, and he is certain, that
none do pass either way but according to their burden and loading, adds
somewhat to his treasury. The Haven is able to contain a great Fleet, for it
has Cronburg Castle on the North side, the Castle of Elsburg on the East side,
and Seeland, the chief Island of the Kingdom on the West side, and the Island
Fimeria or Whern on the South side, in which I noted before, that Tycho Brahe,
the samous Mathematician, had his residence. The Danes conceive this Island to
be of such importance, as they have a Fable. That Henry the seventh of England
offered for the possession of it, as much Scarlet Cloth as would cover the
same, with a Rose Noble at the corner of each cloth. If any such offer were
made, doubtless the wildom and judgment of that Prince, knew how to make that
Island being fortified, peradventure to return him his charges again with good
Interest; but it is not credible, by reason that it cannot benefit a foreign
Prince, whole Territories heth out of the Sound, by which he must needs enter,
those before mentioned Castles commanding the entrance, though it might prove
more beneficial to some Prince bordering upon the Baltic Seas, and to whom the
Sea is open for passage.

CHAP. CCXIII. Weights in general of Denmark reduced to that of London.
Weights in general of Denmark.
NOw for the Weights of this Kingdom, they are found to differ in many places;
so many as have come to my hand, I have reduced to the subtle hundred of
London, which subtle hundred is found to produce in these Cities of Traffic
and some others adjoining, l. Aldar 87 Copping ham 92 Cracou 119 Dantzick 116
Hamburg 92 Wild 116 Elsinour 92 Lubeck 92 Melvin 120 Revel 116 Rhiga 116
Stacar 108 Stralsont 88 Bergen Norway 92

Where it is to be noted, that generally in Copenhagen, and in most parts of
Denmark, they hare a great and small hundred, one of 112 pound to the hundred,
and another of 120 pound to the hundred, accounted twelve stone of ten pound to
the stone: Also they have a Skip-pound, 32 stone of ten pound the stone, or 20
Lispound of 16 mark pound is a Skip-pound, and 20 times 16 pound is 320 pound,

CHAP. CCXIV. Measures in general of Denmark reduced to London.
Measures in general of Denmark.
AS I have done with their Weights, so I will proceed with their Measures,
reducing then to the hundred yards English, and makes in Else. Arsnis 166.
Breme 162. Breslow for cloth 148 Ditto for Silks 160 Connixborough 166 Lubeck
160 Munster 80 Ockermond 141. Revel 166 Rhostick 158. Wismar 157. Dantzick 162.
Doinin 163 Embden 163 Gripswould 163 Hamburg 163 Melvin 162 Narva 166
Ossenbrighs 84 Rhiga 166 Statin 141.

And thus much shall serve to have said for the Measures of this Country,
whereto I have added the Measures of some other the adjoining eminent Cities of
Trade and Commerce.

CHAP. CCXV. Of the Trade in general of Denmark.
Of the Trade in general of Denmark.
TO conclude, the Trade of Denmark driven by the Inhabitants, is not great,
their Country partly not affording Commodities for Merchandise; and their Seas,
I mean principally the Baltic, not being for many Months in the year navigable
for Frost. The Inhabitants are frugal in Food and Apparel, and therefore not
much addicted either to Silks or Spices, and the great Traffic and Concourse
of other Nations through the Sound, that furnishes them with all Necessaries,
makes the Inhabitants less desirous to sail abroad to fetch the same at the
first hand. Stock Fish, and other Salted Fish they send into foreign Countries,
and so also they do their Oxen and Cattle in great Quantity, besides the
Commodities which the Country does naturally afford, mentioned in the former
part of this Country's Description; neither have I heard any great fame of
their Navigations or Mariners which principally sail Northward, and little to
the Southward, tho otherwise it is conceived that next to the English their
Vessels are the strongest built to endure the Blasts of the colder Climates,
and the Scorchings of the warmer Regions; yet of late days I have understood
they have undertaken some new Discoveries and Trade to the East Indies, which
they have since fully performed, to the great Encouragement of such as shall
follow them.

CHAP. CCXVI. Of Norway, and the Cities thereof.
Norway, and the Trade thereof.
NOrway is bounded on the North with Lappia, on the East with the Dofrine
Mountains, on the other parts with the Seas.

The chief Commodities of this Country are Stock Fish, Rich Furs, Train Oil,
and Tackling for Ships, as Masts, Cables, Deal-board, Fir, and the like.

Towns are here thin, and the Houses therein poor and miserable. Nidrosia.
The chief of those that are, is Nidrosia, the Archbishops Seat of Norway,
Iceland, and Groenland. Bergen, one of the 4 ancient Marts of Europe.
The second is Bergen, one of the four ancient Mart-Towns of Europe; the other
three being London in England, Novograde in Moscovia, and Bruges in Flanders:
and all these but London are decayed, for this Bergen has yielded to
Wardhouse; Novograde, by reason of the Charge of Navigation through the Baltic
into the Northern Passage, has given way to St. Nicholas; and Bruges being
deprived of her Traffic by Antwerp, it is now also removed to Amsterdam; for
the Hollanders by blocking up the Haven, but especially by keeping of Bergen up
Zome, have such a command over the River, that no Vessel can pass or repass
without their License. Finmarch.
But to proceed, Finmarch also appertains to this Kingdom and both to the
Dane: the chief Cities are Saman, secondly Hielso, both Sea-towns, Woodhouse.
but the principal is Wardhouse, seated in the very Northern End of all the
Country, being a Town of little Trade, but great Concourso of Shipping that
this way are bound for Moscovia, which must needs touch here, and it is so
called, as seated in a little Island called Ward.

Weights of Bergen.
In Bergen in Norway the Common Weight is a Pound, the 100 l. of London has
been found to make here 92 l. but weighing with a Sling, as they do, is found
to be very uncertain.

The Measure is ^

The particulars of the Trade of this Country, here necessarily to be handled,
I am enforced to omit, by reason of my Ignorance, therefore entreat the better
experienced to supply my Defect therein.

CHAP. CCXVII. Of Swethland, and the Trade thereof.
Swethland, and the Trade thereof.
SWethland is bounded on the East with Moscovia, on the West with the Dosrine
Hills, on the North with the Frozen Seas, and on the South with the Baltic
Seas.

Commodities of Sweden.
The Commodities that this Country affords for Merchandise, are Lead, Copper,
and Silver, drawn out of their Mines, and it abounds also with Hides of
Bucks, Goats and Oxen, Tallow, Tar, Malt, Barley, Rich Furs, and the like.

It contains five Provinces, Lappia, Bodia, Finland, Gothland and Sweden; of
all which a word.

Lappia.
In Lappia I find not any City of note, being cold and comfortless.

Bodia.
In Bodia are the Towns of Vireis and Helsinga.

Finland.
In Finland are many strong Towns, populous and rich, Albo and Narve, both of
great Strength; also those two strong Cities of Veburg and Ruiallia, which cost
the Swebes 100000 Crowns yearly the keeping, by nature defending his own, and
offending his Enemies Territories.

Gothland.
In Gothland stands the chief City of this Kingdom, Stockholm, seated in the
Waters, after the manner of Venice, and the Residence of the Swedish King; next
Lodusia, a Town of great Traffic; then Waldburg and Colmar, two impregnable
Cities.

Sweden.
In Sweden are the chief Cities of Upsal a Bishopric, Nicopea a Sea-town of
good Strength, and Copperdole, most famous for its abundance of Brass, which is
here in such plenty, that there are found 400 Brass Pieces in the Castle of
Stockholm; under which I will comprehend the Trade of Sweden.

CHAP. CCXVIII. Of Stockholm, and the Trade thereof.
Stockholm. and the Trade thereof.
BEcause I intend, upon the general Trade of Estland, to handle some particular
Cities belonging to the Crown of Sweden, therefore I shall be the briefer upon
the Trade of this City of Stockholm, the Metropolis of this Kingdom. Stockholm
then being the Residence of this King, whose Arms of late were so prevalent in
Germany, is accounted famous in these Northern Regions for the great Concourse
of Merchants and Traffic here daily practified seated in watery Marshes, after
the manner of Venice, and supposed to be built upon Piles, and therefore bears
in their Language some Construction thereof, which not improperly may bear in
our ancient English the same sense: It is situate in part upon the Lake of
Meller, and in part upon the East-Sea, out of which the great Trade of Shipping
to this place does come and enter by a deep and narrow Channel, spacious and
commodious for Ships of the greatest Burden; but the Fort of Waxholm on one
side of the Passage, and the Fort of Digne so fitly seated opposite to the
same, in the narrowest of the Gut and Straight, command the whole Channel, and
guard the Lake and City, and no Vessel is suffered either to go in or out, but
here have their Conge and Admission. It is besides fortified with a strong
Castle, wherein are found, for the Defense thereof, 400 Pieces of Brass
Artillery; and for the Beauty thereof, it is adorned with many goodly private
and public Buildings, the King's Palace being more renowned for its Antiquity,
than the stately Structure thereof.

Commodities of Stockholm.
The Commodities for Transportation found in this City are principally Iron,
Steel, Copper, Wire, all sorts of Grain, Lead, and other Minerals, also Honey,
Wax, Tallow, Hides brought from Mosco, and the like: which is hence dispersed
into all parts of these Northern Climates.

Coins current in Swethland.
The Moneys generally current throughout the Kingdom of Sweden, is the Dollar,
which is divided into Marks, and 8 Marks make a Dollar; and this Mark is
divided into Clippings, so that two Clippings make a Mark, and a Clipping is
accounted for 9 Stivers Flemish; and by this Dollar they exchange with other
neighboring Countries, and it is valued in sterling Money at (^)

Weights of Stockholm.
The Weight in use here is the Pound, and the 100 l. of London has produced
here 116 l. They have here also two Ship-pounds, one proper to this Place,
which is 320 l. of this Weight, and the other is 340 l. The proper Ship-pound
of Dantzick is 34 Stones, as in the Chapter of Dantzick appears; and this
Quintar or Pound is found to agree with Narva, Riga, Revel, Danizeck, and some
Towns of Trade in the Baltic Sea.

Measures of Stockholm.
The common Measure of Length here used is the Ell, and is the same in all
Sweden, except some principal Towns of this Tract hereafter noted, and the 100
Yards of London does produce 1^^ Else; but note, That in Barrow in Sweden this
Ell is found to be very uncertain, for the Bigness of a Man's Head is measured
about with a Rope, and this they account for an Ell; so that here a great Head
may be some benefit to a Merchant, for by this Rule the greatest Loggerhead
shall have consequently the largest Measure.

Of Corn.
Corn is here sold by a Measure called a Loop, 23 Loops make a Last in
Amsterdam, or 10 Quarters in London.

CHAP. CCXIX. Of Moscovia, and the Trade thereof.
Moscovia, and the Trade thereof.
MOscovia is bounded on the East with Tartary, on the West with Livonia,
Lituania, and part of Sweden; on the North with the Frozen Ocean, and on the
South with the Caspian Sea, the Turks, and Palus M^otis.

Commodities of Moscovia.
This Country affords for Merchandise, Furs of many sorts, Flax, Hemp,
Whales-grease, Honey, Wax, Canvas, Ropes, Cables, Caveare, Astrican Hides,
Tallow, Raw-hides and Bulgars.

Famous Rivers of Moscovia.
The many Rivers that are found to be in this Country do much further Trading in
general: F^st Tanais, which disburtheneth it self into Palus Moeotis. Secondly,
Dunia, which enters into the Scythian Seas, at the Abbey of St. Nicholas, where
our English, since the Discovery of the Northern Passage, use to land and
disperse themselves into all parts of this vast Empire. Thirdly, Boristhenes,
that enters into Pontus Euxinus. Fourthly, Onega, which opens it self into
the Bal^k Sea. And lastly Volga, which with no less than 70 mouths disgorgeth
it self into the Caspian.

This Empire is divided into nine principal Provinces, which together with the
chief Towns thereof I shall only touch.

Novograde.
Novogradia is first, the chief Town being Novograde, seated on the Dunia, and
once one of the four ancient Mart-Towns of Europe, now of late decayed, since
the Discovery of the new Passage unto the Town of St. Nicholas, by the River
Obye.

Plescovia.
Plescovia is the second, wherein is the City Plescove, the only walled City in
Moscovia, and yet of no great Eminence.

Veladomira.
Valadomira is the next, having also a Town of that Name.

Rhesen.
Rhesen is the fourth, wonderful plenty in Corn, that neither can Birds fly,
nor Horses run through it for thickness; the chief Town Rhesen was the
Metropolis of Russia, it is the first part of Moscovia, abounding in Grain,
Honey, Fish, and Fowl without number.

Servia.
Servia is the fifth, the chief Towns are Staradab and Pativola.

Permia.
Permia is the sixth, the chief City ^s Sickwiardley, abounding in Stags.

Candora.
Candora is the seventh.

Petrosa.
Petrosa is the eighth: in both these Countries the Inhabitants do live under
ground, and have for half the year together perpetual Day, and the other half
perpetual Night, as situated beyond the Arctick.

Moscovia.
Moscovia is the ninth, Mosco.
and so named of the principal City Mosco, being about five miles round, having
therein 16 Churches, of which the one half are made of Wood and Dirt, as most
of the Houses are: the Emperors Palace stands in the midst, and is fortified
with 3 Bulwarks, and 17 Turrets, continually guarded with 25000 Soldiers. This
is the most populous Province of all this great Empire: for it extends 2000
miles in Length.

Smalensko.
Besides these, there are yet some petty Provinces wherein are found the Towns
of Smalensko, then Toropiers, next Colopigrod, Landiskron, and some others of
lesser note, which I willingly omit, till my Observation be better.

The Trade of the English was begun here in the time of Queen Elizabeth of
England, and Basiliades King of this Country, about the year 1575, and within
10 years after it was perfectly settled: and because the Trade of Moscovia is
confined to a small Circuit in these vast Dominions, it will not be improper
that I comprehend the same under the Title of the Metropolis of this Kingdom,
Mosco.

CHAP. CCXX. Of Mosco, and the Trade thereof.
Mosco, and the Trade thereof.
MOsco is the Metropolis of all this large Kingdom, to which the Emperor some
years past repaired, most fit for the Government of so large an Empire, as
accounted the midst of all his Dominions. It is pleasantly seated on the River
Mosca, running into Tanais, where it loses its name; and passing Assaw,
disgorgeth into the Palus Meotis, and so into the Euxinus. About fifty years
past it was esteemed ten miles in circuit, and in its height of Greatness then
burnt by the Tartars wherein 80000 Persons were consumed, and since reduced to
five miles compass, beautified with 16 Churches, some of Stone, some of Timber
and Earth, and with the Palace of the Great Duke situate in the very Heart
thereof, enriched with the Branches of two Rivers for Use and Ornament, which
water two strong Forts that defend the place. St. Nicholas.
At the Abbey of St. Nicholas the Patron of this Country upon the River of Dunia,
or Obby, the English Merchants use to land, and thence disperse themselves to
Smalensko, Novograde, hither and into all other parts of this vast Empire,
amongst whom they find kind entertainment, and by the Favor of the Prince have
larger Immunities granted unto them than to any other Nation, their trafficking
attributed to the never dying Fame of Queen Elizabeth, in whose days the Trade
was here first settled, and to the plausible Behavior of the English Merchants
in general.

Accounts in Moscovia.
The Merchants here are observed to keep their accounts in several manners; some
as the English, by Rubbles and Pence, or as the Inhabitants term them,
Muskofkins, 200 whereof making a Rubble, which is accounted two Rix Dollars.
Some again, as the Dutch and other Nations, by Rubbles, Grevens, and Muskofkins
or Pence, accounting 20 pence to a Greven, and 10 Grevens to a Rubble, which is
most in use here, this Rubble being found an imaginary Coin, and not real.

Coins current in Moscovia.
The Current Money here is a Capeck, in value a Stiver Flemish, and somewhat
more than as English Penny; for 10 Capecks is a Greven, which the English call
12 pence sterling, because that 10 Grevens is a Rubble, which is 10 shillings
sterling. Three Capecks they call an Altine, by which name all Receipts and
Payments are made in bargaining and Contracts, 33 Altius and 1 Capeck making a
Rubble.

Exchanges of Archangel.
At Archangel is sound practiced amongst the Merchants an Exchange for Moneys,
rising and falling, according as the Russ Moneys are observed to be plentiful
or scarce; the English sometimes among themselves giving 11 shillings, and 11
shillings 6 pence sterling in England for the Rubble here; and the Moneys
commonly taken there in August to be paid in London the last of December
following.

Weights of Moscovia.
The Weight of Moscovia common in use is the Pood for fine Goods, and the
Bercovet for gross Goods, the one being derived from the other.

By the Pood is weighed Silk, Bever-wooll, Yefts, etc. and is accounted for 40
l. Russ weight: and 3 Pood has been observed to make 112 l. English, which by
this computation should make 37 l. Averdupois, and all Goods there bought by
the Pood is 10 per cent. Loss in England.

By the Bercovet is weighed Tallow, Hemp, Cable, Yarn, Coil or Lard-ropes, and
all gross Commodities, and is a Russ Ship pound: 10 Poods makes a Bercovet,
which makes 300 l. subtle Averdupois, so that all Goods being bought there by
the Bercovet or Ship pound is hell 10 per cent. Profit: for commonly the
English Merchants reckon the over-weight to pay the Freight of some Goods so
bought.

Measures of Moscovia.
The Measure in Length here generally used is called an Archin, being a Brabant
Ell and a Nail, or something more than of an English Yard, reckoned by the
English Merchants there resident two per cent. more, and may be incirca 28
inches, so that the 100 Archins may produce in London 77 in 78 Yards, and the
100 Yards be here 128 Archins, or thereabout.

Commodities of Moscovia.
The Native Commodities of this Country in general I have already nominated, it
will not be amiss I should particularly view them, and the ordinary Rates they
carry in price, together with the Marks whereby their Goodness and Quality is
discerned.

Sables.
Their most precious Commodities and Merchandise hence exported by foreign
Nations are their rich Furs; the principal is the Sables, bought commonly by
the Timber, which contains 40 Skins, which must be large and well-colour'd, and
are found of all Prices as in Goodness, from 15 to 200 Rubbles the Timber.

Black Fox.
Black Fox-Skins are known amongst all Northern Merchants for the richest Fur
in the World, and is here found in great store, bearing a Price as in Largeness
and Growth, from 5 to 200 Rubbles apiece.

Otters.
Oter-Skins are here found plenty, by reason of the many Rivers of this
Country, accounted the Region of Springs and Streams, sold by the Timber of 40
Skins, from 5 to 40 Rubbles the Timber.

Minikins.
Minikins are sold by the Timber of 40 Skins, and commonly sold about 6 Rubbles
the Timber.

Martins.
Martins are also sold by the Timber of 40 Skins, about 15 Rubbles per Timber,
rising as found in richness of Hair.

Ermins.
Ermins sold also by the Timber of 40 Skins, about 2 Rubbles per Timber.

Squirrels.
Grawert or Squirrels sold by the thousand, as in Goodness, from 14 to 30
Rubbles the thousand.

Foxes red and white and dun.
Red Foxes by the 10 Skins, at 10 or 15 Nobles the 10 Skins.

White Foxes by the Piece, about 5 Altins the piece.

Dun Foxes by the Piece, about 40 Altins the Piece.

Sable Rands sold by the Pair, from 2 to 6 Rubbles the Pair.

Bever.
Bever-wooll is a Staple Commodity also of this Kingdom, and sold by the Pound
about 2 Rubbles per Pound.

Bever Wombs also by the Pound, being a thin Skin and well grown, is commonly
worth 1 Rubble per Pound.

These are the ordinary Furs which their Northern Climate affords for
Merchandise, the next found are these.

Bees Wax.
Yellow Wax is here found made by the Industry of the Be and hands of Man, in
great abundance, sold by the Pood, which is 40 l. here; the hardest and best
colored bear Price here commonly about 4 in 5 Rubbles the Pood.

Tallow.
Tallow is sold by the Berquet, which is 10 Pood, being clean, white and hard,
about 7 in 8 Rubbles the Berquet.

Tar.
Tar is sold by the Hogshead, being thick, as the best is commonly worth (^)
per Hogshead of (^) Gallons English.

Train Oil.
Train Oil is sold by the Barrel, which is half a Hogshead, and discerned by
its Clearness without Grounds, and of a whitish Color, about 4 Rubbles per
Barrel, of (^) Gallons English.

Hemp.
Hemp is sold by the Berquet of 10 Poods, being clean and green, bears price
commonly from 3 to 5 Rubbles the 10 Pood.

Flax.
Flax is sold by the Bercovet; the bright Silver-colour is held the best,
commonly about 7 Rubbles the Bercovet.

Cable Yarn.
Cable Yarn is sold by the Bercovet, and being well spun round and not too much
twisted, from 67 Rubbles the Bercovet.

Coyls.
Coyls or Tard Ropes by the Bercovet, about 7 Rubbles the Bercovet: where note,
That the English and other Nations hither trading, buy here great quantity of
Hemp, and spin it out here into Yarn, to save the charges of Freight: every
1000 Poods do cost about 100 or 110 Rubbles Charges; and, if the Hemp prove
good, there is found near Loss; if bad, so much more, and worth, being in Cable
Yarn, as I said above, from 6 to 7 Rubbles the Bercovet.

Cow-hides.
Dried Cow-hides, being large and weighty, are sold by the 100 Hide, worth from
40 to 44 Rubbles the 100.

Evits.
Red Evits by the Pair, at 2 Rubbles per Pair, and sometimes sold by the Pood,
at 40 Rubbles per Pood: And note, That the White are commonly worst esteemed by
in price.

Losh-hides.
Losh-hides are sold by the Piece, the largest and not worm-eaten is the best,
from 6 Grevens to 5 Rubbles the Piece, as in Goodness.

Feathers.
Duck-Feathers sold by the Pood, as in Goodness, from 3 to 5 Rubbles the Pood.

Caviare.
Caviare is also a principal Commodity here sold by the Pood, and commonly
worth 40 Altines the Pood.

Linens.
Coarse Linen is made here in great quantity, sold by the 1000 Archins of Yard,
and the broad from 15 to 20 Rubbles the 1000 Archins, as found in Fineness.

Some other Commodities this Country affords, which I omit, as of no great
consequence.

CHAP. CCXXI. Of the Trade in general of Moscovia.
Of the Trade in general of Moscovia.
THE excellent Commodity of the great Rivers that in all places of this large
Empire are found to water and enrich this Country, should much incite this
Nation to the Trade of Merchandise; but it is often found, that where Nature is
most liberal in her Furtherances, the Inhabitants prove most backward in their
Endeavors; the natural Coldness of the Climate enclosing the People into their
warm Stoves, and the Neighborhood of the Tartars (who in some respect
resembling Dogs, neither suffering the Moscovites to traffic, nor yet traffic
themselves) by their continual harrying of the Country, and the often
Incursions and Wars of the Swedes, may in some sort serve them for a reasonable
Excuse; yet it is sound, that these Wars prove main Helps sometimes to their
Traffic, especially in Furs, for their Bodies thereby inured to Cold and
Hardness, make the Pastime of Hunting a profitable Exercise in the worst Season
of the year, the rest of their Merchandise come to them very near in the same
kind: for it wholly depends upon Manufactures and Labor for Cordage; Linens
and Yarn they have from the Earth, as their Hides, Tallow and Wax upon the
same; the Caveare and Train Oil, and some other such by Fishing: so that it may
be supposed they are more addicted to Husbandry and Fishing than to
Merchandising. The English about the year 1575 first discovered the Trade, and
found here good Entertainment and great Privileges from the then reigning
Prince, and the first Discoverers were in London incorporated into a Society of
Merchants, by the name of the Moscovia Company, by Grant of Queen Elizabeth;
which Company has been subject to some Alterations and Contingencies of their
Trade, by reason of some cross Accidents happening; Mr Henry Graway Alderman,
being at present Governor.
but being in England ordered by the Advice of a Governor, Deputy, and certain
select Committee, and in Moscovia by an Agent, who regulate the same, by whose
Wisdom they have of late so prudently settled their Trade in general, and
reformed their past Errors, that it is now seen to flourish, and in likelihood
to increase daily, to the particular Benefit of that Company, and the Good both
of this and that Kingdom in general.

CHAP. CCXXII. Of Polonia, and the Trade thereof.
Poland, and the Trade thereof.
POland is limited on the East with Boristhenes, which parts it from Germany,
on the West with Vistula, which parts it from Germany, on the North with the
Baltic Sea, and Sinus Frinicus, on the South with Hungary.

Commodities of Poland.
The chief Merchandise that this Country affords for Transportation, is Barley,
Oats, Anber, Wax, Honey, Hemp, Pitch, Yar, Rosin, and some Cordage, with other
Commodities.

Rivers of Poland.
The chief Rivers are, first Vistula, navigable 400 miles, and ends in the
Baltic Sea, Niger, Reuben, Bog, Mimel, and others. The Provinces are accounted
to be 11, and the principal Towns are as follows.

Luconia.
Luconia is the first, in length 500 miles, in breadth 160; where are Riga an
Archbishopric, Derpt a Town of great Commerce, Ruialia and Narve two strong
Towns.

Lituania.
Lituania is the second, abounding with Beasts, which yield the Inhabitants
Furs for Commodities; the chief Cities are Vilna, Vilcomire and Brescia.

Volinia.
Volinia is the third, wherein are found Kiovia and Circassia.

Samogitia.
Samogitia is the fourth, the chief Town is Camia.

Podolia.
Podolia is the fifth, affording three Harvests of one Sowing; the chief City
is Camiense, held invincible, seated on high Rocks, Orkacow, Wincecsa, and
others.

Russia,
Russia Nigra is the sixth, wherein are found Leinburg, Grodeck, etc.

Prussia.
Prussia or Spruce is the seventh, wherein upon the Seacoast is Amber found;
the chief Cities are Dantzick, a famous Mart, especially for all sorts of
Grain, 1000 Measures whereof being here daily sold. 2. Regiomount or Conisberg,
a famous University. 3. Heilsperg. 4. Manberg. 5. Angenberg. 6. Culne, and
others.

Podlasia.
Podlasia is the eighth, wherein are Ticocksin, where the Royal Treasury is
kept, Biesco, Knisen, and others.

Masovia.
Masovia is the ninth, the prime City being Marksow.

Poland.
Poland is the tenth, wherein is the Metropolis of Polonia which is Cracovia,
seated pleasantly on the River Vistula; here are also the Cities of Lublins,
Guisna, Siradia and others; and of the principal of these, or others seated in
this Tract, as follows.

CHAP. CCXXIII. Of Cracovia, and the Trade thereof.
Cracovia, and the Trade thereof.
CRacovia is the chief, and Metropolis of all the Kingdom of Poland, where the
King and his Council have their continual Residence; it is seated in a Plain,
having Mountains on all sides, but somewhat distant; it is compassed with two
strong Walls of Stone, and a dry Ditch; the Building is very fair, of
Freestone, 4 stories high, but covered with Tiles of Wood or Shingles, it is
of round Form, in the midst whereof stands a large quadrangular Marketplace,
wherein is seated the Cathedral Church, and the Senate house for the City,
about which are many Shops for Merchants: upon the East Side of the City is the
King's Castle, fair and well built on a Hill, lying open on the South Side,
without any Building above the Wall; on the East side are the King's and
Queen's Lodgings, on the North-side Lodgings for Feasting, on the West a
Chapel where the Kings are interred: it has not received any great Fame for
Merchandising, many Scotch-men have attained to some Estate here by Trading,
but it may more properly be called Pedlarising than Merchandising, for they
have a moveable Magazine which they transport by Horse from Town to Town,
wherein their Commodities are enclosed; and not a few such are found to have
begun this Traffic at first by their Backs, and afterward by Horses.

Their Coins current with their Weights and Measures I shall here insert.

Coins current in Polonia.
It is not above 300 years since the Polonians used Silver Coins stamped; for
before that time they did traffic with little pieces of uncoined Silver, and
by the Exchange of Skins, and other such Commodities; but at this day they make
all Contracts by Silver Guildens, but have no such real Coin amongst them: the
Coins current are these, a Gold Ducat, known by the name of Polander, is of the
same value with the Hungarian Ducat, and worth 70 Polish Groshe; a Silver
Guilden or Florin is worth 30 Polish Groshe, which is 2 s. sterling; a Dollar
in specie is worth 40 Polish Groshe; but in all Contracts for buying and
felling, the Dollar is accounted 36 Grosh; a Creitzer is worth 3 Potchanels; 18
Deniers make 1 Grosh; a Grosh of Poland or Bobenia, is worth 7 Potchanels; 16
Whites make 1 Ort, 4 Orts make a Dollar, valued at 4 s. 4 d. sterling.

Weights of Cracovia.
The common Weight of Cracovia is the Pound, 136 l. whereof is here acounted a
Quintar, which makes in London 114 l. circa, and the 100 l. of London has
yielded here about 120 l. but the common Pound is reduced to a Stone, and to a
Ship Pound, which is 10 of the said St^es.

Measures of Cracovia.
The common Measure of Length is an Ell, which is an English Ell, but they sell
their Linen by Shocks, which produces 57 Else English the Shock.

CHAP. CCXXIV. Of Dantzick, and the Trade thereof.
Dantzick and the Trade thereof.
DAntzick is a very fair City, standing at the foot of a great Mountain that
hangs over it, the famous River Vistula passing by it on the East Side, and
running toward the North falls into the Baltic Sea, a little Brook enters the
City on the South Side, and runs through it toward the North, affording many
Commodities to the City: as first a Fair Water Conduit, where by a Mill the
Waters are drawn into a Cistern, and thence by Pipes serving every private
Citizens House, then a Corn mill for the Senate (besides their private Mills.)
which affords them in every hour a golden Guilden throughout the year to their
public Treasury; and besides many other Mills, it has one for sawing of
Boards and Timber, having an Iron Wheel, which not only drives the Saw, but
hooks in and turns the Boards to the Saw without the help of Hands; the Corn
Granaries of this Town are also fair, remarkable and many in number, wherein
the Citizens do lay up the Corn coming out of Poland, and according to the
Wants of Europe, carry it into many Kingdoms, and many times relieve fruitful
Provinces in time of casual Dearth; into which Granaries, under a great
Penalty, no Man may carry either Fire or Candle lighted, by a Law enacted
amongst them.

The City is compassed with one Wall, yet contains three several Cities,
governed by three distinct Senates, out of which one chief Senate is chosen to
govern the whole City; and according to the Roman Superstition they have St.
George for their Protector, whose Red Cross they carry in their Flags, as does
also England, Genoua in Italy, and the Island Saio in the Arches; the City is
seated about one English mile from the Baltic Shore, the Port being called
Dermind, where the Ships of Burden do ride to lade and unlade their
Commodities; and the City being acknowledged a Free Town, is permitted to coin
Moneys; which as I find observed I shall note here, together with the Weights
and Measures here in use.

Accounts in Dantzick.
Their Accounts are kept here in sundry manners; the common being by Polish
Guilders, of 30 Gross, and 12 d. to a Grosh.

But Merchants buy Commodities here by the great Mark of 60 Gross, and by the
lesser of 15, and also by the Dollar of 35 Gross, of 3 Stivers the Grosh.

Coins current in Dantzick.
Their Moneys current being thus accounted; 1 great Mark is 2 Polish Guilders; 1
Polish Guilder is worth 2 lesser Marks; 1 lesser Mark worth 15 Grosh, and the
Grosh 18 d. Besides which, they coin Hungarian Ducats of Gold as they do in
Poland, and they have 2 Coins in Gold, called a Milres, and half a Milres; each
Milres is 3 Dollars and 2 Soslins, 36 Polish Grosh are here a Dollar.

Weights of Dantzick.
The Weight in use here is the Pound for fine Goods, the 100 l. in London making
here 116 l. Besides which they have a Skip pound and a Lis-pound thus
distinguished, 16 Mark pound are a Lis-pound, and 20 Lis-pound make a
Skip-pound, by the small Stone of 24 l. for Spices, etc.

But they have also a great Stone to weigh gross Wares, as Flax, Wax, and the
like, of 34 l. whereof 10 l. to the Skip-pound of 340 l.

Measures of Dantzick.
The Measure for Length of this City is the Ell, the 100 whereof makes in London
about 49 Else, and the 100 yards of London do here make 162 or 163 Else incirca.

The Measure of Beer is the Fat, which contains 180 Stoops, and is accounted 81
Stoops of Antwerp.

The Measure of Corn here is the Last, which contains 61 shepels, 56 whereof
make a Last in Amsterdam, or 10 Quarters of London, 4 shepels make a Mud, which
is the Ship-pound beforementioned of 34 l.

Accounts in Estland.
Merchants for the most part throughout all Estland are found to keep their
Accounts in Flori^ or Guilders, and in Groshes and Deniers, accounting 12
Deniers to the Grosh, and 20 Grosh to the Guilder or Florin.

CHAP. CCXXV. Of Elbin, and the Trade thereof.
Elbin, and the Trade thereof.
ELbin, a small yet a fair City, and of late days compassed with Walls, grown
great and large by the Trade and Residence of the English Merchants, who since
upon some Grievance and Coffeehouse are hence removed. In this City lies the
Gross of the Trade of Prussen, especially for all the gruff Goods of that
Dukedom; it once appertained to the Testonick Knights, but now to the Kings of
Poland, and whom for the present the Citizens acknowledge for their Protector,
and otherwise it yields him but little Obedience, being of it self a Free City:
from this City toward the North-east is a Channel that runs up to
Conixburg, the Seat of the Dukes of Prusland, by which all Commodities are
transported and conveyed from one to the other.

Weights of Elbin.
The Coins current, and the manner of their Accounts here kept, I have touched
before, and the Weight in use here is the Pound, 40 whereof make a stone, and
10 stone of 40 l. make the Ship pound, which is 400 l. and is 350 l. of their
great Weight, and the 100 l. of London has been found to make here 120 l.

The Last of Wheat is here accounted for 5200.

Measures of Elbin.
The Measure of Length in use here is the Ell, and the 100 yards of London are
found to make here 163 Else. There are also in this Tract found for eminent
Cities of Trade, Conixburg, Stetin, Straelsond, Revel, Riga, of which a word or
two, and first of Conixburg.

CHAP. CCXXVI. Of Conixburg, and the Trade thereof.
Conixburg, and the Trade thereof.
COnixburg, vulgarly called Queensburg, and in Italian, Mount Royal, is the
Metropolis of this Duchy, seated upon an Inlet of the Baltic Sea, and washed
with the pleasant River Fiegol; it is found to have an Academy for Sciences,
and well stored with Merchants from all the Northern parts of the World; and
here the Merchants of Prusen keep their Factors for the vending of their inland
Commodities. Upon this shore is also found in some quantity that excellent
Amber, which the Inhabitants call Berstein, which in English may be translated
the Burning Stone, of which some Writers make three sorts, the first coming
from certain Gummy Trees, the second made by Art of Gold and Silver, and other
ingredients; and the third, this sort coming naturally from the bottom of these
Seas, which for six Months are frozen up, and deny the Seaman and Merchant the
use of Navigation.

Weights of Conixburg.
The Moneys and Accounts here in use are mentioned before: and the common Weight
used amongst Merchants is the Stone, containing 40 pound, and 10 Stone makes a
Ship pound, of 400 pound, and the 100 l. Averdupois of London does yield here
about 120 l. or 112 l. besides which, they have also the Ship pound of Dantzick
in use for some Commodities of 350 l. but this Weight is to be avoided by the
Strangers as being ever accounted too favorable to the Citizens.

Measures of Conixburg.
The common Measure of length is the Ell here for all Commodities measureable:
the 100 Yards of London, has made here by Observation 166 incirca. And thus
much shall suffice to have said of this City; from whence proceeding, I come
next to Rhiga and Revel, two eminent Cities in this Tract.

CHAP. CCXXVII. Of Rhiga, and the Trade thereof.
Rhiga, and the Trade thereof.
RHiga is the principal City of Livonia, or Lissland, seated near the Embosure
of the River Dunia, strengthened with an exceeding strong Wall, many Ordnance
to desend it against all Enemies, and bordering upon the Lissland Sea: it was
formerly the chief residence of the Teutonick Knights, and then and now
reinforced by the Garrison of D^mund, accounted one of the impregnable Forts of
this Northern Climate, where all Ships entering, are searched, and pay a certain
Toll or Duty: the Inhabitants curious for the preservation of their Liberty,
acknowledge the King of Poland for their Protector, to whom they pay a yearly
Contribution, but else are governed by their own ancient Laws and Privileges,
which they enjoyed from the Knights their old Masters, at the resignation of
this Country to that King.

Commodities of Rhiga.
The Commodities of this Country for Merchandising and Exportation, is Corn, and
Grain of all sorts, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Wax, Rosin, Tar, Horses, and all sorts
of rich Furs, as Martins, Ermins, Sables, Bevers and the like, not wanting any
necessary for nourishment save Wine and Oil, which foreign Nations do bring
them.

Weights of Rhiga.
The Weight in use is the Pound, 20 pound whereof makes a Lis-pound, and 20
Lis-pound makes a Ship-pound, and 12 Ship pound being 4000 pound, is accounted
a Last of Rye both here and at Narva, and the 100 pound of London has been
observed to make here 116 pound.

Measures of Rhiga.
The Measure is the Ell, agreeing with the Ell in use in Kevel, Conixburg, and
Narva, 100 yards London making 160 incirca.

Coins in Rhiga.
The Coins and Accounts differ not much here in value from the others
beforementioned, yet found to differ in appellation: for the Rix-Dollar, and
the Mark-Lups, is here all one, which makes two Swedens or common Marks, and
one Sweden is eight Lups-shillings, one Lups is two Shillings, one Shilling is
twelve Pence, and one Penny is two Hellers.

CHAP. CCXXVIII. Of Revel, and the Trade thereof.
Revel, and the Trade thereof.
REvel is nothing inferior for Trade to Rhiga, situated on the North of the
Bal^ Seas, famoused in these Northern Countries for the safety and
commodiousness of the Haven: it is well stored of Merchants that frequent the
place for the Traffic of the Commodities thereof, nominated in the aforegoing
Chapter. The Inhabitants stand much upon the^ ancient Privileges granted them
by their old Masters the Teutonick Knights, and acknowledging the King of
Swedeland for Protector, to whom they yield obedience, the keeping of which
cost him 100000 Crowns yearly, as naturally defending his own, and offending
his Neighbors Territories. This City in one thing has a larger freedom than
Rhiga, and is the same as in Lubeck for coining of Moneys, which they do four
square, yet are bound to stamp the same of the same worth and value as the
current Coins of Poland, therefore I shall not need further to insist thereupon.

Weights of Revel.
Their common Weight is a pound, their Ship-pound is 400 l. and the 100 l. of
London make here 116 l.

Exchanges of Revel.
There is found some Exchanges practiced in these parts by the Mark Swedens of
16 s. and by the Mark-Lups of 32 s. etc.

Measures of Revel.
Their common Measure of length is the Ell, agreeing with that of Conixburg and
R^, the 100 Yards, London, making by computation incirca 166 Else here. Narva
also seated (...) this Tract, agrees in Weight and Measures with Revel,
therefore I shall not need to in^ further thereupon.

CHAP. CCXXIX. Of Stralsont, and the Trade thereof.
Stralsont, and the Trade thereof.
STralsont lies also in this Tract, and is found seated on the Baltic Sea,
opposite to the Island of Raugi, where the late King of Sweden first landed in
his Invasion of the Empire: it is now subject to the Duke of Pomeran, and in
whose cause it has endured; long and straight Siege; but being well and
strongly fortified, by suffering it overcame, and (...) now accounted a famous
Mart in these Northern parts for Grain, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Honey, Wax, Hides,
Tallow, and the like. Here passes in Merchandise the Moneys of Nor^, Denmark,
Sweden, and Germany, of all which I have spoken, and the Duke has also a
pecular Coin, which is stamped in equal value to the Imperial Dollar, as above
is said.

Weights of Stralsont.
The Weight of Stralsont is the Pound, 10 whereof is accounted for a Stone, and
16 for a Lis-pound, and the 100 l. in London has produced here about 88 in 89
pound.

Measures of Stralsont.
The Measure of length is the Ell, and is found to agree with the Ell of Statin,
as is showed hereafter.

Julin.
I must not here omit a word in memory of the ancient City of Julin, seated in
the Duchy, and which once was the principal City of Trade in all this Sea: for
here the Vand^, Saxons, Muscovites, Polonians, Swedes, English, Danes, and
Germans, had their several Quartes of residency for Commerce; and all the
Commodities of these Countries were brought ^ither by these Nations. It is
noted, that the Inhabitants were the last of all these Northern People that
embraced the Christian Religion, by reason that being in the height of their
prosperity, perceiving the Gospel of Christ to thrive and increase in all their
Neighboring Territories, strictly prohibited, that no Stranger whatsoever here
resident should embrace the same, nor that any should as much as mention any
new Religion unto them; but in these latter days their great Traffic is lost,
and they are become Religious according to the Superstition of that Religion
they use, and since have suffered much by the vexation of the continual Wa^ of
the Danes, and appears now for the most part ruined, where I leave it, and pass
thence to the next Town of Pomeran.

CHAP. CCXXX. Of Stetin, and the Trade thereof.
Stetin, and the Trade thereof.
THIS Stetin is the capital City of Pomerania, situate upon the River of Oder,
in a pleasant and delightsome Soil, and carries in these Northern Regions that
Renown, that from hence the Dukes of Stetin in Pomerland have their
appellations. The City abounds in all Commodities for Merchandise that the
Neighboring Countries afford; and of it self it yields to Merehants the
Commodities common to Prusen, Sweden, and Polonia. For its defense, it is
strengthened on all sides with Ramparts, Ditches, and good Artillery; the River
of Oder is bea^tified with many useful and necessary Bridges, the one whereof
is purposely made to lead to the Granaries and Storehouses, where the Corn and
Grain, either for Store or Exportation, is laid up, and where their Arsenals
are seated, in which their warlike Provision is kept, and where Vessels of all
sorts both for Sea and River is seen daily to be fabricated; beside the several
Churches and Colleges that adorn this City, the Duke's Palace must be accounted
as the principal Ornament, built of that Art and Sumptuousness, that it gives
not place to the most excellent in Italy; in fine, Stetin is not to be
accounted the least of the Hans-Towns and though the Prince be daily there
Resident, yet it proves no way prejudicial to the Privileges thereof.

Commodities of Stetin.
The Commodities of this City are for Merchandising, such as all the East
Country affords, viz. Tar, Pitch, Rosin, Honey, Wax, Hides, Grain, and all
kind of Furs.

Weights of Stetin.
The Weight of this City is divided into two kinds, derived from the Pound
weight here in use, the Quintar is accounted 112 l. of this place, and that is
the first, and the second is the Stone, which is also of two sorts; as a Stone
of 10 l. being the small Stone, and a Stone of 21 l. accounted the great Stone;
and it has been observed, that the 10 l. of London Averdupois, bath yielded
here incirca 92 l.

Measures of Stetin.
The common Measure in the use for length is called the Ell, as the usual
denomination thereof in all the East parts, and the 100 Yards of London has
been observed to produce here about 141 Else.

And thus much shall serve to have said of these Cities, which I have entitled
under the Names of P^land and Eastland, though in themselves acknowledging
several distinct Princes, having taken that liberty to my self in my first
method, rather narrowly to observe the maritime Shores, and the principal
Cities seated thereupon, though acknowledging diverse Sovereigns, than precisely
to follow the limits and bounds of Princes Dominions according to the largeness
and extent of their Command and Power.

CHAP. CCXXXI. Of the Weights and Measures of Eastland to that of London.
NOW, forasmuch as there may be many other eminent Cities of Trade, which in
particular, I have willingly omitted to handle, therefore according to my
observed order, I will contract them here, and show how the Weights and
Measures of London do agree, and are found to accord together.

The agreement of 100 l. London to diverse of Poland.
And first, I find it observed, that the 100 l. of Averdupois in London does
make in these Towns following, viz. in l. Straelsont as I said 88 Stetin 92
Revel 116 Dantzick 116 Conixburgh 120 Rhiga 116 Thoren and Narva 116 Cracovia
120 Elbin 120 Wild 116

Agreement of the 100 yards London to diverse of Poland.
And thus much shall serve for the Weights in general of Eastland; and for the
Measures take here the same Observations made upon 100 Yards of London, which
produces in Else. Embden 163 Hamburgh 162 Bremen 163 Lubeck 160 Munster 86
Ossenbridges 84 Wismar 156 Conixburg 166 Riga and Kevel 166 Rostick 158
Gripswald 163 Donim 163 Stettin 141 Dantzick 163 Ocermond 141 Melluine 161
Narva 166 Ars^.

CHAP. CCXXXII. Of Corn-Measures of Eastland reduced to that of other Countries.
Corn-measure in Eastland.
THis Country is above all other Commodities abounding in Corn, which hence is
transported into all parts of Europe; it will not be amiss to see what
Observations have been made upon the Measure thereof, here in use, and
concurrent with other places.

Schepels, 60 in Dantzick make a Last, and 4 makes a Mud, which is the
Skip-pond of 340 l. as you find it there noted.

Werpes, 61 make a Last in Emden, or 15 Barrels of 4 Werpes

Schepels, 90 make a Last in Hamburg.

Schepels, 96 make a Last in Lubeck.

Schepels, 96 make at Fameren a Last.

Schepels, 96 make a Last in Hileger-Haven in Denmark.

Barrels, 42 make a Last in Copenhagen.

Barrels, 36 make a Last in Ebeltorffe donie.

Quarters, 10 make a Last in London; but in lading of Ships, Quarters five are
accounted for one Tun lading.

With the agreement thereof with other Countries.
Now let us see how these respond together, and how these agree with the Last of
Corn in Amsterdam, upon which I find these notes, and that the same makes in
Danzick 56 Schepels. Embden 55 Werps. Hamburgh 85 Schepels. Lubeck 85 Schepels.
Fameren 78 Schepels. Hylegher 80 Schepels. Copenhagen 23 small Barrels.
Eboltorff 23 Barrels. Sweden 23 Barrels. Conixburgh 6/7 of a Last, for the 6
Lasts are 7 at Amsterdam. Melvin 17/21 of a Last. Stetin 6/7 of a Last. Rhiga
42 Loops, Rostick and Mechburgh, measures of Lubeck. Antwerp 37 Vertales.
Brussels 10 Muden, and differing in all places of Brabant. Middleburgh 40
Sacks, 41 to the Last in Zealand. Rotterdam, Delph. 87 Achtellins. Gronninghen
33 Muddes. London 10 Quarters, and 5 Quarters to a Tun.

CHAP. CCXXXIII. Of the Trade in general of Poland and Eastland.
Of the Trade in general of Poland and Eastland.
HAving thus surveyed the Trade of this Country in some particulars, it will not
be amise to look upon it in the general. The Revenues both of the King and
Gentlemen is here esteemed but moderate, and scarce sufficient to maintain a
plentiful Table, and to exchange with Merchants for Wines and Spices, which
they yet much covet, as also they do foreign Stuffs of Silks and Cloth: I have
noted, that this Kingdom abounds with Beasts as well wild as tame, and
yields excellent Horses, not great but quick, nimble and stirring; it
abounds also in Flesh, Fowl, and Water-Fish, and in all kind of Pulse and
Grain; it is found also toward the Carpathian Mountains of Hungary to have
some Mines of Gold and Silver, of Iron and Brimstone; it yields also in
abundance plenty of Honey found in hollow Trees, besides the Husband-man's
Hives: it yields moreover, Wax, Flax, and Linen Cloths made thereof, Hemp,
Pitch of both kinds, Masts for Ships, Boards and Timber, rich Furs, Salt dug
out of the Earth, Amber, Soap-ashes, and Rice in abundance, which has made
Dantzick famous throughout Europe.

No marvel then if Merchants bring unto them Silks from Italy, Cloth from
England, Wines from France and Spain, and the very Spices and Drugs from India,
since they not only sell then at good prices, but also bring thence such
precious and staple Commodities. Poland it self is found within land, and
Prussia with their immunities subject to this Kingdom, is sound to have the
principal Traders therein inhabiting, yet have they but few Ships, using
Strangers to export their Commodities. For the rest of the Polanders they are
observed to live content with their own, and not by way of Merchandising to
stir much abroad; yet are they not rich, because they want the abovesaid
Commodities, which the proud Gentlemen and Nobility of these Countries buy
dear, and will have, though brought from far unto them, and they are noted to
have so little Gold and Silver, as despising all in respect of it; they sell
the rich Commodities of their Country at a low rate, especially those which are
for daily Food, and thereby made unfit to be exported. The People themselves
are not much addicted to Traffic into remote Regions, nor to travel far out of
their own Countries; yet in imitation of other their Neighbors, they sometimes
Trade with their rich Furs into other Countries, of whom I have observed some
to come to Constantinople, rather making a ranging Voyage, than coming with
intent to Trade and Reside. Wherein they cannot be much blamed, in regard that
they have in plenty all things that naturally are wanting to mankind, if they
can be contented therewith: but the Inhabitants of Pomerland, East Country,
etc. are observed to be more ingenious, and far more addict to Traffic and
Commerce, and have some Vessels sitter for transport and carriage than for
warfare, but yet most proper for their gross Commodities and large Stowage,
however their Winter-colds depriving them of almost half the years Traffic:
the other half wherein their Seas are navigable, cannot make them any competent
amends, and their Merchandise being altogether gross, cannot give them
therefore the attribute of Eminent Merchants.

CHAP. CCXXXIV. Of Hungary, and the principal Cities thereof.
Hungary, and the Cities thereof.
HUngary is bounded on the East with Transylvania and Valachia, on the West
with Austria, on the North with Poland, on the South with Sclavonia, etc.

This Kingdom now stands divided between the Grand Seignior and the Hungarians:
Buda.
the Great Turk enjoys Buda, seated on Danubius, once the Metropolis of this
Kingdom, and Court of the Kings; also Guilia Pest, Alba Regalis, called by them
Wesenberg, next quinque Ecclesiae, Rab, and others of lesser note.

In the Hungarians possessions are these principal Cities, Presberg.
Presberg the present Metropolis of this Country; 2. Strigonium, 3. Agraria, 4.
Comara in an Island of that name, 5. Tertax, 6. Cimista, 7. Segith, before
which Solomon the Great Turk ended his days, and some others of lesser
consequence.

Commodities of Hungary.
This Country does much abound in Cattle, sufficient to feed all Germany, the
Store is so great, that they yearly sell to their Neighbors 80 or 100 Thousand
Oxen; they have also some Copper and Tin, some quantity of Corn, Honey, Wax,
and such like Commodities, and from hence to Constantinople, I have seen Hides,
Butter, and Cheese, that in great abundance have come out of these parts
through the Black-Sea. Further matter of Trade has not remarkably fallen into my
hands; therefore for the current Coins of this Country, with their Weights and
Measures in use, I must refer to the better experienced, and hence travel to
Dacia, and the rest of those Provinces comprehended within that circuit.

CHAP. CCXXXV. Of Dacia, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.
Dacia, and the Cities thereof.
DAcia is bounded on the East with the Euxine, on the West with Hungary, on the
North with the Carpathian Mountains, on the South with Hemus, dividing it from
Greece.

The Rivers that enrich this Country are Danubius, 2 Alata, 3. Salvata, 4.
Cockle, 5. More, and some others.

Commodities of Dacia.
The Commodities that this Country affords for Merchandise, is Butter, Cheese,
Honey, Wax, Hides, Oxen, Tallow, and Warlike Horses of great worth.

The Provinces are these, and are all under the command of the Grand Seignior.

Transylvania 1.
Transylvania, the chief Towns thereof are, 1 Wisenberg, 2. Clasenberg, 3.
Bristitia, 4. Fogar^, and others, and now in possession of Bethlem Gabar the
Vaivode thereof.

Moldavia 2.
Moldavia is the next, the chief Cities are Saccania, the second is Falsing, 3.
Kilim, 4. Chermon, etc. under a Vavoide, who is Tributary to the Great Turk.

Valachia. 3.
Valachia is the third Province, the principal Towns whereof are, 1. Salnium,
2. Pracklabs, 3. Tergovista, the Vavoides Seat, who is Tributary to the Turk.
This Country abounds in Mines of Gold, Silver, Salt Pits, Wines, Cattle, and
Brimstone, and esteemed the richest of these Provinces.

Servia. 4.
Servia is the fourth, and has these Cities, 1. Stoneburg, the Seat of the
Despot, Tributary to the Turk, 2. Samandria, 3. Belgrade, a famous Town, which
cost the Great Turk much Blood and Money the getting, and was accounted before
the Bulwark of Christendom on this side.

Rasia 5.
Rasia is the fifth, the chief City is Bodin, a famous Mart.

Bulgaria.
Bulgaria is the next, wherein is found Sophia, the Seat of the Beglerbeg of
Greece, who has under him 21 Sansacks. Next is Nicopolis, and some others of
lesser note.

Bosna.
Bosna is the last Province, wherein is Casachium, and Jasiga, the residence of
their former Despots. All which afford not further matter of Trade: for where
the Great Turk once commands, Traffic is accounted very rare, and is seldom
found of import, and being ignorant in that little there is, I am constrained
to omit it.

CHAP. CCXXXVI. Of Sclavonia, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.
Sclavionia.
SClavonia has on the East the River of Drinus, and a line drawn from thence
to the Sea, on the West part of Italy: on the North, Hungary; and on the
South, the Adriatic Sea.

Commodities.
The Commodities that this Country does afford for Merchandise, are Horses for
Service, Cattle, Oxon, Hides, Tallow, Butter, and Cheese, and has some Mines
of Silver and Gold, now in the Great Turk's possession. The Provinces and
Cities of note in Sclavonia are these

Illyria.
Illyria, now by the Turks called Windismark, has in it Zatha, seated upon
Dan^, 2: Zackaoes, 3. Windisgreets, and others.

Dalmatia.
Dalmatia is the second Province, the chief City is Ragusa, situated on the
Adriatic Sea, formerly a Town of great Traffic and Riches, and now tributary
to the Turk; next is Sci^, 3. Zara, both seated on the Seashore, and subject
to the Venetians; 4. Spalatta, a Sea-Town, from whence to Venice that State
keeps many Galleys for transportation of Merchant Goods, and by reason of an
unreasonable Freight by them taken, they stand to the hazard and adventures
thereof, which they did to their Cost in Anno 1619. my self being in Nail when
as the Duke d' Ossuna then Vice-King took two of these their Galley grosses
laden with a rich Booty, as was reported to the import of 300000 Crowns which
the State of Venice were enforced to make good principally to Merchants Turks
of Constantinople, to whom the greatest part thereof did at that time
appertain, and who are found at this day to be the greatest Traders this way.
The next Town is Scodra, famous for the Resistance it made against the Turks;
and last, Lissa, famous here for the Sepulcher of Scanderbeg, whose Bones were
dug up, and worn by the Turks at the taking of this City, as conceiving them
to be of excellent Virtue to make them partake of his good Fortunes. This
Province being now divided between the Venetians and the Turk.

Croatia.
Croatia is the next, the chief Towns are Cardisca, seated on the River Savus,
2. Brumon, 3. Nivograde, 4. Sisgith, and lastly Petrovia; this Country is now
subject in part to the Venetians, and in part to the Austrians; of the Trade of
the most principal of this in brief, and first of Ragusa and Spallatta.

CHAP. CCXXXVII. Of Rhagusa and Spallatta, and the Trade thereof.
THE Trade of Sclavonia is at this day but of small Account, and little to our
Mation: the two Cities of Spalatta and Rhagusa seated therein, merit the
principal consideration.

Rhagusa, and the Trade thereof.
Rhagusa then, formerly called Epidaurus, being situated on the Adriatic Sea,
a Commonwealth of great Traffic and Riches, was in times past of far greater
Fame and Name, both in Trade and Navigation than now it is: for from hence was
the Original of those great Ships here built, and in old times famous, as then
vulgarly called Argoses, properly Rhaguses.
Rhaguses; the last which they were noted to have, they lent Philip the Second
King of Spain, in 1588 to invade England, and has her burial in our British
Seas, and may all others so thrive that envy the Prosperity of England; since
which I hear not of any they have of any consequence. They now pay 12000 Ducats
yearly to the Turk for Tribute of that Trade and Liberty they now enjoy, which
notwithstanding is of no great consequence.

The Country affords not any Commodities of moment for our Nation, and we only
send thither some blue Hampshire Kersies, some Lead, Tin, and little else.

Moneys current in Rhagusa.
The Moneys thereof are such as pass current through the State of Venice and
Turkey their Neighbors, and their own being in correspondence therewith, and
accounted by Grosses. Grosses 6 is a Livre Grosses 59 is a Hungar Grosses 38 is
a Rial Grosses 1 is 2 Gassets A Gasset is 2 Saldes Grosses 62 is a Venice
Chicquin Grosses 40 is a Naples Ducat Grosses 59 is also a Sultain, accounted
in England for 8 s. sterling.

Weights of Rhagusa.
The Weight is a pound of (^) and 100 l. is the Quintal. The 100 l. is English
80 l. and is Venice subtle 120 l. and is Venice gross 76 l. 1 l. Rhagusa is 9
gross Ven. 1 l. Rhagusa is 14 sac. 2 subtle.

Measures of Rhagusa.
The Measure is the Brace, which agrees with the Brace of Venice: thus the 100
Cloth Braces is in Rhagusa 124, and of Silk 116 Braces, and is in England (^)
inches.

Spallatta.
Note that the Weights and Measures of Spallatta do wholly agree with those in
Venetia, therefore I need not to say further thereof in this place; and by the
way note, that for the Weights of Rhagusa, I find this observation made: the
100 Rot. of Alexandria Zero, is in Rhagusa 260 l. the 100 l. Forfori is in
Rhagusa 116 l. the 100 Rot. Laidin, is in Rhagusa 165 l. the 100 Rot. of
Damietta is in Rhagusa 120 l. the 100 Rot. of Roma is in Rhagusa 666 l. the 100
Rot. of Baruti is in Rhagusa 625 l. the 100 Rot. Damasco is in Rhagusa 600 l.
the 100 Rot. of Tripoli in Soria is in Rhagusa 500 l. the 100 Rot. of Aleppo is
in Rhagusa 600 l. the 100 Rot. of Rhodes and Gasa is in Rhagusa 666 l. the 100
Rot. of Cyprus is in Rhagusa 625 l. the 100 Rot. of Bursie in Natolia is in
Rhagusa 146 l. the 100 Rot. of Constantinople is in Rhagusa 146 l. and the 100
l. in Rhagusa does make as follows. In Puglia 39 Rot. Puglia 110 l. Roma 101
Florence 105 Perosa 95 Siena 108 Acquilla 107 Lansano 166 Urbino 106 Crema 111
Piemont 101 Forli 111 Faensa 110 Cesena 106 Ricanati 107 Camerino 108 Bollonia
110 Lucca 106 Millana 111 Verona 108 Bressia 111 Ferrara 106 Modena 109 Genoua
114 Fanno 106

Further matter worthy mentioning, that concerns either the Weight, Measure, or
Trade of this place, I have not observed, therefore I pass it over; and hence
take my Journey to Greci^, the next place which challenges my survey.

CHAP. CCXXXVIII. Of Greece, and the Provinces thereof.
Greece, and the Cities thereof.
GReece, accounted the Mother of Arts and Sciences, is bounded on the East with
the Egean Sea, the Hellespont, Propontis, and Thracian Bosphorus, on the West
with Italy and the Adriatic Sea, on the North with the Mountain Hemus, and on
the South with the Ioni^ Sea, and is now entirely subject to the Grand Seignior.

Commodities.
The general Commodities found here, and transported hence, are Wines, Oils,
Copper, Vitriol, Brimstone, Silks raw and wrought, as into Velvets, Damasks,
Grograms of Goats-hair or Wool; Cute, Anniseeds, Cominseeds, Currants, Soap,
Carpets, Cottons, etc.

Rivers in Greece.
The chief Rivers navigable are Cepheus, rising in Epirus, and setting in the
Egean Sea, Erig^, and Alicmon, rising both in Maccdonia, and issuing in
Thermasius sinus, then Sirmon in Migd^, Alicus and Nissus in Thracia, and some
others.

Peloponnesus, or Morea.
The principal Provinces are seven, and the Cities therein are as follows;
Peloponnes^ is the first, dividing it self into six lesser parts, wherein is
found the Cities of Eliz, Olympia, now ruined, though once famous; then the
Cities of Corona and Modena, the now flourishing Towns of this Province: here
was also in times past Thebes, Lacedemon, Sparta, Argos, N^s, Corinth, now a
little Village called Crato, all now gone and ruined; and here is now of note
in matter of Traffic in this circuit, found only Modena, Corona, before named,
and Petr^, and some others of lesser consequence, whereto Merchants do frequent
for Traffic sake. Of the Trade whereof a word.

CHAP. CCXXXIX. Of Modena, Corona, and Petras, and the Trade thereof.
Modena, Corona, and Petras, and the Trade thereof.
THese three Cities are situated on the same Shores, and subject to the same
Customs, and found abounding in Corn, Wines, and Currants, Galls, Anniseeds,
Silk, and such like, which I have thought good to put into one Member, to
abbreviate my Task.

Petras.
In Petras there has been of many years a Trade maintained by the endeavors of
the English, who here by Authority of the Grand Seignior have a protecting
Consul resident, who has the Title of the Consul of the Morea: Exchange.
and here is vended from England some Cloths of Suffolk, Serges, Tin, Lead, etc.
In exchange whereof, they transport hence these Commodities aforementioned, Corn
and Oil being by their Laws prohibited Transportation, but by the connivance of
Officers, found permitted notwithstanding.

Moneys of Morea.
The Moneys of these places is current with those of Turkey, and those of
Venetia, as Possessors and Borderers, which they account by the Turkish Coins,
as in Dollars and Aspers.

Aspers 80 accounted to a Dollar, or Rot. which is the best Commodity: Aspers
120 accounted to a Sultany Hungary or Checquin, which Coins are found to rise
oftentimes 10, 20, or 30 per Cent. in Aspers, as the occasion of Trade or
Misgovernment too oftentimes does permit.

Weights of Morea.
The Weight of Petras is the Pound of 12 Ounces, ordinarily making 11 Drams to
an Ounce, 3 l. making their Oak, which is 4 l. 2 Ounces English, or 400 Drams
here.

132 l. makes their Quintal, which is 117 l. London; but their Silk is sold by
a Pound of 15 Ounces, which is 1 Pound abovesaid: and it has been found, that
112 l. English have made in Petras 126 l. the Sack of Currants commonly weighing
of their Weight 140 l. which is Zant has produced incirca 118 l.

100 l. of Petrus has been found to make in Venice sotile 130 l. and in the
gross Weight of Venice 83 l. which thus computed may be 88 in 90 l. Averdupois
of London.

Measures of Morea.
The Measures of these places are two for distinction of length; first, the Silk
Pico is found to be 25 inches English, and the Cloth Pico 27 inches by the Rule
in England.

Of Oils.
Oils are sold by a measure called the Liver, and weighs 7 l 20 whereof is
found to make a Candy Barrel, which must hold 15 Gallons English, which should
be 112 l. Averdupois.

Of Corn.
Corn is here sold by the Bachel, whereof 9 and has been noted to make in
England 8 Bushels Winchester measure.

From Petras it will not be improper that I trace the Dalmatian shore, and
survey the Cities seated on the Maritime Coast, and found in the Gulf of
Venice, purposely omitted in the Chapter of Dalmatia, as more proper to this
place; and then proceed to the rest of the Grecian Provinces.

CHAP. CCXL. Of Catarro, and the Trade thereof.
Catarro, and the Trade thereof.
THough in this Tract Rhagusa and Spalato be the principal Cities of Trade known
to our Merchants of London, yet now coasting this Dalmatian shore, it will not
be improper that I take a general view of such eminent Cities of note as are
observable in this Tract, the next of consequence being Catarro, seated in a
Gulf bearing the name of the City, enjoying a commodious Harbor and safe from
all Winds, but not enjoying any great Trade, by reason of the too near
neighborhood of Rhagusa; yet the place does afford for Merchandise which is
Exported to Venetia, and to other places in that Gulf, Wax, Honey, Tar, and
Pitch or Rosin, some Minerals, or colors for Painters, Tallow and Candles,
Cordovants and Sheepskins, Figs, Almonds, Nuts, and some other Commodities for
Victual.

Moneys in Catarro.
The Moneys here, and generally throughout all this Coast, are those current in
the State of Venetia, and the Dominion of the great Turk, of which more is said
in its due place.

Weights in Catarro.
The Weight here used is the Pound, and the 100 l. here is in Venetia subtle 133
l. as has been observed, and may be about 90 l. English, and the said Pound is
16 Ounces. And the said 100 Pound of Catarro has made in Sicilia 127 Pound,
and the 100 Pound of Sicilia has made here 78 Pound, and the gross Salmo of
Sicilia has made here 4 Stares, the 100 Pound of Catarro has been also
observed to yield in Linsano, and other parts of Pulia 117 Pound.

Measures of Catarro.
The Measures of Catarro are

From Catarro I will take my passage to the next City neighboring, the most
important being Sebenico.

CHAP. CCXLI. Of Sebenico, and the Trade thereof.
Sebenico, and the Trade thereof.
SEbenico is also found on this Shore, and seated upon the River of Cherca,
abutting on the Gulf of Venetia, and having a commodious Harbor locked from
all dangers of Winds by sundry small Islands, Caprano and Standica being the
principal, Tina a fair City lies upon this River more into the Land, which adds
to the Trade of this place, and were it not for the continual Piracy of Rovers
upon this Coast, and especially amongst these Islands, the Trade thereof would
doubtless increase daily, and grow, by reason of its commodious sicuation, to a
great height; yet notwithstanding this difficulty, it affords for Merchandise
exportable, Was, Honey, in great plenty, Tallow, Hides and Cheese, excellent
Oil of Olives, and strong Waes, Figs, and some other Fruit.

Weights of Sebenico.
The City of Sebenico is found to have two several weights commonly in use; the
one for the weighing of fine Goods, and the other for gross Goods.

The first being called the subtle Hundred, consisting of 100 Pound, is in
England 80 Pound Averdupois.

The second called the gross Quintar of 100 Pound, does also produce in London
128 Pound Averdupois.

Measures of Sebenico.
The measure of length in use is the Pico, which is accounted to be about 23
Inches English, and is about 10 per cent. less than the Cloth Brace of Venice.

This Note has been made between the weight of Venice and Sebenico. 100 Pound
subtle Sebenico is subtle in Venetia 120 Pound. 100 Pound gross Sebenico is
gross in Venetia 120 Pound. 100 Pound subtle Venice is subtle in Sebenico 83
Pound. 100 Pound gross Venice is gross in Sebenico 83 Pound. 1 Pound subtle in
Venice is in Sebenico 10 Ounces. 1 Pound subtle Sebenico is in Venetia subtle
14 Ounces 2 Sases.


And so leaving Sebenico I come to Scutary.

CHAP. CCXLII. Of Scutary, and the Trade thereof.
Scutary, and the Trade thereof.
SCutary is accounted the Metropolis of Albania, and situated upon a Lake,
called the Lake of Scutary, or Scodra, through which the River of Boiano
runs, and so to the Sea, near the Gulf of Lodrin, and includes in the
Gulf of Venetia; but being now as the other Cities of this Tract in subjection
to the Grand Seignior, the Trade thereof is much decayed, and City ruined from
its ancient splendor and beauty, yet the Industry of the Inhabitants does
afford some Silk; also Wax, Honey, Hides, Cordovants, and some other Skins for
Merchandise.

Weights of Scutary.
In Scutary is used two sorts of Weights, a gross and a subtle; the gross
hundred of 100 l. is in England 108 l. incirca Averdupois, by which all the
gross Commodities are weighed, and the subtle hundred, by which all fine
Commodities are weighed, is English 64 l. and it has been observed, the 1000
l. subtle Venice has made here gross 664 l. and the 1000 l. gross here in
Scutary, has made in Venice 1600 l.

Measures of Scutary.
The measure of length here in use is the Pico, observed to accord with Venice
thus. The 100 Braces of Cloth has made here 112 Pico, and the 100 Braces of
Silk in Venice has made 106 Pico, which in England must be accounted for (27)
Inches.

Of Grain.
All sort of Grain is sold by the Stare, not only in Scutary, but also in
Boiano, seated on the mouth of this River, and the 100 Stares make in Venice 66
Stares, which is in England (^) accounting by this Computation every three
Stares of Scutary to make two Stares in Venice.

And thus leaving Scodra with this short Survey, with the applause due to it,
for its excellent situation and strength, I hence pass to Valona, or Avalona.

CHAP. CCXLIII. Of Valona, and the Trade thereof.
Valona, and the Trade thereof.
VAlona is also a fair commodious City, seated on the Shore, between the Cape
of Languetta, and the Cape of Caurion, and is opposite to the Cape of Otranto,
and accounted the entrance into the Gulf of Venice; and though it be in
subjection to the Turks, who are not always found Friends to Traffic, yet by
the Industry of the Inhabitants it affords for Merchandise to be Exported, Raw
Silk, Powder of Berry or Grain, for dying of rich colors; Wax, Honey, Rosin,
Cottons, Carpets, Cordovants, some Salt fish which they call Sarrache, and
other such Commodies in good quantity.

Weight of Valona.
The Weight here is the Pound, of which the Quintar is composed, being 100 l.
which has been found to produce in England 88 in 90 l. Averdupois, and has
made in Venice, from whence I gather my Notes for these Towns, 133 l. subtle;
so that the Pound of Valona makes subtle in Venice 16 Ounces, and the Pound
subtle there makes in Valona but 9 Ounces.

Measures of Valona.
The Measure of length here in use is the Pico, common in name throughout all
the Gr^ Seignior's Dominions; the 100 Braces Silk measure of Venice making in
Valona 105 to 105 Pico, which is in London (^) Yards English.

And the 100 Braces of Cloth in Venice makes here 112 Picos; and having done
with Avalona, I proceed in the next place to Survey the Trade of Larta.

CHAP. CCXLIV. Of Larta, and the Trade thereof.
Larta, and the Trade thereof.
LArta is a pretty commodious Town for Traffic, seated on a Gulf, which bears
the name of the Town, having two points of Land fortified, that commands the
entrance into the said Gulf out of the Mediterranean Sea, and is seated also
on this Shore, between the Islands of Corfu and Santa Maura; it is, as the rest
of the Cities aforegoing, subject to the Grand Seignior, and does afford for
Merchandise to be Exported great store of Sheepskins and Cordovants, Raw-Silk,
by us known by the name of Morea Silk, Powder of Berry for Dyers: Cottons, Wax,
Honey, Portagos in great abundance, being the Row of the Mullet in great
quantity caught in this Gulf of Larta.

Weights in Larta.
The weight here in use is the Pound, 100 l. whereof does make the Quintar, and
is found to produce in London 88 l. in 89 l.

The measure of length is the Pico, agreeing with the Pico beforementioned,
used in Valona.

And now I come to Lepanto, the next Town of consequence.

CHAP. CCXLV. Of Lepanto, and the Trade thereof.
Lepanto, and the Trade thereof.
LEpanto is seated in the entrance of the Gulf of Lepanto, made famous to
Posterity by the Sea Victory obtained by the Christians over the Turks, and the
overthrow of their Fleet here in 1571; it is here opposite to the City of
Petras, which is seated on the right side of the entrance in this Gulf, as
Lepanto is on the left. It is subject to the Grand Turk, whose Coins are here
Current, as I shall have occasion to speak more at large, when I handle the
Trade of Constantinople, the Metropolis of all his Dominions. This place
affords for Merchandise, which is hence exported into other parts, Silk-raw,
called by us Morea-Silk, Powder of Grain or Berry for Diers, Honey, Wax,
Cottons, Currants, Cheese, Wines, Grain, O^, Galls, Aniseeds, and some other
Commodities.

Weights of Lepanto.
In Lepanto is used two several weights, the one called the gross weight,
agreeing with the gross weight of Venice, which in England is about 107 l. the
other agrees with the weight of Petras, by which is sold Silk, Grain, Wax, and
some other Commodities; and by the gross-weight is sold Woolls, Cottons, Honey,
Cheese, and all manducable Commodities; but the Currants here are usually sold
by the Bag or Sack at so many Aspers a Sack or Bag, the which Bag ought to
weigh 140 l. Petrasin, the which 140 l. is of Venice subtle 182 l. which is
Averdupois 120 l. or 121 l. incirca: where it is to be noted, That 200 l.
Petrasin makes 260 l. subtle Venice, which is 174 l. English, and is the Staro
of Currants in Venice; Again note, That the 100 l. Patrasin, or the 100 l. in
Lepanto of Petras weight, is about 86 l. Averdupois, which is 130 l. subtle in
Venice, and 83 l. gross, and the Pound Petrasin, makes gross Venice 10 Ounces
by observation.

The 100 l. subtle of Venetia, yields here Petrasin 77 l.

The 100 l. gross of Venetia, yields here Petrasin 121.

Measure of Lepanto.
The Measure is here found to be the Pico, agreeing with the Pico of Larta and
Valona aforementioned.

Before I pass out of this Gulf, it will not be improper, that I view the
bottom thereof, where Caranto a small Village now supplies the place of that
ancient and famous Corinth, a City commodious for the command of a brave Trade,
as enjoying two famous Ports into two different Seas, seated formerly on the
Isthmus, enjoying a double Harbor, one of each side thereof, the one whereof
regarding Asia, and the other beholding Italy, and by the commodiousness of
which situation the City in a short time came to a great largeness.
Acro-Corinth was but little distance thence, on the top of an adjoining
Mountain, upon which Mountain was seated the famous Temple of Venus, near which
was that notable Fountain discovered by the impression of the Foot of Pegasus,
as the Ancients did feign.

The ancient Corinth.
This Corinth was destroyed and ruined by L. Mummius, because the Inhabitants
had irreverently and unworthily handled the Ambassadors of the Romans, 952
years after the first building thereof, by Allettus the Son of Hypottes.

Misene.
In this Continent, if the memory thereof may not here be improper, was the City
of Misene, the dwelling of Agamemnon, where the Temple of Juno stood, so much
famoused both for the Antiquity and Devotion thereof, near which the Lake of
Lerna, where Hercules slew the Lernian seven-headed-hidra: Argos.
Here was also Argos built, by that all ever-seeing Argos, so much celebrated by
ancient Poets: Epidaurus.
Likewise Epidaurus, renowned for the Temple of Esculepius, filled with the
Tables of those that had been healed by him; the Sick who entered into the
Temple to be cured, were to sleep there a night, and imagined that Esculapius
healed them, during that their repose and sleep.

Sparta.
Here is also Lacedemon, by some called Sparta, now Misithie, formerly great and
powerful, girt not with Walls but with the Virtue of the Inhabitants; not
renowned for the magnificency of Public Works, but the Discipline,
Instruction, and the manner of their living. Arcadian Plains.
Here was also those pleasant Arcadian Plains, Olympians.
and the places where the Olympian Games were solemnized; with diverse other
memorable Antiquities, which the injury of time has eaten out and consumed,
wherefore here I omit them, and return again to my purpose, and prosecute my
method.

CHAP. CCXLVI. Of Salonica, and the Trade thereof.
Salonica, and the Trade thereof.
OF Modon, Coron, and Petras, the three prime Cities of Morea, I have already
handled, now there rest a word of the Trade of this ancient and famous City of
Salonica, anciently called Thessalonica, to the Inhabitants whereof S. Paul
writ one of his Epistles. It is yet a rich and large City, and the Residence of
the Sangiac of Macedonia under the Grand Seignior. The present Inhabitants are
Greeks, Turks, and principally Jews, who are here found to be very rich and
eminent Merchants, 80 Synagogues of them being accounted to be in this Town,
employing themselves in several Arts and Merchandising. It is seated in the
bottom of a Gulf called by the Cities name; and by the demur that happened in
the English Trade to Turkey some years past, these Jews and Inhabitants, and
some Moors banished out of Spain, have here set up some Looms, and made Cloth,
in imitation of our English Suffolk Cloths, which has proved a great detriment
to the sale of Hampshire Kersies, once vended in great quantity generally
throughout Turkey, and especially in these parts; besides which sort of Cloth
now here made, and hence taking name; the place affords the general
Commodities of the Morea, as Powder of Berry Orgrame for Dyers, Woolls,
Cottons, Wax, Honey, Cordovants, Aniseeds, and the like.

Weights of Salonica.
The Weights here in use are two, the one called the Quintar Turcesco, and the
other the Quintar Petrasin.

The Quintar Turcesco of 100 Pound makes in English Pounds 119 Pound to 120, in
Venice gross 112 Pound, in Venice Subtle 176 in 178 Pound.

The Quintar or 100 Pound Petrasin makes English 88 l. as is before mentioned:
by this all Silk, Powder of Grain, and other fine Goods are sold; and by the
Quintar Turcesco is Wool, Cottons, Caviere, Wax, Honey, and some other gross
Commodities sold and weighed.

Measures of Salonica.
The measures of length is the Pico, which is 27 Inches English, and the hundred
Braces of Cloth in Venice holds here 112 Pico, and the hundred Braces of Silk
in Venice holds here 106 Pico.

Siderocapse rich in Mines of Gold.
Near this City is the Town of Siderocapse, so well known to the Turks for the
rich Mines of Gold there adjoining, from which the Great Turk does monthly draw
for his own share above 20000 Dollars, besides the Charges.

Mount Athos.
Near the entrance of the Gulf of Salonica is found the high and craggy Hill of
Athos, now the Holy Mountain; whereon is found four and twenty Monasteries of
Colloires, or Religious Grecian Friars, with such Devotion and Zeal, that the
Turks themselves not only admire their quiet living, but oftentimes Communicate
to their Necessities, giving them Gifts and Alms. Here it is reported the
Ancient Learning of many Greek Fathers lies buried, or at least immured, till
by some Divine hand they may be freed and dispersed through Christendom.

And now to the rest of the Provinces of this fruitful and famous Country.

Achaia,
The next Province is Achaia, Athens.
wherein was that famous Athens, now Salines; Marathron.
also Marathron, where Darius was overthrown.

Megara.
Then Megara, famous in times of old. Thebes.
Thebes built upon the River Cephisus. Thermopilae.
Here is also the Straights of Thermopile, 25 Foot in breadth, defended by 300
Spartans against Xer^es, to the loss of 30000 of his Men. Parnassus.
Here is also the Mount Helicon and Parnassus, famoused amongst Poets, and the
Pythian City accounted the midst of all the World, and many other remarkable
places, which were here in times past, all having yielded to Age, and therefore
merit not a longer stay, or a more serious Survey of the Trade thereof.

Epyrus.
Epyrus is the next Province, wherein was found famous, 1. Antigonia. 2.
Casiope. 3. Anbrasia, and others now ruined, and of no account.

Albania.
Albania is the next, wherein is 1. Albanopolis. 2. Sfetigrade. 3. Durazzo, a
strong Town. 4. Croia, under whose Walls Amurath II. died; now affording little
known Trade unto us.

Macedonia.
Macedonia is the next, wherein is Scidra, Adessa, Eribea, all fair Cities, but
little known to the English for matter of Trade; only it is not to be
forgotten, that this Country is famous for Philip and Alexander the Great his
Son, who from hence had their original.

Thessalia.
Thessaly is the next Province, where the Cities of Tricca, Lomia, Demetria,
Pharsalia, and others stood, now also ruined and forgot.

Migdonia.
Migdoma is the next Province, wherein was Stagira, next Apollonia, Nepolis,
Antigons who also are now all ruined, giving pre-eminence to Thessalonica, now
called Salonica, seated in a Bay of that name, as I have mentioned in the
Chapter before going.

Thracia.
Thracia is the last Province comprised in Grecia, wherein is found the City of
Sestos opposite, to Abydos upon the Hellespont, famous for the loves of Hero
and Leander, and now the Castles or Keys of Constantinople. Abdera the
birthplace of Democritus, who spent his life in Laughing, Calipolis.
Calipolis situated on the Northern Promontory of Chersonese, the first Town
that ever the Turks took in Europe; Trajanopolis, founded by Trajanus,
Adrianople.
and Adrianapolis built by Adrian the Emperor, and by Bajazet taken in 1362, and
made the Seat of the Empire, till the taking of Constantinople about 90 years
after; Pera.
and Pira, a City of the Genoways, opposite to Constantinople: and lastly, here
is found the famous City of Constantinople it self, the Metropolis of Greece,
and present Seat of the Emperors of the Turks, wherein having resided for some
years, and finding that it comprehends most part of the Traffic of his
European Dominions, it will not be amiss for me to observe it in a particular
Chapter, as well meriting the same.

CHAP. CCXLVII. Of Constantinople, and the Trade thereof.
Constantinople; and the Trade thereof.
COnstantinople, the Seat and Residence of the Great Turk, is situated upon the
Stream that passes from the Euxine Seas to the Mediterranean, and thereby
reaping the benefit of all that the Winds can convey thither, both from the
Black and White Seas, as they term them. It is no more commodious for
Merchandise, than for to be the Head of an Empire, affronting Asia, and behind
it Europe, whereof it is accounted the uttermost limit, esteemed to be to Miles
in Circuit, and comprehending 700000 living Souls, as some have conceived,
which would grow innumerable, did not the Grand Seigniors Armies yearly, and
the Plague once in three or four years sweep away abundance of them.

It was first built by Pausanias, a Lacedemonian Captain, 660 years before
Christ, and by him called Bisantium, afterward ruined by Severus, and in Anno
313. re-edified by Constantins the Great, and made the Seat of his Empire, and
by him beautified and adorned with Magnificent Buildings and curious Ornaments,
and called Constantinople; then it fell into the Hand; of the Latins, from them
to the Grecians; and lastly, in 1453 to the Turks, who now command it, upon
which some have made this observation: That the first Emperor of the Latins who
commanded it was a Baldwin, and so was he also that lost it: also that it was
built by a Constantine, the Son of a Helena, a Gregory being Patriarch, and
lost by a Constantine, the Son of a Helena, a Gregory being Patriarch; and as
it was gained by Mahomet, so have the Turks a Prophecy, that a Mahomet shall
lose it.

The City is formed in manner of a Triangle, or more fitly, as we see the
Composition of a Harp, having its two largest Angles bordering upon the Seas,
upon a point that stretches it self into the Sea; and the third, which is the
least part, encompassed with a strong tripled Wall, encompassed with dry deep
Ditches for defense, and strengthened with sundry Towers now daily ruined, for
the Turks hold but few Cities fortified either by Walls or Bulwarks, save some
principal places, Frontiers or such like.

It has many goodly modern Buildings, Canes.
and amongst the rest many Canes for Merchants Strangers to abide; Canes.
Besesternes.
and Besesternes, for them to make sales of their Commodities in; it has also
many goodly Mosques, or Turkish Churches, and that anciently of Santa Sophia,
converted to their irreligious Devotion, is not the least, though only the now
standing Chancel of the first Building, near which is the Grand Seignior's
Place, in the very point of the Angle, encompassed for three-Miles in Circuit
with a high Wall, and fortified with many hundred pieces of Ordnance: This City
is the common Mart of all Commodities of this Empire, receiving and
distributing what either comes or goes; the Merchants of London about 1586 here
began to have some Trade, and break the Ice by their Land-Travel hither through
Hungary; afterward it was settled by the benefit of the Sea, and the first
English Ship that came hither, was about 1585, with an Ambassador to reside;
who obtained here such favor by the recommendation of Queen Elizabeth, that
her Subjects in their Treaty and Capitulations had many Immunities and
Privileges granted them, and amongst the rest a Toleration of their Religion,
freedom to their Persons and Estates, and that their Customs should only be
three in the hundred out, and three in, whereas all other Christians there
Resident paid 5 per cent. Since which time the English have here driven a great
Trade, under Protection of diverse Ambassadors, that have here resided, which
have had their Election, Salary, and Maintenance from a society of Merchants
Incorporated in England under the Great Seal; first, by the said Queen
Elizabeth, and confirmed afterward with new Privileges by our deceased
Sovereign King James: and lastly, by our present King Charles under the Title
of Merchants of England trading to the Levant Seas, wherein was at first
comprehended the Eastern-Indies, the Dominions of the great Turk, and also the
Seigniory of Venice; this Company deriving their Original from the Company of
Barbary Merchants, which about this time, by reason of the Civil-Wars of
Morocco and Fesse, began to decay, and within a short time came to nothing, and
who afterward searching more advisedly into the Trade of these
Eastern-Countries, this Company settled a Consul in Aleppo, and a Vice-Consul
in Tripoly, the then principal Seat of Syria, with the Titles of Syria and
Cyprus: also they placed another Consul in Chios, entitled of Scio, Smyrna, and
the Arches; as another Consul since in Argier, and another in Tunis, and the
last in Petras in Morea, strengthened with command from the Port and Durane of
the Grand Seignior, not only for their peaceable living, but also for the quiet
enjoying of these Privileges granted unto them, as above is said.

Commodities found in Constantinople.
The Commodities that this place at first affords to our Nation, and which
hence in those days were brought into England, were Grograms, Camlet, Mohair,
Persia Silk, Gold in great quantity, Carpets, Anniseeds, Cottons, Galls, some
Pepper, Indico, and other Spices, which now by the benefit of our East India
Trade, we send thither in far greater abundance than ever we had them thence;
and those are yet the common Staple Commodities of this Country.

Commodities sent from England to Constantinople.
The Commodities which at first this Company did send to Constantinople, were
Lead, Tin, and principally a sort of blue Kersies, called Hampshire, and
Stoplist, and some few Cloths of Suffolk, Furs of Martins, Coney, Fitches,
Sables, and such: and now those Kersies are altogether out of use, and
converted into Cloths of Suffolk, Gloucesters, Coventries, and the like, which
they send in colors died and dressed, to the number of eight or ten thousand
Cloths yearly; and now we also supply their Markets with Indico, Pepper,
Cloves, Moces, Nutmegs, Ginger, Calicoes, and other East India Commodities

Accounts in Constantinople.
The Merchants here residing keep their Accounts as almost is accustomed over
all Turkey, in Dollars and Aspers, whereof 80 Aspers is accounted a Dollar; and
though in Merchandise it does pass at 90, 100, or 110, or 115 Aspers, as I have
known it, yet the standard of the Dollar in Accounts alter not of 80 Aspers to
a Dollar, nor of the 120 Aspers to a Sultany.

Coins current in Turkey.
The Coins Current in Constantinople, are those proper to the whole Empire;
which is principally the Sultany in Gold, which agrees with the Hungar, Venice,
Checquin, and Xeriff of Barbary, passing for 120 Aspers and the Dollar of
Germany: the Rial of Spanish passes for 80 Aspers, so that the 1 Rial of is a
Sultany of Gold; howbeit of late days Silver is found more plentiful, and Gold
more scarce, so that the said Sultany Hungar or Checquin is worth 1 Dollar, and
10, 12, or 13 Aspers more or less as the same is demanded and sought after:
also here are found other Dollars, both of Italy and Germany, to pass for a
considerable value, as the Lion Dollar at 75 Aspers, and the German Sesetine at
70 Aspers, etc. and in fine, most sort of Current Coins in the World, if found
good Silver, find here a real price in payments of Merchandise.

Weights in Constantinople.
The Weights used amongst Merchants are these.

A Grain is the least, 4 makes a Quillat.

A Dram is 16 Grains, of which all the Weights of these Countries are Composed.

An Yusdrome is 100 Drams, and is 1 l. sotile Venice, or 72 Mitigales here.

A Lodero is 176 Drams, about 132 l. Averdupois 19 Ounces.

An Oak is 400 Drams, which is near 2 l. 12 Ounces, or 10 Ounces.

Loderos 100 is accounted to be 42 Oaks, and called a Quintar; which Quintar is
accounted to be 118 in 120 l. subtle English.

A Batman is 6 Oaks, which is 2400 Drams, or 16 l. English. By which weight
Silk is here bought, making 10 great l. Ounces per Batman. Batman 7 and Oaks 2
makes a Quintal, which is 120 l. English. Loders 13 and Drams 112 makes a
Batman: all Silk is sold by the Batman, and yet weighed by the Lodero; so also
is Grogram Yarn, and other Commonities sold by the Oak, yet weighed by the
Lodero. To bring Loderos into Oaks.
To bring therefore Loderos into Oaks, do thus, posite, you have 14 Loders, and
would know how many Oaks it produces: First, multiply your 14 Loderos by 44,
which produces 616; then cut off the two last Figures, for the C. will remain
6 which is Oaks; then multiplying the 16 you cut off by 4, and it makes 64,
which is Drams, and so your 14 Loders is 6 Oaks 64 Drams: And so do of any
other Sum given. Drams 720 are accounted Rotolos of Silk and other Commodities
in Aleppo, according to the Custom in sale of that Commodity which is to be
noted: 700 680 And this Dram is 16 Killats.

A Mitigal is 1 Drams, which is 24 Killats, 20 Mitigals of Gold is 3 Ounces
English.

A Checquin Sultain or Hungar is 18 Killats or Charats.

Rotolos 3 and 20 Drams in Aleppo is a Batman in Constantinople, four hundred
Drams making an Oak consisting of four Yusdromes or Pounds, ten Ounces to the
Yusdrome, and ten Drams to the Ounce; and hereby I have estimated near forty
eight Drams to sixteen Ounces Averdupois. Where note, That here (as in Aleppo)
several Commodities are sold by a several Oak, as there by several Rotolo, as
the Oak of Saffron is here 120 Drems, and no more: and so in others.

Weights of Constantinople. with other Countries.
Now having considered this weight in it self, let us consider it as it is found
to agree with other Cities of Trade, which may best be done upon the 100
Loderos as the known Beam; here the Oak, and Batman and Rotolo being feigned
and compounded thereof.

100 Loders in Constantinople make in In Sergamo 160 l. In Cronia 163 l. London
120 l. and found by often trial but to be 117 and 118 l. Aleppo 242 Ditto Silk
Rot. 252 Tripoli Suria 294 Tripoli Barbaria 140 l. Baruti 236 Alex. Zera 56
Alex. Forfori 125 l. Rhodes 22 Acria 196 Babylonia 168 Balsora 48 Millan, and
Verona, and Mantua 163 l. Lucca 157 l. Genoa 160 l. Florence 151 l. Venice
subtle 176 l. Venice gross 112 l. Cairo 123 Rot. Cyprus 25 Rot. Corfu 112 l.
Larta and Cattaro 132 l. Rhagusa and Spallato 146 l. Messina gross 62 Rot.
Sicilia subtle 69 Rot. Naples and Puglia 60 Rot. Ancona 148 l. Rome and Balonia
146 l.

Measures of Constantinople.
The measures of length in Constantinople used in Trade are three, and are
called Picos: the first is the Cloth Pico: four whereof has been observed to
make three Yards English, and is about 26 Inches, and if heedfully noted,
twenty seven Inches very near.

The second is the Grogram or Chamlet Pico, containing 24 Inches, and observed
to make 24 Pico 16 Yards English.

The third is the Linen Pico, which is only the former doubled: and note, That
in the meas^ring here of all Commodities of length, here is no allowance made
nor given in courtesy, as the Inch is Overplus in England; but the said Picos
are found to be made of flat Iron, and to more allowance given than the
thickness of the Pico at the end, which commonly exceeds not the thickness of
an English Shilling.

Corn measure.
Corn's sold by a measure Concave, called the Killow, and weighs about 20
Oaks; and it has been observed, that 8 of a Killow is a London Quarter, and
does make a Salmo in Legern, and 5 Killows in Zant make 6 Bushels English.

Wine and Oil.
Wine and Oil, and almost all liquid Commodities is sold by a Meter, which
makes 8 Oaks, and is accounted of a Gallon English.

Note, That in Constantinople all Fuel to burn, Fruit, Fish, Flesh, and for the
most part all Commodities are sold by weight, and very few by the Concave
measures, which is a good benefit to the Provident. Observe, That Scio does
agree with these Measures and Weights; and so also should Smyrna by the
Observations of Merchants, some years past; but some difference is now found
peradventure crept in by the abuse of the Weighers, and the falsehood of Beams;
and this difference is found more gross upon Cottons and Galls, than upon any
other Commodity, which may proceed both from the foulness of the first, and the
greenness of the latter, which I refer to the reformation of the more judicious.

Customs of Constantinople.
The Customs paid in Constantinople are diverse: as the Italians, and other
Franks and Jews pay upon all Commodities, both Outward and Inward, 5 per cent.

The Turks themselves are free from all Customs.

The English and Dutch pay 3 per cent. Inward, and as much Outward, upon all
Commodities, and this is paid in Species, and not in Money, except that the
Merchants do compound, as oftentimes they do with the Customer, that an
indifferent rate be made upon the Commodities, and upon that rate is 3 per
cent. taken accordingly.

Miseteria.
Note, That over and above this Custom paid by agreement and Capitulation of
Foreign Princes for their Subjects, there is paid upon all ponderous Commodities
a Duty of 1 per cent. and upon all measurable Commodities is paid 1 per cent.
and these Customs are called Miseteries; and ever paid between the Buyer and
the Seller; the Turk, if happening to be either, is ever exempted, which Duty,
both by the Buyer and Seller is paid to the Brokers, who repay it to the Farmer
thereof, and both for the Collector, and is a Rent settled for the maintenance
of an Hospital founded by Sultan Achmet, as hoping by this new Custom levied
upon Strangers, and thus disposed of to charitable uses, to gain Heaven at the
charges of Christians.

Gallattae.
Opposite to the City of Constantinople, is the City Gallatta, formerly
Cornubisantum, and in times past belonging to the Genoese, who in the declining
state of the Grecian Empire were Possessors of this City, and many other in
this Empire both of great Trade and Consequence, which are now in the
possession of the Grand Seignior, between which a River now runs, wherein
all shipping find both a safe and convenient Harbor, and in which all the
Wester^ Christians, either English, French, Dutch, or Venetian Merchants have
their common Refidency, intermixed with Grecians, Jews, Armenians, and some few
Turks, where also is placed a Custom-house opposite to another on
Constantinople side, Emine.
both commonly farmed by one and the self same Emine or Farmer, who is the
Receiver of the Grand Seigniors Customs, which are found commonly payable, the
one half in Aspers, of 80 Aspers to a Dollar, and the other half in Sultanies
of Gold, or otherwise as the Farmer and Merchant can agree for, and compound
the same.

The Government of the English in Constantinople.
I have showed before, how that the Company of English Merchants, incorporated
by the name of the Society of the Levant Company in England, do elect and
nominate an able and skilful well qualified man in Merchants affairs, who with
his Majesty's consent and approbation resideth here as Legier Ambassador, to
protect both the said Companies Factors, and their Estates here in matter of
Trade, whose charges and salary is paid and defrayed wholly by the said Levant
Company, and for the honor of the English Nation, and as necessary to his
Port, and the said Companies Traffic through the Grand Seigniors Dominions,
they are found also to maintain at present, and to pay Salary to 6 Consuls in
six several places of this Empire; and to wait upon these and their Factors,
they give pay to 40 Janissaries, 20 Druggermen, or ^terpreters, 6 Secretaries, 3
Ministers, besides sundry other needful Officers. Mr. Alderman Garaway at
present being Governor, and Mr. William Cockaine. Deputy, to whom I owe this
grateful acknowledgment, as to those who have lent me their ready furtherance
in this Work.
And for the government of this Trade in England, they have a Governor, who is
always yearly chosen in London, and is ever one of the most eminent of the said
Company, then a Deputy, and thirdly a Husband, in which last, the said Company
have for some years honored my employment, and thought my pains worthy their
acceptance: and these in consideration of their care have a yearly courtesy
or gratuity for their pains: also to these are added a Secretary, Accomptant,
and some other Officers receiving Salary; and for the better regulating of this
Trade, and as Assistants to the abovesaid, they have a Treasurer, and 18
Committees yearly chosen, and are ever the greatest Traders, and the most
eminent of the said Society, and commonly the deepest interessed in the general
Trade; and in this nature has it continued since the first Erection and
Incorporation of this Society in Anno 1585, by Queen Elizabeth, whose love to
her Merchants procured them in Turkey many privileges, and granted them in
England the Immunities aforesaid. Now for the levying and supportation of this
charge annually this happening, and for the raising of the Present that is
given to the Grand Seignor at the change of every Ambassador, there is levied
a Lanto upon the Merchandise, either Imported or Erported, in or out of Turkey,
upon the Members of the said Company, The English Nation the greatest Traders
into Turkey of Christians.
which in England is called by the name of Impositions, and in Turkey by the name
of Consolage, which the said Company do impose upon themselves, and set the
same either higher or lower, as their occasions and necessity of their charge
does require, and these are the most eminent of all the Merchant Christians
that Traffic bither.

The Venetians being second.
The second eminent Traders into this City are the Venetians, and the Subjects
of that Seignory, to protect whom, and for reasons of State, because of their
near Neighborhood, that Commonwealth maintains here an Ambassador, commonly
entitled the Bailo, together with 10 Consuls in sundry parts of the Grand
Seignior's Dominions, together with 60 Janizeries, 30 Druggermen, and sundry
other Officers, which are all paid and defraid out of the Office of Cottinio in
Venice, from whence also issues all avennues, and other losses and charges
that happen for the preservation and maintenance of the Trade of Turkey, or the
Liberties and Immunities granted thereto throughout all the Grand Seignior's
Dominions.

The French being the third.
The third eminent Traders into this City are the French, and the Subjects of
that Crown: to protect whom, and also for preservation of Amity settled between
them, that King maintains here an Ambassador, together with twelve Consuls,
dispersed into sundry parts of this Empire; together with 80 Janissaries, 34
Druggermen, and sundry other Officers, all paid and defraid out of the Coffers
of the French King, who willingly contributeth the charge for the ease of his
Merchants, and has but small Leviations upon them for the same.

The Dutch being the last and least.
The fourth and last is the Dutch Nation, who in some manner are found to have
some Traffic hither; to which end that State maintains in this City an
Ambassador, whom they entitle their Orator, besides whom they have only three
Consulships, twelve Janissaries, ^e^ Druggermen, and some other Officers
dispersed through the Grand Seignior's Dominions, whose charge is born by the
State of the Merchants of that Nation, trading hither at a tante per cent. and
not by the Purse of the said Provinces.

Besides these, some small Trade is driven here by the Subjects of the King of
Poland, as also by the Subjects of the King of Hungary, and by the Emperors
Subjects; who each of them have here their Ambassadors: but the Trade thereof
is of so little consequence, and subject to such change and variation by reason
of the War and Peace, which sometimes is truy observed, and sometimes again as
little regarded, that it merits no great consideration in this place.

As for the Traffic driven here out of Armenia, Moscovia, Tartaria, Egypt,
Georgia, Persia, and other Countries of Asia, and Africa, I pass them over in
silence, having handled them particularly in those several Kingdoms, to which I
refer the Reader.

The Trade of the Citizens of Constantinople
Now the Trade of other Nations hither, I have noted, it is not unproper I
should give a touch of the Trade of the Inhabitants of this City into other
places: Four sorts of People are found hence to use a Traffic; such as are the
native Greeks, Turks, the Armenians and the Jews. The Jews bend much of their
Trade into the Land, as to Adrianople, with English Cloths, Tin and Spices,
brought hither by other Nations: To Angora for Gragrams, Mohairs, and Grogram
Yarn: To Salonica and other Cities in Peloponnesus for Silks and other
Manufactures. The Arenenians drive most of their Trade into Georgia, Armenia
and Persia for raw Silks, Galls, and some Drugs; and carry thither Cloths, Tin,
and other European Commodities, and Rials of Silver. The Turks bend their
Traffic to Venice with Grograms and Camblets and other Commodities of Dalmatia
and Sclavonia; and thence return Sattins, Velvets, and some Woollen Cloths, and
Venices Gold: thence to Meccn, Damasco, and Cairo, with European Commodities,
someomes by Sea, but oftener by Land, and bring thence Gems, Spices, Drugs, and
Callicoes, and other Indian Commodities. The Greeks for the most part found to
be either Shopkeepers, and so cannot be termed Merchants; or else Mariners,
which sail to Caipha, to Danubius, to the Arthes, Cyprus, and Alexandria; and
these are noted to drive some Trade, that it merits not here any further
observation.

Having thus as briefly and succinctly as I could, handled the Trade of the
main Continent of Europe; and being come to this City of Constantinople, one of
the most eminent and fairest Cities, not only of Europe, but also of the whole
World, whose Trade I have also duly and yet briefly related: It is now high
time for me to look homewards; and so leaving this famous Ory, sail down the
Thracian Bosphorus to the Hellespont, Galipolis.
leaving in view and sight on Europe side the once famous Galipolis, the late
Station for the Grand Seignior's Galleys; whose materials either for the matter
or for the manner of Traffic, differs not from this used in the City of
Constantinople it self, though otherwise it yields to the Merchants for
transportation good quantity of raw Hides, Sheeps-Wooll, Anniseeds, and some
other Commodities; and taking aboard me one qualified here, who according to
the Custom of the place supplies the room of general C^sul for all Western
Nations, I sail with him to the Castles of Sestos and Abydos, the now Keys of
this Sea and said City, famoused by the Ancients for the sad and disastrous
love of Hero and Leander; where staying three days to clear my Vessel,
according to the manner of each that would depart hence, discharging 101
Dollers 6 Aspers to the Custom-houses of Constantinople and Galatta, and to the
Captain of these Castles, and here 124 Dollers 54 Aspers more, I and my Ship
are cleared and discharged hence: and being freed, and my Sails flown, I begin
to descry the Arches, and there survey what Islands of note and consequence I
find in those Seas, leaving behind me the main Continent of Europe; and having
thus performed my Land-Travel, and fully discovered and laid open the Traffic
and Commerce thereof, I am called upon in the next place, to survey the Trade
of the principal Islands comprehended under this part of the World, Europe.

CHAP. CCXLVIII. Of the Trade of the Isles seated in the Egean, Ionian,
Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas.
Tenedos.
THE first Island falling in view, coming out of the Hellespont, is the Isle of
Tenedos opposite to Troy, which has a pretty Town in it, and enriched with
excellent Wines.

Samothracia.
The next is Samothracia in the Egean Sea, affording at Samia a good Harbor for
Ships, ^d naught else of consequence.

Lemnos.
Lemnos is the next in the said Seas, Terra Sigillata.
affording that Sovereign Mineral against Infection called ^era Sigillata, the
earth thereof is made into little Pellets, and sealed with the Turks Cha^ter,
and so dispersed over all Christendom for an excellent Antidote.

Scio.
Scio or Chios is the next of note, affording that excellent Gum, called
Mastick, which in (...) and August the Inhabitants do force out of Trees, by
making of deep Incisions into the ^k thereof with sharp Instruments, out of
which the juice dropping is afterward hardened like ^to a bright Gum, and in
September following gathered; Mastick.
which Mastick is farmed of the (...) Signior, as his peculiar Commodity, and
therefore ever maintained at a constant ^ce, and hence dispersed throughout the
World.

CHAP. CCXLIX. Of Scio, and the Trade thereof.
Scio, and the Trade thereof.
I Have already declared in the Trade of Smyrna, how that of late days the
principal Seat of Traffic was in this Island in the Town of Scio, where a
Consul for the English and other Nations did reside; but finding the Port of
Smyrna seated on the Continent more proper for lading of Cottons and
Cotton-Yarn, and other gross Goods, the principal Commodities of this Seat,
they removed their habitation thither, and with them is that Trade that was
here also removed; yet in that was found a place where great concourse of
Merchants was found, we own it a touch of its Weight and Measures, etc.

Accounts in Scio.
Accounts were, and are kept in Dollars of 80 Aspers, and of Aspers as in
Constantinople.

The Moneys are the same in general mentioned in Constantinople, save that
Commerce does oftentimes make them be here two or three per Cent. better
esteemed.

Weights of Scio.
The Weights here, are derived from the Dram of Turkey that I mentioned in
Constantinople.

100 Drams make a Rotolo, which is 19 Ounces Venice subtle, 400 Drams make an
Oak, too Rotolos make a Quintar, accounted incirca 118 l. English, and should
hold, as in Sinyrna 120 l. but daily experience finds the contrary, both here
and in Smyrna, not making above 118 l. subtle Averdupois.

Measures in Scio.
Their Measures are here two, the Linen Pico quarter 26 Inches, and the Cloth
Pico usual in Constantinople of 27 inches: for other passages, vide further
Constantinople and Smyrna.

Lesbos.
I will now proceed to the rest of those Islands in these Seas, which at first
Lesbos, in which Mitylena is noted for the principal Town, where was born
Sappho, the inventress of the Saphick Verse; Pittacus, one of the Sages of
Greece; Arion, the Dolphin Harper, and which have samoused this Island to
posterity.

Negroponte.
Negroponte is the next, where the Sea ebbeth and flows seven times a day,
which because Aristotle could not unriddle, he here drowned himself: the chief
is Colchis, Caristis and others.

Seiros. Salamais.
Here is also Seiros, Salamis, the 12 Sporades, Delos.
also Delos, where Oracles were given to the Petitioners, and the 35 Islands of
Cyclades, which afford nothing note worthy: Semos.
also S^ the habitation of that fortunate unfortunate Policrates; Coos.
and Coos the birth place of Apelles and Hippocrates, Pathmos.
then Pathmos where St. John wrote his Revelations, being confined hither by
Domitian, which are now of small account, save only in their number; and so I
come in the next place to Rhodes.

CHAP. CCL. Of Rhodes, and the Trade thereof.
Rhodes, and the Trade thereof.
THE Fame of this Island and City is sufficiently known through Europe; and the
Yalour of the ancient Knights the Masters thereof sufficiently testified, in
the desence thereof; it now (in matter of Traffic) by reason of the commodious
Harbor and Sit^ution, daily increases, and many Merchants Christians are
found to frequent the place by day; but must by night get Lodgings in the
Suburbs; so fearful are the Turks of the loss or surpri^ of this place, which
cost them so much Blood in the gaining.

Commodities of Rhodes.
This City is a Mart for most of the Commodities of the Arches, as of Corn,
Wines, Oils, Raisins, Wax, Honey, Cordivants, some Cotton-woolls, and Yarn and
Stuffs made thereof, as Dimities, Vermillion, and also some Damasks and other
Stuffs of Silk, etc.

Accounts in Rhodes.
Their Accounts are kept in Aspers, only amounting by increase, after the manner
of the Great Turks Treasures, to hundred and thousand, and so to Loads or
Cargo, which is 10000 Aspers.

Coins current in Rhodes.
Their Moneys is the same as throughout Turkey, all other Coins being rather
esteemed here as a Commodity than a Coin: for they rise and fall according to
Contract; so that in all Bargains here, the price of Money by the Buyer as well
as the Price of the Commodity by the Seller, must be agreed upon.

Weights in Rhodes.
Their Weight is a Rotolo: the Quintar is 100 Rotolos; which Rotolos, 100 do
make in England 536 l. and by consequence the Rotolo is Averdupois 5 l. 6
Ounces incirca, and has made in Venice 800 l. subtle, and 506 l. gross by
observation; and in Genoua has made 762 l. subtle in Florence 701 l. in Rome
676 l. in Rhagusa 666 l.

Measures in Rhodes.
Their Measure is a Cane, which is about 84 Inches English. Other notes have not
come t^ my Hands, therefore from hence I will sail to Candia, anciently Creet.

CHAP. CCLI. Of Candia, and the Trade thereof.
Candia, and the Trade thereof.
THis Island is situated in the mouth of the Egean Seas, Commodities of Candia.
and is very fruitful in these Commodities which it affords for Merchants;
first, Muskadels, whereof there is above 2000 (...) yearly Exported, then in
Sugars refined, and hence called Candid, in Gums, Honey, Wax, (...), Dates,
Olives, Apples, Oranges, Lemons, Raisins, but desicient in Corn.

The chief Cities herein are Candia, the Metropolis, Canea, Rhetmio Sitta,
Suda, a brave Harbor.
and Suda not to be ^gotten, being the best Harbor in all these Seas, and
capable to receive 1000 Sail of Ships.

Coins current in Candia.
The Coins of Venice is here current with little difference, and their Accounts
kept as there, and ^nce a year the Gally grosses from Venice come hither to
furnish the Inhabitants with all those Con^ities which Nature has denied them
of, and which other, Germany, Italy, France or England can afford them.

Weights in Candia.
There is here used two Weights, or two Quintals, as in Venice, a subtle and a
gross quintar, which is found thus to agree with the said City of Venice.

100 l. gross of Candia, is 110 l. gross Venice, and 118 l. English.

100 l. subtle of Candia, is 114 l. subtle Venice, and 76 l. English.

100 l. gross of Venice, make here about 90 l. gross.

100 l. subtle of Venice, make here about 86 in 87 l. subtle.

Measures of Candia.
There is here also used two Picos, a Cloth Pico, and a Silk Pico, 100 Braces
Cloth in Venice is (...) in Cloth 106 Picos, (^) 100 Braces Silk in Venice, is
here also 100 Pico Silk, which by observation has made in London (^) inches.

Of Wines.
Maska^els are here sold by a Measure called the Mestach, 100 Mestach, of clear
Malvoise, makes 24 Quarts of the Begonso Measure in Venice, or 21 of the Sechio
Measure, which is in England, (^) Gallons.

Cerigo.
To proceed then in the Ionian Isles, I find next Cerigo, which is plentiful in
Marble, and out of the Castle of the chief Towns of this Isle, was Helena, the
Wife of Menelaus, stolen by Paris, where during my abode here, the Castelan did
show me, and lodged me in the Chamber, whence, as be would have me believe, she
was ravished; but if it were so, her Lodging I (...) confident was better than
mine, for a soft Board was my best Bed, and God knows with what sorty Coverings
and Appurtenance.

Strival.
The Strophades or Strivali, are the next, giving only a poor livelihood to some
few Greek (...) or Friars.

Cursalari.
And the Cursalari, noted only as silent Spectators to the Battle of Lepanto,
fought in Anno 1571. near them.

Corfu.
Then Corfu, the Key of the Venetian State, being in the center of their
Dominions by Sea, of which a word by the way.

CHAP. CCLII. Of Corfu, and the Trade thereof.
Corfu, and the Trade thereof.
THis Island having the principal Town of that name, is now reputed to be one of
the Bulwarks of Christendom, and the Key of the Venetian State, and is a
reasonable fruitful ^d, especially in Wax, Honey, Wine, Oil, and some other
Commodities.

Their Moneys and Accounts as in Venetia.

Weights in Corfu.
Their Weights is two as in Venice, a subtle and a gross pound, and Quintar,
which thus is found to agree together.

100 l. subtle of Corfu, makes subtle Venice 133 l. and 90 l. London.

100 l. gross of Corfu, makes gross Venice

Measures in Corfu
Their Measure in Corfu is a Brace, which is (^) English inches.

of Corn.
Their Corn measure is a Moija, which is 4 Delegators, which is 1 Staio of
Venetia, and in England is (^) Gallons.

Wine.
Wine is sold by the Jar, 4 whereof makes a Quart in Corfu, which makes of the
Sachio measure in Venetia, 6 Sechis, and Jars 2 and ^ makes one Quart Venetian
in Wine which is in England (^) Gallons.

Salt.
Salt is sold by the Moyetta, 1000 whereof makes in Venice 23 in 24 Moya
incirca, and in London (^) Bushels.

Saint Mauro.
Then comes in view Saint Mauro, where stood a Temple, famous for curing
unfortunate Lovers, but the Medicine was by casting themselves headlong into
the Sea, and so I imagine they may be cured in any Country else whatsoever: the
chief Town is S. Mauro, inhabited (...) Jews only.

There rests yet of note in these Seas, Ithaca.
the Islands of Ithaca, now called Val de Cem^ being 50 miles in compass,
Zephalonia.
and North-East from the Island of Zephalonia, being 66 miles (...) compass, and
wherein are found the Towns and Havens of Argusto, Guiscardo and (...) Zant.
and on the South-East thereof, is the Island of Zant or Zacynthus, about 40
miles (...) compass, fortified with a strong Castle on the East Side, which
commands the Town (...) Zant, and the Harbor thereunto adjoining, the Trade
whereof I here for brevity (...) comprise together.

CHAP. CCLIII. Of the Island of Zant, Zeffalonia, and Ithaca, and the Trade
thereof.
Zant, Zeffalonia, and the Trade thereof.
HAving before treated of these Islands, and their fituation, I now come to the
(...) thereof, as found at the times of my being there, which was in Anno 1619.
and (...) 1624. with the needful Observations remarkable thereupon.

Commodities of these Islands.
The Commodities that these three Islands do yield for Merchandise, are Honey,
Wax, Oyl^ Wines, and Currants, of which last here is found growing such
abundance, that some year the English have laden here 3000 tuns and upwards,
besides what the Dutch, French, and other Countries do export, and is computed
to yield to the Inhabitants 300000 (...) incirca yearly, etc. and to the
Seigniory of Venice for Custom, which is hereon very great 40000 Chequins.

Currants in Zant, Zeffatonia and Theaca.
Of these Currants, Zeffalonia does yield the greatest quantity, but is commonly
the smallest^ and least esteemed: Zant does next yield a lesser proportion, but
a better and larger sort (...) Ithaca, vulgarly Theaca, does commonly produce
the best and fairest, but withal, the fewest (...) quantity.

The Commodities that this place does vent coming from England, is little, some
Cl^ Perpetuanos, Serges, Lead and Tin, and some Fish of Newfound Land, also
some Herrings, and Pilchards, but the principal Commodity brought hither is
Rials Spanish, with which these Currants abovesaid are usually provided and
bought, and no other Commodity is so welcome amongst them.

Coins current in Zant, etc.
Their Moneys current are those of the Seigniory of Venice, as being under their
Government, and especially the Rials Spanish, which is hither by the English
brought in great quantity, and also by all such other Nations as have occasion
for this Fruit.

Accounts in Zant, etc.
Their Accounts are kept by the Islanders, as in Venice, but by the Merchants
Strangers here resident, in Dollars, which are those Rials of 8/8 and Gassets
80 to a Dollar.

Weights of Zant, etc.
Their Weight is the Pound of 12 Ounces, and the Quintar is 100 l. and found
thus to agree with Venice and other places.

100 l. subtle of Venice, makes here 63 l. in these Islands.

100 l. gross of Venice, agrees with the common 100 l. thereof.

The Pound subtle in Venice, makes here 7 Ounces, 1 Sac. 16 per Cent.

Currants are here bought by the 1000 l. which by the computation of
Concordancy, specified in this Tract, should be subtle English 1070 l. which is
gross of London 9 C. 26 l. b^t either by the deceit of Weights, the falsehood of
staying, or the fraud of Factors, it commonly produces not so much by 2 or 3
per Cent. and this mischief is increased to that height of late years, that it
is found oftentimes to produce but 9 C. gross, or about 1020 l. sutcle English;
but let them that are herein guilty, endeavor to amend it in the future for
their Credit sake: for the 100 l. gross Venice, is never found to yield less
than 107 or 106 in England, and what is found wanting thereof to their
principals, comes by all probability by their default.

Measures in Zant, etc.
Their Measure is the Brace, and found to be twofold in use, the long Brace
being for Cloths, Linens, etc. agreeing with the Cloth Brace in Venice, and
found to be 27 (...) English, and the short Brace for Silks to be 6 in 7 per
Cent. Of Oils.
the lesser Oil is sold by a Measure called the Liver, and should weigh 13 l.
English, 10 whereof makes a Candis Barrel.

Of Wines.
Wine is sold by a measure called a Jar, 3 is a Candia Barrel. Of Corn.
Corn is sold by the measure called a Bechelo, 3 whereof is a Staro, and
weighth 44 l. and 5 Killows make 6 Bachellos, which Bachello has been observed
to be in England ^ Gallons, and a Moya of Corn here makes 2 Staro in Venetia,
and 7 Jars of Wine here, makes 3 Quarts in Venetia.

Customs of Zant, etc.
The Customs of these Islands some few years past upon Currants, were small, till
the Venetians perceiving the Trade of that City to decay, thought to augment
the Revenues by the Customs of the Fruit of these Islands, which accordingly
they have effected; for seeing the English to cover the same unmeasurably,
which at first the vulgar judged they used in the dye of their Clatbs, or which
was worst, in the feeding of their Swine, and finding on a time, sundry Ships
of burden laden therewith, and ready to depart, their departure was stayed
till the Merchants were compelled to pay 5 Ducats, which is 25 s. sterling. the
1000 l. upon which the English Merchants made complaint in England thereof to
his Majesty deceased, and for the taking away that Custom, it was thought fit
to put as much more here in England thereupon, by way of an imposition, which
has been found to be so far from gaining a remedy, that the same continues in
England, contrary to the first intent, and the State of Venice has added 10
Ducats more to the former, as imagining England cannot subsist without this
Commodity, at what charge or discommodity whatsoever, yet it is now levied with
this proviso, that the Currants be laden in a Vessel that does come hither
purposely to lade them; but if she landeth her outward freight in Venice, or
the thereof, and then comes hither, she is freed thereof, as I have showed in
the Trade of that City.

CHAP. CCLIV. Of the Islands of the Adriatic Seas, and the Trade thereof.
Adriatic Islands.
THE Islands found in these Seas are many, as Absirtides; secondly, Cherso,
Vegea, Grissa, Iaesica, Cursola, Brassia, Lissa, and Zara, all the rest are
small, and appertaining to the Seigniony of Venice.

Commodities.
The Commodities that hence are exported for Merchandise, is Wood for Fuel,
Wines, Grain, Cattle, and some Oils.

CHAP. CCLV. Zara, and the Trade thereof.
Zara, and the Trade thereof.
ZARA being for the goodness of its Harbor, conceived one of the best of the
abovesaid, though small in circumference, yet most commodious for Trading,
therefore I will note what is observable therein, and make it the principal of
the rest, to which the Trade of all the others may be reduced.

Moneys of Zara.
Their Moneys I account the same as used in Venice, and the Dalmatian and
Sclavonian Coins are here passable, by reason of their situation, which is
bordering all along that Continent.

Weights of Zara.
Their Weights are two, a gross and subtle, as is used in Venetia, but found
thus to agree together.

100 l. subtle of Zara, is Venetia subtle, 120 l. English, 80 l.

100 l. gross of Zara, is Venetia gross, 120 l. English, 128 l.

100 l. subtle Venetia, is gross 83 l. Zara.

100 l. gross Venetia, is gross 83 l. Zara.

Measures of Zara.
Their common Measures of length, is a Brace 29 inches London, the 100 Braces
Cloth in Venice, makes here 112 Braces, and the 100 Braces Silk in Venice, is
here 106 or 107 Braces, most of the other Islands concur with this in Weight
and Measure. Now sailing hence, and getting out of these Islands into the
Mediterranean Seas, in which surveying the most erninent of the European Isles
therein contained; I find in the first rank the Islands of Sicilia, Malta,
Cursice, Sardinia, Majorca, Minorca, and some others now coming to be handled,
and first of Sicilia.

CHAP. CCLVI. Of Sicilia, and the Cities of Trade thereof.
Sicilia, and the Cities thereof.
SICILIA, anciently for its fertility in Corn, accounted the Granary of Rome,
is held to be 700 Miles in compass, and is beautified with sundry Rivers and
Cities, which I shall handle in order as my method requires. Commodities.
The Commodities exported hence for Merchandise, and here abounding, are Wines,
Oils, Honey, Wax, Saffron, Sugars, Salt, Alloms, Coeals, Agats, and some other
Gems, and wonderful fruitful in all sorts of Grain, also it has some Mines of
Gold and Silver, also good quantity of Silk is here made, which is exported,
both raw and wrought, into diverse Fabrics: Mount Hibla.
here is also famous the Hill Hibla for Bees and Honey, Mount Aetna.
and Mount Aetna for its continual burning and evaporating of Flames. Division
into 3 Provinces.
The Country is divided into three Provinces, the first is Vall is de Notto,
wherein the City of Syracusa stands, once containing 22 Miles in circuit, and
the Metropolis of the Island, and some others. The second Province is Masara,
wherein is the Cities of Montreal, second Gergenti and Palern^, now the chief
Cities of Sicily, whereto I will reduce the Trade of this part of the Island.

CHAP. CCLVII. Of Palermo, and the Trade thereof.
Palermo, and the Trade thereof.
PALERMO, anciently Panormus, and a Colony of the Phoenicians, is now the chief
City of Sicilia, and the Seat of the Spanish Viceroy, Don Ferdinando de Castro,
being Viceroy at my being here in 1619 from whom I and my Company received so
much honor, that I cannot without ingratitude, forget in this place to
commemorate his Nobleness: the City is situate on the West Cape of the Island,
and is beautified with large Streets, and delicate Buildings, strong Walls and
magnificent Palaces and Temples: here I found a Dutch Gentleman attendant upon
the said Viceroy, who was entitled the English Consul, from whom I gathered
these my Observations in the Trade of this Place and Island.

Accounts in Palermo and all Sicilia.
Their Accounts are here kept by Ounces, Taries and Grains.

One Ounce is 30 Taries.

One Tarry is 20 Grains.

Moneys current in Sicilia.
Their Moneys are also Ounces, Taries and Grains, accounted one Ounce to be 30
Tari^s which is 5 Florins, of Carlins 12 the Florin.

One Tari to be 20 Grains, and is 12 Sol. 6 Den. small Money.

One Tari to be two Carlins.

One Carlin to be 10 Grains, and is 12 Livres.

One Grain is 6 Picholies, and is 7 Den. Money Siciliano.

One Poncto is 8 Picholis.

A Ducat of Gold is worth 13 Taries.

Note, that for the Money which they pay by Bills of Exchange, they give
allowance 1 per Cent. for bad Money.

Weights in Palermo.
It is to be observed, that throughout all the Kingdom of Sicilia, there is but
one Weight in use, only in Messina excepted, which I shall show in its due
place: now this Weight of Sicilia in general is the Rotolo (30) Ounces, which
is 2 l. Sicilian, 300 Rot. making the Cantar which 100 l. has been observed to
have made in London 173 l. circa, Some have found it to yield 148 l. English.
or properly in gross to say, 1 C. 2 Quarters 4 l. incirca, and in Venetia
subtle, to have produced 260 l. or Venice gross 163 l. circa, and has been
found to render in Florence 225 in 230 l. but yet by the calculation I made, it
should be but 221 l. just, it is in Rhagusa 218 l. in Cattarro 78 l. Alexandris
Zera, 83 Rot. ditto Forfori 185 Rot. in Damasco 43 Rot. etc.

Measures of length.
Their Measure of length is the Cane, which is in London about 80 or 81 Inches
by the Rule, which is 2 Yards English; this Cane is divided into 8 Palms, which
is about 10 Inches, the Cane making 3 Cloth Braces in Venetia.

Of Corn.
Corn which is the prime Commodity of this Place and Kingdom, is sold by the
Salmo, of which there is the gross Salmo, and the general Sicilian Salmo, which
is the small Salmo, upon which general salmo, these Observations have been
made, and that the same is found to agree thus with these Countries. In Rhagusa
staro 3. Dalmatia staro 3. Ancoma somma 1. Ricanati somma 1. Rimine staro 1.
Bolonia corbe 3. In Andalusia 5 Fanegos. In Portugal 22 Alquiers. In Florence
11 staios. In Avignon 5 sesteros. In Venetia 3 staros and 1 quarter. In Pisa 11
18 staros. Bergamo staro 13. Millan mesni 4. Genoua measure 2. In Ferrara staro
9. In Tripoli cafesie 15. In Tunis cafesie 15. Alexandria ribebe 1 l. 1. Candia
measures 14. Corfu mosie 2. Catarro staro 3. Verona minali 7 quastero. Vicentia
staro 9. Padua staro 9. Treviso staro 3. Modena staro 3 5/7. Parma staro 6.
Mirandola staro 3 5/7.


The gross Salmo of Palermo and Sicilia has been observed to make in Spalatto
staro 4. Rhagusa staro 3 Segnia quart. 12. Arbe staro 4. Istria staro 4. Padua
staro 12. Vincentia staro 12. Ferrara staro 11. Forli staro 3 quaterroli 14
Bollonia corbe 4. Mantua staro 10. Cremona sommas 2. Bergamo staro 16. Verona
minali 8 and 11 quarteroli. Brassia sommas 2. Millan Mesini 5 1/9. Florentia
staro 14.

Wherein I have been somewhat the larger, by reason of the general use of this
measure in the Lewant.

Note, that both the gross and general Salmo are divided into into 16 Tomelos,
and that the gross Salmo is greater than the general Salmo about 17 per Cent.
and observe, that the ordinary charge of Corn here bought is 3 Taries, and 15
Grains the Salmo; but if Corn be above 18 Taries per Salmo, it pays also a new
impost, which is per Salmo.

Of Salt.
Salt is also sold by the Salmo, which in Trappano is made in great quantity,
where at my being here I observed to be as great as 3 ordinary Salmos of Corn,
divided also in 16 Tomelos, which made Sicilia weight about 7 Cantaros.

Of Oils.
Oil is here sold by the Cantaro, which is 2 Barrels of Florence, and has made
180 l. English.

Customs of Sicilia.
The Custom of the Island is commonly 9 and 10 per Cent. but Fish and other
Commodities for food, pays 12 per Cent.

Exchanges.
Palermo is also a place of great Exchanges, which briefly at my being there,
did run thus with other places, always noting, that all Bills coming from
abroad, pay one Carlin per ounce to make good Money: and they exchange by
Ponctos, as I have noted elsewhere: With Naples.
and they give in Palermo 160 Pomutos incirca, to have in Naples a Ducat
current, and their Account is made as in the particular of Naples is expressed.
With Rome.
They give in Palermo 26 or 27 Carlins, to have in Rome a Ducat de Camera.

With Valentia.
They gave in Palermo 6 Taries accounted, and 1 Carlin per Ounce more, to have
in Valentia 10 Sold. 3 Den. and a Crown of 12 Taries is 20 Solds, and a Ducat
of 13 Taries, is there estimated for 21 Sold.

With Messina.
With Messina and Syracusa, and other places of the Kingdom, they exchange with
the Crown and the same Moneys.

This note of Equality or Par, I also learned here for current.

For Valentia Sold 9 dc. 10 per Florin.

For Barselona Sol. 11 d. 3 per Florin.

For Majorca Sold 14 d. 10 per Florin: and for the aforesaid places, they
consider the interest, to him that takes by Exchange at the rate of one Carlin
per Ounce, which they recover accordingly: for the other particular
Circumstances thereof, I refer the Reader to the end of this Tract, where the
Exchanges of this Place and Messina, is largely handled, and as the same may
more amply there appear in the Chapters 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, and 425.
with all particular Circumstances, whereto I desire to be referred for better
satisfaction.

And in the next place, survey the Trade of Messina, the second eminent City of
Traffic in this Island.

CHAP. CCLVIII. Of Messina, and the Trade thereof.
Messina, and the Trade thereof.
THE last Province of this Kingdom and Island is Mona, wherein are the Cities of
Nicosia in the Midland, Milaso on the North Promontory, and Messina in the face
opposite to Reggio in Calabria, which fare has in times past been accounted to
be very dangerous by reason of those anciently accounted perils, Scylla and
Charybdis, the one a Sand, and the other a Rock, opposing each other at the
entrance thereof; now not so much feared by our Seamen by being more expert:
this Town is the most eminent Town of Trade in all this Island, and inhabited
by many Merchants, which the benefit of the Haven does much further, and the
commodiousness of the Situation, and the Privileges and Immunities of the
yearly Fairs much augmenteth.

The Commodities proper hitherto, as also to the whole Island, as also the
manner of keeping their Accounts, I have noted; but Moneys finding some
variation, and diversity, by reason of Trade, I will briefly touch the same:
First then, Coins current in Messina.
A Crown of Gold of Italy is worth 14 Taries. A Crown of the place they account,
12 Taries. A Tarry as in Palermo, 20 grains, is 2 Carlins. An Ounce is as in
Palermo, 30 Taries. A Grain is 5 Pecolies. A Florence Ducat did pass for 11
Taries, 4 gr. A Ducat of Camera of Rome, for 12 Taries, 6 gr. A Ducat of
Carlins of Naples, for 10 Taries, 16. gr. A Crown of Mark, is 12 Taries. A
Livre of gross of Venice, is 3 Ounces 21 Taries, 1 gr. One Pound gross of
Avers, is 1 Ounce and 10 Taries. Marvedies 29 of Spain, is one Tarry. And a
Pound Sterling is here (^


Note.
The Weights of Messina are found to be two, the first being the gross Cantar,
whereby is weighed all manner of Food, Flesh, Caveare, Fish, Tonnies, Cheese,
etc. which is noted to be 10 per Cent. greater than the second Cantar, and has
produced by computation Pound English 196, in 198 Pound; and the smaller Cantar
contains as the former 100 Rotolos of 30 Ounces, or 2 Pound Siciliano, does
agree with the sum mentioned in Palermo, as being the common Weight of all the
Island, and accounted (as I said before) to be 173 Pound, but found by
experience of some English Merchants, 184 Pound, which I refer to trial, and
they account 20 Pesos to make a subtle Cantar, and 22 Peso the Gross, which is
the general Cantar of Palia.

Measures in Messina.
Their Measures is the same as mentioned in Palermo, which is the Cane divided
into 8 Palms for length, and the Salmo divided into 16 Tomolos for Corn and so
forth, as I have more at large handled under the Chapter of Palermo, as serving
for great use to the Merchants that traffic in the Mediterranean Seas.

Customs of Messina.
All Stuffs of Linen or Woollen (measurable) of this Kingdom, selling or not
selling, pay at Messina 6 per cent.

All Commodities of weight from without the Kingdom, selling or not selling,
pay at Messina 3 per cent.

Removing from Ship to Ship pays 3 per cent. or 3, all Merchandise that is
conveyed out of the Kingdom at the Port of Messina, pays 6 per cent. Fairs of
Messina.
unless at the Fair^, when as some Commodities pay less than some others, so
that Silk then pays only 3 per cent.

I have noted an old printed observation between London and Messina to be thus,
which I refer to the trial, That the 100 l. of Palermo is in London 172 l. the
100 l. of Messina in Silk makes Silk weight in London 43, and the Rotolo of
Palermo has made in London 1 l. 9 conces, the 100 Yards has made 44 Canes,
and that the Cane has made in London 2 Yards or Else 1 Goad of Freezes and
Cottons; and thus I will leave this City and Island, and sail to Malta.

Malta.
Malta is the next Island of note in these Seas, famoused more by the Knights,
the now possessors, than by any Traffic that is found therein; it is the place
where St. Paul suffered Shipwreck, and where he shook the Viper from his hand
into the flame, which yet the Inhabitants would persuade Travelers has left
some virtue and relics thereof behind him, which I refer to the relation of
others; it abounds in Cotton-wooll, Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Honey, Wax, and
some other fruits: the Towns of note are Valetta, Saint Hermes, and Malta, and
some others.

Corsica.
Corsica is the next, and seated opposite to Genoa to whom it belongs, being
300 mile; in compass. Bastia is the chief City, and the residence of the
Genoese Governor, with a commodious Haven and a strong Garrison, the principal
Ports for Shipping are Saint Florence in the Northern part, and Saint Boniface
in the South; the Commodities thereof are Oils, Figs, Rai^s, Wates, Honey, Wax,
Alum, Boxwood, Iron, good Horses and fierce Mastives, little other Comm^ities
it affords not, their weights and measure agrees with Genoa.

Sardinia.
Sardinia is the next, and accounted 550 miles in circuit, and subject to the
Spaniard, divided into two parts, first, Cape Luggudory toward Corsica, and
secondly Cape Cagliares toward Africa. Commodities. of Sardinia.
It affords for Merchandise Corn in good plenty, and Oils in a reasonable
manner, but abundance of all sorts of Cattle, as appears by the great
abundance of Hides and Cheese, which in an homely manner is made here, and
hence dispersed through Italy, Spain, and other Countries: there is here many
Towns, such as is Bossa, Santa Reparata, Alquilastro, and lasty, Callary the
Metropolis, of which a word, together with the Trade thereof.

CHAP. CCLIX. Of Callary, and the Trade thereof.
Callary, and the Trade thereof.
CAllary is the principal City of this Island, opposite to Africa, the Seat of
the Spanish Vice-Kings, enjoying a goodly Haven, and much frequented by
Merchants, and is an Archbi^p's See, and well stored with eminent Citizens.

Moneys of Callary.
Their moneys are generally the moneys of Valentia in the Kingdom of Spain, but
they have proper to the Island some Copper or black moneys, to which the
Ducates and Livers of Valentia are reduced, and their Accounts are kept in the
same manner, as in that City.

Weights in Sardinia.
The common weight is the Pound, consisting of 12 ounces, 160 l. thereof being
their Quinter, is English 88 in 89 l. and in Marselia 101 l. in Florence 125 l.
circa.

Measures of Sardinia.
Their common measure is a Vare and a Brace, the Vare found to agree with
Valentia, and Brace with Florence, the first used in Cloth and Linen, and the
latter in Silks, etc.

Further observations of the Trade of this Island have not come to my hand,
therefore I will hence sail to the next Islands, which are those of Majorca and
Minorca.

CHAP. CCLX. Of Majorca and Minorca, and the Trade thereof.
Majorca, and Minorca, and the Trade thereof.
MAjorca is seated also in these Seas, 300 miles in circuit, and 30 miles
distant from the Continent of Spain; the principal City is Majorca, an
University, and the Seat of the Spanish Viceroy.

Minorca is nine miles distant from Majorca, and 150 miles in compass, wherein
is Minorca and Java, the principal Towns; but Mahon therein is found to be an
excellent Port, able to contain 500 Sail of very great Ships in safety from all
weathers whatsoever. Commodities of Majorca, etc
This Country affords for Merchandise, Corn, Wines, Oils, this last being the
principal Commodity of this Country, which the English do here lade above 500
Tuns yearly, and sometimes more, and hence exported by them, if the Spaniard
have not otherwise occasion for it for his own use, for from hence Provisions
are made for all the Eastern and Western Navigators.

Moneys in Majorca.
Their Moneys have reference to those current in Spain, and principally in
Barcelona, and Velentia, and they account 7 Rials Spanish and two Marvedes to
make a Liver, Accounts.
by which their Accounts are kept, being in Livers, Sold, Deniers, 12 Deniers to
the Sold, and 20 Sold to the Liver, which Liver is 3 s. 8 d. sterling; but all
Commodities are here sold by the Sold, 20 making a Liver, which may be
accounted 3 s. 8 d. sterling as aforesaid, and they account 17 Doublers is a
Rial Span.

Weights of Majorca.
Their Weight is in Majorca and Minorca two, the one the Rotolo, which 100
Rotolos make a Cantar, called the Cantar Barbaresco, which is 117 l. of the
other weight, which they call a Cantar of Majorca or Majorina, and consists of
104 l. The Cantar Barbaresco has made in Pisa and Florence 141 l. Venetia
subtle 163 l. Venetia gross 103 l. London 110 l. The Cantar Majorca which is
104 l. has made in Valentia 116 l. 104 l. Cantar Majorca in Florence 120 l.
Venetia subtle 140 l. Venetia gross 110 l. Genoa 130 l. London 117 l.

Cargo.
Some Commodities are also sold by the Cargo of three Cantars, but each Cantar
contains 104 l. by which Cargo is Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, Rice, Spices, and
other things, and the Cargo has made in Venice 420 l. subtle; by the Cantar
Barbaresco is weighed Wool, Hides, Skins, Metals, Lead, Tin, and such gross
Goods, and fine Goods by the other Cuintar, or the Cargo aforesaid.

Measures in Majorca. etc.
Their measure of length is a Cane, which has made in London 67 in 68 Inches,
which is 1 ^/^ Yards London measure.

Their measure of Oils is a quarter, or quartano, 12 whereof is contained in an
Odor or skin of Oil, and 212 Quartans I have found herein 1617; to be a Tun of
236 Gallons, and 214 a Tun of 252 Gallons or thereabouts, and 41 ^/4 Quartans
has made in Venice one Miara, and in Alexandria has weighed 5 Cantars, and 20
Rotolos.

Of Oils, and how they are laden, and the account thereof made up in Majorca.
Oils are commonly laden at Porcupin, and were found in my time to have there
these charges for Custom, 8 Doublers per Liver, which is 7 Rials, and 2 Marved.
Spanish, and 17 Doublers, as I said before, being a Rial, for part 3 Doublers
per Od^r for measuring, 3 Den. per Od^r for Pipes at 3 Livers the Pipe, for Sea
Custom at 9 Doub. per Liver, brokered at 1 Den. per Liver, for Halledge of the
Pipes at 5 s. the Pipe, Stowage at 8 Den. the Pipe, Barkage to Parcapin 2 Sol.
6 Den. the Pipe, Provision according to the custom of the place at 3 per cent.
A brief of all which charges may be comprehended in this rule certainly:
observe, That accounting 214 Quartans to a Tun, and for every Soldo that a
Quartan does cost here first penny, if you reckon 47 s. 6 d. sterling for every
the said Soldo, so much infallibly will your Tun of Oil stand you in clear
aboard of all charges: And thus much out of my own trial I have thought good to
insert in lading of Oils in this place.

Ivisa.
Near unto these Islands are the Islands of Ivisa, 100 miles in circuit; the
chief City is Ivisa, the chiefest Commodity that it affords is Salt, of the
Trade of which a word.

CHAP. CCLXI. Of Ivisa, and the Trade thereof.
Ivisa, and the Trade thereof.
THE Island of Ivisa, the chief City whereof being Ivisa, consists wholly in
making of Salt, Of Salt.
which is here sold by a measure called the Modino, which weighs in Summer by
the weight of Valentia, which is here in use, is 33 Cantars, and in Winter 36
Cantars gross of the said place of Valentia, and corresponds with other places
thus. In Majorca it makes Cantars 38. In Florence Staros 50 in 52. In Genoa
Mine. 9 in 9. In Valentia Cassico 8. In Flanders 100 Lutos, which is in Ivisa
13 Modini. In London (^) Bushels.


Their measures and weights I must refer to the better skilled.

Lesser Islands of the Mediterranean Seas.
Here is also Promentary, Pantcleria and Lipara Isles, with the Isles of Naples,
as Caprae, Ischia, ^gitu, Elba, Gades, or Cales, and some others which I pass
by, and so sail into the Ocean, and observe the Islands thereof.

CHAP. CCLXII. Of the Ocean Islands, and the Trade thereof.
BEing entered into these Seas, Northern Islands.
I will begin with the most Northen Islands thereof, and so drawing toward
England, the place of our abode, and there determinate my Traffic and
peregrination. In the North then the report is credible, that the end of Nature
and of the world is, wherein by late discovery are found these Islands:
Willoughbies.
first, Sir Hugh Willoughbie's Island, who by his death gave life and knowledge
to us of this Island, searching here a new way to China, Cathai, and Moluccos:
Nova Zembla.
then there is Nova Zembla only discovered, else not famous for any thing.
Frisland.
Next, Frisland, subject to the King of Denmark, and much frequented by Dutch,
English, and French, for fish here taken in great abundance in the Summer
season only. Island.
Then have we Island or Icieland, plentiful in Ling; the chief Towns are Hallen
and Schasholton, and subject to the King of Sweden. Gronland.
Then Gronland, seated under the Northern cold Zone, where their longest Summers
day is three months and a half, abounding in fish, of which there is a Society
now incorporated in London, by the name of Greenland Company: the Trade whereof
principally consists in fishing of Whales for Fins and Oils, and only lasts
the Summer Season, and no longer, and then they are enforced to return, by
reason of the extremity of the cold and Frosts. Now to come out of those cold
Seas to the Ocean, as into more temperate Regions, Orcades 32.
I meet in my way with the Orcades, or Isles of Orkney, being 33 in number,
Pomonia.
the principal of which is Pomonia, stored with Tin and Lead; next Hethie; then
Shetland, anciently imagined the last Island of the World, and called Thule.

Hebrides 44.
Then the Hebrides, which are 44, the prime whereof is Ila, abounding in red
Dear. 2. Iona, famous for the Sepulchers of the Scottish Kings. 3. Mula, whose
Inhabitants are called the Red^nks; the rest of as little note I omit.

Sorlings 145
Then the Sorlings, which are 145. The Principal being Armath, Agnes, Samson,
and Silly, the name given to the rest and others.

Here I meet also with 5 Islands, which cannot be comprised within the former
account. Man.
First the Isle of Man, which is ten miles in length, and ten in breadth,
abounding in Flax, Hemp, Oats, Barley, and Wheat, and some Cattle; the chief
Towns are Ballacuri and Russin, or Castletown.

Anglesey.
Then appears the Isle of Anglesey, which is accounted a Shire of Wales, in
length 24 in breadth 10 miles, and for its abundant fertility in all things, is
called by the neighboring Shires, Mam Cimbri, the Mother of Wales, as having
of all food and other provision necessary to preserve the life of man, out of
which is yearly sent 3000 head of Cattle to supply the wants of other Countries
adjoining, together with a good quantity of Corn, Butter, Cheese, etc. the same
had in times past 300 Towns and Villages, Beaumares.
now it has but one of consequence remaining, called Beaumares, commodious for
Trade, as commanding a fair, safe, and capacious Haven and Road, to which as
being the place of my birth, I owe this grateful remembrance. Jarsey.
Jarsey is the next, in compass 20 miles; the chief Towns are St. Hillary, and
S. Mollo, abounding in sheep etc. Garnsey.
Then Garnsey, 20 miles distant from Jarsey, rich in good Harbors; the chief
Town is St. Peter's. Wight.
The last is the Isle of Wight, being 20 miles long, and 12 broad; the principal
Towns being Yarmouth, Newport, and Bradring, it is well fortified and
strengthened against all foreign attempts whatsoever. There be also some other
petty Islands round about this Shore, but I will pass them to come to those of
greater note and consequence, which are Ireland and Great Britain, the last
Isle and place, both of this my Travel and Traffic.

CHAP. CCLXIII. Of Ireland, and the Provinces thereof.
Ireland, and the Provinces thereof.
IReland stands West of Britain, containing in length 400 miles, and in
breadth 200 miles, enjoying this prerogative by nature, That no venomous
Serpent will either live here if brought from other Regions, nor yet does
naturally breed here: It is divided into 5 Provinces, which according to my
former method, I will in order touch, and see what Towns of Note they contain.

Munster 1.
Munster is the first, wherein is found the Cities of Limrick, seated on the
banks of Shan^, 2, Cork, 3. Kingsale, and 4. Waterford, the first ground that
ever I trod on out of my native soil, being about 13 or 14 years old, and then
began to be employed by my Parents in trade of Merchandising.

Connaught 2.
Connaught is the second Province, the chief Cities are Dunratty and Galloway;
the third City in Ireland both for fairness, largeness, and for pleasant
dwellings and situation,

Vlster 3.
Ulster is the third Province, the chief Towns are Dundale, 2. Dungannon, 3.
Armagh, an Archbishopric, 4. Dongal, and 5. Londonderry, lately built, and
peopled by the City and Citizens of London.

Meth 4.
Meth is the fourth; the chief Towns are Kelly, 2. Thim, and lastly Tredagh, a
fine Town, where also I resided in these my younger years of Travel, and first
employment in Traffic.

Lempster 5.
Lempster is the last Province, wherein is found the Cities of Mareaburg,
Philips-Town, Kildare, and Dublin, of the Trade whereof a word.

CHAP. CCLXIV. Of Dublin, and the Trade thereof.
Of Dublin, and the Trade thereof.
DUblin is seated on the Liffe, being the Metropolis of Ireland, and the
residence of the Lord Deputy for the King of England, who is Sovereign here, it
being also an Archbishopric and an University. Commodities of Ireland.
The Commodities the Country does afford for Merchandise, are these: first, the
Country abounds in Cattle, each affords Tallow and Hides in great abundance,
which is hence exported to Spain, France, and Italy; also Salmon is here caught
good store in July, August, and September, which is salted and exported, and in
Summer the quantity is so great in some parts of this Island, that the Servants
do covenant with their Masters, they must not feed thereon but certain days in
the week. Herrings are here also caught, and accounted the best; as also
Pilchards in August, September, and October, and thence vented to Spain,
France, and into the Streights of Gibraltar; here is also some Butter, Cheese,
Pipe-staves, Calves-skins, and other Commodities of late days prohibited to be
exported by the Laws of the Kingdom.

Coins of Ireland.
The Coins of this Kingdom in the standard, carries a concurrence with those of
England, which also here are current for the value, as being subject to one and
the same Scepter, yet in distinction of the true and real worth, are found thus
entitled.

The pound of Ireland consists of 20 shillings Irish, yet in sterling is
accounted but 15 shillings

The shillings by this account is but 9 d. sterling, and the 6 d. Irish is 4 d.
sterling.

Exchanges of Ireland.
Here is also an Exchange found and practiced, but not for any foreign part,
saving England, and principally London and Bristol, commonly running at 8 d.
upon the pound, and when most at 12 d. per l. which is 5 per cent.

Weights and Measures as in England.
Dublin, and in general all Ireland, has the Measures and Weights of England
in use in their Traffic, and agreeing therewith in all particulars, I need not
insist further therein.

Now a word of the Trade in general of Ireland, as it is found observable in
these days.

Of the Trade in general of Ireland.
The daily conversation of the English Nation, and the late impartial and found
administration of justice in this Country, has redeemed this Island from the
jaws of Barbarism, wherein it was ready to fall and suffer a ruin, and since by
little and little peace being firmly established, has brought the Inhabitants
to a desire of enriching themselves, and this desire has so well been seconded
by their industry, that I may say it has brought store and plenty into their
dwellings, which has hitherto met with so good a success, that whereas few
years past this Country was with all necessaries supplied out of Englands and
Scotlands abundance, it now returns that courtesy, and contributeth some
years not only to the wants of both, but to the wants of Spain, France, and
some other adjoining Countries; for now it is found that the Earth and Seas add
to the Inhabitants labor and pains; as first, the Seas and Rivers in their
season afford them great plenty of Cod-fish, Hake fish, Pitchards, Herrings,
and these of both the largest, best, and in abundance, which they take, kill,
and salt, and so disperse as a Merchandise into France, Spain, England,
Scotland, and other Countries.

Then the Earth yields them a good breed of Cattle, especially Sheep and Oxen,
in such store, that they have thereof in great abundance, as also of Hides,
Woolls, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, and Beef; and the Wool, they by Manufactures
convert into Cloth, Mantles, Ruggs, Frises, and Yarn, whereof it is reported
that there comes yearly to the Town of Manchester in Lancashire, to be there
woven into Stuffs, at least two hundred thousand weight fine and coarse:
besides which, the bowels of the Earth yield them Lead, Iron, and Tin, and by
their own industry they have many other Manufactures, as also Pipe-staves, Wax,
Honey, Furs, Hemp, Linen Cloth, Salt, and some others: all this considered,
what should want here to make them eminent Merchants, but shipping and skill in
the Art of Navigation, and a desire to employ their Talents in foreign
Countries, which yet is not seen to be perfected amongst them: Nature having to
this end fitted them with many goodly Ports and navigable Rivers, and will in
time I hope fit them with an inclination to second by their endeavors, what is
so plentifully bestowed by her upon them, which by little and little may be
brought to pass by the conversation and direction of the civiliz?d English,
that daily are seen to come and reside amongst them: and thus leaving Ireland,
and my good wishes to the increase of her Traffic, I hence pass over to
Scotland (a part of Britain) and view the present Trade thereof.

CHAP. CCLXV. Of Scotland, and the Provinces and Cities thereof.
Scotland, and the Trade thereof.
SCotland is the Northern part of Britain, and separated from England by the
River Tweed and Salway, and the Cheviot hills, extending from thence to the
other, which being a Kingdom, and varying in the manner of Trade from England,
I have thought good here to insert by it self.

Commodities of Scotland.
The Commodies that this Country affords for Merchandise are coarse Cloths,
Freezes, Fish salted, Hides, Tallow, Lead Ore, some Grain, Feathers, and other
Commodities, as Sea-coal, Allom, Iron, etc.

This Country is divided into two parts, the High-land and the Low-land, and
the same into several Sheriffdoms, or Provinces, in which are found these Towns
of consequence.

CHAP. CCLXVI. Of Edenburg and the Trade thereof.
Edenburg and the Trade thereof.
FIrst Edenburg, wherein is seated the King's Palace, and the Court of Justice,
consisting principally of one street of a mile in length, whereto does lead
many other petty Lanes, making the whole near three miles in circuit; the
second Town is Glascow, an Archbishops See, and an University; the third is
Saint Andrews in Fife honored with many Prerogatives; fourthly, Sterling: then
is Perth, Aberdeen, Dondes, Saint John's Town, and some others of lesser note.

Moneys of Scotland.
Their current moneys in Merchandise is the proper Coins of that Kingdom both in
Gold and Silver, which are usually found to be in Gold.

In Pieces of 22 shill. sterling. Pieces of 11 shill. sterling. Pieces of 5. 6 d.
sterling. Pieces of 2. 9 d. sterling. Pieces of 4. 4 d. sterling. Pieces of 1 shill. 1
d. sterling. Pieces of the and thereof. Pieces of 9. 6 d. being of the 13 d.
sterling. One Mark. Pieces of which is 4 d. being of the abovesaid.

Again, 13 d. sterling. is a Scotch Mark. or 13 shill. 4. d. Scotch. 6 is a Scotch
Noble, 6 shill. 8 d. 20 d. sterling. is 1 Mark Scotch. or 1 Pound Scotch of 20
shill. 20 shill sterling. is 18 Scotch Marks.


Besides which, are here found current the Coins of England, and he that would
see further into the intrinsic value and weight of these Coins either of Silver
and Gold, must have recourse to a Proclamation set out by our Sovereign King
James deceased, dated in 1609, which will also show their conformity to the
Coins of England in weight and goodness, and the current value and estimation
thereof through this Kingdom.

Exchanges in Scotland.
Here is practiced for England an Exchange for moneys as is done upon the Scotch
Mark for 12 pence sterling in London, etc.

Accounts in Scotland.
Their Accounts are now kept several ways, some following the custom of England,
by sterling pounds, shillings, and pence, and some by their own ancient manner
also in pounds, shillings, and pence Scottish, 20 pence sterling being their
pound, 13 being their Mark, and pence Scottish, of which they had some black or
Copper Moneys, as Babaes, esteemed by them for six pence, whereof two made a
penny sterling; Placks, which they esteemed for four pence, and three of them
made a penny sterling; and lastly, pieces called Hard-heads, esteemed by them
at 1 pence, but eight of them made a penny sterling money, and some of these are
yet current amongst them.

Weights of Scotland.
They have in general (as is also the custom of England) but one weight for
weighing of their Merchandise, and for buying and selling throughout the
Kingdom, which is the Pound of 16 ounces, 100 of which pounds makes their
Quintal, which is found to make in London and all throughout England 108 l.
Averdupois, and the 100 l. London sotile is found to render here 92 l. incirca,
or the 112 l. to give 103 l. or thereabouts.

Measures of length. 120 for 100.
Their common measure in length for Linens, Cloth, Silk, or Stuffs, is an Ell
common in use throughout Scotland, which is about 4 per cent. differing from
our English Yard, as being greater; so that whereas we allow 36 inches to the
Yard by Rule, their Ell may make incirca 34 inches, it having been observed by
Traders hither, that 75 Yards in London or Else, 60 Else has made here 72
Scotch Else, but in their hundred by tale in measure they account six score or
120 for 100.

In other measures of Corn, Coal, Salt, or liquid measures of Beer, Ale, Wines,
Oils, and such like, imitate the better experienced to supply my defects
therein, for I hasten now toward England, and so to London, the City of my
abode, and the end of my present labors, and by the way will observe, That the
Inhabitants of this Country are much addicted both to Trade and Navigation, and
have many good helps and furtherances there both by the natural and artificial
Commodities of this Country, and the good Ports of the same; so that in brief I
may conclude this Kingdom to be more addicted to Traffic and Navigation than
the Irish, and yet not so much as the English, which yet by the gracious aspect
of our Sovereign is seen daily to increase, and may in time come to a greater
perfection.

CHAP. CCLXVII. Of Britain, and the Provinces thereof.
Britain, and the Provinces thereof.
HAving now set my foot upon the happy shore, and run through the Trade of most
of the greatest known Cities of Commerce and Traffic in the World, give me
leave to survey the distinct Ports of this Kingdom, that I may not do less to
our own than in this Tract I have done to other foreign Countries. Britain
then, the Queen of Islands, is found to be in circuit 1836 miles extending it
self (comprehending England, Wales, and Scotland, as of one entire Island,
which we now know by the name of Great Britain) 800 miles, being divided into 3
parts, as into England and Wales, whose Trade we have now in hand, and
Scotland, whose Traffic we have already declared.

CHAP. CCLXVIII. Of Wales, and the Trade thereof.
Of Wales, and the Cities thereof.
WAles then being the second part of this division, is bounded on all sides
with the Seas, except the East, where it is separated from England by the River
Dee, and a line drawn to the River Wie, but by some by Clauda Offa, or Offa's
ditch, or more proper by interpretation, Offa's Hedge or Rampire, beginning at
the influx of Wie into Severn, reaching unto Chester for 84 miles, where the
River of Dee enters into the Sea.

The Country is in many places mountainous and barren, yet able of it self to
subsist without assistance of any neighborhood, partly by the industry of the
Inhabitants, and partly by the plenty of some of the shires thereof, the most
fruitful affording supply to others that are found the most barren and
deficient.

Commodities of Wales.
The Commodities which this Country does yield and vent abroad for Merchandise,
are first Cattle in abundance, bred in general through the whole Country, Wax,
Honey, Herrings white and red, Butter and Cheese in great plenty, Woolls also
in some measure; also this Country is well stored with Mines of Silver,
Lead-Ore, Coal, and some Tin, Milstones, and good Quarries of Freestone for
building, Hides, Calf skins, Frises, Bays, some Linens, and great quantity of
Cottons, known by the name of Welsh Cottons and Plains, which in Oswestry,
seated in Sheep hire, is every Monday (as the common Emporie of all Wales)
vented in great abundance, and thence dispersed throughout England, and so
thence is shipped and conveyed to supply the defects of Normandy, Britain, and
Picardy, and of late have found a current vent in Spain, Turkey, and other
Countries: therefore I would encourage my Countrymen to go on in their
Mansfactures of Woolls, seeing that Nature has done her part to give them the
materials, their industry must be added, and that will soon bring forward the
Art, and all these conjoined will bring a benefit for a reward of all, and to
all of them.

Four Circuits in Wales.
Wales is found at this day to contain 4 Circuits for the administration of
Justice, 1 Flint, Denhigh, Montgomery shires being the first; Radnor,
Glamorgan, and Brecknockshires being the second; Cardigan, Carmarthen, and
Pembroke shires being the third; Merioneth, Carnarvan, and the Isle of
Anglesey, the fourth; Four Dioceses.
also to contain 4 Dioceses for Ecclesiastical Discipline, Twelve Shires.
and these comprehended in twelve shires, wherein is also found 1 Choose, 13
Forests, 36 Parks, 99 Bridges, 230 Rivers, 1016 Parishes, wherein are noted to
be 56 Market Towns, being no Cities, and in them 41 Castles, and 4 Cities,
being the Seats of so many Bishops, as (...) Saint David's in Pembrookshire, 2.
Bangor in Carnarvonshire, 3. Asaph in Flintshire, 4 Landaffe in Glenorganshire:
Lastly, the Inhabitants are accounted men of faithful carriage one to another,
most especially in a strange Country, and to strangers in their own, and use a
peculiar language that has remained without alteration or commixture with any
other in the world, from the original thereof to this day.

And lastly, to their everlasting praise and commendation, have for many years
valiantly withstood all their Enemies by their own proper valor, and being
joined to the Crown of England, have been found to be true and loyal to the
same, and have so continued in all amity, love, and faithfulness.

CHAP. CCLXIX. Of England, and the Trade thereof.
England and the Cities thereof.
ENGLAND is the principal part of Britain, and now the last in my labors,
bounded on the East with the German, on the West with the Irish, on the South
with the British Oceans, and on the North with Scotland, as is aforementioned.
The ornaments of this Country has in times past been expressed unto us by this
verse, Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana.
England is stored with Mountains, Bridges, Wool,
With Churches, Rivers, Women beautiful.


But these are not the Commodities that Merchants look after, therefore I will
show you in his proper place, those Commodities which England does naturally
afford for Merchandise, and in the mean season it will not be improper that I
run over the Provinces of this Kingdom, and therein see what particulars may be
gathered out of each, conducing either to Traffic or to the honor and
commodity of the Country, and thereto add also the Provinces of Wales,
purposely omitted for this place. The Provinces, or more properly the Shires of
England and Wales, according to Cambden, whom I gladly follow in this
description, are these.

Cornwall.
The first is Cornwall, in it self a barren and mountainous Country, but the
bosom thereof incloseth rich Mines of Tin, which for the excellence thereof is
famous throughout the world, also therewith is dug Gold and Silver, and a
certain Stone is found upon the earth of it self transparent, and naturally
formed into angles and points, which if found in foreign Countries, would be
held admirable: here is also upon this Coast taken Pilchards and Herrings in
great abundance, which the Inhabitants do salt and dry in the smoke, and so
transport into France, Spain, and Italy, to good advantage: the Seacoast is
beautified with many Towns and Havens, capable of many Ships, Falmouth being
the chief, and here is found that famous Mount Michael, by the Inhabitants
called Cana, which has for many ages been noted for its steepness and
antiquity.

St. Ives in Cornwall, and the Trade thereof.
The situation of the Town of St. Ives is on the the Seaside, with a good Road
before it for any Vessel whatsoever to ride in it within one league, half
league, or quarter of a league of the Town, with a Peer or dry Key belonging
unto it, which will admit the entering a Vessel of 200 Tuns bringing their Tide
with them. The situation of the Road, and how it lies, and in what degrees, is
in a Paper hereunto annexed. There may be a Mould made for the preservation of
Vessels with small cost. That Ships of 50 Tuns, or 100 Tuns, may ride a float
on a Neap-Tide within it in safety. The Town consists only of one Parish
belonging to it, about some three miles round of it, with at least 500
Families, or above 3000 souls in it.

What the place naturally affords, is Pilchards, Herring, Congerdoust,
Ray-fish, and other sorts of Summer-fish. The materials which they mostly use
for it, is Salt supplied from France; The quantity it affords yearly more or
less, as pleases God, may be 3, 4, or 5000 Hogsheads of Pilchards yearly, 3,
4, or 500 Barrels of Herring, good quantity of Congerdoust, 4 or 5 Barks laden
of about 20 or 30 Tuns, each Bark of Ray-fish yearly, some years more, some
less.

These Commodities, as Pilchards, are sold by the Hogshead, four of them make a
Tun: but commonly by the 1000; (1200 small tale they sell the Merchant in the
Cask to the 1000) the Barrel of Herring about 30 Gallons, sold commonly at 18
s. 20 s. 22 s. per Barrel; a Congerdoust by the Kintale, that is to say^ 112 l.
to the Kintale. Ray fish constantly sold by the dozen fresh, at 2 s. 4 d. 2 s.
6 d. or 3 s. per dozen. They have to their dozen 20, 30, 40, 50, sometimes 60
fishes to the dozen, according to their custom the Merchant has that buys it,
per dozens.

Their Weight is 12 l. according to the Standard; likewise is their Yard or
Ell, according to the Standard by Law.

Their Measure is a Bushel for all Grain and Salt to be measured, imported,
containing 28 Gallons water-measure, their ancient standing measure. The places
for venting these Commodities are in the Straights, Spain, France, and other
foreign parts beyond the Seas. The prices are commonly on Pilchards 7, 8, or 9
s. per thousand, 30, 35, or 45 s. per Hogshead.

The Measures used in the public Market for Corn are a Bushel containing 20
Gallons, the half Bushel 10 Gallons, the Peek 5 Gallons, the Gallon agrees with
the Winchester Gallon. Salt is sold in the public Market by the Gallon; and it
is a good Country for victualling of Ships.

The quantity of Shipping or Barks belonging to the place are but few, and in
number seven, they were many more, but are taken and lost. The Burden of these
are from 60 tuns to 20 Tuns: diverse other Vessels of foreign parts do frequent
the Road yearly, and Port likewise.

The Trade they drive with foreign Nations are the Commodities formerly
expressed out of this Port exported; with great quantities of Tin, which this
Country round about us affords, and that the best in England, which we usually
export.

The Commodities imported, or usually expended on the place or parts adjacent,
are great quantities of Salt, at least 10000 bushels of Salt yearly, with all
other sorts of Commodities being small quantities.

The manner of taking Pilchards and Herrings is by Nets, the other Fish by
Hooks: they likewise use great quantity of Netting and Rope yearly for their
Fishing craft, which cost them great Sums of Money. The Season for taking of
Pilchards is between the first day of July and the first of January following.
The Herrings they take from Michaelmas to Christmas following. The other Fish
are taken in the Summer. The quantity of Boats belonging to the place are about
60; the Men a great number employed to Sea in Ships; and at least four hundred
Men all the Fishing-season are employed about the Pilchard-catching and
Herring-fishing.

And for the better encouragement of Trade there might be a Mould erected from
the Castle whereon the Colors stand in the Map toward the Church, which has
been profer'd to be done for 3000 l. which, if done, would be the preservation
of many thousand pounds per Annon, and many Men's Lives, who by extremity of
Weather and contrary Wind are forced this side the Lands-end, having no place
else to preserve themselves, unless they can get the Harbor of Milford, which
is 32 Leagues from this place, being the only place on this North side for
preservation of Ships.

General Blake, when he beleaguered the Island of Scilly, which lies 13 Leagues
from this place was put off by a Storm from the Island of Scilly with his Fleet
which came into this Road, and here anchored with his Fleet till the Storm was
over, which continued five days in Safety; it is a good Road, and with good
Ground-tackle a Ship may safely ride with all Weather.

This Bay is from the Lands-end 5 Leagues, and from the Lands-end to Scilly is
8 Leagues:

The Inhabitants of this place are poor, and have often made it their Request
to have a Mould erected for the greater Safety of Ships that come here. But by
reason of the late Troubles, and through the negligence of such as were
entrusted for the prosecuting thereof, it has been neglected, which (if
erected) Ships of 300 tuns might be secured within the Mould at any time, and
then it would be one of the best dry Peers in England.

Devon 2.
The second is Devonshire, no less rich in Veins of Tin, and withal beautified
with many more Towns and good Havens than the former, Exon being the principal
Town, and an Inland City, but Datmouth and Plymouth the best Havens; this last
being, from a poor fishing Village, become a fair Town, by reason of the Castle
and Commodiousness of the Haven; and the rather it is to be mentioned, as
giving birth to Sir Fruncis Droke Knight. who in our Fathers days accomplished so
many notable Exploits at Sea, and was the chief Glory of that Age for
Navigation.

Dorset 3.
The third is Dorsetshire, Dorchester being the chief Town, and Weymouth the
chief Haven.

Somerset 4.
Somersetshire is the fourth, happy in the fruitful Soil, rich Pastures,
Multitude of Inhabitants, and Commodiousness of Havens: the chief Towns are
Bridgwater, next Bath famous for those medicinal Baths there found; and lastly
Bristol, encompassed with a double Wall feate^ on the River Severn, beautified
with many fair private and public Buildings, and next to London and York it is
preferred to all other Cities of England, but in Amplitude of Traffic,
Shipping, and Eminence of Merchants, next to London it self, and else in my
opinion second to none.

Of Taunton.
Taunton, being a Corporation governed by a Mayor and 24 of the Society, is
situate in a very fruitful Valley between 2 Hills, one of the Hills is 4 miles
off the Town on the South, the other 2 miles distant from the Town on the
North. In the Town are 2 Parish Churches, St Mary Magdalen and St. James, and
in these Parishes are 700 Dwelling House; and upward, being fully inhabited and
very populous: through which Parishes runs a great River of Fresh Water
called Tone, into which run diverse small Rivulets before it comes to the Town;
this Town is encompassed round; within 5 miles, with 32 Parishes, which are
very populous. Market Towns near it are, Bridgwater a Haven Market Town 7 mil^s
off, Chard a Market Town 8 miles, Wellington a Market Town 5 miles, Stoy a
Market town 9 miles, Wilvescome a Market Town 7 miles, Ilminster a Market Town
8 miles from this Town.

Mercers and Drapers, also Smiths, Shoe-makers, Wool combers, Weavers, Fullers,
Goldsmiths, and Tailors, with others of manual Occupations, of which there are
a considerable Number: the chiefest Commodities that it affords for
Merchandise, being at present mixed Serges and white Serges (in the Town and
places adjacent) made of clean Wool, out of which are sent to London and other
places every week 700 pieces and upward: the Town was furnished with Wool in
former times from Ireland, but now little comes from thence by reason of the
Wars: but at this instant (what this fruitful Valley, being full of Pasture
does not afford) is supplied with Wool from the North, viz. Buckingham, Oxford,
Warwick and Leicester shires: Besides, here is made a sort of Bays called
Taunton Bays, for making of which Serges and Bays aforesaid, are kept at work
weekly 8500.

The Yard, Ell and Bushel, are according to the Standard and Measure of
Winchester.

Measure in the Market for Corn is the Peck, 4 Pecks to the Bushel, which is 8
Gallons, agreeing with Winchester.

Port called Minhead, with a sure Key, where may ride 30 Ships of 60 Tuns and
downward: also another Port 12 miles off called Watchet of the same bigness,
only the Key is ruined: and another Port 7 miles from the Town called
Bridgwater, in which Town comes a Salt Water River, in which may come in at a
full Tide Vessels of 60 Tuns, and the River from the main of Severn is above 10
miles, by which you may judge how many Vessels may arrive to these Ports; there
are but few Ships belonging to these Ports: their Trade is to Ireland, to Wales
for Coals; and Bristol, and sometimes to France and Spain. The Ports he against
the Sea that runs to Bristol, called the Severn.

Trade they drive is set forth in the former Articles.

Fishing there is very little, not worth mentioning.

Wiltshire 5.
Wiltshire is the 5. altogether an inland Country; the chiefest Towns are
Malmesbury, famours for the Cloths of Wool made here; Salisbury for the
Bishopric; and Wilton, of old the chief of this County, now a little Village.

Hampshire 6.
Hampshire is the 6. wherein are found the little fair City of Southampton,
Winchester the pleasant, and Portsmouth the only now Garrison Town of England.

Barkshire 7.
Berkshire is the 7. wherein are found the Towns of Newbery famous for
Clothing, and Windsor for the King's Castle, and where the Ceremony of the
Knights of the Garter is solemnized.

Surrey 8.
Surrey is the 8. wherein are seen Oatlands and Richmond, two beautiful and
stately Palaces, belonging to the Kings of England.

Sussex 9.
Sussex is the 9. Chichester being the chief City, and Rhy the chief Sea-Town.

Kent 10.
Kent is the next, rich in Meadows, Pastures, Groves, Apples and Cherries,
wherein are found seated the Cinque Ports, Deptford the King's Yard for
building of his Ships, Rochester the Seat of a Bishop, Eltham and Greenwich two
Palaces of the Kings, Dover a famous Seaport and one of the Keys of this
Island; and lastly, Canterbury the prime of this County, and the Seat of the
Archbishop and Metropolitan of all England.

Gloucester 11.
Gloucestershire is the 11. the principal Towns are Tewksbury famous for
Cloth-making, and Gloucester the chief of the County; here are also found the
famous Hills of Cotswold, upon which great Flocks of Sheep are found to feed,
yielding that excellent Wool so much esteemed amongst all Nations.

Oxford 12.
Oxfordshire is the 12. which is a fruitful County both in Corn and Pasture,
and wherein is found Woodstock a House of the King's, an enclosed Park with a
Stone Wall, imagined the the first of this Land, and Oxford an University
famous through the World, and chief of this Island.

Buckingh. 13.
Buckinghamshire is the 13. wherein are found the good Towns of Ailsbury,
Stony-stratford, and Buckingham the principal of the County.

Bedford 14.
Bedfordshire is the next, and shows the Town of Bedford for the first of the
County.

Hertford 15.
Hertfordshire is the 15. wherein is the stately House of Theobalds, a House of
the Kings, St. Albans, a fair Thorough-fare, and Hertford the principal of the
County.

Middlesex 16.
Middlesex is the 16. wherein are found the King's Palace, Hampton Court, and
London, the prime City of this Kingdom, and the Chamber of the Kings of
England, so famous abroad in foreign Countries that it needs no Man's
Commendation: it is beautified with sundry Colleges for the Study of the
Municipal Laws, with the Churches of Westminster and London, besides diverse
others, with the Hall of Westminster, where the Parliaments extraordinary, and
Courts of Chancery, King's Bench, and other Courts are ordinarily kept, with the
2 Palaces of Whitehall and St. James, with an Exchange or Burse for Merchants
to meet in, with a sumptuous and wonderful Bridge of Free stone, besides many
other excellent private and public Edifices.

Essex 17.
Essex is the next, abounding in Pasturage, Corn and Saffron, and in which are
found Chelmsford the chief Town, Colchester, Coxal, and others abounding with
Bays, Says, and other new Drapery; and lastly, Harwich a safe Haven for Ships.

Suffolk 18.
Suffolk is next, which affords quantity of Butter, Cheese and Cloths, known by
the names of Suffolk-cloth, wherein is found St. Edmunds bury and Ipswich,
which has a commodious Haven.

Norfolk 19.
Norfolk is the 19. a large champain Country, abounding in Conies and Sheep,
affording the two good Haven Towns of Lin and Yarmouth, and Norwich, the first
of the County, which deserves to be numbered amongst the chiefest Cities of
England.

A Description of the City of Norwich, and the Trade thereof.
It is seated in the County of Norfolk, and is situate upon the River Yare,
(which runs to Yarmouth, and gives name to that Town) passable for small Boats
only, on which River are 5 Bridges; the City is well walled with many Turrets,
and has 12 Gates for Entrance, containing 36 Parishes, in the midst whereof is
a very fair Marketplace, ^and Town Hall for the City Courts and Elections, and
one other Hall wherein the Citizens keep their great Feasts. This City is also
beautified with a fair Cathedral and Cloister not much inferior to any in the
World, tho now much ruinated by these unhappy Times. There is also in this City
the Ruins of an old Castle, 3 Palaces, viz. one belonging to the Dukes of
Norfolk, one formerly belonging the Earls of Surrey, and one other for the
Bishop of Norwich. Here are also 3 Hospitals, one for aged Persons, one for
Boys, and one for Girls. The Government of this City is by a Mayor, 2 Sheriffs,
24 Aldermen, and 16 Common Council-Men. This City being an Inland Place, about
30 miles from the Sea by Water (tho not above 16 by Land) has little foreign
Trade, save only with Holland, and that not considerable or worth taking notice
of, the chief Trade of this City being to London, and that in these two
Commodities especially, viz. Stuffs and Stockings: the Stuffs here vended in a
time of Free Trade, may be estimated at 100000 l. per annum, and upward; which
said Stuffs are under the Government of two Companies, one called the Worsted
Company, and the other the Russel Company; those Manusactures under the
Government of the Worsted Company (and approved by the Wardens thereof) have a
Seal affixed to each End thereof, the one Seal having this Word ( Norwich) on
one side, and certain Letters on the other, which stand for such of the Wardens
Names as are present at the Sealing thereof: the other Seal has on one side
these Words ( Worsted reformed,) and on the other side thereof (in Figures) the
Quantity of Yards the Piece contains; and those Manufactures under the
Government of the Russel Company, and approved by them, have but one Seal,
which has on one side the Representation of a Castle, and on the other side
these Words ( Fidelitas Arts alit.) This Stuff Trade is chiefly managed in
Partnership between the London and Norwich Merchants, great Quantities whereof
have in formertimes, in a Free Trade with other Nations, been exported beyond
the Seas to several places, but especially to Spain, and from thence to the
West Indies. The Stockings here vended may, in time of Free Trade, be estimated
at 60000 l. per annum, and are not under any Company or Government, but are
here put out to knitting by certain Citizens brought up thereto, and so sent up
to London to their Factors, which sell them to Merchants, who transport them to
Spain, France, Portugal. The Advancement of these Manufactures is Peace and
Free Trade with those Nations whither they are exported; and the chiefest
Prejudice to the Makers of these Manufactures is the Decay of Sheep by the Rot
and Casualties, and the suffering our Wools to be exported unwrought into
Holland and other places. The Country hereabouts affords great quantities of
Sheep and Conies, and is well stored with Corn of all sorts, especially Barley
which is here converted into Malt, whereof in former times great quantities
have been lent to London and Scotland. All Grain, according to the Custom of
the Country, is here sold by the Score (which is 20 Cooms, every Coom being 4
Bushels) and have 1 Coom allowed to every Score, as in Measure or Courtesy.

The Weights and Measures both dry and wet here used, and other things
enquirable, according to the Articles of Instruction not herein before
expressed, are agreeable and do correspond with London.

Cambridge 20
Cambridgeshire is the 20. which is found to abound in Corn, and wherein is
seen the University of Cambridge, and Ely famous for being the Seat of a Bishop.

Huntington 21
Huntingtonshire is the 21. the chief Town being Huntington.

Northamp. 22
Northamptonshire is the 22. abounding in Corn, Peterborough being here the
Seat of a Bishop, and Northampton the chief City.

Leicester 23.
Leicestershire is the 23. abounding in Corn, Leicester the chief Town is more
famous for the Antiquity than for the Beauty thereof.

Rutland 24.
Rutlandshire is the 24. and accounted the least County in this Kingdom,
Uppinham being the chief Town.

Lincoln 25.
Lincolnshire is the 25 rich in Corn and Pasture, abounding in Fish and Fowl;
Lincoln, once a great City, is yet the greatest in this County.

Nottingh. 20.
Nottinghamshire is the 26. wherein is Nottingham the chief Town, and the
Forest of Sherwood seeding many fallow and red Deer.

Darby 27.
Darbyshire is the 27. the chief City is Darby, famous for the Ale thereof; in
this County are many Mines of Lead and other Minerals:

Warwick 28.
Warwickshire is the 28. wherein is found Warwick the chief Town, and Coventry
a fair walled City, and accounted the fairest Inland City of this Island,
wherein no great quantity of Cloth is made.

Worcester 29
Worcestershire is the 29. wherein is sound the City of Worcester, famous now
for Clothing, and the Seat of a Bishop.

Stafford 30.
Staffordshire is the 30. which affords Salt Pits and Wells, and Coals taken
out of the Earth, Stone and Lichfield being the principal Towns in this County.

Shropshire 31
Shropshire is the 31. wherein is found Ludlow, of more Beauty than Antiquity,
honored with a Council and Court of Justice for Wales, and a Palace for the
Princes thereof. Shrewsbury the chief of this County, much enriched by their
Trade for Cottons and Frizes with their Neighbors the Welsh, whom yet
notwithstanding they greatly affect not.

Chester 32.
Cheshire is the 32. abounding in Pastures and excellent Cheeses, hence
transported throughout England; it has Chester for the chief City, seated on
the River Dee.

Hereford 33.
Herefordshire is the 33. and boasts to be, for its Fertility and Abundance
of all things, the first Shire in England; Hereford is the chief City, and
Lemster justly boasts of the Sheeps Wool, feeding in those Grounds, with
which no part of Europe can equalize.

Yorkshire 34.
Yorkshire is the 34. and largest County in all England, abounding in Corn,
Pasture and Meadows, yielding Clothing, by the Industry of the Inhabitants, in
abundance; York is the chief City, and the second in England, also the Seat of
an Archbishop; here is a Court of Justice held for the neighboring Marches,
like that of Ludlow. In this County is also the Town of Hull, seated on the
River Humber, where are found Merchants of good quality; and here is also the
Castle of Scarborough, where, in the adjoining Sea, is the great Fishing found
annually for Herrings.

Richmond 35
Richmond is the 35. in which are found Mountains to yield plentifully Lead,
Pit Coals and some Brass, and the chief City is called Richmond.

Durham 36
The Bishopric of Durham is the 36. pleasant in Meadows, Pastures and Groves,
and abounds in Sea-Coal, which is dig'd out of the Earth. Durham is the chief
City.

Lancashire 37
Lancashire is the 37. wherein is Manchester, an old Town, enriched by the
Industry of the Inhabitants, by Cloth of Linen and Woollen, the City of
Lancaster being the first of the Shire.

Westmerl. 38.
Westmerland is the 38. the chief Town whereof is Kendal, famous for making of
Woollen Cloth.

Cumberlan. 39.
Cumberland is the 39. affording Mines of Brass, and some Veins of Silver, and
Black Lead in abundance: also there is made much Linen Cloth in this County.
Carlisle is the principal Town, where they are lately set to the making of
Dimities, which may in time prove a very considerable Manufacture. Here are
found apparent Ruins of that Wall which the Romans built, to keep out the
Picts from making incursions upon the Britains, being as it seems then so poor,
that they cared not to subdue them.

Northumb. 40
Northumberland is the 40. wherein is found the Sea-Town of Newcastle, which
affords such abundance of Sea-Coal, that the same is thence transported into
many Kingdoms of the World: Berwick.
here is also Berwick one of the strongest fortified Towns of England, formerly
strengthened against the Incursions of the Scots, by a strong Garrison of
Soldiers, and now dismissed by the Happy Union of England and Scotland.

The Measures used in Morpeth, 12 miles beyond Newcastle for hard Corn (viz.
Wheat, Rye, Pease and Beans) is the Bole, containing 2 Bushels, every Bushel
makes 2 Canings; a Caning makes 2 Pecks, every Peck 2 Houps, each Houp 4 Fourth
Parts. This Morpeth Bole makes 3 Bushels, or the Bole and half of the hard Corn
Bole of Newcastle.

There is another Bole used for Barley, (there called Big) and Oats, which is
bigger than the former Bole by one fifth part.

The Bole of Alnwick, 12 miles beyond Morpeth, for hard Corn contains a Morpeth
Bole and a Houp or 1/10 part more. The Bole for Oats (with the Alnwick Charity,
as they call it) which is a Houp, makes the Bole for Big and Oats of Morpeth.
Their Bole for Big is less than the Morpeth Bole for Big 1/8 part. The Bole of
Wool, 20 miles beyond Alnwick for all Corn is bigger than that of Alnwick by
part, or a Peck. The Measure for Salt all the County over is the same.

Shires of Wales.
Having thus briefly run over the Shires of England, it will be necessary I
should here add the like cursory View of Wales, comprehended under the
Government of England, and included within the same Limit, and omitted to this
place, as having parts of the said Kingdom, which I find to be in number these.

Anglesey 1.
Anglesey I account the first, which is touched amongst the Islands, being
esteemed a County of Wales, Beaumaries being the principal Town of the County.

Flint 2.
Flintshire is the second, plentiful in Corn and Pasture, famous for the Spring
of Holy Well, called here St. Winifreds Well, and Flint Town being the chiefest
of the County.

Denbigh 3.
Denbighshire is the next, affording some Mines of Lead, wherein are found
Wrexham that boasts of its Holy Tower, and Musical Organs, and Denbigh the
chief of the County.

Canarvan 4.
Canarvanshire is the next, anciently called Snowden Forest, before that Wales
was reduced to Counties, wherein are found the high Hills, the Alps of Britain;
also Aberconway, a strong and fair little Town; Bangor, the Seat of a Bishop,
and Canarvan, the chief of this Province, Famous for the Birthplace of Edward
II. the first Prince of Wales of English Blood.

Merioneth 5.
Merionethshire is the next, a mountainous Country, affording notwithstanding
good Pasture for Cattle. The chief Town is Balla, tho poor yet principal of
these Mountaincers.

Montgomery 6
Montgomeryshire is the next, having its chief Town of the same Name.

Cardigan 7.
Cardiganshire is the seventh, and has the Town of Cardigan for the chief of
the County.

Pembroke 8.
Pembrokeshire is the eighth, Pembr^ is the chief Town, and here a long Neck of
Land makes a Haven, called Milford Haven, than which Europe has not a more
noble, more safe, and more large, with many Creeks and safe Roads, wherein 1000
Sail may ride out of sight one of another, and made more famous by the Landing
of Henry VII.

Caermarden 9
Caermardenshire is the next, abounding in Corn, Sheep, and Pit-Coal,
Caermarden being the chief Town.

Glamorgan 10
Glamorganshire is the next, Cardiff is the chief Town, having a commodious
Haven for Shipping.

Monmouth 11
Monmouthshire is the next, wherein are found Chepstow and Monmouth, the last
is glorious in giving Birth to Henry V. Conqueror of France.

Brecknock 12.
Brecknockshire is the next, Brecknock being the chief Town.

Radnor 13.
Radnorshire is the last, wherein is sound Radnor the chief. These are in brief
the Shires of Wales.

Commodities of England.
To observe now my former Method, having thus particularly surveyed the
Continent, let me now search into those Commodities which England in general
affords for Merchandise, and is thence exported into foreign Regions, as being
the principal Motives of Trade in all Kingdoms, which it produces several
ways. First, by Manufactures it yields Woollen Cloths of all sorts, broad and
narrow, known and called by the name of several Shires, also Perpetuanos, Bays,
Says, Scrges, Cottons, Kersies, Buffins, Mocados, Grograms, Sattins,
Calimancas, Velvets, Pl^shts, Worsteds, Fustians, Durances, Tukes, and infinite
others: there is made in this Island yearly 250000 Cloths by computation, and
by this may be guessed the Quantity of the res^ of other sorts; also Furs and
Skins, as Coney-skins, Squirrel-skins, Fitches, Calf-skins, Hides, and sundry
others.

Also it produces by Mines out of the Earth, 1. Tin 1200000 l. yearly, Lead
800 Foders yearly, Allom 800 Tuns yearly, Copper 500 Tuns yearly, Iron of all
sorts, 800 Furnaces daily set on work, besides Ordnance of Iron and such like,
Sea-coal yearly (^) Chaldrons, Salt (^) Tuns; also all manner of Grain, Oats,
Pease, Barley, Rye and Wheat in great plenty; also Linen Cloth, all Iron Wares,
Tallow, Leather, Glass, and Glasses of all sorts, Venice Gold and Bilver,
Train-Oyl, Salmons, Pilchards and Herrings, Hake, Conger and Haberdine, Hops,
Wood, Butter, Cheese, Beer, Saltpeter, Gunpowder, Honey, Wax, Alabaster, and
some other Stones, Wools, Woolfels, Yern, Yernsey, etc. and to conclude, many
other good and rich Commodities is here found.

Beauty of England.
The Beauty and Wealth of this Kingdom is demonstrated in 325 Rivers, 8 thereof
being great and navigable for some Miles, whereon are found 857 Bridges, 30
Chases, 55 Forests, 745 Parks; here are also reckoned 26 Deanries, 60
Archdeaconries, 504 Dignities and Prebends, 5439 Parochial Benefices, besides
Impropriations and Vicarages, and the whole divided into 6 Circuits for the
Administration of Justice, into 22 Episcopal Dioceses for Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and into 2 Archbishopricks under whom the rest are subordinate: and
lastly, into 40 Shires, over each of which is yearly a Sheriff appointed, who
is to assist the Itinerary Judges in executing Justice, and to gather in the
King's Amercements: and these Shires are divided into Hundreds, and these
Hundreds into Tithings; and to conclude, in England are found 145 Castles, 9527
Parishes besides Chapels, whereof 585 are Market Towns, and 22 Cities, the
principal whereof are these, 1. Oxford, 2. Cambridge, both being Universities,
3. Exeter in Devonshire, 4. Norwich in Norfolk, 5. Bristol watered by Severn,
accounted the second for Trade in this Country, 6. York, on the River Ure,
accounted the second City for Beauty and Greatness in England; and lastly
London, under which I will comprise the Trade of this whole Island.

CHAP. CCLXX. Of London, and the Trade thereof.
London, and the Trade thereof.
LOndon, the Metropolis of England, the prime City of Trading this day in the
World, is pleasantly seated on the River Thames, which divides it into two
parts, her Circuit may be 8 miles, wherein are found 122 Parish Churches, with
the Palace of the King, the Houses of the Nobility, Colleges for the Study of
the Laws, and diverse other stately public Edifices, and may contain 400000
People. Merchants of London.
Here have their Residence, the rich and most eminent Merchants of this Island,
whom diverse Princes of this Kingdom have incorporated into several Societies
and Companies, partly to encourage their Endeavors, and partly in reward of
the Discoveries of those Countries and Regions, whereof they take their Name,
and by the Power and Immunities granted them, do make Acts and Orders for the
Benefit of Commerce in general, and of their Companies in particular. Merchants
Adventurers, and their Original and places of Residence.
The antientest of which Companies have had their Original and Continuance since
Edward I. his Reign, called the Company of Merchant Adventurers, grounded at
first upon the Exportations of Wool only, as the prime and Staple Commodity of
this Kingdom; since which it is grounded upon Clothing, into which this Wool is
now converted; for he, at the request and being in league with the Cities and
Towns in Flanders, made Bruges, which was then the greatest Mart of
Christendom, the Staple for his Wools, where it continued for 15 years, whenas
by some Discontent with the Flemings, and by experience seeing what the Benefit
of these Staples were, removed them from Bruges to England; and for the ease,
as well of his Subjects in bringing their Wools into those parts, as of such
foreign Merchants as came to buy the same, he placed his Staples at Exon,
Bristal, Winchester, Westminster, Chichester, Canterbury, Norwich, Lincoln,
York and Newcastle, for the Kingdom of England; Carmarden for Wales; at Dublin,
Waterford, Cork and Tredagh for Ireland; and enacted, That no English, Irish or
Welchman, should transport this stapled Commodity, (no not by Licenses, if any
such should be granted) on pain of Confiscation, during the King's Pleasure.

Lastly, he allured over hither diverse Flemings, which taught our Nation the
making of Cloth, who are now grown the best Cloth workers in the World; and to
encourage them in that Art, in the 27 of his Reign, it was by Statute enacted
to be Felony, to transport hence Wools unwrought. Now when England had thus for
some time enjoyed the Benefit of these Staples, he removed the same to Callais,
which he had then conquered, and which he desired to enrich: From hence they
were at several times and occasions removed, now to one, now to another Town in
Belgium, and still happy was that Town, in what Country soever where the said
Company keep a House for their Traffic and Residence, the Confluence of all
People thither to buy, infinitely enriching it. Antwerp for a long time enjoyed
their Company, till upon some Discontents between Henry VII. and Maximilian
Archduke, they removed thence, but at their Return again they were received by
the Antwerpians with the Solemn Processions, Princely Triumph, sumptuous
Feasts, rare Banquetings, and Expressions of much Joy, and more Love: here they
continued till the Surprisal and Sack of this Town by the Spaniards, Anno (^)
whence by reason of their Wrongs and hard Measure there received, they removed
into two places, one to Middleburgh, the other to Stoad, afterward from
Middleburgh to Delph, and from Delph now to Rotterdam, where they have lately
seated themselves, with many Immunities granted them, and a Palace appointed
them for their Residence; the other from Stoad, by some Vicissitude of Change,
is now placed at Hamburgh, where also they have many Privileges, and the said
Company being now enlarged, and all new Drapery comprised therein, they intend
to implant more Factories in other places; and this is the most ancient of all
our Societies, which is observed to be governed beyond Seas, in the said
places, by a Deputy and certain Assistants, and in England by a Governor,
Deputy, and certain Assistants, Sir Thomas Moulson Knight. and Alderman, being the
present Governor, to whose Worth and Government I ow this Acknowledgment, as
being a Member of this so ancient and worthy a Society.

Barbary Merchants, their Original and Ruin.
The next to these are the Barbary Merchants, which had their Original in Henry
VII's time, being indeed the Age wherein our Nation did begin, by Imitation of
the Portugals and Spaniards, to discover new Regions: and this flourished and
continued till the End of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, wherein it fell, whenas Civil
Wars were hot in Morocco and Fez, amongst the Pretenders to that Empire.

Levant Merchants and their Original.
Out of whose Ashes about that time did rise the Levant Company or Turkey
Merchants, and by their Discoveries and Trade first made the Traffic into the
Seigntory of Venice, and then to the Dominions of the Great Turk, including as
then within their Privileges the East Indies Navigation, which was then known
to them only by Land, and to the Portugals by Sea, since East India Merchants,
and their Original.
which the said Indies are raised to a great and eminent Company, and by
themselves incorporated, employing in a joint Stock a great Capitol, by which
Trade and Stock they have built many warlike Ships, and brought all those
Indian Commodities to our homes, which before were brought to us by other
Nations; both which Companies now supply our Land, and by their second
Transportation many other Countries with those rich Commodities, which Venetia,
Tuuky, Arabia, Egypt, Persia, China and India yield, and is found governed in
England by Sir Maurice Abbot Knight. and Alderman, and by Mr. Henry Garraway,
Alderman; the former Governor of the East India Company, and the latter of the
Turkey Company, to which are joined certain Committees and Assistants, to whose
Worth and Government I here ow this Acknowledgment, as being now both a Member,
and entrusted with a particular Charge in both the said Companies.

Moscovia, Eastland, Greenland, French, and Spanish Merchants, and their
Originals
Other Countries and Companies, in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and
some in the beginning of King James's Reign have been discovered, settled and
continued; as to the Northward, the Moscovy Company, the Eastland Company, the
Greenland Company, and of late days there is erected a Company for France,
governed here by Sir James Cambel Knight. and Alderman, to whom also I ow this
Acknowledgment as being a Member thereof; and now there is in agitation a
Parent for a Company for Spain, of which also, when confirmed, I may entitle my
self a Member.

These Companies then and Societies, besides others not at all incorporated,
encouraged by sundry Privileges granted unto them, govern themselves by settled
Acts and Orders, under certain chosen Governors, Deputies, and a select number
of Assistants, which have been found to be so profitable to these Kingdoms by
exporting the Native Commodities thereof by setting the Poor to work, by
building of many brave Ships, and by importing of sundry Necessaries both for
Use and Ornament, that the Benefit thereof cannot here be certainly expressed.
But one particular in the Levant Merchants may in part demonstrate what great
Benefit the rest do produce; for it was found, That in our last Voyage to Cales
and to the Isle of Rhee, they were the Owners of 20 great Sail of Ships that
served in both those Voyages, and it is probable that they are Owners of 30
Sail more, which one with the other may contain 12 or 13000 Tuns of Burden,
and which may have for further Defense 1200 pieces of Ordnance at the least,
and employ about 4 or 5000 Sailors yearly, besides Porters, Weighers, Bargemen,
Lightermen, Carmen, which cannot be less than 2 or 3000 Persons more; and they
are found, if Report may gain credit, to pay his Majesty by way of Customs and
Imposts 50000 l. yearly, partly outward by their Exportation of Cloth, Tin and
other Commodities; partly inwards by the Importation of Silks, Cottons, Galls,
Grograms, Spices, Drugs, Currants, and other Levantine Commodities. This being
then briefly to show the Benefit of a well governed Trade, and the Profits
arising thereby to the Commonwealth, I leave it to others to consider the
general Good accruing to this Island, by all the rest of the said Companies and
Societies of this Kingdom, and come in the next place, according to my Method,
to handle the other principal Parts of Traffic comprised in this City, and
generally of all this Kingdom.

The Coins of this City and Kingdom are partly of Gold and partly of Silver, as
in other Countries; the principal in use are these,

Coins current in England of Silver.
The Silver current Coins are Pieces of 5 s. sterling. Crown. Pieces of 2 s. 6 d.
Pieces of 12 d. Shilling. Pieces of 6 d. 4 d. 3 d. 2 d. 1 d. sterling. Which are
accounted 4 farthings to a penny sterling. 12 pence to a shilling, 5 shillings to a
crown, 4 crowns or 20 shillings to a pound sterling.

Of Gold.
The Gold current Coins are Pieces of 22 s. sterling. Pieces of 11 s. Pieces of 5
s. 6 d. Pieces of 2 s. 9 d. the of 22 s.Also Pieces of 20 s. Pieces of 10 s.
Pieces of 5 s. Pieces of 2 s. 6 d. the of 20 s.

Accounted also in former Accounts of pounds, shillings and pence sterling, the
Goodness and Fineness, and intrinsic Value may be more particularly known by a
Proclamation An. 1609. published by our deceased Sovereign King James, to which
I refer the Reader, or otherwise to a Table inserted in the end of this
Chapter, of the Equality and Valuation thereof with the Coins of sundry other
Countries.

Accounts in England.
Their Accounts are kept throughout England by pounds, shillings and pence
sterling, accounting 12 pence to the shilling, and 20 shillings to the pound;
but the Accounts of the Revenues of the Kingdom have been, and yet are in some
Offices kept in marks, containing 13 shillings 4 pence per mark.

CHAP. CCLXXI. Of Weights used in England.
Weights in England.
THE Weights commonly used throughout England are two, the Troy-weight, and the
Averdupois-weight.

Troy Weight.
The Troy pound consists of 12 ^ounces, the ounce of 20 peny-weights, the
penny-weight of 24 grains, and serves only for Bread, Gold, Silver and
Electuaries, 8 l. accounted to the gall^, and by consequence 16 l. to the peck,
32 l. to the half-bushel, and 64 to the bushel, and hereby Weight and Measure
are reduced one into another.

Weight with Measure.
Wet Measures are also derived from this pound Troy, both on Land and
Shipboard, as also Corn and Grain, as above is specified; for first this pound
of 12 ounces, made into a concave Measure is named a pint, 8 of the said pints
or 8 l. make a gallon of either Wine, Ale, Beer or Corn, according to the
Standard of the Exchequer, and the Acts of Parliament of 11 and 12 of Henry VII.

Assize.
From hence is also drawn the Assize-Measure of all vendible Cask, each hogshead
to contain 63 gallons, every terce 84, every pipe 126, and every tun 252
gallons.

From hence also the Measure for Fish, the Salmon-butt is to be 84 gallons, the
Barrel 42 gallons, the Herring-barrel to be 32 gallons, the Eel-barrel to be 42
gallons, the Soap-barrel to be 32 gallons, and the Firkin of these to be
accordingly.

Averdupois.
The second Weight is the Averdupois-pound, which consists of 16 ounces, which
are lesser than the former; for these 16 ounces make but 14 ounces, and 2 penny
weight of Troy, used in the Mint, where 136 l. Averdupois subtle is but 100
subtle Troy.

By the Averdupois-weight are all Commodities weighed, which bear the name of
Garble, and whereof issues a Garble or Waste; also Butter, Cheese, Tallow,
Wax, and other Commodities, and 7 l. of this Weight is accounted to the gallon
of Wheat, as is 14 l. the peck, 28 l. the half-^ashel, and 56 l. to the bushel.

Troy and Averdupois compared for the Weight of Bread.
The 7 l. Averdupois is 102 ounces Troy, according to which rate the quarter of
Wheat must weigh 448 l. Averdupois, and so 14 l. Averdupois and 16 l. 11 ounces
Troy do accord in one, or 56 l. Averdupois and 67 l. 8 ounces Troy: and note,
That as 1 penny sterling is the ^/2^ part of an ounce Troy, so thereby is found
that 7 l. 12 s. sterling, is 84 and 2 peny-weight Troy, and 6 l. 18 s.
sterling, is 82 ounces and 1 penny Troy, from which 2 Assizes the White, Wheaten
and Household Breads are calculated and drawn.

Cheese weight.
From the Averdupois-weight is also drawn the true Weight of Cheese and Butter
called the weigh, which is 112 l. Averdupois to the hundred, and the 2 hundred
is 224 l. containing 32 cloves, and every clove is 7 l. the weigh of Suffolk
Cheese being 256 l. and the weigh of Essex Cheese 336 l. Averdupois.

Wool weight.
The Sack of Wool, formerly so famoused by the Staplers, did weigh 364 l.
Averdupois; 2 weigh of Wool make a sack, and 12 sacks make a last.

Herrings measure.
The Last of Herrings contains 10 thousand, and every thousand contains 10
hundred, and every hundred six score or 120.

Lead weight.
Lead is sold by the foder, the Load being 175 l. and the foder makes
accordingly 19 hundred of 112 l. per cent.

Three Quintars used in England.
It is also to be noted, that of this pound of 16 ounces Averdupois, are made in
England 3 several Quintars, for weighing of sundry sorts of Merchandise.

First 100 l.
The first is an hundred of five score, or 10 l. just, and this is called the
100 subtle, by which are sold Spices, Drugs, and other fine Commodities, which
are accounted by the pound, and to which is added by Seller an allowance of 4
l. upon 104 l. taken from the Overplus received from Antwerp weights in times
past in Spices, as I have said elsewhere, and called by the name of Tret, yet
by some alleged to be an allowance in garbled Commodities.

Second 112 l.
The second is an hundred of five score and twelve, 112 l. the half hundred
being 56 l. the quarter 28 l. etc. to which all the aforesaid Weight is
adjusted, and by which all Commodities are weighed, and all fine Commodities
afterward reduced to the subtle hundred, and by this are sold all gross Goods,
Grocery, Saltery, etc.

Third 120 l.
The third is an hundred of six score of the said Averdupois pounds, by which
Tin is weighed to his Majesty's Farmers, and some few other Commodities, and is
called the Stannery hundred. This pound Averdupois has, in it self, a Division
of 16 ounces, and thereof are formed other weights, as sometimes a Stone of 8
l. 7 l. 10 l. 14 l. 16 l. 20 l. sometimes a Tod of 7 l. 8 l. 10 l. sometimes a
Clove of 20 l. 28 l. 32 l. and such like, which is still found to be made out
of this pound of Averdupois of 16 ounces, and every ounce of 8 drams, and every
dram 60 grains. Raw Silk of Persia or Tuckey is also sold by this pound, but
then it is accounted a pound of 24 ounces, or a pound and a half of the
abovesaid; all which is requisite his learning, that is either to buy or sell
in England, that he may know not only the true weight of this Commodity, but
also the denomination thereof, and how many pound or ounces is contained
therein.

Having now showed the distinction of the Troy and Averdupois weight, and how
they agree together, and having calculated most of the Weights of this Book to
the hundred subtle, I will also show here how the 112 l. is found to respound
with some other Countries, as being the weight common in use amongst Merchants,
and in notes of Commodities observed abroad.

Europa.
The 112 l. London Marselia 125 l. Venetia subtle 164 l. Venetia gross 104 l.
Sicilia 62 l. Lisbon 100 l. Florence 143 l. Anvers 106 l. Lions 118 l. Sevil
110 l. Dantzick 129 l. Bruges 112 l. Asia, Africa.
The 112 l. London Aleppo 22 Rot. Aleppo Silk 24 Rot. Tripoli Suria 27 Rot.
Tripoli Barbaria 97 Rot. Alexandria Zata 519 Rot. Alexandria Forfar 116 Rot.
Scio and Constantinople 101 Rot. Rhodes 20. 4 Rot. Acria 18. 1 Rot. Babylonia
15. 6 M. Balsola Ormus 108. 7 l.

I need not further enlarge my self herein, by reason of the many Tables found
in this Book, whereby the said weight of 112 l. may easily be reduced to any
eminent place of the World; and forasmuch as our English Gold and Silver is
weighed and valued by the pound Troy, I shall here following insert how the
same concurs and agrees with most of the eminent Cities in the World, in their
Coins both of Silver and Gold.

Troy weight for Gold and Silver compared with other Countries.
It is observed then in most Countries abroad as with us in England, that Gold
and Silver is coined and minted by a peculiar weight only proper thereunto,
which in many great Cities and Countries of Trade I have purposely omitted,
that I might both facilitate this my labor, and in one place reduce them
together to the Pound Troy used, especially to that purpose in England;
therefore if I prove here somewhat the larger, it is but what the seriousness
and due circumstances of the matter requires.

The Weight then used in this case in England is the pound Troy, and that which
is in use in most other Countries is the Mark, which as well as I can I will
here abbreviate: now this pound Troy consisting of 12 ounces, and the ounce of
20 penny weights, and the penny weight of 24 grains, the 100 l. of these
abovesaid pounds being used for the Standard of Gold and Silver in this
Kingdom, has been observed to make in Antwerp 112 Marks each Mark being 8
Ounces. 1 Ounce being 20 Penny weight. 1 Penny weight 32 Grains.
Alder 86 l. Caire 105 Besses. Ancona 116 Marks. Aquila 79 l. Ausburg 118
marks. Bavaria 116 marks. Bohemia 99 marks. Catalonia 112 marks. Colen 118
marks. Constantinople 99 marks. Crema 116 marks. 1 mark is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is
8 grosses. 1 gross is 3 Deniers. 1 Denier is 24 grains.
Dantzick 118 marks. Florence 158 marks. Frankford 118 marks. Friburg 116
marks. Genoa for Gold 130 marks. 1 mark is 8 ounces. 1 ounce 24 Deniers. 1
Denier is 24 grains
Genoa for Silver 86 pounds. 1 pound is 12 ounces. 1 ounce is 24 Deniers. 1
Denier is 24 grains.
Hungary 99 marks. Lipsick 118 marks. Lions 126 marks. 1 mark in France is 8
ounces. 1 ounce is 8 grosses. 1 gross is 3 Deniers. 1 Denier is 24 grains.
Paris idem 126 marks. Millan 118 marks. Narsigna 97 marks. Naples 86 pounds. 1
pound Naples is 12 ounces. 1 ounce is 8 Octavos.
Persia 98 Mains. Peris 99 Cillats. Piemont 111 marks. Mosen 118 marks. A mark
of Mesen is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 24 Deniers. 1 Denier, or penny, is found to be
24 Momenta, or Grains.
Saxony idem 118 marks. Burgas 120 marks. Franconia 116 marks. Norimberg 116
marks. 1 mark Norimberg is 16 Loots. 1 Loot is 4 Quints. 1 Quint is 4 pence
primes or numulies. 1 penny is 4 Sesterties.
Turkey 98 marks. Turin 111 marks. Vicentia 116 marks. Vienna 98 marks. New
Spain, America, 98 marks. Spain in general 121 marks. 1 mark Spanish is 50
Castilianos. 1 Castiliano is 8 Tomines. 1 Tominos is 8 grains, and this mark is
29700 marks, or 873 Rials, or 792 Ducates.
Treviso 117 marks. Ulme 116 marks. Weselburg 115 Venice 116 marks. 1 mark
Venice is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 4 quarts or Silices. 1 quarta 36 Carrats or
Siliquas. 1 Carrat is 4 grains.
Verona Rome 116 marks. 1 mark Roman is 8 ounces. 1 ounce is 8 drams. 1 dram is
3 scruples. 1 scruple is a obolos. 1 obolo is 3 Siliquas. 1 Siliqua is 4 grains
or Primi.
Lisbon 121 Mark 1 Mark Portugal is 8 Ounces. 1 Ounce is 8 Octavos. 1 Octavo is
4 Grains.


These are all the Standards of the Coins both of Gold and Silver that I have
met withal, and the particulars whereto the said Weights are distinguished,
which may be so far needful to the Traffic of Countries, that thereby every
Merchant Stranger may know of what goodness and real value those Coins are
stamped and coined for, and what the same will yield and afford him in his own
City or place of residence.

Weights used in Physic, and their parts.
Upon this Troy-weight does also depend in Physic all Drugs and Simples
administered by way of Potions, which according to the custom practiced amongst
Physicians, is thus distinguished into parts. One Sesquilibra is 1 pound, or 18
ounces. One pound is 2 Selibra, or 12 ounces. One Selibra is 2 Quadrans, or 6
ounces. One Quadran is a of a l. or 3 ounces. One Sescuntia is 1 ounce, or 12
drams. One ounce is 8 drams. One dram is 3 scruples, or 60 grains. One scruple
is 20 grains. One Obolus is of a scruple or, 10 grains.


The reduction of some foreign current Coins to the Engl. sterling.
Now according to this agreement of the weights of Silver and Gold, I will here
reduce the ralue of some foreign Coins to the English sterling. The Crown of
Camera of Rome is sterling 00 l. 07 s. 0 d. The Sols of Genoa is sterling 00 01
6. The Ducate of Venice of 6 l. 4 Sols is sterling 04 6. The Ducate of Naples
is sterling 04 9. The Crown of Gold of Florence is sterling 06 0 The 20 Sols of
Millan is sterling 01 0. The Carlin of Cicilia is sterling 00 3. The Sol of
gross of Antwerp is sterling 00 7. The Lire of Valentia, Barselona, and
Saragosa is 05 6. The Lire or Frank of France is sterling 02 0. The Florin of
Turin and Savoy is sterling 00 3. The 34 Marvedes or single Royal of Spain is
sterling 06 0. The 40 Res of Lisbon in Portugal is sterling 00 6. The Lire of
Bollonia is sterling 01 3. The Crown of Lucca is sterling 05 9. The Florin of
Noremberg and Frankford sterling 3 4. The Chequin of Turkey is sterling 7 10.

Where note, That in Europe the Exchange ever makes the accounted value of
their Goins with us, which are seen sometimes to differ much from the abovesaid
Rules, yet according to the estimation of our English Mint, this carries a
near concordancy, and therefore I have the rather thought fit to insert it in
this place.

Pounds foreig. to Pounds English reduced.
I have in many places of this Book showed how the 100 l. subtle does agree with
Lonlon; and in the leaf aforegoing, showed how the 112 l. does also respond
with some of them: Now I will show by a new invented Table out of the Works of
Mr. Hunt the Arith^etician, a method reducing the pounds of foreign Counties to
the pound of London, which I find thus. M D Ancona 13 10 Antwerp 24 25
Archipelago 497 448 Acquilla 143 100 Avignon 11 10 Ausburg 19 20 Barselona 9 10
Besenson 91 100 Bruges 1 1 Burgois 23 25 Calice 24 25 Castile 51 50 Cicilia 37
25 Colen 19 20 Corfu 497 448 Dantzick 29 24 Diep 359 400 Ferrara 133 100
Florence 131 100 Frankford 396 446 Genoa 141 100 Geneva 81 100 Lipsich 99 100
London Troy 29 24 London Averd. 127 120 Lubeck 389 448 Lions 21 20 Lisbon 83
100 Marselia 497 448 Naples 71 50 Norimberg 396 448 Paris 19 20 Padua 33 25
Parma 34 25 Preslau 538 448 Rochel 81 100 Roan 127 100 Sicilia 250 448 Sevil
439 448 Tholousa 491 448 Venice gross 423 448 Venice subtle 151 100 Vienna 256
448

For the understanding of this Table, note, That one pound of London is in
Ancona 13/30 of a pound, and so in the rest 13/10 is 1 and 3/10 first then
against the names of the places are two numbers; as against Avignon, you have
11 for to multiply, and 10 for Diviser, or 11 for Numerator, and 10 for
Denominator: multiply then pounds of Avignon by 11, and divide it by 10, and
they are pounds of London; so do for the other places, as the Table directs.

CHAP. CCLXII. Of Measures used in England.
Measures in England.
HAving now done with the Weights of England, whereby all Merchandise of Weight
is weighed, I come now to those Measures that are in use through the Kingdom of
England, which are three; 1. A Yard.
the first is the Yard, the common measure of all woollen Cloth, Stuffs, Silks,
and such like, which is composed of three foot, every foot being 12 inches, and
every inch 3 B^ly corns; so that the Yard does contain 36 inches, and there is
in the measure of all Commodities given in measure an Inch, which does make the
Yard to be 37 Inches, when compoted with the measure of other Countries.

2. An Ell.
The second is an Ell, wherewith all Linens are measured, and it contains 44
inches, or 45 inches by the Rule, and herewith is allowed an inch, for measure
by the custom of the Country.

3. A Goad.
The third is a Goad, only used in Welsh Frizes, Frizadoes, and the like, being
the ancient measure of Wales, and as some imagine, of England, before the
settling of the Yard-wand, and by the Inch-Rule is found to be (55 inches) at
this time.

The coursesies of Londoners.
In London there is found a custom both in weighing and measuring of some
Commodities not found or practiced in any other place, and called beyond Seas,
the Courtesies of London; Tret.
the which is first in Commodities weighed by 4 in 104 l. allowed and called
Tret, which I have noted before; Closse.
next by 2 l. allowed upon every Draught and Commodity, which exceeds 336 l.
or three hundred Gross, called Cloffe; Shaftner.
and lastly in the measure of Broad-Cloth by retail in Drapers Shops, allowing
to the Buyer a Shaftner upon each yard, in lieu of the inch before specified,
which is as much as is in length at the yards end, from the bottom of the wrist
to the end of the thumb, which commonly may be about 5 in 6 inches in length,
according to the dimension of the hand. I have already showed what agreement
some of these measures, especially the yard has with the measures of length of
many other places: it is requisite I should also here show how our English Ell
is found to respond with other Countries, which I find to be by tho
observations of some ingenious Persons thus. Measures of London compared.
Antwerp 166 Else. Franckfort 208 Else. Dantzick 138 Else. Vienna 145 Else.
Lions 101 Aln. Paris 95 Aln. Roan 103 Aln. Lisbon 100 Vares. Sevil 135 Vares.
Madera Isles 103 2/7 Braces. Venice Linen 180 Braces. Venice Silk 196 Braces.
Lucques 200 Braces. Florence 204 Braces. Millan 230 Braces. Genoa 480 Pal.
Bruges 164 Else. Arras 165 Else. Callice 157 Alns. Norimberg 174 Else. Rome 56
Canes. Colen 208 Else. Lisle 166 Else. Mastricht 157 Else.

How true these Observations are, I must refer to trial by experience; and
forasmuch as I would not omit any material collection that might add to the
perfection of this knowledge, which does oftentimes so much concern Merchants in
their Negotiations; I have here also insetted M. Hunt's Table of respondency of
other Countries, measures of length to the abovesaid English Ell and Yard.

Measures foreign to English measure reduced.
M D Antwerp 3 5 Arras 23 35 Bruges short 25 41 Castile 20 27 Calice 150 157
Colen 25 52 Franckfort 25 52 Flemish Else 6 10 French Alns 6 5 Florence 25 47
Gant long 50 77 Gant short 25 41 Genoa 150 721 Lions 1 London yard 4 5 Lisbon
and Lisle 50 83 Lucca 5 8 Malins 3 5 Mastricht 100 173 Madera 25 26 Millan 50
57 Norimberg 100 137 Paris 19 20 Roan 100 103 Rome 14 25 Sevil 20 27 Venice
long 5 9 Venice short 25 49 Vienna 20 29 Vincentia 100 133

Use of the former Table threefold.
The use of the former Table is threefold, first, to know what proportion one of
our London Else will bear unto any of the measures of the aforesaid places,
which is thus performed: Look the place in the Table posito Florence, against
it you shall find these two numbers, 25. under the title of M. which signifies
Multiplicate, and 47 under the title of D. which signifies Diviser; divide
then the greater by the lesser, viz. 47 by 25. the Quotient is 1, and 22 is the
remainder, which is Numerator to 25. making the Fraction (...), so that our Ell
at London is at Florence 1 of their measures, 22/25 parts thereof, and so in
the rest.

2. Use.
Secondly, it reduces foreign measures to the London Ell thus; Posito the
Question were, How many Else are there in 387 of the measures of Dantzick? then
look Dantzick, against which you shall find two numbers, the first is 20 your
Multiplicate, the second 27 your Divisor, the order of the Question then is
thus, ^

Further note of 20 Nails of a Yard. ^

3 Use.
Thirdly and lastly, it reduces Else of London to any of the aforesaid foreign
Measures, posito in 597 Else of London, how many Lucca Braces do they contain?
To do this, look Lucca in the Table, and right against it you have the two
numbers of 5 and 8: and note by the way, That in questions of this nature, that
you multiply by the second number under D. and divide by the first under M.
multiply therefore 597 by 8, and divide by 5, and the Quotient is 955 of the
Braces or measures of Lucca. And this shall suffice concerning measures of
length, the truth of which Tables I refer to the Inquisition of the Curious.

There is also in use in England diverse Measures for several distinct
Commodities, which orderly I will here observe.

Measures of Land in use.
First, a Measure whereby land is measured, and this has some correspondence
with all things that are measured by a square proportion in breadth and length,
and this done also by the aforementioned Yard, which beginning from the least
part, and is thus reckoned.

Grains 3 is an Inch. Inches 12 a Foot. Foot 3 a Yard. Feet 3, Inches 9 an Ell.
Yards 5 is a Perch. Perch 1 in breadth a Farthingdole. Perch 1 in breadth
Farthingdole 2 is half an Acre. Farthingdole 4 is an Acre.

Of Furs. Sables 40 skins the Timber Martins Minks Jenits Filches Greys Cony
100 the Hundred. Kid Lamb Budge Cat

One Acre contains Half Acre 2 Roods 4 Rods or Land-yard Perches, 160 Square
Yards 4804 Square Foot 43560 One Mile contains Rod 40 Furlongs 8 Perches 320
Paces 1056 Else 1408 Yards 1760 Feet 5280 Inches 63360 So that hereby it may be
discerned, that a foot being Inches every way, as 12 in length, and 12 in
breadth, making 12 times 12, is 144 inches; and so in the yard, which is ^ foot
in breadth, and 3 foot in length, which is 9 foot, is 1286 inches, Board,
Glass, Hangings, etc.
and thus is Board, Glass, Pavement, Hangings, Wainscot, and the like
commodities measured in England.

Dry measures of Grain.
Next, let us observe dry Measures in themselves; for so far forth as they
concur with Weight I have noted before, dry measure is principally for Grains
Gallons. Pottl. Quarts Pints. The Gallon is found to be by the Statute of
England 1 or 2 or 4 or 8 A Peck is 2 or 4 or 8 or 16 Half a Bushel is 4 or 8 or
16 or 32 A Bushel is 8 or 16 or 32 or 46 A Strike is 16 or 32 or 64 or 128 A
Cornock is 32 or 64 or 28 or 256 A Quarter is 64 128 or 256 or 512 A Wey is 384
768 1530 3072 A Last is 640 1280 2560 5128

It is here to be noted, That several Commodities are measured by a several
different measure: as for Example, Corn is measured by the Quarter, which
contains 8 Bushels, as above is mentioned, five Quarters making a Tun lading,
and 10 Quarters to a Last, but yet 10 or 10 goes for a Last of Holland; so also
in Salt, which is sold by the weight, which is 40 Bushels water measure of ten
Gallons; yet note, That in Plymouth, and in some other Sea Ports of England,
they measure by a Bushel alien measure, whereof 24 makes a Tun, and 8 does make
a Quarter; so three Quarters make one Tun, and every Bushel is 18 Gallons, so
that a Tun of Salt at Plymouth, is greater than a Weigh of London by 32
Gallons. And note, That as in Salt, so also in Corn, they have 2 measures, the
Water-measure, large for Shipboard, and the Land for Shop-measure, the
difference in some places, as from 6 to 7, also from 3 to 4, which is to be
observed.

Liquid Measures in England.
The next measure observable is liquid measures, which in England are found to
vary much, and to be of diverse kinds, both in the quantity it self, and in the
commodity or liquor, which I will here for method sake collect together thus.
Gallons. Potles. Quart. Pints. Of Ale. Ale the Firkin ought to be 8 or 16 or 32
or 64 Kilderkin of Ale ought to be 16 32 64 128 Barrel of Ale ought to be 32 64
128 256 Of Beer. Beer the Firkin ought to be 9 or 18 or 36 or 72 Kilderkin of
Beer 18 36 72 144 Barrel of Beer 36 72 144 288 Of Wine. Kilderkin of Wine ought
to be 18 or 36 or 72 or 144 Barrel of Wine to be 31 62 124 248 Hogshead of Wine
to be 63 126 252 504 A Tertian of Wine 84 168 336 672 Butt or Pipe of Wine 126
252 504 1008 Tun of Wine 252 504 1008 2016 Of Soap. A Firkin of Soap ought to
be 8 or 16 or 32 or 64 A Kilderkin to be 16 32 64 128 A Barrel to be 32 64 128
256 Of Eels and Salmon. A Firkin of Salmon and Eels to be 10 21 42 84 A Barrel
ought to be 42 84 168 236 A Butt ought to be 84 168 236 572 Of Oil. A Tun of
Oil and Honey ought to be 252 504 1008 2016 A Pipe of Oils to be 126 252 504
1008 A Hogshead to be 63 126 252 504 A Rundlet to be 18 37 74 148

But note, That the custom of London sometimes is found to disagree with the
Statute in the measures of some Commodities, as in Oils it is observed, that
236 Gallons, which by Merchants is called the Civil Gauge, is sold ordinarily
for a Tun, and not 252 Gallons, as above is montioned.

A declaration of the Standard for cloth-making, made in the fourth year of
Ring James.
Now forasmuch as Cloth, Tin, Lead, and some other Commodities, are the Staple
of the Trade of England, and that diverse good Laws have been enacted for
preservation of the said Commodities in their true nature: It will not be
unproper that I mention here some heads of such Orders as have been made, and
principally for the true making of Cloth, being the prime of the native
Commodities of England. Sack of Wool.
The Sack of Wool then, of which our English Cloth is made, does contain, as I
said before, 364 l. the Tod of Wool is 28 l. 13 Tods making a Sack, every Tod
being 4 Nails, and every Nail being 7 l. This Sack of Wool is accounted to make
4 Standard Cloths of clean Wool, called sorting Cloths, weighing 60 l. the
Cloth, and being 24 yards long of 6 quarters broad. Now in the Weight it is to
be observed, that the Cloths be well scoured, thicked, milled, and fully dried:
and in the measure that the same be measured by the Yard and Inch, within the
lift, concerning the breadth, all which I will for the benefit of Cloth traders
insert this following collection.

Breadth, weights, and measures of English cloths.
Breadth. Weight. Measures. Kent, York, and Reading cloths of 6 quar. 86 l. 30
and 34 yards. Suffolk, Norfolk, and Essex cloths of 7 quar. 80 l. 29 and 32
yards. Worcester, Coventry, and Hereford cloths of 6 quar. 78 l. 30 and 33
yards. Wiltshire, Gloucester, Oxon, Somerset of 7 quar. 76 l. 29 and 32 yards.
Suffolk sorting cloths 6 quar. 64 l. 23 and 26 yards. All sorting cloths of
diverse Shires of 6 quar. 60 l. 24 and 26 yards. Broad-cloth, Taunton,
Bridgwater, and Dunst. 7 quar. 30 l. 12 and 13 yards. Broad and narrow of
Yorkshire of 4 quar. 30 l. 24 and 25. Devonshire Kersies and Dossens of 4 quar.
13 l. 12 and 13. Check, Kersies, strait and plain Grays 4 quar. 24 l. 17 and
18. Ordinary Penistens or Forests 5 quar. 28 l. 12 and 13. Sorting Penistons of
6 quar. 35 l. 13 and 14. Washers of Lancashire, and others 17 l. 17 and 18.

Tin in England.
See further the said Statute for the manner of making of all the said woollen
Cloths, and orders for Workmen, with the viewing, searching, and all other
needful circumstances there and thereunto belonging, for further direction
whereto I refer you. As for Tin, which is also one of the Staple Commodities of
this Kingdom, many good orders are enacted for the true casting and assay
thereof, and is accounted as the Princes peculiar Commodities, farmed to
certain Merchants, who have the sole preemption thereof, and thereto belongs
a peculiar weight, called the Stannery weight, the hundred thereof making 120
l. subtle Averdupois, as I said before. Lead in England.
Lead is also one of the Staples of this Island, known throughout all the parts
of the World, and is in England sold likewise by a particular weight called the
Foder, which is 19 hundred of 112 l. to the hundred, and making subtle pounds
2184 l. For other the Staple Commodities of England, I need not further insist,
referring the same to the search of the Inquisitor at his own leisure.

I have already noted, that sundry Commodities are in England weighed and
measured by sundry and distinct Weights and Measures, the principal thereof
being of Silver and Gold. I have already showed the Standard of our English
Coins, and showed how the same agrees with other places, then of Salt, Wine,
and Corn, which in the next place I mean here to show, and withal demonstrate
how the same holds correspondency with other Countries, which in the most
Cities I have omitted as purposely intended here to be inserted by it self, as
reducing all others to the City of London.

Corn measure, with other Countries.
Corn then, as the most necessary Commodity, is sold, as I have showed before
in England, by the Quarter, accounting 5 Quarters for one Tun lading
ordinarily, though otherwise 10 Quarters is a Last of Corn, and this Last then
of Corn does make,

In Embden 55 Werpes, whereof 61 made a Last there, or 15 Barrels of 4 Werpes.

In Hamburg 83 Schepels, whereof 90 make a Last there.

In Lubeck 85 Schepels, whereof 96 make a Last.

In Dantzick 56 Schepels, whereof 60 there make a Last, the 4 Schepels make one
Muid, which is the the Skip-pound of 340 l.

In Fameran 78 Schepels, whereof 96 to the Last.

In Haleger haven in Denmark 80 Schepeli, 96 to the Last.

In Copenhagen 23 small Barrels, whereof 16 to the Last.

In Ebbetroffe Danick 23 Barrels, whereof 36 to the Last.

In Nelbogge 23 Barrels, whereof 42 to the Last.

In Sweden 23 Barrels.

In Conixburg 6/7 of a Last, the 6 Last are 7 at Amsterdam.

In Millan 17/21 of a Last.

In Statin in Pomerland, 6/7 of a last.

In Riga 42 loops.

In Antwerp 37 vertules.

In Bruxels 10 mudden, and differ in all places in Brabant.

In Gant 4 muds, 7 halsters of 12 to 1 mud is 55 halsters.

In Bruges 7 hoots.

In Bunkirk 18 raisere water measure.

In Middleburg 40 sacks is 41 to the last in all Holland.

In Dort 28 sacks.

In Rotterdam and Delf, 87 achtelings.

In Schoon haven 88 achtelings.

In Erchusen, Horn, Medenblick, 42 sacks.

In Groeningen 33 muds.

In Tenel 58 loops.

In Calais 18 rasiers.

In Rouers 20 to 30 mines, every mine is 4 bushels.

In Rachel 128 bushels, 4 to every sestier.

In Bourdeaux 38 boiseaux, whereof 33 to the last.

In Sevil 54 hanegas, a last is 4 cahis of 12 haneg as.

In Lisbon 225 alquieres, whereof 240 to the last, or 4 moyos of 60 alquiers to
the moyo, and so in all the Islands of Portugal.

In Venice 32 stares.

In Genoua 23 minas.

In Sicilia 38 medinos of 6 moyos.

In Paglia 32 cara 36 timans.

In Cyprus 40 medinos of 2 cipros.

In Amsterdam a last, and it is observable here, that Corn is found so far to
differ in Goodness that the Measure of this place will weigh of East-land wheat
156 l. of French wheat 180 l. of Suilia wheat 224 l. and of Africa 236 l. and
this last of Amsterdam is 27 moyos or muddens, each mudden is 4 schepels, or
every last is 29 sacks, and each sack 3 achtelings, so that a last may be said
to be 108 schepels or 87 achtelings.

Measures of Salt compared with other places.
Now for as much as Salt is not a native Commodity of our Country, we must
borrow the Original of the Measure thereof from those places which produce the
greatest quantity, or from those Cities which hold the principal Staple
thereof. It will be necessary then we bring it to tho great hundred of Zealand,
which is accounted for 4 small hundred, and because it is best known in all
places, they measure their Salt with barrels, 18 barrels to a last, and 7 last
to the b^drea, which is 126 barrels.

In Armuyden in Zealand they reckon 8^ weighs for one hundred: every weigh is
11 sacks, every sack 4 measures, and 15 weighs of Browage Salt make the great
hundred. The sack of Salt of Armuyden, being 122 small barrels, for the 122
sacks shall be my Computation, and it makes

In ^rew^ge 4/7 parts of one hundred of 28 moyos, and 12 sacks to the Moyo;
also by charges or loads, ten loads to the hundred, and 48 moyos or moys to the
last of 21 barrels.

In Lisbon 25 moyos.

In S^ Mary Port 28 moyos.

In Saintubal 20 cays.

In Calis 22 cays.

In Saintlucar 21 cays.

In Gant 108 sacks or barrels.

In Antwerp 144 vertels of 24 to the last, and 6 last to the hundred, and the
white Salt is measured with a lesser measure of 12 upon 100.

In Dunkirk 92 water measures, or 104 land measures.

In Ostend 98 measures.

In Damme and Axiels 102 measures.

In Bruges 104 measures.

In Ypres 144 measures.

In Rotterdam 100, whereof 6 make 1 mud of 18 to the 100.

In Amsterdam, Utrecht, Druenter, 102 schepels.

In Calais 130 barrels, 19 to the last, but 20 by Fraighting.

In Rouen and almost all France 6 muys.

In Hamburgh 7 lasts, whereof 80 barrels make 100.

In Denmark 6 ^ lasts.

In Sweden 111 tuns or barrels, 16 to the last.

In Emden 100 barrels 14 to the last.

In Lubeck, 7 lasts of 18 barrels.

In London 7 lasts of 18 herring-barrels, but by weight 11.

In Venice and Prian 70 mose.

Measures of Sea-coal compared with ^other places.
Pit-coal is a Commodity peculiar and native, and is sold by the Chalder, which
must be taken from the Measure of Newcastle, where the greatest quantity of
Coals is found, and they measure there by the Chalder filled up, whereof 7
chalders make a last, and is measured in giving 21 for 20. the Correspondence
thereof is; The last of Newcastle of 7 chalders is in London and Yarmouth 10
chalers. Rouen 100 barrels giving 104 for 100. Bruges and Ostend 100 measures
for Oats. Dort 12 hort, also by weighs of 144 l. of 24 stone, of 6 l. Gaunt 144
sacks, or 24 muds. Alst 200 muds. Antwerp 175 Vertils, Condet 44 muys, 80 make
a cherk. Zealand 68 herring-barrels. Middleburg by weigh of 108 l. Amsterdam
13^ loots of 38 measures.

Measures of Wine.
Wines are sold in England by the tun of 252 gallons, and by reason of the
Diversity of W^ of the Growth of sundry Countries coming to England, it is fit
I should set down how the tun of 252 gallons does correspond with other places.

It then makes in Antwerp 6 ames, containing 300 stoops, every stoop weighing 6
l. called a stone, every ame being 50 stoops, or 42 gallons, and every stoop
being 9 pints English.

In Paris and Orleans 4 hogsheads making 10 stoops, every hogshead 312 stoops,
and at Peris 36 sextiers, each sextier being 4 quarts, every quart 2 pints, is
288 pints, and each pint is a chapins.

In Bourdeaux 4 hogsheads.

In Lisbon 5 hogsheads.

In Auxere in Burgundy 3 puncheons.

In Poitou 2 pipes.

In Coniaque 2 pipes or 4 hogsheads.

In Ay and Artou, 4 hogsheads.

In Seres or Canary 2 pipes of 150 stoops or 1 but and 9/20, every but is in
Antwerp 158 stoopt, they measure by the rove of 30 l. is 5 stoops of Antwerp,
which is about 5 gallons, and every but contains 30 roves, and the pipes
contain 30 roves of 28 l.

In Candado is 2 buts.

In Madrid 2 pipes lacking 16 stoops, or about 19 gallons.

In Sevil 56 ^/4 rove of Romani, a rove is 8 summers, every somer is 4 quartils,
every quartil is ^/8 of a stoop of Antwerp, which is about 1 pints English, and
they do deliver 27 and 28 roves in a pipe, but of Oil measure by 40 and 41
roves in a pipe.

In Ansoy or Bastard 2 pipes, 16 stoops for the said 6 ames.

In Lisbon 37 almudes of 1 rove of Sevil, every Almudas is 12 covados, or somer
at Sevil, a covade is 12 quarts Oil measure by alqueri or cantar, every alqueri
is 6 covados, every cantar is 4 stoops of Antwerp, or 4 gallons English.

In Algorn 34 star.

In Florence 16 barrels of 20 fiaschi or 18 stoops of Antwerp, the 3 barrels is
one star, and each star is 54 stoops of Antwerp, or 64 gallons English.

In Rome 7 brontons, every bront is 96 bocals or 13 rubes or stones of 10 l. of
30 ounces in one bront, or 42 stoops of Antwerp for Honey the pound being 44
ounces.

In Candia 80 mostaches in a but of 34 and 35 mostaches of 3 stoops of Antwerp
or cirea 4 ^/^ gallons English.

In Bolonia 13 corbes incirca 19 gallons English each corbe.

In Padua 1 and ^/25 cara, the Oil is by the millier of 1185 l. is in Antwerp
1100 l. makes 152 stoops in a but.

In Venice 80 mostati, the 38 make a but, and 76 make an Amphora, 16 ^/3 quarti
besonts measure the 4 bigonts, 1 bigout is a French hogshead, 1 quart 18 stoops
of Antwerp, 15 quarti measure, secchio or small measures of 4 tischaufer.

Amphera 4 bigots or bigantines. 16 quartibigots measure. 18 quarti secchio.


Lagol is a puncheon, amphora is 2 ames, which is 84 gallons, and for Oil they
measure by am^hora also, and for Honey, but most by millier of 1210 l.

In Verona 1 cara.

14 brents, every brent is 16 bases.

Oil by the millier of 1738 is 8 brenten and 11 bases.

In Ferrara 12 mastilli of 8 secchio, each mastilli is 21 gallons.

In Vicentia 1 ^/26 cara, and the Oil by the millier of Venice.

In Treviso 11 consi, 10 consi make 1 cara.

In Corfu and Zante, 37 zare or sare, and each sare is near 6 gallons.

In Istria 15 venas, near 17 gallons.

In Tunis 60 matali of 32 rotolos, every matali making about 4 gallons English.

In Tripoli in Barbary 45 metares of 42 rotolos, and each metara being somewhat
more than ^2 gall^s English.

In Constantinople 180 alms, each alm being about 20 pints, and 96 alms of Oil
here, make at Venice a millier.

In Calabria 8 salmes.

In Puglia 8 salmes are French barrels, Oil also 8 salmes, every salm is 10
star, each star is 32 pignaroli.

Hereto it will not be unfit I should add Malines his Observation upon these
Wet Measures in general.

The Romans in times past, called the Wet Measure by ounces, as we do now the
Weight, accounting 10 ounces ponderales, for 12 ounces mensurales; so Sestarius
Bonianorum was 18 ounces weight-measure, and 21 ounces mensurales or wet
measure. Now this Custom of Measuring and Correspondency of Wet Measure and
Weight is yet in use in sundry places:

As at Meyson in Saxony, 20 ounces ponderales, make 24 ounces mensurales.

Also at Lipsick, 32 ounces wet measure, goes to 16 ounces weight measure, the
Difference of Correspondence being of 5 to 6. This is further demonstrated in
many Commodities.

As a hogshead of Wine weighs 500 l. the cask 50 l. so that in net Wine there
is 150 l.

Also a hogshead of Corn weighs 400 l. the cask 50 l. the net Corn is 350 l.
so that by this Computation, the tun of Wine weighs 1800 l. and with the cask
2000 l. and the tun lading of Corn weighs 1600 l. and with the cask 1800 l.
So that for the Lading of a Ship, by Weight and Measure, these Observations are
to be noted;

Observations for the lading of a Ship by weight and measure.
Two tuns are accounted for a last, so 2 tuns of Wine make 4000 l. and somewhat
more, and in hogsheads there should be but parts of a last.

At Dert in Holland they call a great Vessel a rod of Wine, which weighed 4500
l. as a last of Corn, comparing these 4500 l. mensurales by reduction of 6 to
5, as above noted, are 3750 l. perderales, is 12 ames; now if you account the
gallons of Wine of Antwerp to weigh 6 l. the Capacity of this Vessel is 15
ames, being 750 gallons.

The rod is a rod quadrant of 10 feet long, 10 broad, and 1 foot deep, every
foot containing 7 1/^ gallons Antwerp Measure, or 4 feet Cubic. And this is as
much as I think fit to insert in this place concerning the Wine Measures of
England, with other Countries, for other liquid Commodities, the Table
aforegoing will more largely demonstrate.

Exchanges of London.
The Exchanges practiced in England, and principally in London, are confined
within a narrow seantling, being but as a Rivnlet issuing out of the great
Stream of those Exchanges that are used beyond the Seas, and therefore limited
but to some few places, as to Antwerp for Flanders, to Rouen and Paris for
France, to Amsterdam and Rotterdam for the Netherlands, to Dantzick for the
East Country, to Venice for Italy, to Edinburgh for Scotland, to Dublin for
Ireland; all the other parts of the Exchanges practiced in England have their
derivation hence, and he that would exchange for any other foreign Country
(these aforenamed excepted) must first have recourse hither, and by a secondary
Exchange have his Desire fulfilled: all which Exchanges, and the manner how the
same are calculated, and the places with which London has in former time been
seen to exchange, I have at large demonstrated in the 443, 444, 445, 446 and
447 Chapters of this ensuing Treatise: whereto for better satisfaction I will
refer the Reader.

CHAP. CCLXXIII. Of the Trade in general of England.
Of the Trade in general of England.
WHen I consider the true dimensions of our English Traffic, as at this day to
me it appears to be, together with the inbred Commodities that this Island
affords to preserve and maintain the same, with the present Industry of the
Natives, and the Ability of our Navigators; I justly admire both the Height and
Eminence thereof: but when again I survey every Kingdom and great City of the
World, and every petty Port and Creek of the same, and find in each of these
some English prying after the Trade and Commerce thereof, then again I am
easily brought to imagine, that either this great Traffic of England is at its
full perfection, or that it aims higher than can hitherto by my weak Sight be
either seen or discerned. I must confess, England breeds in its own Womb, the
principal Supporters of its present Splendour, and nourishes with its own Milk
the Commodities that give both Luster and Life to the Continuance of this
Trade, (which I pray may never either decay or suffer the least Diminution.)
But England being naturally seated in a Northern Corner of the World, and
herein bending under the Weight of too too ponderous a Burden, cannot possibly
always and for ever find a Vent for all those Commodities that are seen to be
daily exported and brought within the Compass of so narrow a Circuit, unless
there can be (by the Policy and Government of the State) a Mean found out to
make this Island either the common Emporium and Staple of all Europe, or at
leastwise of all these our neighboring Northern Regions.

The real worth of the English Trade.
The staple Commodities of England, are Cloths, Lead, Tin, some new late
Draperies, and other English Real and Royal Commodities, shipped hence in
former times, yielded by their Returns from foreign parts, all those Necessaries
and Wants we desired or stood in need of: but the late great Traffic of this
Island has been such, that it has not only proved a bountiful Mother to the
Inhabitants, but also a courteous Nurse to the adjoining Neighbors: for what
in matter of Traffic they have lost, we have been found to have gained, and
what they have wanted, we have been noted to have supplied them with.

Has the proud and magnificent City of Venice lost her great Traffic and
Commerce with India, Arabia and Persia? England has got it, and now furnishes
her plenteously with the rich Commodities thereof. Has all Italy lost Venice,
that fed it with those Dainties? London now supplieth her place, and is found
both to cloth and nourish it. Has France almost lost the excellent Commodities
of Constantinople, Alexandria and Aleppo, and generally of all Tarky? London
can and does furnish it. Nay, is Turkey it self deprived of the precious Spices
of Iudia? England can and does plentifully afford them. Will you view Moscovia,
survey Sweden, look upon Denmark, peruse the East Country, and those other
colder Regions, there shall you find the English to have been; the Inhabitants
from the Prince to the Peasant wear English woolle^ Livery, feed in English
Pewter, sauced with English Indian Spices, and send to their Enemies sad
English leaden Messengers of Death. Will you behold the Netherlands, whose Eyes
and Hearts envy England's Traffic, yet they must perforce confess, that for
all their great Boasts, they are indebted to London for most of their Syria
Commodities, besides what other Wares else they have of English growth? Will
you see France, and travel from Marselia to Calais? tho they stand least in
need of us, yet they cannot last long without our Commodities. And for Spain,
if you pry therein from the Prince's Palace to the Poor Man's Cottage, he will
Voto a Dios, There is no Clothing comparable to our Bays, nor Pheasant
excelling a seasonable English Red Herring.

The East India Company.
The East India Company of London, are yearly seen to visit Persia, frequent
India, and traffic in Arabia and the Coasts thereof; and for our English
Commodities, and some other exported hence, they are found to import Pepper,
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cotton, Rice, Callicoe^ of sundry sorts, Bezoar Stones,
Aloes, Borax, Calamus, Cassia, Mirabolans, Myrrh, Opium, Rhubarb, Cinnamon,
Sanders, Spikenard, Musk, Civit, Tamarinds, Precious Stones of all sorts, as
Diamonds, Pearks, Carbuncles, Emeraulds, Jacinths, Saphirs, Spinals,
Turquoises, Topazas, Indico, and Silks raw and wrought into sundry Fabrics,
Benjamin, Camphire, Sandalwood, and infinite other Commodities; and tho, in
India and these parts, their Trade equalleth not either the Portugals or the
Dutch, yet in candid, fair and Merchant-like Dealing, these Pagans, Mahumedans
and Gentiles, hold them in esteem far before them, and deservedly have here the
Epithet of far more current and square Dealers. And although for the present this
Trals and Company do suffer under some adverse Clouds, and groan under some
unkind Losses, by the Falsehood of the Netherlanders and sad Accidents at Sea,
yet their Adventures and Acts are praise worthy, and their fair Endeavors for
England's Honor, in point of Trade, merit due Commendations and just Applause.

The Turkey Company.
The Turkey Company of London, for its Height and Eminence is now second to none
other of this Land, for not yearly, but monthly, nay almost weekly their Ships
are observed to go to and fro, exporting hence the Cloths of Suffolk,
Gloucester, Worcester and Coventry, dyed and dressed, Kersies of Hampshire and
York, Lead, Tin, and a great quantity of the abovesaid India Spices, Indico and
Callicoes, and in return thereof, import from Turkey the raw Silks of Persia,
Damasco, Tripoly, etc. Galls of Mosolo and Toccat Camlets, Grograms and Mohairs
of Angora, Cotton and Cotton Yarn of Cyprus and Smyrna, and sometimes the Gems
of India, and Drugs of Egypt and Arabia, the Muscadines of Candia, the Currants
and Oils of Zant, Zeffalonia and Herta, with sundry others, and in all these
Parts are accounted also second to none, nor give place to any Nation, either
in the Greatness of their Traffic, or in their fair and Merchant like
Performances.

The Merchant Adventurers.
The ancient Company of Merchant Adventurers of London, hold the same Proportion
in the Iotegrity of their Dealings and in the Squareness of their Performance
with both the aforenamed: their excellent Government, and their ancient Orders
preserved and maintained, is every where both applauded and commended. The
Cities of Hamburgh, Rotterdam, and others in the Notherlands, by their
submissive seeking for their Residence, and their Privileges and Immunities
granted them during that time, is a sure Testimony that speaks their Welcome
every where, and an assured Token of that City's Decay, that with Leave from
England, they furnish them with Cloths of sundry Shires, and some other
Commodities monthly, as by the shortness of their Navigation they find it
needful and proper to their Traffic, and from thence furnish England with
Tapestry, Diaper, Cambrick, Holland, Lawn, Hops, Mather, Steel, Rhenish Wines,
and many other Manufactures, as Blades, Stuffs, Soap, Latten Wire and Plates,
and here also this Nation is accounted the most current and Merchant-like
Nation that trafficks or has any Commerce amongst them.

The Eastland and Moscovia Company.
The East Country Merchants, and the Moscovia Company, do also challenge a part
in this great Trade of England, and add some Perfection to the Traffic of the
City of London; nor does their fair Dealing there, come behind any of their
Fellow-Citizens, nor are they less esteemed than any other foreign Nation there
resident. They export hence principally Cloth, at the best Commodity, also Tin,
Lead, with some Spices of India, and other Commodities, and return thence,
Ashes, Claphoard, Copper, Deals, Rich Furs, Masts, Pipe-Staves, Rye, Tunber,
Wainscot, Wheat, Fustians, Iron, Latten, Linen, Mather, Quicksilver, Flax,
Hemp, Steel, Caveare, Cordage, Hides, Honey, Tar, Ropes, Tallow, Pitch, Wax,
Rosin, and sundry others.

The French Merchants.
What shall I say to the French Company, the Greenland Company, the Merchants
trading into Spein, Barbary, Guiney, Benyn, Italy, Scotland and Ireland, but
that they also challenge a great Interest in the Traffic of this City and
Kingdom? for the French Merchants carry hence English Cloths, Kersies, Bays,
Galls, Silk and Cotton of Turkey, and for the same return Buckr^m, Canvas,
Cards, Glass, Grain, Linen, Salt, Claret and White Wine, Woad, Oils, Almonds,
Pepper, some Silk Stuffs, and some other petty Manufactures.

The Spanish Merchants.
The Merchants trading into Spain, carry hence Bays, Says, Serges, Perpetuanes,
Lead, Tin, Herrings, Pilchards, Salmon, Newland-fish, Calf-skins, and many
other Commodities, and in return furnish England with Wines of Xeres, Malaga,
Bastard, Candado and Alicant, Rosin, Olives, Oils, Sugar, Soap, Anniseeds,
Liquorish, Soda barilla, Pate, and sundry West India Commodities: neither have
Spanish and Portugal any ill opinion of the Dealing and Traffic of the English
Nation; for tho of all other Nations, they have the best conceit and opinion of
their own Greatness and punctual Worth, and have of late changed the name of
Mercador into Cergador, (how improper, I refer to their own Language) yet
account they the English (next to themselves) the principal and fairest dealing
Merchants in the World.

The Italian Company.
The Merchants of England trading to Naples, Sicilia, Genoa, Legorn and Venice,
etc. which here I term Italy, are not observed to have any Joint Stock or
Company, yet, to the Honor and Benefit of this Kingdom and City, transport
hence Bays, Says, Serges, Perpetuanes, Kersies, Lead, Tin, Cloth, and many
other native Commodities, besides Pepper, Indico, Cloves and other Indian
Commodities in great abundance; and for returns have Cloths of Gold and Silver,
Sattins, Velvets, Taffaties, Plushes, Tabins, Damasks, Allom, Oils, Glass,
Aniseeds, Rice, Venice Gold and Silver, great quantity of raw Silks of sundry
sorts, and diverse other Commodities; and here likewise all other Nations
willingly give place to the English, as the principal Merchants that either
abide amongst them, or negotiate with them. I need not insist here upon the
Relicls of that famous Barbary Trade, nor yet mention the petty Adventures of
the English to Guniney and Benny, tho otherwise they are concurrent to the
Traffic of this Nation, neither go about to particularize the large Traffic
of this Island to their Plantations of Newfoundland, Summer-Islands, Virginia,
Barbados and New England, and to other places which rightly challenge an
Interest in the present Trade and Traffic of this Kingdom.

Therefore omitting what may be further said in this point, and having thus
surveyed the Trade of this Island in particular, and showed the Commodities
exported and imported by every noted Company and Society, I shall now speak a
word concerning the Navigation of this Nation, which is one of the main and
principal means by which this Traffic is observed to be preserved unto them at
this day.

The Navigation of the English famous throughout Europe.
I shall not need to look back into former Ages, nor trouble my self to search
after old Records that express the Worth of the English Nation at Sea in old
times; it suffices me to understand, and know that these present times wherein
we live, are not any ways inferior (in this point) to the former, nor the real
Value nor Valor of the English any ways decayed or altered from its former
ancient Greatness to its present Splendour: what they have done let Histories
remember, and what they now do let the World witness and testify throughout
Europe. What Creek or Port in Europe have they not sought out and found? Nay
how many of them have fought against Hunger, Cold and all Extremities, to find
new Northern Passaget to the Southern Regions? In America.
and tho the South Seas, and a great part of America be at this day debarred to
them and their Navigation, yet their Wills herein are more bounded to their
Princes Pleasure, in a faithful obedience to his Treaties of Peace with that
Don that challenges those vast Countries, than any way in fear of his
Greatness, or his Naval Power by Sea, as may witness their Attempts,
Navigations and Plantations in many parts of that Country not limited or
forbidden by that Treaty. In Africa.
As for their Navigations to Africa, begin at Alexandria in Egypt, and so sail
to Tunis, Argier and Ceuta, and thence along the Coast of Guiney and Benyn, to
Cape Bona Esperansa, then to Mombasa, Melinda, Brava, Cape Guard fuy, and into
the Red Sea Gulf, and tell me where it is that they have not been, or what
Place or Port is not acquainted with them. In Asia.
And if you survey the Maritime Shore of Asia, and begin at Sues in the
aforesaid Gulf, and so to Aclon, Dieu, Cambaia, Ormus, Surat, Goa, Cochin
Mesulapatam, Pegu, Camboi, Cauch, China, Maocau, and to the utmost Bounds of
China, and the Isles of Japan and Cathay, and all the adjacent Islands, they
have all been for many years both well acquainted to our Seamen, and not
unfrequented by our Merchants and Traders; and for the Caspian Sea, the Euxine
and the other parts of Asia comprised from thence by Constantinople to
Scanderoon, and so to Alexandria, every Week brings us Tidings of the current
Advices of those places. To conclude then, by what has been said, may be
clearly discerned the present Height and Amplitude of our English Commerce, and
the Greatness of Englands Navigation, the Continuation whereof my Devotions
shall ever second, and my Prayer shall be, That neither our fained Friends, nor
yet our froward Foes, may ever have just Cause to rejoice at the Decrease, nor
least Diminution thereof.

Having thus happily ended my Peregrination, and drawn out the utmost Bounds
and Limits of this my Map of Commerce, and concluded there the Manner and
Matter of the general and particular Traffic of most of the eminent Cities and
Countries of the World; I will now cast anchor, and finish in this place my
Voyage, till the next fair Gale offers and presents it self, to imbark my Time
and Pen in the Survey and Calculation of the Exchanges of Europe, as at this
day they are seen practiced amongst the Merchants of Christendom.

FINIS.
EXCHANGES.
CHAP. CCLXXIV. Of Exchanges in general, and of the Method and Manner thereof,
and how calculated in any Place in Christendom.
Exchanges in general.
I Have in the Tenth Chapter of this Map of Commerce showed, That to make this
Treatise absolute and complete, the Method and Manner how all Exchanges are
framed and calculated is perfectly to be known and learned; and there also
declared the Necessity of this Knowledge, with all Circumstances depending
thereupon.

Now, by reason that I have in all the aforementioned Cities of this Map
(wherein either Custom, Time, or Commodiousness of Trade, Exchanges of Moneys
have been settled, and where the said Exchanges are daily used and practiced)
omitted the Form, Manner and Calculation thereof, together with all the
particular Circumstances requisite and necessary to the Explanation of this
Mystery of Exchanging; I have in this place thought good to allot i^ (as
worthily meriting) a peculiar Discourse at large by it self, which here I
conceive it most proper to be inserted: and because that my Experience in the
Exactness required may not be peradventure sufficient, to lead me through in
every particular Point and needful Circumstance: I have therefore judged it no
blemish to my Knowledge to be instructed by those excellent and judicious
Bankers, Geo. Baptista Zucetta, a Merchant of Genoua, and Claudio Boiero, a
Merchant of Lions; whose Endeavors herein are worthy Commendations, and whose
laborious Presidents and preceding Labors, where I find my self defective in
this Task and Labyrinth, I willingly follow.

What are places of Exchanges.
Places in use, and those as are apt for Exchanges, are such where Merchants, in
some fit and competent number, do meet and are assembled for the Benefit and
Behoof of Trade and Negatintion, which at this present day are observed to be
many, yet withal are noted not to be so firmly settled, but that the same admits
sometimes an Alteration and Change, varying according as the due occasions of
Commerce and Traffic in that place requires, either by the Decay of Trade
there, or by the Increase of the Trade of another Place more fit and proper
thereunto.

Some Cities are the Staples of Exchanges.
Some Places again are observed to be (if I may so term it) the Staples of
Exchanges, and yet notwithstanding have their dependence upon the Exchanges of
other places, and which else are not found to comprehend any other manner of
Traffic, having only certain Times or Fairs settled and confirmed by the custom
of Exchangers, in which and to which Bills of Exchange are either dated,
expired or renewed; in which nature, and of which sort Placentia is accounted
the most notable for all Italy and other places, where indeed Exchanges are
found to have a certain kind of Being, yet acknowledges its real Existence
from other Places and Cities, Besansin in Burgundy, Spossa in the River of
Genoua, Camberay in Piedmont, and some others were in former times observed to
be of this kind, whose Exchanges did totally depend upon the Partidos of
Exchanges made in other Countries, and these sometimes of such as had the same
Concordancy in the Current Coins of the Exchange, and sometimes a Discrepancy.

The Exchanges of some Cities depend upon the Exchanges of some others
And for as much as it is observed, That some other Cities where no set
Exchanges are sound, sometimes challenge by the necessity of Traffic and
Commerce, a Course of Exchanging with these or the like places, and yet have
none settled therein, then and in such cases is it seen, that the Metropolis or
principal Cities of these Countries prescribes both the Rule, Rate and
Condition thereto, as if Vicentia, Verona or Padua would frame an Exchange with
Placentia; it is observable, That the Rate of Venice, in which Estate these
said Places are sound to be, and who have their Moneys of one and the self same
Goodness and Value, give the Rule, Rate and Condition thereto. So in Pavia,
Como, and other Towns in England, as in the City of London, the principal of
that Island; so have the Cities of France, their Rule from Lions, all Places of
Flanders from Antwerp, and so have the like in other Places and Countries.

The chief Cities of Exchanges.
Now for as much as Exchanges are not found current in all places, Exchangers,
Bankers and Merchants have settled a common Course of Euchanging, in some
certain particular and principal places, which are observed in these days
chiefly to be these, For Italy 13. Rome. Genand. Millan. Naples. Barry.
Messina. Bollonia. Venice. Florence. Lucca. Lechy. Palermo. Bergamo. etc.
For France 3. Paris. Lions. Rouen, etc.
For Spain 6. Valencia. Barcelona. Alcala. Saragosa. Sevil. Medina del Campo.
For Portugal Lisbon only. For Flanders Antwerp only. For England London only.
For Germany 5. Vienna. Neremberg. Colonia. Augusta. Frankfort, etc.


Besides which, some others of lesser note are observed to have an Exchange
current, but by reason that, in most of the principal Points, they have a
dependency upon some of these, and a concordance with them; they are by most
Authors neglected, and therefore shall be by me here wholly omitted.

Many Cities practice Exchanges by one and the same Moneys, etc.
In the next place it is considerable, That many of these beforementioned
Cities are found to practice their Exchanges in one and the self-same Moneys,
Coins and Denominations, as do Lachy and Barry, which are included in Naples,
as Naples it self; Palermo and Messina comprehended in Sicilia; Valencia,
Saragosa and Barcelona in Catalonia; Sevil, Alcala and Medina del Campo in
Castilia; Frankfort, Noremberg, Colonia and Augusta in Germany, and some others.

What Exchange is, etc.
What thing this Exchanging is properly in it self found to be, as also what a
Bill of Exchange is, and the due Ceremonies and strict Rules thereof, together
with the Commodiousness, Necessity and first real Intent of the same, I have
showed in the 10 Chapter, which briefly here may not unproperly be defined by
the Word it self, as it is aptly expressed in our English Tongue, which extends
it self into two parts; 1. An Exchanging of one sort of Moneys for another: and
2. An Exchanging from one City or Country to another; Rates, Terms, Fairs, and
Usances of Exchange.
in which is also considerable both a Rate and Term, wherein and whereby this is
brought to perfection, which are principally performed by certain Fairs or
Usances, accustomed in the Art of Exchanging, and which are set down by
Merchants, Bankers and Exchangers at their Assemblies and Meetings in a fair
and regular Order, by a certain Course of Justice, and by peculiar Laws and
Ordinances amongst themselves; both which Fairs and the Rates and Terms
thereof, have a constant expiration within certain months, as the Usances have,
that are likewise included within the Rules of the said Fairs, which are found
to end within certain prefixed days, according to the received Custom of those
two Cities, wherein the said Exchanges are found mutually and respectively to
be settled and placed.

What is observed in Exchanging in the usual manner thereof.
Moreover, in the Practice of Exchanging, Bankers and Exchangers are found to
observe this Custom amongst themselves, in the usual manner of Exchanging from
one place to another, that is, One propounds his Money in a whole Number or
Denomination, and the Other consequently and necessarily in a Fraction, broken
Number, or lesser Denomination, in which Contract or Bargain, it is imagined
that these two, either Persons or Places, would negotiate one and the self same
thing, so that the one would be the Seller, and the other the Buyer thereof; to
perform which, it is questionless needful, that he that has the thing, makes
the Rate and Price, the which shall happen without any Contract, or difference
of much or little; and as it chances in the sale of any Commodity, so falls
it out by the Exchanges of Moneys; for of the two places that would exchange,
the one propounds a gross Sum, and the other the Condition and Price in a
lesser Sum, which may admit either an increase or decrease in estimation or
value, according as they fall to agreement, upon the lesser or greater esteem
of the said Sum propounded; the use of which is exemplified thus:

Example.
If Placmtia would exchange with any other place, the said Placentia, or as
Exchangers term it, the said Fair, or Fiera, propounds and gives always the
entire Sum or greater denomination, and by consequence, the other that would
exchange therewith, gives the other which is the lesser denomination.

This Sum which I thus term an entire or whole Denomination, falls in some
places to be, sometimes one Crown, and in other places, sometimes 100 Crowns,
Florins or Ducats, the same is likewise found to be practiced between any two
places; Exchanging, for each place gives either a Denomination entire of one
to another, or of one Hundred to another Hundred, or else of a lesser Divident
than one, or than one Hundred, which I here term the Fraction, broken Number,
or smallest Denomination, as shall be more plainly expressed in the calculated
Table following.

What an Entire Sum in Exchanges is, and what a broken Number or Fraction.
Now as touching the Moneys which are thus given as entire or whole Sums, viz.
One or one hundred, these are either found to be Crowns, Ducats, Pounds,
Florins, etc. according to the received quality of the gross and whole Moneys
which that place is found to have current, that would give; so in like manner
it falls out in the smaller or lesser Denomination, in the places that would
take, which in themselves is also various, and consequently of diverse sorts, as
Pence, Sols, Deniers, etc, as shall also appear by the said Table.

Liberty of Exchanging to the judicious.
And though it fall out to be the Custom, that one place gives an Exchange in
gross Moneys, and another place in small, (as is before related) and that this
gross and small Moneys must be of such or such a quality and kind, this
Observation and Rule prescribed notwithstanding is not always necessary, but
that Exchangers may (though I confess it is seldom seen) at their pleasure
propound, the one or the other differing or contrary hereunto, and that the
wise and judicious Exchanger may for his Profit, Ease, or Commodity, propound
his own intentions, and thereby (if he can) obtain a beneficial Bargain or
Issue, according to his Design and Plot. As for Example,

Ignorant Exchangers consure the judicious of varying from the Custom of
Exchanging.
If it should be said, that Exchanges may be made in a method differing from
this or the common Rule, or contrary to that way that has been received and
taken, some would soon censure him of folly that should be of that Opinion, and
conceive such a one to be little versed in exchanging Affairs, that should
either propound or seek to perform such a thing, but yet no great heed is to be
taken to the raw Conceits and childish Opinions of such self-willed Mer^nts,
which may for the most part be said to be either drenched in ignorance, or
drowned in carry; because that a skilful Merchant may (as I have alleged) frame
his Exchanges as he sees good, and to his own Commodity, the which very
oftentimes is observed to be done by others, and practiced daily by those of
this City of excellent judgments.

Example.
In Example whereof, posito I would exchange Genoua with Naples, between which
two places the use and custom is, that Genoua gives the entire Sum, or greater
denomination, which is the Crown of Gold, for the which Naples gives the Grain
135, a little more or less: I demand why may not Genoua give that whole Sum,
which is the Crown of 4 Livres, as it is accustomed to give with other places,
and estimating the same by 120 Grains Naples, and thereby the Exchange will
prove to be equal with the first manner before mentioned. And further, why may
not the contrary be practiced, Naples giving the whole Denomination, which may
be Decats one, for Sold. 66 8 d. and so vary in as many forms as they please,
wherein I confess I never yet found any Exchanges made, neither do know any
true reason that the common Cu^oms should be altered, though I have thought good
to note the same here, that each knowing Merchant may boldly use which he
please; for to him that truly understands the value and course of both the
places Exchanging, there will appear no difficulty therein; and I wish that
those which know no other ways but their own, content themselves within the
limits of their own manner and understanding, and suffer others of better
Judgments, without their censure, to follow their own, when it is to their
Benefit or Commodity.

CHAP. CCLXXV. The Declaration of the Table of Exchanges following.
Declaration of the Tables of Exchanges.
THE Table of Exchanges of the Cities here following, are formed and disposed in
this nature, first, in the front thereof there is placed the Name of the Town
or City exchanging, and in what Region or Country seated; Secondly, the Manner
and Method wherein the Accounts in that City is kept by Exchangers; Thirdly,
the Quality of the Moneys in use is observed, and in what Coin imaginary or
real that City is accustomed to make its Exchange, with the others there
mentioned; Fourthly, underneath that, is orderly set down the Names of all the
other Places, the which by a Line are found to be joined and knit together; and
lastly, in the midst of the Line is written the Name of the Place and City it
self, for which the said Table in the said Leaf is made. As for Example, in the
first Leaf, which is for Placentia in Italy, where besides the Name of the
Place it self is found these words ( Placentia exchangeth with) the which
words, by reason of the including Line drawn from the highest to the lowest,
has reference to every one of the Names of the other Places which are so
included together; so that it is to be understood, as that Placentia exchangeth
with Lions, Placentia exchangeth with Re^e, with Genoua, etc. and so in the
rest from one to another. Next to every one of the said Names of Places,
follows the Species or Moneys exchanged either by an entire and whole Sum, or
by a broken and lesser denomination, which the place in the Table gives in
exchange by proportion with the other, to whose Name the said Moneys are placed
and put unto, as to say, Placentia exchangeth with Lions 100 Crowns, that is
understood, that in Exchanging between Placentia and Lions, 100 Crowns of
Placentia are supposed and put by an equivalency or in value to that quantity
or sum of Money, which is found to be noted in Lions following: As in the said
Example, Placentia exchangeth with Lions Crowns 100, for Crowns 97: so likewise
is it to be understood, that in the said Exchanges that for every 100 Crowns of
Placentia, or of Fiera, or of Mark, it is as much as to say, as Lions
counter-payeth or gives 97 of his Crowns, that is, of the Sun. Also Placentia
exchangeth with Genoua Crown 1. for Sol. 67. 10 d. that is to say, that
Placentia Exchanging with Genoua it gives (or as I said before, it sells)
Crown^, of Mark to have in Genoua, Sol. 67. 10 d. of Gold; and in the same
manner the rest of the said places are to be understood; Though the Tables of
Exchanges differ from the present Rates, yet the use thereof is not any way
lessened.
and whereas the Rates and Prices of these Exchanges may here be sound to
disagree from the current Rates of the same in sundry places, as at this very
day and time, yet that cannot take away the Benefit that may redound to
Merchants by the use thereof, nor prejudice the Labor or Judgment of him that
calculated the said Table; because we see by experience, that the Rates of
Exchanges do hourly differ, and the Moneys also are found to rise and fall
daily in sundry places, upon which these Exchanges have their Ground work and
Foundation; and though a Table were calculated precisely to this present day
and time, yet ever the same could be published, it would find a disagreement in
diverse places.

CHAP. CCLXXVI. The Use of the Table of Exchanges.
The use of the Table of Exchanges by three Examples.
THE method being thus understood, the use thereof is easily comprehended, which
by three Examples I shall illustrate and make plain; where by the way it is to
be noted, that in Exchanging of any Sum of Moneys whatsoever, the Rates
mentioned in this Table are not observable, save only for the Examples sake,
and for Instruction in the Contract, that may be made thereupon; but the Rate
agreed upon, and by which the Exchange is conditioned by both the Giver and
Taker, is the true and firm Rule, whereby the question is to be wrought; First
Example.
notwithstanding for the first Example, we will propound a Question by a
contracted Price, according to the current Rates mentioned in this said Table,
and that from Naples a Merchant would exchange Ducats 738. 4. 10. with
Placentia, and the Price of the Exchange shu^ be that which is mentioned in the
Table of Naples with the Town of Placentia, where it is found, that Naples
exchangeth with Placentia at Grains 133 for a Crown.

By these three Numbers in the Tables mentioned, I work thus then by the Rule
of Thres, saying, If 133 Grains give 1 Crown, how many do 738 Ducats, 4. 10.
give? and working Arithmetically according to the said Rule, it makes 555
Crowns 11. 3. of Mark in Credit to be given in ^era of the said Placentia. ^

Second Example.
For a second Example, I will propound, that Naples would exchange 500 Ducats
with Placentia at Sold. 18. 2 d. etc. This Example considered, will not be
found to differ from the former; save that in the former, Naples gave the
lesser or broken Number, and in this, Naples gives the whole and entire Number,
notwithstanding which the Rule is not found to differ, as in other the like
Questions in simple Exchanges; wherein it is to be observed, that Sol. 18. and
Den. 2. of Valentia, are paid for 1 Ducat of Naples, and by that Price and
Rate, I would know how many Livres of that Money of Valentia the proposed Sum
of 500 Ducats in Naples come into? and by that which we find in the Table by
the same Rule of Three, I say, if one Ducat is worth 18 Sol. 2 Den. how many
shall 500 be worth? and by working the Question, it makes 454 Livr^s, 3 s. 4 d.
and so much Credit will 500 Ducats of Naples give at the Price aforementioned,
thus. ^

Third Example.
All other Exchanges have their Resolutions as these two former, but yet
sometimes it is true, some accidents may interpose, which may cause the
Question to have a double working, as if I should say that Genoua would
exchange with Venetia Crowns 1000 of Livres 4. to Livres 7 l. 10 Sol of that
Money, and the Credit is required in Ducats. Now then because the simple
Exchange gives the Money in Livres, you must make another reckoning to reduce
the same into Ducats; but yet for all this, neither in this, nor in any other
case, would I have but one account made, the which may be done by the Rule
multiplied: I say then, if 1 Crown be worth 7. 100. Den. and that 6 s. 4 Den.
is worth one Ducat, how many Ducats will a 1000 Crowns make? and by working the
Question, it will be found to make 1209 Ducats 13. 6 d. for Credit, which from
Genoua will be produced by a thousand Crowns in Venice: the Question being well
observed, it will be found to be wrought in this manner. ^

It is to be noted, that in what place soever the Moneys are accounted by
Livres, Sols, and Den. or as we say in England, by Pounds, Shillings and Pence,
it is accounted by 20, and by 12, because that Sol. or Shill. 20 make a Livre
or Pound, and 12 Deniers or Pence makes a Soldo, or Shilling: the same Rule
also holds in those places, whose greatest Moneys are imaginary and feigned, or
who keep not this orderly Succession, as are the Ducats of Catalonia, of
Castilia, of Rome, and of Pertugal; also those Crowns who have no proper parts,
also the Ducatoons in what Country soever, and the Florms in Germany; all these
I say, which ought to succeed in 20 and 12, that is, in Solds and Den. or
Shillings and Pence, and each of the other sorts of Moneys shall be accounted
according to the property of that Country, and as shall be signified in the
front of the following Table of that place, amongst which there are some which
are commonly resolved by the more principal of their own Moneys, as the
Exchange of Sicily with Catalonia, Castilia Portugal, Brabant, and England; and
howsoever they make their Exchange, either by the Sicilian Florin, or by the
Ducat, notwithstanding the parcel is resolved in Ounces, Tarins, Grains, and
Pichols, which is thoroughly declared in the following Tables.

And lastly, forasmuch as the terms and days of Bills of Exchange are found in
many Countries to differ in length of time, and are limited of diverse days, and
that the Rates ^sing and falling of Exchanges have a course set by a continual
meeting of Exchangers, and their Opinions in equality of value, I have thought
good to insert the same with some other needful Circumstances of this Art of
Exchanging, at the end of the Tables, to which I refer the Learn, where also
he shall find at large, how most of these Exchanges are cast up, and reckoned
from one place to another; and now I will proceed to the Tables themselves, as
I find them calculated by the said Geo, Bapt. Zuletta, and others following him.

CHAP. CCLXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia, a Place of Fairs, or Fiera of
Exchanges in Italy.
The Exchanges of Placentia.
THis Town is considered as a Fair or Staple of Exchanges, and not as a City of
Trafficle; and therefore there is no esteem made of the current Money of the
place, but only of that which is made by Exchanging, which are Crowns of Mark;
in which Moneys, Bankers and Exchangers do only treat and account in; and the
same is held by Crowns, Sold, and Deniers of Mark. And in the Custom of
Exchanges here in use, it gives the entire and whole Sum to all other places,
being either Crowns one, or Crowns one Hundred.

Placentia does exchange with Lions Crowns 100 for 96 Crowns Rome Crowns 100 99
Ducats Genoua Crown 1 67. 10 Sol. of Gold. Millan Crown 1 134. 9 Sol. Venice
Crowns 100 130 Ducats Florence Crowns 100 109 Crowns Lucca Crowns 100 116
Ducatoons Naples Crown 1 134 Grains Lechi Crown 1 135 Grains Bari Crown 1 135
Grains Palermo Crown 1 29 Carlins Mesina. Crown 1 29 Carlins Antw. and Col.
Crown 1 128 Grosses London Crown 1 81 d. sterling. Valentia. Crown 1 24 Sold.
Saragosa Crown 1 24 Sol. 6 Den. Barcelona Crown 1 24 Sol. 4 Den. Siv. al. Med.
Crown 1 432 Marvedes Lisbon Crown 1 482 Raise Bollonia Crown 1 119 Ducatoons
Bergamo Crown 1 118 Ducatoons Frankford Crown 1 103 Quarentins In the 382.
Chapter, the Reader may find how these Exchanges are cast up and calculated.

CHAP. CCLXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions, Paris, and Rouen in France.
The Exchanges of Lions, etc.
IN Lions, Paris, Rouen, and through all France, they keep their Accounts in
Livres, Sols, Deniers and Turnois, and they here do exchange in Crowns of the
Sun, and Deniers of the Sun; this Livre is also called in some places of
France, a Frank, and 3 Livres or Franks is accounted for the said Crown of the
Sun, and the Crown of Italy by a Decree and Standard of the Country passes at
58 Sol. of the said Crown.

And in the Custom of Exchanging, it gives the entire and whole Sum or Number,
either one Crown, or one hundred Crowns of the Sol.

Lions does exchange with Placentia Crowns 100 for 103 Crowns Rome Crowns 100
99 Ducat Genoua Crown 1 66 Sol. of Gold Millan Crown 1 115 Sol. Venice Crowns
100 116 Duc. Bank. Florence Crowns 100 106 Crown Lucca Crowns 100 117 Ducatoons
Naples Crown 1 124 Grains Lechi Crown 1 122 Grains Bari Crown 1 123 Grains.
Palermo Crown 1 29 Carlins Mesina Crown 1 29 Carlins Antw and Col. Crown 1 96
Gross London Crown 1 62 Pence sterling. Valentia Crown 1 23 Sol. 10 Den. Saragosa
Crown 1 23 Sol. 8 Den. Barcelona Crown 1 24 Sol. Siv. al. Med. Crown 1 436
Marvedes Lisbon Crown 1 485 Raise Bollonia Crowns 100 119 Ducatoons Bergamo
Crowns 100 119 Ducatoons Franckford Crown 1 104 Quarentins Vide Chap. 302. and
so following, of the Calculation of the Exchanges of this place.

CHAP. CCLXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Rome in Italy.
The Exchanges of Rome.
IN Rome, the Bankers and Exchangers keep their Accounts in Crowns, Julios,
Bacochs, and Quatrins, and they Exchange in Ducats, Sols and Deniers of Camera.
The Crown of the abovesard Money is worth 10 Julios, or 100 Bacochs, or else
400 Quatrins; the Julio is 10 Bacochs, or else 40 Quatrins, and the Bacoch is 4
Quatrins.

The Ducat of Camera, according to the old Value, is worth 2 per Cent. more
than the Crown of Gold, so that 100 Ducats are 102 Crowns.

In the Custom of Exchange amongst Merchants, the place gives the broken
Number to all Italy, excepting to the Kingdom of Naples, to Sicilia, Bollonia,
and Bergamo, and to all others (...) gives the whole Number, which is either
one Ducat, or by a 100 Ducats.

Rome does exchange with Placentia Ducats 97 for 100 Crowns Lions Ducats 97 100
Crowns Genoa Ducats 97 100 Crowns of Gold Millan Ducats 97 100 Crowns of Gold
Venice Ducats 85 100 Ducates Florence Ducats 91 100 Crowns Lucca Ducats 84 100
Ducatoons Naples Ducats 100 135 Ducats Lechi Ducats 100 134 Ducats Bari Ducats
100 134 Ducats Palermo Ducat 1 14 15 Tarins Mesina Ducat 1 14 17 Tarins Antw.
and Col. Ducat 1 125 Grosses London Ducat 1 87 d. sterling. Valentia Ducat 1 24
2 Sol. Saragosa Ducat 1 23 Sol. 8 Deniers Barcellona Ducat 1 23 Sol. 10 Deniers
Siv. al. Med. Ducat 1 440 Marvedes Lisbon Ducat 1 482 Rays Bollonia Ducats 100
119 Ducatoons Bergamo Ducats 100 119 Ducatoons Frankford Ducat 1 103 Quarentins
Vide how these are calculated, Chap. 326. and so following.

CHAP. CCLXXX. Of the Exchanges of Genoua, the Metropolis of Liguria.
The Exchanges of Genoua.
IN Genoua, Exchangers keep their Accounts in Livres, Sols and Deniers current,
and they exchange in Livres, Sols and Deniers of Gold. The Moneys current, is
it that is the common in use; of which, the Crown of Gold is worth Sol. 90. and
in times past was worth less: The Moneys of Gold are imaginary, and valued
according as the Fairs of Exchanges permit, of which the Crown of Gold is
always worth 68 Sol.

In the Custom of Exchanging, this place gives the whole Sum to all, excepting
Placentis and Lions, the which are either one Crown, or 100 Crowns; the which
Crowns are accounted of Gold for all the Places, excepting Millan, Venice and
Germany, to which they are accustomed to give the Crown of 4 Livres current.

Genoua does exchange with Placentia Sold. 66 of Gold for 1 Crown Lions Sol.
664 of Gold 1 Crown Rome Crown 100 of Gold 98 Ducats Millan Cro. 1 of 4 Live.
cor. 119 Sold Venice Cro. 1 of 4 Live. cor. 7 Live. 10 Sol. Pico Florence Crown
100 of Gold 106 Crowns Lucca Crown 100 of Gold 118 Ducats Naples Crown 1 of
Gold 134 Grains Lechi Crown 1 of Gold 135 Grains Bari Crown 1 of Gold 134
Grains Palermo Crown 1 of Gold 29 Carlins Mesina Crown 1 of Gold 29 Carlins
Antw. and Col. Crown 1 of Gold 124 Grosses London Crown 1 of Gold 83 d.
sterling. Valentia Crown 1 of Gold Sol. 23. 9. Saragosa Crown 1 of Gold Sol.
23. 10. Barcellona Crown 1 of Gold Sol. 23. 8. Siv. al. Med. Crown 1 of Gold
Marved. 436. Lisbon Crown 1 of Gold Rays 470. Bollonia Crown 101 of Gold
Ducat. 118. Bergamo Crown 110 of Gold Ducat. 118. Frankford Cro. 1 of 4 Live.
cor. Quarentin 92. Vide Chap. 360. how the Exchanges of this place are
calculated.

CHAP. CCLXXXI. Of the Exchanges of Millan in Lombardy.
The Exchanges of Millan.
IN Millan Exchangers keep their Accounts in Livres, Solds and Deniers Imperial,
and some in Crowns, Sols, and Deniers of Gold. The Moneys current is accounted
the Imperial Moneys: there is also the Crown of Gold, of no settled Price, but
now worth Sol. 135. The Crown of 6 Livres, is it which some do use in Exchange
with Genoua. The Crown of 117 Sol, is in use for the Exchange of Venetia.

In the Custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken Number to Placentia,
Lions, and sometimes to Genoua, and to all the other the whole Number, which is
either one or 100 Crowns of Gold, excepting only to Venetia, which is of Sol.
117 as aforesaid.

Millan does exchange with Placentia Sold. 134 for 1 Crown Lions Sold. 135 1
Crown Rome Gold Crowns 100 98 Ducats Genoua Gold Crown 1 Live. 4. 10 current
Venice Cro. 1 of 117 Sol. 1 Live. 7. 6. Florence Gold Crowns 100 Crowns 105.
Lucca Gold Crowns 100 117 Ducats Naples Gold Crowns 100 133 Ducats Lechi Gold
Crowns 100 134 Ducats Bari Gold Crowns 100 133 Ducats Palermo Gold Crown 1 29
Carlins Mesina Gold Crown 1 29 Carlins Antw. and Col. Gold Crown 1 124 Grosses
London Gold Crown 1 84 d. sterling. Valentia Gold Crown 1 24 Sol. Barcelona Gold
Crown 1 23. 9 Sol. Siv. al. Med. Gold Crown 1 434 Marvedes Lisbon Gold Crown 1
465 Rays Bollonia Gold Crowns 100 118 Ducatoons Saragosa Gold Crown 1 23. 10
Sol. Bergamo Gold Crowns 100 118 Ducatoons Franckford Gold Crown 1 103
Quarentins

Vide Chap. 440. how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCLXXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Venice in the Adriatic Seas.
The Exchanges of Venice.
IN Venetia they keep their Accounts in Livres, Sols, and Deniers of Picol, and
some in Livres, Sols, and Deniers gross, and others in Ducats and Grosses. The
Moneys which here is called Picoli, is the current Moneys of the place. The
Moneys which we here call Gross, is worth 1 Livre, Sol. 62 of Picols, or 10
Ducats. The Ducat is always worth Livres 6. Sol. 4. of Picol, or else accounted
24 Grosses. The Gross is worth Sol. 5. 2 d. of Picol, and in the Livre of
Grosses it is accounted and reckoned as in Deniers.

In the Custom of Exchanging it gives the broken Number only to Placentia,
Lions, Genoua, Millan and Bollonia, and to all the rest, the whole Number,
either by one Ducat, or by 100 Ducats.

Venetia does exchange with Placentia Ducats 129 for 100 Crowns Lions Ducats
129 100 Crowns Rome Ducats 100 77 Ducats Geno. Live. Pic. Ducats 7. 10 1 Crown
of 4 Live. current Mill. Live. Pic. 7. 6 5 1 Crown of 117 Sol. Florence Ducats
100 82 Crowns Naples Ducats 100 100 Ducates Lechi Ducats 100 100 Ducats Bari
Ducats 100 99 Ducats Palermo Ducat 1 Tarins 11. 2 Mesina Ducat 1 Tarins 10. 18.
Antw. and Col. Ducat 1 91 Grosses London Ducat 1 60 d. sterling. Valentia Ducat
1 Sol. 7 6. Saragosa Ducat 1 Sol. 17 8. Barcellona Ducat 1 Sol. 17 10. Siv. al.
Med. Ducat 1 Marvedes 320. Lisbon Ducat 1 Rates 350. Bollonia Ducats 115
Ducatoons 100. Bergamo Ducats 100 Ducatoons 117. Frankford Ducats 100 Florins
127. Lucca Ducats 100 Ducatoons 91. Vide Chap. 368. how these are calculated

CHAP. CCLXXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Florence, the Ducal City of Tuscany.
The Exchanges of Florence.
IN Florence the Exchangers keep their Accounts in Livres, Solds, and Deniers,
Picoli, and Exchange in Crowns, Sols, and Deniers.

The Moneys which is here called Picol, is the Money current of the place; the
Crown is always worth Livres 7. Sol. 10. of Picol, wherein the Custom of other
places is diverse, in which the Crown of Gold, with the current Moneys, and here
the variety is accorded by the Exchange.

They use also a Ducat, which is worth Livres 7. or else Bolonini 70.

In the use of Exchanging it gives the broken Number to Lions, Placentia,
Genoua Millan, and Venice, and to all others the entire or whole Number found
to be either one Crown, or 100 Crowns.

Florence does exchange with Placentia Crowns 105 for 100 Crowns Lions Crowns
105 100 Crowns Rome Crowns 100 96 Ducats Genoua Crowns 106 100 Crowns of Gold
Millan Crowns 106 100 Crowns of Gold Venetia Crowns 82 100 Ducates Lucca Crowns
100 112 Ducatoons Naples Crowns 100 130 Ducats Lechi Crowns 100 129 Ducats Bari
Crowns 100 129 Ducats Palermo Crown 1 28 Carlins Mesina Crown 1 28 Carlins
Antw. and Col. Crown 1 118 Gross London Crown 1 80 Pence sterling. Valentia Crown
1 23 4 Sold. Saragosa Crown 1 23 6 Sol. Barcelona Crown 1 23 2 Sol. Siv. al.
Med. Crown 1 432 Marvedes Lisbon Crown 1 460 Raise Bollonia Crowns 100 115
Ducatoons Bergamo Crowns 100 115 Ducatoons Franckford Crown 1 89 Quarentins
Vide Chap. 400 how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCLXXXIV. Of the Exchanges of Lucca, a Republic in Tuscany.
The Exchanges of Lucca.
IN Lucca, Exchangers do keep their Accounts in Livres, Sol. and Deniers of
Picols, and do change in Ducatoons, Sol. and Deniers: the Moneys here called
Picols, is the current C^ of the place. The Crown of Gold is always worth Live.
7. Sol. 10. of Picols: as in Florence, the Ducatoon is worth 7 Livres of Picol,
and is commonly called the Crown of Silver.

In the Custom of Exchanging, it gives the broken Number to Placentia, Lions,
Genous, Millan and Venetia, and to all other, the entire or whole, which is one
Ducatoon or 100 Ducatoons.

Lucca does Exchange with Placentia Ducate. 117 for 100 Crowns Lions Ducat. 118
100 Crowns Rome Ducat. 119 100 Duc. Genoa Ducat. 118 100 Crowns of Gold Millan
Ducat. 118 100 Crowns of Gold Venetia Ducat. 92 100 Ducates Florence Ducat. 113
100 Crowns Naples Ducat. 100 114 Ducates Lucca Ducat. 100 114 Ducates Bary
Ducat. 100 115 Ducates Palermo Ducat. 1 24 Carlins Mesina Ducat. 1 24 Carlins
Antw. and Col. Ducat. 1 102 Grosses London Ducat. 1 67 Pence Sterling Valentia
Ducat. 1 20 Sol. Saragosa Ducat. 1 19. 10 Sol. Barselona Ducat. 1 19. 11 Sol.
Siv. al. Med. Ducat. 1 365 Marvedes Lisbon Ducat. 1 35 Rays Bollonia Ducat.
100 Ducatoons 100. Bergamo Ducat. 100 Ducatoons 99 Francfort Ducat. 1 85
Quarentins

CHAP. CCLXXXV. Of the Exchanges of Naples, the Metropolis of that Kingdom.
The Exchanges of Naples.
IN Naples, the Exchangers keep their Accounts in Ducates, Tarins, Grains, and
Cavals, which are accounted in 5, 10, and 12 fol. The Ducate is 5 Tarins, or
100 Grains, or else 1200 Cavalles; the Tarine is accounted 20 Grains, or 240
Cavalles, and the Grain is 12 Cavalles. Besides which, there is in use another
sort of Moneys current, which are Carlins, Cinquins, and Torneses. The Carlin
is 10 Grains, or half a Tarine; from whence 10 Carlius malteth the Ducate. The
Cinque is 2 Grains, of which, 4 makes the Carline, and 40 the Ducate. The
Tornese is 6 Cavalles, of which, 5 makes a Cinquine, 20 makes a Carline, 40 the
Tarine, and 200 the Ducate.

In the Custom of Exchanging, it gives the broken number to all Italy and
Lions, Palermo only excepted, and to all others it gives the whole number,
which is either one Ducate, or 100 Ducates.

Naples does Exchange with Placentia Grains 133 for 1 Crown Rome Ducat. 136 100
Duc. Lions Grains 135 1 Crown Genoa Grains 135 1 Crown of Gold Millan Duc. 134
100 Crowns of Gold Venetia Duc. 100 100 Duc. Florence Duc. 131 100 Crowns Lucca
Duc. 113 100 Ducatoons Lechi Duc. 100 100 Ducates Bary Duc. 100 99 Ducate
Palermo Duc. 1 174 Gra. of 8 Pic. Mesina Duc. 96 of 6 Tar. 100 Ducates Antw.
and Col. Ducate 1 88 Grosses London Ducate 1 66 Pence Sterling Valentia Ducate
1 18. 2 Sols Saragosa Ducate 1 18 Sols Barselona Ducate 1 17. 10 Sols Siv. al.
Med. Ducate 1 330 Marvedes Lisbon Ducate 1 346 Rays Bolonia Duc. 114 100
Ducatoons Bergamo Duc. 100 88 Ducatoons Francfort Duc. 1 76 Quarentins. Vide
Chap. 342. how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCLXXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Lechy in Calabria.
The Exchanges of Lechy.
IN Lechy the Exchangers keep their Accounts, and have their Moneys as in
Naples, the Mepolis of that Kingdom, which is in Ducates, Tarins, Grains, and
Cavalies accounted in 5, 20 and 12, and in Exchanging it differs not much from
the Custom of Naples, specified in the former Leaf.

Lechy does Exchange with Placentia Grains 134 for 1 Crown Lions Grains 136 1
Crown Rome Grains 135 1 Ducate Genoa Grains 135 1 Crown of Gold Millan Grains
134 1 Crown of Gold Venetia Duc. 101 100 Ducates Florence Duc. 131 100 Crowns
Lucca Duc. 116 100 Ducatoons Naples Duc. 102 100 Ducates Bary Duc. 100 100
Ducates Palermo Duccate 1 22 Carlins Mesina Duccate 1 23 Carlins Antw. and Col.
Ducate 1 87 Grosses London Ducate 1 61 Pence Sterling. Valentia Ducate 1 17. 10
Sols Saragosa Ducate 1 18 Sol. Barselona Ducate 1 18. 1 Sol. Siv. al. Med.
Ducate 1 328 Marvedies Lisbon Ducate 1 348 Rays Bollonia Grains 115 1 Ducatoon
Bergamo Grains 114 1 Ducatoon Francfort Ducate 1 75 Quarentins.

CHAP. CCLXXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Bary in Puglia.
The Exchanges of Bary.
IN Bary their Accounts and Moneys are the same as are in use in Naples,
mentioned in the former Leaf, and the Custom in Exchanging also, is near
comformable thereto.

Bary does Exchange with Placentia Grains 133 for 1 Crown Lions Grains 135 1
Crown Rome Grains 137 1 Ducate Genoa Grains 134 1 Crown of Gold Millan Grains
134 1 Crown of Gold Venice Duc, 101 100 Ducates Florence Dac. 130 100 Crowns
Lucca Duc. 115 100 Ducatoons Naples Duc. 101 100 Ducates Lechi Duc. 100 99
Ducates Palermo Ducate 1 22 Carlins Mesina Ducate 1 23 Carlins Antw. and Col.
Ducate 1 88 Grosses London Ducate 1 62 Pence Sterling Valentia Ducate 1 Sol. 18
Saragosa Ducate 1 Sol. 17. 10 Barselona Ducate 1 Sol. 18. 2 Siv. al. Med.
Ducate 1 330 Marved. Lisbon Ducate 1 345 Rays Bolonia Grains 114 1 Ducatoon
Bergamo Grains 112 1 Ducatoon Francfort Ducate 1 75 Quarentines.

CHAP. CCLXXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Palermo, in Sicilia.
The Exchanges of Palermo.
IN Falermo Exchangers keep their Accounts in Ounces, Tarins, Grains, and
Pichols, the which is successively accounted in 30, 20, and 6; and others there
be that keep their Accounts in Crown of Moneys, in Tarins, Grains, and Pichols,
and these account it by 12, 20, ann 6. The Ounce is 30 Tarins, or 600 Grains,
or 3600 Pichols; the Tarin is 20 Grains, or 120 Pichols, and the Grain is 6
Pichols. Besides which there is a Crown in Moneys, which is 12 Tarins or 2^0
Grains, or 440 Pichols, the Ducate is 13 Tarins or else 260 Grains, or 1560
Pichols; the Florin is 6 Tarins, or 120 Grains, or 720 Pichols; the Carlin is a
Tarin, or 10 Grains, or 60 Pichol. In the Custom of Exchanging it gives the
broken number to all Italy, and to Lions, and to all other places it gives the
whole number, which is sometimes one Ducate, or one Florin, or 1 Ounce, or one
hundred Ounces.

Palermo does Exchange with Placentia Carl. 29 for 1 Crown Lions Carl. 29 1
Crown Rome Carl. 29 1 Ducate Genoa Carl. 29 1 Crown of Gold Millan Carl. 29 1
Crown of Gold Venetia Carl. 24 1 Ducate Florence Carl. 28 1 Crown Lucca Carl.
25 1 Ducatoon Naples gra. di. pic. 172 1 Ducate Lechy Carl. 23 1 Ducate Bari
Tarin. 118 1 Ducate Mesina Ounce 100 101 Ounces Antw, and Col. Ducate 1 106
Grosses London Ducate 1 73 Pence Sterling Valentia Florin 1 9. 8 Sols. Saragosa
Florin 1 9. 10 Sol. Barselona Florin 1 Sol. 9. 7 Siv. al. Med. Florin 1 185
Marved. Lisbon Florin 1 196 Rays Bolonia Carl. 25 1 Ducatoon Bergamo Carl. 25
1 Ducatoon Frankfort Ducate 1 89 Quarentines. Vide Chap. 419. how these are
calculated.

CHAP. CCLXXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Mesina, in the Fair of Sicilia.
The Exchanges of Mesina.
IN Mesina, the Accounts are kept, and the Moneys that are current are the same
as in Palermo aforementioned, only excepting in the Exchange thereof with
Naples, it gives a whole Number, which are found to be of 100 Ducates.

This place and Palermo are accounted to Exchange with Placentia or Lions, to
give more one Carlin per Ounce, by the name of making good the Moneys; so that
he that here is to pay Money by Exchange for the said places, must pay 61
Carlins per Ounce.

Mesina does Exchange with Placentia Carl. 29 for 1 Crown Lions Carl. 29 1
Crown Rome Carl. 29 1 Ducate Genoa Carl. 29 1 Crown of Gold Millan Carl. 29 1
Crown of Gold Venetia Carl. 22 1 Ducate Florence Carl. 28 1 Crown Lucca Carl.
25 1 Ducatoon Naples Duc. 100 96 Duc. of 6 Tarins Lechy Turin. 11. 14 1 Ducate
Bary Carl. 23 1 Ducate Palermo Ounce 100 102 Ounces Antw. and Col. Ducate 1 107
Grosses London Ducate 1 72 Pence Sterling. Valentia Florin 1 Sol 9. 9 D.
Saragosa Florin 1 Sol 9. 10 D. Barselona Florin 1 Sol 9. 8 D. Siv. al. Med.
Florin 1 190 Marved. Lisbon Florin 1 200 Rays Bollonia Carlins 25 1 Ducatoon
Bergamo Carlins 25 1 Ducatoon. Francfort Ducate 1 90 Quarentins Vide Chap. 419.
how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCXC. Of the Exchanges of Antwerp in Brabant, and Collen in Germany the
Lower.
The Exchanges of Antwerp and Colonia.
IN both these places the Exchangers keep their Accounts in Livres, Sols, and
Deniers of Grosses, so that their Grosses are there accounted, as their Deniers
or Pefening

And in the Custom of the Exchanges of these two places, they give the broken
number to all other places, London only excepted, which they give not by the
Gross, but by the Sol. or Shillings.

Antwerp and Colonia does Exchange with Placentia Gross 125 for 1 Crown Lions
Gross 128 1 Crown Rome Gross 130 1 Ducate Genoa Gross 129 1 Crown of Gold
Millan Gross 127 1 Crown of Gold Venetia Gross 94 1 Ducate Florence Gross 112 1
Crown Lucca Gross 104 1 Ducatoon Naples Gross 91 1 Ducate Lecchi Gross 90 1
Ducate Bary Gross 91 1 Ducate Palermo Gross 107 1 Ducate Mesina Gross 107 1
Ducate London Sold. 34 1 Pound Sterling Valentia Gross 107 1 Ducate Saragosa
Gross 109 1 Ducate Barselona Gross 112 1 Ducate Siv. al. Med. Gross 106 1
Ducate Lisbon Gross 102 1 Ducate Bolonia Gross 104 1 Ducatoon Bergamo Gross 105
1 Ducatoon Francfort Gross 78 1 Floren of 65 quar. Vide Chap. 435. how these
are calculated.

CHAP. CCXCI. Of the Exchanges of London, the Metropolis of England.
The Exchanges of London.
IN London, and throughout all England, Exchangers keep their Accounts in
Pounds, Shillings, and Pence Sterling, and cast it up, as in other places, by
Livres, Sols, and Deniers by 12 and 20. And in the custom of Exchanging, it
gives the Exchange to all places by the broken number of Pence Sterling,
Antwerp and Colonia only excepted, with which two places it Exchangeth by the
Pound of Sterling Money, above specified.

London does Exchange with Placentia Sterling. Pence 64 for 1 Crown Lions Pence 64
1 Crown Rome Pence 66 1 Ducate Genoa Pence 65 1 Crown of Gold Milan Pence 64 1
Crown of Gold Venetia Pence 50 1 Duc. in Banco Florence Pence 61 1 Crown Lucca
Pence 53 1 Ducatoon Naples Pence 50 1 Ducate Lechy Pence 50 1 Ducate Bary Pence
51 1 Ducate Palermo Pence 57 1 Ducate Mesina Pence 56 1 Ducate Antw. and Col.
Poun. Sterling. 1 34 Shill. Flem. Valentia Pence 57 1 Ducate Saragosa Pence 59 1
Ducate Barselona Pence 64 1 Ducate Siv. al. Med. Pence 58 1 Ducate Lisbon Pence
53 1 Ducate Bolonia Pence 53 1 Ducatoon Bergamo Pence 52 1 Ducatoon Francfort
Pence 59 1 Florin Vide Chap. 443. how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCXCII. Of the Exchanges of Valentia, the Metropolis of Valentia.
The Exchanges of Valentia.
IN Valentia, and in all the Kingdoms of Valentia, in Spain Merchants do keep
their Accounts in Livres, Solds, and Deniers; the current Moneys of the place,
are Rials and Deniers, and Ricls ten are accounted for a Livre, so that half a
Rial is a Soldo; the Ducate is here imaginary, and accounted for 10 Rials, and
accounted 21 Sols.

In the custom of Exchanges of this place, it gives the broken number to all
Italy, Spain, and Germany, and to all other places the entire number, either of
one Ducate or 100 Ducates.

The Castiliano is also here found in use for an imaginary Coin, in the ancient
custom of Exchanging with Sevil, and accounted worth 27 Sol. 4 Deniers.

Valentia does Exchange with Placentia Sol. 23. 6 for 1 Crown Lions Sol. 23. 8
1 Crown Rome Sol. 24. 2 1 Ducate Genoa Sol. 23 10 1 Crown of Gold Millan Sol.
23. 9 1 Crown of Gold Venice Sol. 17. 10 1 Ducate Florence Sol. 23. 0 1 Crown
Lucca Sol. 20. 2 1 Ducatoon Naples Sol. 18. 0 1 Ducate Lechy Sol. 18. 2 1
Ducate Bary Sol. 18. 1 1 Ducate Palermo Sol. 9. 6 1 Florin. Mesina Sol. 9. 7 1
Florin. Antw. and Col. Ducate 1 106 Grosses London Ducate 1 72 Pence Sterling.
Saragosa Ducat. 100 102 Ducates Barselona Ducat. 100 101 Ducates Siv. al. Med.
Sol. 20. 3 1 Ducate Lisbon Ducate. 100 100 Ducates Bollonia Sol. 20. 3 1
Ducatoon Bergamo Sol. 20. 4 1 Ducatoon Francfort Sol. 14 1 Florin Vide Chap.
426. how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCXCIII. Of the Exchanges of Saragosa, in Catalonia.
The Exchanges of Saragosa.
IN Saragosa, Merchants keep their Accounts as in Valentia aforementioned, and
have the same Moneys, saving that the Ducate passes here in account for 22
Sols, or 11 Rials.

In the Custom of Exchanging, it gives the broken number to all Italy, and to
all the rest the whole number, which is found to be either one Ducate or 100
Ducates.

Saragosa does Exchange with Placentia Sol. 23. 8 for 1 Crown Lions Sol. 23. 11
1 Crown Rome Sol. 24. 3 1 Ducate Genoa Sol. 23. 9 1 Crown of Gold Millan Sol.
23. 8 1 Crown of Gold Venetia Sol. 17. 9 1 Ducate Florence Sol. 22. 10 1 Crown
Lucca Sol. 20. 1 1 Ducatoon Naples Sol. 17. 10 1 Ducate Lechi Sol. 18. 1 1
Ducate Bary Sol. 18. 0 1 Ducate Palermo Sol. 9. 8 1 Florin Mesina Sol. 9. 9 1
Florin. Antw. and Col. Duc. 1 105 Grosses London Duc. 1 73 Pence Sterling
Valentia Duc. 100 103 Ducates Barselona Duc. 100 102 Ducates Siv. al. Med. Duc.
100 105 Ducates Lisbon Duc. 100 108 Ducates Belonia Sol. 20. 2 1 Ducatoon
Bergamo Sol. 20. 1 1 Ducatoon Francfort Duc. 1 95 Quarentins. Vide Chap. 426.
how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCXCIV. Of the Exchanges of Barselona the Metropolis of Catalonia.
The Exchanges of Barselona.
IN Barselona, the use of Account keeping, and the Moneys are the same as is
specified in Valentia, excepting, that the Ducate is here accounted Sol. 24,
which is twelve single Rials.

In the Custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken number to all other
places, excepting to Antwerp, Colonia, London, Lisbon, and Germany, to which it
gives the whole number, which is found to be either one Ducate or 100 Ducates.

Barselona does Exchange with Placentia Sold. 23. 10 for 1 Crown Lions Sol. 24
1 Crown Rome Sol. 24. 4 1 Ducate Genoa Sol. 24. 2 1 Crown of Gold Milan Sol.
24. 1 1 Crown of Gold Venice Sol. 18. 2 1 Ducate Florence Sol. 23. 0 1 Crown
Lucca Sol. 20. 2 1 Ducatoon Naples Sol. 18. 3 1 Ducat. Lechy Sol. 18. 2 1
Ducat. Bary Sol. 18. 1 1 Ducat. Palermo Sol. 9. 10 1 Florin Mesina. Sol. 9. 9 1
Florin Antw. and Col. Ducate 1 103 Grosses London Ducate 1 72 Pence Sterling.
Valentia Duc. 103 100 Ducates Saragosa Duc. 104 100 Ducates Siv. al. and Med.
Duc. 106 100 Ducates Lisbon Duc. 100 104 Ducates Bolonia Sol. 20 1 Ducatoon
Bergamo Sol. 20. 2 1 Ducatoon Francfort Ducate 1 9 Quarentins. Vide Chap. 426.
how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCXCV. Of the Exchanges of Sevil, Alcala, Medina del Campo, and other
places in Castilia.
The Exchanges of Sevil, Alcala, Medina del Campo, etc.
IN these parts, and generally throughout Spain, Merchants do keep their
Accounts in Marvedies; yet notwithstanding, for the benefit of Exchanging, they
have an imaginary Ducate, which Ducate is accounted 375 Marvedies. The Crown of
Gold is ever worth 400 Marvedies, and the single Rial ever worth 34 Marvedies.

In the Custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken number to all Italy
and Liens, but to all other places the whole number, found to be either simply
the single Ducate, or 100 Ducates.

There is also of old in use an imaginary Coin called the Castiliano, wherewith
these places do Exchange with Valentia, and is 485 Marvedies.

Sevil, Alcala, and Medina does Exchange with. Placentia Marued. 440 for 1
Crown Lions Marved. 445 1 Crown Rome Marved. 450 1 Ducate Genoa Marved. 442 1
Crown of Gold Millan Marved. 438 1 Crown of Gold Venice Marved. 330 1 Ducate
Florence Marved. 430 1 Crown Lucca Marved. 370 1 Ducatoon Naples Marved. 337 1
Ducat. Lechy Marved. 334 1 Ducat. Bari Marved. 333 1 Ducat. Palermo Marved. 180
1 Florin. Mesina Marved. 175 1 Florin. Antw, and Col. Ducate 1 105 Grosses
London Ducate 1 72 Pence Sterling. Valentia Ducate 1 Sol 19. 8. Saragosa Ducates
100 104 1 Ducat. Barselona Ducates 100 108 Ducat. Lisbon Ducates 100 109 Ducat.
Belonia Marved. 372 1 Ducatoon Bergamo Marved. 368 1 Ducatoon Frankfort Ducate
1 88 Quarentins.

Vide Chap. 426. how these are calculated.

CHAP. CCXCVI. Of the Exchanges of Lisbon in Portugal.
The Exchanges of Lisbon.
IN Lisbon and throughout Portugal, Merchants Accounts are kept in Rays, beside
which, they have an imaginary Ducate, which is accounted for four hundred Rays.

In the Custom of Exchanging, this place gives a whole number to Anvers,
Colonia, London, and Germany, which is only upon the said one Ducate, and to
all other places it gives on Exchange by a broken number.

Lisbon does Exchange with Placentia Res 472 for 1 Crown Lions Res 480 1 Crown
Rome Res 483 1 Ducate Genoa Res 476 1 Crown of Gold Milan Res 495 1 Crown of
Gold Venetia Res 354 1 Ducate Florence Res 465 1 Crown Lucca Res 397 1 Ducatoon
Naples Res 350 1 Ducate Lechy Res 352 1 Ducate Bary Res 348 1 Ducate Palermo
Res 190 1 Florin Mesina Res 193 1 Florin Antw. and Col. Ducate 1 104 Grosses
London Ducate 1 69 d. sterling. Valentia Duc. 105 100 Ducates Saragosa Duc. 104
100 Ducates Barselona Duc. 103 100 Ducates Siv. al. and Med. Duc. 106 100
Ducates Bolonia Res 400 1 Ducatoon Bergamo Res 388 1 Ducatoon Francfort Duc. 1
89 Quarentines.

CHAP. CCXCVII. Of the Exchanges of Bolonia in Italy.
The Exchanges of Bolonia.
IN Bolonia some are found to keep their Accounts in Livres, Sols, and Deniers,
and others in Ducatoons, Sols, and Deniers. And in the Custom of Exchanging,
this place gives the broken number to Placentia, Lions, Rome, Genoa, Millan,
Florence, and Lucca, and to all the others the whole number, which is the
Ducatoon, either one or one hundred.

Bollonia does exchange with Placentia Ducat. 117 for 100 Crowns Lions Ducat.
119 100 Crowns Rome Ducat. 120 100 Ducats Genoua Ducat. 118 100 Crowns of Gold
Millan Ducat. 117 100 Crowns of Gold Venetia Ducat. 100 114 Ducats Florence
Ducat. 116 100 Crowns Lucca Ducat. 101 100 Ducatoons Naples Ducat. 100 113
Ducats Lechi Ducat. 1 112 Grains Bari Ducat. 100 112 Ducats Palermo Ducat. 1 24
Carlins Mesina Ducat. 1 24 Carlins Antw. and Col. Ducat. 1 103 Grosses London
Ducat. 1 67 d. sterling. Valentia Ducat. 1 Sol. 20. 2 d. Saragosa Ducat. 1 Sol.
20. 0. Barcellona Ducat. 1 Sol. 20. 1 d. Siv. al. Med. Ducat. 1 370 Marvedes
Lisbon Ducat. 1 395 Rays Bergamo Ducat. 100 101 Ducatoons Frankford Ducat. 1
87 Quarentins

CHAP. CCXCVIII. Of the Exchanges of Bergamo in Lombardy.
The Exchanges of Bergamo
IN Bergamo, Merchants Accounts are kept in Livres, Sols, and Deniers of
Picolis, and the Exchanges in Ducatoens, Sols, and Deniers. The Money of Picoli
is the current Coin of the place, and the same as is in use in Venetia. The
Ducatoon is worth 7 Livres of Picolis, so that 1 Sol of Ducatoon, is worth 7
Sol of Picolis; so likewise the Denier of Ducatoon, is worth 7 Deniers of
Picoli.

In the Custom of Exchanging, this place gives the broken Number to Placentia,
Lions, Rome, Gencua, Millan, Venetia, Florence, Lucca, Naples, and Bollonia,
and all other places the whole Number which is found to be the Ducatoon.

Bergamo does exchange with Placentia Ducat. 117 for 100 Crowns Lions Ducat.
117 100 Crowns Rome Ducat. 118 100 Ducats Genoua Ducat. 117 100 Crowns of Gold
Millan Ducat. 117 100 Crowns of Gold Venetia Ducat. 87 100 Ducat. Florence
Ducat. 111 100 Crowns Lucca Ducat. 100 100 Ducat. Naples Ducat. 88 100 Ducat.
Lechi Ducatoon 1 112 Grains Bari Ducatoon 1 110 Grains Palermo Ducatoon 1 25
Carlins Mesina Ducatoon 1 24 Carlins Antw. and Col. Ducatoon 1 104 Grosses
London Ducatoon 1 67 d. sterling. Valentia Ducatoon 1 Sol. 20 Saragosa Ducatoon 1
Sol. 20. 1 d. Barcelona Ducatoon 1 Sol. 20. 2 d. Siv. al. Med. Ducatoon 1 370
Marvedes Lisbon Ducatoon 1 390 Rays Bollonia Ducat. 100 100 Ducatoons
Franckford Ducatoon 1 86 Quarentins

CHAP. CCXCIX. Of the Exchanges of Franckford, Norimberg, Augusta, and Vienna
in Germany.
The Exchanges of Franckford, Norimberg, Augusta, and Vienna.
IN these places, Merchant are found to keep their Accounts in Florins, Sols,
and Deniers, as by 20 and 12, the Florins being 20 Sols, or 60 Quarentins. The
Quarentin is in some places called the Craizer, which is 4 Pfenings, so that 12
Pfenings makes one Sol.

In the Custom of Exchanging, these places give the whole Number, which is the
Florin, to London, Antwerp, Colonia, and Valentia, and to all others gives the
broken Number, which is the Quarentin.

Franckford, Norimberg, Augusta and Vienna, do exchange with Placentia
Quarentins 102 for 1 Crown Lions Quarentins 103 1 Crown Rome Quarentins 104 1
Ducat Genoua Quarentins 101 100 Ducats Millan Quarentins 102 1 Crown of 4 l.
current. Venice Flor. 126 1 Crown of Gold Florence Quarentins 96 100 Ducats
Lucca Quarentins 86 1 Crown Naples Quarentins 77 1 Ducatoon Lechi Quarentins 77
1 Ducat Bari Quarentins 78 1 Ducat Palermo Quarentins 90 1 Ducat Mesina
Quarentins 89 1 Ducat. Antw. and Col. Flor. of 65 quar. 1 80 Grosses London
Florin 1 50 Pence sterling. Valentia Florin 1 Sol. 13. 8 d. Saragosa Quarentins
96 1 Ducat. Barcelona Quarentins 97 1 Ducat. Siv. al. Med. Quarentins 87 1
Ducat. Lubon Quarentins 86 1 Ducat. Bollonia Quarentins 88 1 Ducatoon Bergamo
Quarentins 87 1 Ducatoon.

CHAP. CCC. Of the Terms of Payments in general of Bills of Exchange.
The terms of payment of Bills of Exchange, five.
TO make these Tables complete, and the Rules of these Exchanges to be truly and
rightly understood, it is observable, that as all Exchanges have a settled Rate
and Price, by which the Taker takes, and the Giver by Covenant gives it; so
is there likewise a certain positive term and time limited, wherein, and at
which day expired, the Factor of the Taker, or his Assign, repayeth the
covenanted Sum to the Factor or Assign of the Giver thereof, which term o^ time
is of differing space of days prefixed. The common term or times by which all
Bills in Exchanges are made, are found usually to be five; which is, first, at
sight of the Bill; secondly, at Usance; thirdly at double Usance; fourthly, at
half Usance; fifthly, at Marts, Fairs, etc. which five Terms in Exchanges are
thus understood.

1. At Sight.
First then, at sight, or so many days after sight, is understood to be so long
a term or time, as the Bill of Exchange will be after the delivery going to
that place, where it is covenanted that the same should be paid; and upon the
show and sight thereof, or at so many days after, as is specified therein, it
must be paid and answered accordingly.

2. At Usance.
Secondly, at Usance, is understood to be of a different term and space of time,
sometimes consisting of 8 days, as from Rome to Naples; sometimes of 10 days,
as from Genoua to Rome; sometimes of 30 days, as from London to Rouen, to
Antwerp, to Middleburgh, to Amsterdam, and so to other places; sometimes of 60
days, or two months, as from London to Hamburgh, from Antwerp to Rome, and to
Venice, and to Florence, to Naples, to Palermo, and so to other places:
Sometimes again, Usance is understood to be 90 days, or three months, as from
London to Venice, Florence, Naples, etc. according to the several Customs of
the said distant several places, where the Bills of Exchanges are made, and
ever accounted from the date of the said Bill.

3. At double Usance.
Thirdly, at double Usance; which considering the said places, is understood to
be double; the former spaces of single Usance, being either of 8, 10, 30, 60,
or 90 days doubled, according to the Custom of the place where the Bill is
made, and accounted also from the date of the said Bill.

4. At half Usance
Fourthly, at half Usance; this is understood to be half the abovesaid limited
term or time, according as (as I said before) to the common Custom of that
place where the Bill is made, and accounted also from the date of the Bill.

5. At Fairs and Marts.
Fifthly, at Marts or Fairs, which by Italians and Spaniards is called La Fiera
and this space of time for payment of Bills is understood to be at some certain
days, accounted for Fairs in the said places where the Bills are made to be
payable, as is found in Placentia quarterly four times of the year; the like
observed generally in Lions, and in Castile at three times of the year,
accounted as in three Banks, 1. IN las Fieras de Vilaleon, 2. de Medina del
Campo, 3. de Medina del Rio Sicco, which places are as public Marts whereunto
Merchants do use to give and take, sometimes to benefit themselves by
Exchanges, as in the abovesaid places, and sometimes to buy Commodities, and
supply their occasions, as is used twice a year for some Marts in Germany, as I
have touched more largely in the Description of the Trade of the said Cities.

CHAP. CCCI. How the Rates and Prices in Exchanges are settled.
How the Rates and Prices of Exchangers are settled.
THE next thing considerable yet to be handled, for the explanation of these
Tables of Exchanges, is the Rate and Price it self; for seeing that so many
Merchants of great eminence, whose Estates are continually traversed from one
Country to another, and from one Coin to another, do daily and constantly give
and take as their occasion, and the Rates of the Exchanges conduce to their
Profit, it may be conceived, that their great Purses should prescribe the Rule
and Rate thereto, which is seen so variously to alter, and daily to rise and
fall by the continual current of those and others that use this Mystery, yet
notwithstanding, not found that they have any determinate Power or Stroke in
giving the Price thereto: though it must be confessed, that such have a
conducing hand, so far forth as it may be ^ound that their Opinion concurs with
the universal Opinions of the rest, interessed in this mystical body of
Exchanges. And therefore to explain my self, it may fitly here be demanded, how
those Rates and Prices of Exchanges come to be set, and then continued, or how
it comes to pass that the same are seen so frequently to vary and alter in
foreign Parts? Whereto I answer, That the Bankers in Italy, Spain and France,
being now a days found to be the only great takers and deliverers of Moneys,
have at the times of Payments of Exchanges in the principal places aforesaid,
(as namely, a^ Lions in France, Madrid, and in other places of Spain, Florence,
Genoua, Venetia, and such other places in Italy) a constant meeting, and there
by certain Tickets in writing, deliver every Man his Opinion, what the Price of
the Exchange ought to be for all places: Then exchanging for the next Fair or
time of payment in every the said places, and according to the same, the
Calculation is cast up by the Medium; that is to say, if there be seven or more
Voices or Tickets, the said seven are added together, and the seventh part is
the medium; and if there be ten, then the ten being cast up, the tenth part is
the medium, and so for greater or lesser numbers accordingly: wherein it is to
be noted, that these Bankers do observe how the plenty of Moneys lies by
Exchange, how the occasions of Princes may help or hinder, either by great
Receipts, or great Disbursements; how the Trade and Commerce of the Negotiators
and Merchants is concurrent and effective; and therein they are found to concur
in setting the said Rates and Prices for their own Commodity and Advantage: And
from this Spring is observed to rise the main Ocean of all the Exchanges of
Christendom, in which this our Country of England has but a small share, as
being only a Branch derived from the principal Channel.

CHAP. CCCII. Of the Par in Exchanges.
Of the Par in Exchanges, which is two.
THE next thing observable here, is the Loss and Gain accruing by these
Exchanges practiced amongst Merchants: To distinguish which, and for the
finding out the reality thereof, every Giver or Taker applies his study to
find out the true and real Par of Exchanges; whereby it is manifested, both
what the Gain and Loss is, and who is Gainer, and who is the Loser. Now this
Par in Exchanges may be here properly (in the general) said to be of two
distinct kinds; the one as appertaining to the State and Prince, and belonging
to the Profit and Loss of the Kingdom; and the other to the Merchant or
Exchanger, and appertaining to the Profit and Loss of his private Estate and
Interest: The first I hold proper, and fit the knowledge of Counselors and
Statesmen; and the other is proper and fit the knowledge of the
Trading-Merchant, the finding out of both which Pars in Exchanges, is thus.

1. Princes Par.
The first Par in Exchanges, which I term here the Prince's Par, or the
Sovereign's Value for Value, is grounded upon the weight, fineness and
valuation of the Moneys of each several Kingdom, City, or Place; the several
Standards thereof so equally, proportioned, so truly and justly by the Art of
the Mint rectified, that each Prince his Coin in Exchanges may have its due
allowance, according to the goodness and fineness, coarsness and badness
thereof: and therefore herein to make and to settle this abovenamed Par
exactly betwixt one Kingdom and another, we are to examine and compare, not
only the weight and fineness of our own Coins as they are in themselves, but
also the weight and fineness of those of other Princes and Countries, with the
real proportion that happens therein, not only between our own Gold and
Silver, but also between the Gold and Silver of other Countries. This
examination, comparison and proportion, duly, rightly and really examined,
compared and proportioned, and no difference, inequality or disproportion,
found or admitted therein, then may our Exchanges run at one and the same Price
and Rate both for Gold and Silver, taking the denomination according to the
valuation of the Money of each Country and Kingdom, hereby finding how much
fine Silver or Gold our own Pound sterling contains, and what quantity of
other Moneys, either of France, Italy, Germany, Netherlands, Eastland, etc.
this Kingdom is to have in Exchange, to countervail the same in the weight and
fineness, answerable to our own, be it by the Pound, Dollar, Ducat, Crown, or
any other real or imaginary Coin, giving always a Value for Value, and
receiving the like; which, by reason of the great Consequence depending
thereon, I here call the Prince his Par, in the Exchanges of his Moneys by
Bills of Exchange with other Countries and Kingdoms.

2. Merchants Par.
The second Par, I call the Merchants or Exchangers Par in Bills of Exchange,
and is grounded partly upon the Sovereign or Prince's Par abovementioned, but
principally upon the current value of the said Coins, the plenty and scarcity
thereof, the rising and falling, inhansement and debasement of the same: and
therefore such Merchants as are Exchangers, do endeavor by certain Rules of
Exchanges to equalize the valuation of the Moneys of one Prince or Country with
another. And therefore every Man that delivers his Money in one Country or
Place, to have it in another, is, and ought to be ever curious, to understand
either the Loss or Gain that comes thereof, which is only and properly
distinguished by the knowledge and finding out this Par aforementioned. For
finding out of which, it is requisite for him that remitteth, to know either by
his own Advice, Judgment, or otherwise, how much the Crown, Dollar, Ducat, or
Pound whence he remitteth, is worth in the place whither he would make his
remittance unto. As for Example, having Money in Lions in France, which I would
remit for Antwerp, I ought to know how much the Crown of France is really worth
in Antwerp: as presuppose, that the Crown of France, of 67 Sols, or 3 l. 7 Sols
Turn^, is worth by Exchange, according to the course thereof, 100 Grosses
there; I would then know, what a real Crown of 60 Sols or 3 l. Turnois (the
Crown wherein Exchanges are made) is worth? multiplying and dividing as the
Rule requires it, it will appear to be Sols 89 ^/67 Gross, which is indeed the
true value of the Crown: if then the Bill of Exchange be made for less than 89
^/67 Gross per Crown of 3 l. Turnois, there is a loss thereby; and if for more,
there is a Gain thereby: so that it is hereby evident, that 89 ^7/67 Gross is
the Par in Exchanges between these two Countries, in the Crown of France, and
in the Gross of Antwerp; the which Rule may serve as an Example in Remittances
for all other places: for it is not otherwise to be imagined, that any positive
Rule can be set down herein, considering the diversity of species, which, as I
said before, daily rises and falls, and the Price of the Exchanges, which
every day, according to presenting occasions, likewise alters, found to be
sometimes at one Rate, and sometimes at another. And this Par is the matter
whereupon all Merchants Exchanges for Profit and Loss is grounded, and is the
Par, or Value for Value, which in this following Tract I principally and
fundamentally aim at.

Now the last thing considerable in this place, and now to be observed, is the
method, form and manner, how the Accounts of these diverse Exchanges from one
Country to another, is between one Merchant and another cast up and calculated;
which indeed principally is the work of the Pen and Hand of the A^ithmetician,
which as a necessary adjunct, and needful furtherance to the mystery of
Exchanging, I have hereto inserted, and have herein pitched upon the principal
places here mentioned, willingly omitted the least and rest of them, having
fitted (to such as I have conceived the most worthy) apt Questions and their
Solutions, from one Town or City to another, with the denomination of their
several Accounts and Species, the manner of the brief calculations thereof, and
the short proof of each prescribed Rule and Position, adding for conclusion to
each general City of Exchanges, some Examples of Orders and Commissions, given
and received, in Draughts and Remittances, made according to the common Custom
and use of the place, omitting some other principal Points wherein I might have
enlarged both this Matter and Subject, that the ingedious Head and Hand of the
Learner may have room and scope to work upon, according either to his Desire,
Capacity, or Inclination.

CHAP CCCIII. Of Examples upon the Exchanges practiced at Lions, and how the
the same are calculated.
Examples upon Exchanges in Lions.
I Have formerly noted, that the payments of Bills of Exchanges at Lions is only
in use four times a year, which are, first, 1. The payment of Roys, begins
the 6th. of March after their Style, and continues the rest of that Month. 2.
The payments of Pasques, or Easter, the 6th. of June. 4. The payments of
August, the 6th. of September. 4. The payments of All Saints, the 6th. of
December.


The Custom of acceptance of Bills of Exchange in Lions.
The Acceptance of all Bills of Exchange here, is always made the first day of
the Month of each payment, which Acceptances hold in themselves both a promise
and assurance of the payment of the Sum included in the said Bills so accepted:
And because there is no other time accustomed wherein Bills of Exchange are
accepted, the Merchants here resident have invented, by means of a little Book,
a way of registring their several Bills, which they commonly call in French a
Bilan; A Bilan.
in which Book or Bilan, they accustomarily use to make a little Cross or Mark
upon each Bill there registered, and thus orderly accepted. But if the Party to
whom the same is presented, make a Question whether he shall accept it or not,
and demands time to think upon it, then they place upon that Bill so there
registered the letter V. signifying in French, Voir la lettre, or the Bill seen;
or if in conclusion he refuse the same, either because he holds not the Party
that charge the same sufficient, or solvent, or for any other just occasion,
they commonly note the same in their Bilan with S and P, signifying that the
same is Soubs Protest, that is, under Protest: The which Bilan of Acceptations,
Draughts, and Remittances, thus quoted and thus registered, I observed at my
residence in that City, to carry so much Credit amongst the Merchants of the
place, as if the same had been done with Witnesses by a Public Notary.

The price settled for the succeeding Fairs.
The third day of the Month of the said payments, the price of the said Exchange
is cut and settled, as well for the succeeding course of Lions it self, as for
all the principal exchanging places of Christendom; in all which it is found,
that Lions gives the Law and Rule, ordering in some sort the price of all other
places, excepting for Placentia.

Discounters or transferring of Bills of Exchange, and Debts in Lions.
The sixth day all the Merchants residing upon the place, appear in certain
public Rooms near the Burse, or place of daily meeting with their Book or
Bilan, containing both their Debit and Credit, of both Debts and Bills of
Exchanges, and there address themselves to one another, and to whom they are
indebted, intimating unto them, to transfer Parcels, or as they term it, V^er
party, and give for Debtor one or more, who does owe, and stands indebted unto
them the like Sum or Parcel, the which being accepted by the Creditors, the Sum
is respectively registered, and noted in the Bilan abovesaid; and after that
time, that Parcel is understood to be transferred and remains entirely upon
the Risgoe, peril and fortune of the Party that did accept the same: And in
this manner here I have observed a Million of Crowns has in a morning been
paid and satisfied without the disbursement of a Denier in Money, and therefore
to this purpose all Merchants resident here, or their Servants for them, are
compelled in this manner to appear with their Bilan, thus to satisfy Accounts
with their Creditors, and make good their payments, or in default of this
appearance are by the Custom of the place declared as Bankrupts; and this in
brief is the remarkable Custom of Lions in matters of Exchanges upon every
payment.

Rules of casting up the Exchanges in Lions.
It now remains I should show the Rules how the Exchanges are made in this
place; for at every payment the current Moneys of the place are found
increasing or decreasing, being sometimes worth from one payment to another 2
per Cent. or 2 more or less: to understand then there Rules, I will first lay
down some Examples for the help of those that are not well acquainted with the
Custom of this City.

Presuppose that a Merchant has taken in Banco 455 Livres at 2 per Cent. from
the payments of Roys as they call it, or Kings, until the payment of Pasques or
Easter, and to know what the Exchange may amount unto, at the rate abovesaid,
do this briefly: the of the said At 2 per Cent.
455 l. is first to be taken, and the of the said tenth, shall be the Exchange,
forasmuch as the tenth of an hundred is ten, and the of ten is 2, which is the
Exchange aforementioned, and therefore of the tenth is to be taken, as for
Example: ^

At 2 ^/3.
Again, a Debtor owes unto his Creditor l. 3141. 16 s. 6 d. to pay at the rate
of 2 per Cent. for Exchange, the which most facile and briefly is thus
performed: Take the 1/1^ of the said Sum, and of the proceed, and of the the
^/3, adding the said fifth to the. And thus the value of the Exchange is found
out, as here follows. ^

The reason of this brevity is, that if from 100 one takes as is before said
of 1/10 and of the said, the product of the said ^/5 with the, gives just 2, as
is above specified.

Again, at 2 ^/4 per Cent. how much amounts the Exchange of l. 842. 17. 6.
you must here take ^/3 of a 1/10, and a ^/10 of the said, adding the two last
products the Exchange will appear, as ^

At 2.
Again, a Debtor owes to his Creditor l. 1435. 17. 8 d. to be paid at the rate
of 2 per Cent. for the Exchange: To do this, take the 1/10 parts of the said
Sum, and of his Product, and of the the, adding the said to the said, and the
Exchange will appear. ^

At 2
Again, at 2 per Cent. what will the Exchange of 7661 l. 17 Sols amount unto? To
do which, the of 1/10, and the of the said is to be taken, adding the and the,
and it gives the Exchange. ^

At 3 per Cent.
Again, at 3 per Cent. I would know the Exchange of 7000 l. herein take of 1/10
and of the said, adding the two last products, it gives the Exchange: as for
Example; ^

At 2.
Also presuppose, that a Merchant has sold some Goods for the value of 5312 l.
10 s. at a years time, conditionally to have the allowance of 2 per Cent. for
every payment, what ought the Buyer to give the Seller at the said term? In
this case consider, that 2 per Cent. for a payment, is 10 per Cent. for the
year; and therefore the 1/10 is to be taken, and to be added to the Total, and
it gives l. 5843. 15. ^

But I have stayed upon this Point too long, and therefore will omit further
Examples, and will only insert a brief method of these forms of Exchanges in
this place, because the ingenious may make it serve his occasions in any
Country where Moneys are either given or taken at Interest, serving as
compendious Tables for casting up of any Exchange here, or of Interest
elsewhere, for any space and term of time whatsoever, and fitly serves as a
necessary introduction to what I shall here further insert, as concerning the
Exchanges made by Lions for other Countries.

CHAP. CCCIV. Brief Rates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for the Rates
of Interest in many other places.
Rates of Exchange in Lions, and may serve for Rates of Interest in many other
Cities.
FIrst, at per Cent. take 1/10 of a 1/10, and the of the last 1/10 shall be the
Rate and Sum of the Exchange propounded and demanded. At per Cent. take a 1/10
of a 1/10, and a of the last 1/10, is the Exchange. At per Cent. take a 1/10 of
a 1/10, and of the last 1/10 is the Exchange. At per Cent. take a 1/10 of a
1/10, and of the last 1/10 is the Exchange. At per Cent. take of a 1/10, and
the 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At per Cent. take a of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall
be the Exchange. At per Cent. take a of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall be the
Exchange. At 1 per Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 1 per
Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10 and of the last 1/10, adding the two last. At 1 per
Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10 and of the last 1/10, adding the and 1/10. At 1 per
Cent. take a of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 1 per Cent. take a of a 1/10
shall be the Exchange. At 1 per Cent. take and of the 1/10 of a 1/10 shall be
the Exchange. At 1 per Cent. take a 1/10 of a 1/10 and of the last 1/10. At 2
per Cent. take a of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 2 per Cent. take a of a
1/10 and of the said, adding the and. At 2 per Cent. take a of a 1/10 and of
the said. At 2 per Cent. take a of a 1/10 shall be the Exchange. At 2 per Cent.
take a of a 1/10 and of the said, adding the and. At 2 per Cent. take a of a
1/10 and the 1/10 of the said. At 3 per Cent. take a of a 1/10 and of the said,
adding the and the. At 3 per Cent. take a of a 1/10. At 3 per Cent. take a of a
1/10 and of the said, adding the and. At 3 per Cent. take a of a 1/10 and of
the said, adding the and the. At 4 per Cent. take a of a. At 4 per Cent. take
and of At 5 per Cent. take a of a 1/10. At 5 per Cent. take a of a 1/10 and
1/10 of the said, adding the and the 1/10. At 6 per Cent. take a of a 1/10 and
of the said, shall be the Exchange. At 6 per Cent. take a 1/10 of a of a shall
be the Exchange. At 6 per Cent. take a 1/10 of a of one. At 7 per Cent. take a
of 1/10 and of the said. At 8 per Cent. take a 1/11. At 10 per Cent. take a
1/10. At 12 per Cent. take a. At 15 per Cent. take a 1/10 and of the said 1/10,
adding the whole. At 16 per Cent. take a 1/10. At 17 per Cent. -- 1/10 and
twice the the one of the other of the said 1/10. At 20 per Cent. --. At 22 per
Cent. -- and of the said adding gives the Exchange. At 25 per Cent. taking
the.
The reason and benefit of these Rules, as well in Lions as elsewhere.
The reason why I have been induced to set down the brief method of calculating
the Exchanges here, is, that as it is to be understood, that the rate of the
Exchange at the payment is regulated for the next ensuing payment for that day;
so must it also be understood, that the nearer the time is to the day of the
next ensuing, the lesser consequently is the rate of the Exchange for that
payment to be accounted; and because in many Contracts that are made there in
private Bargains between Merchant and Merchant, it is oftentimes found, that
the time of payment prefixed by agreement is sometimes 2, 3, or 4, or more
Fairs or Payments to come and succeed, and thereto is oftentimes to be
considered, the remaining time running to the first payment ensuing: Therefore
in this case, I have for the easier and better reckoning of him that sells a
Commodity, and of him that does buy the same, set down the easiest and briefest
way how to make his Account of the time to run, which here I have set down to
the common term of ten payments, which at 2 per Cent. makes 25 per Cent.

CHAP. CCCV. Examples of the Exchanges of Lions, with the Profit of the Profits
thereof.
Example of Exchange, with the Profit of the Profit thereof, in the nature of
Interest upon Interest.
THE declaration of these Rules is best demonstrated by Examples, which here
following my intended method, for the better understanding thereof, I here
purpose to insert, the Question being, That if a Creditor receives not each
payment, the Exchange that is due to him, the Debtor ought to make him good the
same as if it were the principal. For Example:

I would know what shall l. 1560. 15 Ounces give for profit at the rate of two
per Cent. for three payments, valuing the said Exchange with the Principal at
the price abovenamed.

First it is to be noted, That if by the Rules above mentioned, the Profits of
the said Sum at 2 per Cent. for one payment comes to l. 39. 0. 4 d. that Sum is
to be added to the Principal, and then it does amount unto l. 1599. 15 s. 4 d.
out of which must be drawn the Exchange of the second payment, and add that
likewise to the principal, and out of that the Exchange of the third, and
adding that in the same manner, and it gives 1680. l. 15 s. As by Example
following does appear. ^

And in this manner the account of the Profits of the Exchange of Lions may be
made for any time whatsoever; and forasmuch as the rate of the Exchange, for a
payment in a continued Sum, may alter, therefore I will lay down one Example
more, which pesus may be 7450 put out by the Exchange of Lions for a year, or
four payments: The first payment falling to be at 2, the second at 2, the third
at 2 and the fourth payment at, which accordingly cast up, and continued with
the Profit of the Profit added to the principal, it will amount to 8203 l. 6 s.
6 d. as following shall appear by the Example. ^

Interest paid upon Rebate.
Now forasmuch as these Rules have affinity with the interest used in many
Countries, continued by the year from one to another, called by us, interest
upon interest, it will be needless further to insist thereupon; and therefore
before I proceed to the Exchange of Lions, I must not omit to show one
particular circumstance much in use upon this place, which is the account of
discounting, which falls out in many occasions, but principally when a Merchant
does here sell his commodities at 4, 9, or 10 payments time, and that he would
pay the same at any payment, before the prefixed time, at a covenanted rate; an
example or two in this kind I will also show, serving for other Countries also,
where the like manner of discounting is used, with a brief manner how the same
is easily cast up, contrary to the method of many of our common Arithmeticians.

CHAP. CCCVI. Of the Account of Discounts or Rebates, and the manner thereof,
used as well in Lions, as in many other places of Trade.
Accounts of Discounts or Rebates in Lions, and elsewhere.
AMerchant sells a commodity for l. 3709, 12, 9, payable at a year, to
discount at pleasure at 2 per cent. for a payment or Fair, now if the buyer pay
the same content, or in ready money, how much ought the seller to rebate him for
a discount for the 4 payment or fairs at the said price?

To do this succinctly and briefly, I first draw the discount of the said l.
3709, 12, 9 at 108 per cent. and then multiply the said sum by 2, and of the
product take 1/^ of a 1/9 or more facilely, 3 thirds, the one of the other, the
last whereof, shall be the discount of the said parcel, and so much must the
seller rebate to the buyer, the which discount deducted from 3709. 12, d. 9.
there rests 343 ^/^ l. 17. 0 d. which the buyer ought to pay in ready money;
the which for better declaration, I will lay down by example, with the proof of
the rule, for the trial of the certainty thereof. ^

Example proved.
Now the reason why out of 108 per cent. there must three thirds be taken one
out of the other, is, because that 8 (which is the discount or Rebate) is
contained 13 times in 108, the which is 13 doubled, are 27, and therefore must
be divided by 27 or for the briefer and readier way, take of a, or three thirds
one out of the other, and therefore to make the proof, take, of the said 3434,
17. 0. and in drawing of the said., the rest gives 274. 15. 9 l. which
declares that the rule is well and rightly made.

Because that in this manner of discounting, or as we term it, of rebating, the
time and price is found diversely to alter, I will set down a brief Table for
the casting up of any sum, for any Fair or Payment, and an example or two for
the understanding thereof, thereby the better to come to the main and principal
point of our account of Exchanges.

CHAP. CCCVII. The Table of casting the Accounts of Discounts, or Rebatements.
A Table for casting up all accounts of discounts or rebatements.
IMprimis, At 101 per cent. divide by 101. At 101 per cent. divide by 81, or
take 1/9 of a 1/9. At 102 per cent. divide by 51. At 102 per cent. divide by
41. At 102 per cent. for 38 divide by 77, or take 1/7 of one ^. At 104 per
cent. divide by 26, or take of a ^. At 105 per cent. divide by 21, or take ^ of
a 1/7. At 106 per cent. for 17 divide by 53. At 106 per cent. divide by 17. At
107 per cent. for 14 divide by 43. At 108 per cent. for 13 divide by 27, or
take of a 3/9. At 108 per cent. divide by 13. At 100 per cent. divide by 11, or
take ^. At 112 per cent. for 9 divide by 28, or take ^ of one 1/7. At 112 per
cent. divide by 9, or take 1/9. At 113 per cent. for 8 divide by 17. At 114 per
cent. for 8 divide by 57. At 115 per cent. for 7 divide by 23. At 116 per cent.
for 7 divide by 29. At 116 per cent. divide by 7, or take 1/7. At 117 per cent.
for 6 5/7 divide by 47. At 118 per cent. for 6 9/5 divide by 59. At 120 per
cent. divide by 6, or take. At 122 per cent. for 5 4/9 divide by 49, or take a
1/7 of a 1/7. At 125 per cent. divide by 5 or take.
Example of Discounting or Rebate.
For the better understanding of the precedent Table, note, that for Example, to
take the discount at 122, I divide the 22, in 2, which make 45, and the like of
the 100, making 200, which divided by 45, the product gives 4 4/9, and so many
times 22 are contained in 100, and because that the Discount or Rebate is
always upon the 100, one more is to be added thereto, which makes 5 4/9, so
that the said 22 are contained 5 4/9 in 122, and therefore it must be divided
by 4 4/9, the which to do, it is needful, that all the same be put into ninths,
multiplying by 9, as well the sum out of which the discount is to be made, as
the said 5 4/9, amounting to 49 for Divisor; and for to divide, by 49, as the
briefest and shortest way, take the 1/7 of a (...) because that 7 times 7 makes
49.

Another Example of Discounting at 105.
Again, to draw the discount at 105 per cent. I divide a 100 by 5, taking which
is 20, to the which number, I always add one for the reason beforementioned,
making thereby 21 for divisor, and for to divide by 21, you must take of the
sum, which the discount is to be made of, and the of the said (...) shall be
the discount.

Another Example at 107.
Again, for to make the discount at 107 (...), I double 7 in two parts, which
making 15, and so of the 100, making 200, which I divide by 15, taking of, his
product giving 13 (...) to which I add (...), making thereby 14, and so many
times 7 are contained in 107, and therefore you must divide the sum, of which
the discount must be made, by 14, and thus do in all other sums and parcels.

CHAP. CCCVIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Rome.
Exchanges of Lions with Rome.
I Have declared before in the general Chapter of the Exchanges of Lions, how
many Cities Lions is found to Exchange with, and there also showed the common
rates how the same does govern, which notwithstanding is found at every Fair,
and payment, to alter, yet it stands the Merchant so far in stead, that
thereby he is able to make the account, both of his draughts and remittances,
though otherwise altering from their noted prices, which is the thing now
rests to be handled, that it may be discerned, how the Exchange at Lions is
cast up with any other place whatsoever: Accounts kept in Lions.
and there likewise it is observed, how the Merchants Exchangers do keep their
accounts, which for the most part is in Livers, Tournois, Sols and Deniers, 12
Deniers making a Sol, and 20 Sols a Liver; and yet some there be, that keep
their accounts in Crowns of Exchange, called Crowns of the Sun, and is as the
Liver distinguished into Sols and Deniers of Gold, accounted by 12 and 20 as
the former, this Crown being accounted worth 3 Livers, upon which the Exchange
of the place is made and marked with Crowns, Livers, Sols and Deniers; the
question then upon the Exchange of Lions with Rome is thus: 100 Crowns of Gold
of 3 l. is given in Lions to have in Rome 85 Crowns of Gold, Estampe or de
Camera, more or less, as the Exchange passes, I demand for Crowns 4520. 12. 6
d. of Gold of the Sun, how many Crowns of Estampe shall Lions have at Rome? To
know which, you must multiply the said Crowns of the Sun, by 85, and from the
Product cut the two last figures, the which must multiply by 20, to make them
Sols, and then by 12 to make them Deniers, which will come to be 3842. 10. 7 of
Gold of Estampe which Lions ought to have in Rome for the said sum of Crowns of
Gold, which this calculation following makes more apparent. Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account will appear in the same question propounded,
where Rome Exchangeth at the same terms with Lions.

CHAP. CCCIX. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Florence.
Exchanges of Lions with Florence.
LIms Exchangeth with Florence, and gives 100 Crowns to have in the said place
954 Crowns of Gold more or less, I demand for Crowns 1324. 15. 0, of Gold of
the Sun, how many Crowns of Gold I shall have in Florence, to know which, I
multiply the said Crowns of Gold by 95 in cutting the two last figures of the
Product, as I did in the precedent account, the which are to be multiplied by
20 and 12, to make the same Sols and Deniers, and I find I must have in
Florence, Crowns 1268. 8. 11 of Gold, for the said Crowns of the Sun; as in the
following Example. ^

Proof.
Facit Crowns 1268 -- 8 -- 11 which shall appear, when Florence Exchangeth with
Lions.

CHAP. CCCX. Of the Exchange of Lions with Lucca.
Exchanges of Lions with Lucca,
LIons Exchangeth with Lucca, and takes Crowns 100 to pay in Lucca posito 103
of Livers 7 the Crown: I demand for Crowns 1234 -- 5 -- 6 of Gold of the Sun,
how much must I pay in the said City of Lucca: To know which, I multiply the
said sum of Crowns of the Sun by Crowns 103 and from its Product cut off the
two last figures, the which I multiply by 20 to come to Sols, and then by 12 to
come to Deniers, and it will make Crowns 1273 -- 7 -- 2, which I must pay in
the said place of Lucca: Example. ^

Payment made in Money.
Note, that if in Lions it be paid in money, there is one per cent. given more,
so that receiving in the said place of Lucca, the said Crowns 1273 -- 7 -- 2 in
money of the said place, the Debt^ shall be bound to pay more Crowns 12. 14 8,
which is in all Crowns 1286 -- 1 -- 10; as for Example thus cast up. ^

The proof of the said Exchange, you shall find in the account when Lucca does
Exchange with Lions, made by the Rule of Three, saying, If Crowns 103 give 100,
how many shall the abovesaid 1273 -- 7 -- 2 d. give, which will be Crowns 1234
-- 5 -- 6. of Gold of the Sun.

CHAP. CCCXI. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Naples.
Exchanges of Lions with Naples.
LIons Exchanges with Naples, and gives Crowns 100 of the Sun to have in that
place Duc. 127 more or less of Taries, 5 per Ducate. I would know for Crowns
2584. 9. 6. of Gold of the Sun, how much Lions shall have credit for in Naples:
The which to do, you must multiply the said sum of Crowns by the said 127 Duc.
cutting the two last figures of the Product, the which must be multiplied by 5,
to make them Taries, and then by 20, to make them Grains, because that the
Ducate is worth 5 Taries; and the Tarry 20 Grains, so that it will give in
Naples, Duc: 3295, Tarry 1. ^

The proof of the said Rule shall appear in the Exchange of Naples with Lions.

CHAP. CCCXII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Palermo or Mesina.
Exchanges of Lions with Palermo and Mesina.
LIons exchangeth for Palermo or Messina, and gives 1 Crown of Gold of the
Sun, to have in the said place posito 38 Carlins. I would know, for Crowns
4692. 11. 3. of the Sun, how many Ounces shall Lions have credit in Palermo or
Messina: first multiply the said Crown of the Sun by the said 38 Carlins, the
value of the Crown, and taking the rest of the multiplication for parts of 10,
because the Carlin is worth 10 Grains, and the product shall be Carlins and
Grains, to make the which Ounces, you must take in cutting the last figure,
because that 60 Carlins make an Ounce, and of that which rests cut off, add
with the last figure, you must take to make Taries, one whereof being 2
Carlins, and 30 worth one Ounce, and if you find a rest of the said Taries, you
must take which is 10 Grains, because that one Tarry is worth 10 Grains, and of
20 which is 10, to the which must be added the resting Grains, if any be, so
that the said sum of Carlins will make Ounces 2189 Tar. 25, Grains 17, and so
many Ounces will Palermo or Messina give, and over and above the said sum of
Ounces, one Carlin per Ounce is given for to make it good money; and to add the
said Carlin per Ounce in the shortest way, it is to be considered, that for the
said Ounces 2189 is given the same sum of Carlins for the Laggio of the moneys
as they term it, which reduced into Ounces, cutting the last figure, and taking
of the rest, as has been said before, will give Ounces 36. resting two (...)
of Carlins, which is twenty, to which must be added the last figure cut off,
and it will be 29 Carlins, which is 14 Taries, and there will rest 1 Carlin,
which is 10 Grains, to which must be added 8 Grains for 25 Taries which are
with the Ounces, seeing that for 3 Taries comes one Grain, for Laggio of the
said money, and they will be Ounces 2226. 10. 15. and so much will the credit of
Lions be in Palermo, and because that the said Carlin per Ounce comes to 1 per
cent. the account may be made in taking (...) per cent. of the said sum of
Ounces, and it will make the same sum; as Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account shall appear in the Exchange of Palermo and
Mesina back to Lions.

CHAP. CCCXIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Genoa.
Exchanges of Lions with Genoa.
LIons exchangeth with Genoa, and gives one Crown of the Sun, have in that
place, posit^ of money in Gold 59 s. 9 d. I demand for Cro. 9432. 9 of the Sun,
how much credit shall Lions have in Genoa in current money? To do which, first
multiply the said Crown of the Sun by Sol. 59. 9 d. and it makes Sol. 563588.
10 d. which reduced into Livers, makes Lib. 28179. 8. 10 Many of Gold, which
divided by 68 Sol, which is the price of a Crown of Gold in money of Gold, and
that which rests of the division, you must multiply by 20, to make them Sols
of Gold, and then by 12 to make them Deniers, and they will be Crowns 8288. 1.
5 of Gold, the which multiply by 4 which is the price at present of the Crown
of Gold in current money, and of its prod^ct will come Lib. 37296. 6. 4 of money
current, and so much credit shall Lions have in Genoa, for the said Crown 9432.
9. of the Sun. And you must note, That the Livers, of the money of Gold cann^e
be reduced into current money, unless first it be reduced to Crowns of Exchange.
^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is seen, when that Genoa does Exchange for Lions.

CHAP. CCCXIV. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Millan.
Exchanges of Lions with Millan.
LIONS Exchangeth with Millan, and gives a Crown of the Sun to have in Millan
posito 118 s. I would know how many Livers makes Crowns 1564. 15. 6. of Gold of
the Sun in Milla^t? To do which, you must multiply the said, sum of Crowns by 5
l. 18. 4. which are the Sols 118^, beginning to multiply the l 5 by the 6 Den.
and then by the 15 which are with the Crown of the Sun, the proceed of the
multiplication shall be l. 9258. 5. which shall be had in Millan for the said
Crown of the Sun: as for Example, ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account shall be manifest in the Example of Millan with
Lions.

CHAP. CCCXV. Of the Exchange of Lions with Venetia.
Exchanges of Lions with Venetia.
LIONS Exchangeth with Venice, and gives 100 Crowns of Gold, to have their
D^cates posito 119 of Livers 6 per Ducat; I demand, for Crowns 3549. 10. of the
Sun, how much credit shall Lions have in Venice? To know which, multiply the
said sum of Crowns by the said 119^ Ducats, and the remainder produced by the
said multiplication, shall be divided by 24, because that the Ducat is worth 24
Gross, and out of that product cut the two last figures, the which being
multiplied by 24, to make them Grosses, they will make Dac^t. 48 38 1/12, which
Lions shall have credit in Venice for the said Crowns of the Sun: as Example. ^

Facit, 4238 Ducat. 2 Gross. And the proof of this account shall be manifested
by Example, Proof.
in the Exchanges of Venetia back for Lion.

CHAP. CCCXVI. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Bolonia.
Exchanges of Lions with Bolonia.
LIONS Exchangeth with Bolonia, and gives 100 Crowns of the Sun to have in
Bolonia Crowns 113 of Livers 4 per Crown; I demand then, for Crowns 3879. 13.
4. of the Sun, how much credit shall Lions have in Bolonia: To do which,
multiply the said Crowns of the Sun by 113, and from the product cut the two
last figures, then multiply them by 20. and 12. to make them Sols and Deniers,
and it will come to Crowns 4282. 6. 5. in Bolonia, the which you must bring
into Livers, by multiplying them by l. 4. 15. which is the value of the Crown
in Bolonia, and they make l. 20341. 0. 5. which Lions shall have credit for in
Bolonia. ^

The proof hereof serves to know how to make the account, when Bolonia
exchangeth for Lions, and is done by the Rule of 3 saying, If Crowns 213 give
100 Crowns, how many shall 4282 Crowns 5. s. 6 d. give?

CHAP. CCCXVII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Placentia.
Exchanges of Lions with Placentia.
LIONS Exchangeth with Placentia, and gives 119 posito Crowns of the Sun, to
have in Placentia Crowns 100 of Marc. I demand for Crowns 3489. 15 of Gold of
the Sun, how many Crowns shall be due to me in Placentia? To find which, I say
by the Rule of three, If Crowas 119 give 100 Crowns of Marc. how many will
Crowns 3489. 15. give? the product of which Rule, gives Crowns 2916. 4. 6. d.
of Marc. and so much shall be due to me in the said place of Placentia, for the
said sum of Crowns of the Sun: for example, ^

The proof of this rule is seen, when that Placentia shall exchange with Lions.

CHAP. CCCXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Antwerp.
Exchanges of Lions with Antwerp.
LIONS Exchangeth with Antwerp, and gives one Crown of the Sun to have in
Antwerp posito 121 Gross; I demand then, how many Livers of Grosses I shall
have there, for Cro. 6895. 11. 3. To do which, I multiply the said sum by the
said 121 Gross, and it gives Grosses 836661, out of which take 1/12, to make
them Sols, and they make Sols 69721. 9. which to make into Livers, you must cut
the two last figures, and take the of the others, and it will come to l. 3486.
1. 9. of Grosses, which I should have in the said place of Antwerp, for the
abovementioned sum of Crowns of the Sun: as by Example, ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account will appear, when that Antwerp exchangeth with
Lions: and therein is to be noted, that in the manner of the Exchange that
Lions makes with Antwerp, the Calculation will serve in the same manner with
Colonia; because the same Moneys are used in Exchanges in the said City of
Colonia as in Antwerp, and the same also is in use in Amsterdam, and throughout
the Netherlands.

CHAP. CCCXIX. Of the Exchanges of Lions with London.
Exchanges of Lions with London.
LIons exchangeth with London, and gives a Crown of the Sun to have in London
posito Pence sterling 58; I then demand, for Crowns 7693. 10. 0. Crowns of the
Sun, how many Liens of Pounds sterling shall I have in London; working the same
as in the precedent Rule, and accoun^ from Lions to Antwerp, and it will make
sterling Pounds 1859. 5. 3. d. And so much Credit shall the same give me in
London, as shall appear by Example following: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account shall appear, when I come to the Exchanges of London
with this place of Lions.

Paris, Rouen.
Here also is to be noted, That the account is calculated in the same manner,
when either P^ris, Rouen, or any other part of France does exchange for the
City of London, or for any other City in England.

CHAP. CCCXX. Of the Exchange of Lions with Francfort.
Exchanges of Lions with Francfort.
LIons exchangeth with Francfort, and gives a Crown of the Sun to have in the
said place Quarentines posito 95 I demand, for 1500 Crowns of the Sun, how many
Florins shall Lions have in Francfort: to do which, multiply the said Crowns of
the Sun by 95, and it makes Quarendines 143625; to reduce which into Florins,
you must cut off the two last figures, and then take of the others, or else
divide them by 60, because that 60 Quarentines make a Florin, and it givet
(...) Florins 2393, and 4 overplus, which is to be understood for 40, and with
the figure cut off, makes 45, of which is to be taken to make Sols, because
that 3 Quarentines is a Sol, and then it makes Florins 2393. Sol. 15. which
Lions ought to have Credit for in Francfort. ^

Proof.
Desiring for proof the said account, to exchange from Francfort to Lions, the
said Florins 2393. 15. at Quarent. 95 per Crown, I first put the said Florins
into Quarentines, multiplying them by 60, and they will be Quarentines 143625,
which divided by 95 makes just Crowns 1500 of the Sun, as abovesaid.

Note also, that in Francfort is only accounted two Fairs; the first in
Mid-Lent, and the other in Mid-September; and if the Remittance be out of the
Fair you may stay for the said Fair, and the Money must stay half a Year, which
is here two Fairs, in satisfaction whereof, is sometimes made good 6, sometimes
7 per cent. as Merchants can agree, more or less.

Note also, that when Lions is found to exchange with Norimberg, the account
thereof is made as above is said, with Francfort.

CHAP. CCCXXI. Of the Exchange of Lions with Sevil.
Exchanges of Lions with Sevil
LIons exchangeth with Sevil, and gives Crowns 1 of the Sun, to have in the
said place pos^ 396 Marvedes; I demand then, what Credit I shall have in Sevil,
for Crowns 6792 -- 16 -- 6 d. delivered in Lions, at the said price? To do
which, multiply the said Crowns by 396, and they will make Marvedes 2689958, to
which must be added per cent. for the Lagi^ of the money, which is 5 per 1000,
and then they will make Marvedes 2703407, and so much shall Lions have Credit
in Sevil; as in Example: ^

Alcala.
Note that when Lions does exchange with Alcala, the account is made as the
precede^t with Sevil, and that the proof of the said calculation is found true
by the Exchange of Sevil or Alcala with Lions.

CHAP. CCCXXII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Lisbon.
Exchanges of Lions with Lisbon.
LIons exchangeth with Lisbon, and gives 1 Crown of the Sun, to have their
posito 528 Raes, I demand then for Crowns 7893. 4. 6. of the Sun, how many Raes
Lions shall have Credit in the said place of Lisbon; and to know which, I
multiply the said Crowns by 528, and find that it gives in Raes 4167622, which
Lions shall have Credit in Lisbon: as for Example; ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is manifested, when that Lisbon shall exchange with
Lions.

CHAP. CCCXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Lions with Barselona.
Exchanges of Lions with Barselona.
LIons exchangeth with Barselona, and gives one Crown of the Sun, to have in
the said place posito 22. 8. Sols: I demand for 7822. 12. 6. Crowns of the Sun,
which Lions does remit to Barselona, how many Livers shall I have? To do which,
you must multiply the abovesaid sum of Crowns, by l. 1. 2. 8. which is 22. 8 d.
beginning to multiply by the Deniers, and then by the Sols, which are annexed
to the Crowns, and the sum will come to 8865. 12. 10. which you shall have in
Barselona for the said sum of Crowns of the Sun. For Example; ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account will appear, when Barselona exchangeth back with
Lions.

Valentia and Saragosa.
It will not be needful I should propound here any Examples when Lions
exchangeth with Valentia and Saragosa, seeing that the account is the same as
with Barselona abovesaid, and this is as much as I conceive requisite
concerning the Exchanges of Lions with other places, to which I could add
sundry Remittances and Draughts in Exchange hence made to other places, with
other such circumstances: but here being matter enough set down, to exercise
the Pen and Head of the Ingenious, and of him that will study the Art and
Mystery of the Exchanges of this place, I will only add a word of the Orders
and Commissions, given and received here in Exchanges, and an Example for
Explanation thereof, and leave the rest to the consideration of the studious.

CHAP. CCCXXIV. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances by Exchanges in Lions.
Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Lions.
BEfore I enter this vast subject of Orders and Commissions, I will briefly show
how the accounts of these Orders and Commissions are made, being only given by
the expert and subtle beads of Bankers and Exchangers, conversant in the course
of Exchanging, which sorts of Commission or Orders, are wrought partly by the
Rule of Three Direct, and partly by the same Rule backward; and the better to
distinguish those that are made Direct, and those that are made backward, it is
requisite, that the course and manner of Exchanging from one place to another
be precisely known and learned, and how that place to which the Commission is
sent and given, draw or remit either by a certain or uncertain rate, and such
Commissions ought to be made by the Rule of Three backward, taking one of the
prices, which are found, for Divisor, and the other two, which are the ordered
prices, take for the sum to divide by; and it is to be noted, that the first
price, which is taken for Divisor, be of the same place as the last: and to
know wherein what is meant by this word certain and uncertain, I shall now
declare it.

Certain price in Exchanges.
A Certain Exchange is no other, than to give a settled price, which varieth not
in Exchanging, and has no change or alteration, as it is seen in Lions, or in
Placentia, which gives always Crowns 100, or Crown 1, to have in Naples Ducats
130 more or less, and this 100 Crowns, or 1 Crown is never found to alter, and
therefore termed by Exchangers to be the certain price.

Uncertain price in ^changes.
Uncertain Exchanges is a price that is observed unconstant, and which admits
of variation, which shall be when the place which exchangeth, gives a number
of Crowns, Ducats, or Sols, or of any other money which comes not to the just
sum of 100, or else exceeds the same, and therefore the same not being firm
and stable, are named uncertain Exchanges, as subject to alteration, sometimes
more or sometimes less, which is rightly and well to be considered and
understood in Orders and Commissions of Exchanges given.

When the place then wherein the Commission is to be effected, gives to the
places whereto it ought to remit, and draw, to both of them the Uncertain, the
account must be made by the Rule of Three Forward or Direct, taking for first
and second number the prices that have been ordered, and for the last number of
the said Rule take one of the prices that are found in such a manner, that the
first Exchange of the said Rule be of the same place as the latter. Likewise,
when the said place where the Commission is essected, gives to the places that
it ought to remit, and to draw to both of them the certain, the account thereof
is made by the said Rule of ^Three forward; as by Example;

Example of a certain and uncertain Exchange.
Order and Commission is given for a Merchant to his friend at Lions, to remit
to Naples at Ducaes 126, and to prevail for Rome at 85 Crowns, or at another
price differing therefrom, provided that it may be done without loss, it is
found to remit to Naples at 125 Ducats, I would now know at how much might the
same be drawn for Rome, to the end that this Commission be fully and justly
effected.

It is here first to be considered, that Lions gives the price certain to the
said two places of Naples and Rome, and therefore by that account it must be
made by the Rule of Three forward, saying, If Ducats 126 give Crowns 85, the
inordered price, how many will Ducas 125 give, the price found for Naples, and
it will come to Crowns 84. 4. 4, and at that price you must draw for Rome.

By this Commission then it is to be understood, that those of Naples will have
Ducats 126 in Remittance, in that place, and be Debitors in Rome Crowns 85; who
finding to remit at Dacats 125, it gives loss, receiving less than that which
is inordered; and making the account in this abovesaid manner, it is found,
that the Draught ought to be made at Crowns 84. 4. 4. which is to profit,
becoming this way a less Debtor than that which was inordered, which c^th to
recompense the loss which is made in the Remittance; as for Example shall
appear; ^

To prove this account, by which may be clearly known how this Commission
remains perfectly effected, do in this manner.

Presuppose, that those of Naples have given the Commission for Crowns 2000 of
Gold of Estampe, or de Camera, which they would draw for Rome, and remit the
value for Naples: you must first see how much the said Crowns of Estampe are
worth in Crowns of the Sun, at Crowns 85 per cent. the inordered price, and it
will come to Crowns 2352. 18. 9. of Gold of the Sun, out of which you must take
per cent. for provision, and there will remain Crowns 2343. 10. 7. the which
must be remitted to Naples at the price inordered of Ducats 126 per cent. and
it will come to Ducats 2964, or thereabout.

So that it does appear, the said Crowns 2000 of debt in Rome, are made by
Remittance to Naples, Ducats 2964.

Now then it is to be observed in the prices (different from the order given)
which are found that is to say at Crowns 84. 4. 4. for Rome, and at Ducats 125
for Naples, if for the said Crowns 2000 by Draught to Rome, a Remittance may be
made of the abovesaid Ducats 2964; and the better to know it, it must be seen,
how much the said sum of Crowns of Estampe are worth in Crowns of Gold of the
Sun, at Crowns 84. 4. 4. per cent. which will come to Crowns 2374. 16. 6 Crowns
of the Sun; out of which, taking the provision at per cent. there will remain
Crowns 2365. 6. 7. which must be remitted to Naples at the said price, which is
found of 125 per cent. and it will make in Ducats 2964, or thereabouts by
Remittance to Naples; the which shows the said Commission is perfectly
accomplished, in conformity of the order given. For Example; ^

I could add many of these Examples for the illustration of this point of
Commissions, but I forbear to do it, because the Examples might prove tedious
and intricate, and the rather because I may publish in this kind some things
that I have already roughly drawn, if I find that my labors this way prove
grateful; and therefore touching other circumstances and questions that may
arise in the Exchanges practiced in Lions, I will refer the same to the
ingenious lover of this Art and Mystery, having set down sufficient to exercise
both the head and the hand of the sludious, and which may afford matter for
greater variety in the next place; therefore I will in the next place survey
the Exchanges practiced in Rome, after the same manner.

CHAP. CCCXXV. Of the Fairs of Lions, wherein all Bills of Exchange are thence
drawn, and are there satisfied.
The four Fairs of Lions.
LIons is noted to have four Fairs: the manner of accepting of Bills of
Exchange therein, I have observed in the 275 Chapter; the times of the said
Bills now rests to be showed.

1. Foir des Rois.
The first Fair begins in Lions the first Monday after the Epiphany; and if
the same fall upon a Monday, the Fair does then begin the Monday following; the
which lasts fifteen working days, excluding and excepting Sundays and
Holy Days; the which is designed for Merchants to do their affairs: at the end
whereof (which oftentimes happens at Candlemas) all parties are made by
Exchanges, and all former Remittances are paid and discharged.

2. Foir des Pasque.
The second is the Fair of Easter, which begins the Monday following the
Octaves after Easter Day, and lasts 15 working days, Sundays and Holy Days
excepted: at the end whereof, all former Draughts, payable in this Fair, are
satisfied, and all new Remittances and Draughts for other places are made and
framed from one Man to another.

3. Foir d' Aust.
The third, is the Fair of August, and begins the fourth of the said Month,
and continues as the rest 15 working days, which oftentimes happens not till
the beginning of September; wherein, as above is noted, the Draughts made
hither, and Remittances are discharged, and new parties by Exchange for other
places framed, and perfected from one Man to another.

4. Foir des toutes Saints.
The fourth, is the Fair of All Saints, beginning the third of November,
continuing as the former 15 working days, which sometimes happens on the
beginning of December; and therein the Merchants use to discharge all former
Bills that come hither from other places, and frame new Remittances and
Draughts hence to other Cities between Man and Man. For it is here to be noted,
That all Bills of Exchanges, and for the most part all Bills of Debt have is
this City no other time of Payment, Receipt, or Discharge, but during these
four principal aforementioned Times or Fairs.

CHAP. CCCXXVI. Of Examples of the Exchanges practiced in Rome, and how the
same are calculated.
Exchanges practiced in Rome, and first with Lions.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Rome, with how many places the same
is found to exchange; and there also showed the common Rates how the same does
govern, which every day is observed to alter, that no set Rule can be
Peremptorily laid down for the same; yet is in it self so beneficial, that
thereby the ignorant may make his calculation, either in his Draughts, or
Remittances: the way of making which account now remains to be handled,
observing the same with so many other places, as may be fit to understand the
ground thereof.

It is also there noted, for the understanding of what is to follow, That
Bankers and Exchangers in Rome do keep their accounts in Crowns of Stamp or
Camera, Sols, and Deniers of Gold named of the Eight Stamp, which are numbered
by 20 and 12, because that 20 Sols of Gold makes a Crown, and 12 Deniers a Sol.

The Crown of Stamp being worth 12 Julio's The Crown in Money worth 10 And the
Julio^ worth 10 Baio's.

CHAP. CCCXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Lions.
Exchanges of Rome with Lions
FIrst then, Rome exchangeth with Lions, and gives Cro. 85 of Gold of the Eight
Stamp, to have in the said City of Lions Crowns 100 of the Sun; I demand for
Crowns 3842. 10. 7. of Estampe, how many Crowns of the Sun shall Rome have in
Lions? To know which, you must say by the Rule of Three, If Crowns 85 give 100
Crowns of the Sun, how much will 3842. 10. 7. Crowns give? and it will come to
Crowns 4520. and the Remainder of the Divident multiply by 20 and by 12, to
make Sols and Deniers of Gold, and it will be Crowns 4520. 12. 5. of the S^
that Rome ought to have in Lions for the said sum: as may be seen by the
following Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen, when Lions does exchange with Rome.

CHAP CCCXXVIII. Of the Exchange of Rome with Placentia
Exchanges of Rome with Placentia.
ROme exchangeth with Placentia, and gives posito 99 Crowns of Gold of
Estampe, to have here Crowns 100 of Marc. I demand, for Crowns 1382. 5. 8. of
Estampe, how many Crowns of Marc. Placentia shall have? You must reduce the
price and the sum of Crowns into Deniers, multiplying the same by 20 and by 12,
and adding 15 for the of a Crown, then say by the Rule of Three, if the Deniers
come of the said price, give Crowns 100 of Marc. how many will the Deniers come
of the said sum of Crowns give? and multiplying the remainder of the division
by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold; in doing which, they
will amount to Crowns 1385. 14. 11. of Marc. which must be had in the said
place of Placentia for the said sum of Crowns of Estampe, as may be seen by the
following Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen when Placentia does exchange with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXIX. Of the Exchange of Rome with Florence.
Exchanges of Rome with Florence.
ROme exchangeth with Florence, and gives posito Crowns 92 of Gold of Estampe,
to have in this place 100 Crowns of Gold? I demand for Crowns 1476. 2. 3. of
Estampe, what Credit shall Rome have in the said Florence? To know which, you
must reduce (as before is said) the price and the sum of Crowns into Deniers of
Gold, multiplying by 20 and by 12, and adding 5 Sol for the Crown; then say by
the Rule of Three, If the Deniers come of the said price, give Crowns 100 of
Gold, how many will the Deniers of the abovesaid sum of Crowns give? and
multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 and by 12, to have Sols and
Deniers of Gold, it will appear to come to Crowns 1600. 5. 2. of Gold: and so
much Credit must Rome have in Florence. As for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen, when as Florence does exchange with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXX. Of the Exchange of Rome with Venetia.
Exchanges of Rome with Venice.
ROme exchangeth with Venice, and gives Crowns 73 posito of Estampe, to have
in that place Ducats 100 de Banco of Livers 6 per Ducat. I demand for Crowns
850. 15. 8. of Estampe, what Credit in Banco shall I have at Venice? To do
which, I must reduce as in the precedent accounts, the price and the sum of
Crowns into Deniers of Gold, multiplying the same by 20 and by 12, and add 10
Sols for the Crown, and then say by The Rule of Three, If the Deniers come of
the price, give Ducats 100, how many will the Deniers give me that come of the
abovesaid sum of Crowns? and multiplying the remainder of the Division by 24,
to bring them into Gross, because that 24 Grosses are worth in the said City of
Venice 1 Ducat of l. 6, then it will make Ducats 1157, which Rome has Credit
at Venice: as for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account may be discerned, when as Venetia does exchange with
Rome back.

CHAP. CCCXXXXI. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Millan.
Exchanges of Rome with Millan.
ROme exchangeth with Millan, and gives posito Crown. 87 of Estampe, to have
in that place Crowns 100 of Livers 5. Sol. 17 per Crown; I demand, for Crowns
2140. 16 of Estampe, how many Livers of Millan shall I have?

First, reduce the price and the Crowns into Sols of Gold, multiplying them by
20, and to the multiplication add 16 Sol. of a Crown, and then say by the Rule
of Three, If the Sols coming of the price, give Crowns 100, how many will the
Sols coming of the abovesaid sum of Crowns give? and multiplying the remainder
of the Division by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, they
will make Crowns 2438. 5. 4 d. the which you must reduce into Livers, by
multiplying them by l. 5. 17. and they will make l. 14263. 17. 2 d. which I
must have at Millan for the said sum of Crowns of Estampe; as appears plainly
by this Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is apparent, when Millan shall exchange with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXXII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Naples.
Exchanges of Rome with Naples.
Rome Exchangeth with Naples, and gives Crowns 100 of Gold of Estampe, to have
in that place, posito Ducates 135, I demand for Crowns 2346. 15. 4 of Estampe,
how many Ducates shall I have? To do which, you must multiply the said sum of
Crowns by Grains 135 per Crown, seeing it is the same grains 135 per Crown, as
in Ducates 135 per cent. because the Ducate is worth in Naples grains 100, and
of the product will come Grains 318377, off the which you must cut the two last
figures to make them Ducates, and then it makes Ducates 3183, Taries 3, Grains
17, and these Taries and Grains make Grains 77, because that the Tarry is worth
Grains 20, and so much you are to have in Naples for the said Crow. of Estamp,
as appears by this Example following. ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account is seen when Naples does exchange this sum back
with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Genoa.
Exchanges of Rome with Genoa.
ROme exchangeth with Genoa, and gives posito Crowns 101 of Gold of Estampe to
have i^ the said place Crowns 100 of Gold of Italy. I demand for Crowns 4000.
10. of Gold of Estampe, what Credit shall Rome have at Genoa? You must first
reduce the said Crowns of Estampe into Crowns of Gold of Italy, at the rate of
Crowns 100 of Estampe, for Crowns 102 of Gold, and therefore you must multiply
by 102 in cutting the two last figures, the which you must multiply by 20, and
by 12, and they will make Crowns 4100. 10. 3. of Gold of Italy; then say by the
Rule of Three, If 101 Cro. give 100 Crowns, what shall 4100 Crowns 10. 3 give?
And it will come to Crowns 4059. 18. 3 of Gold in Gold of Italy; and for to
reduce them into Livers, you must multiply them by Livers 4 3/2 (the value of a
Crown of Gold) and in so doing, it will come to l. 18269. 12. 1 current money,
that Rome shall have Credit in Genoa for the said Crows of Estampe; as for
Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of the said rule is more apparently demonstrated, when Genoa does
Exchange this parcel back with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXXIV. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Palermo or Mesina.
Exchanges of Rome with Paelermo and Mesina.
ROme Exchangeth with Palermo or Mesina, and gives 1 Crown of Gold of Estampe
to have in one of the two said places posito Carl. 29, I would know then for
Crowns 4000. 10. 6, what Credit in Ounces shall Rome have in Palermo or Mesina:
To do which, you must multiply the said Crowns by 29, and the Product will be
Carlins 117348. 7. 2. the which must be reduced into Ounces, by cutting the
last sigure, and by taking the of the rest, and the 48 remaining are Ca^lins,
of which take the and they shall be Taries, and in this working it will make
Ounces 1955, Taries 24, Grains 7, and Picolies 2, which Rome must have Credit
for in one of the aforesaid places, for the abovementioned Crowns of Estempe,
as is apparent by the following Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen when Palermo or Mesina shall exchange back
with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXXV. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Antwerp.
Exchanges of Rome with Antwerp.
ROme Exchangeth with Antwerp, and gives one Crown to have in the said City of
Antwerp posito 114 gross; I demand then, for Crowns 2000. 17. 8, how many
pounds in gross, or gresses, shall Rome have Credit in Antwerp? To do this, you
must multiply the said sum of Crowns by 114, and of the Product will come
grosses 228100, the which reduced into Pounds Flemish will make l. 950. 8. 4.
and for so much shall Rome have Credit in the said City of Antwerp, as for
Example. ^

Proof.
The Proof of this account is demonstrated when this parcel is Exchanged back
from Antwerp to Rome: And Note, That when Rome shall Exchange with Frankfort,
Amsterdam, or any other part of the Netherlands, the account is made as in the
abovesaid manner of Rome with Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCXXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Rome with London.
Exchanges of Rome with London.
ROme Exchangeth with London, and gives one Crown there to have in the said
City posito 65 pence sterling. I demand then for Crowns 4000. 14. 8. of Estamp,
how many pouads sterling shall Rome have Credit in London, which must be
wrought as in the precedent account of Rome with Antwerp, and it will be found,
that it will amount unto 1083. 10. 8. den. which lought to have in the said
City of London, for the said sum of Crowns of Estamp, as may appear by the
Example following. ^

Proof.
The Proof of this Rule will more evidently appear, when the sum of 1083 l. 10
s. 8 den. Sterling. is remitted from London to Rome, which I hope is not in these
days used in England.

CHAP. CCCXXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with the Cities of Valentia,
Saragosa, or Barselona.
Exchanges of Rome with Valentia, Saragosa, and Barcelona.
ROme does exchange with Valentia, Saragosa, and Barselona, and gives 1 Crown
of Estam^ to have in one of the said places Sols posito 25. den. 6. I demand
then for Crowns 6000 14. 4. of Estampe, what Credit shall Rome have in one of
the said places? To know which, you must multiply the said sum of Crowns of
Estampe, by l. 1. 5. 6. and they will make l. 7650. 18. 3 d. which Rome shall
have in Credit in one of the said places, for the said sum of Crowns of
Estampe, as shall appear by this Example. ^

Proof.
The Proof this Rule is best seen, when this sum shall be remitted back from
these Cities to Rome; and because that the Calculation to all these three
places is made in one and the same manner, I have put them thus together, the
price only giving the alteration in Exchange more or less in each City.

CHAP. CCCXXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Sevil.
Exchanges of Rome with Sevil.
ROme Exchangeth with Sevil, and gives 1 Crown of Estampe to have in Sevil
posito 456 Marvedes; I demand then for 400 Crowns of Estampe, how many Marvedes
shall Ro^ have in Sevil? To do which, you must multiply the said sum of Crowns
of Estampe by 456 M^evedes, and they make 182400, which Rome must have Credit
in the said Place: And it is hereto be noted, That throughout all Castilia the
Exchanges are made in the same manner as at Sev^l, and they likewise keep their
accounts in the denomination of Marvedes, and when as they amount to a million,
they term it in Spanish a Quintos. ^

Proof.
At Alcala, and other places in Spain, the Account is as above made, and the
further Proof thereof is seen, when that Sevil shall Exchange with Rome.

CHAP. CCCXXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Rome with Lisbon.
Exchanges of Rome with Lisbon.
ROme does Exchange with Lisbon, and delivers one Crown of Estampe, to have
in the said place posito 513 Raes. I demand what Credit in Raes shall Rome have
in Lisbon for 325 Crowns 9. 6. d. this question is to be wrought, as in the
precedent account is showed, and it (...) appear, that Rome shall have Credit
in Lisbon for Raes 166968, as shall be seen by the wor^ing thereof following. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Account is apparent, when that Lisbon shall Exchange back
Raes 166968 with Rome at 513 Raes per Ducat.

CHAP. CCCXL. Of the Terms of Payment of Bills of Exchange in Rome.
Terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in Rome.
From Rome the Terms are To Naples at 8 days sight, and from thence back at 10
days. To Bruges and Antwerp at 8 days sight. To Palermo at 15 days sight, and
from thence back at 10 days. To Florence at 10 days sight, and so back. To
Venice at 10 days sight, and so back. To Avignon at 45 days sight, and thence
at 10 days back. To Valentia at 1 month from the date, and 10 days sight back.
To Barselona at 2 months from the date, and 10 days sight back. To Lions on the
Fair, and thence 10 days sight back. To Genoa at 10 days sight, and so back. To
Pisa at 10 days, and the same back thence.


CHAP. CCCXLI. Of the Aggio of Moneys practiced in the Exchanges and Payments
of Rome.
The Aggio of money paid to Rome by Exchanges.
THis Term Aggio, common in diverse parts of Italy, is as much as the Valuable
consideration, in the species of sundry Moneys, that are made in payments,
either for Merchandise or in Exchanges by Bills, and is accounted the
difference between the best Money, used in Terms of Exchanges, and the worst
used in payments of Goods; and therefore for the declaration and manifestation
thereof, I have made this Question and Chapter, by way of Proposition and
Demand. A certain Merchant in Rome, finding himself to have received for
Merchandise sold by him to another, Crowns 3441, and Baiocs 97, of Julio's 10
per Crown, which he desires to reduce into Crowns of the Fstampe, or as some
Term them de Camera, thereby to make them fit to be remitted into any other
place, the Aggio of the Moneys being considered, as commonly is seen at 45
Julio's; I demand then how many Crowns of Estampe the same will produce? To
know which, you must first see how much the 100 Destampe are worth in Julio's
at Julio's 12 the Crown, which will be Julio's 1200, to which must be added 45
Julio's for the Aggio thereof, because that the Crown of Estampe is worth 12
Julio's, and then the Aggio, which comes to be 12 Julio's and Baiocs 4 per
Crown, or else 45 Julio's for Crowns 100, and they will be 1245 Julio's, and so
much shall 100 Crowns Destampe be worth the Aggio of the Money comprised;
likewise in the same manner you must reduce the said Sum of Crowns of money
into Julio's, and they make Julio's 34419 and Baiocs 7, comprehending 9 Julio's
and 7 Baiocs, for 97 Baiocs, and this being done, then work by the Rule of
Three, and say, If Julio's 1245 give Crowns of Gold of Estampe 100 Crowns, how
much shall the said Julio's 34419. 7 give? Then to multiply the said Julio's by
100, there is only a Cipher to be added after the 7 Baiocs, and prosecuting
thus the working of the question, it will amount unto Crowns 2764. 12. 8. of
Estamp. Proof of the Aggios account.
Now to prove the said account, you must multiply the said Crowns of Estampe by
Julio's 1245 per cent. in cutting the two last figures, and of the Product,
there will remain Crowns 3441, and Baiocs 96, and so the account will appear to
be well made, saving a small broken number lost, and in this manner must be
wrought all like accounts, though the Aggio of the money be either augmented or
lessened, still by adding the Aggio, such as it shall be found to be, with or
to the Julio's 1200, which is the price of 100 Crowns of Gold Destamp. The
whole question I shall for Explanation demonstrate by the working thereof in
this Example: And first, ^

CHAP. CCCXLII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances by Exchanges in Rome.
Orders and Commissions given and received for draughts and remittances in Rome.
I Will herein, following my first intended method, give you also a Proposition
or two of a Draught and Remittance by Commission and Order, the manner whereof
largely explained by Example, will be full and sufficient for reglement for the
like Draught or Remittance from this City to any another place.

From Rome then is remitted to Venice, at Crowns 97 posito, and from thence is
remitted to Placentia, at Ducates 136; I would now know at how much comes the
Remittance from Rome for Placentia? To do which, work thus:

You must first multiply the said Duc. 139, being the price of 100 Crowns of
Mark by Crowns 72 per cent. cutting the two last figures, the which being
multiplied by 20 and by 12, to reduce them into Sols and Den. of Gold, and in
thus working it will come to Crowns 98, 14. 9. to the which must be added per
cent. for the provision, paid at Venice, which is 6 Sols, 7 Deniers, and they
make Crowns 99 1/15, and so many Crowns Destampe disbursed in Rome, for 100
Crowns of Marc. of Credit at Placentia, as does appear by Example following. ^

Proof.
To prove this account, you must see how much the sum of Crowns Destamp that you
would remit, are worth in Ducates in Venice, at the said price of Crowns 72 for
Duc. 100, out of which to make the Remittance to Placentia, the provision is to
be taken out at per cent. then see, how many will the Crowns of Mark give at
Duc. 136 for 100 Crowns of Mark, and the Crowns of Mark, which come thereof,
must be multiplied by the said price of 99 1/15 per cent. and in thus working
will come to the self-same sum of Crowns of Estampe, which are disbursed in
Rome for the Remittance made to Venice, and by the Rule may the proof be made
of all other accounts of the self-same subject.

But it is to be noted, that the said account cannot serve in any other
occasion, but where the Remittance is made from Rome to Placentia, and that the
Exchange is at 100 Crown of Estampe, for 100 Crown of Mark thereby to discern,
if it be the more profitable, to remit, as they te^m it, a dritura, or
straight, or else to make Remittance to Venice, and from Venice to Placentia,
as is beforesaid at the abovesaid prices, the Remittance coming to be at 99
1/15 Crowns of Estampe, so that as it is apparent, it is more beneficial to
remit to Placentia by the way of Venice, for as much as it is seen by this
Example, that for 100 Crowns of Mark in that place, there is no more paid and
disbursed, but Crowns 99 1/15 in Rome, and making the Remittance straight, and
a dritura, 100 Crowns is to be disbursed. And moreover it is to be noted, that
their Exchange is made sometimes at a greater or less price, according to the
abundance or scarcity of the moneys current, and therefore these accounts serve
only but for instruction sake, and to show how the Rules thereof are to be
reckoned and cast up.

Another Example of a Commission given to enlighten this point, I will add
hereunto.

There is Order and Commission given at Rome to remit to Venice at 73 Crowns,
and to prevail for the same from Placentia at Crow. 93, but there is found
Bills of Exchange for Venice at Crowns 74, and money for Florence at Crowns 94,
the question is then; If at these prices the said Commission and Order may be
effected? The which to accomplish and know, I must say by the Rule of Three,
seeing that Rome gives the uncertain to both those said places, If Crowns 73
give 93 Crowns, what will Crowns 74 give? And it will give by the said Rule,
Crowns 94. 3. 6 d. so that this Order and Commission may be accomplished and
performed with benefit, because that remitting to Venice at Crowns 74, it ought
to be drawn to Florence at Crowns 94. 3. 6, and there it is found at more,
videlicet at Crowns 94: As for Example. ^

And thus much shall serve for instruction and method to the Exchanges and
Commissions practiced at Rome, and now I will proceed to the next eminent place
of Exchanges, according to my intended method, which is Naples.

CHAP. CCCXLIII. Examples of the Exchanges practiced in Naples, and how the
same are to be calculated.
Examples of Exchanges practiced in Naples.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Naples, with how many other places
this City is found to Exchange, and there also showed the common rates, how the
same does govern, which every day is so found to alter, that no set rule can
peremptorily be set down for the same, yet it is in it self so beneficial, that
thereby the Learner may know how to make his account, either in his Draughts or
Remittances; the way of making which account now remains to be handled,
observing the same with so many other places, as may be fittest to understand
the ground thereof.

Accounts in Naples.
It is also there observed, that the Bankers and Exchangers of the place do keep
their account in Ducats, Taries and Grains, the which are cast up by 5, and by
20, because that 5 Taries do make a Ducate, and 20 grains a Tarry; also that
the Crown of Gold, in Gold of this Kingdom, is 13 Carlins, or 6 Taries, and the
Crown of money or Silver is 11 Carlins or 5 Taries, the Ducute of Gold being
worth 6 Taries, and the Ducate current is worth 5 Taries.

CHAP. CCCXLIV. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lions.
Exchanges of Naples with Lions.
NAples then Exchangeth with Lions, and gives posito Ducates 127 to have in
this place 100 Crowns of Gold of the Sun, I demand then, for Ducates 3295 and 1
Tarry, how many Crowns of Gold shall I have in Lions? To know which you must
say, by the Rule of Three, If Ducates 127 give 100 Crowns, how many will
Ducates 3295 give? Multiplying the remainder of the Division by 20 and by 12,
to make them Sols and Deniers, and it will make Crowns 2584. 9. 4. of Gold of
the Sun, which I should have at Lions. ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen, when Lions exchangeth back either for
Naples, Bery, Lechy, or any other City of that Kingdom.

CHAP. CCCXLV. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Placentia.
Exchanges of Naples with Placentia.
NAples Exchangeth with Placentia, and gives posito Ducates 132 to have in
this place Crow. 100 of Mark; I demand then for Duc. 3416, Taries 2, and Grains
8, how many Crowns of Mark shall I have at Placentia? To do which, I must first
reduce the said sum of Duc. into Grains; and if there were neither Taries nor
Grains, it were done by the only addition of two Ciphers, because that the
Ducate is worth 100 Grains; and because that there is in this Question 2 Taries
and 8 Grains, 48 Grains is to be added, and take Grains 132 for Divisor of the
said sum, seeing it is as much at Grains 132 per Crown, as at Duc. 132 per
Crown 100, multiplying as well the one part as the other by 4 to bring them
into quarters of Grains, and after Division by multiplying the rest of the
Divisor by 20 and 12 to bring them into Sols and Deniers of Gold; and all this
done, it will come to Crow. 2573. 12. 4 of Mark, which I must have in the said
place of Placentia for the said sum of Ducates abovementioned; as for Example.
^

Proof.
The proof of this Account is more apparently demonstrated, when this sum or
parcel is exchanged back from Placentia to Naples, Bary, Lechy, or other Cities
of this Kingdom.

CHAP. CCCXLVI. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Rome.
Exchanges of Naples with Rome.
NAples does exchange with Rome, and gives posito. Ducats 135 in this place,
to have in Rome 100 Crowns of Gold of Estampe: I demand then for Ducats 3183.
3. 17. what credit in Crowns shall Naples have in the said City of Rome? To
know which, the question is wrought as is before mentioned in the precedent
Exchange of Naples with Placentia, and it comes to Crowns 2346. 15. 2. of Gold
of Estampe or de Camera, and for so much shall Naples have credit in Rome, as
for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is manifested, when this parcel is Exchanged back from
Rome to Naples, Bary, Lechy, or to any other City of this Kingdom.

CHAP. CCCXLVII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Florence.
Exchanges of Naples with Florence.
Naples exchangeth with Florence, and gives Duc. posita 119 to have in
Florence 100 Crowns of Gold: I demand then for Duc. 934. 1. 10. how much shall
Naples have Credit in the said City of Florence? This must be wrought as the
precedent question of the Exchange of Naples for the City of Rome, and it will
come to Crowns 780. 15. 0 of Gold, and so much shall Naples have credit in the
said place of Florence, as appears by this Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Account is declared, when this parcel is Exchanged back from
Florence to Naples.

CHAP. CCCXLVIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Venice.
Exchanges of Naples with Venice.
NAples Exchangeth with Venice, and gives posito Ducats 97 to have in Venice
Ducas 100 of Livers 6 of this Money (which now is termed in Banco) I demand
then for Ducats 1799. 1. 13 of Naples, how many Ducats shall I have in the
place of Venetia? This is to be wrought as the precedent, multiplying the
remainder of the division by 24, to bring the same into gross, because that the
Ducats of Livers 6. 4 s. makes 24 gross, and it will come to Ducats 1850 5/24,
and so many Ducats shall Naples have in the said place of Venice, as by the
Example following. ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Account appears when this parcel of 1850 3/24 is
exchanged ba^ from Venice, to the aforesaid place of Naples.

CHAP. CCCXLIX. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Millan.
Exchanges of Naples with Millan.
NAples exchangeth with Millan and gives posito Duc. 98 to have in Millan
Crow. 100 of Livers 5 per Crow. of the money of this place; I demand then for
Duc. 850, how many Crow. shall I have in Millan? To know which, I must do as in
the precedent exchanges, multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 and
12, to bring the same into Sols and Deniers, and by this working it will make
Crow. 862. 18. 10. and to know how many Livers they are, they must be
multiplied by 5 Livers, beginning to multiply the Den. then the Sols, and
afterward's the Crow. calculating for 12 Den. one Sols, and for 20 Sols in
Money one Liver, and it will make l. 4314. 14. 2, which one shall have in the
said place of Millan for the said Ducates 850. As for Example, ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is manifested, when this parcel is Exchanged back
from Millan to Naples, as aforesaid.

CHAP. CCCL. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lechy and Bary.
Exchanges of Naples with Lechy and Bary.
NAples exchangeth with Lechy and Bary, Cities within that Kingdom, and gives
posito 98 Ducates to have in the said places Ducates 100. I demand then for
Ducates 3850. 1. 15 of Naples, how many Ducates shall I have in these two
places. This Rule must be cast up as in the precedent Exchange for Millan, and
multiplying the remainder of the division by 100, to bring it into grains, and
thereof will come 98 which are 4 Taries, and grains 18, and in all Ducates
3908, Taries 4, grains 18, which Naples shall have credit in the said places;
And note, That when Naples exchangeth with Montetion, with Cosense, or any
other part of this Kingdom, the account is made as above: As for Example, ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule and Account is thus made up. ^

CHAP. CCCLI. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Mesina.
Exchanges of Naples with Mesina.
NAples exchangeth with Mesina, and gives posito Duc. 115 to have in Mesina
Crowns 100 of Tar. 13 of that money, I demand how many Crowns of Taries 13
shall I have there for Duc. 2348. 3. 8. To do which, working, as by the
precedent Rules, I say: If Grains 115 make one Crown of 13 Taries, what will
Grains 234868 make? And multiplying the remainder of the division by 52, to
bring them into half Carlines, because that 13 Taries are worth 26 Carlins, and
by this working it makes Crowns 2035 36/32, which abridged are 9/13, or
otherwise multiplying the remainder of the division by 13, and then by 20, to
bring them into Taries and Grains, which will be the easier to comprehend; but
the reason why I have otherwise demonstrated it, is because herein I would
follow the method and manner of the Merchants of Naples, who in their accounts
are accustomed to do as above is showed, and to reduce the said Crowns 2035
9/13 into ounces, you must multiply by 13 to bring them into Taries, adding to
the multiplication 9 for 9/13 and they will be Taries 26464, from which cutting
the last figure, and take of the rest to make them Ounces, because that 30
Taries is an ounce, and the remainder of these thirds are tens of Taries, to
the which adding the figure cut off, which are so many Taries, as must be
placed after the ounces, and it will make ounces 882. 4, and for so much shall
Naples have credit in the said place of Mesina for Duc. 2348. 3. 8. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is manifested, when that Mesina shall be found to
Exchange for Naples.

CHAP. CCCLII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Palermo.
Exchanges of Naples with Palermo.
NAples exchangeth with Palermo, and gives one Ducate to have in the said
place posit^ 166 Pontos, I demand for Duc. 2846. 2. 10. what credit shall I
have in ounces in Palermo; to do which, multiply the said sum of Duc. by 166
Pontos per Ducates, and it makes Pontos 473942, to which add, to make them
Grains, because that 1 Pontos is 1 Grain and, and for as much as one Grain is
worth 6 Piccolis, and 1 Pontos is 8 Piccolis, and it makes Grains 631922, to
reduce which into ounces, you must cut off the two last figures, and take of
the rest, because that 600 Grains make an ounce, which in all make ounces 1035,
and there remains 1, which is worth with the two figures cut off 122 grains,
which are 6 Taries and 2 grains, because that 20 grains is 1 Tarry, and they
will be ounces 1053, Taries 6 and Grains 2, and so many ounces by the said
Exchange shall you have in Palermo; Aggio allowed in Palermo.
And note, That over and above, they give credit 1 Carl. per ounce for good
money, to add which said Carl. per ounce, do thus, considering that for the
said ounces 1053, will come the same sum of Carlins, for the Aggio of the
money; and to make the said Carlin into ounces, you must cut the last figure,
and take of the rest, will make ounces 17, and there will remain 3 tens of
Carlins, which are 30 in value, to which adding the figure cut, and it is 33
Carlins, for which taking to make them Taries, (a Carlin being a Tarry) which
are 16 Taries, and the remainder is 1 Carl. in worth 10 grains, and adding 2
grains for the 6 Taries, which is with the ounce, because that for 3 Taries,
which are 60 gra. the Aggio will be 1 grain, and it will be in all ounc. 17,
tar. 16, and gra. 12. which added to the abovesaid ounces, it makes 1070 Tar.
22, and gra. 14, and so much credit you shall have in Palermo for Duc. 2846, 2.
10. in Naples at Pont. 166 per Duc. Example. ^

Proof.
The Proof of this account is showed, when Palermo does exchange back with
Naples this same parcel.

CHAP. CCCLIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Genoa.
Naples Exchangeth with Genoa.
NAples exchangeth with Genoa, and gives one Ducate to have posito in Genoa 66
Sols, I demand for Duc. 1345. 4. 5, how many Livers current money shall I have
in Genoa, the which is done by Multiplication in taking of grains 85, which are
the 4 Taries, and grains 5. the: Seeing that it may be calculated for one grain
of Naples of a Sols, and it will come to Sol. 89723, and Deniers 4, which to
reduce into Livers you must cut the last figure, and take the of the rest, and
if any rest, it will be a tenth, to which must be added the figure cut off, and
it will be Sols, and thus it will appear to be Livers 4486. 3. 4. and so much
will your credit be in the said place of Genoa, as by this Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Rule is more evident, when this sum comes to be
rechanged from Genoa to Naples, as is aforesaid.

CHAP. CCCLIV. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Antwerp.
Exchanges of Naples with Antwerp.
NAples exchangeth with Antwerp, and gives one Ducate, to have in Antwerp
posito 90 gross. I demand then by this Exchange, what credit shall Naples have
in Antwerp for 3200 Duc. to do which, you must multiply the said sum of Duc. by
90, and it makes 288000 gra. which reduced to pounds Flemish, will make 1200
l. 00. 0 d. and so much credit shall Naples have in Antwerp for the said sum of
Duc. 3200. As in the following Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is more apparent, when this sum of 1200 l. Flem. is
rechanged from Antwerp to Naples.

CHAP. CCCLV. Of the Exchanges of Naples with London.
Exchanges of Naples with London.
NAples does exchange with London, and gives one Ducate to have in London
posite 52 pence sterling, I demand then for 1528 Duc. how many pounds sterling
shall Naples have credit in London: this must be done as in the precedent
account, of Naples and Antwerp, and it will be found that the same will give in
London 331 l. 1 s. 4 d. which is the sum that Naples shall have credit there
for 1528 Duc. delivered: As for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule will appear, when as 331 l. 1 s. 4 d. shall be rechanged
from London to Naples.

CHAP. CCCLVI. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Valentia.
Exchanges of Naples with Valentia.
NAples does exchange with Valentia, and gives one Ducate for posito 21 Sols
in Valentia, I demand then for Duc. 2306 of Naples, how much shall I have
credit in Valentia; to know which, you must do as in the Exchange preceding,
multiplying the said sum by 21 Sols, and they will make 2421 l. 6 s. which
Naples shall have answered in Valentia at the price above showed; the like is
to be observed in the Exchanges of Saragosa and Barselona, which I here omit
for brevity, to which this Example shall suffice. ^

Proof.
The Proof of this Rule is seen, when this sum shall be rechanged from Valentia
to Naples.

CHAP. CCCLVII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Sevil.
Exchanges of Naples with Sevil.
NAples does exchange with Sevil, and gives one Ducat, to have in Sevil posito
402 Marvedes; I demand then for 2634 Ducats in Naples, how many Marvedes shall
I have in Sevil? To do which, you must multiply the said sum of Ducats by 402
Marvedes, and they make Marvedes 1058 868, which Naples must have credit in the
said place. And moreover it is here to be noted, That throughout all Castilia
the Exchanges are made in the same manner as at Sevil, and they likewise keep
their Account in the same denomination of Marvedes, which when amounting to one
million, they term it in Spanish a Quinto, marked. thus V. Example. ^

Proof.
And accounted 1058 V. or Quintos 868 mar. The proof whereof is seen when Sevil
rechangeth with Naples.

CHAP. CCCLVIII. Of the Exchanges of Naples with Lisbon.
Exchanges of Naples with Lisbon.
NAples does exchange with Lisbon, and gives one Ducat to have in Lisbon,
posito 498 Res; I demand for 1200 Ducats in Naples delivered, how many Res I
shall have credit in Lisbon? This question is wrought as in the precedent with
Sevil, and it will appear that Naples hall have in Lisbon the Sum of 597 V.
600, as by the following working thereof. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is manifested, when that Lisbon shall have occasion to
rechange for Naples.

CHAP. CCCLIX. Of the Terms of the Payment of Bills of Exchange in Naples.
Terms of Bills of Exchange in Naples.
From Naples the Terms are TO Rome at 10 days sight, and at 8 days back. To all
other places of that Kingdom at 8 days sight, and so back. To Florence at 20
days after date, and thence at 10 days back. To Venice at 15 days sight, and
the like thence. To Avignon at 60 days from the date, and thence at 20 days
sight. To Valentia at 40 days sight. To Genoa at 10 days sight and thence at 15
days sight. To Pisa at 10 days sight, and so thence. To Palermo at 10 days
sight, and the same back.


CHAP. CCCLX. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances in Naples.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Naples.
ACcording to my intended method, I will here add an Example or two of Draughts
and Remittances, by Commission and Order, performed in this place of Naples,
posito.

1 Example.
To Naples comes Order from Venice, that the Remittance is made to the said
place at Duc. 98, in drawing from Placentia at Duc. 135, but there do Bills
present for Venice, at Duc. 99: I demand then, (considering the loss that
falls out in the Remittance) at how much ought I to draw for Placentia? To
know which, you must say by the Rule of Three, If Duc. 98, give Duc. 135, what
will 99 Duc. give? and it will come to 137 Duc. and at that rate the draught
must be made for Placentia, in the Remittance for Venice at Duc. 99 and the the
Commission will remain effected according to the order given: As for Example: ^

2 Example.
Again, presuppose that at Naples comes Order from Florence, to remit to Rome,
at 134^ and to prevail for Naples at 121, there is found Bills for Rome at 136,
and money for Farence, at 122 I demand then, if at these presenting prices the
Commission may be accomplished? To know which, work by the Rule of Three, and
say, If Duc. 134 give Duc. 121^ what will Ducates 136 give? and it will come to
Ducats 122 and grains 58, so that as it is apparent, the Commission may be
effected, because that Remitting to Rome 136, the dr^s for Florence must be
made at Duc. 122, grains 58, and it is found at 122, which is 60 grains more;
as by the following Example: ^

3 Example.
Again, at Naples comes Order from Palermo, to draw to the said Palermo, at
Pont. 168 and to remit to Placentia at 134. Now there is found Money for
Palermo, at 166, a^ Bills for Placentia, at 136. I demand then, if the said
Commissions may be effected, at the Rates presented? To do which, you must work
by the Rule of Three, taking one of the prices which are found for the Divisor,
as has been showed by the instruction given upon Commissions, and say, If
Pontos 166 give 134, what will 168 give? And it will make Ducats 135 9/10, or
thereabouts. So that it appears this Order and Commission may not be performed,
seeing that drawing to Palermo at 168, the remittance cannot be made for
Placentia at more then 135 8/10, and there is found Bills but at 136; as by
this Example: ^

4. Example.
Again, at Naples comes Order from Genoa, to remit for Placentia at 133, and to
prevail from Mesuia at 114, clear of charge: There are found Bills for
Placentia, at 131. I demand (considering the benefit which is given in the
remittance) at what price may the parcel be made? To know which, say by the
Rule of Three; If 133 give 114, what shall 131? And it will come to Duc. 112,
and 57 Gr. To the which must be added 44 Grains, for the provision which is
there taken at per cent. and it will be Ducats 113; And at a lesser price, may
not be taken for Mesina. The Example will make it evident: ^

And this is as much as I conceive sitting to have said of the Exchanges,
Orders and Commissions practiced in the City of Naples; And next to Genoa.

CHAP. CCCLXI. Examples of the Exchanges practiced at Genoa, and how the same
are concluded.
Exchanges practiced at Genoa.
I Have showed elsewhere, the general Exchanges of Genoa, and with how many
other places this City is found to Exchange, and there also declared the common
rates and prices, how the same is found to govern, which notwithstanding is
found so subject to alteration, that it cannot admit of any great certainty,
yet so far it is conducible to this knowledge, that it may serve as a certain
rule for the calculation thereof, either in the Draughts, Remittances, or
Orders, that may happen to fall within the limit of this City, the forming of
which accounts now remains to be handled, observing the same with some other
principal places, which being well understood, will enlighten the way to what
is here by me for brevity sake willingly omitted.

Accounts in Genoa.
To give then Introduction thereto, it is to be noted, that Exchangers do here
keep their accounts several ways, as some in Livers, Sols and Deniers of
current money, and others by Livers, Sols and Deniers money of Gold, and both
these accounted and summed up by 20 and 12, because 20 Sols make a Liver, and
12 Deniers do make a Sol.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that the Crown of Italy of Gold, in Gold, is
worth here in current Money 90 Sols of Genoa, though it is found sometimes to
be worth more, and sometimes less, as Moneys are requested: Notwithstanding,
the said Crown is always given for 68 Sols Money of Gold.

Again it is to be observed, that in Genoa all, or the most part of Exchanges
that are practiced, are effectively for Placentia, Lions, Millan, Venice,
Naples and Rome; and therefore in the handling thereof, I shall, to avoid
tediousness, be the briefer.

CHAP. CCCLXII. Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Placentia.
Exchange of Genoa with Placentia.
GEnoa does Exchange with Placentia, and gives posito Sol. 87 current money,
to have there 1 Crow. of Mark. I would know then, for Livers 10269. 19. 3 d.
current money, how many Crow. of Mark I shall have in Placentia?

1. Example.
First then multiply the said Sol. 87 by 4, to bring them into 4/4, adding the
^/4, and they make 351 quarters; and then multiply the said sum of Livers by
20, to make them Sols, and then by 4, to make them quarters of Sols, adding to
the multiplication for the 3 Deniers, and it will be in all 821 597, which
divide by 331 the price of the Crown of Mark and the division will be 2340,
multiplying the rest by 20 and by 12 to make them Sols and Deniers, and they
will be in all Crow. 2340. 14. 7. of Gold of Mark, which you must have in
Placentia, as by Example will be more evident: ^

To prove this account, you must multiply the said Crowns of Mark by Lib. 4. 7.
9. beginning to multiply by the Deniers, and then by Sols, calculating it by 12
Deniers for one Sol, and by 2^ for one Liver, and of the product will come l.
10269-18-11. so that it is evident, that the account is just, the difference
being in some small parts of the division which is lost, as by Example: ^

Another Example of the said Exchanges.
At Genoa it is oftentimes seen that the Exchange is made for Placentia in Sols
of Money of Gold, and the difference of this money is, that the Crown of Gold,
by decree of the estate, is worth Sols money of Gold, and in current money 90
Sols, and though that the said price of the current money rise and fall, the
money of Gold, never varieth from the said price of 68 Sol. If then I would
know for Livers 2816. 13. 4. money of Gold, which one exchangeth at 66 5 d.
money of Gold per Crown, how many Crowns of mark, shall one have? Do thus:
Reduce the abovesaid Livers into Deniers, multiplying them by 20, and the Sols
resting by 12; likewise reduce the said Sols 66. 5 Deniers, into Deniers,
multiplying them by 12, and that which will come thereof shall be the Divisor
of the sum of Deniers, come of the said Live. the which divided, will be 848
Cro. 3. 7. of Mark. ^

Proof.
To prove this Rule, multiply this by 5 d. and the product will be 2186. 13. 3.
which shows the account to be just cast.

Third Example.
In Genoa I would deliver for Placentia lib. 3248. 15. of current money, which
is exchanged at 67 Sol. 10 d. of money of Gold, I demand how many Crowns of
Mark they will be? First reduce the said sum of Livers of current money, into
Livers of money of Gold, dividing the same by 90 Sols, the price of the Crown
of Gold in current money, and they will be Crowns 721. 18. 10, which must be
multiplied by 3 l. 8 s. the price of the Crown in money of Gold, and it will
come to lib. 2454. 12. money of Gold, which divided by 67. 10, to see what the
Crowns of Mark are worth, and they will make Crowns 723. 14. 3. of Mark, and so
much shall Genoa have medit in Placentia for the said l. 3248. 15 of current
money, as the example shall more evidently demonstrate: ^

To reduce Livers of current money into Livers of Gold in Geona.
If in Genoa you would reduce any sum of current money, into Livers of money of
Gold by a short rule, because that the Crow. of Gold in current money is 90 s.
and in money of Gold 68 s. you must take of the current money twice placing
them the one under the other, and out of one of the said take, and of that
which comes of the said you must take, and adding these 4 parcels together,
will come Money of Gold, as will appear by this Example: ^

Proof.
For proof of the said account, if by the same method you would reduce Livers of
Money of Gold into Livers of current Money, you must add to the said Livers of
Money of Gold the, and of that which will come thereof, take 1/17, adding the
said two parcels together, and they will make Livers of current Money: Example:
^

And thus much shall serve for the Exchange of Genoa with Placentia; wherein I
have thought fit thus far to enlarge my self by reason of the great Exchanges
continually practiced between the said two places.

CHAP. CCCLXIII. Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Lions.
Exchanges of Genoa with Lions.
GEnoa Exchangeth with Lions, and gives posito Sols 59. 9. Money of Gold, to
have in Lions a Crown of the Sun; I would know then, for Livers 37296. 6. 0 of
current Money in Genoa, how many Crowns of the Sun I shall have in Livers?
First reduce the said sum of Livers of current Money into Livers of Money of
Gold, by the former Rules, dividing by Sol. 90. the price of the Crown of Gold
in current Money, and they will make Crowns 8288. 1. 4. which must be
multiplied by l. 3. 8. 5. the price of the Crown in Money of Gold, and it will
come to l. 28179. 8. 6. the which divided by Sol. 59. 9. the price of the Crown
of the Sun, it will be Crowns 9432. 8. 10. And so many Crowns of the Sun will
Lions give for those Livers of c^rent Money, as above propounded. Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this rule will appear, when this parcel shall be rechanged back
from Lions to Genoa.

CHAP. CCCLXIV. Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Millan.
Exchanges of Genoa with Millan.
GEnoa does Exchange with Millan and gives 1 Crown of Livers 4 of current
Money to have in this place posito Sol. 118; I would know then for Livers 3850.
14. 8. of current Meney, what credit shall Genoa have in Millan? First, take
the quarter of the said sum of Livers, to make the same into Crowns of Livers
4, and they will make Crowns 962. 13. 8, the which must be multiplied by Livers
5. 18. 6. per Crown which are the said Sol. 118, and they will make l. 5703.
17. 11 d. And so much shall the said credit be in Millan, as does appear by the
Example in the work following: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account will more evidently appear, when this parcel is
rechanged for Genoa from Millan.

CHAP. CCCLXV. Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Venice.
Exchanges of Genoa with Venice.
GEnoa does Exchange with Venice, and gives one Crown of Livers 4 current
money, to have in Venice posito 146. Sol de Banco and of that money: I demand
for l. 8340. 12. 0. turrent Money of Genoa, how many Ducats de Banco of l. 6
per Duc. shall one have credit in Venice? To do this then, first take the of
the said sum of Livers to reduce them into Crowns of 4 l. and they will make
Crowns 2085. 3. 0. the which by l. 7. 6. 6. per Crowns, which are the said Sol.
146, and of the Product thereof will come l. 15273. 14. 6. which must be
reduced to Ducats, dividing them by 124, the price of the Ducat of 6 l. 4 Sol.
and multiplying the rest of the Division by 24, to bring them into Grosses,
because that 24 Grosses makes one Ducat; and by thus working, the same will be
Ducats 2463. and so many Ducats of lib. 6 shall you have credit in Banco for at
Venice; as for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this rule is seen, when Venice does Exchange back for Genoa this
said sum.

CHAP. CCCLXVI. Of the Exchanges of Genoa with Naples.
Exchange of Genoa with Naples.
GEnoa does Exchange with Naples, and gives posito 66 Sols of current money,
to have in this place one Ducat of 5 Taries, I demand then for live. 4486. 3. 4.
current Money how many Ducats in credit shall I have in Naples?

First reduce all the said sum of Livers with the said l. 66 of current Money
into Deniers, multiplying the Livers by 20, and the Sols that come thereof by
12, doing the same by the Sols, of the price of the Exchange, multiplying the
same by 12, and by the Division thereof it will make Ducats 1345, and
multiplying the remainder of the Division by 100, by reason that 100 Grains
does make one Ducat, and there will come Grains 85, which are worth 4 Taries,
and Grains 5, seeing, as has been before remembered, that 1 Tarry is in Naples
20 Grains: And by thus working, it will make Ducats 1345. 4. 5. and so much
shall the credit be in Naples, as by the Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen, when Naples shall Exchange back with Genoa.
I could much more enlarge the Exchanges practiced at Genoa with other places,
but for brevity I willingly omit the same, and therefore now come to the
Commissions and Orders given in matters of Exchanges at Genoa.

CHAP. CCCLXVII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances in Genoa.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances. in
Genoa. 1. Example.
ACcording to my proposed method, I will here add one or two Examples of the
Orders and Commissions, given and thereby received in Draughts and Remittances
at Genoa.

First the posito from Venice, there is order given to Genoa, to remit to
Venice, and to prevail for Millan, at such a Price that the Draught from Millan
to Venice, comes but to 148 l. clear of all charges; now then there do present
Bills for Venice, at 149, and money for Millan at 148. I demand if at these
prices, the said Commission may be performed? To do which, say by the Rule of
Three, If Sols 148 of Venice give at Millan, Sols 117, being the price of the
Crown of the said Millan, what will Sols 149 give, the price of the Crown of
Livers 4 l. at Genoal And it will come to 117 Sol. the which without deduction
of provision, is apparent that the Commission cannot be performed, because that
the remitting to Venice at 149, the Draught cannot be made for Millan at more
then 117 besides the provision, and the patido is found at 118 Sols, as the
Example shows: ^

See Example
Again to Genoa comes order from Antwerp to buy some Velvets, and to prevail
for the same by Placentia, at such a price, that the Palm of Velvets in Genoa,
amount not (being bought) to more than Sol 8 money of Gross, and the Draught
for Placentia at Gross 123. Now there is found Velvets at 72 Sols the Palm, and
Money for Placentia at Sol 88. in current Money I demand then, if at these
prices the said Commissions may be effected? To know which, say by the Rule of
Three, if Gross. 123 the price of the Crowns of Mark, give at Genoa, Sol. 88.
what will Gross 102. which are the said Sol. of 8 of Grosses, give? and it will
come to Sol. 72. 11 so that as it will appear, the said Commissions may be
performed to benefit, because that in drawing for Placentia at 88. Sol the
Velvets may be bought at 72 Sol. 11 Den. the Palm, and i^ is found at 72 1/^
Sol. ^

CHAP. CCCLXVIII. Of the terms of payment of Bills of Exchanges in Genoa.
Of the terms of payment of Bills in Genoa.
From Genoa the terms of Bills are. TO Venetia at 15 days sight, and at 16 days
back. To Avignon at 15 days sight, and so back. To Barselona at 20 days sight,
and so back. To Valentia at 20 days sight, and so back. To London at 3 months
from the date, and so back. To Millan at 5 days sight, and so back. To Rome at
10 days sight, and so back. To Pisa at 5 days sight, and so back. To Gaietta at
10 days sight, and so back. To Bridges and Antwerp at 10 days sight, and thence
at two months from the date. To Paris the same as to Bridges and Antwerp. To
Naples and Palermo at 15 days sight, and back at 20 days sight;


And thus much shall serve for Exchanges practiced at Genoa together with the
Comnissions given and received there, and so proceed to the next eminent place
of Exchanges. Venetia.

CHAP. CCCLXIX. Examples of the Exchanges practiced at Venice, and how the same
are to be calculated.
Exchanges practiced at Venice.
I Have showed the general Exchanges used in Venice, and with how many other
places this City is found to Exchange, and there also showed at large the
common rates and prices the same is found there to govern, which
notwithstanding is so subject to alteration, that the prices there mentioned,
cannot be admitted for a settled rule, and certain rate; yet so far it is
conducible in it self to the understanding hereof, that the same may serve as
an undoubted method in the culculation thereof, either in the Draughts or
Remittances, Orders or Commissions, that may fall within the limit of the
Exchanges of this City: the working of which rules now remains to be handled,
observing the same only with such principal places as are most notable, which
being well understood, will serve as guides to find out what else is here by me
for brevity willingly omitted.

Accounts kept in Venice.
To give first then an introduction thereunto, it is to be noted, That Merchants
and Bankers here do keep their accounts by several methods, and denominations;
some in Ducats and Grosses of Livers 6 the Ducat, the which they sum by 24,
because that 24 Grosses are worth one Ducat: and others keep the same by
Livers, Sols, and Gross, which are worth ten Lucats the Liver, which is summed
up by 20 and by 12, making 20 Sols of Gross to be one Liver, and 12 Deniers one
Sol.

Again it is to be noted, that some few years past, the Money current paid in
payment of Merchandise, and the Money current paid upon Bills of Exchange, was
of one and the self-same goodness in value, or little in difference; but now
the moneys paid upon Bills of Exchange, is found to exceed the former 20 in 21
per cent. and is commonly now called in Banco, as the other is called the
current Money, and therefore when moneys by Exchange is mentioned, it is
understood to be in Banco, as the best and principal.

CHAP. CCCLXX. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Lions.
Exchanges of Venice with Lions.
VEnice does Exchange with Lions, and gives posito Ducats 119 of Livers 6 to
have in Lions, Crow. 100 of Gold of the Sun: I demand for Duc. 4238 1/12, how
many Crowns of the Sun shall I have in Lions? To do this, say by the Rule of
Three, If Duc. 119 give 100 Cro. of the Sun of Gold, what will Duc. 4328 1/12
give me? which being done, accordingly as I have heretofore often mentioned, it
will come to Crow. 3459, and multiplying the remainder of the division by 20 to
make them Sols of Gold, and then by 12 to make them Deniers, it will come in
all to Crow. 3549. 9. 8. of Gold of the Sun, and so much shall you have credit
in Lions for the said sum of Ducats 4238 1/12 of Livers 6. 4. Sols per Ducat,
as may be seen by the following Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is seen when that Lions does Exchange back with Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXI. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Placentia.
Exchanges of Venice with Placentia.
VEnice does Exchange with Placentia, and gives posito Duc. 134 of Livers 6 to
have in Placentia 100 Crow. of mark: I demand for Ducats 1450 17/24, how many
Crowns of Mark? First reduce the said Duc. 134 into grosses, multiply them by
24, and adding 12 grosses for the half Ducat, and it will make gross. 3228. in
like manner you must reduce the said Ducats into grosses in multiplying them by
24, and adding of 17 gross. for the 17/24, (it being the same to say one gross,
as 1/24) and it will be grosses 34817; saying then by the Rule of Three, If
grosses 3228 give Crow. 100. what will grosses 34817 give? And it will come to
Crow. 1078: and multiplying the rest of the division by 20 to make them Sols of
Gold, and by 12 to make them Deniers, it will be found to make in all Crowns
1078. 11. 10. of Gold of mark, and so much you shall have in Placentia for the
said Duc. 1450 17/24 of l. 6. 4. s. as by the Example following: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is more apparent when Placentia does Exchange back with
Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Rome.
Exchanges of Venice with Rome.
VEnice does Exchange with Rome, and gives Ducats 100 of 6 l. 4 s. to have in
that place posito Cro. 73 of Gold de Camera for Duc. 1157, I would know how
many Crow. shall Venice have in Rome: you must multiply the said sum of duc. at
the said price of Crow. 73 per cent. and out of its product cut off the two
last figures, the which multiplied by 20 and by 12, to make them sols and
deniers of gold, and it will make Crowns 850. 15. 3. of gold of estampe, and so
much credit shall Venice have in Rome, as is apparent by this Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account is more apparent, when this parcel is Exchanged
from Rome back to Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Naples.
Exchanges of Venice with Naples.
VEnice does Exchange with Naples, and gives Ducats 100 of lib. to have in the
said place posito Duc. 97 of Taries 5 per Ducat. I demand then for Ducats 1850
5/24 of Venice, how many Ducats credit shall I have in Naples? Multiply the
said sum of Ducats by Grains 97 per Duc. and of the Product will come grains,
out of which cut off the two last Figures, to make them Ducats because (as has
been said before) one Ducat is worth 100 grains, and it will make Ducats, 1799,
and grains 32, which are one Tarry and grains 12, and so much credit shall you
have in Naples, for the said sum of Duc. of Venice, as by Example shall appear:
^

Proof.
The Proof of this account will appear when this is rechanged from Naples to
Venice: and note, That when Venice does Exchange with Bary, Lechy, Lausano, or
other parts of the Kingdom of Naples, the account is made as above with Naples
it self.

CHAP. CCCLXXIV. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Florence.
Exchanges of Venice with Florence.
VEnice does Exchange with Florence, and gives Duc. 100 of l. 6 to have in
Florence Posito 81 Crow. of Gold, I demand then for Ducats 2500 what credit
shall Venice have in Florence? To do this, multiply the said sum of Duc. at the
abovesaid Price of Crow 81 per cent. and from the Product cut the two last
sigures, multiplying the same by 20 and by 12, to make the same Sols and
Deniers of Gold, and they make Crow. 2037. 10 Sols of Gold of Florence, as by
Example will manifestly appear: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen, when this Sum is rechanged from Florence to
Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXV. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Millan.
Exchanges of Venice with Millan.
VEnice does exchange with Millan, and gives posito Sols 148, to have in
Millan one Crown of Livers 5, and 17 Sols of that Money: I demand, for Duc.
1486 of Live. 6, what credit in Livers shall Venice have in Millan? First
multiply the said sum of Duc. by 124. Sol. the value of the Duc. of Li. 6, and
it will make Sol. 184295. the which divided by Sol 148, to see how much the
Crowns of Millan are worth, and multiplying the remainder of the division by 20
and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make Crowns
1241, and 10 Deniers, the which multiplied by Li. 5. 17. the price of the Crown
to make them Livers, beginning to multiply the Livers 5 by the 10 Deniers,
which are worth the Crown, and then with the Sols, if any be, calculating for
12 Deniers 1 Sol, and for 20 Sols 1 Liver, and of the product thereof will come
Li. 7260. 1. 10. And so much Credit shall Venice have in Millan, for the said
Ducats 1486 of Livers 6 of Venice; as by the Example following: ^

Proof
The proof of this rule is seen, when Millan does exchange with Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Antwerp.
Exchanges of Venice with Antwerp.
VEnice does exchange with Antwerp and gives one Ducat of Livers 6 to have in
that place posito Gross 92, I demand then for Duc. 3810, how many Livers
Gross shall Venice have credit in Antwerp? You must multiply the said sum of
Ducats by the said Gross 92, and it will make Gross 352494, out of which, take
1/12 to make the same Sols of Gross, and they will be Sels 29374, and Gross 6,
the which must be reduced into Livers, by cutting the last figure, and by
taking the of the rest, and it will come to be Livers 1468, and the tenth that
is remaining is ten Sols, and adding 4, the figure cut off, shall be 14 Sol. so
in all 1468. 14. 6, which Antwerp will give; As for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this rule is seen when Antwerp rechangeth this sum with Venice:
And here it is to be noted, that Venice does exchange with Colonia, and
Amsterdam and the Nethelands after the same manner as with Antwerp, and the
account is made up as the precedent, whereto needs no further example for
Illustration.

CHAP. CCCLXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with London.
Exchanges of Venice with London.
VEnice does exchange with London, and gives one Ducat of Live. 6 to have there
posite 56 pence sterling: I demand then for Ducats 740, how many Livers of
Sterling shall Venice have credit in London? This must be done as in the
precedent account is showed of Venice with Antwerp, and it will come to pounds
173. s. 8. and pence 9, which Venice shall have credit in London, as by the
Example more at large appears: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is manifested, when London does rechange this sum of
173. 8. 9 d. for Venice; and here note, that Vsance from Venice to London is 3
months, or 90 days, and double Vsance the said time doubled; and the like
accounted back from London to Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Genoa.
Exchanges of Venice with Genoa.
VEnice does Exchange with Genoa, and gives posito Sols 146 to have in Genoa
one Crown of 4 Livers money of Genoa. I demand then for Duc. 2463 of Livers 6
how many Livers of current money shall I have credit in Genoa? First reduce the
said sum of Duc. into Sols, multiplying them by 124, the value of the Ducat,
and divide the Sols that shall rest of the said multiplication by 146 to make
them Crow. of 4 Livers, and multiply the remainder of the Division by 20 and by
12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they shall be Crow. 2085. 2. 11,
which must be multiplied by l. 4 per Crown, beginning the multiplication by
Deniers, and then by Sols, calculating for 12 Deniers 1 Sol, and for 20 Sols 1
Liver, and of the product will come Livers 8340. 11. 8 current Money, and so
much will the credit be in Genoa; as in the following Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen, when Genoa does rechange this parcel for
Venice.

CHAP. CCCLXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Norimberg.
Exchanges of Venice with Norimberg.
VEnice does exchange with Norimberg, and gives Duc. 100 of lib. 6, to have in
the said place posito Florins 130 of 60 Quarent. per Florin. I demand then, for
Duc. 2645 5/14, what credit in Florins must I have in the said place?

Multiply the said sum of Ducats by Florins 130 per cent. and the broken
numbers of the multiplication divide by 20, to have an account of the Sols, and
of the remainder cut off the two last figures, the which being multiplied by
20, to bring the same into Sols, and then by 12, to bring them into Deniers;
and in doing thus, there will be found Florins 3210. 18. 8. which must be had
in credit at Norimberg, for the said Duc. in Venice remitted: As by this
Example following appears: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is manifest, when Norimberg shall exchange this sum
back with Venice: And note, That for Augusta and Francfort, the Exchange from
Venice is made as with Norimberg, whereto needs no other Examples.

CHAP. CCCLXXX. Of the Exchanges of Venice with Bergamo.
Exchanges of Venice with Bergamo.
VEnice does Exchange with Bergamo, and gives one Crown of 7 Lib: to have in
Bergamo Sols 145 posito, I demand then for Duc. 4220, how many Livers will it
amount unto? Multiply the said sum of Ducats by 6 l., and it will amount to
lib. 26168. 2. 8, of which take the 1/7 to make them Crowns, and the remainders
divide by 20 and 12, and they will be Crowns 3738. 6. 1. the which must be
multiplied by lib. 7. 5. 6. which are the said lib. 145 Sols, and of the
multiplication will come lib. 27196. 3. 2. which must be had in credit in the
said place of Bergamo, as by this Example following: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Rule is discerned when this parcel is Remitted back from
Bergans to Venice: And thus much shall serve to have said of the Exchanges of
Venice, a word of the Orders and Commissions here practiced in matters of
Exchanges.

CHAP. CCCLXXXI. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances in Venice.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Venice.
ACcording to my proposed method, I will here add an Example or two of Draughts
and Remittances, ordered by Commission in the City of Venice, posito: 1.
Example.
Into Venice comes Order from Francfort, that they may draw thither at Florins
130, and remit thence to London at 56 pence, not of charges or provision, the
partido being for Ducats 3500: Now there is Bills found for London at 57 pence,
and money for Francfort at Florins 132, I demand then at these rates, whether
this Commission without breach of Order may be performed? To do which, say by
the Rule of Three, (seeing that Venice gives the certain price to both those
said two places) If 56 pence sterling. give 130 Florins the limited price, what
shall 57 pence give (the price found) and it will make Flor. 132 9/10, from
which deduct 10 s. 7 Den. for the provision that is taken at per cent there
will remain Flor. 132. 7. 5, so that thereby the said Commission may be
performed with benefit, because that remitting to London at 57 pence sterling. the
draught may be made for Francfort, at Florins 132. 7. 5, and the money that is
found is at Flor. 132, as appears by this Example: ^

2. Example.
Again, a Merchant of Florence is creditor in Venice posito 2000 Ducats of
banco, who orders that the same be remitted unto him at Crow. 81 thence; or
by the way of Antwerp at gross 91, and to take the most beneficial way of the
two; and finding a remittance by both to profit, according to the limited
prices, the order is to take the most prositable of the two; and finding the
remit tances produce loss, to accept of the least. Now then, there are Bills
found for Florence, as I said, at 82 Crow. and for Antwerp at 92 7/10 gro. I
would know by which the remittance ought to be made, seeing that by both the
remittance may be made to profit; and desirous to find out the most profitable,
you must say by the Rule of Three, If Crow. 81 give gross. 91 the price
limited, what shall 82 Crow. give, which is the price found? And it will make
grosses 92 7/10 or thereabouts; so that the remittance must be made by Florence
straight, because that remitting by that way at 82 Crow. to make the price, you
should remit to Antwerp at 92 7/10 gross. and there are no Bills found but at
gross 92 9/10, as it is seen wrought by this Example: ^

3. Example.
Again, posito from Lions the Exchange goes for Venice at Duc. 117, and for
Naples at Duc. 125, I demand giving order to Lions, that at these prices they
make draught to Venice, and remit (...) Naples, at what price then will the
remittance come out to be from Venice to Naples? To know ^aich, say by the Rule
of Three, If Ducats 117 of Venice, the price of 100 Crow. of Sol. of Gold of
Lions, give at Naples Duc. 125, how many will Duc. 100 give of the said place
of Venice? and it will make Duc. 106 or thereabouts, and so much credit must be
had in Naples for Duc. 100 of lib. 6 which are disbursed in Venice, out of
which must be deducted per cent. for the provision that is paid in Lions. ^

4. Example.
Again, in the said place of Venice, comes order from Florence to remit to
Placentia at Duc. 136, and to prevail on them at Crow. 80 not of charges, the
partido being made for 5000 Crowns of Mark: Now the said 5000 Crow. of Mark, is
found for Placentia at Duc. 135, and for Florence may be drawn Duc. 2000 at
Crowns 80: I would know at what price must the rest be dawn? To know which, I
must first see for remittance of the said Crew. 5000 of Mark, at the price
inordered, how many Crow. of Gold it is at Florence, and to do this, multiply
the said sum of Crowns by Duc. 136 per cent. and they make Duc. 6000, without
calculation of provisi^, seeing that the order is not of charges, you must
multiply them by Crowns 80 per cent. and they will be Crow. 5440 of Gold, and
so much the draught will appear to be for the said Crow. 5000 of Mark by
remittance, and afterward multiplying the said Crowns 5000 by Duc. 135 per
cent. the price that is found, it makes Duc. 6750. to which adding Duc. 27.
for the provision at per cent. seeing that the draught must be made for
Florence, and they will be Duc. 6777, out of which deduct Duc. 2000 which were
found to be drawn at Crowns 80, there will rest Duc. 4777, and for the said
Duc. 2000. there disbursement is at Florence Crowns 1605^ which must be
deducted out of Crow. 5440, which must be drawn; there will remain Crowns 3835
of Gold, which must be drawn, for the which I must be imbursed at Venice,
Ducats 4777: and to know at what price, say by the Rule of Three, If Duc. 4777
give by disbursment at Florence Crowns 3835 of Gold, what will Duc. 100 give?
And it will make Crow. 80. 5. 7. of Gold, and at this price the said partido of
Duc. 4777 may be drawn, and the other Duc. 2000 at 80 Crow. and so for both
these parcels must be drawn, Crown 5440, as is inordered, and there is imbursed
Duc. 6777, there being per contra disbursed Duc. 6750 for the remittance of the
said Crown. 5000 of Mark, at Duc. 135. per cent. and Duc. 27; which is imbursed
over and above, proceeding from the provision, and in this manner this said
Commission will remain performed, as it was by the Committees, inordered, as by
example the same will appear evident, following: ^

Note.
And note, when the said City of Venice exchangeth for Naples, Rome, Antwerp,
and London, and that you would know at how much comes the Money of any one of
the said places for Lions or Placentia, the account is made as in the precedent
rule of Florence and Placentia, always multiplying the price by which the
Exchange goes for Lions, with the price of the other place from whence it is
remitted or drawn: And therefore, for brevity sake it is needless to propound
here any further example.

CHAP. CCCLXXXII. Of the Terms of Payment of Bills of Exchange in Venice.
Terms of payments of Bills of Exchange in Venice.
The Terms from Venice. TO Naples and Gaietta at 15 days sight, and so back. To
Palermo and Mesina at 30 days sight, and so back. To Rome at 10 days sight, and
so back. To Florence and Lucca, at 20 after date, and 5 days sight back. To
Avignon at 45 days after date, and thence 2 months after date. To Barselona at
2 months after date, and so back. To Valentia at 75 days after date, and so
back. To Sevil at 90 days after date, and so back. To Lions for the Fair, and
from Fair to Fair. To Bridges and Antwerp at 2 months after date, and so back.
To London at 3 months after date, and so back. To Paris at 2 months after date,
and so back. To Genoa at 10 days sight, and 15 days back. To Millan at 12 days
sight, and 20 days thence after date. To Constantinople 5 months after date,
and so back.


CHAP. CCCLXXXIII. Examples of the Exchanges that are practiced in Placentia,
and how the same are to be calculated.
Of Exchanges practiced at Placentia.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Placentia with how many other places
Placentia is found to Exchange, and there also set down the common rates how
the same is for the most part found to govern, which every day is so subject to
alteration, that no positive rules can be set down for the same; yet it is in
it self so beneficial, that thereby the unexperienced may know how to make up
the account thereof, at what rate soever the same be found to be, either in
Remittances or Draughts, the which only now remains to be handled, observing
the same with so many other Towns, as may be fittest to understand the ground
thereof.

Accounts kept in Placentia.
It is then first to be noted, that all Bankers and Exchangers here do keep
their Accounts in Crowns, Sols, and Deniers of Gold of Mark, which are cast up
by 20 and 12, because that 20 Sels of Gold make a Crown, and 12 Deniers make a
Sol.

CHAP. CCCLXXXIV. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Lions.
Exchanges of Placentia with Lions.
ANd first then Placentia is found to Exchange with Lions, and gives posito
Crowns 85, to have at Lions 100 Crowns of the Sun of Gold; I demand then, for
Crowns 1516. 12. of Mark, what will be due to me in Lions? To do which, say by
the Rule of Three, If Crowns 85 of Mark give 100 Crowns of the Sun, what will
the said Crowns 1516. 12. give? And it will come to Crowns 1773. 16. 0. of Gold
of the Sun: And so much will be due to me in Lions, for the said sum of Crowns
of Mark; as by Example following: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is seen, when that Lions does Exchange with Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXV. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Genoa.
Exchanges of Placentia with Genoa.
PLacentia Exchangeth for Genoa, and gives one Crown of Mark to have posito
Sols 67. 10 Money of Gold in Genoa; I demand then, for Crow. 723. 14. 3. of
Mark how many Livers of current money shall I have in Genoa? First multiply the
said Crow. of Mark by Li. 3. 7. 10 per Crow. which are the said 67 Sols. 12
Den. beginning to multiply the said Li. 3. by 3 Den. and afterward by Sols 14,
which are with the Crow. calculating for 12 Den. one Sol. and for 20 Sols one
Liver, and the product will come Li. 2454. 11. 9. Money of Gold, which must be
divided by 68 Sols, the price of the Crown of Gold, in Money of Gold, to bring
them into Crowns, multiplying the rest of the division by 20 and by 12, to make
them Sols and Deniers and they will make Crow. 721. 18. 9. of Gold, which must
be multiplied by Li. 4 per Crow. the present price of the Crow. of Gold in
current Money, and it will make Li. 3248. 14. 4. And so much in current Money I
shall have in Genoa for the said Crow. 723. 14. 3. of Mark. As by Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Account is seen, when Genoa exchangeth for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Rome.
Exchanges of Placentia with Rome.
PLacentia Exchangeth with Rome, and gives 100 Crowns of Gold of Mark to have
in that place posito Crown 99 of Gold of Estampe; I demand then, for Crowns
1385. 15. of Mark how many Crowns of Estampe shall Placentia have credit for in
Rome? To do which, multiply the said sum of Crowns of Mark by 99 per cent. and
taking the remainder of the multiplication, to be divided by 20 Sols, cutting
off the two last figures of the production, the which multiplied by 20 to make
them Sols of Gold, and then by 12, to make them Deniers, and they will make
Crowns 1382 5. 9. of Gold. And so much will the credit be in Rome: as by the
Example following: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account is seen, when that Rome does Exchange back for
Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Florence.
Exchanges of Placentia with Florence.
PLacentia does Exchange with Florence, and gives 100 Crowns of Mark to have
in that place posito Crowns 110 of Gold: I demand, for Crowns 4500. 10 of Mark,
how many Crowns of Gold shall I have in Florence? To know which, working
according to the preceding Example, and Rule of Placentia with Rome, and I
find it gives Crowns 4973. 1. 0. of Gold, which Flacentia must have Credit for
in Florence: As for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is discerned, when Florence does rechange for
Placentia.

CHAP. CCCLXXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Palermo.
Exchanges of Placentia with Palermo.
PLecentia does Exchange with Palermo, and gives Crow. 100 of Mark to have in
Palermo posito Duc. 132 of Taries 5 per Duc. I demand then, for Crow. 2573. 12.
4. of Mark what credit shall Placentia have in Palermo? To do which, you must
multiply the said sum of Crowns by Grains 132 per crow. seeing as has been
said, it is alike so many Grains per Crow. as so many Ducats per 100 Crowns,
and of the product will come Grains; the which to turn to Ducats you must cut
off the two last figures, and there will remain Duc. 3416. and the Grains 47,
which are the two last cut figures, which are 2 Taries and 7 Grains: So that
for the said Crow. 2573: 12. 4 of Mark, Placentia shall have Credit in Palermo
Duc. 3416. 2. 7 d. As for Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Account is discerned, when that Palermo is seen to
rechange for Placentia. Exchanges with Mesina, the same as with Palermo.
And note, that when the said place does exchange with Mesina in this Kingdom,
the Account is made as above with Palermo, the price and rate is only found to
differ, and to be either higher or lower.

CHAP. CCCLXXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Venice.
Exchanges of Placentia with Venice.
PLacentia does Exchange for Venice, and gives Crowns 100 of Mark to have in
the said place Duc. 134 more or less, of Livers 6 per Duc. I say in Banco, I
demand, for Crow. 1078. 12 of Mark, how many Ducats shall it make in Venice?
Multiply the said sum of Crowns by Duc. 134 per cent. and the remainders of the
multiplication are to be divided by 24, to bring them into Grosses, and from
the product cut off the two last figures, which are to be multiplied by 24, to
make them Grosses, and it will make Duc. 1450 17/24 of Livers 6 per Duc. And so
much will Placentia have in Venetia, for the said sum of Crowns of Mark. As by
this Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Account is discerned, when that Venetia is found to
rechange for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXC. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Millan.
Exchanges of Placentia with Millan.
PLacentia does Exchange with Millan, and is found to give one Cro. of Mark, to
have in the said place posito Sols 133, I demand then, for Crow. 1450. 15. 6 of
Mark, how many Livers ought I to have in Millan? Multiply the said Crowns by
Livers 6. 13. 4. per Crow. which are the said Sols 133, beginning to multiply
the 6 Livers by the 6 Deniers, and then by the 15 Sols which are with the Crow.
of Mark, calculating for 12 Deniers one Sol, and for 20 Sols one Liver, and
they will make l. 9671. 16. 8. which Placentia must have in Millan: As by
Example: ^

Proof.
The proof the said account is seen, when Millan does Exchange back with
Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCI. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Naples.
Exchanges of Placentia with Naples.
PLacentia does Exchange with Naples, and gives one Crown of Mark to have in
Naples Carlins posito 29; I demand, for Crowns 2400. 10. 10. of Mark, what
credit in Ounces shall I have in Naples? Multiply the said Crowns by 29 Carlins
per Crown, and take the rest of the multiplication to be divided by 10, to the
end to make them Grains, and they will make Carlins 70815, Grains 9. the which
to reduce to Ounces, you must cut off the last figure, and take of the rest,
and it will be Ounces 1180 and the tenth of the remaining Carlins is to be
added to the 5 Carlins, which is the figure cut off, and they are Carlins 15,
which are Taries 7, and there will remain 1 Carlin, with the 9 Grains, which
are Grains 19, and in all are Ounces 1180. 7. 19. to which add one Carlin per
Ounce for the good Money, which done as has been before showed, when Naples
does exchange with Palermo, and it will make Ounces 1199. 28. 1. And that is
the credit that shall be due in the said Naples, good Money being therein
comprised; as by this Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen, when Naples does Exchange with Placentia.
Note Barry and Lechy.
And note, the account is the same, when Placentia does Exchange with Barry and
Lechy in this Kingdom, the rates only altering.

CHAP. CCCXCII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Sevil.
Exchanges of Placentia with Sevil.
PLacentia is found to Exchange with Sevil, and gives one Crown of Mark to
have in that place posito 428 Marvedes; I demand then, for Crow. 815. 5. 6 of
Mark, what credit in Marvedes shall Placentia have in Sevil? Multiply the said
sum of Crowns by 428 Marvedes the Crown, and it will make Marvedes 348937, and
adding per cent. for the Aggio of the Moneys, at 5 Mervedes per Mill, and they
make Marvedes 350681. and so much Credit shall Placentia have in Sevil: As for
Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Account is seen, when that Sevil does rechange for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCIII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Valentia.
Exchanges of Placentia with Valentia.
PLacentia does exchange with Valentia, and is found to give one Crown of Mark,
to have in Valentia 23 Sols posito: I demand, for Crowns 926. 19. 2 of Mark,
how many Livers shall I have in Valentia? To do this, multiply the said sum of
Crowns by Lavers 1, 3, 4 d. per Crown, which are the said 23 Sols, beginning
the multiplication by the Deniers, and then by the Sols which are with the
Crowns, and they will make Livers 848. 2. 4 d. And so much shall Placentia have
Credit in Valentia. Example: ^

Note, Saragosa and Barselona the same as Valentia.
Note, That when Placentia does exchange with Barselona and Saragosa, the
account thereof is made up, as the abovementioned exchange from Placentia to
Valentia. Proof.
And the proof of the said Rule is apparent, when that Valentia shall exchange
back for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCIV. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Antwerp.
Exchanges of Placentia with Antwerp.
PLacentia does exchange with Antwerp, and gives one Crown of Mark, to have in
Antwerp posito 124 Grosses; I demand, for Crow. 700. 15. 0. of Mark, how many
Livers of Grosses shall I have in Antwerp? You must multiply the said sum of
Crowns by 124 Grosses per Crown, and it makes Grosses 87243, from which you
must take 1, to make them Sols, and then it is 7270, and Gross. 3. which
reduced to Livers, cutting off the last figure, and by taking of rest, and it
will make Livers 363, and the tenth that remains is worth 10 Sols, and the 3
Gross. And so much will the Credit appear to be in Antwerp: As by Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is seen, when Antwerp does rechange for Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCV. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Bergamo.
Exchanges of Placentia with Bergamo.
PLacentia does exchange with Bergamo, and gives 100 Crowns of Mark to have
Crowns 123 posito, more or less, of Livers 7 per Crown. I demand for Crowns
740. 4. 8. how many Livers credit shall I have in Bergamo? To do which, first
multiply the said sum of Crowns of Mark by the said Crowns 123, and the
remainders divide by 20, to keep account of the Sols, and from the product cut
off the two last figures, which must be multiplied by 20 and by 12, to make
them Deniers and Sols of Gold, and they shall be Crowns, 912. 6. 8. which to
reduce into Livers, multiply by 7 Livers, the value of the Crowns, beginning to
multiply the said 7 Livers by the Deniers 8, and then by the Sols 6, which are
with the Crowns, calculating for 12 Deniers one Sol, and for 20 Sols one Liver,
and it makes l. 6386. 6. 8. which must be had in credit at Bergamo. Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Account is seen, when Bergamo does rechange this parcel for
Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCVI. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Lucca.
Exchanges of Placentia with Lucca.
PLacentia does exchange with Lucca, and gives 100 Crowns of Mark, to have in
Lucca posito 117 Crowns of Livers 7 per Crown; I demand then, at this rate, for
Crowns 406. 10. 10. of Mark how many Crowns of li. 7 shall I have credit in
Lucca? First multiply the said sum of Crowns of Mark by Crowns 117 per cent.
and of the product cut off the two last Figures, which multiplied by 20, and by
12, to bring them into Sols and Deniers of Gold, they will make Crowns 477. 13.
8. And so many Crowns of Livers 7 per Crown shall I have at Lucca^ Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Exchange serves to know how to make the account, when Lucca
exchangeth with Placentia, being done by the Rule of Three, saying, If Crow.
177 give 100 Crow. of Mark, how much will 477. 13. 8. Crow. give? And it will
be 406. 10. 10 Crow. of Mark. And this is to be observed in the proof of the
rest, according to former mentioned rules.

CHAP. CCCXCVII. Of the Exchanges of Placentia with Francfort.
Exchanges of Placentia with Francfort.
PLacentia does Exchange with Francfort, and gives Crowns 100 of Mark to have
here Crow. 110 of 93 Quarentines per Crown: I demand then for 800 Crowns of
Mark, how many Florins of 60 Quarentines per Flor. shall I have in Francfort?
Multiply the said Crow. 800 by Crow. 110 per cent. cutting off the two last
figures, the which multiply by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of
Gold, and it comes to 884 Crowns of Quarentines 93, the which to make Florins,
must be multiplied by 93 Quarentines, and they are 82212 Quarentines, from
which cut off the last figure, and take of the rest, and they then do make
Florins 1370, and the tenth remaining, with the 2 Quarentines, which is the
figure cut off, and it makes 12, from which taking to make them Sols, by
reason that 3 Quarentines make one Sol, and they are Florins 1370, and Sols 4,
which is the credit that must be rendered in Francfort, as shall appear by
Example: ^

Proof.
The proof hereof appears when Francfort Exchangeth for Placentia. And thus
much shall serve for the Exchanges practiced a Dritura from Placentia.

CHAP. CCCXCVIII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances in Placentia.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Placentia.
ACcording to my method proposed, I will here add some examples of Draughts and
Remittances made by Order and Commission, in this place of Placentia, wherein I
will somewhat enlarge my self, by reason that it is the most noted and eminent
place of Exchanges at this day practiced in the World.

1. Example.
To Placentia then is order given, to remit to Venice at Duc. 134, or to
Florence at Crowns 110 where the benefit shall appear to be most, that is to
say, that finding to remit to one of the said two places, with benefit of the
limited prices, the remittance be made thither where most will be given, and if
the Remittance be found to be made with loss, to that which will give the
least: For Florence then there is found at Crow. 111, and for Venice at Duc.
135: I demand whither ought the Remittance to be made? for to both the
Remittance is found to be with profit: And to know where the greatest gain will
be, I say by the Rule of Three, If Duc. 134 give 110 the inordered price, what
will 135 Duc. give? The price found, it will make Crow. 111, or circa, so that
there is more profit to make the Remittance to Florence, because that remitting
at Duc. 135, to make the Par, the Remittance should be for Florence at Crow.
111, and the partido found is 111 Crow. As in the following Example: ^

See Example.
Again, at Placentia there is order received to remit to Antwerp at Grosses 123,
or to Barselona at Sol, where the most advantage shall be found; there is found
a parcel for Antwerp at Gross 120, and for Barselona at Sol 24, I would know
to which must the Remittance be made, seeing that in both places there is loss
given upon the prices that are inordered: and to know where is the least, I say
by the Rule of Three, If Sols 24 give Grosses 123, the price ^ordered, what
will 24 Sols give, the price that is found? And it makes Grosses 120; so that
the Remittance must be made for Antwerp, by reason that remitting to Barselona
at Sols 24, to make the Par, the Remittance should be made to Antwerp at Gross
120; and it is found at 120 ^/3: ^

CHAP. CCCXCIX. Questions upon the Exchanges practiced at Placentia.
Questions upon the Exchanges practiced at Placentia.
AT Florence there is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of the Fair,
posito at Crow. 109, and for Venice at Crow. 81, I would know by the said
Exchanges, at what price Placentia does hereby exchange for Venice? To do which
say by the Rule of Three, If 81 Cro. of Gold of Florence give at Venice 100
Duc. of Livers 6, how many will 109 Crow. give, the price of 100 Crow. of Mark?
and it will make Duc. 134 of l. 6, and at that price should Placentia exchange
for Venice: Where by the way it is to be noted, That it is a thing evident,
that Exchanges are here made at greater or lesser prices, according to the
plenty or scarcity of money to be found, and the rates uncertain, these rules
only serving for instruction to make up the accounts thereof. ^

Question for Venetia.
Again, at Naples is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a Fair there,
at Duc. 136, and for Venice at Duc. 101, I would know by the said Exchanges at
what prices should Placentia Exchange with Venice? I say by the Rule of Three,
If Duc. 101 of Naples give at Venice Duc. 100 at l. 6, how many will 136 Duc.
give, the price of 100 Crowns of Mark? and it will appear to make Duc. 134
11/24, and at that price should Placentia Exchange for Venice; As by Example: ^

Question for Naples.
Again, at Venice there is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a Fair,
at Duc. 133, and for Naples at Duc. 102, I demand by the said parties, at what
price should Placentia Exchange for Naples? You must multiply the said Duc.
133, which is the value of 100 Crow. of Mark, by Duc. 102 per cent. by reason
that the said Duc. 102 are the value of 100 Duc. of Venice, and thus wrought,
it will make Duc. 137 or thereabout, and at that price should Placentia
Exchange with Naples: ^

Question for Rome.
Again, at Naples is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a Fair, at
Duc. 136^, and for Rome at Duc. 137, I demand by the said Exchanges, at what
price should Placentia Exchange with Rome? I say then by the Rule of Three, If
Duc. 137 of Naples give at Rome Crow. 100 of Gold of Estampe, how many will
Duc. 136 give, the price of 100 Crow. of Mark? and thus it will come to Crow.
99 or Circa of Gold of Estampe, and at that price should Placentia Exchange
with Rome. ^

Question for Florence.
Again, at Rome is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a Fair there,
at Crow. 99, and for Florence at Crow. 90. I demand by the said Exchanges, at
what price should Placentia Exchange with Florence? I say then by the Rule of
Three, If Crow. 90. of Gold of Estampe, give in Florence Crow. 100 of Gold,
what will Crow. 99. of Estampe, the value of Crow. 100 of Mark, give? It will
be Crow. 100, and at that price should Placentia exchange for Florence. ^

Question for Millan.
Again, at Rome is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a Fair there,
at Crow. 99, and for Millan at Crow. 86, I demand by the said Exchanges at what
prices should Placentia Exchange with Millan? I say by the Rule of Three, If
Cro. 86 of Gold of Estampe give at Millan Cro. 100 of l. 5. 17. 0. what will
Crowns 99, the price of 100 Crow. of Mark, give? It will be Crow. 115. 2, 3.
which being multiplied by Sol. 117, the price of the Crown in cutting the two
last figures off its product, to reduce the Exchange to the value of the Crown
of Mark, there will remain Sol. 134, and at that price should Placentia
Exchange with, or for Millan: ^

Question for Genoa.
Again, at Millan is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a Fair there,
at Sol 133, and for Genoa at Sol 118, I demand by the said Exchanges, at what
price should Placentia Exchange for Genoa? I say by the Rule of Three, If Sols
118 of Millan (the price of the Crown of 4 l. of Genoa) give Sols 80, what will
Sols 133 give (the price of the Crown of Mark in money of Millan? and it will
be 90 Sols of current money, the which without making the reduction into money
of Gold, seeing it has been already said, that 90 Sols of current money is
worth 68 Sol. of Gold, and at this price should Placentia exchange with, and
for Genoa. ^

Question for Lions.
Again, at Venice is Exchange made for Placentia, in expedition of a Fair there,
at Duc. 141. and for Lions at 116, I demand by the said Exchanges, at what
price should Placentia exchange for Lions? I say by the Rule of Three, If Duc.
141. of l. 6. of Venice give in Placentia Crow. 100. how many will Duc. 116
give (the value of the Crow. 100 of Gold of the Sun of Lions?) and it will be
Crow. 82 or circa, and at that price should Placcntia exchange with Lions. ^

Another.
At Placentia there is Exchange made for Lions at Crow. 83, and for Florence at
Crow. 113, and from that place we have advice, that they exchange for Lions at
Crow. 95, I would know by the said Exchanges, if it be beneficial to remit from
Placentia to Lions, and to draw from Florence, by inordering my Factors at
Florence to prevail upon Lions at the said price of Crow. 95. To know which,
you must multiply the said Crow. 83 of Mark, being the price of Crow. 100 of
the Sun of Gold, by Crow. 113. of Gold per cent. seeing that the said Crowns of
Gold are the value of 100 Crowns of Mark, and from the product cut off the two
last figures, and there will remain Crow. 94. 7. 1. to which adding per cent.
for the provisions which are paid, the one at Florence, the other at Lions, and
they will be Crow. 94. 19. 8. so that it will be profitable to draw and to
remit according to the abovesaid order and manner, because that at Florence may
be taken by Exchange for Lions at Crow. 95 or circa, and finding Crow. 95, upon
which consideration is to be had, what the moneys of Florence may do by
Exchange for Lions; which thus I work by Example: ^

Now for the terms of payments of Bills of Exchanges in Placentia, it is
expressed in the Trade of that City, in Chapter 383.

And this shall suffice to have said of the Exchanges practiced at Placentia,
where by reason of the great and continued practices here daily made for vast
sums, I have somewhat more than ordinarily enlarged my self, and so I proceed
to the next place of Exchanges, which is Florence.

CHAP. CCCC. Examples of Exchanges practiced at Florence, and how the same are
to be calculated.
Exchanges practiced in Florence.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Florence, with how many other places
the said City is found to Exchange with, and there also showed the common
rates, how the same is observed to rule, which every day is so subject to
alter, that no set price can be peremptorily set down for the same, yet in it
self it is so beneficial, that thereby the ignorant may be furthered to make
his Accounts either in Draughts or Remittances: The way of making which
Accounts, upon this place, now remains here to be handled, observing the same
with so many other places, as may make a man capable to understand the same,
with any of the rest here omitted.

Accounts kept in Florence.
And by the way it is observable here, That all Exchangers here do keep their
Accounts in Crowns, Sols and Deniers of Gold, or Lire or Livers 7 of that money
per Crown, the which are cast up by 20 and by 12, because that 20 Sols of Gold
do make one Crown, and 12 Den. one Sol.

CHAP. CCCCI. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Lions.
Exchanges of Florence with Lions.
FLorence then is found to Exchange with Lions, and gives posito Crow. 95 of
Gold, to have in Lions 100 Crowns of the Sun of Gold, I demand for Crow. 1268.
9. of Gold, how many Crowns of the Sun shall I have in Lions? I say by the Rule
of Three, If Crow. 95 give Crowns 100, what will Crowns 1268. 9. give? And it
comes to Crowns 1324, and the remainder of the division being multiplied by 20
and by 12, to bring them into Sols and Deniers of Gold, they will make in all
Crowns 1324. 15. of Gold of the Sun, which I should have Credit in Lions for
the said sum of Crowns of Florence: The calculation thereof here follows: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is seen, when Lions does Exchange with Florence.

CHAP. CCCCII. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Placentia.
Exchanges of Florence with Placentia.
FLorence does Exchange with Placentia, and gives posito 110 Crowns of Gold,
to have there 100 Crowns of Mark, I demand then for Crowns 4973. 1. 0. of Gold,
how many Crowns of Mark is due to me? First reduce the said Crowns 110 into
Sols of Gold, multiplying them by 20, adding to the multiplication 10 Sols for
the half Crown, and they make Sol. 2210: likewise reduce the said sum of Crowns
of Gold into Sols, and it will be 99461: Then say by the Rule of Three, If Sols
2210 give Crow. 100 of Mark, what will Sol. 99461 give? To which adding two
ciphers for the 100, and then dividing it, will come to Crowns of Mark, and
multiplying the rest of the division by 20, and then by 12, to make the same
Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make Crowns 4500. 9. 11. of Mark, and
so much must I have Credit in Placentia for the said Crow. 4973. 1. 0. of Gold
of Florence, as by Example calculated: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Account is seen, when the Exchange is made from Placentia to
Florence, etc.

CHAP. CCCCIII. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Venetia.
Exchanges of Florence with Venice.
FLorence does Exchange with Venice, and gives posito Crow. 81 of Gold, to
have Duc. in Banco 100 of Livers 6 I demand then, for Crow. 2037. 10. of Gold,
how many Duc. shall Florence have credit in Venice? To do which, bring the
Crow. 81 into half Crowns, multiplying them by 2, and so in the same manner the
said sum of Crow. of Gold, adding half a Crown for the 10 Sols: then say by the
Rule of Three, If the half Crowns produced of the price of the Exchange, give
at Venice Duc. 100, what will the half Crowns give, proceeding from the said
sum of Crow. of Gold? and so by adding two ciphers for the 100, and dividing
the same, it will make Duc. 2500, which Florence is to have in Venice; and if
there were any remaining of the division, they must be multiplied by 24, to
make them Grosses, because that 24 Gross. make a Duc. of Lib. 6. 4 Sols.
Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Account is more evident, when Venice does rechange for
Florence.

CHAP. CCCCIV. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Rome.
Exchanges of Florence with Rome.
FLorence is said to Exchange with Rome, and gives 100 Crowns of Gold to have
in the said place posito Crowns 92 of Gold of Estampe; I demand then, for Crow.
1600, 2 Sols 5 Den. of Gold of Florence, how many Crowns of Gold of Estampe
shall Florence have credit for in Rome? First multiply the said Sum of Crowns
of Gold at 92 per cent. and multiply the remainder by 20 and by 12, to bring
them into Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they make Crowns 1476, 2 Sols, 2 Den.
of Gold, which should be had in Rome: As for Example: ^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Rule is evident, when this parcel is rechanged from Rome
to Flounce.

CHAP. CCCCV. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Naples.
Exchanges of Florence with Naples.
FLorence Exchangeth with Naples, and gives Crow. 100 of Gold, to have in
Naples posito Duc. 119 of Taries 5 per Duc. I demand then, for Crow. 780. 15 of
Gold, what credit in Duc. shall Florence have in Naples? To do which, first
multiply the said sum of Crow. of Gold by Grains 119 per Crown, because it is
so many Grains per Crow. as it comes to be Duc. for Crow. 100. and they make
Grains 93429. of which cut off the two last figures, to make them Ducats,
saying that the Duc. is worth 100 Grains, and they make Duc. 934. and for the
Grains 29, Taries 1, and Grains 9. And so much Credit shall Florence have in
Naples, as by this Example is showed: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is manifested, when Naples is seen to exchange with
Florence.

CHAP. CCCCVI. Of the Exchanges of Florence with Antwerp.
Exchanges of Florence with Antwerp.
FLorence does Exchange with Antwerp, and gives one Crown of Gold, to have in
the said place Groff. 112 posito. I demand then, for Crowns 1400. 12. 8. of
Gold how many pounds of Groff. am I to have in Antwerp? To do this, multiply
the said sum of Crowns by the said price of Gross. 112, and it makes Grosses
157571. of which, take the 1, to make them Sols, and they make Sols 13130, and
Gross. 11. which to reduce to pounds, cut off the last figure of the said Sols
or Shillings, and take of the rest, and it makes pounds 656, and for the tenth
that is remaining, it is to be accounted 10 Sols; and if the figure cut off had
been any number, it should have been added to the 10 Sols: and it thus makes
pounds, 656. 10. 11. Money of Antwerp. ^

Proof.
The proof of the said Account is seen, when that Antwerp does exchange with
Florence.

Note Florence with London.
Note, That when Florence does Exchange for London, which is seldom in use, the
rule of casting up the same in sterling Money, is this as above with Antwerp in
Flemish Pounds.

CHAP. CCCCVII. To Reduce Crowns of 7 l. in Florence into Crowns of Gold of
Lire, 7.
IF in Florence you would reduce any sum of Crowns of money of Lire 7 l. per
Crow. into Crowns of Gold of Lire 7 l., you must take the 1 of the Crow. of
money, and the remainder will be Crowns of Gold.

And if again you would reduce Crowns of Gold into Crowns of Money, you must
add contrarily to the Crow. of Gold 1, and they will be so many Crowns of
Money: As for Example: ^

CHAP. CCCCVIII. Of the Terms of Payment of Bills of Exchange in Florence.
THE Term of Payment of Bills of Exchange is found to be from Florence. To
Naples at 10 days sight, and from thence at 15 days sight. To Rome at 10 days
sight, and so back. To Venice at 5 days sight, and thence at 20 days after
date. To Bollonia at 3 days sight, and so back, and so for Pisa. To Ferrara at
5 days sight, and so back. To Perugia and Sciena at 2 days sight, and so back.
To Genoa at 8 days sight, and so back. To Avignon at 30 days after date, and
thence 45 days after date. To Gaietta at 10 days sight, and so back. To Paris 2
months after sight, and so back. To Padua at 5 days sight, and so back. To
Palermo and Mesina at 15 days sight, and so back. To Ancona at 10 days sight,
and so back. To Barselona at 2 months after date, and so back. To Valentia at
40 days sight, and so back. To Bruges and Antwerp at 2 months after date, and
so back. To London at 3 months after date, and so back. To Genoa at the Fairs,
and thence 15 days sight back. To Lions to the Fair, and from Fair to Fair. To
Millan at 10 days fight, and so back. To Aquila and Sermona at 11 days sight.
To Comerino at 8 days sight, and so back.


CHAP. CCCCIX. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances by Exchanges in the City of Florence in Tuscany.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances by
exchange in Florence.
ACcording to my proposed method, I will here set down an Example or two of
Draughts and Remittances, made by Order and Commission in Florence.

1 Example.
To Florence then comes advice from Venice, that the Exchange for the said
place of Florence comes at Crow. 80 and for Placentia at Duc. 135, they
inorder in the said place of Venice, That at this rate they make a Remittance
to Florence, and draw from Placentia, at how much then will the Draught of
Florence for Placentia come unto? To do this,

Multiply Duc. 135, which is the value of 100 Crow. of Mark by Crow. 80 of Gold
per cent. because the said Crow. of Gold is the rate of the Duc. 100 of Venice,
and it will be Crow. 109. 19. from which take 2/^ per cent. for the provision
paid at Venice, and there will rest Crow. 108. 12. 10. and so many Crow. of
Gold is imbursed at Florence for 100 Crow. of Mark for a debt at Placentia; As
thus for Example: ^

2 Example.
Again, one of Venice is Creditor in Florence Crow. 3000 of Gold, who inordereth
that the same be remitted unto him at Crow. 81, or by Placentia at Crow. 110,
where the most advance and profit shall appear to be, that is to say, That
finding a Remittance in both places to benefit of the price limited, the
Remittance should be where the profit and benefit is greatest, and finding the
Remittance to loss, the Remittance be made where the damage is least, there is
then Bills found for Venice at Crow. 82, and for Placentia at Crow. 110, I
demand by which of the two should the Remittance be made?

By both the said places there is found a delivery to loss, and to know which
of the two is the least, say by the Rule of Three, If Crow. 81 give Crow. 110
the price limited, what will Crow. 82 the price found give? and it will come to
Crow. 111. 0. 2. So that the Remittance should be made by Placentia, because
that remitting to Venice; at Crow. 82, to run at the Par, the delivery should
be for Placentia at Crow. 114. and the Bills is at Crow. 110, As in the
following Example. ^

3. Example.
Again, one of Rome is debtor in Florence in Crow. 2500, who inordereth that
the draught be made at Crow. 91, or by Placentia at Crow. 110 where the most
profit shall appear to be, now there is found money for Rome at Crow. 92^ l.
for Placentia, at 109 Crow. I demand, whither should this draught be made,
seeing that to both the places the draughts happen to be to loss in both the
limited prices? And to know which is the least of both, say by the Rule of
Three, If Crow. 92 the price found for Rome (seeing that Placentia receives
the uncertain rate from Florence) give Crow. 110, what will Crow. 91 the price
inordered give? It will make Crow. 109. 1. 2. so that the draught shall be made
for Placentia, seeing that drawing for Rome at Crow. 92^, to run upon a Par,
should be taken for Placentia at the said price at Crow. 109, or thereabout,
and there is found at more, that is at Crow. 109: As by Example: ^

And so much shall suffice to have said of the Orders and Commissions in
Draughts and Remittances by Exchange of Florence.

CHAP. CCCCX. Examples of Exchanges practiced at Millan, and how the same are
to be calculated.
Exchanges practiced at Millan.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Millan, with how many other places
this City is found to Exchange, and there also set down the common current
rates thereof, which every day is found so to alter, and no positive rule can
be observed in the same; yet is in it self so beneficial, that thereby the
unexperienced may know how to make his Accounts, either in his Draughts or
Remittances; the way of framing these Accounts now remains, observing the
same with some few other, the principal needful hereunto.

Accounts kept in Millan.
It is also to be noted, That Exchangers do there keep their Accounts in Lire,
Sols, and Deniers, and cast up by 20 and 12, because that 20 Sols do make a
Lire, and 12 Deniers a Sol.

CHAP. CCCCXI. Of the Exchanges of Millan with Lions.
Exchanges of Millan with Lions.
MIllan then exchanges with Lions, and gives posito Sols 118 to have in the
said place, one Crown of the Sun of Gold, I demand then for l. 9258. Sol. 5 of
Millan, how many Crowns shall I have credit in Lions? First reduce into Sols
the said sum of Livers, of Millan, and they make Sols 185165, the which must be
multiplied by 3 to make them thirds of Sols; likewise bring the Sols 118 into
thirds, multiplying them by 3, and they make 355, for division of the said sum,
and by division it will come to be Crowns, and multiplying the remainder of the
division by 20 and 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will be
Crowns 1564. 15. 5. of Gold of the Sun, and so much will be had in Lions for
the said sum of li. 9258. 5 of Millan Money, as by this Example: ^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Account is seen when that Lions exchangeth with Millan,
as before.

CHAP. CCCCXII. Of the Exchanges of Millan with Placentia.
Exchanges of Millan with Placentia.
MIllan does exchange with Placentia, and gives posito Sols 133, to have in
Placentia one Crown of Mark; I demand then for Livers 9671. 16. 8. of Millan,
how many Crowns of Mark must I have in Placentia?

First, reduce into Deniers the said 133 Sols, multiplying them by 12, and
adding 4 Deniers for the of a Sol. and they make Deniers 1600, and then to
reduce into Deniers the said sum of Lire, multiply them by 20 and by 12, adding
to the multiplication Sol. 16. and Deniers 8, which account with the Livers,
and they make Deniers 2321240, the which must be divided by Deniers 1600, the
price of the Crown of Mark, and by division they will come to be Crowns,
multiplying the rest of the division by 20 and then by 12, to make them Sols
and Deniers of Gold, and they make Crow. 1450. 15. 6. of Mark, and so much will
the said sum be in Placentia. Example: ^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Rule is manifested when that Placentia exchangeth for
Millan.

CHAP. CCCCXIII. Of the Exchanges of Millan with Venice.
Exchanges of Millan with Venice.
MIllan exchangeth with Venice, and gives a Crown of Livers of 5. 17 s. to
have in that place, posito 148 l. Sols, money of Piccoli, I demand for l. 7260.
10. 0. of Millan, how many Ducats of l. 6 shall I have in Venice?

You must divide the said sum of Livers, by Livers 5. 17. reducing them, and
the other price into Deniers, and it will be Crow. 1241. 0. 9. the which must
be multiplied by l. 7. 8. 6. the Crown, which are the abovesaid 148. 6,
beginning to multiply the l. 7. by the Den. 9. 4. then by the Sols, if there
were any with the said Crowns, calculating for Deniers 12 one Sol, and for Sols
20 one Lire, and they will be l. 9214. 14. money of Piccoli of Venice; which to
be reduced into Ducats, must be divided by l. 6, the value of the Ducat, and it
will make Duc. 1486 ^/24 of l. 6^, and so much shall I have in Venice for the
sum above mentioned in Livers of Millan, as by Example is more apparent: ^

Proof.
The proof of the said account is seen when Venice does exchange for Millan.

CHAP. CCCCXIV. Of the Exchanges of Millan with Rome.
Exchanges of Millan with Rome.
MIllan exchangeth with Rome, and gives posito Crow. 115 of l. 5. 17. per
Crow. to have in the said place Crow. 100 of Gold of Estampe, I demand then for
l. 7820. 18 of Millan, how many Crowns of Gold of Estampe shall I have in Rome?

You must first see for the said sum of Millan Livers, how many Crowns they
will be, dividing them by l. 5. 17 per Crown, and they make Crown. 1336. 18. 1,
then say by the Rule of Three, If Crow. 115 of Millan give in Rome Crowns 100
of Estampe, how many Crowns will the said Crow. 1336. 18. 1. give? and it will
amount to Crowns 1157. 9. 9. of Gold of Estampe, which will be given in Rome
for the said sum of Millan Livers as abovesaid. Example: ^

Proof.
The Proof of this Rule is seen when that Rome does exchange with Millan.

CHAP. CCCCXV. Of the Exchanges of Millan with Naples.
Exchanges of Millan with Naples.
MIllan does exchange with Naples, and gives Crow. 100 of l. 5 per Crow. to
have in Naples posito 98 Ducats, I demand for l. 4314 -- 14 -- 2 of Millan, how
many Ducats shall I have in Naples? First take of the said sum of Livers to
reduce them into Crow. of 5 l. and they make Crow. 862. 18. 10. which must be
multiplied by grains 98 per Crow. seeing it is the same as at Ducats 98 per 100
Crow. and it makes grains 84999, and cutting off the two last figures, there
will remain Ducats 849; and for the two figures cut off, which are grains 99,
will be Livers 4, grains 19, in all Ducats 849. 4. 19. which is to be had in
Naples for the said sum of Livers of Millan; As for Example: ^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Account is seen when Naples shall exchange with Millan.

CHAP. CCCCXVI. Of the Exchanges of Millan for Genoa.
Exchanges of Millan with Genoa.
MIllan exchangeth with Genoa, and gives posito Sols 118 to have in Genoa one
Crown for 4 l. of that money, I demand for l. 5703. 18. 0 of Millan, how many
Livers of current Money shall I have in Genoa? First, reduce the said sum into
Sols, multiplying them by 20, and adding to the multiplication the 18 Sols,
which account with the Livers, and then of the Sols produced, and of the said
Sols 118 taken for division, bring into Sols, and dividing the same will become
Crowns, and the remainder of the Division multiply by 20 and by 12 to make them
Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will make Crowns 962. 13. 8. of l. 4. money
of Genoa, the which to bring into Livers, must be multiplied by l. 4. per Crow.
beginning to multiply the said l. 4. by Deniers 8, and by the Sols 13, which
are with the Crowns, calculating for 12 Deniers 1 Sol, and for 20 Sols one
Liver, it will come to l. 3850. 14. 8. and so many Livers of money current
shall you have in Genoa for the said Livers 5703. 18. of Millan. ^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Rule is seen when that Genoa does exchange for Millan.

CHAP. CCCCXVII. Of Terms of Payment of Bills of Exchange in Millan.
Terms of payments of Bills of Exchange in Millan.
THE Terms of Payment found to be in Millan, are observed to be from thence To
Genoa at 5 days sight, and so back. To Pisa at 10 days sight, and so back. To
Florence at 10 days sight, and so back. To Venice at 10 days sight, and so
back. To Paris at 2 months after date, and so back. To Bruges and Antwerp at 2
months after date, and so back. To Barselona at 20 days sight, and so back. To
Montpellier at 20 days sight, and so back. To Lions for a Fair, and so from
Fair to Fair.


And thus much shall serve to have spoken of the Exchanges of Millan: and now
to Orders and Commissions in use in the said place.

CHAP. CCCCXVIII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances.
Orders and Commission^ given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Millan.
ACcording to my proposed method, I will here briefly insert some Examples of
Draughts and Remittances made here by Order and Commission from other places.

1 Example.
From Naples then comes Order to Millan, to remit for Placentia at 133 Sol. and
to prevail for Genoa at Sol. 118, the parcel being for 3000 Crowns of Mark. Now
there are Bills found for Placentia at Sols 131. considering then the benefit,
which is found in the Remittance, at how much may the Draught be for Genoa? Say
by the Rule of Three, If Sol. 133 give 118, the price inordered, what will 131
give, the price found for Placentia? And it will be Sol. 116, and at this price
the Draught must be made for Genoa, in remitting to Placentia at Sol. 131, and
the Commission will remain effected according to the Order given. ^

2 Example.
Again, from Lions is order given to Millan, that they may draw for Lions at
Sol. 118, and re^it to Venice at Sol. 145, the parcel being for Duc. 5500 of l.
6 per Duc. there is money for Lions at Sol. 119, and Bills for Venice at Sol.
144, I demand if at these prices the order may be performed? Say by the Rule of
Three, taking one of the prices which is found for divisor, by reason that
Millan gives (according to my former method) the certain price to Venice, and
the uncertain to Lions; and say, If 144, the price found for Venice, give Sol.
118, what will 145 the price inordered give? And it will make 118, so that the
said Commission at the prices found, may be effected to benefit, because that
remitting to Venice, at the said price of 144, the Draught may be made for
Lions at 118, and there is money found at Sol. 119. As by Example: ^

2 Example.
Again, from Rome comes Order to Millan, to draw on them at Crow. 115, and
remit to Pla^ntia at 132 Sol, the party being for Crow. 4000, there is Bills
found for Placentia at Sol. 133, and mo. for Rome at Crow. 11. 6, I demand if
at these rates the Commission may be performed without loss? Say by the Rule of
Three, If Sol. 132 give Cro. 11. 5. tho price limited, what will 133 give, the
price found for Placentia? And it will come to Crow. 116. 6. 1. so that the
Commission may be performed to benefit, because that remitting to Placentia at
the said price of Sol. 133 the Draught may be made for Rome at Crow. 116 3/18,
and there is found at more, that is to say, at Crow. 116; as per Example: ^

And thus much shall serve for the Exchanges of Millan, next is Palermo and
Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXIX. Of Exchanges practiced in Palermo and Mesina, and how the same
are to be calculated.
Exchanges practiced in Palermo and Mesina.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with how many
other places these Cities in Sicilia are observed to Exchange, and there also
set down the common current Rates thereof, which every day are found so subject
to alteration, that no positive rule can be observed in the same, yet it is in
it self so beneficial, that thereby the unexperienced may know how to make his
calculation both in his Draughts and Remittances. The way of casting the sum up
is now to be handled, observing the same here with some few principal places,
which is sufficient for instruction to those others omitted.

Accounts kept in Sicilia.
First, it is to be noted, that in Palermo and Mesina, and generally throught
the Island of Sicilia the Exchangers keep their Accounts in Ounces, Taries and
Grains, which are cast up by 30 and 20, because that 30 Taries do make an
Ounce, and 20 Grains make a Tarry: And also it is to be observed, That the
Ducat is worth Taries 13, which is Carlins 26; the Crown of money is worth
Taries 12, which is Carlins 24. The Florin is worth Taries 6, which is Carlins
12. So that the Tarry is -- 2 Carlins. The Carlin is -- 10 Grains. The Grain is
-- 6 Picolis.


CHAP. CCCCXX. Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Lions.
Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Lions.
PAlermo and Mesina does Exchange with Lions, and gives posito 28 Carlins to
have in Lions a Crown of the Sun, I demand then for ounces 2189. 25. 17, how
many Crowns must I have in Lions? First, multiply the ounces by 30, to make
them Taries, adding thereto the 25 Taries, and multiply the Taries that will
come thereof by 20 to bring them into Grains, and add thereto 17 which are with
the ounces, and then they will be Grains 1313917; do the same likewise with the
28 Carlins, multiplying them by 10, because the Carlin is worth 10 Grains, and
they will be 280 Grains, the which must be taken for divisor against the said
Grains come from the ounces 2189. 25. 17, and from the division will come
Crowns of the Sun, and multiplying the remainder by 20, and then by 12, to make
them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they will be Crow. 4692. 11. 2; As for
Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen when that Lions shall Exchange back with
Palermo and Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXXI. Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Placentia.
Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Placentia.
PAlermo and Mesina Exchange for Placentia, and give posito Carlins 29 to have
in the said place one Crown of Mark, I demand then for ounces 1180, Taries 7,
and Grains 19, how many Crowns of Mark shall I have in Placentia? Herein do as
in the precedent account, multiplying the said ounces by 30, to make them
Taries, and add the 7, which are with the ounces, and then multiply the said
Taries by 20, to make them Grains, and add the 19, and they will be Grains
7081. 59. do the same with the 29 Carlins, multiplying them by 10 to being them
into Grains, adding 5 for the Carlin, and they make 295 grains, the which taken
for divisor, against the sum of Grains come of the ounces 1180. 7. 19, and of
the division will come Crow. of Mark; multiplying the remainder by 20, and then
by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, and they make Crow. 2400. 10. 9.
and so many Crow. of Mark shall I have in Placentia for the said sum of Ounces.
^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Rule is seen when that Placentia does exchange either for
Palermo or Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXXII. Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Naples.
Exchanges of Palermo, etc. with Naples.
PAlermo and Mesina does Exchange with Naples, and gives posito Pomitos 166 of
8 Picolis to have one Ducat of 5 Taries, I demand then, for Ounces 1053, Taries
6, and 2 Grains how many Ducats must I have? First multiply the said sum of
Ounces by 30, to make them Taries, and then by 20 to make them Grains, adding
to the multiplication 6 Taries, and 2 Grains which accompany the Ounces, and
then they make Grains 631922, out of which to make them Pomitos take out the,
because that the Grain is worth 6 Picolis, and the Pomito is worth 8 Picolis,
of which the 2 Picols overplus is the of 8, and then they make Pomitos 473942,
which must be divided by the said 166 the price of the Exchange, reducing them
into Picolis both on the one and on the other side, and by division they will
make Ducats of Naples, multiplying the remainder by 100, and adding of two
Ciphers, to bring them into Grains, because that the Ducat is 100 Grains, and
the same will be Ducats 2846; and for the Grains 49, Tarics 2, and Grains 9, of
Taries 5 per Ducat, which is to be rendered at Naples for the said sum of Ounces
of money of Palermo; Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is seen when that Nuples does Exchange for either
Palermo or Mesina.

CHAP. CCCCXXIII. Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Venice.
Exchanges of Palermo, etc. with Venice.
PAlermo and Mesina does Exchange with Venice, and gives one Crown of 12
Taries, to have in Venice l. 6. 18 posito, I demand for ounces 1486 26. 10,
what credit in Ducats shall I have in Venice of l. 6 per Ducat? First reduce
the said Ounces into Crowns of 12 Taries, multiplying them by 30, to make them
Taries, adding to the multiplication the 26 Taries which are with the ounces,
and they make Taries 44606, out of which take 1/12, and they then make Cro.
3717, Taries 2, and Grains 10, which must be multiplied by 138 Sol per crow.
which are the said l. 61. 8, and they make Sols 512974, which must be divided
by 124 the price of the Ducat, and it will make Ducats 4136; and so much shall
I have in Venice for the said sum of ounces in Palermo or Mesina. Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is to see if 4136 21/24 Duc. of l. 6 of Venice make the
said sum of Ounces 1486. 26. 10. of l. 6. 18 money of Venice, for one Crown of
12 Taries in Palermo, or Mesina, as abovesaid.

CHAP. CCCCXXIV. Of the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Barselona.
Exchanges of Palermo, etc. with Barselona.
PAlermo and Mesina Exchanges with Barselona, and gives one Florin of 6
Taries, money of Palermo, to have in Barselona posito 10 Sols, money current of
Barselona; I demand then for 300 ounces what credit in Livers is due for the
same? First, multiply the said ounces by 5 to make them Florins, the ounce
being accounted 5 Florins, and it makes 1500 Florins, the which multiplied by
10 Sols per Florin, make Sols 15750, which to reduce to Livers, you must cut
off the last figure, and take of the rest, and it will be l 787. 10, which is
due at Barselona. ^

Proof.
For the proof of the said Rule, as above divide the said Livers l. 787. 10 by
10 Sol. to make them Florins, and it is 1500 Flor. and if there were any
remainders, they should be multiplied by 6 and then by 20, to bring them into
Taries and Grains: and for to reduce the said 1500 Flor. into ounces, you must
take, for that 5 Flor. make one ounce, and it will come to 300 ounces, the Rule
thus appearing right and just.

Palermo and Mesina, with Saragosa and Valentia.
And for the Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina, with Valentia and Saragosa, it is
cast up as above, we therefore need not insist further, as being easily
comprehended.

CHAP. CCCCXXV. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances in Palermo and Mesina.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Palermo and Mesina.
ACcording to my proposed method, I will here briefly insert some examples of
Draughts and Remittances made by Order and Commission in Palermo and Mesina
from other places: At Mesina, the Exchange for Lions is found to go at Carlins
28, and for Placentia at Carlins 33, and from hence there is an exchange for
Lions at Crow. 81, I demand if at these prices there will be a benefit to remit
from Mesina to Placentia, and draw for Lions, to remit from Placentia to the
said Lions at the said price of Cro. 81? Say by the Rule of Three, If Carlins
33 the value of a Crown of Mark (to reduce the exchange to the value of 100
Crow.) give 100 Crow. of Mark, what will 28 Carlins give, the value of the
Crown of the Sun? And it will be Crow. 84 11/20, out of which must be abated
per cent. for provision payable at Lions, and another at Placentia, and there
will remain Crow. 84 3/10, and at this price the remittance may be made from
Placentia to Lions, to satisfy that debt, and finding to remit at less, that
is at Crow. 81, it appears plainly to be to profit to draw and to remit
according to the aforesaid Order, in which also lies this consideration, that
the money of Placentia for Lions may also vary from the said price. Example: ^

1 Example.
Again, from Venice there is Order given to Mesina, to draw upon them at l. 6.
14, and to remit to Placentia at Carlins 29, the partido being for Crowns 2000
of Mark. Now there are Bills for Placentia found at Carlins 29, and money for
Venice at l. 6. 12. 6, I demand if at these prices the said Commission may be
effected? Say by the Rule of Three, taking one of the prices that is found for
divisor, because that from Mesina to Venice it gives the price certain, and to
Placentia the uncertain, saying thus, If Carlins 29 the price found for
Placentia, give Sol. 134, which are the said l. 6. 14. what will Carlins 29
give, the price inordered? And it will make Sol. 131, or thereabout, so that
the said Commission may not be effected but to loss, seeing that remitting to
Placentia at the said price of 29 Carl the draught, cannot be made to Venice at
more than Sol. 131, and money is not found but at Sol. 132, which are the said
l. 6. 12. 6 d. Example: ^

2 Example.
Again, from Naples there is an exchange made for Mesina at Duc. 118 1/31, and
for Placentia at Duc. 132. Now there is order given in Naples, that at these
rates, they draw for Mesina, and that they remit to Placentia, I demand then at
how much will the remittance be from Mesina to Placentia? Say by the Rule of
Three, If grains 118 make disbursed in Mesina Carl. 26, the price of the Crow.
of Taries 13, how many will 132 grains disbursed be, the value of the Crow. of
Mark? It will make Carlins 29, and of a grain, and so many Carlins (and then
per cent. for the provision that is paid at Naples) comes to be disbursed in
Mesina for one Crown of Mark of credit in Placentia. ^

And thus much shall serve to have said of the Exchanges that are practiced in
Palermo and Mesina, to which the whole Island of Sicilia has reference.

CHAP. CCCCXXVI. Of Examples upon the Exchanges that are practiced in
Barselona, and how the same are calculated.
Exchanges practiced in Barselona.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of Barselona, how many other places
Barselona is found to Exchange with, and there also set down the common rates
how the same for the most part is found to govern, which every day is so
subject to alter, that no positive Rules can be set down for the same, howbeit
the same is in it self so available, that thereby the unexperienced may know
how to make the account thereof, at what rate soever the Exchange is found to
be, either in remittance or draughts, the which only now remains to be
handled, observing the same with so many other Towns, as may be fittest to
understand the ground thereof.

Accounts kept in Barselona.
It is then to be noted, That Bankers and Exchangers here do keep their accounts
in Lire, Sold, and Deniers, which are cast up in 20 and 12, because that 20
Sols makes a Liver, and 12 Deniers make a Soldo, and it is to be noted that;
The Ducat is worth -- sold. 24 The Crown is worth -- sold. 22 The Rial is worth
-- sold. 02


Note, concerning the exchanges practiced in Valentia and Saragossa, Sevil and
Lisbon.
Note also here, that the same order which is observed in the Exchanges which
are made in this City of Barselona, with the other places of Spain, should be
observed in the Exchanges which are made in Saragosa, Valentia, Sevil and
Lisbon, seeing that when the said places of Spain Exchange the one with the
other, always that place which Exchangeth, gives Duc. 100, to have the more or
the less, and therefore the money of the place where the Exchange is made, must
first be reduced into Ducats, and multiplying the Ducats which come thereof,
(which are of the place to which it Exchang^th) by the price it is worth, for
to reduce the same into the money wherein their accounts are there kept, and
this considered to abreviate my labor, the rules being easy, I shall forbear
to trouble my self with any further particulars concerning the said place; of
Valentia, Saragossa, Sevil and Lisbon.

CHAP. CCCCXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Lions.
Exchanges of Barselona with Lions.
BArselona does Exchange with Lions, and gives posito Sols 22. 8 to have in
Lions one Crown of the Sun of 3 l. I demand for l. 8865. 12. 10, how many Crow.
am I to have in Lions? First reduce the said sum of Livers into Deniers,
multiplying the same by 20, and adding of 12 Sols, and then by 12 and adding 10
Deniers; then reduce into Deniers the said Sol. 22. 8. d. and they make 272,
for divisor, against the sum of Deniers come of the said Livers; and
multiplying the rest of the divisor by 20 and by 12 to make them Sols and
Deniers of Gold, and they make Crowns 7822. 12. 6, Of Gold of the Sun, which is
due to have in Lions. Example: ^

Proof.
The proof of this account is manifested when that Lions does Exchange for
Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Placentia.
Exchanges of Barselona with Placienta.
BArselona does Exchange with Placentia, and gives posito Sols 23 2/12 to have
there a Cro^ of Mark, I demand for Livers 1850. 12. 0. how many Crow. of Mark
shall I have?

First reduce the said sum of Livers into Deniers, multiplying them by 20, to
make them Sold and add the 12, and then by 12 to make them Deniers, and do the
same with the Sols 23 ^/12 multiplying them by 12, and adding thereto 7
Deniers; the Deniers come thereof are to be taken for divisor against the
Deniers come of the said Livers, and by division they will come to Crow. of
Mark, multiplying the rest by 20 and by 12 to make them Sols and Deniers of
Gold, and then they make Crow. 1569. 8. 3 of Mark, which is due to be had in
Placentia for the said sum of Barselona: ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is apparent when that Placentia does Exchange for
Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Saragosa.
Exchanges of Barselona with Saragosa.
BArsclona exchangeth with Saragosa, and gives 10 Ducats of 24 Sol. per Ducat,
to have in this place posito 104 Ducats of Sols 22 per Ducat of that money, I
demand for Livers 6000 of Barselona, how many Livers shall I have in Saragosa?
First reduce into Sols the said sum of Livers, multiplying them by 20, and
divide the Sols coming thereof by Sol. 24. the price of the Ducat, and it will
be Ducats 5000, the which Duc. 5000 of Barselona must be multiplied at the said
price of Duc. 104 per cent. and from the sum cut off the two last sigures the
which multiplied by 20 and by 12, to make them Sols and Deniers of Gold, will
be Duc. 5200 of S^ragosa, which must be multiplied by l. 1. 2 Sol. the price of
the Ducat, and they make Livers 5720, which should be rendered in Saragosa for
the said 6000 l. money of Barselona. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is manifest when that Saragosa does again rechange back
for Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXX. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Valentia.
Exchanges of Barselona with Valentia.
BArselona does Exchange with Valentia, and gives Duc. 100 of 24 Sols, to have
in Valentia posito Duc. 108 of Sols 21 per Duc. of that money, I demand for l.
7000 money of Barselona, how many l. shall I have in Valentia?

In this you must do as in the preceding account of Barselona for Saragosa,
multiplying the Ducats of Valentia which shall come thereof by Livers 1, 1 the
price of the Ducat, and it will be Livers 16615, and so much will be due in
Valentia for 7000 l. delivered in Barselona. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is apparent when that Valentia does rechange for
Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXXI. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Sevil.
Exchanges of Barselona with Sevil.
BArselona does exchange with Sevil, and gives Duc. 100 of 24 Sol. per Duc. to
have in this place Duc. 108 posito more or less, of Marvedes 375 per Ducat. I
demand for l. 7500 how many Marvedes must I have in Sevil?

You must do as in the precedent Rule of Barselona for Valentia, multiplying
the Ducats of Sevil which come thereof, by Marvedes 375, the price of the Duc.
and it will make Marvedes 2531250, which is due to have in Sevil for the said
sum of 7500 l. in Barselona. Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is manifested when that Sevil does rechange for
Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXXII. Of the Exchanges of Barselona with Lisbon.
Exchanges of Barselona with Lisbon.
BArselona does exchange for Lisbon, and gives Duc. 100 of 24 Sols per Duc. to
have in Lisbon Ducats posito 113, of 400 Raes per Duc. I demand for 4000 l. of
Barselona, how many Racs shall I have in Lisbon? Here you must do as in the
account precedent of Barselona for Sevil, multiplying the Ducats of Lisbon
which shall come thereof by 400 Raes per Duc. and they make Raes 1506666, which
is due to be had in Lisbon for l. 4000. in Barselona. Example. ^

Proof.
The proof of this Rule is apparent when that Lisbon does rechange back for
Barselona.

CHAP. CCCCXXXIII. Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances in Barselona.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Barselona.
ACcording to my proposed method, I will here briefly insert some Examples of
Draughts and Remittances made in this City by Order and Commission from other
places.

1 Example.
To Sevil then comes Order from Barselona to draw upon them at Duc. 93, and
remit to Placentia at Marvedes 413, clear of all charges, the partido being for
Crow. 3000 of Mark. Now there is found money for Barselona at duc. 93, and
Bills for Placentia at Marvedes 413, I demand if at these rates the Commission
may be accomplished and performed? You must say by the Rule of Three, taking
one of the prices which are found for divisor, because that Sevil gives to
Barselona the certain, and to Placentia the uncertain price, saying, If duc. 93
the price found for Barselona give Marvedes 413, what will duc. 93 give the
price inordered? and it makes vedes 415, out of which deduct per cent. for
Provision which is taken, there will remain Marvedes 413 11/20 incirca; so that
the said Commission may be effected to profit, seeing that drawing to Barselona
at the said price of Duc. 93, it may be delivered for Placentia at Mar. 413
20/21, and there present Bills at less, that is, at 413 Marvedes: as by
Example: ^

2 Example.
Again in Barselona comes Order from Valentia, that Remittance may be made to
them at Duc, 108, and to prevail from Placentia at Sol. 23, the Partido made
for 3000 Crow. Mark, Now there is Bills found for Valentia at Duc. 107, I
demand then for the loss that is given by the Remittance, at what price may the
Draught be made for Placentia? Say by the Rule of Three, taking one, of the
prices found for Divisor, because then Barselona gives the certain to
Valenria, and the uncertain price to Placentia, saying if Duc. 107 the price
found for Valentia give Sol. 23. what will Duc. 108 give, being the price
inordered? and it will come to Sols 23, and at less price cannot be drawn for
Placentia, remitting to Valentia at Duc. 107. Examples: ^

CHAP. CCCCXXXIV. Of the Terms of Payments of Bills of Exchange in Barselona.
Terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in Barselona, etc.
THE Terms of Payment found accustomed in Barselona, is noted to be thence, To
Venice at 2 months after date, and so back. To Florence at 2 months after date,
and so back. To Avignon at 18 days sight, and so back. To Bruges and Antwerp at
50 days after date, and so back. To Genoa at 20 days after date, and so back.
To Lisbon at To Sevil at To Saragosa at To Valentia at To Lions for the Fair,
and so from Fair to Fair, To Placentia, and from Fair to Fair.


And thus much shall serve to have said of the Exchanges in general practiced
in Barselona Valentia, Saragosa, Sevil, and Lisbon in Portugal.

CHAP. CCCCXXXV. Examples of Exchanges practiced in Antwerp, and how the same
are to be calculated.
Exchanges practiced in Antwerp.
I Have showed before in the general Exchanges of Antwerp, with how many other
places this City is found to exchange, and there also observed the common
current rates thereof, which in it self is found every day so subject to
alteration, that no positive rule can be set down therein; however the same is
so beneficial to the unexperienced, that he may easily make his calculation
thereby either in his Draughts or his Remittances: there rests now to be
handled the way and method how the same is cast up, which I shall only observe
with such other principal places as may be sufficient for instruction, and as a
guide to rule that which is here omitted.

Accounts kept in Antwerp.
And the better to understand what shall ensue, it is to be noted, that in
Antwerp, Bankers and Exchangers do keep their accounts in pounds, shillings,
and pence Flemish or gross, which are cast up by 20, and by 12, because that 20
Sols or shillings make a pound, and 12 pence or gross makes shilling.

CHAP. CCCCXXXVI. Of the Exchanges of Antwerp with Lions.
Exchanges of Antwerp with Lions.
ANtwerp does exchange with Lions, and gives posito 121 gros. to have in Lions
one Crown of the Sun of Gold of 3 l. I demand then for l. 3486. 1. 9. money of
Antwerp, how many Crowns must I have in Lions? First reduce the said sum of
Livers into grosses, multiplying the same by 20 and then by 12, adding to the
multiplications 1 Sol. and 9 pence, which are with the pounds, and divide by
121 gros. the sum of Grosses which shall come of the said Livers, reducing both
them and others into thirds of Grosses, and of the Division will come Crowns,
and multiplying the remainder of the Division by 20 and 12, to make them Sols
and Deniers of Gold, they will make Crow. 6895. 11. 1. of Gold of the Sun,
which you shall have in Lions for the said sum delivered in Antwerp. Example: ^

Proof.
the Proof of the said Rule is seen when that Lions does exchange for Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCCXXXVII. Of the Exchanges of Antwerp with Placentia.
Exchanges of Antwerp with Placentia.
ANtwerp does exchange with Placentia, and gives posito Gros. 124 to have in
Placentia one Crown of Mark; I demand for l. 363. 10. 3. money of Antwerp, how
many Crowns of Mark shall I have in Placentia? First, reduce the said sum of
Livers into Gros. multiplying the sum by 20 and by 12, adding to the
Multiplication 10 s. and 3 d. which are with the pounds, and divide the Grosses
that come thereof by the said Gros. 124 the price of the Crown of Mark,
bringing both the one and the other into half Grosses, and by division it will
come to Crow. multiplying the remainder by 20 and by 12, to bring the same into
pence, and then they will be Crow. 700. 14. 11 of Mark, which will be due at
Placentia for the said sum of Livers or pounds in Grosses. ^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Account is seen when that Placentia shall exchange with
Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCCXXXVIII. Of the Exchanges of Antwerp with Florence.
Exchanges of Antwerp with Florence.
ANntwerp does exchange with Florence, and gives posito 112 gross. to have in
that place one Crown of Gold, I demand for l. 656. 10. 11. money of Antwerp,
how many Crow. of Gold do they make? and doing as in the precedent Rule, it
will appear to be Crow. 1400. 12. 7. of Gold, which I shall have in Florence
for the said pounds Flemish. ^

Proof.
The Proof of the said Account is seen when that Florence shall be found to
exchange with Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCCXXXIX. Of the Exchanges of Antwerp with Venice.
Exchanges of Antwerp with Venice.
ANtwerp does exchange with Venice, and gives posito 92 Grosses to have in
that place one Ducat of l. 6 money of Venice, I demand for l. 1468 14 6, money
of Antwerp, how many Ducats shall I have in Venice? and doing as in the
precedent Accounts, it will come to Ducats 3810 17/24; and so many Ducats of l.
6 will be due in Venice. Example: ^

Proof.
The Proof of this Account is seen when that Venice shall exchange for Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCCXL. Of the Exchanges of Antwerp with London.
Exchanges of Antwerp with London.
ANtwerp does exchange for London, and gives posito Shillings 33 to have in
that place one pound sterling, I demand for l. 748 18 6 money of Antwerp, how
many pounds sterling shall I have in London? First reduce as well the said sum
of pounds sterling as the said sum of pounds Flemish into Gross and Pence,
multiplying the pounds by 20, and then by 12, adding the shillings 18, 6 d.
which are with the pounds Flemish, and the shillings Flemish 33 multiplied by
12, adding 4 Gross for of a shilling Flemish, and the Gross. which shall come
thereof must be taken for Divisor, against the sum of Grosses come of the said
pounds, and dividing the sum will come pounds sterling, multiplying the
remainder of the division by 20, and then 12 to make them shillings and pence
sterling, they will make pounds sterling 449 7 1, due in London for the said
sum of pounds Flemish 748 18 6. Proof.
And for proof of the said Exchange, multiply the said pounds sterling 449 7 1
by 1 l. 13 shillings, 4 d. with the said 33 shillings, and it will make the
abovesaid l. 748 18 5 pounds Flemish; so that the account will appear to be
just cast up. ^

And thus much shall serve to have said here of Exchanges. Now to the Terms of
Payments of Bills in Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCCXLI. Of the Terms of Payment of Bills of Exchange in Antwerp.
Terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in Antwerp.
THE Terms of Payments of Bills of Exchange observed in Antwerp, and to go from
thence to other Cities, is: To Venice 2 months after date, and so back. To
Florence at two months after date, and back the same. To Genoa at 2 months
after date, and thence the same. To Avignon at 2 months after date, and so
back. To Barselona at 50 days after date, and so back. To Valentia one month
after sight, and back 30 days after date. To London one month after date, and
so back. To Pisa 2 months after date, and so back. To Millan 2 months after
date, and so back. To Paris one month after date, and so back. To Montpellier
20 days after sight, and so back. To Lions for the succeeding Fair. To
Placentia for the next succeeding Fair. To Rouen one month after date, and so
back.


Now for the Orders and Commissions given in Antwerp, I will here insert a word
also, according to my method.

CHAP. CCCCXLII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and
Remittances in Antwerp.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
Antwerp.
ACcording to my proposed method, for the better understanding of what is said,
I will insert some Examples of Draughts and Remittances made by Order and
Commission in the City of Antwerp.

1 Example.
At Venice then is found an Exchange for Antwerp posito at Gross. 90, and for
Placentia at Duc. 135, Order being given to Venice that at these prices they
draw to Antwerp, and remit to Placentia; I demand at how much will come the
Remittance from Antwerp to Placentia? First you must multiply the said Ducats
135, the value of 100 Crow. of Mark, at the said price of 90 Gross. per Ducat,
and of the Grosses which shall come thereof, you must cut off the two last
sigures, and there will remain Gross. 121, and so many Gross. and more per
cent. for provision, which is payable in Venice, is disbursable in Antwerp for
one Crown of Mark in credit in Placentia. ^

2 Example.
Again, at Venice is Exchange found for Antwerp at gro. 90, and for London at 56
pence sterling, there is hereupon Order given to Venice, that at these prices
they draw for Antwerp, and remit to London, the question is, At what price will
the Remittance be from Antwerp to London? To do this, say by the Rule of Three,
If 56 pence sterling give gros. 90 (seeing that the one and the other is the
value of a Ducat of Venice) what will 240 pence sterling give, being the price
of the pound sterling of London? It will be gros. 387, which reducing to
shillings in taking the 1/12, and it will be 32 shillings; and so many
shillings Flemish, and more per cent. for the provision payable in Venice,
comes to be disbursed in Antwerp, for one pound sterling money Credit in
London. ^

2 Example.
Again, a Merchant of London is Creditor in Antwerp 2000 l. Flemish, who
inordereth that it be remitted him at Shillings 33, or to Placentia at 121 gro.
where the most profit shall be found, that is, to that place which shall be
most beneficial, or to least loss of the prices limited: Now there are found
Bills for London at Shillings 33, and for Placentia at gro. 121, I demand to
which of the said places should the Remittance be made, seeing that by both
there is found Remittance to loss? And to know where is the least, say by the
Rule of Three, If shil. 33 give gros. 121 the price inordered, what will shil.
33 give, being the price found for London? It will come to gros. 121 9/10; so
that the Remittance should be made to Placentia, because that remitting to
London at shil. 33 to go to the Par, should be delivered for Placentia at gro.
121 9/10, and there is found Bills for loss, that is at 121 gross. ^

And thus much for the Exchanges practiced in Antwerp.

CHAP. CCCCXLIII. Of the Exchanges practisd in London, and how the same are to
be calculated.
Exchanges practiced in London.
I Have showed in the general Exchanges of London, with how many other places
this City is found to Exchange and there also set down the common current
prices and rates thereof, which every day is found to be so subject to
alteration, that no positive rule can be observed rightly to set down the same,
yet it is in it self so beneficial, that thereby the unexperienced may know how
to make his calculation thereof, and that as well in his Draughts as in his
Remittances. Now only there rests to conclude this Tract of Exchanges and
this Map of Commerce, to handle the way how the same is cast up, and how by
Arithmetic it is performed, which I will observe here with some other
principal places, which may serve for a sufficient ground and instruction to
those here omitted.

Accounts kept in London.
It is here to be noted for the better understanding of what ensues, That all
Bankers or Exchangers do keep their Accounts in London in pounds, shillings,
and pence, commonly called sterling, and cast up by 20 and by 12, for 20
Shillings make a pound, and 12 pence make a shilling.

And morcover that London exchangeth in the Denominator of pence sterling with
all other Countries, Antwerp, and those Countries neighboring of Flanders and
Holland excepted, with which it exchangeth by the entire pound of 20 shillings
sterling.

CHAP. CCCCXLIV. Of the Exchanges of London with Lions.
Exchanges of London with Lions.
LOndon exchangeth with Lions, and gives posito 61 pence more or less to have
in Lions a Crown of Gold of the Sun of 3 l. piece I demand then for 348 l. 15
shillings sterling, how many Crowns of the Sun shall I have Credit for in
Lions? First reduce the said sum of pounds sterling into shillings, multiplying
the same by 20, and adding thereto 15 shillings, and then by 12 pence, adding
thereto the pence if any were, and then divide the same by 61 pence, and the
Divident will make Crowns, multiplying the remainder of the Division by 20 to
make them Sols, and by 12 to make them Den. of Gold, and then they make in all
Crow. 1372008 Pence of the Sun of Gold, that I shall have in Credit at Lions
for the said sum of 348 l. 15 sterling delivered in London. ^

Proof.
The proof of this rule is manifested when that Lions shall exchange the said
sum of 1372 Crowns for London: Exchanges of London with Paris, Rouen etc, in
France.
And here also it is to be noted, that the rule is the same when London shall
exchange with either Paris or Rouen, or any other City of the Kingdom of France.

CHAP. CCCCXLV. Of the Exchanges of London with Florence.
Exchanges of London with Florence.
LOndon does exchange with Florence, and gives posito 70 pence ster. more or
less to have in Florence a Crow. of Gold, I demand then for pounds 656 10 6 d.
ster. how many Crowns shall I have Credit in Florence? This is to be cast up as
in the precedent rule of London with Lions, and it will appear, That for the
said 656 10 6 sterling I am to have Credit in Florence the sum of Crow. 2250 --
as per Example: ^

Proof.
Note, That this Exchange is seldom practiced from London, and therefore not in
use in these days, but when many Florentine Merchants resided in London it was
much in use; yet the Rule is right, and the proof thereof is evident, when
Florence rechangeth again for London.

CHAP. CCCCXLVI. Of the Exchanges of London with Venice.
Exchanges of London with Venice.
LOndon is found to Exchange for great Sums with Venice, and gives posito 50
d. sterling to have in the said place one Ducat in Banco of l. 6 money of
Venice, I demand then for 555 l. 17 6 d. sterling, how many Ducats shall I have
Credit for in Venice? This is done as in the precedent rule, reducing the
pounds sterling into shillings, by the multiplication of 20, and adding 17, and
then multiplying that again by 12, to bring it into pence, and adding thereto 6
d. and it will make Duc. (2668) which should be rendered in Venice for 555 l. 17
6 d. sterling in London, as per Example: ^

Proof. Difference between money in Banco, and current money in Venice.
Note, that for distinction of the current money in Venice, which is 21 per
cent. at present worse than the money payable by Exchange, it is termed in
Banco, in which all Bills of Exchange are payable, and the proof of this rule
is apparent when that the said sum of 2668 Ducats is rechanged for London.

CHAP. CCCCXLVII. Of the Exchanges of London with Antwerp.
Exchanges of London with Antwerp.
LOndon does exchange with Antwerp, and gives one pound sterling, to have in
Antwerp posito Shillings 35. 6 pence or gross, money of Antwerp, I demand then
for 445 l. 15 and six pence sterling, how many pounds Flemish shall I have in
Antwerp? First, multiply the pounds sterling by 20, and bring them into
shillings, and then by 12 to bring them into pence sterling, do also the same
with the pounds Flemish, bringing them first into shillings Flemish, by a
multiplication of 20, and then to pence or gross by multiplication of 12 d.
accounting the 35 s. 6 d. for l. Flem. 1. 15. 6 d. and say then by the Rule of
Three, If one pound sterling give 35. 6 d Flemish, the price proposed, what
will 445 l. 15. 6 sterling give? which will make l. 791. 5. 0 d. Flemish, for
which you must have credit in Antwerp. ^

Proof.
The proof of the Rule is more apparent when that Antwerp does Exchange for
London; London Exchange with Amster^ C^olond^
and note, That the account is the same when that London does exchange for
Colonia, Amsterd^m, and other places in the Low Countries.

CHAP. CCCCXLVIII. Of Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts
and Remittances in London.
Orders and Commissions given and received for Draughts and Remittances in
London.
ACcording to my proposed method I will here for conclusion of the Exchanges
practiced in London, briefly insert some Examples of Draughts and Remittances
made by Commission and Order in the City of London.

Example 1.
To London then comes Order from Venice to remit to them at 60 pence, and to
draw for Placentia at 82 per sterling, the partido being for Crow. 40000 of
Mark. I find then Bills for Venice at 61 pence, I would know, considering the
loss that presents in the Remittance, at how much should I draw my Draughts
for Placentia; you must say by the Rule of Three, If pence 60 give pence 82,
the price inordered, how many will pence 61 give the price found for Venice?
and it will be pence 83 sterling, or thereabouts, and at less must not the
Draught be for Placentia. ^

Example 2.
Again, posito, Florence is found to exchange for London at pence 83 sterling,
and say for Placentia at Crow. 108, and that there is Order given to Florence,
that at these rates they draw for London and remit to Placentia, at how much
then will the remittance come from London to Placentia? to do this, I multiply
the said Crow. of Florence, which properly are to the value of Crowns 100 of
Mark by pence sterling 83, as is abovementioned, and out of the pence that are
thence produced, I cut off the two last figures, and there will remain pence
sterling 89 incirca, and so many pence together with per cent. for the
provision that is commonly paid in Florence, comes to be disbursed in London,
for one Crown of Mark credit in Placentia. ^

3 Example.
Again, to Antwerp comes Order from London, to draw thither, and to remit to
Venice, at such a price, that the remittance from London for Venice, come but
to 55 pence sterling clear of charges, the partido being 1000 pound sterling,
now there is found money for London at s. 33, and Bills for Venice at gro 90, I
demand if at this price the said Commission may be essected? First reduce the
said s. 33 into gros. and they make 400, then say by the Rule of Three, if
pence 240, (the value of the pound sterling) give 400 gro. what will 55 pence
sterl^g give being the price of the Ducats of Venice, it will make gross. 91
from whence mull be deducted per cent. for provision taken, and there will
remain gro. 91 3/10, so that the said Commission may be effected to profit,
because that drawing for London at s. 33 ^/^, may be delivered for Venice at
gross. 91 3/10, and there present Bills at less, that is at gross. 90; Example.
^

And this is as much as I conceive needful at this time to insert concerning
the Exchanges practiced in London, now there only rests Terms of payment of
Bills of Exchange in London.

CHAP. CCCCXLIX. Of the Terms of Payments of Bills of Exchange in London.
Terms of payment of Bills of Exchange in London.
THE Terms for the Payment of Bills of Exchange in London are observed to be
with other Cities thus: To Venice at 3 months after date, and so back. To
Antwerp at one month after date, and so back. To Genoa at 3 months after date,
and so back. To Florence at 3 months after date, and so back. To Pisa at 3
months after date, and so back. To Lions for the Fair, and so from Fair to
Fair. To Placentia the same as Lions. To Rouen and Paris at one month after
date, and so back.


CHAP. CCCCL. Of the Abreviation of Division and Multiplication after the
Italian and foreign manner and method.
Of Division and Multiplication abreviated after the Italian manner.
FOr as much as I have in many parts of this particular Tract of Exchanges,
followed the Arithmetical method and manner of those rules practiced in the
calculation of these Exchanges by the Bankers and Exchangers of Italy, it will
be here needful for the better enlightening of the same, and the easier casting
up and calculation thereof, that I show how the Italian Brokers and Exchangers
do abreviate their labor, and shorten their task therein, and the rather I
have presumed to add the same here, and in this place, partly in regard that I
have not found it published by any of our English Arithmeticians, but
princinally to show the learner the ways how the same are there wrought and
Arithmetically calculated.

It is generally confessed by all Arithmeticians, that the whole Art of
Arithmetic depends upon five principal Rules, now commonly in all Countries
received and taught, that is, by Numeration, Addition, Substraction,
Multiplication, and Division, and that no one proposed question in Arithmetic
can be perfected without the help of some of these; for the three former, I
find not any disagreement in the common received manner by them and us, and
therefore I will omit to speak any thing thereof; but of the two latter,
whereby is observed that most Rules and Questions of all Exchanges are
perfected and performed, I will here insist upon, induced principally, as I
said before, to enlighten thereby the precedent Examples that I have handled in
the calculations of the Exchanges beforementioned.

I will then in the first place, contrary to the custom of our English Masters
in this Science, begin with that part of Arithmetic which we call Division,
and by an example or two of the working thereof, explain the same to such as
either shall be desirous to learn it, or such as shall desire to make use of
the beforementioned Tables.

Division abreviated in Calculations of Accounts.
A certain Merchant then bought 46 Cloths, which cost him 673 l. and desires by
a brief way to know what one Cloth does stand him in; To do which, I dispose of
the question after the manner of the Rule of Three, and say, If 46 Clothes cost
673 l. how much does one Cloth cost?

Now for as much as it would prove to be too dissicult, at first sight after
the common manner, to find how often 46 the Divisor is found in 673, it will be
more facile and commodious, to take it after their method thus, Take then the
first figure, which is 4, and see how often the same is included in the figure
6, which is once, the which 1 I write then under the Divisor, drawing a line
between them, and then multiply it by the whole Divisor 46, beginning at 6,
saying once 6 is 6, and next coming to the sum that is to be divided 673, I
choose the second figure 7, from whence I take 6 and there remains one, which I
place under the said 7, and returning again to the Divisor, I multiply 1 by 4,
which gives 4, which I deduct from the other figure 6, of the sum to be
divided, and there remains 2, the which I write under the 6; so that 46 taken
by this means out of 67, there remains 21, from whence I proceed and put this
before the figure 3 remaining, which thereby makes 213, for the sum that now
remains to be divided by 46, saying in 21, how many times 4? which cannot be
but 4 times, for in taking 5 there will remain but 1, which with the following
figure does make 13, (the which number cannot pay 5 times 6, and for this cause
I can take but 4,) multiplying the Divisor as at first, saying (beginning
always by the last figure of the Divisor) 4 times 6 is 24, and taking the last
figure 3 from the sum to be divided 213, the which for payment, of 24 I borrow
3 tens, which I bear in mind, and say 24 from 33 there rests 9, the which I
place under the 3, and then come to multiply the other figure 4 of the divisor
by 4, and it makes 16, which with 3 tens born in mind, makes 19, which must be
deducted from the sum to be divided 21, so there will rest 2, the which I place
under the 1; as by the Example appears more at large.

So that 673 l. divided by 46 Cloths, the quotient gives 14 l. and the rest is
29 l. which now is to be divided by 46, which cannot be done, and therefore the
same to be reduced to shillings, which multiplied by 20 come to 580 s. which
must now be divided by 46, in the manner before showed, saying, how many times
4 in 5? which is once, the which I write in the quotient at the side of 14 l.
proceeding from the first division, multiplying it by 6, and it gives 6, which
taken from 8 the rest is 2, which I put under the 8, and multiply the other
figure of the divisor 4 by 1, which gives 4 taken from 5, there rests 1, then
46 subtracted from 58 there rests 12, right with which I put the other figure
0, resting of the sum to be divided, and return to say, how many times 6 in 12,
the which I can take but 2, and I place it in the quotient, and multiply it by
the last figure of the divisor, saying 2 times 6 is 12, which I deduct from
120, the which to do, I say (borrowing 2 tens, which I bear in mind) 12 from 20
rests 8, which I place under the 0, and multiply the other figure of the
Divisor 4 by, making 8 with the 2 born in mind, comes to be 10, taken from 12
there rests 2, so that 580 s. divided by 46, the product is 12 s. and there
remains yet 28 s. which must be brought into pence, multiplied by 12, and it
makes 336, the which must be divided by 46, saying in 33, how many times 4?
which is 7 times, the which I place in the quotient by the shillings,
multiplying 7 by 6, which makes 42 from 46, there rests 4, the which I place
under the 6, and keep 4 in mind borrowed, adding them with 4 times 7, they make
32, which deducted from 33, there rests 1, the which I place under the 3, so
that 336 divided by 46, the product gives 7, and there rests 14 d. to divide,
which is a thing of a small value.

So that if 46 pieces of Cloth cost 673 l. the one will cost 14 l. 12 s. 7 d.
as may be seen by the Example here under wrought. ^

Another Example.
To show the brevity of this manner of dividing, I will show here another
Example, which cannot without much difficulty be performed by the common manner
of division in cancelling the figures. and yet is very easily and compendiously
performed this way, by observing the order which is before prescribed, and
therefore to avoid prolixity, I shall not need here to put down any particular
Explication, the Example shall be thus then, to divide 19999100007 by 99999,
which by the Product does give 199993 without any Remainder, as shall appear by
the working here underneath: ^

Another method of dividing by the Rule of Practice.
Division which is wrought by the Rule of Practice, is done in this manner by
the help of the parts found therein, as for Example, if 72 pieces of Serges
cost 169 l. 12 s. how much will the piece stand in, then dividing by 72, I find
first the parts thereof; and observe that 8 times 9 makes 72, I take then the
of the sum to be divided, saying the eighth part of 16 is 2, which I place
under a line drawn, and the of 9 is 1, there remains one pound, which is 20 s.
which, with the 12. makes 32, the whereof is 4, so that the eighth of the said
169 l. 12 s. is 21 l. 4 s. of which number I take the 1/9 (which shall be the
price of the piece) in this manner, saying, the 1/9 of 21 is 2, the rest is 3
l. which is 60 s. and with the 4 makes 64 s. of which the 1/9 is 7, then there
rests 1, which is 12 pence, and the 1/9 of 12 is 1, so that the ninth part of
21 l. 4 s. is 2 l. 7 s. 1 d. the price of the piece; as by this Example is
showed: ^

Note, another Example.
But when it happens that any broken numbers fall in the Divisor, the Divisor
and the sun^ to be divided, must then be reduced to one and the self same
denominator; as for Example, If 13 pieces should cost 264 l. 17 s. 6 d. what
would the piece stand in? to do which I reduce into halfs the pieces 13
multiplying the same by 2 making 27 halfs, doing the same with the sum to be
divided, multiplying it by 2, which comes to be l. 529. 15, which to be divided
by 27, must be considered that 3 times 9 is 27, therefore must be taken and 1/9
of the said third in this manner, saying of 5 is 1, of 22 is 7, and of 19 is 6,
and there remains 1 l. which is 20 s. which with the 15 makes 35, the, of which
is 11, and there rests 2 s. which are 24 d. the whereof is 8, and afterward
taking of the 1/9 the said saying, the 1/9 of 17 is 1, and of 86 is 9, and
there rests 5 l. which with the 11 s. is 111 s. the 1/9 whereof is 12, then
rests 3 s. which with the 8 d. remaining is 44 d. the 1/9 whereof is 4, so that
the product of the said 1/9 gives 19 l. 12 s. 4 d. the value of the said
piece, as by Example. ^

Another.
Again, at 34 l. 16 s. the 21 yard, how much will the yard amount to? Do this as
the preceding rule, putting the yard into thirds, in multiplying them by 3 they
make 64 for divisor to 34 l. 16 also multiplied by 3, which make 104 l. 8 s.
which to divide by 64, is to be considered that 8 times 8 is 64, and therefore
the 1/8 of an eight is the price of a yard, as Example. ^

Many other divisions are resolved in the same manner as the preceding, which I
willingly here omit, and refer them to the occurrences of Traffic that shall
happen herein, and now I will proceed to Multiplication abreviated, by which
two rules both the Golden Rule of Three, and many other in Arithmetic are
wrought and performed, commodious and necessary to this Tract of Exchanges, and
this Map of Commerce, as being indeed the proper rules, by which the Exchanges
in this Book are cast up and calculated.

Multiplication abreviated.
The method that has been showed in Division, may in some sort serve also in
Multiplication in this manner, suppose you were to multiply 56 yards by 4 l. 18
s. 9 d. you must consider that 56 is composed of 7 times 8, and therefore you
must multiply the said 4. 18. 9. by 7, and its product by 8, beginning with the
pence, and saying 7 times 9 is 63, I write 3 pence, and retain 5 s. which I add
with 7 times 8, which make 61, write then 1 and retain 6, which added to 1 time
7 makes 13, which is 6 l. 10 s. and following the common method of Addition, I
put down one ten, and retain 6 l. which I add with 4 times 7, and they make 34
l. the which product I multiply again by 8, beginning to multiply by the pence
which are with the pounds, and then by the s. calculating for 12 d. one s. and
for 20 s. 1 pound, they then make 276 l. 10 s. for the value of 56 yards, as
shall be more plainly demonstrated by this Example following ^

Another Example.
Many other questions may be answered as the abovesaid, but yet note, that to
multiply by an uneven number, such as is 31, 43, and the like, then do in this
manner, posito I demand at 5 l. 9 s. 3 d. the Yard what will 43 Yards come
unto? Now for as much as 43, has no dividable parts, I take 42, multiplying it
by 6 and by 7, as has been showed, and for the Yard that does remain, I add
the last Multiplication 5 l. 9 s. 3 d. which is the cost of 1 Yard and it makes
23 l. 17. 9. d. the cost of 43 Yards, as may be observed by the following
Example. ^

Another Example.
But when there is any broken number in the Yards or pieces, do thus by Example
at l. 7. 14. 6 the piece what will 81 cost? Then for 81 I multiply by 9 the
cost of the piece, and its product again by 9, because that 9 times 9 is 81,
and I find l. 625. 14. 6 for the value of the said 18 pieces; and for the piece
I take the of 7 l. 14. 6 d. and adding it thereto, the same comes to be l. 629.
11. s. 9 d. and so much the 81 cost. Example. ^

Another way of Multipication abreviated.
But for as much as this may seem difficult, I will here note another way of
Multiplication abreviated, serving as well in Exchanges or in Merchandising
posito; I would know what comes 154 Yards unto, at 56 shillings the Yard: To do
this, multiply the said Yards, by the half of the said money, which is 28 s and
in adding its product, double the last figure, taking that for so many s. and
the rest for pounds, as does appear by this Example following, which I add in
this manner, saying, 2. 4. and 9 makes 15, and after the ordinary manner, you
must set down 5, and bear 1 ten; but in this method, you must double it,
setting down 10 for 5; the which doubled, you must hold as so many shillings,
and so proceed in the addition of the rest, and adding the tenth born of 15, it
will come to l. 431. 4. s the value of 154 Yards; and this note is to be
observed in all other questions of this nature, as by example does appear. ^

Another way of abreviated Multiplication.
There is yet another brief way of Multiplication, used in France and many parts
beyond the Seas, which is done by taking the parts of 10 or of 100 in this
manner, I would multiply 113 Yards by 1, I note what part 1 is in 10, and find
it to be therefore is 113 Yards to be multiplied by 10, or else more brief by
adding an o, and in taking the, which shall be the value of the said 113 Yards,
and for to multiply by 1 you must take the of the sum to be multiplied, after
you have added thereunto an 0 because that 1 ^/^ is the of 10, and for to
multiply by 3 you must add an 0 and take, because that 3 is the of 10, and so
in many others, in taking always the parts of 10; and note, that the same may
be done in taking the parts of 100, as to multiply 137 Yards by 8, you must add
two 00 to the sum, then take 1/12 because that 8 is the 2/12 part of 100, and
for to multiply by 12, you must add two 00 and take the, because that the (...)
of 100 is 12, as may be seen by these following Examples. ^

Another Example.
Again, at 3 s. the pound, what will the 100 l. come to? to do this in brief, a
cipher is to be added to the cost of the pound which is 3 s. and it makes 30,
of which sum take the and it makes 15 l. which makes the cost of the hundred,
and so for others by these Examples following. ^

Another.
Again, at 3 d. the pound, I would know how much 100 l. comes to? multiply the
pence (which the pound is worth) by 5, and out of its product take 1/12 which
shall be the cost of the quintal; and to find the cost of the pound, you must
multiply the value of the hundred by 12, and the of the product is the cost of
the pound, as follows by these Examples. ^

But I have wandered too far, and proceeded farther in this subject than I
intended, therefore here will conclude both the calcuations of Exchanges, and
these methods of abreviating the rules of Division and Multiplication,
referring what is here by me omitted in both the said subjects to the ingenious
hand and head of the mysterious Exchanger.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table, comprehending the most Notable Things contained in this
Merchants Map of Commerce.
A.
AFRICA bounded with longitude and latitude, 1 Asia bounded with its longitude
and latitude, ibid. America bounded, its longitude and latitude, ibid. Art of
Merchandising, and the general parts thereof, 2 A Merchant should know the form
of Acquittances, Letters of Atturny, of Account-keeping, and Arithmetic, ibid.
To Abbreviate the labor of Weighing, 6 How to Accord the weights of any two
places, ibid. Of Accounts and Account-keepings, 7 Accounts kept diversely in
diverse Cities and Countries, ibid. The method used in Accounts is diverse, ibid.
Four rules required in an Account, ibid. Artificial commodities, what, 9
America, and the Provinces thereof, 11 Andalusia nova, 13 Africa and the
Provinces, 14 Argier and the Trade thereof, comaining the Commodities, coins,
weights, measures, accounts and customs thereof, 10 Aian and the Commodities
thereof, 27 Alexandria, 28, and the Trade of the commodities, weights,
measures, 30 Asia and the Provinces thereof, 40 Anatolia or Natolia, 41
Alexandretta, Scanderone, 42 Angora, with weights and measures, 50 Amasia, 51
Armenia and the Cities, Chap. 67, and 52. Mount Ararat, ibid. Acria and the
Trade thereof, 56 Containing weights, measures, and Coins, ibid. Amano, and the
Trade thereof, 58 Aleppo and the Trade thereof, cont aining commodities,
weights, coins, measures, accounts, customs thereof, etc. 63 Arabia and the
Provinces thereof, 68 Assyria and the Cities thereof, 69 Aden and the Trade
thereof, 71 Astracan and the Trade thereof, containing the weights, measures
thereof, etc. 85 Aracan and Ava, 88, 95 Agria, 90 Amadavar, ibid. Adam's hills
the Paradise of Siloners, 102 Amboina Islands, 103 Achin and the Trade thereof,
105 Andalusia, 112 Alicant and the Trade thereof, containing coins, accounts,
weights, measures, etc. 115 Alcala, ibid. Aragon, 119 Aquitania, 122 Anjou, 125
Avergno, 127 Avignon, 131 Abruzzo, 139 Apulia and the Trade thereof, 141 Anco
and the Trade thereof, 149 Aste a great Mart, 168 Antwerp and the Trade
thereof, 179 Artois, ibid. Arras, ibid. Amsterdam and the Trade thereof, 180
Albis River in Germany, 182 Alsatia, 185 Anspache, 186 Ausburge, and the Trade
thereof, 194 Austria, ibid. Amber, 209 Archangel in Moscovia, 220 Avalona or
Valona, and the Trade thereof, 243 Argos in Morea, 245 Arcadian Plains, ibid.
Achaia, 246 Athens, ibid. Albania and the Cities thereof, 246 Mount Athos, the
holy Mountain, ibid. Adrianopolis, ibid. Adriatic Islands 254 Anglesey Island,
269 and 262 Merchant Adventures, their original and places of residency in
London, 267 Antwerp Exchanges 289 Alcala Exchanges, 294 Augusta Exchanges 298
Custom of Acceptations of Bills of Exchanges in Lions, 302 Account of
Discounts, and the manner thereof, used as well in Lions as in many other
places of Trade, 305 Account-keeping in Lions, how, 307 Aggio of moneys
practiced in the payment of Bills of Exchanges in Rome, 340 Examples of
Exchanges practiced in Antwerp, and how calculated, 435 Exchanges of Antwerp
with Lions, 436 Of Antwerp with Placentia, 437 Of Antwerp with Florence, 438 Of
Antwerp with Venice, 439 Of Antwerp with London, 440 Of Terms of Payment of
Bills of Exchanges in Antwerp, 441 Orders and Commissions given and received in
Exchanges at Antwerp. 442
B.
BArtering in use of old, 2 Bargaining, ibid. Things considerable in Bartering,
ibid. Things considerable in Bargaining, ibid. A Merchant ought to know the
form of a Bill of Exchange, ibid. Of Bills of lading, ibid. Of Bills of debt,
ibid. The Burse or Exchange, 3 The Book of Rates of Customs, 4 Bartering and
Exchanging before the use of Gold and Silver, 5 Brasilia, 13 Barbada Island,
ibid. Barmuda, or Summer Islands, ibid. Barbary, 14 Barbary Merchants, 23
Borneo, 25 Boro, 27 Bithinia, and the Cities thereof, 47 Brusia in Bithinia,
the Trade, commodities, coins, weights, measures and customs thereof, 48
Baruti, with the Trade, of the coins, measures, weights thereof, 59 Babylon and
the Trade, containing the weights and measures, etc. thereof, 72 Balsara and
the Trade thereof, containing the customs, commodities, weights and measures,
77 Bindamir, 79 Balasia, 88 Bengala, ibid. Barma. ibid. Boroche and the Trade
thereof, 90 Bassain, 92 Bengala, and the Trade of that coast, 94 Banda, and
Islands of Moluccos, 103 Batavia olim Jacetra, 104 Bantam, and the Trade
thereof, ibid. Borneo Island, and the Trade thereof, 106 Beniermasa, an English
Factory, ibid. Baiona and Biscay, 114 Barselona and the Trade thereof, 119
Bordeaux and the Trade thereof, 124 Brittany, 125 Burbon, 127 Berry and la
Beuse, ibid. Burges and Beauvois, ibid. Beaucarre, 129 Burgundy, 132 Bresse.
ibid. Bisanson, ibid. Bolonia, and the Trade thereof, 143 Bressia and the Trade
thereof, 155 Brussels, 178 Breda, ibid. Bruges, 179 Breme, the Trade thereof,
184 Baccrai, 186 Baden, ibid. Bainsberge, ibid. Basil and the Trade thereof,
193 Bavaria, 194 Bohemia, 195 Brandenburge, 196 Brunswick and the Trade thereof
200 Beer of Lubeck famous, 205 Baltic Islands, 210 Bornholm, ibid. Blesida,
ibid. Bergen, one of the 4 ancient Mart Towns of Europe, 216 Bodia in Sweden,
217 Buda in Hungary, 234 Bulgaria, 235 Bosna, ibid. Beaumares in Anglesey, 262
Britain and the Provinces, 268 Barkshire, 269 Buckinghamshire, ibid.
Bedfordshire, ibid. Barwick, ibid. Brecknockshire, ibid. Beauty of England,
ibid. Barbary Merchants of London, their original and decay, 270 Barry
Exchanges, 286 Barselona Exchanges, 293 Bolonia Exchanges, 296 Bergamo
Exchanges, 297 Bilan, what, 302 Examples upon Exchanges practiced in Barselona,
and how calculated, 426 Exchanges of Barselona with Lions, 427 Exchanges of
Barselona with Placentia, 428 Exchanges of Barselona with Saragosa, 429 Of
Barselona with Valentia, 430 Of Barselona with Sevil, 431 Of Barselona with
Lisbon, 432 Of Orders and Commissions given and received in draughts and
remittances in Exchanges made in Barselona, 433 Terms of Payment of Bills of
Exchanges in Barselona, 434
C.
The Commodity of the knowledge of Geography to Merchants, 1 Cancer and
Capricorn Tropicks, ibid. Commutations distinguished into three manners, 2 A
Merchant should know the form of all Charter-parties, ibid. Cities and Towns
eminent in Trade, only mentioned in this Map, 3 Six parts required in a
complete City and Town, ibid. What Cities are found sit for Traffic and
Commerce, ibid. Two sorts of Cities of Traffic, ibid. Sea Cities of Trade,
what, ibid. Land Cities of Trade, what, ibid. Cities of Trade in manual Arts,
ibid. The Cities of Trade mentioned in this Map of Commerce, ibid. Five places
in a City depending upon Trade, ibid. The Custom-house, ibid. The Customs,
Impositions, and other duties paid by Merchants upon Goods, 4 Customs not
always alike in all places, ibid. Customs due upon all commodities, ibid.
Customs differing in regard of times, of places, of Cities, of Commodities, and
of weight, ibid. Coins of sundry Countries used in Traffic of Merchandising, 5
Coins made of Silver and Gold, ibid. A Capital crime to debase or alter any
Princes Coin, ibid. Cargos in weight, what 6 Cain the Inventer of Weights and
Measures, 8 All Cities of Trade have sworn and public measures, ibid. Of
Commodities used in Merchandising, and the knowledge thereof, 9 All Commodities
are either natural or artificial. ibid. All Commodities known by the Sensce,
ibid. All Coins brought into one by exchanging, 10 Castella aurea, 13 Chilo,
ibid. Cuba, ibid. Caffaria, 27 Cape bona speransa, ibid. Carro, 29. and the
Trade thereof, 31 Casir in the red Sea, 29 Captus, ibid. Caffa in the Euxine
Sea, ibid. Cilicia and the Cities thereof, 42 Colloso, 46 Cappadocia and the
Cities thereof, 51 Celosyria and the Cities thereof, 61 Colcos, 67 Caldea and
the Cities thereof, 69 Cabin and the Trade thereof, 76 Cusestam, 77 Cusan and
the Trade thereof, 78 Caramania, ibid. Carriage of Commodities by Caravans, 81
Capha and the Trade thereof, containing the Coins, Weights, Measures, and
Accounts thereof, 85 Cathay and the Provinces, 86 Cambalu and the Trade
thereof, 87 Cannor 88. and the Trade, 92 Cambaia, 88 Canora, ibid. Camboia,
ibid. Cauchinchina, ibid. Cambaia and the Trade thereof, 90 Chaul and the Trade
thereof, 92 Cochin and the Trade thereof, ibid. Calicut and the Trade thereof,
ibid. Coast of Cormandle, and the Trade thereof, 93 Custom in India for
debtors, 94 China and the Provinces thereof, 98 Commodities of China, ibid.
Cloves in abundance in Molluccos, 103 Celebs Island, and the Trade thereof,
containing Coins, Weights, etc. thereof, 107 Cyprus and the Trade thereof,
containing Commodities, Coins, Weights, Measures, 108 Cartagena, 114 Castilia
and the Trade thereof, containing Exchanges, Coins, Weights, Measures, 116
Catalonia, 118 Callais and the Trade thereof, 132 Champaign, ibid. Callabria
and the Trade thereof, 140 Crema and the Trade thereof, 157 Cremona and the
Trade thereof, 166 Como and the Trade thereof, 167 Cambray, 179 Charlemont,
ibid, Collen and the rade thereof, 185 Cleveland, ibid. Coins in general of
Germany, 206 Coins of Stoad, Hamburg, and Lubeck, ibid. Coins of Embden, Breme,
Edenburg, Brunswick, Mainburg, Lipsick, Upper Germany, Bohemia, Switzerland,
ibid. Copenhagen, 210. and the Trade thereof, 211 Candroa in Moscovia, 219
Cracovia and the Trade thereof, 223 Coninburg and the Trade thereof, 226
Corn-measures of Eastland, reduced to that of sundry other Countries, 231
Croatia, 236 Corono and the Trade thereof, 239 Catarro and the Trade thereof,
240 Caranto, anciently Corinth a samous Mart in Morea, 245 Constantinople, and
the Trade thereof, 247 Coos Island, 249 C(...)ia Island, and the Trade thereof,
251 Cerigo Island, ibid. Cursolari Islands, ibid. Corfu Island and the Trade
thereof, 235 Corsica Island, 258 Callary and the Trade thereof, 259 Capre
Island, 261 Cadis or Gades, ibid. Conaught in Ireland, 263 Four Circuits in
Wales, 268 Cornwall, 269 Cambridgshire, ibid. Cheshire, ibid. Cumberland, ibid.
Canarvanshire, ibid. Cardiganshire, ibid. Caermarthenshire, ibid. Six Circuits
in England, ibid. Cities of Exchanges in Europe, 273 Collen Exchanges, 290 The
Captain of Mosambick, the greatest Merchant of that Coast. 28
D.
DEscription of Countries conduces to the description of Cities 1 Division of
the World into four parts, ibid. Distance of places how found out, ibid. Duty
of building a Ship belonging to the Shipwright, 2 Duty of Ships provision
belonging to Owners and Out-readers, ibid. Duty of sailing a Ship belonging to
Navigators, ibid. Duty of Employing of Ships belonging to Merchants, ibid.
Denarius how called, 5 The best way of Accounts is by Debtor and Creditor, 7
Diverse Countries have a diversity in their measures 8 Decaying Commodities,
what, 9 Damietta, 29 Damascus and the Trade, containing the Coins, Weights,
Measures, Commodities thereof, etc. 62 Derbent, 73 Dellia, 88 Dieu, and the
Trade thereof, and of that Coast, and the Commodities, 89 Damain in India, 92
Customs in India for Debtors, 94 The Dutch Forts and Trade in Amboina Islands
103 Denia and the Trade thereof, 118 Dolphine, 127 Duke of Florence a great
Merchant, 159 Dry measures of several Cities in the Levant Seas compared, 161
Dukedom of Millan, 164 Dunkirk, 179 Doway, ibid. Delph, ibid. Dort, ibid.
Danubius River, 182 Dresden, and the trade thereof, 199 Denmark, and the
Provinces, 210 Dithmar in Denmark, ibid. Dantsick, and the trade thereof, 224
Dacia, and the Cities thereof, 235 Dalmatia, 236 Delos or Delphos, 249 Dublin
the Metropolis of Ireland, and the Trade thereof, 264 Four Dioceses in Wales,
268 Devonshire, 269 Dorsetshire, ibid. Darby-shire, ibid. Durham, ibid.
Denbighshire, ibid. Declaration of The Table of Exchanges, 274 Double Vsance
what, 299 Account of Discounts used in Lions, and elsewhere, 305 Days and
Nights differ according to the Latitude, 1
E.
Aequinoctial what, 1 Europe and its bounds, Latitude and Longitude, ibid.
Eclipse of the Sun and Moon when seen, ibid. Exchanging the third manner of
Commutation, 2 Exchanging drawn into a profitable Art, and the reasons thereof,
ibid. Things considerable in Exchanging, ibid. Esterlin moneys in England, 5 Of
Exchanges in general used by Merchants, 10 The Excellency of a Bill of
Exchange, ibid. The Exchanger rectifieth the disorders of Mints, and the
necessity of Prices, ibid. Estotiland, 12 Aethiopia, and the Provinces, 26
Elephants Teeth, 27 Egypt and the Provinces, 29 The Trade of Egypt in times
past, ibid. Egypt weights compared with others, 34 Euphesus 44 Eolis, the
first Merchants, 46 Ephrates, 54 Three Excellencies in Casbin, 76 Exendu, and
the largeness thereof, 87 The English the last Traders into India, 107 English
Consul at Cyprus, 108 Europe, and the Kingdoms thereof, 110 Escurial, 115
English subjection at Blois upon the River of Gerond, 124 English Hall in Rouen
for Wool, 126 East-Frisland, 182 Embden and the trade thereof, 183 Elsmore and
the Trade thereof, 212 Elbin and the Trade thereof, 225 Epidaurus, 245 Epirus,
246 The English the greatest Traders of any Christians into Constantinople, 247
Mount Aetna in Sicilia, 256 Elba Island, 261 Edinburgh and the Trade thereof,
266 Essex, 269 East India Merchants of London their original, 270 Eastland
Merchants their original, ibid. Of Exchanges in general, with the method and
manner thereof, as practiced in Christendom, 273 Exchanging places, ibid. What
Exchanges are, etc. ibid. Declaration of the Table of Exchanges, 274 Of the
Exchanges of Placentia, 276 The Exchanges of Lions, Paris, 277 The Exchanges of
Rome, 278 The Exchanges of Genoa, 279 Exchanges of Millan, 280 Exchanges of
Venice, 281 Exchanges of Florence, 282 Exchanges of Lucca, 283 Exchanges of
Naples, 284 Exchanges of Leccy, 285 Exchanges of Barry, 286 Exchanges of
Palermo, 287 Exchanges of Mesina, 288 Exchanges of Antwerp and Collen, 289
Exchanges of London, 290 Exchanges of Valentia, 291 Exchanges of Saragosa, 292
Exchanges of Barselona, 293 Exchanges of Sevil, Alcala, Medina del campo in
Castilia, 294 Exchanges of Lisbon, 295 Exchanges of Bolonia, 296 Exchanges of
Bergamo, 297 Exchanges of Frankfort, Norimberg, Augusta, Vienna, 298 How the
Rates and Prices in Exchanges are settled amongst Merchants, 300 Of Examples
upon Exchanges practiced at Lions, and how the same are calculated, 302
Examples of the Exchanges of Lions with the profit of the presits thereof, as
interest upon interest, 304 Certain and uncertain prices in Exchanges, what,
323 Examples of Exchanges in Rome and how the same are calculated, 325 Examples
of Exchanges in Naples, and how the same are calculated, 342 Examples of
Exchanges in Genoa, and how the same are calculated, 360 Examples of Exchanges
practiced in Venice, and how to be calculated, 368 Examples of Exchanges
practiced in Placentia, and how calculated, 382 Questions of Exchanges in
Placentia, 399 Examples of Exchanges practiced in Florence, and how calculated,
400 Exchanges practiced at Millan, and how the same are to be calculated, 410
Exchanges practiced at Palermo and Mesina, and how to be calculated, 419
Exchanges of Barselona, Sevil, Lisbon, Valentia and Saragosa, and how the same
is calculated, 426 Examples of Exchanges practiced in Antwerp, and how
calculated, 435 Examples of Exchanges practiced in London, and how calculated,
443 The Excellency of the Palm Tree, 30
F.
FLorida, 12 Fishing in New-foundland, ibid. Fess and the Provinces thereof, 20
The City of Fess, with the commodities, moneys, weights, measures, and customs
thereof, 21 The manner of farming the Pepper in India by the Portuguese, 92 The
Fortune of Siam and Pegu, 96 Firando and the Trade thereof, 101 France and the
Provinces thereof, 122 French not addicted to Trade, 127 Foreign Weights
compared with the Weights of Lions, 129 Farara and the Trade thereof, 144
Florence, and the Cities of that Dukedom, 159 Florence, and the Trade of that
City, 160 Flushing, 180 Franconia, 186 Francfort and the Trade thereof, 191
Fountain of Salt in Limburg, 201 Friburg and the Trade thereof, 202 Fionia, 210
Fincria, ibid. Finmark, 216 Finland in Siden, 217 The French Nation the Third
eminent Traders into Turkey, 247 Fromentary, 261 Frisland, 262 Flint, 269 French
Merchants of London, their original, 270 Florence Exchanges, 282 Francford
Exchanges, 298 Fairs and Marts, what, 299 Fairs in Lions when, 324 Examples of
Exchanges used in Florence, and how calculated, 400 Exchanges of Florence with
Lions, 401 Of Florence with Placentia, 402 Of Florence with Venice, 403 Of
Florence with Rome, 404 Of Florence with Naples, 405 Of Florence with Antwerp,
406 To reduce Crown of 7 Livers in Florence to Crown of Gold of 7 l. 407 Terms
of payment of Bills of Exchange in Florence, 408 Orders and Commissions in
Exchanges practiced in Florence, 409
G.
GEography dilightful, profitable, and necessary to Merchants, 1 Geography
demonstrated in Maps and Sea-cards, ibid. Gold and Silver the most excellent of
Metals, 5 Nova Granada, 13 Guiana, ibid. Goaga, 25 Genin and Benin, and their
Trade, with their customs, coins, weights, measures, and manner of accounting,
ibid. Gordion, 46 Gallacia, and the Cities thereof, 50 Grogram Trade, ibid.
Galelia, 66 Gasa and the Trade thereof, 66 Georgia, 67 Gedrosia, 78 Gombrone
and the Trade thereof, 80 Ganges the famous River, 88 Goa and the Trade
thereof, containing the commodities, coins, weights, and measures, 91 The
greatness of China, 98 Granado and the Trade thereof, 113 Geneva and the Trade
thereof, 136 Genoa and the Trade thereof, 174 Guelderland, 178 Gante, 179
Graveling, ibid. Groining 180 Germany, and the Provinces thereof, 182 Grats,
194 Gorlits, 195 Germany accounts and coyns, 206 Gothland in Sweden, 217 Grecia
and the Provinces thereof, 238 Galipolis or Calipolis, 246 Gallata, 247 The
Government of the Trade of the English into Constantinople, ibid. Groanland,
262 Garnsey Island, ibid. Glocestershire, 269 Glamorganshire, ibid. Greenland
Merchants of London their original, 270 Genoa Exchanges, 279 Genoa Exchanges,
and how calculated, 360 Exchanges of Genoa with Placentia, 361 To reduce Livers
of current money into Livers of Gold in Genoa, ibid. Exchanges of Genoa with
Lions, 362 Of Genoa with Millan, 363 Of Genoa with Venice, 364 Of Genoa with
Naples, 365 Orders and Commissions in Genoa, 366 Terms of payment of Bills of
Exchange in Genoa, 367 Galetta in Tunes, 15 Granatins or Moro francos, ibid.
H.
HUndred weights what, 6 Hispaniola, 13 Hispahan and the Trade thereof,
containing the commodities, coins, accounts, weights, measures thereof, and
Persia, 81 The Hollanders the second Traders into India, 107 Holland, 179
Henalt, ibid. Harlem, ibid. Hans-Towns in Germany, 182 Hidleberg, and the Trade
thereof, 189 Helvetia, 191 Hasia, 201 Hamburg and the Trade thereof, 204
Holfatia, 210 Hungaria and the Cities thereof, 234 The Hollanders the least
Traders into Turkey, of the Western Christians, 246 Mount Hibla in Sicilia, 256
Hebrides Isles, 262 Hampshire, 269 Hartfordshire, ibid. Huntingtonshire, ibid.
Herefordshire, ibid. Half Vsance, what, ibid.
I.
A Merchant should know the form of Intimations and Protests, 2 Impositions
upon Goods, 4 An Instrument to find out the argreement of measures in any two
Cities or Places, 8 Jucatan, 12 Isles of Solomon, 13 Isles of Baccalos, ibid.
Island of Beriquen, ibid. Jamaica, ibid. Island St. Thomas, 37 Islands
Canaries, and the Trade thereof, 38 Island Tarceras, or Asores, 39 Ionia and
the Cities thereof, 44 Jordan the River, 65 Idumea, ibid. Judea, ibid. Jerico,
66 Jerusalem, ibid. Jasques in Persia, 80 India and the Provinces thereof, 88
Islands of Asia, and their Trade, 100 Islands of Japan and their Trade,
containing their coyns, weights, measures, etc. 101 Island of Silon, and the
Trade, 102 Inhabitants of Silon excellent and rare Tumblers and Morisdancers,
ibid. Islands of Moluccos, and the Trade, 103 Islands of Java, and the Trade,
104 Jacetra baptized Batavia, ibid. Japarra and the Trade thereof, ibid. Jambe
and the Trade thereof, 105 Isle of France, 126 Italy and the Provinces thereof,
137 Imperial Towns in Germany, 202 Juitland in Denmark, 210 Julin an ancient
Mart, 229 Illyria, 236 The Trade of the Islands seated in the Ionian, Egron,
Mediterranean and Adriatic Sea, 248 Ithecca and the Trade thereof, 252 Ivisa
Island and the Trade thereof, 261 Iscia Islands, ibid. Island, 262 Jarsey
Island ibid. Ireland and the Trade thereof, 269 Ingland and the Cities thereof,
269 Levant Merchants of London, their original and splendor, 270 Ignorant
Exchangers censure the judicious, if varying from the custom of Exchanging, 273
Dates of Exchanges in Lions, which may serve for the rate of Interest in any
other place, 303 Interest paid upon Rebate, 304
K.
The King's Beam or Weighhouse, 3 How a Merchant may have a knowledge in all
Commodities, 9 The Kingdoms now in subjection to the Grand Seignior, 67 Kent,
26 Kings of Portugal great Merchants into India, 28
L.
Latitude how accounted, 1 The Longitude of a place how to be found out, ibid.
The Latitude of a place how to be found, ibid. Latitude and Longitude found out
by the Meridians, ibid. Lucay Islands, 13 Lybia and the Provinces, 24 Lydia, 46
Liconia and the Cities, 52 Lahoare, 90 Lawibander, ibid. Lisbon and the Trade
thereof, containing coyns, weights, measures, and customs of Portugal, 117
Locrams, 125 Limosin, 127 Lions and the Trade thereof, 128 Languedoc, 129
Lorrain, 132 Loretta, 147 Leghorn and the Trade thereof, 173 Lucca and the
Trade thereof, 175 Limburge, 178 Liege, ibid. Luxenburg, ibid. Lovain, ibid.
Lisle, 179 Leiden, ibid. Lipsick and the Trade thereof, 197 Luneburg and the
Trade thereof, 201 Lubeck and the Trade thereof, 205 Lappia in Swethland, 218
Livonia, 222 Lituania, ibid. Larta and the Trade thereof, 244 Lepanto and the
Trade thereof, 245 Lemnos, 248 Lesbos, 249 Lipar Island, 261 Lemster in
Ireland, 263 Liecestershire, ibid. Lincolnshire, ibid. Lancashire, ibid. London
and the Trade thereof, 270 Liberty of Exchanging, 273 The Exchanges of Lions,
277 Lucca Exchanges, 283 Leccy Exchanges, 285 London Exchanges, 290 Lisbon
Exchanges, 295 Examples upon Exchanges in Lions, and how calculated, 302
Customs of acceptions of Bills of Exchanges in Lions, ibid. The price of
Exchanges settled in Lions for succeeding Fairs, ib. Recounters in Lions, what,
ibid. Rules of casting up the Exchanges made in Lions, ibid. Rates of Exchanges
in Lions, which may serve for the rates of interest in many other places, 303
The reason and benefit of the Rules of Exchanges in Lions, ibid. Examples of
the Exchanges of Lions, with the profit of the profits thereof, 304 Accounts of
disaccounts in Lions in many other places, 305 Exchanges of Lions with Rome,
307 Exchanges of Lions with Florence, 308 Exchanges of Lions with Lucca, 309
Exchanges of Lions with Naples, 310 Exchanges of Lions with Palermo, 311
Exchanges of Lions with Genoa, 312 Exchanges of Lions with Millan, 313
Exchanges of Lions with Venice, 314 Exchanges of Lions with Bolonia, 315
Exchanges of Lions with Placentia, 316 Exchanges of Lions with Antwerp, 317
Exchanges of Lions with London, 318 Exchanges of Lions with Francfort, 319
Exchanges of Lions with Sevil, 320 Exchanges of Lions with Lisbon, 321
Exchanges of Lions with Barselona, 322 Orders and Commissions for Exchange in
Lions, 323 The Fairs of Lions, 324 Exchanges of Lisbon, 426 Examples of
Exchanges practiced in London, and how calculated, 443 Exchanges of London with
Lions, 444 Exchanges of London with Florence, 445 Exchanges of London with
Venice, 446 Of London with Antwerp, 447 Orders and Commissions in draughts and
remittances in Exchanges in London, 448 Terms of payments of Bills of Exchanges
in London, 449
M.
MErchandising the first School of the present government of many Countries, 1
The use of Maps and Sea-Cards in general, ibid. Meridian, what, ibid. Meridians
and their use, ibid. Merchandising accounted an Art, 2 The materials of
Merchandising are Commodities and Moneys, ibid. The duty of Merchants, ibid. A
Merchant ought to know 1. the Form of a Bill of Exchange, 2. of all Intimations
and Protests, 3. of Charter-parties, 4. Bills of lading, 5. Policies of
Assurance, 6. of Bills of Debt, 7. of a Release, 8. of Letters of Attorney, 9,
of Account-keeping, and 10. Arithmetic, ibid. The Merchant's purse and person
supplies many defects in a City, 3 Magazines for commodities, ibid Met-house,
ibid. Merchants must learn what customs are, and duly pay them, 4 Moneys of
Leather in Saint Dominico, 5 Moneys of Shells in Tombuto, ibid. Moneys of Iron
in Massa, ibid. Moneys of Lumaches in Congo, ibid. Moneys of Glass in Melinda,
ibid. Moneys of Salt and Paper in Cathay, ibid. Moneys of Gansa in Pegu, ibid.
Moneys of Almonds in Bengala, ibid. Moneys of dead men's Sculls in Sumatra,
ibid. Moneys of Pepper and Cocos in India, ibid. Moneys called by three several
names, ibid. Moneta, what, and how called, ibid. The Merchant must be versed in
all weights, 6 Of Measures in general, 8 False Measures are punishable by the
Magistrate, ibid. Measures of solid Bodies, of dry and liquid Commodities,
ibid. All Measures to the Merchant must be as one measure, ibid. A Merchant
must be seen in all Commodities, and in all Trades, 9 A Merchant must know the
value of all Commodities, ibid. A Merchant must reduce the knowledge of
commodities to a profitable end, ibid. Merchants should know how to preserve
all commodities, ibid. Merchants should know how to better their commodities,
ibid. The Mystery of Exchange reduced to profitable principles, 10 Mexicana and
the Provinces, 12 Mexico and the commodities, ibid. Manoa the Golden City, 13
Margarita, ibid. Kingdom of Morocco, 22 City of Morocco with the Trade
containing the commodities, coins, weights, measures, and customs thereof, 23
Mosambique, and the Trade thereof, containing coins, weights, measures and
commodities thereof, 28 Monomotapa, 27 Manica, ibid Manicongo, ibid. Merchants
of six sorts in Cairo, 31 Madagascar, otherwise Saint Laurence, 35 Midium, 46
Medina Talnabni and Mecha, 68 Mesopotamia and the Cities, 69 Mocha and the
Trade, containing the coins, weights, measures thereof, 70 Media and the Cities
thereof, ibid. Mallavar, Chap: 88. and the Trade of that Coast, 92 Mandoa,
ibid. Macin, ibid. The Merchants that in general are found to traffic in
India, ibid. Musulapatam, and the Trade of the coast of Cormandil, with the
coins, weights, measures of that place and coast, 93 Maccau in China, 95
Mallaca and the Trade thereof, as the weights, measures, coins etc. thereof, 97
Moonsons at Mallaca, ibid. Maccau and the Trade thereof, containing the
commodities, coins, weights, etc. thereof, 99 Macasser and the Trade thereof,
containing weights, measures, coins, etc. 107 Malaga and the Trade thereof,
containing coins, customs, weights, measures, 114 Murcia, ibid. Madrid, 115
Measures of Spain reduced to the English Yard of London, 120 Main, 125 St.
Mallos and Morlais in Britanny, ibid. Moneys lately inhansed in France, 127
Molins, ibid. Mart of Lions formerly in Geneva, 128 Marselia and the Trade
thereof, 131 Modena and the Trade thereof, 145 Millan and the Trade thereof,
165 Mantona and the Trade thereof, 168 Mirandola and the Trade thereof, 172
Mastricht, 178 Marquisate, ibid. Middleburge, 180 Maclin, ibid. Measures of the
Netherlands reduced to the measures of London, ibid. Mentz, 186 Meclinburge,
196 Measures of Germany reduced to London, 208 Measures of Denmark to London,
214 Moscovia and the Provinces, 219 Mosco and the Trade thereof, 220 Massovia,
222 Moldavia, 235 Modona and the Trade thereof, 239 Morea and the Trade
thereof, ibid. Misene in Morea, 245 Marathron, 256 Megara, ibid. Macedonia,
ibid. Migdonia, ibid. Mastique, 248 Mesina and the Trade thereof, 257 Malta
Island, ibid. Majorque and Minorque, and the Trade thereof, 260 Man Island, 262
Munster in Ireland, 263 Meth in Ireland, ibid. Middlesex, 269 Mcrionethshire,
ibid. Mountgomeryshire, ibid. Monmouthshire, ibid. Merchants Adventurers of
London, their Original, and places of residence, 270 Moscovia Merchants of
London, their Original, ibid. Measures used in England, 272 Manner of
Exchanging, 273 Millan Exchanges, 280 Mesina Exchanges, 288 Medina del Campo
Exchanges 294 Exchanges practiced at Millan, and how the same are calculated
410 Exchanges of Millan with Lions, 411 Of Millan with Placentia, 412 Of Millan
with Venice, 413 Of Millan with Rome, 414 Of Millan with Naples, 415 Of Millan
with Genoa, 416 Terms of Payments of Bills of Exchanges in Millan, 417 Orders
and Commissions given and received in Exchanges in Millan, 418 Exchanges of
Mesina and Palermo, 419
N.
THe duty of Navigators, 2 Nummos, what, 5 Natural commodities, what, 9 The
Necessity and commodiousness of Exchanges, 10 Nicaragua, 12 Norumbega, ibid.
Nova Francia, ibid. Nombre de dios, 13 Numidia and the Provinces, 24 Negrita
and the Trade thereof, 25 Navigation to India, 21 Nilus River, 29 Narsinga, 88
Nanquin, 98 Normandy, 125 Nevers, 127 Naples and the Cities therein, 138 Naples
and the Trade thereof, 139 Nemingen, 178 Newport, 179 Namurce, ibid. Normbierg,
186 And the Trade thereof, 190 Northgoia, 195 Norway and the Provinces, 216
Nodrosia in Norway, ibid. Novegrade in Moscovia, 219 St. Nicholas in Moscovia,
220 Negroponte, 249 Northern Islands, 262 Norfolk, ibid. Northamptonshire,
ibid. Nottinghamshire, ibid. Northumberland, ibid. Naples Exchanges, 298
Norimberg Exchanges, 298 Exchanges of Naples how calculated, 342 Exchanges of
Naples with Lions, 343 Exchanges of Naples with Placentia, 344 Exchanges of
Naples with Rome, 345 Exchanges of Naples with Florence, 346 Exchanges of
Naples with Venice, 347 Exchanges of Naples with Millan, 348 Exchanges of
Naples with Leccy and Barry, 349 Exchanges of Naples with Mesina, 350 Exchanges
of Naples with Palermo, 351 Exchanges of Naples with Genoa, 352 Exchanges of
Naples with Antwerp, 353 Exchanges of Naples with London, 354 Exchanges of
Naples with Venice, 355 Exchanges of Naples with Sevil, 356 Exchanges of Naples
with Lisbon, 457 Terms of Payment of Bills of Exchanges in Naples, 358 Orders
and Commissions in Naples, 359
O.
THe duty of Owners of Ships, 2 The Original of Customs, 4 Officers Fees of
Custom-houses, to be known and discharged, ib. Merchants should write down
their Observations upon Commodities, 9 Ocknam's brave Attempt, 13 Oran, with
the coins, weights, and measures thereof, 17 Original of the company of
Merchants of Turkey and East India, 23 Ormus and the Trade thereof, 80 Restored
to the Persian Scepter by the valor of the English, ibid. Orders of Caravans
from Syria to Balsara, ibid. Orleans, 127 Oils of Provence how bought, 130 Oils
how measured in Thollon, ibid. Orange, 131 Ottranto, 139 Oversels, 180 Ordera
River, 182 Ossenbregs, 184 Olmuts, 195 Olympian Games, 245 Ocean Islands, 262
Orcades, ibid. Oxfordshire, 269 Orders and Commissions given and received for
draughts and remittances of Exchanges in Lions, 323 Orders and Commissions
given and received for draughts and remittances of Exchanges in Rome, 341
Orders and Commissions given and received for draughts and remittances of
Exchanges in Naples, 359 Orders and Commissions for draughts and remittances in
Genoa, 366 Orders and Commissions for draughts and remittances in Venice, 380
Orders and Commissions for draughts and remittances in Placentia, 398 Orders
and Commissions for draughts and remittances in Florence, 409 Orders and
Commissions for draughts and remittances in Millan, 418 Orders and Commissions
for draughts and remittances in Palermo and Mesina, 425 Orders and Commissions
for draughts and remittances in Barselona, 434 Orders and Commissions for
draughts and remittances in Antwerp, 442 Orders and Commissions for draughts
and remittances in London, 448 Original of Burses, or places for meeting of
Merchants, 181
P.
PArallels, what, 1 Poles artick and antartick, ibid. A Merchant should know
the form of Policies of Assurance, 2 Pecunia, what, and how called, 5 A
Principal part of Merchandising consists in the knowledge of Commodities, 9 How
to find out the Par of Exchanges, 10 The Price of the Exchanges, at the
disposal of the Exchanger, ibid. The Particulars observed in the Map of
Commerce, ibid. Peruana and the Provinces, 13 Panama, ibid. Peru, ibid.
Pamphilia, 43 Phrigia, 46 Pontus and the Cities thereof, 49 Pompey's Pillar,
ibid. Paphlagonia and the Cities, 50 Pisidia and the Cities, 52 Phoenicia and
the Cities, 55 Palestine and the Cities, 65 Place of Paradise, 71 Pigeons
Letter-carriers, 72 Persia and the Provinces thereof, 75 Persis, ibid. Policies
of Casan, 78 Parthia, 10 Pegu, 88 The manner of framing the Pepper in India by
the Portuguese, 92 Pegu, and the Trade of that coast, 95 Pottana and the Trade
thereof, 96 Priaman and the Trade thereof, 105 Philippine Islands, 107 The
Portuguese the first Masters of the Trade of India, 107 Portugal, 116 Poitou,
125 Paris and the Trade thereof, 127 Perigort, ibid. Provence, 129 Picardy, 131
Popacie and the Cities thereof, 142 Padua and the Trade thereof, 153 Pisa and
the Trade thereof, 162 Parma and the Trade thereof, 170 Placentia and the Trade
thereof, 171 Principalities in Germany, 182 Preslave, 195 Prague and the Trade
thereof, 196 Pomerania, 197 Plescovia, 212 Permia, ibid. Petrosa, ibid. Polonia
and the Provinces thereof, 222 Podolia, ibid. Podlasia, ibid. Prussia, ibid.
The Trade in general of Poland and East-land, 233 Presburg, 234 Pretras and the
Trade thereof, 239 Parnassus Mount, 246 Pera, ibid. Pathmos Island, 249 Palermo
and the Trade thereof, 257 Panteleria Island, 261 Progita, ibid. Pomonia Isles,
262 Pembroke-shire, 269 The Exchanges of Placentia, 277 The Exchanges of Paris,
277 Palermo Exchanges, 288 The Par in Exchanges, what, 301 Princes Par in
Exchanges, 301 Merchants Par in Exchanges, ibid. Examples of Exchanges
practiced in Placentia, and how calculated, 388 Exchanges of Placentia with
Lions, 382 Of Placentia with Genoa, 384 Of Placentia with Rome, 385 Of
Placentia with Florence, 386 Of Placentia with Palermo, 387 Of Placentia with
Venice, 388 Of Placentia with Millan, 389 Of Placentia with Naples, 390 Of
Placentia with Sevil, 391 Of Placentia with Valentia, 392 Of Placentia with
Antwerp, 393 Of Placentia with Bergamo, 394 Of Placentia with Lucca, 395 Of
Placentia with Francfort, 396 Of Placentia with London, 397 Of Orders and
Commissions given and received in Exchanges in Placentia, 398 Questions upon
Exchanges in Placentia, 399 Exchanges practiced in Palermo and Mesina, and how
the same are calculated, 419 Exchanges of Palermo and Mesina with Lions, 420 Of
Palermo, etc. with Placentia, 421 Of Palermo, etc. with Naples, 422 Of Palermo,
etc. with Venice, 423 Of Palermo etc. with Barselona, 424 Of Palermo, etc. with
Saragosa and Valentia, ibid. Orders and Commissions in Palermo and Mesina,
given and received in Exchanges there, 425 Piratical Trade of Tunis and Argier,
19
Q.
QUivira, 12 Quiloa, 27 Quitiana, ibid. Quinsay, 98 Quinto of money, what, 116
Quercu, 127 The Quality of money Exchanged, 273 Questions upon Exchanges that
are practiced in Placentia, 399
R.
ROves in weighing, what, 6 Rotolos in weighing, what ibid. (...) de la plata,
13 (...) Contracts, 28 Ros^ on Nilus, 29 Rovenas of Egypt, 31 Rhubarb, 85
River of Martaban, 95 River of Menan, 96 Rarities found in Sumatra, 105 Rochel
and the Trade thereof, 125 Rouen and the Trade thereof, 126 Runano and the
Trade thereof, 146 Ravenna and the Trade thereof, 147 Ricanti and the Trade
thereof, 148 Rome and the Trade thereof, 150 Rotterdam a seat of the
Merchant-Adventurers of London, 179 River of Rhine, 182 Rivers of Moscovia, 219
Rhesian, ibid. Russia Niger, 222 Riga and the Trade thereof, 227 Revell and the
Trade thereof, 228 Rasia, 235 Rhagusa and the Trade thereof, 237 Rhodes and the
Trade thereof, 250 Rutland-shire, 269 Richmondshire, ibid. Rhadnorshire, ibid.
The Exchanges of Rouen, 277 The Exchanges of Rome, 278 Rescounters in Lions,
what, 302 Rules of casting up the Exchanges made in Lions, ibid. Rates of
Exchanges in Lions which may serve for rates of interest in many other places,
303 A Table for casting up the Account of Rebatements, 305 Examples of
Exchanges practiced in Rome, and how the same are to be calculated, 326
Exchanges of Rome with Placentia, 327 Exchanges of Rome with Florence, 328
Exchanges of Rome with Venice, 329 Exchanges of Rome with Millan, 330 Exchanges
of Rome with Naples, 331 Exchanges of Rome with Genoa, ^ Exchanges of Rome with
(...)lermo, 333 Exchanges of Rome with Antwerp, 334 Exchanges of Rome with
London, 335 Exchanges of Rome with Valentia, Saragosa and Barselona, 336
Exchanges of Rome with Sevil, 337 Exchanges of Rome with Lisbon, 338 Terms of
Payments of Bills of Exchange in Rome, 339 Aggio of moneys in Rome, 340 Orders
and Commissions by Exchange in Rome, 341
S.
SHipping distinguished into four parts, as the duty of four distinct Persons,
2 The Ship-wright's duty, ibid. Strictness for not paying customs in Russin,
Denmark, Sweden, Spain, in England, Scotland, Germany, France, Italy,
Netherlands and Turkey, 4 Several forts of moneys in use in several Countries,
5 Ship-ponds in weights, what, 6 Stones in weights, what, ibid.
Staple-commodities, what, 9 Sugar-trade, 25 Sossala, 27 Sues in the Red Sea,
29. and the Trade thereof, 33 Sauchen and the Trade, containing the
commodities, measures, and weights thereof, 32 Smyrna, with the commodities,
coins, accounts, weights, measures, customs, and the Trade thereof, 45 Mineral
Salt, 51 Syria in general, 54 Sidon and the Trade, containing coins, weights
and measures thereof, 58 Syrophoenicia and the Cities thereof, ibid. Samaria,
65 Sciras and the Trade thereof, 79 Sarmacand, 86 Siam, 88 Surat and the (...)
the coins, (...), etc. thereof, ^ Ships of (...) (...) coast of Bengala
weights, etc. 94 Strange manner of buying and selling in Pegu and that coast,
95 Spinals dug at Coplan, ibid. Siam, and the Trade of the coast thereof,
their weights, measures, etc. 96 Ten thousand sail of Ships belonging to the
King of China in one River, 98 A Ship yearly at Maccau from Goa going to Japan,
99 Summatra and the Trade thereof, 105 Socodana an English Factory, 106 Spain
and the Cities thereof, 111 Sevil and the Trade thereof, containing accounts,
coins, Exchanges, weights, commodities, measures, etc. thereof, 112 Segovia,
115 Salamanca, ibid. Saragosa, 119 Savoy and the Trade thereof, 133 Sienna and
the Trade thereof, 163 Seventeen United Provinces, 178 Sidan, ibid. Sluis, 179
The ancient Staple of Bridges, 181 Strasburg and the Trade thereof, 186
Stutgard, ibid. Spiers and the Trade thereof, 188 Saxony, 196 Silver Mines in
Friburg, 202 Stoad and the Trade thereof, 203 Sealand in Denmark, 210 Scania,
ibid. Scandia, ibid. Sweden and the Cities thereof, 217 Stockholm and the Trade
thereof, 218 Seruca, 219 Smaleusco, ibid. Samogitia, 222 Stralsond and the
Trade thereof, 229 Stetin and the Trade thereof, 230 Servia, 235 Sclavonia, 236
Spallata and the Trade thereof, 237 Schenico and the Trade thereof, 241
Scuttari and the Trade thereof, 242 Sparta, 245 Salonica and the Trade thereof,
246 Sidrocapse rich in Mines of Gold, ibid. Samothrasia, 248 Scio, or Chios,
and the Trade thereof, 249 Sciros Island, ibid. Salamis Island, ibid. Samos
Island, ibid. Suda a brave Harbor in Candia, 251 Strucalli Islands, ibid.
Santo Mauro, 252 Sicilia and the Provinces thereof, 256 Sardinia Island, 258
Sorlings Islands, 262 Scotland and the Provinces thereof, 264 Twelve Shires in
Wales, 268 Somersetshire, 269 Surry, ibid. Sussolk, ibid. Sussex, ibid.
Staffordshire, ibid. Shropshire, ibid. Saragosa Exchanges, 291 Sevil Exchanges,
294 Sight, what, 299 Exchanges of Sevil, 426 Exchanges of Saragosa, ibid.
T.
TRopicks of Cancer and Capricorn, 1 Things considerable in bartering,
bargaining, and exchanging, 2 Terra Cotterialis, 12 Trindado, 13 The Trade of
America by Spaniards, ibid. Tunis and the Trade thereof, with the coins,
weights, measures, commodities, and customs thereof, 15 The Trade in general of
Argier, and Tunis, 19 Of Trade in general of Barbary, 23 Tarradant, ibid.
Tombotu, 25 Troys Ruins ruined, 46 Trapesond, Chap. 51. with the weights and
measures thereof, 55 Tire, and the ancient Trade thereof, 60 Tripoli in Syria,
with the Trade, containing weights, measures, etc. thereof, 64 Turcomania, 67
Tauris and the Trade thereof, 74 The general Trade of Persia, 82 Tartary and
the Provinces thereof, 83 Tartaria Precopensis, ibid. Tartaria Asiatica and
Antiqua, 85 Tutta, 90 The Trade in general of the Seacoast of India, 92 Ticco
and the Trade thereof, 105 Trade in general of Asia, 109 Toledo, 114 Tortosa,
119 The Trade in general of Spain and Portugal surveyed, 121 Thoullousa and the
Trade thereof, 123 Torrian, 125 Thollon and the Trade thereof, 130 Turino and
the Trade thereof, 134 The Trade in general of France, 135 Tarranto, 139
Treviso and the Trade thereof, 152 The Trade in general of Italy, 177 Tornay,
179 The Trade of Antwerp augmented by three occasions, and decayed by three
occasions, 179 The Trade in general of Netherlands, 181 The Trade in general of
Aermany, 209 The Trade of Prussia, ibid. The Trade of Denmark, 215 The Trade of
Moscovia, 221 Transylvania, 236 Thebes, 246 Thermophilae Straights famous,
ibid. Thessalia, ibid. Thracia, ibid. The Trade of the Citizens of
Constantinople, 247 Tenedos, 248 Terra Sigillata, 248 Temple for the cure of
Lovers, 252 Turkey or Levant Merchants their original in London, 270 Though the
Tables of Exchanges differ from the present rates, yet the use thereof is no
way lessened, 274 Terms of payments of Bills of Exchange, 299 A Table for
casting up the account of Discounts or Rebatements. 304 Tripoly in Barbary, 15
V.
VIrginia, 12 Una and the Trade thereof, containing the coins, weights,
measures thereof, 12 The Undermining tricks of the Dutch in the Trade of Guiny,
25 The matchless Villainy of the Dutch in the Amboina Islands, 103 Validolide,
115 Valentia and the Trade thereof, 118 Vienne in France, 127 Valentia in
France, ibid. Republic of Venice, and the Cities, 131 Vicentia and the Trade
thereof, 154 Verona and the Trade thereof, 156 Venice and the Trade thereof,
158 Urbin and the Trade thereof, 169 Valencourt, 179 Utrecht, 180 Vienna and
the Trade thereof, 195 Veteravia, 201 Valadomira, 219 Volmia, 222 Valona or
Avalona, and the Trade, 243 Venetians the second Traders of eminency in Turkey,
247 Ulster in Ireland, 263 The Use of the Table of Exchanges, 275 Venice
Exchanges, 281 Valentia Exchanges, 291 Vienna Exchanges, 298 Usance, what, 299
Examples of Exchanges practiced in Venice, and how calculated, 368 Exchanges of
Venice with Lions, 369 Of Venice with Placentia, 370 Of Venice with Rome, 371
Of Venice with Naples, 372 Of Venice with Florence, 373 Of Venice with Millan,
374 Of Venice with Antwerp, 375 Of Venice with London, 376 Of Venice with
Genoa, 377 Of Venice with Norimberg, 378 Of Venice with Bergamo, 379 Of Orders
and Commissions given and received in Exchanges at Venice, 380 Terms of
payments of Bills of Exchange in Venice, 381 Exchanges of Valentia, 426
Injurious decrees of Venice against the Trade of the English in the Levant
Seas, 158 The present Trade of Venice surveyed, ibid.
W.
THe World divided into 4 Parts, 1 The Weigh-House or Kingsbeam, 36 Weights in
general used in Merchandising, 6 The difference of Weights in all Countries,
ibid. Two manners of Weighing in use, ibid. Weighing by Beam, ibid. Weighing by
Stadiero, ibid. Weights are authorized by Magistrates, ibid. Weights to be
sworn, ibid. By what Weights the Weights of this Book are authorized, ib. How
to accord the Weights of any two several places, ibid. The Weights of Spain
reduced to the English Hundred, 120 Woad or Pastel of Tholousa, 123 Weights and
Measures of France reduced to the English, 134 Weights of Italy reduced to the
weights and measures of London, 176 West-Frisland, 180 Weights of Netherlands,
reduced to the weights of London, ibid. Westphalia, 183 Worms and the Trade
thereof, 187 Wittenburg, 186 Westburg, ibid. Wallen a samous Mart, 196
Wittenburg and the Trade thereof, 198 Weights of Germany with London, 207
Weights of Denmark with London, 213 Warehouses in Norway, 216 Weights and
measures of Eastland reduced to that of England, 231 Wallacia, 235 Willowbeys
Island, 262 Wight Island, ibid. Wales and its bounds, 268 Wiltshire, 269
Warwickshire, ibid. Worcestershire, ibid. Westmorland, ibid. Weights used in
England, 271
Y.
YPres, 279 Yorkshire, 269
Z.
Zones five, 1 Zanibar, 27 Zagatora, 36 Zagatai and the Provinces, 86 Zutphen,
179 Zealand, 180 Zuriche and the Cities thereof, 192 Zante and the Trade
thereof, 253 Zeffalonia and the Trade thereof, ibid. Zara Island and the Trade
thereof, 255 Nova Zembla, 262
The End of the TABLE.
A Table of the Longitude and Latitude of all the principal Cities mentioned in
this Map of Commerce.
Lat. Long. D. M. D. M. A. ADrianople 42 45 22 45 Alba regalis. 46 48 42 0
Alb^m castrum 48 35 50 45 Amsterdam 52 40 27 34 Alexandria in Egypt 31 00 60
30 Alexandria in Italy 43 10 30 00 Alsfild in Hassia 51 00 72 00 Abbevile, in
Picardy, 49 50 22 30 Amberge in Bohemia 49 26 32 40 Ancona 43 22 39 40 Antioch
37 20 70 15 Antwerp 51 58 26 36 Acquilla 43 30 38 20 Argentina 48 45 28 14
Angusta 47 42 33 00 Anglers 47 25 18 10 Avignon 44 40 22 40 Aleppo 38 00 72 30
Arming 41 00 76 00 Ava 27 50 142 30 Agacles 30 00 66 33 Agasimba 7 00 24 0
Algiers 25 20 30 0 Almara -- S. L. 30 00 63 30 Angola -- S. L. 07 00 45 10 Asna
25 00 66 30 Ascentia -- S. L. 19 00 363 20 Santa Anna -- S. L. 27 30 318 30 B.
Boriquen -- S. L. 19 40 273 20 Bangamodrum 06 00 62 36 Bernagasum 13 00 70 0
Benomotapa 26 00 55 0 Bona 35 40 37 10 Brava 30 74 30 Bugia 35 10 34 30 Babylon
33 00 82 20 Bethlem 31 50 65 45 Baccu 42 00 88 50 Bulgar 54 30 88 30 Bengala 21
20 125 10 Bensanson 46 30 20 30 Burges 46 20 22 10 Buda 47 00 42 0 Bordeaux 44
30 17 50 Bollonia 43 33 35 50 Basil 47 40 31 0 C. Constantinople 43 05 56 0
Cales 37 05 10 Conimbre 40 00 11 25 Collen 51 00 30 30 Copenhagen 56 50 34 30
Cor^nth 36 55 51 15 Cracovia 50 12 42 40 Cane 49 42 19 20 Compostella 20 06
Caminetsa 50 40 50 20 Calicut 10 38 112 40 Casan 35 10 96 10 Cappha 48 00 68 5d
Cambalu 51 10 161 10 Cambaia 11 40 142 20 Cantan 25 149 00 Chile -- S. L. 36
299 30 Coanum 31 259 40 Canada 50 20 305 10 Cartagena nova 20 10 300 Casco --
S. L. 13 30 297 20 Caxamalca -- S. L. 11 30 298 30 Cuba 31 40 296 Capua 41 39
10 Carenge 31 50 31 48 Cairo 29 50 63 Cesena 43 40 34 40 Cephalonia 37 10 47 10
Colmar 48 12 26 0 Constance 47 30 28 30 Cordova 37 50 28 0 Corfu 38 45 45 10
Corsica Island 40 50 31 0 Crema 44 20 31 15 Cremona 44 40 32 25 Cyprus 35 30 65
30 Cuma 41 40 41 0 Cap bona speransa S. L. 35 00 50 30 Cape verde 40 10 9 50 D.
Dabul 31 00 112 20 Damascus 35 69 Doway 50 30 25 Dole 46 10 27 0 Dublin Dort 44
0 30^ Dantsick 54 44 44 15 Dresden 51 00 23 45 Dirraccium 40 50 54 0 Decan 14
00 113 20 Delle 5 00 114 19 Damieta 32 40 69 00 Dara 12 0 66 50 Dancali 17 10
66 50 E. Edinburgh 58 00 19 20 Ephesus 37 40 57 40 Erford 51 10 34 Epidauro 36
25 51 45 F. Francford upon Oder 50 30 24 Francford upon Mentz 50 30 30 Florence
34 43 Ferara 36 44 Friburg 48 13 28 Famagusta 30 30 69 20 Fassum 45 40 57 50
Favencia 43 40 35 20 Fess 34 30 5 30 Flanders 52 30 22 45 G. Guatimala 24 20
303 Guaiachil -- S. L. 2 30 294 30 Goa 14 40 112 20 Gaza 33 70 50 Guinea -- S.
L. 9 10 18 Guangala 25 50 37 30 Goaga 22 55 Geneva 45 45 28 Granado 37 30 17 15
Genoa 15 20 45 20 Gaieta 40 50 38 20 Gallipoli 41 30 45 10 Gelderland 52 20 27
40 Gotland 60 00 48 Golmon 54 6 33 54 Gorlits 51 34 45 Gulich 52 0 27 30 H.
Hidleberg 49 25 33 Havana 20 0 292 10 Hochlaga 44 10 300 50 Hamburg 54 20 30 15
Hamaria in Norway 60 31 45 Halbestad 52 11 35 20 I. Jerusalem 31 40 66 Ireland
the midst 57 12 Ingolstad 48 42 31 20 Jamaica 17 0 298 30 St. Jaco 32 10 298 10
Isabella 10 10 32 India the midst 28 105 40 Jerico 33 73 L. London 51 30 20
Leiden 52 10 27 20 Lions 44 30 25 40 Lovain 51 23 Lisbon 38 50 10 50 Leigh 50
30 29 Liampo 34 40 160 20 Lima -- S. L. 23 30 296 40 Lucaio 30 0 299 27 Lansano
47 40 35 30 Leoburg 54 10 28 2 Legorn 42 12 33 10 Lovain 51 0 26 45 Lubeck 54
48 34 0 Lucca 42 40 32 40 Luneburg 54 40 34 20 Lucern 46 34 26 0 Lipsick 51 25
35 45 M. Maragna 19 30 281 30 Margarita 10 50 314 10 Martha 10 40 301 20 St.
Michael -- S. L. 6 10 291 40 St. Michael 27 20 327 10 Mexico 38 30 283
Madagascar -- S. L. 19 77 Madera 31 30 8 10 Manicongo -- S. L. 7 47 10 Morocco
30 30 30 Melinda -- S. L. 3 20 71 20 Meroe 16 10 68 20 Mombafa -- S. L. 4 50 72
Mandao 125 25 Mallacca 5 136 30 Mecha 25 75 30 Medina 27 20 73 Meacum 23 15 160
30 Mentz 50 30 27 30 Marburg 51 30 Millain 43 40 20 Modena 45 40 43 50 Majorca
39 35 18 50 Mosco 61 Mechlin 51 15 20 50 Maguntia 50 8 30 Madgburg 52 20 34 30
Mantua 44 30 32 20 Marselia 43 6 24 30 Manfrednia 40 45 42 50 Mesina 38 50 42
46 Minorque 40 10 19 30 Montpelier 43 25 20 30 N. Naples 39 30 46 Nidrosia 60
50 89 45 Nismes 42 30 25 Nica 40 0 57 Ninive 36 40 82 Narsinga 18 119 Nicodemia
44 20 63 50 Nicopolis 45 56 30 Nova Albion 50 235 Nova Galisia 2 40 298 15
Norumbega 43 40 315 40 Nombre de dios 9 20 294 30 Navaca 17 10 300 20 Narbon 43
19 20 Nantz 48 12 16 20 Nola 40 45 40 15 Novaria 44 30 30 30 Negroponte 38 15
53 40 Norimburg 49 24 31 10 Nursia Italia 42 44 308 O. Ormus 19 92 0 Odia 12
138 30 Oxiana 20 107 40 Oxford 51 30 19 Orleans 47 10 22 Orcades Isles 61 40 21
Orting^ in Sweden 49 58 28 3 P. Paris 48 23 20 Poitiers 50 10 20 Padua 36 10 44
45 Pavia 33 5 44 Prague 46 10 29 10 Persepolis 30 40 90 40 Ptolemais 29 40 66
40 Palama 28 6 20 Panama 8 10 294 10 Papaian 1 50 297 30 Palermo 37 37
Perpignan 42 40 18 30 Pampelon 42 50 15 Parma 43 30 32 30 Perusca 42 56 36 50
Pisa 4^ 45 36 30 Pistoia 43 33 20 Pescaro 42 38 32 40 Placentia 44 31 30
Portugal 40 45 5 48 Q. Quito -- S. L. 10 293 10 Quivira 40 233 41 Quinsay 40
153 R. Rome 38 41 40 Rheims 48 30 25 25 Riga 59 43 45 Rhodes 35 58 Rhagusa 43
30 42 14 Ratisbone 48 56 29 50 Ravenna 44 2 34 40 Ricanti 43 22 40 60 Rostock
54 36 34 Rouen 49 21 15 Regium 48 15 43 10 S. Sanguinai 55 306 40 S. Spirits 13
20 322 30 Saba 8 40 68 20 Septa 35 40 22 0 Smyrna 40 30 60 20 Susis 48 00 73 40
Sigestan 31 105 00 Sarmacand 44 109 Samaria 33 40 72 20 Salamanca 41 20 21 24
Siquenea 18 2 Siena 42 15 42 20 Siracuse 37 30 40 30 Stockholm 60 30 47
Strasburg 48 44 27 50 Sevil 37 30 14 20 Salern 40 30 40 20 Salisburg 44 44 35
15 Sardinia Island 38 31 Savoy 43 30 29 10 Salonica 44 30 39 50 Scodra 44 40 20
Sebenico 37 6 36 Spallata 43 15 39 45 Spires 49 20 28 40 T. Taranto 41 15 43 15
Trevilo 45 30 33 35 Toledo 41 10 30 Tholousa 43 30 18 Turin 44 20 29 30 Tunis
32 30 33 Trent 45 18 31 32 Triers 45 50 4 Tarsus 40 71 20 Tauris 38 20 90 30
Tenduc 37 30 168 30 Titus 36 30 72 10 Trabesond 44 10 140 30 Troas 48 10 31
Tripolis 37 72 20 Tedoro 160 40 Tanger 35 20 30 50 Tombuto 15 20 15 Telesm 34
29 Totantoon 36 248 20 Tombez -- S. L. 4 10 291 40 V. Valentia 36 10 12 40
Valadolid 42 20 9 Venetia 45 15 34 30 Verona 45 16 32 45 Vercelles 44 12 29 50
Vicentia 44 55 33 Vienna France 45 12 22 30 Vienna Austria 47 42 38 Vilerbo 42
18 39 Ulma 48 26 30 20 Voltera 42 40 33 50 W. Witenberg 50 20 Witsburg 50
Wormatia 49 44 28 30 X. Xaintn 55 40 168 40 Y. York 54 30 23 30 Z. Zeilan 11 20
^38 Zama -- S. L. 11 40 74 40 Zocatara 12 50 88 Zansibar -- S. L. 6 30 73
Zimbaos -- S. L. 25 20 9

Note, that S. L. signifies a Southerly Latitude.

FINIS.
ADVICE CONCERNING BILLS of Exchange. Wherein is plainly set forth The Nature
of Exchange of Moneys. Several Forms of Bills of Exchange in different
Languages. Manner of proceeding in Protest, Counterwand, Security, Letters of
Credit, Assignment; and generally The whole Practical Part and Body of
Exchanges Anatomized.


WITH Two exact Tables of New-stile and Old-stile.

By JOHN MARIUS, Public Notary.

The like never before Published.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Horn, at the South-Entrance into the Royal Exchange.
MDCC.

ADVICE CONCERNING BILLS of EXCHANGE.
To the READER.
I Formerly published a small Treatise concerning Bills of Exchange, which
having found good Acceptance by all into whose hands it came, (that ever I
could hear of,) and being since much solicited by some to enlarge upon that
Theme, that I might be serviceable in my generation, and for the more general
Good of all, I have yielded to their Desires; for whereas I did in the first
Impression mention only some Customs of Merchants concerning: Bills of
Exchange, I have now in this second not only comprised what was formerly
handled, and something enlarged upon the same, for the better understanding
thereof, but also added very much in setting down the Nature of Exchange, the
several Denominations and kinds thereof, the Pair of some Countries, the proper
Appellations and Names of those Persons which do negotiate Exchange, how many
Persons which do negotiate by Exchange, how many Persons are therein active,
diverse Cases propounded and resolved, Objections answered, to know when any
Bill will fall due, Moneys taken up by Letters of Credit, two perfect Tables of
the just day from New style to Old style throughout the Year, which may serve
as an indifferent Judge between Party and Party, and full Directions almost in
all Cases that may happen in Bills of Exchange, useful as well to the
Merchant-man, as to the Notary, and others, for I have in a manner gone through
the whole Body of Exchange. As for Attachments, and some few other Cases on
Bills of Exchange, I have purposely omitted, lest I should give occasion to any
turbulent Spirit to make Contest where none need. The right dealing Merchant
does not care how little he has to do in the Common Law, or things of that
nature; neither have I herein set down several Instances of Exchanges of one
Town or Country with another, to show what the Parcel will amount to with the
Exchange from one sort of Money or Species to another, in regard the same has
been already published by Mr. Lewis Roberts, in his Map of Commerce; but I have
given my Advice in the Practical part of Exchanges, according to the Custom of
Merchants used in England. And I have generally backed my Advice with some
Reasons, which amongst Wise Men is esteemed more prevalent than Law it self. I
dare warrant the proceedings of any that shall walk after this my Advice to be
good and justifiable by the Law of Merchants; but I think I need not hang out a
Bush, if the Palate be right I know the Wine cannot be disrelished: It is the
Crop of four and twenty Years Experience in my Employment in the Art of a
Notary Public. Reader, let not one Perusal suffice thee, this Labor is mine,
the Gain will be thine, I am but the Adviser, be thou Advised by

J. MARIUS.

Exchange Excellent and Necessary.
EXCHANGE is by some held to be the most mysterious part of the Art of
Merchandising and Traffic, being grounded upon Custom and Experience; and the
Necessity and Commodiousness of Exchanges is seen, in that it has found a
general Allowance in all Countries time out of mind, and yet is maintained with
the general Consent of all, for it prevents the Danger and Adventure of
Carriage of Moneys from one City or Country to another.

And this is done only by two or three Lines written on a small piece of Paper,
termed, A Bill of Exchange; which is so noble and excellent, that tho it cannot
properly, (as I conceive) be called a Specialty, because it wants those
Formalities which by the Common Law of England are thereunto required, as Seal,
Delivery and Witnesses; yet it is equivalent thereunto, if not beyond, or
exceeding any Specialty or Bond, in its punctuality and precise Payment,
carrying with it a commanding Power, tho directed from the Servant to the
Master; for if by him accepted, it concerns him every whit as much to see it
be paid with Honor at the time, as the Servant can desire, or the Party to
whom it is payable can expect, in regard the Acceptor's Credit lies at stake:
And if he fail of Payment at the precise day, presently there will issue forth
a Protest, which may tell tales, and soon make a Dilemma in his Commerce; for
he must not expect to continue his Credit long, that does not pay his accepted
Bills at the time appointed, and besides his own, his Servant or Friend, the
Drawer's Credit will also be wounded; besides the Charges which are incident
thereunto, and unavoidable Payment of Principal and Charges at the end, if the
Party or Parties are able; for both Acceptor and Drawer are bound till Payment,
as shall be more particularly showed in this ensuing Treatise. Thus much in
general, for I love not to spend more words than need, or tell a large Story to
little or no purpose.

Exchange what it is.
REal Exchange is nothing else, but to give or take up Money in one City or
Town, to the End to have it again, or to restore the just Value thereof in Money
in another Town, according to the Price which shall be agreed upon between the
Taker and the Deliverer, to allow or pay for the Exchange of the Money, and the
Loss of Time, which will be from the time that the Money is taken up or
delivered, till it be restored or received again.

Inland and Outland Bills all alike.
AND by this it appears, That a Bill of Exchange which shall be made for
Moneys taken up at Edenborough, York, Bristol, Exon, Plymouth, Dover, or any
other part of England or Scotland, and payable at London, is in all things as
effectual as any Bill of Exchange made beyond the Seas, and payable here in
England, which we use to call an Outland Bill, and the other an Inland Bill,
both the Inland and Outland being made for Moneys taken up by Exchange: and
Exchange of Moneys being a thing which may be done as well from one Town to
another, as from one Country, Kingdom or Nation to another, it must needs be,
that the Bills of Exchange which shall be made as well at one part as at
another, (I mean Inland and Outland) ought to be esteemed of equal Worth, and
the Custom of Merchants on both equally observed; howbeit Mr. John Trenchant in
his Book of Arithmetic printed at Lions Anno 1608. says, that an Exchange
made in the same Realm, as from Lions to Paris, is not real, for that the real
Exchange is appointed only for Exchange between Towns in subjection to diverse
Lords, who do not allow Moneys to be transported out of their own Territories,
or because the Moneys are not conveyed from one place to another without great
Loss.

Four Persons to make an Exchange, and how called.
ORdinarily there are four Persons requisite to be employed in taking up or
remitting any Parcel of Money by Exchange, (besides the Broker who does procure
the Parcel) as namely, two at the Place where the Money is taken up, and two at
the Place where the Money is payable. 1. The Party who delivers the Money by
Exchange, whom we use to call the Deliverer, or the Giver, (and the French, le
Banquier,) because there are who keep a Stock of Money only to negotiate by
Exchange (as our Usurers do Money to deliver at Interest) although these Bankers
will as well take up as deliver Moneys by Exchange, according as they see it
most advantageous to them, by the Rise or Fall of the Price of Moneys by
Exchange. 2. The Taker or Party who receives or takes up Money by Exchange, and
this Party we usually call the Drawer, because he may be said to be the chief
occasion of the Draught of those Moneys from one place to another by virtue of
his Bill of Exchange. 3. The Party who is to pay the Money, or he upon whom the
Bill is drawn, or to whom the Bill of Exchange is directed. And 4. The Party to
whom the Money is made payable, or he to whom the Bill is sent to get accepted,
and to receive the Money when due according to the Bill. So that by setting down
these four Parties, and what use there is of them in Exchange of Moneys, it is
apparent, that there must be a Correspondency and familiar Acquaintance between
the Party who delivers Moneys by Exchange, and he to whom the same is made
payable; and the Party who takes up Moneys by Exchange, and he on whom the Bill
is drawn.

Three Persons to make an Exchange.
BUT sometimes there are but three Persons needful in the doing a parcel of
Money by Exchange; as First the Taker; Secondly, the Deliverer; and Thirdly, the
Party upon whom the Bill is drawn. 1. The Taker, he makes and subscribes a Bill
of Exchange for so much Money by him received of the Deliverer. 2. The
Deliverer, he orders the Bill to be made payable to himself, or Assigns for the
value of himself. And 3. The Party that is to pay the Bill; for the Taker
directs the Bill to his Friend or Servant to pay the same. Now, this way of
Exchange is very useful, according as occasion may be. For suppose I were to go
from London to Plymouth, there to employ some Moneys in the buying of some
Coromodity; I deliver my Moneys here in London, to some body who gives me his
Bill of Exchange on his Friend, Factor or Servant at Plymouth, payable to my
self; so I carry the Bill along with me, and receive my Money my self by virtue
thereof at Plymouth.

Another way, wherein only three Persons are needful in the Negotiation of
Moneys by Exchange: namely, First, the Drawer; Secondly, the Party on whom it
is drawn. Thirdly, the Party to whom it is payable. 1. The Drawer having Moneys
in his hands belonging to the Party to whom he orders the Bill to be paid, does
make a Bill of Exchange himself, confessing the value received in his own hand.
2. Charging it on his Friend or Factor. 3. Payable to the Party to whom he was
indebted. There is yet one way more wherein Moneys may be remitted by Exchange
only with the help of three Persons; 1. The Taker. 2. The Deliverer. 3. The
Party to whom payable. As thus, If I were at Dartmouth, or Exon, and intended
to come to London, I would take up Moneys by Exchange at Dartmouth, or Exon,
and subscribe Bills of Exchange for the same, confessing the Value received of
the Deliverer, directed or drawn on my self, payable to whom the Deliverer
should appoint in London.

Two Persons to make an Exchange.
LIkewise a Parcel of Money may be done by Exchange between two Persons: First,
the Drawer; and secondly, the Party on whom it is drawn; the Drawer he makes a
Bill of Exchange payable to himself or Order, for the Value in himself, and
subscribes the Bill, and directs it to the Party that owes him Money, and is to
pay it by Exchange; by which Bill (when the Party on whom it is drawn has
accepted it) he becomes Debtor to the Drawer, and he, before the Bill falls
due, does negotiate the Parcel with another Man, and so draws in the Money at
the place where he lives, and makes only an Assignment on the Bill, payable to
him of whom he has received the Value. The Usefulness of framing Bills of
Exchange after these several Forms beforementioned, will be found out
according as each Man's Occasion shall present in his Trade and Commerce by
Exchange, which is so necessary, that there is fearce a Merchant but at some
time or other, one way or other, does either receive or pay Moneys by Bills of
Exchange.

All these manner of Exchanges beforementioned are termed Real Exchange,
because it is a thing really done, and the Money really Exchanged from one place
to another.

There are other Exchanges of Moneys, so called (but improperly) as Dry
Exchange, Feigned or Imaginary Exchange, Small or Petty Exchange.

Dry Exchange.
DRY Exchange, is, when I, having occasion for Moneys, desire a Banker to lend
me 100 l. at Interest for a certain time; the Banker, unwilling to deliver at
Interest, offers me 100 l. by Exchange for Amsterdam, whereunto I agree; but
not having any Correspondence there, the Banker bids me make my Bills of
Exchange for so much Money, to be paid at double or treble Usance at Amsterdam,
by any imaginary Body, at the Price the Exchange shall there go at, which I do;
the time being run out, comes a Protest from Amsterdam for Non-payment, with
their Exchange of the Money from Amsterdam to London; all which with Costs I
must repay him here in London for the Money he lent me.

Feigned Exchange.
FEigned Exchange, is, when I ow a Banker Moneys, and have none at present to
pay; I desire time, the Banker grants it me; but I am to pay him his Money by
Exchange at the time at Rouen, yet we are agreed between our selves, that if I
pay it him here in London at the time, then I am free, otherwise I am bound as
above. In the interim, the Banker writes to his Friend at Rouen, that against
such a time he send him from thence a Bill of Exchange for the like Sum;
feigning that he owes it him there. After the time is expired, comes a Bill of
Exchange from Rouen, to pay here so much as he owed there, with the Rechange;
all which the Banker puts to my Account, and per our Agreement will force me to
pay, in case I do not pay him here at the time agreed upon.

Petty Exchange.
PEtty Exchange, is, the Changing of one sort of Money for another, as to
exchange 20 s. in Silver, for 21 s. in Brass or Copper Farthings, and the like.

But these three last-mentioned kinds of Exchanges, I intend not to insist upon
in this ensuing Treatise, in regard they are not so commendable as the Real
Exchange, nor (as I conceive) much practiced in these parts.

PAIR.
PAir (as the French call it) is to equalize, match or make even the Money of
Exchange from one place with that of another, when I take up so much Money per
Exchange in one place, to pay the just Value thereof in other kind of Money in
another place, without having respect to the price current of Exchange for the
same, but only to what the Moneys are worth, and do currantly pass for in each
place; according whereunto is easily found out the Profit and Loss, which from
time to time is made in whatever Parcels of Money drawn or remitted by Exchange:
and it is likewise delivering Money at Pair, when there is received in one Town
just so much Money as was delivered by Exchange in another Town; as when I
deliver by Exchange 100 l. sterling at York to receive 100 l. sterling at
London, which is done only by the Loss of time.

For what Parts the Exchange is made.
THE Price of Exchange of Moneys from one Country to another is usually made
from and to the most eminent Cities or Towns, in each Place or Country where
Commerce and Trade is held between Merchants in Exchange of Moneys; and the
Trade ceasing at any Town, the Price current for Exchange for that Town ceases
with it: As for instance, when the English Merchant-Adventurers had their
Factors and Company at Delft, then there was a Price current of Exchange from
London to Delft; but the Company removing from Delft to Rotterdam, where they
are at present, there is now no Price current of Exchange from London to Delft,
but from London to Rotterdam.

Upon what the Exchange is valued.
NOW most Countries using several kinds of Moneys, different in Value one from
another, the Exchange is valued or rated upon some one certain, most
considerable Species or sort of Money for each Country or Town as follows;

The Exchange of Moneys from London to Antwerp, Amsterdam, Middleborough, Lisle
and Rotterdam, is usually accounted and valued on the Pound sterling of 20 s.
English Money; that is to say, to pay after the rate of so many Shillings and so
many Pence Flemish Money for every Pound sterling: the Exchange from London to
Hamburgh is on the Pound sterling to pay so many Shillings and Pence Hamburgh
Money per Pound sterling, which differs something from the Flemish Money: The
Exchange from London for Paris and Rouen is valued on the French Crown; that
is, to pay so many Pence and so many parts of a Penny sterling for every French
Crown. The Exchange from London to Venice is made on the Ducat, so many Pence
and parts of a Penny sterling for every Ducat. And the Exchange from London to
Legorn is made on the Dollar or Piece of Eight, to pay so many Pence and parts
of a Penny sterling for every Dollar; and these are the most usual Places, for
which there is a Price current of Exchange at London at present.

The PAIR of several Countries.
THE Pair at Antwerp, Amsterdam, Middleburgh, Lisle and Rotterdam, with our
Pound sterling, is 33 s. 4 d. Flemish to a Pound sterling, which 33 s. 4 d.
Flemish do make 10 Gilders, at 2 s. sterling the Gilder, or 10 Livres Tournois.

Pair at France.
THE Pair at Paris, Rouen, and other Parts of France with our sterling Money is
at 71 Soulz the Crown, or 6 s. sterling the French Crown of 3 Livres Tournois,
which 3 Livres make 6 s. sterling, every Livre at 2 s. sterling, and every 10
Soulz French rekoned at 12 d. sterling.

Pair at Legorn.
THE Pair at Legorn with our sterling Money is at 4 s. 6 d. or 54 d. per Dollar
or Piece of Eight.

Pair at Venice.
THE Pair at Venice with our sterling Money is at 6 Livres and 4 Soulz of Venice
per Ducat, or 4 s. 3 d. or 51 d. sterling per Ducat.

Pair between Antwerp and Paris, or any part of France.
THE French Crown of 60 Soulz, or 3 Livres Tournois, wherein Exchanges are
usually made for France, is worth 89 31/67 gross of Antwerp, which is indeed
the true Value of the Crown. If then the Bill of Exchange be made for less than
89 37/67 gross per Crown of 3 l. Tournois, there is a Loss thereby, and if for
more there is a Gain. So that 89 37/67 gross being the Pair in Exchanges
between these two Countries, in the Crown of France, and the Gross of Antwerp,
you may presently see whether there be Loss or Gain by any Parcel done by
Exchange. And the like may be done between any other two Places, having first
found out the Pair or equalizing the Money of one Country with that of the other
Country where the Exchange is to be made, and knowing at what Price the
Exchange then goes, the Loss or Gain will soon appear. But this Pair being
grounded principally upon the current. Value of Coins, the Plenty and Scarcity
thereof, the rising and falling, Inhancement and Debasement of the same, it
must necessarily follow that the same is subject to change, as Experience does
show.

Hamburgh Pair.
TWenty Shillings sterling for Hamburgh at Pair is wont to be reckoned four
Rix-Dollars, which makes Flemish 33 s. 4 d.

Receive your Money before you part with your Bill, by Assignment to receive the
Money elsewhere.
WHen a Bill of Exchange is due, and the Party to whom it is payable, or his
Servant comes for the Money to the Party who has accepted the Bill, and ought
to pay the same, demanding Payment thereof; and he writes him a Note to go to a
Goldsmith, or to such a Place to such a Man, and there orders the Money to be
paid: Or that he gives him another Bill of Exchange due upon another Man, and
sets his Name on the Backside thereof, leaving some space above his Name to
make a Receipt for the Money, as is usual; I would advise the Party, who is to
receive the Money, to keep his Bill (I mean the first mentioned Bill of
Exchange) in his Custody, till he has received his Money by Assignment, as
above, and then he may either leave his Bill with the Goldsmith, or Party of
whom he has received the Money, or else he may carry the Bill back to the Party
that gave him the Note or other Bill of Exchange to receive the Money by,
according as he shall order him: But I should not advise to part with the
first-mentioned Bill, and to give it up to the Party upon whom it is drawn,
upon the Receipt of his Note or other Bill of Exchange for the Money, till such
time as he be actually possessed of his Money. I know the contrary is sometimes
practiced, namely, upon the receipt of such a Note, etc. to give up the Bill of
Exchange, but then here is the Inconvenience, If the Money be not presently paid
me at the time, upon such Note, etc. I am hindered from protesting my Bill of
Exchange, which I have delivered up as satisfied, and so, whereas I before had
both the Drawer and Accep or bound (and it may be the Endorsers also) I have
now only the Acceptor, upon his singlesol'd Note, etc. And if the Acceptor, or
Party on whom my Bill is drawn, in this Case of Assignment, will not trust me
with his Note, etc. whereby to go to receive my Money, I have less reason to
trust him with my Bill of Exchange before I have my Money; for, should I receive
my Money upon his Note, etc. and afterward not deliver him up his Bill of
Exchange, if I am a solvable Man, and of known Residence, his Bill will do me
little good, for the Payment will appear upon the Testimony of the Goldsmith,
or Party that paid the Money upon the Note, etc. but if I deliver up my Bill
upon the receipt of his Note, etc. and then have not my Money, I must rest only
upon him for my Money, and dance after his Pipe, which I hold not convenient;
only I concieve it good for the Party that makes such a Note, to mention in it
the Party's Name to whom the Money is to be paid, and upon Payment of the Money,
to take up that Note and Bill of Exchange, and then there can be no Danger: But
suppose I give such a Note to receive the Money by, not mentioning in it to take
up my Bill of Exchange, the Party to whom I give this Note, receives the Money,
assigns his Bill of Exchange, which he has on me, to another Man, and plays
the Knave and absents himself; Cannot this other Man sue me for the Money on my
accepted Bill? I answer, he can, and therefore it is good to know the Party to
whom I give such a Note, and mention in my Note, that upon payment of the Money,
the Goldsmith, etc. do take up my Bill of Exchange with that Note. But now if
he give me another Bill of Exchange to receive my Money by, and I go to the
Party to whom it is directed, and he do not presently pay me, (it being the
third day after the Bill is due) I ought presently the same day, and in
convenient time of the day, to carry bank the Bill to the Party of whom I
received it, that so he may cause the same to be protested for Nonpayment if he
please, and may not be any ways prejudiced through my Detention of his Bill
beyond the due time; And usually the Party of whom I do receive such a Bill to
go for my Money, does give me order, in case I have not my Money paid me, either
to bring him back the Bill again, or else to carry it to a Notary to be
protested, and come to him and he will pay me, which if he do not, and that it
be the third day of my Bill, I must likewise protest it against him for want of
present Payment.

Several Forms of BILLS OF EXCHANGE in several Languages.
Laus Deo, in London, this 16 of November. 1654. for 100 l. sterling.
AT six days sight pay this my first Bill of Exchange to Mr. Abraham P. or
Assigns one hundred pounds sterling, for the value here received of Mr. John D.
make good payment, and put it to Account as per Advice

Your loving Friend William M.

To Mr. Francis W. Merchant dd. in Exon. P^
Laus Deo, in London, the 16 of November 1654. for 100 l. sterling.
AT six days sight pay this my second Bill of Exchange (my first not paid) to
Mr. Abraham P. or Assigns, one hundred pounds sterling, for the value here
received of Mr. John D. make good payment, and put it to Account as per Advice.

Your loving Friend William M.

To Mr. Francis W. Merchant dd. in Exon. Sd^
If he who under-writes the Bill is to make himself Debtor, then he writes in
the Bill, And put it to my Account; but if he who ought to pay it, and to whom
it is directed, is Debtor to the Drawer, then he writes And put it to your
Account: Also sometimes it is expressed in the Bill thus, And put it to the
Account of such an one.

Laus Deo, in London, this 17 of November. 1654. for 100 l. at 36 s. 8 d. Flemish
per pound.
AT Usance pay this my first Bill of Exchange to Mr. Cornelius Vande B. or
Order, one hundred pounds sterling, at 36 s. 8 d. Flemish per pound sterling,
for the value here received of Mr. John C. make good payment, and put it to
Account as per Advice.

Your loving Friend Thomas D.

To Mr. Peter E. Merchant dd. in Amsterdam. P^
The second Bill is the same with the first, only with this Alteration and
Addition. At Usance, not having my first, pay this my second Bill of Exchange
to Mr. Cornelius Vande B. or Order, etc.



Laus Deo, in London, adj. 17 November. 1654. for 333. at 52 d. sterling per.
AT double Usance pay this my first Bill of Exchange to Mr. Robert A. or
Assigns, the Sum of three hundred and thirty three Crowns and (...) third, for
the value here received of Mr. Henry B. and put it to Account as per Advice.

Your loving Friend Richard C.

To Mr. Charles D. Merchant dd. in Rouen. P^
Laus Deo, in London, adj. 17 November. 1654. for Dts. 564 at 51 d. sterling per
Dt.
THree months after date pay this my first Bill of Exchange to Mr. Daniel A. or
Order, Ducats five hundred threescore and four and one quarter in banco, for
the value here received of Mr. John B. and put it to Account as per Advice.

William C.

To Mr. Thomas D. Merchant in Venice. P^
Ihus Malaga 13 Noviembre, 1654. A. Son 132 l. 7 s. 6 d.
A Quarenta dias Vista pagara V. M. por esta mi teroera no aviendo pagado por
la pri mera y segunda ala Voluntad de Diego P. Ciento treynta y dos libras
siete sueldoi y seis peniques esterlinus Valor aqui recevida de Henrique G. y^
sutiempo ara V. M. buen pago a sentandolas come a viso Xpto con todos.

Antonio de S.

A Juan D. gde Dios Londres.
Adj. 18 Augusti, 1654. in Venetia Dt. 1000. a d. 54 per Dto.
AUso pagate per qa. pma. di Cambio alli SSri f. de V. and figli d'Ham^. (o)
chi ordinerann^ Dti. Mill a d Cinquanta quatre per Dto. valuta Contmi. e
ponete Come vi s'avisa a dio.

Tomaso D.

Al Magco S^ Ricardo W. in pma Londra.
The Assignment on the backside is thus. ET per noi pagate il contenuto
diquesta senza aitra procura al Sr. Gio. W. Cambiati con Sr. Francisco R.
Hamburgo 28 Augusti, 1654. per F. de V. and figli.



Livorno, the 21 November. 1654. per L. 239 -- 13 -- 9 sterling. at 59 d. Dollars
975.
THree months after date of this my first Bill of Exchange, my second or third
not being paid, pay unto Mr. William G. or Assigns, the Sum of two hundred
thirty and nine pounds, thirteen shillings and nine pence sterling, for the
value received here of Mr. Thomas W. placing it to Account as per Advice.

Thomas S.

To Mr. Robert B. Merchant in London. P^
Amsterdam adj. 27 October. 1654. Voor 100 l. sterling.
OP uso betaelt desen mine eersten wisselbrief ten Sr. Jan E. ost order Hondert
ponden sterlinex Valuta Van Sr. Robert G. stelt op mine rekeninge als per advys,

Martin P.

Ersamen Sr. Willem S. Coopman tot London. P^
A Paris Ce 10 Juillet 1654. pour 450, a 52 d. sterling. per.
A Double usance payez per ceste premiere de change a Monsr. Paul M. ou a son
order quatre Centz Escus a Cinquante deux deniers sterlins pour Escu, valleur
receu de Monsieur Franceis L. and passez a compte suivant l'advys de,

Ure treshumble serviteur Daniel F.

Monsieur Monsieur Guillaume G. Merchant a Londres. P^
If there be an Assignment on the backside thereof, it runs thus; Le Contenu de
ceste payez au Sr. Pierre H. ou order valleur du Sr. Jean C. Paris 26me
Novembre 1654. Paul M.



Rotterdam, 2 Oct. 1654. for 200 l. sterling.
AT double usance pay this my first of Exchange to Mr. Roger C. or Assigns, Two
hundred pounds sterling for the value received of himself, and put it to
Account of G. P. as per advice.

Your loving Friend John M.

To Mr. Peter H. Merchant in London. P^
If this Bill be negotiated by Exchange, or the Money taken in, and so to be
Assigned over to another man, the Assignment must be written on the backside of
the Bill thus, Pay the Contents on the other side hereof to Mr. Humphery N. or
Assigns, value of Mr. Joseph B. Rotterdam 4 Oct. 1654. Roger C.



But if Humphry N. do likewise assign the same Bill for his Account, then he
writes only thus, Pay the Contents hereof to Mr. John D.

Humphery N.



Take up Money for another Man, how performed.
IF a man would take up money by Exchange, and he be not well known to the Party
that is to deliver the Money; or if the man that world take up the Money by
Exchange be not esteemed of sufficient Credit for the same with the Deliverer;
and thereupon if the Deliverer of the Money shall desire another man to be bound
with the Taker for the Money that is to be delivered by Exchange, and to be his
Surety, and engage himself for the Money delivered; this may be done two manner
of ways: For first, either the Party who is the principal Taker, may make three
Bills of Exchange, first, second, and third, all of one tenor and date, for the
Money he is to take up, in the usual manner, payable to the Party who is the
Deliverer of the Money, or to his order, for the value received of himself; and
the Party who is to be bound as Surety, may only subscribe the third Bill of
Exchange with the principal Taker or Drawer, which third Bill the Deliverer may
keep by him for his security: Or else secondly, only two Bills of Exchange
(first and second) may be made and subscribed by the principal who takes up the
Money, payable to him who is to be the Surety, or his order, for the value of
himself, and then the Surety must make an Assignment upon both Bills of
Exchange, and make them payable to the party who really and indeed does deliver
the value to the principal Taker, or to whom the same Deliverer of the Money
shall appoint, the Surety in the Assignment confessing the value received of
the true and real Deliverer of the Money; and in either of these ways,
especially in the former of them, the principal is wont to give Bond to the
Surety (if he desire it) to save him harmless, according to reason: And both of
these ways are good and Merchantlike, though acted variously; for by the former
way the Deliverer of the Money has two Men equally bound unto him (by the third
Bill) of whom they do confess to have received the value, and he that is
properly but the Surety has not the principal taker or Drawer of the Money
bound unto him in or by those Bills of Exchange, but only by his Bond which he
does make thereupon; but by the latter way, only the Surety is bound to the
Deliverer of the Money by the Assignments which are to be made upon the Bills of
Exchange; and the principal Drawer is bound to the Surety by the Bills of
Exchange which only the principal does subscribe, and wherein he does
acknowledge the value received of the Surety, as is before expressed; and in
this latter way, if in case the Bill be not accepted, and paid according to the
tenor thereof, then the true Deliverer of the Moneys comes upon the Surety by
virtue of his Assignment, for repayment, and the Surety comes upon the
Principal by virtue of the Bill of Exchange by him subscribed, as above. I
shall not prescribe either of these ways unto any, but shall leave it in the
choice of every Merchant to follow which of these two ways he likes best, and
may suit most to his occasions.

Note in your Book the name and place of abode of him who presents a Bill to be
Accepted.
IT happens often in Foreign Bills of Exchange, that they come payable either
to the same Party that did deliver the value, or to his order; or else to some
other body living beyond the Seas, who usually does send the first Bill of
Exchange to some Friend of his here in London, only to get accepted, and then
to return it him again, that so, being accepted, he may the better negotiate
the same Bill of Exchange again, and take in the value thereof, and make an
Assignment for the same, either on the accepted Bill, or on the other Bill of
the same tenor, not accepted, according as occasion shall be: Now, if an
Assignment do come on the second Bill, payable to another person, without order
where to take up the first accepted Bill; this second Bill being presented to
the Party on whom it is drawn, to be accepted, he does deny acceptance thereof,
alleging that he has already accepted the first Bill, but he does not know to
whom, or in whose hands the same first accepted Bill does remain; and thereupon
the Party which has the second Bill, wanting acceptance thereof, does cause
Protest to be made for nonacceptance; for prevention whereof, and that each
party may receive all due content, as is fitting, I would advise all Merchants
that have such Bills of Exchange presented unto them to be accepted, to note
down in their Books the name of the party by whom the said Bill is presented
unto them to be accepted, and his place of abode, that so, if in case the
second Bill be also presented unto them by another party to be accepted, the
party on whom it is drawn, and who has already accepted the first Bill, may
give answer to him who shall present the second Bill to be accepted, and
acquaint him to whom he has already accepted, and acquaint him to whom he has
already accepted the first Bill, and where he lives, that so the same may
appear to be real, and remove scruples or doubts, which otherwise may arise
therein; this I conceive is not yet generally practiced and observed by all
Merchants trading in Exchange, because not commonly known, but it is
Merchant-like, and I have seen it practiced by some Merchants here in London,
and I persuade my self it will be willingly embraced by all those that mean
honestly and endeavor after plain dealing, which cannot but redound to their
credit.

Keep Copies of Bills sent to get accepted.
AS it is commendable (and for the avoiding of doubts, which otherwise may be
occasioned) for the party on whom any Bill is drawn, to take notice where the
party lives that presents him the Bill to be accepted, which may be easily
done, as I have heretofore showed; so on the other side, when such Bills of
Exchange are sent unto any one to get accepted, I advise the party to whom they
are sent, upon receipt of his Letter, with the Bills of Exchange, presently to
take a Copy of the Bills, verbatim, in a Book, which he may keep purposely for
such occasions, especially to write down the Names of the several Parties on
whom they are drawn, or to whom they are directed, before ever he go about to
get them accepted; I confess it is a little pains, and may seem at first
hearing useless, but if maturely considered, the benefit will countervail the
labor; for by keeping Copies of all Bills of Exchange that do come to my
hands, I can always see who are usual Drawers and Deliverers of Money by
Exchange, in those places from whence the Bills do come; and if the Bills come
from France or Italy, I can know how the Exchange went then at those places;
but especially, if the Bills are sent me only to get accepted, and then to
return them, this Copying of the Bills of Exchange, verbatim, in a Book, before
you send or deliver them out to the several Parties to whom they are directed
to be accepted, is very useful, thereby to remember where, and to whom you are
to call for your Bills again, and to see what Bills you want, which you have
delivered out to be accepted, for otherwise you may chance to forget (when the
Bills are out of your hands) to whom they were delivered to be accepted, and so
be put to a nonplus, when you are to return your Friend an answer, and to give
him an account of all those Bills which he sent you to get accepted, especially
if you have many Bills sent you at one time: It happened once (as I have heard)
that a Merchant had 7 or 8 Bills of Exchange at one time sent him to get
accepted, and he accordingly did deliver them out to the several parties on
whom they were drawn, to be accepted, but when he was to write his Friend an
answer, and return the Bills which were sent unto him, he did miss one of them,
and could not in a good while remember with whom he left it, or to whom it was
sent to be accepted, because he had not kept any particular notice thereof,
which put him to some trouble to recollect himself, and to study where he had
been, and with whom he had spoken, and what he had done from time to time, from
the time he received the Letter with the Bills of Exchange until that instant,
and at length he did call to mind the name of the Party on whom the missing
Bill was drawn, and so sent to him, and had the Bill of Exchange accepted; but
before he could remember the party, he was in much perplexity, whereas if he
had kept Copies of the Bills, or a breviate or Note of the places, dates, sums,
times of payment, drawer, and party to whom directed, such perplexity of mind
might have been prevented.

Make the Directions of Bills on the inside.
THE Directions of Bills of Exchange is made by the Italians and Dutch usually
on the backside of the Bill, and the English in their Outland Bills do (for the
most part) writ^ after their Copy, but the French do ordinarily write the
Direction of their Bill of Exchange in the inside of the Bill beneath on the
left hand thereof; and for my part, I conceive it more convenient to write the
Direction of Bills of Exchange under the Bills on the left hand, according to
the custom of the French, and of our English Inland Bills, than on the middle
on the backside, as Italians and Dutch do use to do; for the paper being but
little on which a Bill of Exchange is usually made, if the Direction be on the
backside, there remains small place to write Assignments upon, and a Receipt
for the Money, when paid; whereas if the Direction be written on the inside of
the Bill, all the outside of the Bill may serve to write the Assignments,
(which many times, especially in Outland Bills, are three or four upon a Bill)
and the Receipt for the Money, when it shall be paid, the spare place on the
inside of the Bill serving only to write the Acceptance.

Whether a man is bound to present his Bill to be Accepted.
THere are some which hold an Opinion, that a man having a Bill made payable
unto him, is not bound to get it accepted, or to Protest for non-acceptance,
but that he may keep the Bill by him, and never present it to the Party on whom
it is drawn, until the Bill be due; and that it rests at his pleasure, as
arbitrator, whether he please to endeavor to get acceptance of the Bill so
soon as it comes to his hands or not: To this I say, That according to the
custom of Merchants here in England, if I have a Bill of Exchange sent unto me,
I ought forthwith upon receipt thereof, or so soon as convemently I can, to
present the same to the Party on whom it is drawn, or leave notice thereof at
his dwelling house or place of abode, and demand acceptance of the Bill, to pay
at the time therein limited, that so the Party on whom it is drawn may take
notice thereof, and order his business accordingly: True, will they say, if a
Bill be sent to me to receive the Money for another man's Account, and I to whom
the Bill is sent, am but as a Factor or Agent for the Party who delivered the
value, then indeed I am to use my diligence to get the Bill accepted, and to
give him advice thereof with the first, because I am but as a Servant for
another man, and reason teaches that I must follow his order, and use all
lawful endeavors for his security; but what if the Moneys which are delivered
by Exchange are my own Moneys, and the Deliverer be my Factor or Servant, and
the Bill be payable to me? In this case, may not I choose whether I will demand
acceptance of the Bill, and upon refusal Protest for nonacceptance, or keep the
Bill by me, and never present it to the Party on whom it is drawn, until the
Bill fall due, and then go and demand the Money; and if the Money be not paid
Protest only for non-payment, and upon that Protest recover upon the Drawer as
well as if I had protested for non-acceptance, and sent it back to my Factor or
Servant? Truly, in this case there seems to be more reason, why it should be
arbitrary in me to get acceptance of the Bill of Exchange, because the Moneys
which were delivered are my own Moneys, and the accepting of the Bill is but as
another string to the Bow; but if we examine the business a little further,
neither in this case will it be found arbitrary in me to endeavor acceptance
or not: for admit the Moneys remitted are mine own, yet must I receive it in a
legal way. I cannot receive my Money of the Party on whom the Bill is drawn
before it be due, neither can I without discharging the Drawer contract with
the Party on whom it is drawn for a longer time than is mentioned in the Bill;
so that although it be mine own Moneys which are remitted, yet I am tied to
follow the custom of Merchants, and I must not prejudice neither the Drawer,
nor the Party on whom it is drawn, nor mine own Servant or Factor the
deliverer. Now if the Bill is drawn at double usance, and I keep it by me
without presenting it until it fall due, the Drawer in all that while, not
having any advice whether it be accepted or not, may suffer much damage in
reference to the Party on whom it was drawn, supposing him to have accepted the
Bill: Or on the other side, the Party on whom the Bill is drawn may suffer in
his credit or esteem with the Drawer, who is held in doubt whether the Bill be
accepted or not, and so whether probably it will be paid or not at the time;
and the Deliverer (though only a Factor or Servant) must have advice whether
the parcel be accepted or not, to govern himself accordingly, and doubtless
will be glad to hear the parcels he remitteth are accepted, and be troubled at
the contrary; wherefore although the Moneys are remitted me for mine own
Account, yet because the Bill of Exchange does concern other men as well as my
self, therefore I ought to have respect unto them also, and to follow the usual
course of Exchange, which is, to endeavor to procure acceptance of Bills of
Exchange, as well as payment; and indeed, in the very Letter of Advice, which
is sent by the Deliverer of the Money (be he Servant, Factor or Principal) to
the party to whom the Bills are made payable, it is usually expressed in these
or the like words; Sir, here enclosed I do send you four Bills of Exchange for
500 l. viz. 20 Nov. 100 l. per Arthur A. at do. uso. on Roger G. Ditto 100 l.
per Joos D. at do. uso. 10 days on Gregory N. Ditto 150 l. per Arent B. at 1
uso. on William M. 22 Do 150 l. per Jac. C. at do. uso. on Frederick V.
whereof please to get acceptance, and payment at the times when fall due,
giving advice. Now certainly all Merchants are bound to follow Order, and
consequently to endeavor the acceptance of all Bills of Exchange in the like
kind sent unto them, or else they break the order of the party which sends the
Bills.

Whether the Accepter is freed by protesting.
A Bill of Exchange which is accepted, and at the time not punctually paid,
there are other some that think, if they should cause a Protest to be made on
such a Bill for non-payment, that they by protesting should free the party who
has accepted the Bill of Exchange, and that they do reserve their right only
against the Drawer of the Bill to recover upon him by virtue of the Protest. To
this I say, It is true, by protesting the Drawer is liable to make
satisfaction, but the party which accepted the Bill is so far thereby (I mean
by protesting for want of present payment) from being freed, as that he is
thereby made more liable, or at least liable to pay more than he was before the
Protest was made; for then he was only liable for the just sum mentioned in the
Bill, but now after Protest is made for non payment, he is liable also to pay
all costs, damages, and interests, etc. which the party protesting does by his
Protest expressly declare, he does intend to recover of the Acceptor in usual
manner; and indeed, a Protest for non-payment ought usually to precede an
action at Law: For by the Protest is proved default of payment of the Money at
the time limited in the Bill, and so the Acceptor becomes liable to an Action
of the Case, and so soon as ever Protest has been made for non-payment, the
party accepting may be arrested thereupon, which before he could not so legally
have been.

Times of Payment, and in what Species.
EVery Country has its usance, or accustomed time for payment of Moneys by
Bill of Exchange from one place to another: As for instance; from London to
Antwerp, Amsterdam, Middleborough, Rotterdam, Lisle, Rouen and Paris, usance is
one month after the date of the Bill, and so likewise from those parts to
London usance is one month after date, double usance is two months, etc. and
between Hamborough and London, Moneys are usually delivered at two months, and
in the Bills of Exchange for Hamborough they do usually express double usance,
when they intend only two months. From Venice and other parts of Italy, to
Amsterdam, etc. and from thence to Italy, usance is two months; from Venice,
etc. to London, usance is three months; and at Lions and some other places they
do usually make their Moneys pavable at certain Marts or Fairs; and here in
England at so many days sight, each place observing its accustomed manner; and
in some places likewise they contract for what sort of Money to pay, either
current Money in bank, or out of bank, which is sometime 1, 1, or 2 or more per
Cent. difference; This is very expedient to be known, to the end that he which
does deliver his Money by Exchange for any place, may not be deceived in his
expectation, as well concerning the time, as for the quality of the Money which
is to be paid in Exchange for the Money which he delivers.

Danger in making Bills payable to the Bearer.
NEver make your Bills of Exchange payable to such an one (naming his name) or
to the bearer hereof, which is very dangerous; but always make your Bills
payable to such an one, or his order, or his Assigns, or the like: For a Bill
which shall be made payable to Robert W. or the bearer hereof, may chance to
miscarry, or come to a wrong man's hands, and he may go and receive the Money
upon such a Bill, and the party to whom of right it ought to be paid never the
wiser, I mean, not know of it; and he that paid it will produce the Bill it
self for his warrant to pay it to whomsoever should bring it: so you may chance
to be defeated of your Moneys, and it may be your Friend on whom you drew the
Bill be suspected by you to have had a hand in the business, though it may be,
he never had any such thought, but paid it really to the party that brought the
Bill, not knowing him, nor ever enquiring where he dwelt, or what he was; and
if you will needs have your Friend bear some blame for paying the Moneys in
that manner, you must bear the greater blame, and thank your self for giving
such an order; for he has performed your order, and so you can have nothing
against him, unless you can prove a fraud in him; but to prevent all such
suspicion, always make your Bills payable to a certain man by name.

The Names and Times of Old and New Style, though both agreeing, yet how
distinguished.
THE computation or style of the year of our Lord amongst Christians does
differ in several Countries and Nations, both in name and time: First, in name;
There is the Julian or English Account, which amongst Merchants is called stilo
veteri, or old style; and there is the Gregorian or Roman Account, which
amongst the Merchants is called stilo novo, or new style: The old style is used
with us in England, and at Hamburg, Strasburg, and other parts of Germany; the
new style is used in the Netherlands, France, Spain, and most parts of
Christendom. Then for matter of time; We in England begin our year the 25 day
of March; they in the Netherlands, and other places where they write new style
(except at Venice and some parts of Italy) begin their year the first day of
January: Or, as Dr. Vilvain says, Christians in general, do reckon from
Christ's Nativity current January 1. but the Church of England (with Pisa and
Siena in Italy) from his Conception or Incarnation March 25. we taking it
complete or consummate, when he had been a whole year in the flesh, though but
three months old: They current or inchoat from the first day of Conception, (as
Kings reckon from their Initiation) so they date nine months before the Vulgar,
and a whole year before Us, which is a difference in the manner, but all
equally true for the matter; and the very style distinguishes the form, for
our term is Anno ab incarnatione, implying complete, theirs Annus
incarnationis, implying current; Pisa and Siena style this year Annus
incarnationis 1655. we ab incarnatione 1654. but all else call it Annus
nativitatis 1654. commencing at Christ's Circumcision last past: So that though
in Italy they write new style, which is ten days before Us, yet they begin the
year the 25 of March as we do.

No witness to a Bill of Exchange:
SUch is the excellency of a Bill of Exchange, that according to the Law of
Merchants, there is never any Witnesses required to be present to see the
Drawer or Party, that does underwrite the Bill, subscribe his name thereunto,
or to be present when the party on whom it is drawn does underwrite his
acceptance thereof; for it is supposed, that those which deal by Exchange are
men of Credit, whom it does as much concern (in reference to their Credit) of
their own accord to acknowledge their subscriptions, and take care the Bills be
punctually paid and discharged, as it does the Deliverer, and Party to whom it
is payable to look after their Money, and demand payment at the time: And if it
should otherwise happen, that the Drawer or Accepter should presume to deny
their Subscription, it may be easily proved against them by their Letters, in
comparing the one with the other, and by the consequences of the draughts and
books of Account, and by diverse other Circumstances, which case does seldom or
never fall out, I mean, for a man to deny his hand to a Bill of Exchange;
because it strikes at his Credit, and is so poor a shift, as that he can hardly
find any wool to cover it; and if he should be so unadvised as to stand it out,
and it be proved against him (besides other damages) he will lose his Credit
amongst Merchants for ever: and then though he may know them, yet they will not
know him further than they know his Money.

Hamborough and Strasburgh style.
AT Hamborough and Strasburg in Germany they do write the same style with us
here in England, namely old style; but in all other parts beyond the Seas
(except New England, Barbados, and where our English Plantations are) they do
generally write new style, which is ten days before us.

Usance from Venice, Hamborough, etc.
NOte also, that usance from Venice to London is three months from the date of
the Bill of Exchange, and from Hamborough to London, and so from London to
Hamborough Bills of Exchange are usually made payable at two months after the
date of the Bills, and accordingly the price current of Exchange from London to
Hamborough is valued and set down at two months from the date; the price
current from London to Venice and Ligorn at three months, and for Antwerp,
Amsterdam, Middleborough, Lisle, Rotterdam, Paris, and Rouen at one month, or
single usance; and so we call one month, usance; two months, double usance;
three months, treble usance.

No three days for acceptance.
WHen any Bill of Exchange is sent unto you from beyond the Seas, or from any
Inland Town, to cause to be accepted, I would advise you presently to present
the Bill, so soon as possibly you can, to the party to whom it is directed, and
request him to accept the same; if he refuse to accept it, you may presently
cause a Protest to be made for non-acceptance, and send it away with the next
conveyance; for (according to the custom of Merchants in London) there is not
any three days respite to be allowed for acceptance before you can Protest, but
so soon as the Bill has been presented and acceptance refused, presently you
may Protest the very same day.

Twenty four hours for Acceptance.
BUt if the party, to whom the Bill of Exchange is directed, be a Merchant well
known unto you, and when the Bill is presented him to accept, he shall desire
time to consider on it, and so shall entreat you to leave the Bill of Exchange
with him, and to come to him the next day, (provided the Post do not go away in
the interim) and that then he will give you an answer whether he will accept it
or not; herein he does demand nothing of you but what is usually allowed
between Merchants known one to another: For according to custom of Merchants,
the party on whom the Bill is drawn may have four and twenty hours time to
consider, whether he will accept of the Bill or not; but that time being
expired, you may in civility demand of the party on whom your Bill is drawn,
the Bill of Exchange which you left with him to be accepted, if so he pleased;
If he then say, that he has not as yet accepted it, and that he would desire
you to call for it some other time, or the like, (the four and twenty hours
being expired) it is at your choice to stay any longer or not; and you may then
desire a Notary to go to the dwelling house of the party that has the Bill,
and demand the Bill of Exchange of him accepted or not accepted, and in default
of present delivery thereof, you may cause Protest to be made in due form.

But though this may be lawfully done, yet notwithstanding amongst Merchants
which do know one another, they do not usually proceed so strictly for
acceptance, but do leave their Bills with the parties to whom they are directed
(to be accepted) sometimes two or three days, if it be not their prejudice, as
namely, if the Post do not depart in the interim, but if the Post is to depart
within the two or three days, then it is a very reasonable thing (and which men
that know the custom of Merchants will not omit) to demand their Bill, accepted
or not accepted, that so they may give advice thereof by the first Post (after
the receipt of their Letters) unto their Friend who sent them the Bill, or
delivered the value thereof: For it is to be noted by the way,

Give advice by the first Post.
THat advice of the receipt of Bills of Exchange, and of the acceptance or not
acceptance, and payment thereof, ought to be given by the first Post after
receipt, that thereby the Deliverer may know the better how to govern himself,
and the Taker know what to trust unto.

A Bill drawn on two Persons.
IF any Bill of Exchange shall come directed unto two or more persons, in these
terms, To Mr. Robert A. and Mr. John B. Merchants in London: In this case, both
A. and B. ought to accept the same Bill: Or else if but one of them do accept
it, and the other do refuse to accept, that Bill must be protested for want of
due acceptance; but if the Bill do come directed thus, To Robert A. and John B.
or to either of them: Or thus, To Robert A. or in his absence to John B. in
this case, the Bill being accepted by A. or B. namely, by but one of them, it
is sufficient, and the Bill ought not to be protested for want of due
acceptance, in regard (being accepted but by one of them on whom it is drawn)
it is accepted according to the tenor of the Bill.

Verbal Acceptance.
IF a Bill of Exchange be presented to the party to whom it is directed to be
accepted, and he do answer you thus, Leave your Bill with me and I will accept
it: Or thus, Call for it to morrow and you shall have it accepted, or such like
words promising acceptance; such an acceptance is binding, and amongst
Merchants is taken for an acceptance of the Bill, if the same can be proved by
witness; and if afterward he to whom the Bill is directed shall refuse to set
his name to the Bill, and to write under it, Accepted by me Richard D.
according to the most usual manner here in England; In this case the party to
whom the Bill is payable may content himself with such an acceptance until the
time of payment, and then, if payment be not made by the party who promised
acceptance thereof, as is before specified, the party to whom it is payable may
take his course in Law against the party so accepting, and questionless will be
compelled to the payment thereof, provided the Bill be first protested in due
form for non-payment; and surely such a verbal acceptance is good and binding,
and there is a great deal of reason for it; for it may so be that that Bill of
Exchange was drawn for provision to the party to whom it was payable, to the
end to pay some other Bill of Exchange charged and drawn on the party to whom
the former Bill was payable, and he having such a verbal promise of acceptance,
upon confidence therefore may chance to have accepted the other Bill drawn on
him: Or, it may be, the former Bill was sent him to furnish him with Moneys to
buy some Commodities for the party that remitted the same, and upon such a
verbal acceptance, supposing the Moneys will be paid him at the time, he may
happen to have bought the Commodities for his Friend, and may peradventure have
written to his Friend that sent him the Bill, and having given him advice that
he is promised acceptance, or that he doubts not of acceptance, or the like,
and upon such advice given, his Friend will take notice thereof, and make his
account accordingly; and verily if it were not so, namely, that such a verbal
acceptance were binding, there might happen great inconveniences in matter of
Trade between Merchant and Merchant, amongst whom, in their way of Commerce,
their word is, or ought to be, as binding as their writing.

Accept for part.
IF the party to whom your Bill of Exchange is directed, say unto you when you
present him the Bill to be accepted, That he will accept it for part, in regard
he has no more provision in his hands from the party for whose account the
Bill of Exchange is drawn, or that he owes him no more upon Account, or other
the like reasons best known to himself; In this case you may take such his
acceptance for part, but then you presently go to a Notary public, and cause
the Bill to be protested for want of acceptance for the whole Sum therein
mentioned, and you must send away that your Protest to the party which sent you
the Bill, that he may thereupon have security (from the party which took up the
Money) for the remaining Sum. And so likewise at the time when the Bill shall
fall due, you must go and receive the Sum for which it was accepted, and you
may make a Receipt upon the Bill for the same, using these, or the like words;
Received this 22 January 1654. in part of payment of this Bill twenty five
pounds six shillings, I say, Received per me John N. And then you must cause
Protest again to be made for non payment of the remaining Sum, and send the
same back according as you formerly did for non-acceptance.

Note on your Bills the times when they will fall due.
AFter you have presented your Bills of Exchange, and received them accepted,
then presently reckon when they will fall due, and if you have any Bills drawn
from France, or Italy, or other parts in French Crowns, Ducats, Dollars, or
other outlandish Money, look in the Bills at what rate or price they are drawn
for Exchange of the Money here in England, and reduce them to our English Money;
and then note on the backside of your Bills, close to the top at one end
thereof in short, the time when your Bills will be due, with the just sum which
you are to receive at the time according to the tenor of your Bill^, before you
lay them up in your Counting house, to the end that at any time when you would
desire to know upon any occasion what Moneys you have to receive, and when
payable, you may presently looking over your Bills see and know the same on the
backside of the Bills, which you will find to be much ease, very convenient,
and indeed Merchan^ like, and I have known it practiced by some of the best and
most experienced Merchants in London.

Keep or return Bills accepted.
YOur Bills thus accepted, if payable to your self, you may lay up by you in
your Counting House until the time of payment be come, or that you have other
use thereof; but if payable to him that delivered the value, or that sent them
you to cause to be accepted, then you must therewith follow his order, either
in keeping them by you until further order, or in returning them back to be
endorsed, and it may be to take in the value thereof himself, which he may
likewise do on the second Bill, if he have it by him, and so assign it over to
another man, and send you his order to deliver the accepted Bill to some other
person who may have the second Bill endorsed payable unto him.

The Deliverer is Master.
FOr you are to take notice, That the party which first delivered the Money on
the Bill of Exchange (if the Moneys he delivered were for his own proper
Account) is rightly and properly Master thereof until the Bill falls due; and
he can or may prohibit the party to whom it is directed not to pay the same at
the time unto him to whom the Bill is first made payable, (supposing him to be
a Factor for the Deliverer) although the party on whom the Bill is drawn have
already accepted the Bill, which prohibition is called a Countermand, and ought
to be done in due form, and but upon special sure ground, because it strikes at
the Credit of the party to whom the Bill was made payable: As for example, if
the Master or principal Deliverer of the Money do make over Moneys by Exchange
payable to his Servant or Factor, and do afterward hear by certain advice given
him that his said Servant or Factor does take ill courses, whereby the Moneys
and effects which he has in his hands, or which may come to his hands for
account of the principal Deliverer, may be in danger of being misspent or
wasted; then and in such case the principal may send his Countermand,
forbidding the party to whom the Bill is directed not to pay the Money to that
Servant or Factor, but to some other person, or to keep the same in his hands,
when due, until further order, which Countermand must be made and passed before
a public Notary in legal manner, and by a Notary notified to the party that
has accepted the Bill, or that is to pay the Money, to the end he may not
pretend any ignorance thereof, and such a Countermand is good and lawful,
according to custom of Merchants, and ought to be obeyed accordingly, if the
same be notified in due form and time by a Notary (to the party which has
accepted the Bill) before it be due, and neither the Drawer nor Acceptor can
suffer any damage in obedience thereto; but if the time be expired, and the
Money orderly paid before the Countermand come to hand, and be notified as
above, in such case there is nothing to be done for prevention of danger, the
Bird being already fled; and by this which has been said, it may appear, that
a Bill of Exchange ought not to be paid before it be due, as shall be showed
hereafter.

Usance, what it is, and how to be accounted.
A Bill of Exchange made payable at usance, double usance, or treble usance, is
to be understood by usance, if from any part beyond the Seas, (except
Hamborough and Venice) one month next after the date of the Bill, and the like
of double and treble usance, two or three months to be accounted still from the
date of the Bill, (for from Hamborough they usually draw at two months, and
usance from Venice is three months as I have already shewed^) but I say, always
the usance is to be accounted a month from the date of the Bill, let the month
fall out how it will, whether it be a month that has 31 days, 30 days, or 28
days, each month by denomination is a full and perfect usance, for when it is
said at usance, it is as much as if it were said one month after the date; now
Merchants usually count twelve months in the year, and not thirteen months (as
amongst Nurses and the female sex, 4 weeks, or 28 days to a month) neither do
we reckon every thirty days a month (if the month have more or less days in it)
as some imagine, but a full month by denomination, from such a day of such a
month, to the same day of the next month, or from the last day of one month to
the last day of the next month: As for instance, A Bill of Exchange dated in
Amsterdam the 20th. of December new style, which is the 10th. of December old
style, payable at usance, will be due the 10th of January old style; A Bill
dated the 15th of June new style, which is the 5th of June old style, payable
at usance, will be due the 5th of July old style; and a Bill dated the 10th of
February new style, which is the last of January old style, made payable at
usance in London, will be due the last of February old style; and a Bill dated
in Amsterdam the 9th of January new style, payable at double usance, will be
due in London the 27th of February old style, as will be made very plain and
manifest by the Tables at the end of this Book; and in like manner is to be
accounted from any other date for usance, double usance, or treble usance,
always reckon from the date of the Bill month after month.

Days sight.
A Bill payable at so many days sight, is to be accounted so many days next
after the Bill shall be accepted, or else protested for non acceptance, and not
from the date of the Bill, nor from the day that the same came to hand, or was
privately exhibited to the party on whom it is drawn to be accepted, if he do
not accept thereof, for the sight must appear in a legal way, which is approved
either by the parties under-writing the Bill accepting thereof, or by Protest
made for non-acceptance; and therefore if a Bill so made payable, be omitted to
be presently upon refusal protested for non-acceptance, all that time which
shall run out between the private presenting of the Bill and the protesting
thereof, is lost time, and not to be accounted as part of the number of days
mentioned in the Bill of Exchange, except the party on whom the Bill is drawn,
do of his own free will acknowledge to have seen the Bill from the first day it
was privately presented unto him.

An accepted Bill lost by the party to whom payable.
IF an accepted Bill of Exchange be lost by the party to whom it is payable, or
his Servant, or any other whom he had entrusted with the Bill, I do advise him
presently, so soon as he finds the Bill missing, to notify the same unto the
party on whom it is drawn, and who has accepted the same, that he may take
notice thereof, to the end, that if peradventure the accepted Bill be found by
a stranger, nothing concerned therein, and he should knavishly come or send for
the Money, or use any indirect ways for the fingering thereof, the party that
accepted the Bill may be premonished at his peril not to pay it to the bringer,
without the special order of the party to whom it is payable, or that lost the
Bill, and this Notification to be made by a Notary that may give testimony
thereof, if occasion be, to serve and prevail to the right party to whom the
Bill was made payable, or that lost the Bill, in time and place according to
reason; and when the Bill falls due, and the time is come for him to go for the
Money, the party which had accepted the Bill is not freed from present payment
of the Money because the Bill is lost; for though the accepted Bill be lost yet
he that accepted it is not; and though a specialty may be mislayed and not
presently found, yet that does no ways free the deptor from performing his
engagement: Neither must the acceptor think this to be a sufficient answer for
him, to say, show me my accepted Bill and I will pay you, or else I will keep
the Money until you bring me the second Bill, and such like flams, merely to
make use of the Money a little longer time, thinking that because the accepted
Bill is lost, and it may be the second Bill not yet come to hand, that
therefore no Protest can be made for non-payment, which is frivoulous and vain,
and will prove but a sandy foundation for any to build upon; Nota.
For even by the Notifica-which was made to the party accepting, declaring how
that the first Bill of Exchange, of such a date, and sum of Money, from such a
party payable to such a one, and drawn on him, and by him accepted, is lost,
etc. the acceptor does thereby tacitly acknowledge, that such a Bill was by him
accepted, and so makes himself debtor for the parcel, and thereupon he may (in
case of obstinacy) be sued at Law for the Money without the accepted Bill, and
be forced to the payment thereof with costs and damages, and therefore merely
by reason of the loss of the accepted Bill he can have no just cause or plea to
detain the Money beyond the just time from the right party who should receive
the same; but only thus, when such an accepted Bill is lost, the party to whom
the Bill was payable must give Bond, or other reasonable writing, to the
content and good liking of the party that did accept the Bill, and such as in
reason he cannot refuse, therein and thereby engaging to save the Acceptor
harmless from the accepted Bill which is lost, and to discharge him from the
sum the ein mentioned, against the Drawer and all others in due form; and
thereupon the party which did accept the Bill ought to pay the same, although
he have not in his accepted Bill, for otherwise the party to whom it was made
payable must send a Notary to make demand of the said sum upon the same offer
of giving Bond to save harmless, as above; and then if payment be refused, the
Notary must Protest for want of present payment, and the party that accepted
the Bill is liable to make good the damages and costs, he being the wilful
occasion thereof, the loss of the accepted Bill being but accidental; and
indeed such a Bill being really lost to the party to whom it was payable, and
he himself being a man well known, and of good commerce, and such notification
being made as above; Nota.
(yea, I would advise to make the notification, though I did not miss the Bill
till I went for the Money, and the rather, because I cannot tell what may fall
out between the cup and the lip.) I cannot well imagine what loss he on whom it
is drawn can be at in paying it at the due time to the right party upon his
Bond to save harmless.

Object. Peradventure you will object and say, What if the second Bill comes
payable to another man, am not I bound to pay that Bill?

I answer, That can hardly be, I mean, that the second Bill should come payable
to another man, if the first be made payable (in the Bill or by orderly
assignment) to the party to whom you have paid the Money: And yet suppose the
first accepted Bill which was lost was payable, or assigned to him that lost
it, and a second Bill should come assigned to another man, (as I have seen such
a thing happen, the honesty of him that did it I will not now dispute) the Money
being really paid at the time when the same fell due to him that had the
accepted Bill, and payable to him, and not having had notice of the other Bill
until after it be due, the payment on, or according to the first Bill, is good
and warrantable.

Ob. But what if the first accepted Bill be afterward found by any that shall
come and demand the Money in the name of the party to whom it is payable, or
that he himself shall have assigned it over to another man, and have taken up
the value of him?

An. It is all as nothing, coming after the time, and the Money having been paid
at the time to the party to whom payable, (though without the accepted Bill, it
being supposed lost) and having good Bond to save harmless; It will lie on him
which has committed the fraud, and not on the party on whom the Bill was
drawn, and has paid it at the time, who is free from both first and second
Bill, and ought to be saved harmless accordingly.

No revoking Acceptance.
IT happened one day, that a young Merchant, though a middle aged man, came to
me, and told me, he had few hours ago accepted a Bill of Exchange, and
delivered it back to the party to whom it was payable, but that just now he had
received Letters of advice, that the party for whose account the Money was
drawn, namely, the Drawer of the Bill, was failed of his Credit, and therefore
the Acceptor would (if he could) un-accept the Bill, or make void his
acceptance thereof, and desired me to advise him how he ought to do it: To whom
I made answer merrily, Sir, pray go to the party that has your accepted Bill,
and tell him as much as you have told me, (if he know it not already) and if he
will give you leave to cancel your acceptance of the Bill, (which he ought not
to do) then you may be free from your engagement; but for my part I know no
other way, for if you cannot recall your word in such case, much less can you
make void your deed without mutual consent; for the truth is, a Bill of
Exchange being once accepted, that acceptance cannot be recalled, but the
acceptor stands liable to the payment, and must make it good if he be able.

Accept for longer time.
IF a Bill of Exchange be made payable at 30 days sight, and the party to whom
the said Bill is directed will not accept it but at 60 days sight: Or if the
Bill be drawn at double usance, and the party upon whom the same is drawn will
not accept it but at treble usance, or the like; that is to say, if the party
upon whom the Bill of Exchange is charged will not accept it to pay according
to the time therein limited, but for a longer time; In such case the party to
whom the Bill is made payable, or his Assigns, must cause protest to be made
for want of acceptance of the said Bill according to the tenor thereof, and
then he may take the acceptance offered; Or if the Bill of Exchange be left
with the party to whom it is directed to be accepted, and he do of his own
accord, without the knowledge of the party to whom it is payable, accept the
Bill for a longer time, or for a less sum than is mentioned in the said Bill;
in either of these cases the party unto whom the said Bill is made payable, or
his assigns, must go with the said Bill of Exchange to a Notary, and cause
Protest to be made for want of acceptance of the said Bill for the whole sum
therein mentioned, or according to the tenor thereof as aforesaid; but he may
not let the party blot out his acceptance; Nota.
for by his acceptance he makes himself debtor, and owns the draught made by his
Friend upon him, whose right another man cannot give away, and therefore cannot
refuse or discharge the acceptance; and when the Bill is due, according to the
time therein limited, I mean the time mentioned in the Bill of Exchange, the
party to whom the said Bill is payable, or his Assigns, must demand payment
thereof accordingly, and in default thereof, a second Protest must be made for
non-payment; and then he may (in sending away the Protest, but keeping the Bill
by him) receive the Money for which it is accepted, or at the time it is
accepted at, unless he have express order to the contrary from the party which
did remit the Money, whose order he ought to follow.

Receive part.
AND if the Bill be accepted to pay but part of the Money mentioned in the Bill,
as is before declared: Or that it be accepted in due form for the whole sum,
but when the Bill falls due, the whole sum be not presently paid, then you may
receive so much Money as will then be paid thereupon; and you may likewise make
a receipt on the backside of the Bill for so much Money as you have received in
part of payment thereof. But you must presently Protest for non-payment of the
remaining sum, according as is already here before declared: and the receiving
part of the Moneys upon the Bill does no ways weaken the Bill, or the making
Protest for not payment of the remainder, or any legal course to be taken for
recovery thereof, either against the Drawer or Acceptor, but it rather
strengthens the same, for there will be less behind to be paid, and it will
serve to prove it a real debt, in regard there is part thereof already paid.

Bill accepted by another man.
MOreover, if a Bill of Exchange be drawn on John A. and he refuse to accept
it: Or if John A. be out of Town, and have left no legal order for acceptance
thereof, by Letter of Attorney under his hand and seal, in due form: And that
William C. (a Friend of the Drawers) will accept the Bill for honor of the
Drawer; In either of these cases, the party to whom the said Bill is payable,
or his Assigns, ought in the first place to cause Protest to be made for
non-acceptance by John A. and then he may take the acceptance of William C. for
honor of the Drawer, for otherwise the Drawer may allege that he did not draw
the Bill on William C. but on John A. and therefore according to custom of
Merchants, diligence ought to be first used toward John A. and by Protest
legally to prove his want of acceptance: Or else Order and Commission is
broken, and so the damage, which may happen for want of having the acceptance
of John A. (or his refusal for not having given order) will be put upon him who
had the Bill sent unto him to be gotten accepted, for you ought to respect your
Friends good as your own.

How to reckon the time.
A Bill of Exchange dated the second of March new style, which is the twentieth
of February old style (except in Leapyear, which will be then the twenty first
of February) payable in London at double usance, will be due the two and
twentieth of April old style, and not the twentieth of April, as some do
erroniously imagine, who would deduct the ten days (to reduce the new style to
old style) at the end of the double usance, and so they would go as far as the
second of May new style, and then go backwards ten days, when of right they
should go forwards from the date of old style, relating to the place where it
is payable, and reckon the double usance from the very date of the Bill, thus:
A Bill dated the second of March new style, is the twentieth of February old
style, February having but twenty eight days, (for the twentienth of February
old style is the second of March new style, even to the very day of the week)
so from the twentieth of February to the twenty third of March is one usance,
and from the twenty third of March to the twenty second of April there is
another usance; and so in like manner, if a Bill of Exchange be dated the tenth
of March new style, which is the last of February old style, payable at treble
usance, such a Bill will be due the last of May in London, and not the twenty
eighth of May, as some do imagine, because February has but twenty eight days.
Also if a Bill be dated the eighth of January in Rouen, payable at double
usance in London, it will fall due the twenty sixth of February, and if from
that date payable at treble usance, it will fall due the twenty ninth of March,
as is manifest by the Almanac or Table at the end of this Book; for you must
always count your usances from the very date of the Bill, as I have made
evidently appear by what has been before declared concerning usances; And I
have seen diverse Bill of Exchange which have been sent from beyond the Seas,
wherein the Drawers have written the old and new style both together in the
date of their Bills one above another, thus: Amsterdam adj. 3/13 February
1654/55 for 200 l. sterling. Middleborough adj. ^ March 1654/55 for 150 l. sterling.
Adj. 27 March 1655. 6 April 1655.
in Genoua Dol^ 245 at 57 d. L 58-3-9 d sterling.


And the like, which is very plain and commendable in those that do so write,
thereby to make things evident to the capacity of the weakest, and to avoid any
further disputes thereupon, although in those Bills of Exchange where the old
and new style are not positively expressed, yet the same thing is intended and
meant, and ought to be understood as if particularly set down; for if you have
the date in new style, you may soon see what date it is in old style: And I
have taken the more pains to make this out to every man's understanding, because
I do perceive that many men for their own advantage, and in their own case, are
subject to be biased, and judge amiss; but I conceive I have herein so clearly
evidenced the truth and reason of my opinion, that it cannot but convince those
that are, or have been of a contrary judgment, of their error and mistake,
except they are wilfully blind, and then none so blind; Or that they can give
me any better reason for their contrary opinion, and then I will submit unto
them; for all Bills of Exchange (as I have said before, and is notoriously
known and assented unto by all) which are made payable at usances, must
bereckoned directly from the date of the Bill, which if it be new style, and
payable in London, or any other place where they write old style, the date must
first be found out in the old style, and then count forward and you cannot
mistake.

Half Usance.
HAlf usance is always reckoned fifteen days from the date of the Bill; neither
more nor less, because usance is one month by denomination, to be accounted
next after the date of the Bill, as I have very fully showed here before, and
there is not any month in the year which has in it above 31 days: Now
therefore upon an indifferent account fifteen days must be reckoned for half
usance, because fifteen is the half of thirty, and a day consisting of 24 hours
cannot be subdivided from its proper denomination; So that if you have a Bill
of Exchange dated the third of February new style, and payable in London at
half usance, and would know when this Bill falls due, you must first (as
before) look to the date, and you shall find that the third of February new
style is the 24 of January old style, from whence count fifteen days forward,
or add fifteen days to the twenty fourth of January, and you will find it will
fall due the eighth of February inclusive following; and in case you have a
Bill dated the third of February new style, and payble at usance and half, then
count from the 24 of January old style to the 24 of February old style for the
usance, and from thence to the 11 of March inclusive (except in Leap-year) is
15 days, or half usance, on which 11th. day of March, and with the same day the
usance and half will expire, and that is the last day of the usance and half,
which day must be fully expired and past before the Money ought to be paid, and
before any Protest can be legally made for non-payment.

Three days after due.
YOu are to take special notice, that the day on which any Bill of Exchange
does fall due, is always to be accounted as part of the time limited in the
Bill of Exchange as included therein; so that the day on which any Bill of
Exchange does fall due, does belong to the party which is to make payment
thereof, as being part of his time: As now for example, Suppose a Bill is made
payable at thirty days sight, and it be accepted the fifth of February (
February having but 28 days, except in Leap year) you must reckon from the
fifth of February to the sixth of February for one day, and from thence to the
seventh two days, and so forward, (allowing 24 hours to a day) it will fall due
(or the 30 days sight will expire with) the seventh of March inclusive; and in
like manner with Bills payable at usance, double or treble usance, or Bills
payable at a prefixed day, the full time of the usances, or prefixed day must be
taken inclusive as part of the time appointed for payment of the Bill: and
three days next after the expiration of that day are usually allowed in London,
as well for him on whom it is payable to procure payment thereof, as for him on
whom the Bill is drawn to pay it, unless it be a Bill of Exchange made in
France, and that the French Post shall happen to depart on the second day after
it be due, or that the third day be a Sunday, or no working day, or day of
public commerce and trade: And in any of those cases the Money must be paid the
second day after the Bill falls due, or else Protest must be then made for
nonpayment, that so lawful diligence may be used within the three days, and
advice thereof may be sent away by the very first Post after the Bill falls
due: For although three days are usually allowed after a Bill is due, yet it is
with this proviso, that the same be not to the prejudice of him to whom the
Bill is payable, or of his Correspondent, or the Drawer; for if the Money be not
paid, and the Protest made within the three days next after the Bill falls due,
and that there should happen in the interim any misfortune to the party on whom
the Bill is drawn, that he should be non solvent, or the like, those in France
concerned therein, will sooner take advantage thereupon to avoid the repayment,
than they will do in the like kind who take up moneys by Exchange in Holland,
or other parts, whose Bills if not paid the second day after due, and that the
third day fall on a Saturday, they many times forbear to protest for
non-payment until the Monday following: however this is a general rule, namely,
that according to custom of Merchants in London, protest ought to be made for
non-payment within three days after the Bill falls due, and the protest ought
to be sent away by the first Post next after the time of payment is expired, be
it for what part soever. I know there are some that would not have Sunday
reckoned for one of the three days after a Bill falls due; Truly, I think they
may as well not reckon Sundays to be any of the thirty days sight, or the like;
for my part (though payments are not used to be made on Sundays, neither ought
protest to be made on a Sunday for non-payment) I cannot but reckon Sunday
amongst the number of the three days, for I am sure if Saturday be the second
day after the Bill is due, then Monday will be the fourth day after it is due;
Sure bind, sure find.

Protest must be made though the three days are expired.
BUt if protest for non-payment be not made within the three days after a Bill
of Exchange falls due, and that through negligence, or otherwise, it be forborne
four, five, six, or more days after the time limited in the Bill of Exchange;
Yet nevertheless even then, if it be not paid, the Bill of Exchange must be
protested for non-payment. I say although the three days are expired, because
you cannot well take any course in Law against the party which has accepted
the bill, until you have made a legal demand of the money by a public Notary;
neither is the party that drew the bill bound, or liable (according to custom
of Merchants) to repay the money unto him of whom he has received the value,
until such time as there does appear a protest made for non-payment, to prove
that the party who accepted the bill, or he on whom it was drawn, has not paid
the money upon that Bill of Exchange; but though a bill must be protested
although the three days are expired, yet I would never counsel any body to omit
protesting a Bill of Exchange the third day after it is due: For if it be not
protested before the three days are expired, and the party which has accepted
it shall then happen to be non solvent, as I said before, it may be alleged by
the Drawer or Endorser, that the party to whom it was payable has prejudiced
them in neglecting his diligence therein, and the party that drew the bill
(especially if it be a French bill, that is to say, a bill made in France) may
happen to delay (if not free) the second payment thereof upon that account; for
although the Drawer is bound to the deliverer until the bill be satisfied, yet
it is with this proviso, that protest be made in due time, and lawful diligence
used for receipt of the money by the party to whom it is payable, according to
his duty, that so the Drawer may not suffer through his neglect: It is good to
walk securely, there is no danger at all in protesting within the three days
after a Bill of Exchange is due, but there may be danger in forbearing to
protest within that time: Wherefore my advice is, (let the party up on whom the
Bill is drawn be never so good and able a man) if he do not pay within the time
accustomed, cause the Bill presently to be protested for non-payment.

Bill payable at a prefixed day.
A Bill of Exchange made at any part beyond the seas, where they dousually
write new style, which is ten days before our English style, being old style,
and such a bill being made payable on such, or such a day, of such, or such a
month, you must know in this case, that you have nothing to do with the date of
the Bill, but you are only to look to the day of the month positively expressed
in the Bill, and that very day of the month according to our style here in
England, must be expired before the bill will be due; and a bill so made
payable is not to be understood on such, or such a day new style, (except the
same be so particularly expressed) but on such, or such a day old style,
according to the style and usual computation observed at the place where it is
made payable: As for instance, suppose a Bill of Exchange were made payable in
this manner following.

Laus Deo, in Amsterdam the 7th. of February 1655. for 200 l. sterling.
ON the ninth day of March next pay this my first Bill of Exchange to Mr.
Robert W. or his assigns, the sum of two hundred pounds sterling for the value
received of Mr. Charles D. and put it to account as per advice.

Francis P.

To Mr. George H. Merchant in London P^
This Bill of Exchange will not be due until the ninth day of March English
style, and it cannot be accounted due (as some would have it) on the twenty
seventh of February old style, which is the ninth of March new style; for it
relates to the style of the place where the bill is made payable, and not to
the computation of the place or country where the Bill is dated. For suppose
now Mr. Robert W. in the Bill mentioned should demand payment of this Bill on
the last of February and first of March old style, and Mr. George H. should
tell him, that he would pay it the ninth of March our style, when due according
to the tenor of the Bill, and not before, I would fain know how any Notary (if
he understand himself) can protest upon such an answer, or can draw out any
legal protest for non payment before the ninth of March old style be expired:
For (pray observe) if the Notary dateth his protest for non-payment on any day
before the ninth of March old style, according to the computation of the place
where the bill is payable, he will make his protest bear date before the bill
is due, and so will be illegally made, and even the protest it self will carry
that along with it which will certainly cut its own throat; for the bill is
made payable the ninth, and the protest will bear date before the day of
payment be come, as may evidently appear: And yet this very case (to my
knowledge) has stumbled a Merchant of no small rank and commerce in Bills of
Exchange, who having such a Bill of Exchange payable to him, would fam have
persuaded himself (for the acceptor, nor me he could not,) that the bill would
be due the 27 old style, and if the party on whom the bill was drawn would not
so accept it, my Merchant was very earnest to have a protest made; whereupon to
make things plain, and thereby convince him of his error, I directed the
acceptor to underwrite the Bill thus, Accepted to pay the ninth of March,
according to the tenor of the Bill, which when my Merchant beheld and well
considered, he perceived his error, and well approved of the acceptance (for it
was good) and so tarryed till the ninth of March for his money, as he ought to
do.

Acceptance by Wife, or Servant.
A Man's Wife, or Friend, or Servant cannot accept a Bill of Exchange for him in
his absence, without sufficient authority from him by a Letter of Attorney under
his hand and seal, delivered in the presence of sufficient witness for the
doing thereof; a man's word, (as if he should say to his Wife, Friend, or
Servant, If any Bills of Exchange shall come drawn on me in my absence, accept
them for me) is not sufficient, neither will a bare Letter serve, written to
his Wife, Friend, or Servant; but there must be hand and seal, and witnesses,
which (if occasion be) may prove his legal consent to such acceptance: For
indeed, it is against reason that any man should be bound to the payment of any
sum of money without valuable consideration, or without his own free consent; It
is true, if the Wife or Servant have formerly accepted several Bills of
Exchange in the like kind, and when the party on whom they were drawn has come
to town, he has approved thereof, and paid the bills at the time, and so the
Wife, or Servant are wont to do from time to time, and that this can be proved,
I conceive it will come very close to him; but we hold a legal order for
acceptance ought to be granted by Letter of Attorney under hand and seal, as I
have already showed.

A Bill drawn at one place, and payable at another.
IF a Bill of Exchange be drawn upon a man living at one place, or City, and
pay able to a man living at another place, and that the money is not to be paid
in the City, or Town, where the party on whom the bill is drawn does dwell, but
in some other City or Town where the party to whom the Bill is payable does
live, or at a place for, and at which there is a usual course of Exchange, and
that the party on whom the Bill is drawn does dwell some score of miles off
from thence: Such a Bill as this, so soon as it comes to your hands you may
send it down to some friend in the same Town, where he on whom it is drawn does
live, to get acceptance thereof, and then to be returned to you; but when the
Bill falls due, you need not seek farther for payment than at the house, or in
the place where the Bill is made payable, and in default thereof you must there
cause protest to be made in due form: As for instance, suppose a Bill of
Exchange be drawn from Rouen, and directed thus To Mr. William P. Merchant at
Southampton, but made payable thus; Pay this my first of Exchange to Mr. Samuel
B. or Assigns in London; or thus, Pay this my first Bill of Exchange at the
house of Mr. Roger C. in London, to the order of Mr. Benjamin L. etc. this Bill
must be sent down to Southampton to some friend there to present to Mr. William
P. to get accepted, but if he refuse to accept the Bill, you may either protest
at Southampton for non-acceptance, or else the friend there may return the
Bill, with his answer of refusal by a Letter to London to his friend that sent
him the Bill, and by the help of such a Letter protest may be made at London
for non-acceptance; But now when this Bill is due, you must then only endeavor
to get payment at London according to the express words and tenor of the Bill;
and if no order be given at the house of Mr. Roger C. in London for payment, or
if a particular house be not expressed, but only the Bill is payable in London,
if you have not your money brought you within the three days after the Bill is
due, you must cause protest for non-payment to be made in London according to
the usual manner.

The Taker bound to the Deliverer, and the Acceptor bound to the Party to whom
payable.
YOu may please to take notice, That generally in all Bills of Exchange the
party that draws or under writes the Bill, (or the taker, which is all one) I
say he is bound to the deliverer, or to the party of whom the value was
received; and the acceptor, or party that does accept the Bill, is bound to the
party to whom the Bill is made payable: For although as well the Taker (or
Drawer of the Bill) as also the Acceptor, are both bound in the Bill, and both
equally liable for the payment thereof, yet they are not generally both bound
to one man; I say generally, for if the Deliverer be servant to the party to
whom the Bill is payable, then indeed the Drawer may be said to be bound to the
party to whom it is payable as well as the Acceptor: Or, if the Deliverer be
the principal, and he remits his own moneys by exchange, payable to his
servant, in this case likewise both Taker and Acceptor may be said to be bound
to the Deliverer: But generally in parcels remitted and taken up by exchange
between Merchant and Merchant, the Taker is properly bound to one, and the
Acceptor to another, though both of them are liable until the Bill be
satisfied: So that if the accepted Bill be not paid at the time, and protest
made for non-payment, and there be occasion to commence a suit in Law against
the Drawer, it must be entered in the name of the Deliverer; and in like manner,
if a suit be commenced against the Acceptor, it must be made and prosecuted in
the name of the party to whom the Bill is made payable, for the party (happily)
that draws the Bill takes no great notice to whom it is made payable, (he being
thereunto directed usually by the party that delivers him the value;) Neither
does the party which accepts the Bill take much cognizance of the party that
did deliver the value, but only of the party that drew the Bill, (with whom he
corresponds,) and of the party to whom it is made payable, (to whom by his
acceptance he binds himself for the payment;) And so likewise where there are
any Assignments on Bills negotiated, always the party that receives the value
is directly bound to him of whom he has received it, and the Acceptor to the
last assigned.

Better security.
IF a Merchant which has accepted a Bill of Exchange shall happen to be
nonsolvent, or publicly reported to be failed of his Credit, and that he does
absent himself from the Exchange in the interim before the Bill of Exchange by
him accepted be due: You must then presently upon such report cause demand to
be made by a Notary for better security, and in fault thereof, cause protest to
be made for want of better security, and send away that protest by the very
next Post, that so upon receipt thereof by your friend which sent you the Bill,
he may procure security to be given by the party which drew the Bill; One
string being cracked you must seek to get another new one, that so you may still
have two strings to your bow; And when the Bill is due, if not paid, you must
then protest again for non-payment, and send away that protest also; Charges.
and the Drawer, or his surety, must bear and pay as well principal as charges,
such as is port of Letters, cost of protests, and (if the money be taken up per
rechange on him) the price of rechange, and brokerage.

Protest in the day time.
IF at any time you have occasion to cause protest to be made on any Bill of
Exchange, either for non-acceptance, better security, or for want of payment,
always be sure to cause protest to be made in the day time, that is to say,
between sun rising and sun setting, but tarry not until the last hour, if you
may do otherwise; and when I say between sun and sun, my meaning is, in the day
time, or time of commerce and public trade, when, and during the time that
shops are generally open, for one swallow does not make a summer; For it may be
in summer time in London some men do open shops by four or five of the clock in
the morning, but generally not until six or seven, and some do not shut up
until nine or ten, but generally at seven or eight of the clock: And again, in
winter happily some may open about six or seven of the clock in the morning, and
shut up not until nine or ten, whenas generally they open about eight, and shut
up about four or five of the clock at evening: So that as a Bill of Exchange is
of great concernment to Merchants in trade, and a protest upon any of their
Bills may prove to their great discredit; A Caveat for Notaries,
so likewise it is therefore provided by the Law and custom of Merchants, that
no protest upon any of their Bills of Exchange ought to be made against them
out of season, or at an unseasonable time, when men generally cease to use
public commerce and trade; for there is a time of rest as well as a time of
labor, a time for devotion as well as a time of negotiation, a time for
private employment, as well as for public concernment. If I should go about
ten of the clock at night to a Merchant to buy a parcel of Taffaties, would he
not be ready to excuse the showing of them at such an unseasonable hour, and
desire me rather to come the next morning about nine of the clock, and that
then I should see them, and in so answering me, wherein does he deserve blame,
may not he for all that continue to be a Merchant of good repute? Because he
will not show his goods at such an unseasonable hour, can any therefore
conclude that he has no goods to sell? Ought not I rather to be blamed to give
disturbance to him at such an hour of the night? I could say much in this
particular: but as I desire not to give advantage to any ill affected to
forbear payment of moneys due by Bill of Exchange, whenever the same is
justly and rightly demanded, so I dare not conclude a protest to be legally
made at any hour of the night, or at an unseasonable time; You cannot err in
causing protest to be made (if occasion be) on a working day before noon, or
after noon, in the time that men do generally use and exercise commerce and
trade, as well in buying and selling of goods, as in paying and receiving of
moneys: And therefore to prevent all objections which may be made against the
legality of the protest, Nota.
I would advise every one that has occasion to cause protest to be made for
nonpayment to play above board, and to let their protest be made at convenient
time, as is before declared; for you are not bound not to protest until the
last hour of the third day after the Bill is due, but you are bound by the Law
of Merchants, used in England, to protest within the three days, and before the
last hour be expired, which is generally taken at sun setting, or thereabouts;
wherefore you may as well protest in the forenoon as in the afternoon, and as
well at two of the clock in the afternoon as at four of the clock: And
therefore be sure you do not prejudice your self in tarrying beyond your time
before you cause protest to be made for non-payment of your Bill, in case it be
not paid before the third day.

Protest returned for non-acceptance, or want of better security.
WHen any protest is returned unto you for want of acceptance, or for want of
better security, upon receipt thereof you must presently repair with the
protest to the party to whom you delivered your money upon the Bill of Exchange,
which is either the Drawer or Indorser; and upon sight of the protest he must
give you good security to your content for the moneys so taken up by exchange
to be bound to repay the same with rechange and costs, in case it be not paid
at the time by the party on whom it is drawn; and therefore the usual custom
is, in this case, that the drawer or indorser having received the value, must
procure an able man, some friend of his, to underwrite the protest, which is
come, for not acceptance, or for want of better security, using these or the
like words: I here underwritten, do bind my self as principal, according to
the custom of Merchants, for the sum of money mentioned in the Bill of Exchange
whereupon this protest is made. London this ninth of February 1654.

John G.

Protest for non-payment returned.
BUT if a protest be returned for want of payment, and if you have had security
already given you on the protest for non-acceptance, or for want of better
security, then upon receipt of your protest for non-payment you may only
acquaint the drawer (or party that took up the money) therewith, and tarry out
the same proportion of time at which the Bill was made payable, to be accounted
from the time it fell due, before you demand your principal money with the
rechange and charges of the party that drew the Bill, or of his surety, who,
according to the Law of Merchants, are bound jointly and severally to repay the
same upon the protest for non-payment: but if the Bill was accepted, and the
acceptor not failed, so that there was not any protest made till the Bill fell
due, and then there comes a protest for want of payment: In this Case you must
take security upon that protest for non-payment, as is directed here before
upon the protest for non-acceptance, except the drawer do presently pay down
the money, and interest, and charge, accrewing from the day it fell due until
that very day of showing him the protest for non-payment, and that you do
consent thereunto; for otherwise, in case a Bill be protested for non payment,
and the protest exhibited to the drawer, he may (giving security, as before)
keep the money until so much time more be elapsed as the Bill was drawn for,
before he can be compelled to make payment: As now for instance, if the Bill be
dated in Amsterdam the ninth of February, and payable at usance in London, and
protested for non-payment, the drawer may claim the like time of usance for
repayment thereof, as above; so that as there was one month for the Exchange of
the money from Amsterdam to London, so likewise there must be another month for
re-exchange of the money from London back again to Amsterdam; and thus you see
it will be the ninth of April before you can have your money with the
reexchange thereof, and charges at Amsterdam; but if the drawer will keep the
money out the time, and yet will not give security upon the protest, then the
deliverer may presently take a course in Law against him, and he will be
compelled to repay the same with costs, and considerable damage.

Keep the accepted Bill, but return the non-accepted.
WHen an accepted Bill is protested for Non-payment, I would advise to send
away the Protest, as I have showed before, but to keep the accepted Bill in
your own Custody, except you have express order to the contrary; for the
Protest for Non-payment will be sufficient proof whereby to recover of the
Drawer, and then withal if the first Bill be accepted, the second Bill will
serve against the Drawer, as well as the accepted Bill; but here in England you
cannot take course in Law and expect a good Issue in your Suit against the
Acceptor, without the original accepted Bill be produced in Court: so that you
keeping the accepted Bill by you, and sending your Friend the other Bill (if
you have it) with the Protest, he can sufficiently thereby claim his Money of
the Drawer or Party to whom he has delivered the Value; and likewise you at
the same time (if it be an outland Bill) may implead the Acceptor upon the
accepted Bill; and if the Drawer should desire to have in the accepted Bill as
well as the other, before he repay the Money, it will be time enough to send the
accepted Bill when it is so desired, but I would not advise to send away the
accepted Bill with the Protest for Non-payment, for fear it miscarry, nor to
part with the accepted Bill without special order and upon good grounds. But if
the Bill was never accepted, and not paid at the time, then there is no danger
to send back the Bill with the Protest for Non-payment both together; for you
have done your whole Diligence needful concerning that Bill, and it will rest
wholly upon the Deliverer to seek his Remedy against the Taker up of the Money,
and to procure Payment thereof from him as is fitting.

Bill of Exchange lost, left to be accepted.
IF a Bill of Exchange be lest with a Man to be accepted, and he happen to have
lost the Bill, or that it be mis-deliver'd, that is to say, delivered by him,
or any of his Servants, or by his means, to a wrong Party; or, if in any case
the Party which left the Bill to be accepted cannot have his Bill of Exchange
re-deliver'd to him, accepted or not accepted, according to the Custom of
Merchants: In this case the Party that lost the Bill, namely, he on whom it is
drawn, or through whose means it is mis-deliver'd, (if he intended to accept
the Bill, or if he had accepted it) must give a Note under his hand and seal
for the payment of the Money mentioned in the Bill, to the Party to whom it was
made payable, or his Assigns, at the time limited in the Bill. I say, to pay
the Money upon the second Bill, if it shall come to hand within the time; or
else, in default thereof, he must bind himself to pay the Money upon that Note
at the same time; for it is but just and reasonable, that he who has lost my
Specialty or Bill of Exchange, should make it good to me by some other means
equivalent thereunto; but in case the Party that thus lost the Bill do refuse
to give such a Note under his hand and seal, then he who presented the Bill to
be accepted, or that left the Bill with him, must presently cause Protest
thereupon to be made in due form, and must send the Protest away by the first
Post: and in like manner make Demand of the Money at the time, tho he have
neither Note nor Bill of Exchange, and in default of Payment he must cause a
second Protest to be made, and send it away as the former. But in case there be
such a Note made, and at or before the time limited for Payment thereof the
second Bill of Exchange shall not come to hand, you must go receive the Money
upon that Note, according to the Contents thereof, and in default of Payment
you must cause Protest to be made upon that Note for Non-payment, as if you had
the accepted Bill, or that the second Bill were come to hand, but not paid at
the time.

Bill endorsed in Blank.
IF a Bill of Exchange be made payable to one beyond the Seas, or to one
withinland in the Country, and he subscribe only his Name on the backsidet
hereof, leaving an empty place above his Name, and do so send it to a Merchant
or Friend to get it accepted, and to receive the Money at the time therein
limited of the Party on whom the Bill is drawn, (as it is usual to do) the same
is sufficient warrant for the Party to whom the Bill is sent to get it
accepted, and, and to receive the Money accordingly: And in this case, when the
Party that has the Bill shall go for the Money when the Bill is due, he may
either receive the Money himself, or send his Man for it; if he go himself, he
may either write an Assignment in the empty place above the Name on the
backside of the Bill, and so make it payable to himself, and then when he shall
have received the Money, he must make a Receipt for the same underneath the
Assignment in his own Name in ordinary manner for so much Money received; Or
else he may forbear making an Assignment in the empty place to himself, and
instead thereof he may in the same empty place above the Name make a Receipt,
as if the Money had been paid to the Party to whom the Bill is payable, and that
set his Name thereunto in blank; and if he send his Man with the Bill to
receive the Money, the Man may, upon the receipt of the Money, either deliver up
the Bill as it is, without writing any thing upon it, or else, he may (as
before) fill up the empty place with an Assignment payable to his Master, and
then make a Receipt underneath for so much Money received in full of that Bill
for his Master's use, governing himself therein according as the Party that
shall pay the Bill of Exchange shall direct, for either way is good and
warrantable, according to the Custom of Merchants used in England.

Accept for Account of Drawer.
IF a Bill of Exchange be subscribed or drawn by Abraham F. on Benjamin G. for
the Account of Charles H. and it so happen that Benjamin G. to whom the Bill is
directed, will not accept the Bill for account of Charles H. as it is drawn,
but would willingly accept it for the account of Abraham F. being a special
Friend to Benjamin G. on whom it is drawn, and so this Benjamin G. is very
unwilling to suffer the Bill to go back by Protest for Non-acceptance, and
therefore he desires to accept it for Honor of the Drawer, and for his
Account: In this case (according to the Law of Merchants) Benjamin G. may so
accept the same; but before he do accept the Bill, he must personally appear
before a Notary public, and declare before him such his Intent, and the Notary
must make an Act thereof in due Form, to be sent away by Benjamin G. to Abraham
F, that so he may have speedy Advice thereof; and the Act being entered, then he
may accept the Bill for the Honor of the Drawer and for his account. And when
the Bill is due, he must cause a like Act to be made for Payment, before he pay
the Bill, declaring that he will pay the Bill for the Honor of the Drawer, and
for his account, but not for account of Charles H. for whose account it was
drawn; and thus ( Benjamin G. giving Honor to the Bill, although he do it for
another account than for which it was drawn) according to the Custom and Law of
Merchants generally observed, Abraham F. is bound to make the same good again
unto Benjamin G. with Exchange, Re-exchange, and Costs; but Benjamin G. must be
sure to make such his declaration before he do accept the Bill, or any ways
engage or oblige himself thereunto; for otherwise if he should first accept it,
and that it might be lawful for him at any time afterward to alter the
Property thereof, and charge it for account of the Drawer at the Acceptor's
Pleasure, the Drawer Abraham F. might be much prejudiced, as in reference to
Charles H. by whose order (it may be) and for whose account Abraham F. drew the
same Bill.

Bill paid upon Protest.
IF a Bill of Exchange be drawn upon a Merchant, or any other here in London,
and he refuse to pay it, or has not Money ready to make present Payment at the
day, and thereupon Protest is made for Non-payment, and another Merchant or
Friend to the Drawer, having notice thereof, does appear and declare before a
Notary public that he will pay it for honor of the Drawer upon protest, and
accordingly does pay the same, and cause an Act to be made thereupon, as I have
showed before; my Advice is, That the Receipt which he shall take for the Money
by him paid, be made and written under the Protest and Act, but not upon the
original accepted Bill of Exchange, for diverse Reasons which I could give, but
especially, I approve of a Receipt upon the Protest and not on the Bill, that
so thereby he may still keep the Bill free, as not being satisfied by those
whom it particularly did concern; only (if he will) let the Party to whom the
Bill is payable (and to whom the Money is paid) subscribe his Name on the
backside of the Bill to a blank, and let the Protest and Act be sent and
returned to the Party, for whose account he does honor the Bill, but let him
keep the accepted Bill by him, to be ready upon all occasions against the
Acceptor.

Bill must not be paid before due.
IF a Bill of Exchange be made payable at usance, double usance, thirty days
sight, or at any longer or shorter time, and when the Bill shall be presented
to the Party on whom it is drawn to be accepted, or at any time before the Bill
is due, he to whom it is payable shall desire to have the Money presently paid
him (by way of anticipation) before it be due by the tenor of the Bill, and
thereupon shall offer to rebate for the time: Or if the Party to whom the said
Bill is directed, having some Moneys by him, and willing to make some Profit
thereof, shall of his own accord offer him to whom it is made payable to pay
him the Money presently before the time limited in the Bill of Exchange be
expired, in case he will discount for it, or allow him some consideration for
the time; the Party who shall so pay Money upon any Bill of Exchange before it
be due, runs in some danger in not observing Order: Indeed he to whom it is
payable, and who does receive the same, is in no danger at all by receiving the
Money before it be due, but let him beware that so pays it; for if the Money or
Parcel which is remitted be really and properly belonging to the Party which
delivered the same by Exchange to the subscribed of the Bill, and if the Bill
be made payable to a Factor, Servant, Agent, or Friend of the Deliverer's, only
to and for the Deliverer's use; and if, before the Bill is due, the Deliverer
do send his Countermand (as he may do) not to pay the Money to such his Factor,
Servant, Agent or Friend to whom it was payable by the tenor of the Bill but
to some other whom he shall appoint: In this case he on whom the Bill is drawn
ought to be liable to the Payment thereof according to that Countermand, to the
Party who shall be thereupon so appointed; for as it is not properly in his
power, (I mean in the power of the Party on whom the Bill is drawn) to prolong
the time of Payment, so as that he may choose if he will pay the Money at the
time limited in the Bill, or make the Party to whom it was payable to carry any
longer for it; neither can that Party to whom the Bill is payable (in the case
before mentioned) warrantably shorten the time limited and appointed in the
Bill, or agree with the Party on whom it is drawn to pay him the Money before it
be due, for the bargain is made between the Deliverer and the Taker, and
respect ought to be had thereunto; and although this case of countermand does not
ordinarily and commonly happen, yet it may happen, and I have known it come to
pass, and who can certainly assure himself that the same will not befall him in
his Payment of Moneys on any Bill of Exchange before it be due? For my part the
Advice which I desire to give herein is such as may be for the Security of him
that parts with his Money, that he may do it upon good grounds, and so may be
warrantably discharged, but that he cannot well be in breaking Order, wherefore
I shall never advise any to pay Money on Bills of Exchange before they be due.

Second Bill with an Assignment.
IF a second unaccepted Bill of Exchange be sent to you from the Party to whom
it is payable, with an Assignment on the backside thereof, ordering the Payment
to made to your self for the Value received of your Friend or Factor; presently
upon receipt thereof you must present, or cause the same to be presented to the
Party on whom it is drawn, to be by him accepted (unless you have the first
Bill already accepted;) If the Party on whom it is drawn do refuse to accept
the second Bill, pretending that he has already accepted the first Bill to
another Man unknown, or that he cannot name unto you; or if you cannot be
actually possessed of that first accepted Bill, you ought upon refusal of
Acceptance to cause Protest to be made for Non-acceptance of that second Bill;
that so upon sending away the Protest, security may be given to your Friend or
Factor, that the Money shall be paid to you at the time, or at leastwise Protest
to be entered; for the Party to whom the Bill is directed is not bound by your
second Bill to the Payment of the Money to you, till he accept the Bills of
Exchange according to Custom of Merchants, unless he have already accepted the
first Bill, and the same be in your custody; for tho as well the Subscribed or
Drawer of the Bill of Exchange, as the Party who underwrites the Assignment
confessing the Value received, and likewise the Acceptor of the Bill are all of
them liable and bound in the Bill of Exchange, yet they are not all immediately
bound either to the Deliverer or the Party to whom the Bill is payable, but
each Party is bound to him with whom he does more immediately correspond, as I
have more particularly before declared.

Party dead which accepted.
IF the Party to whom your Bill of Exchange is directed to accept the Bill, and
then if he shall afterward happen to die before your Bill is due, you must at
the appointed time for payment, demand the Money of his Executors or
Administrators, at his mortuary House, or last Dwelling House, or Place of
abode; and upon their Refusal or Delay of payment, you must protest for Non
payment, in the same manner as you would have done if the Party on whom the
Bill was drawn had been living, and had not paid it at the time.

Party dead to whom payable.
IF the Party to whom a Bill of Exchange is made payable be dead at the time
when it falls due, and his Executor or Administrator have not yet proved the
Will, nor taken out Letters of Administration, nevertheless you must not omit
to make Demand of the Money at the just time limited in the Bill: and if you
offer Security to save harmless against the Executors and Administrators of the
deceased Party, and it be refused, you must protest for Non-payment.

Bill without Assignment.
IN like manner, if you have a Bill of Exchange, sent to you to get to be
accepted, payable to another Man, and (the Bill being accepted and due) you
have not an Assignment on the Bill from the Party to whom it is payable,
ordering it to be paid unto you, according to Custom of Merchants, you must
make demand of the Money upon that accepted Bill without an Assignment, and you
must offer to give Security to save harmless against the Party to whom the Bill
is made payable, and all others: and if your Proffer be refused, you must
protest for Non-payment.

No such Man to be found.
IF your Bill of Exchange be directed (suppose) to Nathaniel Q. Merchant in
London, and you shall have inquired on the Royal Exchange and other parts of
the City for such a Merchant, and shall not be able to find him out, or any
body that knows him, or that indeed there be none of that Name in London, then
you must carry your Bill to a Notary public, and he must protest thereupon in
due form.

No body at home.
IF a Bill of Exchange is sent you to get accepted, and there be no body at
home, at the House or Place of abode of the Party on whom the Bill is drawn: Or
if, when your Bill is due you cannot meet the Party at home, nor any one else
to pay the Money on his behalf, you must cause Protest to be made, either for
Non-acceptance or Non-payment, at his Dwelling House or Lodging, in his
Absence; which is as effectual, according to the known Law of Merchants and the
Rules of Equity, (being made in seasonable time) as if the same had been made
speaking to him in Person: for you cannot be bound (it being beyond your power)
to make him, on whom the Bill is drawn, abide at home; but in reason he is
bound to attend his own business at seasonable hours, and it concerns him to
keep a good Correspondence with his Friends, especially in matters of Bills of
Exchange, whereof he cannot be ignorant.

No avoiding a Protest.
AND the truth is, if no Protest could be made legally, but in speaking to the
Party himself, a Protest might be prevented at pleasure: but it lies not in the
power of him on whom a Bill is drawn to hinder the protesting of the Bill, if
not by him accepted and paid according to the tenor thereof.

Figures and Words disagreeing.
A Bill of Exchange, tho written in few Words and contained in a small piece of
Paper, yet is of great Weight and Concern in point of Trade between Merchant
and Merchant, and therefore ought to be writ very plain and legible, and
without any Blots, Mending, or altering any word thereof, that so there may not
arise any Doubt or Scruple in the Payment thereof: And therefore it is that
Merchants do usually write the Sum to be paid, as well in figures as in words
at length, as you may observe in the several Forms of Bills of Exchange
contained in this Treatise; And if it so fall out, through Inadvertency or
otherwise, that the Figures and the Words at length of the Sum that is to be
paid upon a Bill of Exchange do not agree together, if either the Figures do
mention more, and the Words less, or the Figures do specify less, and the
Words more, in either or in any such case, you ought to observe and follow the
order of the Words at length and not in Figures, until further order be had
concerning the same, because a Man is more apt to commit an Error with his Pen
in writing a Figure than in writing a Word: And also because the Figures at the
top of the Bill do only, as it were, serve as the Contents of the Bill and a
Breviat thereof, but the Words at length are in the Body of the Bill of
Exchange and are the chief and principal Substance thereof, whereunto special
regard ought to be had; and tho it may so fall out that the Sum mentioned in
Figures in the Letter of Advice, and the Sum mentioned in Figures in the Bill
of Exchange do agree, yet if the Words at length in the same Bill do differ,
you ought to follow the order mentioned in Words at length in the Bill, and not
the order in Figures, for the Reasons before alleged.

A Name mended or interlined.
IF the Name of the Person, to whom a Bill of Exchange is made payable, chance
to be mended or interlin'd in the Bill, and the same be accepted by the Person
upon whom it is drawn, (tho it is an Error and justly to be reproved,
especially in Merchants) which indeed does seldom happen, yet the same cannot
be a sufficient Excuse for the Party who has accepted it, or any legal warrant
for him to refuse Payment thereof at the time, unto the Party whose Name is
mended or interlin'd in the Bill, or unto his Order by his Assignment, if the
Bill was so mended before it was accepted, and be made payable to him or his
Assigns, for he could not choose but take notice of the Error when he accepted
the Bill, and ought to have satisfied himself therein before he accepted it: if
he say, it has been mended or interlin'd since he accepted it, he must prove
that.

Bill payable positively to such a Man.
BUT if the Bill be made payable positively to such a Man, and not to such a
Man, or his Assigns, or Order, then an Assignment on the Bill will not serve
turn, but the Money must be immediately paid to such a Man in person, and he
must be known to be the same Man mentioned in the Bill of Exchange, that so the
Money may not be paid to a wrong Person, and the Acceptor forced to pay it
twice. And if the Bill be made payable positively to such a Man, as has been
before observed, such a Man's Name writ on the backside of the Bill in blank,
is no sufficient warrant for another Man to come (as in his name) to receive
the Money, but the Man himself, to whom the Bill is payable, must appear in
person.

Bill without Direction.
IN case a Bill of Exchange do come without a Direction on it, that is, if it
be not directed to any Man, only the Drawer has set his Name to it, but not
directed it to the Party on whom he designed to charge it; yet if in his Letter
of Advice to his Friend to whom the Bill is payable, or to whom it is sent to
get accepted, the Bill is mentioned to be drawn on such a Man, naming a Man's
Name; this Friend to whom the Bill is sent, ought to present the Bill to that
Man to be accepted, according to Advice: And in case he shall refuse to accept
it, because it is not directed to him, the Party to whom the Bill was sent
ought to make Protest for Non-acceptance, for he protests against the Drawer in
not having taken sufficient care that the Bill might be accepted by some body,
according to Custom, and the Drawer is justly to bear the Charges thereof for
his Omission and Oversight; tho I cannot see but if the Party, to whom the Bill
is presented to be accepted, have likewise Advice thereof, and sufficient
ground or reason to have accepteed it, if the Bill had had a Direction on it to
himself, he may accept the Bill, although the Direction to him be omitted; but it
must be confessed it is an Oversight and an Error in the Drawer, in omitting to
direct his Bill of Exchange; and if his Friend do suffer it to be protested, I
conceive, he shall have sufficiently punished him for his Error.

The Drawer repays the Value upon Protest.
IF a Bill of Exchange be made payable to one Man, for the Value received of
another, and the Party on whom the Bill is drawn has accepted it, but when it
falls due fails in the Payment, whereupon Protest is made, and by virtue of
this Protest the Party who delivered the Value recovers Satisfaction of the
Drawer; In this case the Drawer is freely discharged against the Party or
Parties, to whom the said Bill was made payable, either immediately in the
Bill, or mediately by Assignment or Assignments, were they never so many upon
it: So that neither he to whom the Bill was first made payable, nor any other
to whom it shall be assigned in any manner whatever, ought to molest or trouble
the Drawer, or legally, according to the Law of Merchants, can sue or prosecute
the Drawer, he having already repaid the Money to the right Party, whose
Receipt and Discharge for the same is a sufficient Release from all further
Trouble which may happen; Neither can he to whom the Bill is first made payable
(if but an Assign of the Deliverer) prosecute the Acceptor (after the Drawer
has given Satisfaction to the Party who delivered the Value) no more than my
Assign can protest and prosecute a Surety upon a Bond payable to me or my
Assigns, after I have received Satisfaction from the Principal; for tho, I must
confess, in this case the Acceptor is not totally discharged, for it is
supposed he did accept the Bill by order of the Drawer, or for some other
account, to whom therefore he must be responsible: Yet in reference to the
Party who first delivered the Value, and the Party to whom the Bill was payable
(supposing himself to be but an Assign of the Deliverer) the Acceptor does but
confirm what the Drawer has done, and the Drawer having made Refaction to the
Deliverer, the Acceptor is likewise discharged against the Deliverer, and
against the Party to whom the Bill was first payable, (if he be but an Assign)
but the Acceptor, by virtue of his Acceptance, makes himself Debtor, and is
still liable to the Drawer, or to the account for which he accepted the Bill,
till satisfaction be given.

Letters of Credit.
THE chiefest means of Correspondence and Trade between Merchant and Merchant
from one Place or Country to another, does consist, and is born up by Letters
missive from one to the other; which Letters, if not countermanded, are
binding, and may serve for sufficient proof according to the Law of Merchants,
in case of dispute; and therefore it is that Merchants do usually keep Copies
of their Letters which they write to their Correspondents, by which they know
how to order their affairs, and to whom they are bound; and these Letters have
diverse appellations, tho they serve all for Advice and Order, yet some are more
particularly called Letters of Commission, others Letters of Advice, others are
called Freight-Letters, and others Letters of Credit: Letters of Commission are
for buying or selling of Goods, freighting Ships, taking up Money or remitting
Money by Exchange or the like: Letters of Advice are such as I write to my
Friend, Servant, Correspondent, or Principal, advising them of Moneys drawn or
remitted by Exchange; Freight-Letters are such as are written upon the
Freighting, or taking to Freight any Ship or Vessel, or any Tunnage thereof,
informing what Tunnage is taken to freight, and what Freight is to be paid for
the same; Letters of Credit are properly such as are written to furnish Moneys
by Exchange upon the Credit of him who writes the Letter: these Letters of
Credit (in regard they do more immediately concern the Credit and Honor of the
Party who writes the same, supposing him to be a Merchant or Trader, whose best
and chiefest Subsistence is Credit) must needs be of greatest concern, and most
binding by, or from the Party or Parties who under-write or subscribe the same,
to those to whom they are directed, or who are concerned therein, in case he or
they shall comply therewith; because the Credit of him who under-writes the
Letter is thereby vindicated, and his Honor, Repute and Esteem much
manifested. Now Letters of Credit for the furnishing of Moneys by Exchange, are
of two sorts, the one General the other Special: The General Letter of Credit
is, when I write my open Letter directed to all Merchants and others that shall
furnish Moneys to such and such Persons upon this my Letter of Credit, in and
by which I bind my self, that what Moneys shall be by them delivered unto the
Party or Parties therein mentioned, within such a time at such and such Rates,
(or in general terms, at the Price current) I do thereby bind my self to be
accountable and answerable for the same to be repaid according to the Bill or
Bills of Exchange, which upon receipt of the Money so furnished shall be given
or delivered for the same; and if any Money be furnished upon such my General
Letter of Credit, and Bills of Exchange therefore given, and charged, drawn or
directed to me, although when the Bills come to hand, and are presented to me, I
should refuse to accept thereof, yet (according to the Custom of Merchants) I
am bound and liable to the payment of those Bills of Exchange, by virtue and
force of such my General Letter of Credit; because he or they who furnish the
Money, have not so much (if any) respect to the Sufficiency or Ability of the
Party who takes up the Money, as to me who have given my Letter of Credit for
the same, and upon whose Credit merely those Moneys may be properly said to
have been delivered: The Special Letter of Credit is, when a Merchant, at the
Request of another Man, writes his open Letter of Credit, directed to his
Factor, Agent or Correspondent, giving him order to furnish such or such a Man
by name, with such or such a Sum of Money, at one or more times, and charge it
to account of the Merchant who gives the Letter of Credit and takes Bills of
Exchange or Receipts for the same; Particular Letters of Credit are usually
writ and subscribed with the own hand of the Merchant that grants them, wherein
it is very expedient, (as well for the certainty of him who is to furnish the
Moneys, that he may be sure the Letters come directly from the Merchant, and so
his Credit may not suffer through any Dilemma or Demur in compliance, by reason
of any Doubt which may be of the Reality of the Letter, as for the plain
meaning and obligation of the Merchant himself to be responsible for the same)
that the Merchant do mention or recite something or other particularly which
has happened in some former Affairs or Dealings, or which is yet depending
between them, or at least the Date of his last Letter. Now, in the General
Letter of Credit, he that writes it makes use of his Credit for his own account
and concern in his way of Trade, and so there needs no more than his Letter of
Credit to make him liable to repay what shall be so furnished; but in the
Particular Letter of Credit, he who writes the Letter, does it not to make use
of the Moneys himself, or to be employed for his own use, but for the use and
accommodation of some other Man, at whose request he is willing and does write
his Letter of Credit; and therefore it is very expedient and ordinary for him,
at whose entreaty the Letter is written, at the writing, and upon receipt
thereof, to give good Security, by Bond or otherwise, to the Merchant that
gives the Letter of Credit, for Repayment to him, his Executors or Assigns, of
all such Moneys as shall be received by virtue of the said Letter of Credit:
for the Merchant, by his Letter, stands sufficiently bound to his
Correspondent, and therefore it is but reason that he, for whom the Letter is
granted should give (as it were) his Counterbond for Repayment. The Bills of
Exchange, which are to be made for Moneys taken up by Letters of Credit, do run
in the ordinary form of Bills of Exchange, whereof I have set down several
toward the beginning of this Treatise; as for the Form of the General Letter
of Credit (in regard each Man knows best his own occasions inducing him
thereunto, whereof the Letter must chiefly consist) I shall wave it, and only
set down the Form of a Particular Letter of Credit, which may be as follows.

Laus Deo, in London this 29. of February, 1654.
Mr. William M.
SIR, My last to you was of the 12 of January, wherein I wrote you what needful
in answer to yours of the 7 of the same month; This serves chiefly to desire
you to furnish and pay to Mr. John G. English Gentleman, to the value of two
thousand Crowns at one or more times, according as he shall have occasion, and
desire the same of you, taking his Receipt or Bills of Exchange for the Moneys
which you shall so furnish him with, and put it to my account, and this my
Letter of Credit shall be your sufficient Warrant for so doing, Vale.

Yours Thomas P.

To Mr. William M. Merchant at Paris.
Such a Letter as this is to be delivered open to the Party who is to make use
of it; but then the Merchant that writes this Letter of Credit does usually
give notice thereof in or by his next Letters which he shall write to his
Friend to whom it is directed, who having paid the Moneys, and taken Receipt or
Bills of Exchange for the same, must send them back to the Merchant who gave
the Letter of Credit, for him to demand Payment thereupon of those that of
right shall appertain, according to reason.

Put Bill in Letter-Case or Almanac.
IN regard Bills of Exchange (tho of great concern) are ordinarily written upon
small pieces of Paper about 3 or four fingers broad, by reason of which they
are more subject to be lost, especially if you carry them loose about you;
therefore I would advise you (for prevention) to keep a Letter-Case, or (which
is better) a Pocket-Almanack, or small Pocket Paper-Book with Clasps, and put
your Bills of Exchange therein, that so they may be kept clean and whole, and
less subject to be lost.

How to bring French Crowns into sterling Money.
IF you have a Bill of Exchange sent you from France, the Money to be received
in London, and your Bill be remitted to pay so many Crowns, at such or such a
rate, as it is usual to do; To know how much you must receive here in sterling
Money, you must first bring your French Crowns into Pence sterling, at the price
or rate set down in your Bill, and then bring your Pence into Pounds, and you
have your Desire: As for example, If your Bill be drawn to pay 250 Crowns at 56
d. per Crown, first multiply the 250 Crowns by 56 d. this makes 14000 pence,
whereunto add for the 62 pence (because 62 is the part of 250) and it will make
14062 sterling, and divide the 14062 by 240 d. (because 240 d. make a pound
sterling) and it will produce 58 pounds sterling, and there will remain 142
pence, which divided by 12 d. will make 11 shillings and there will remain 10
d. then add the d. remaining of your multiplication, and the total is 58:11:10.
As for Example, thus, ^

By the same rule you may reduce Ducats, Dollars and Pieces of Eight, into
sterling Money, when you know how many Pence sterling the Ducat, Dollar or Piece
of Eight is valued at for the Exchange thereof; but because this properly
belongs to the Art of Arithmetic, whereof diverse able Men have already
published several Treatises, in French and Dutch, and also in English, some
whereof have come to my hands, therefore I shall not proceed any further
herein; It suffices, that what I have in this Treatise declared, is warrantable
according to the Law of Merchants, and enough to guide any in the Trade of
Exchange, beyond what has ever hitherto been published by any, which I will
aver and justify.

Directions concerning the two ensuing Tables.
THE first Table is for any Year except Leap-year. The second Table is for
Leap-year only, which happens every fourth year, as namely, Anno 1700, 1704,
1708, etc.

In the first Column of either of these Tables I have put the New Style (or the
Roman Account) of the days in the year, in regard it is ten days before our
English Account; And I have placed the English Account or Old Style in the
second Column, and so again the New Style in the third Column, and our English
Style in the fourth, and so forward, from the left hand to the right, every odd
Column which has the Month named at the top thereof is the New Style Account,
and every second or even Column, which has not the month writ at the top is
the Old Style Account: as you may perceive, because the Month begins just ten
days after they are begun by the New Account: And in both these Tables I have
exactly counted day for day, and set them side by side, upon an equal and
streit line from the left hand to the right, from New Style to Old Style for
every day in the year; Leap-year containing 366 days, and the ordinary year 365
days; each Style agreeing with the other, even to the very same day of the Week.

By these Tables may exactly be known when Bills of Exchange made payable at
Usance, or Usances, will fall due from New Style to Old Style: Thus a Bill
dated the first of January 1655, New Style, payable at double Usance in London;
to know when this Bill is due, first I enter the first Table, and find January
1. New Style to be December 22. Old style, which is the Date of the Bill, then
I go streit along the same line, and in the fourth Column toward my right
hand, I find 22 (which is January 22) that is one Usance, and yet along the
same line in the sixth Column, I find 19, which is February 19, being the day
on which the Bill is due: Again, a Bill dated January 8. 1665. New Style,
payable at double Usance, having found the date in the first Table, I go streit
along the same line from January 8. on my left hand, to the sixth Column
toward my right, where I find February 26. Old Style, on which day the Bill
will fall due; in like manner, a Bill dated January 10. New Style at Usance,
will be due January 31 Old Style, and payable at double Usance, will be due
February 28 Old Style, if not in Leap-year; but if it be in Leap-year, then I
make use of the second Table serving for Leap-year, and I do there find that a
Bill dated the first of January at double Usance, will be due in London
February 20. Old Style. Again, a Bill dated in Leap-year January 8. New Style
at double Usance, will be due February 27. Old Style; And a Bill dated January
10. New Style at double Usance, will be due February 29. Old Style. And so of
any other date of Bill of Exchange payable at any Usances, or Usance, and half,
or the like; first find out the date of your Bill in the Tables, and then look
streit upon the same line every other Column toward your right hand, you will
find the Usance, or Usances, set down according to the English Account, and for
half Usance you must always reckon fifteen days forward; These Tables are so
exactly made that they cannot deceive any, but may serve as a competent Judge in
resolving many Doubts, Scruples and Questions that may arise between Party and
Party, concerning the precise day on which any Bill of Exchange will fall due
as aforesaid; which in regard (as I conceive) it is plainly set down in each
Table, therefore I shall forbear any further Explanation thereof.

An ALMANAC, or Table, whereby to know the just Date of Bills of Exchange in
any year (except Leap-year) for ever.
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Stilo Romano,
Stilo novo, or New style. Stilo Angliae, Stilo veteri, or Old style. 1 22 1 22
1 19 1 22 1 21 1 22 1 21 1 22 1 22 1 21 1 22 1 21 2 23 2 23 2 20 2 23 2 22 2 23
2 22 2 23 2 23 2 22 2 23 2 22 3 24 3 24 3 21 3 24 3 23 3 24 3 23 3 24 3 24 3 23
3 24 3 23 4 25 4 25 4 22 4 25 4 24 4 25 4 24 4 25 4 25 4 24 4 25 4 24 5 26 5 26
5 23 5 26 5 25 5 26 5 25 5 26 5 26 5 25 5 26 5 25 6 27 6 27 6 24 6 27 6 26 6 27
6 26 6 27 6 27 6 26 6 27 6 26 7 28 7 28 7 25 7 28 7 27 7 28 7 27 7 28 7 28 7 27
7 28 7 27 8 29 8 29 8 26 8 29 8 28 8 29 8 28 8 29 8 29 8 28 8 29 8 28 9 30 9 30
9 27 9 30 9 29 9 30 9 29 9 30 9 30 9 29 9 30 9 29 10 31 10 31 10 28 10 31 10 30
10 31 10 30 10 31 10 31 10 30 10 31 10 30 11 Ja. 1 11 Fe. 1 11 Ma. 1 11 Ap. 1
11 Ma. 1 11 Ju. 1 11 Jul. 1 11 Au. 1 11 Sep. 1 11 Oc. 1 11 No. 1 11 Dec. 1 12 2
12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3
13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4
14 4 14 4 14 4 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 16 6
16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7
17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8
18 8 18 8 18 8 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 20
10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 21 11 21
11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 22 12 22 12 22
12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 23 13 23 13 23 13 23
13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24
14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25
15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26
16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27
17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28
18 28 18 28 18 28 18 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29
19 29 19 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 31
21 31 21 31 21 31 21 31 21 31 21 31 21 An ALMANAC, or Table, whereby to know
the just Date of Bills of Exchange from New style to Old style in Leap-year for
ever.
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep. Oct. No. De. Stilo Romano, Stilo
novo, or New style. Stilo Angliae, Stilo veteri, or Old style. 1 22 1 22 1 20 1
22 1 21 1 22 1 21 1 22 1 22 1 21 1 22 1 21 2 23 2 23 2 21 2 23 2 22 2 23 2 22 2
23 2 23 2 22 2 23 2 22 3 24 3 24 3 22 3 24 3 23 3 24 3 23 3 24 3 24 3 23 3 24 3
23 4 25 4 25 4 23 4 25 4 24 4 25 4 24 4 25 4 25 4 24 4 25 4 24 5 26 5 26 5 24 5
26 5 25 5 26 5 25 5 26 5 26 5 25 5 26 5 25 6 27 6 27 6 25 6 27 6 26 6 27 6 26 6
27 6 27 6 26 6 27 6 26 7 28 7 28 7 26 7 28 7 27 7 28 7 27 7 28 7 28 7 27 7 28 7
27 8 29 8 29 8 27 8 29 8 28 8 29 8 28 8 29 8 29 8 28 8 29 8 28 9 30 9 30 9 28 9
30 9 29 9 30 9 29 9 30 9 30 9 29 9 30 9 29 10 31 10 31 10 29 10 31 10 30 10 31
10 30 10 31 10 31 10 30 10 31 10 30 11 Ja. 1 11 Fe. 1 11 Ma. 1 11 Ap. 1 11 Ma.
1 11 Ju. 1 11 Jul. 1 11 Au. 1 11 Sep. 1 11 Oc. 1 11 No. 1 11 Dec. 1 12 2 12 2
12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 12 2 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3
13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 13 3 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4 14 4
14 4 14 4 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 15 5 16 6 16 6
16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 16 6 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7
17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 17 7 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18 8
18 8 18 8 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 19 9 20 10 20
10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 20 10 21 11 21 11 21
11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 21 11 22 12 22 12 22 12 22
12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 22 12 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23
13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 23 13 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24
14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 24 14 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25
15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 25 15 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26
16 26 16 26 16 26 16 26 16 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27 17 27
17 27 17 27 17 27 17 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28 18 28
18 28 18 28 18 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29 19 29
19 29 19 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 30 20 31
21 31 21 31 21 31 21 31 21 31 21 31 21

Short Instructions how to keep Merchants Books of Account, after the Italian
manner.
1. Money paid. WHen you pay any Money to any body, make the Person Debtor, and
the Account of Cash Creditor.

2. Money received. For Money received, make the Account of Cash Debtor, and the
Person of whom it is received Creditor.

3. Goods bought for ready Money. When Goods are bought for ready Money, make the
Account of Goods Debtor, and Cash Creditor.

4. Goods sold for ready Money. When Goods are sold for ready Money, make the
Account of Cash Debtor, and the Goods Creditor.

5. Goods bought at time. When Goods are bought at time, then make the Account
of the Goods Debtor, and the person of whom they are bought Creditor.

6. Goods sold at time. When Goods are sold at time, then make the Account of
the person Debtor, and the Goods Creditor.

7. Goods bought one part at time, and the rest for ready Money. Goods bought
one part for ready Money, and the rest at time, must be divided in two parts,
namely, first, the Goods must be made Debtor for the whole sum, and the person
of whom they are bought Creditor: Secondly, as much as is paid in ready Money,
you must make the person Debtor, and Cash Creditor.

8. Goods sold one part for ready Money, and the rest at time. Goods sold one
part for ready Money, the rest at time, first you must make the person Debtor
for the whole sum, and afterward the Goods Creditor, then you must make the
Cash Debtor for so much as you receive in ready Money, and the person Creditor
for the rest.

9. Money paid for Goods before it be due. When you have bought any Goods at
time, and afterward you agree with the person which sold you the Goods to pay
your Money before it be due, with rebating or discount, then you must make the
person Debtor as follows, viz. to Cash for so much as you pay him, and to
profit and loss for the rebatement, or allowance for the discount.

10. Goods sold in barter for others. When you sell Goods in barter for others,
then you must make the Goods which you receive Debtor to the Goods which you
deliver.


Receive before you write, and write before you pay,
And so a good Account, be sure to keep you may.
FINIS.
England's Benefit AND ADVANTAGE BY FOREIN-TRADE, Plainly Demonstrated.

Dedicated to the Merchant-Adventurers OF ENGLAND.

By THO. MUN, Merchant.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Horn at the South-Entrance into the Royal Exchange.
MDCC.

England's Treasure BY FOREIGN TRADE; OR, The Balance of our Foreign Trade is
the Rule of our Treasure.
MY Son, In a former Discourse I have endeavored, after my manner, briefly to
teach thee two things: The first is Piety, how to fear God aright, according to
his Works and Word: The second is Policy, how to Love and Serve thy Country, by
instructing thee in the Duties and Proceedings of sundry Vocations, which
either order, or else act the Affairs of the Commonwealth; In which as some
things do especially tend to Preserve, and others are more apt to Enlarge the
same: So am I now to speak of Money, which does indifferently serve to both
these happy ends. Wherein I will observe this Order, First, to show the general
Means whereby a Kingdom may be enriched; and then proceed to those particular
Courses by which Princes are accustomed to be supplied with Treasure. But first
of all I will say something of the Merchant, because be must be a Principal
Agent in this great Business.

CHAP. I. The Qualities which are required in a perfect Merchant of Foreign
Trade.
As it is very commendable to know what is to be done by others in their
Places: So it were a great shame to be ignorant in the Duties of our own
Vacations.
THE Love and Service of our Country consists not so much in the Knowledge of
those Duties which are to be performed by others, as in the skilful Practice,
of that which is done by our selves; and therefore (my Son) it is now fit that
I say something of the Merchant, which I hope in due time shall be thy
Vocation: Yet herein are my Thoughts free from all Ambition, although I rank
thee in a Place of so high estimation; for the Merchant is worthily called, The
Steward of the Kingdom's Stock, by way of Commerce with other Nations; a Work
of no less Reputation than Trust, which ought to be performed with great Skill
and Conscience, that so the Private Gain may ever accompany the Public Good.
And because the Nobleness of this Profession may the better stir up thy Desires
and Endeavors to obtain those Abilities which may effect it worthily, I will
briefly set down the excellent Qualities which are required in a perfect
Merchant.

1. He ought to be a good Penman, a good Arithmetician, and a good accomptant,
by that Noble Order of Debtor and Creditor, which is used only amongst
Merchants; also to be expert in the Order and Form of Charter-parties, Bills of
Lading, Invoices, Contracts, Bills of Exchange, and Policies of Ensurance.

2. He ought to know the Measures, Weights, and Moneys of all Foreign Countries,
especially where we have Trade, and the Moneys not only by their several
Denominations, but also by their Intrinsic Values in Weight and Fineness,
compared with the Standard of this Kingdom, without which he cannot well direct
his Affairs.

3. He ought to know the Customs, Tolls, Taxes, Impositions, Conducts, and
other charges upon all manner of Merchandise, Exported or Imported to and from
the said Foreign Countries.

4. He ought to know in what several Commodities each Country abounds, and what
be the Wares which they want, and how and from whence they are furnished with
the same.

5. He ought to understand, and to be a diligent Observer of the Rates of
Exchanges by Bills, from one State to another, whereby he may the better direct
his Affairs, and remit over and receive home his Moneys to the most advantage
possible.

6. He ought to know what Goods are prohibited to be Exported or Imported in
the said Foreign Countries, lest otherwise he should incur great Danger and Loss
in the ordering of his Affairs.

7. He ought to know upon what Rates and Conditions to Freight his Ships, and
Ensure his Adventures from one Country to another, and to be well acquainted
with the Laws, Orders and Customs of the Insurance-Office, both here and beyond
the Seas, in the many Accidents which may happen upon the Damage or Loss of
Ships or Goods, or both.

8. He ought to have Knowledge in the Goodness and in the Prices of all the
several Materials which are required for the Building and Repairing of Ships,
and the diverse Workmanships of the same, as also for the Masts, Tackling,
Cordage^, Ordnance, Victuals, Munition, and Provisions of many kinds; together
with the ordinary Wages of Commanders, Officers, and Mariners, all which
concern the Merchant as he is an Owner of Ships.

9. He ought (by the diverse Occasions which happen sometimes in the Buying and
Selling of one Commodity and sometimes in another) to have indifferent if not
perfect Knowledge in all manner of erchandze or Wares, which is to be as it were
a Man of all Occupations and Trades.

10. He ought by his Voyaging on the Seas to become skilful in the Art of
Navigation.

11. He ought as he is a Traveller, and sometimes abiding in Foreign Countries
to attain to the speaking of diverse Languages, and to be a diligent Observer of
the ordinary Revenues and Expenses of Foreign Princes, together with their
Strength both by Sea and Land, their Laws, Customs, Policies, Manners,
Religions, Arts, and the like; to be able to give account thereof in all
occasions for the Good of his Country.

12. Lastly, Although there be no necessity that such a Merchant should be a
great Scholar; yet is it (at least) required, that in his Youth he learn the
Latin Tongue, which will the better enable him in all the rest of his
Endeavors.

Thus have I brieflly showed thee a Pattern for thy Diligence, the Merchant in
his Qualities; which in truth, are such, and so many, that I find no other
Profession which leads into more wordly Knowledge. And it cannot be denied
but that their Sufficiency does appear likewise in the excellent Government of
State at Venice, Luca, Genoua, Florence, the Low Countries, and diverse other
Places of Christendom And in those States also where they are least esteemed,
yet is there Skill and Knowledge often used by those who sit in the highest
Places of Authority: It is therefore an Act beyond rashness in some, who
disenable their Counsel and Judgment, (even in Books printed) making them
incapable of those Ways and Means which do either Enrich or Empoverish a Common
wealth, when in truth, this is only effected by the Mystery of their Trade, as
I shall plainly show in that which follows. It is true indeed, that many
Merchants here in England, finding less encouragement given to their Profession
than in other Countries, and seeing themselves not so well esteemed as their
Noble Vocation requires, and according to the great Consequence of the same,
do not therefore labor to attain unto the Excellency of their Profession,
neither is it practiced by the Nobility of this Kingdom, as it is in other
States, from the Father to the Son throughout their Generations, to their great
increase of their Wealth, and maintenance of their Names and Families: There is
more Honor and Profit in an Industrious Life, than in a great Inheritance
which wastes for want of Virtue
Whereas the Memory of our richest Merchants is suddenly extinguished; the Son
being left rich, scorneth the Profession of his Father, conceiving more Honor
to be a Gentleman, (although but in Name) to consume his Estate in dark
Ignorance and Excess, than to follow the Steps of his Father as an Industrious
Merchant to maintain and advance his Fortunes.

But now leaving the Merchant's Praise, we will come to his Practice, or at
least to so much thereof as concerns the bringing of Treasure into the Kingdom.

CHAP. II. The Means to enrich this Kingdom, and to increase our Treasure.
ALthough a Kingdom may be Enriched by Gifts received, or by Purchase taken
from some other Nations, yet these are things uncertain, and of small
Consideration when they happen. Foreign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure.
The ordinary Means therefore to increase our Wealth and Treasure is by Foreign
Trade, wherein we must ever observe this Rule, to sell more to Strangers
yearly, than we consume of theirs in value. For suppose, that when this Kingdom
is plentifully served with the Cloth, Lead, Tin, Iron, Fish, and other Native
Commodities, we do yearly Export the Overplus to Foreign Countries, to the Value
of Twenty two hundred thousand pounds; by which means we are enabled beyond the
Seas to buy and bring in Foreign Wares for our Use and Consumptions, to the
value of Twenty hundred thousand Pounds: By this Order duly kept in our
Trading, we may rest assured, that the Kingdom shall be Enriched yearly two
hundred thousand Pounds, which must be brought to us in so much Treasure;
because that part of our Stock which is not returned to us in Wares, must
necessarily be brought home in Treasure.

For in this case it comes to pass in the Stock of a Kingdom, as in the Estate
of a private Man; who is supposed to have One thousand Pounds yearly Revenue,
and Two thousand Pounds of ready Money in his Chest: If such a Man, through
Excess, shall spend One thousand five hundred Pounds per An. all his ready Money
will be gone in four years; and in the like time his said Money will be doubled,
if he take a Frugal Course to spend but Five hundred Pounds per Annum; which
Rule never fails likewise in the Commonwealth, but in some cases (of no great
moment) which I will hereafter declare, when I shall show by whom and in what
manner this Balance of the Kingdom's Account ought to be drawn up yearly, or
so often as it shall please the State to discover how much we Gain or Lose by
Trade with Foreign Nations. But first I will say something concerning those Ways
and Means which will Increase our Exportations and Diminish our Importations of
VVares; which being done, I will then set down some other Arguments both
Affirmative and Negative, to strengthen that which is here declared, and
thereby to show, that all the other Means which are commonly supposed to Enrich
the Kingdom with Treasure, are altogether Insufficient and mere Fallacies.

CHAP. III. The particular Ways and Means to increase the Exportation of our
Commodities, and to decrease our Consumption of Foreign Wares.
THE Revenue or Stock of a Kingdom, by which it is provided of Foreign Wares is
either Natural or Artificial. The Natural Wealth is so much only as can be
spared from our own Use and Necessities, to be exported unto Strangers. The
Artificial consists in our Manufactures and industrious Trading with Foreign
Commodities, concerning which I will set down such Particulars as may serve for
the Cause we have in hand.

First, Although this Realm be already exceeding Rich by Nature, yet might it
be much increased by laying the waste Grounds (which are infinite,) into such
Employments as should no way hinder the present Revenues of other manured
Lands, but hereby to supply our selves, and prevent the Importations of Hemp,
Flax, Cordage, Tobacco, and diverse other things which now we fetch from
Strangers to our great Impoverishing.

2. We may likewise diminish our Importations, if we would soberly refrain from
excessive Consumption of Foreign Wares in our Diet and Raiment, with such often
change of Fashions as is used, so much the more to increase the Waste and
Charge; which Vices at this present are more Nototious amongst us than in
former Ages. Yet might they easily be amended by enforcing the Observation of
such good Laws, as are strictly practiced in other Countries, against the said
Excesses; where likewise, by commanding their own Manufactures to be used, they
prevent the coming in of others, without Prohibition, or Offense to Strangers
in their mutual Commerce.

3. In our Exportations we must not only regard our own Superfluities, but also
consider our Neighbors Necessities, that so, upon the VVares which they cannot
want, nor yet be furnished therewith elsewhere, we may (besides the vent of
Materials,) gain so much of the Manufacture as we can, and also endeavor to
sell them dear, so far forth as the high Price cause not a less vent in the
Quantity. But the Superfluity of our Commodities which Strangers use, and may
also have the same from other Nations, or may abate their vent by the use of
some such like VVares from other Places, and with little Inconvenience; we must
in this case strive to sell as cheap as possible we can, rather than to lose
the Utterance of such VVares. For we have found of late Years, by good
Experience, that being able to sell our Cloth cheap in Turkey, we have greatly
increased the vent thereof, and the Venetians have lost as much in the
Utterance of theirs in those Countries because it is dearer. And on the other
side, a sew Years past, when, by the excessive Prices of VVools, our Cloth was
exceeding dear, we lost at least half our Clothing for Foreign Parts, which
since is no otherwise (well near) recovered again than by the great fall of
Price for VVeols and Cloth. The State in some Occasions may gain most, when
private Men by their Reventles get least.
We find that Twenty five in the Hundred less in the Price of these and some
other VVares, to the loss of private Men's Revenues, may raise above Fifty upon
the Hundred in the Quantity vented to the Benefit of the Public. For when
Cloth is dear, other Nations do presently practice Clothing, and we know they
want neither Art nor Materials to this Performance. But when by Cheapness we
drive them from this Employment, and so in time obtain our dear Price again,
then do they also use their former Remedy. So that by these Alterations we
learn, that is in vain to expect a greater Revenue of our Wares than their
Condition will afford, but rather it concerns us to apply our endeavors to the
Times, with Care and Diligence to help our selves the best we may, by making
our Cloth and other Manufactures without Deceit, which will increase their
Estimation and Use.

4. The Value of our Exportations likewise may be much advanced when we perform
it our selves in our own Ships, for then we get not only the Price of our Wares
as they are worth here, but also the Merchant's Gains, the Charges of
Insurance, and Freight to carry them beyond the Seas. As for Example, If the
Italian Merchants should come hither in their own Shipping to fetch our Corn,
our Red-Herrings, or the like, in this Case the Kingdom should have ordinarily
but 25 s. for a Quarter of Wheat, and 20 s. for a Barrel of Red Herrings,
whereas if we carry these Wares our selves into Italy upon the said Rates, it
is likely that we shall obtain Fifty shillings for the First, and Forty
shillings for the Last, which is a great Difference in the Utterance or Vent of
the Kingdom's stock. And although it is true, that the Commerce ought to be
free to Strangers to bring in and carry out at their pleasure; yet nevertheless
in many Places, the Exportation of Victuals and Munition are either prohibited,
or at least limited to be done only by the People and Shipping of those Places
where they abound.

5. The Frugal expending likewise of our own Natural Wealth, might advance much
yearly to be exported unto Strangers; and if in our Raiment we will be
prodigal, yet let this be done with our own Materials and Manufactures, as
Cloth, Lace, Embroderies, Cut-works and the like; where the Excess of the Rich
may be the Employment of the Poor, whose Labors, notwithstanding of this kind,
would be more profitable for the Commonwealth, if they were done to the use of
Strangers.

6. The Fishing in His Majesty's Seas of England, Scotland, and Ireland, is our
Natural Wealth, and would cost nothing but Labor, which the Dutch bestow
willingly, and thereby draw yearly a very great Profit to themselves, by
serving many places of Christendom with our Fish, for which they return and
supply their Wants both of Foreign VVares and Money, besides the multitude of
Mariners and Shipping, which hereby are maintained, whereof a long Discourse
might be made, to show the particular Manage of this Important Business. Our
Fishing Plantation likewise in New England, Virginia, Greenland, the Summer
Islands, and the Newfoundland, are of the like Nature, affording much Wealth
and Employments to maintain a great number of Poor, and to increase our
decaying Trade.

How some States have been made Rich
7. A Staple or Magazine for Foreign Corn, Indico, Spices, Raw-silks, Cotton,
Wool, or any other Commodity whatsoever, to be Imported, will increase
Shipping, Trade, Treasure, and the Kings Customs, by Exporting them again where
need shall require; which course of Trading, has been the chief Means to raise
Venice, Genoa, the Low Countries, with some others, and for such a purpose
England stands most commodiously, wanting nothing to this Performance, but our
own Diligence, and Endeavor.

8. Also we ought to esteem and cherish those Trades which we have in remote or
fax Countries; for besides the Increase of Shipping and Mariners thereby, the
VVares also sent thither and received from thence are far more profitable unto
the Kingdom, than by our Trades near at hand: As for Example, suppose Pepper to
be worth here two shillings the Pound constantly, if then it be brought from
the Dutch at Amsterdam, the Merchant may give there twenty pence the Pound, and
gain well by the Bargain; The Traffic to the East Indies is our most
prefitable Trade in its proportion both for King and Kingdom. We get more by
the Indian Wares than the Indians themselves. A Distinction between the
Kingdoms Gain and the Merchant's Profit.
but if he fetch this Pepper from the East Indies, he must not give above three
pence the Pound at the most, which is a mighty Advantage, not only in that Part
which serves for our own use, but also for that great Quantity which (from
heence) we transport yearly unto diverse others Nations to be sold at a higher
Price; whereby it is plain, that we make a far greater Stock by Gain upon these
Indian Commodities, than those Nations do where they Grow, and to whom they
properly appertain, being the Natural Wealth of their Countries. But for the
better understanding of this Particular, we must ever distinguish between the
Gain of the Kingdom, and the Profit of the Merchant; for although the Kingdom
pays no more for this Pepper than is before supposed, nor for any other
Commodity bought in Foreign Parts more than the Stranger receives from us for
the same; yet the Merchant pays not only that Price, but also the Freight,
Ensurance, Customs, and other charges which are exceeding great in these long
Voyages; but yet all these in the Kingdoms account are but commutations among
our selves, and no Privation of the Kingdom's Stock, which being duly
considered, together with the Support also of our other Trades in our best
Shipping to Italy, France, Turkey, the East-Countries and other places, by
Transporting and Venting the Wares which we bring yearly from the East Indies;
It may well stir up our utmost Endeavors to maintain and enlarge this Great
and Noble Business, so much importing the Public Wealth, Strength and
Happiness. Neither is there less Honor and Judgment by growing Rich (in this
manner) upon the Stock of other Nations, than by an industrious Increase of our
own Means; especially when this Latter is advanced by the Benefit of the
Formers as we have found in the East Indies by sale of much of our Tin, Cloth,
Lead and other Commodities, the Vent whereof does daily increase in those
Countries which formerly had no use of our Wares.

9. It would be very beneficial to Export Money as well as Wares, being done in
Trade only, it would increase our Treasure; but of this I write more largely in
the next Chapter to prove it plainly.

10. It were Policy and Profit for the State to suffer Manufactures made of
Foreign Materials to be exported Custom-free, as Velvets, and all other wrought
Silks, Fustians, Thrown Silks, and the like, it would employ very many poor
People, and much increase the Value of our Stock yearly issued into other
Countries, and it would (for this Purpose) cause the more Foreign Materials to
be brought in, to the Emprovement of His Majesty's Customs. I will here
remember a notable Increase in our Manufacture of Winding and Twisting only of
Foreign raw Silk, which within 35 years to my knowledge, did not employ more than
300 People in the City and Suburbs of London, where at this present time it
does set on work above fourteen thousand Souls, as upon diligent Enquiry has
been credibly reported unto His Majesty's Commissioners for Trade. And it is
certain, that if the said Foreign Commodities might be Exported from hence free
of Custom, this Manufacture would yet increase very much, and decrease as fast
in Italy and in the Netherlands. But if any Man allege the Dutch Proverb, Live
and let others live; I answer, that the Dutchmen, notwithstanding their own
Proverb, do not only in these Kingdoms, encroach upon our Livings; but also in
other Foreign Parts of our Trade, (where they have power) they do hinder and
destroy us in our lawful course of Living, hereby taking the Bread out of our
Mouth, which we shall never prevent by plucking the Pot from their Nose, as of
late. Years too many of us do practice, to the great Dishonor of this Famous
Nation: We ought rather to imitate former times in taking sober and worthy
Courses, more pleasing to God, and suitable to our ancient Reputation.

11. It is needful also not to charge the Native Commodities with too great
Customs, lest by endearing them to the Strangers use, it hinder their Vent. And
especially, Foreign Wares brought in to be Transported again, should be
savoured; for otherwise, that manner of Trading (so much importing the Good of
the Commonwealth) cannot Prosper nor Subsist. But the Consumption of such
Foreign Wares in the Realm may be the more Charged, which will turn to the
Profit of the Kingdom in the Balance of Trade, and thereby also enable the
King to lay up the more Treasure out of his yearly Incoms; as of this
Particular I intend to write more fully in its proper Place, where I shall show
how much Money a Prince may conveniently lay up without the hurt of his Subjects.

12. Lastly, In all things we must endeavor to make the most we can of our
own, whether it be Natural or Artificial; and forasmuch as the People which
live by the Arts are far more in number than they who are Masters of the
Fruits, we ought the more carefully to maintain those Endeavors of the
Multitude, in whom does consist the greatest Strength and Riches both of King
and Kingdom: For where the People are many, and the Arts good, there the
Traffic must be greater, and the Country rich. The Italians employ a greates
Number of People, and get more Money by their Industry and Manufactures of the
raw Silks of the Kingdom of Cilicia, than the King of Spain and his Subjects
have, by the Revenue of this rich Commodity. But what need we fetch the Example
so far, when we know that our own Natural Wares do not yield us so much profit
as our industry? for Iron-Oar in the Mines is of no great worth, when it is
compared with the Employment and Advantage it yields, being Dug, Tried,
Transported, Bought, Sold, Cast into Ordnance, Muskets, and many other
Instruments of War, for Offense and Defense; wrought into Anchors, Bolts,
Spikes, Nails, and the like, for the use of Ships, Houses, Carts, Coaches,
Ploughs, and other Instruments for Tillage. Compare our Fleece-wools with our
Cloth, which requires Shearing, Washing, Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Fulling,
Dying, Dressing, and other Trimings; and we shall find these Arts more
profitable than the Natural Wealth, whereof I might instance other Examples;
but I will not be more tedious, for if I would amplify upon this and the other
Particulars before-written, I might find matter sufficient to make a large
Volume, but my desire in all is only to prove what I propound with Brevity and
Plainness.

CHAP. IV. The Exportation of our Moneys in Trade of Merchandise, is a Means to
increase our Treasure.
THis Position is so contrary to the common Opinion, that it will require many
and strong Arguments to prove it, before it can be accepted of the Multitude,
who bitterly exclaim when they see any Moneys carried out of the Realm;
affirming thereupon that we have absolutely lost so much Treasure, and that
this is an act directly against the long continued Laws made and confirmed by
the Wisdom of this Kingdom in the High Court of Parliament; and that many
places, nay Spain itself, which is the Fountain of Money, forbids the
Exportation thereof, some Cases only excepted. To all which I might answer,
that Venice, Florence, Genoua, the Low Countries, and diverse other Places
permit it, their People applaud it, and find great Benefit by it; but all this
makes a Noise and proves nothing; we must therefore come to those Reasons which
concern the Business in Question.

First, I will take that for granted which no Man of Judgment will deny, that
we have no other Means to get Treasure but by Foreign Trade, for Mines we have
none which do afford it, and how this Money is gotten in the Managing of our
said Trade, I have already showed, that it is done by making our Commodities
which are Exported yearly, to overbalance in value the Foreign Wares which we
consume; so that it rests only to show how our Moneys may be added to our
Commodities, and being jointly Exported, may so much the more increase our
Treasure.

We have already supposed our yearly consumptions of Foreign Wares to be for the
Value of Twenty hundred thousand Pounds, and our Exportations to exceed that
Two hundred thousand Pounds, which Sum we have thereupon affirmed is brought to
us in Treasure, to balance the Account. But now if we add three hundred
thousand Pounds more in ready Money, unto our former Exportations in Wares, what
Profit can we have (will some Men say) although by this Means we should bring
in so much ready Money more than we did before, seeing that we have carried out
the like value?

To this the Answer is, that when we have prepared our Exportations of Wares,
and set out as much of every thing as we can spare or vent abroad: Money begets
Trade and Trade increaseeth Money.
It is not therefore said, that then we should add our Money thereunto, to fetch
in the more Money immediately, but rather first to enlarge our Trade by enabling
us to bring in more Foreign VVares, which being sent out again, will in due time
much increase our Treasure.

For although in this manner, we do yearly multiply our Importations to the
Maintenance of more Shipping and Mariners, Improvement of His Majesty's
Customs, and other Benefits: yet our Consumption of those Foreign VVares is no
more than it was before; so that all the said Increase of Commodities, brought
in by the means of our ready Money, sent out as is before written, does in the
end become an exportation unto us of a far greater Value than our said Moneys
were, which is proved by three several Examples following.

1. For I suppose that 100000 l. being sent in our Shipping to the East
Countries, will buy there one hundred thousand Quarters of Wheat, clear aboard
the Ships, which being after brought into England and housed, to Export the
same at the best time for vent thereof in Spain or Italy, it cannot yield less
in those Parts than two hundred thousand Pounds to make the Merchant but a
Saver; yet by this reckoning, we see the Kingdom has doubled that Treasure.

Remote Trades are most Gainful to the Commonwealth.
2. Again this Profit will be far Greater when we Trade thus in remote
Countries, as for Example; if we send one hundred thousand pounds into the East
Indies to buy Pepper there, and bring it hither, and from hence send it for
Italy or Turkey, it must yield seven hundred thousand pounds at least in those
Places, in regard of the Excessive charge which the Merchant disburseth in
those long Voyages in Shipping, Wages, Victuals, Insurance, Interest, Customs,
Imposts, and the like, all which notwithstanding the King and Kingdom gets.

3. But where the Voyages are short, and the VVares rich, which therefore will
not employ much Shipping, the Profit will be far less. As when another hundred
thousand Pounds shall be employed in Turkey in raw Silks, and brought hither to
be after Transported from hence into France, the Low Countries, or Germany, the
Merchant shall have good Gain, although he sell it there but for one hundred
and fifty thousand Pounds: and thus take the Voyages altogether in their
Medium, the Moneys Exported will be returned unto us more than Trebled. But if
any Man will yet object, that these returns come to us in VVares, and not
really in Money, as they were issued out,

The Answer is, (keeping our first Ground) that if our Consumption of Foreign
VVares be no more yearly than is already supposed; and that our Exportations be
so mightily increased by this manner of Trading with ready Money, as is before
declared: It is not then possible, but that all the Over balance or Difference
should return either in Money, or in such Wares as we must Export again, which,
as is already plainly showed, will be still a greater Means to increase our
Treasure.

The Proverb says He that has Ware, has Money by the Year.
For it is in the Stock of the Kingdom, as in the Estates of Private Men, who
having store of Wares, do not therefore say, that they will not venture out or
Trade with their Money, (for this were ridiculous) but do also turn that into
Wares whereby they multiply their Money; and so by a continual and orderly
Change of one into the other, grow Rich, and when they please turn all their
Estates into Treasure; for they that have Wares cannot want Money.

Neither is it said, that Money is the Life of Trade, as if it could not subsist
without the same; for we know that there was great Trading by way of
Commutation or Barter, when there was little Money stirring in the World. The
Italians and some other Nations have such remedies against this Want, that it
can neither decay nor hinder their Trade, for they transfer Bills of Debt, and
have Banks both Public and Private, wherein they do assign their Credits from
one to another daily for very great Sums with Ease and Satisfaction, by
VVritings only, whilst, in the mean time, the Mass of Treasure which gave
foundation to those Credits, is employed in Foreign Trade, as a Merchandise; and
by the said means they have little other use of Money in those Countries, more
than for their ordinary Expenses. It is not therefore the keeping of our Money
in the Kingdom, but the Necessity and Use of our VVares in Foreign Countries,
and our want of their Commodities, that causes the Vent and Consumption on all
sides, which makes a quick and ample Trade. If we were once Poor, and now
having gained some store of Money by Trade, with resolution to keep it still in
the Realm; shall this cause other Nations to spend more of our Commodities than
formerly they have done, whereby we might say that our Trade is Quickened and
Enlarged? No verily, it will produce no such good effect: but rather, according
to the alteration of times by their true causes, we may expect the contrary;
for all Men do consent that Plenty of Money in a Kingdom does make the Native
Commodities dearer; which, as it is to the Profit of some Private Men in their
Revenues, so is it directly against the Benefit of the Public in the Quantity
of the Trade, for as Plenty of Money makes VVares dearer, so dear VVares decline
their Use and Consumption, as has been already plainly showed in the last
Chapter, upon that particular of our Cloth: And although this is a very hard
Lesson for some great landed Men to learn, yet I am sure it is a true Lesson
for all the Land to observe, lest when we have gained some store of Money by
Trade, we loose it again by not Trading with our Money. I knew a Prince in Italy
(of Famous Memory) Ferdinando the first, Great Duke of Tuscany, who being very
rich in Treasure, endeavored therewith to enlarge his Trade, by issuing out to
his Merchants great Sums of Money for very small Profit; I my self had Forty
thousand Crowns of him, gratis, for a whole Year, although he knew that I would
presently send it away in Specie for the Parts of Turkey, to be employed in
VVares for his Countries; he being well assured, that in this Course of Trade
it would return again (according to the Old saying) with a Duck in the Mouth.
This Noble and Industrious Prince, by his Care and diligence to countenance and
favor Merchants in their Affairs, did so increase the Practice thereof, that
there is scarce a Nobleman or Gentleman in all his Dominions, that does not
Merchandise either by himself, or in Partnership with others; whereby, within
these thirty Years, the Trade to his Port of Leghorne is much increased, that
of a poor Little Town, (as I my self knew it) it is now become a Fair and
Strong City, being one of the most Famous Places for all Christendom. And yet
it is worthy our Observation, that the multitude of Ships and VVares which come
thither from England, the Low Countries, and other places, have little or no
means to make their returns from thence, but only in ready Money, which they may
and do carry away freely at all times, to the incredible Advantage of the said
great Duke of Tuscany and his Subjects, who are much enriched by the continual
great concourse of Merchants from all the States of the Neighbor Princes,
bringing them plenty of Money daily to supply their wants of the said Wares. And
thus we see, that the Current of Merchandise which carries away their Treasure,
becomes a flowing Stream to fill them again in a greater measure with Money.

There is yet an Objection or two as weak as all the rest: that is, if we Trade
with our Money, we shall issue out the less Wares; as if a Man should say, those
Countries which heretofore had occasion to consume our Cloth, Lead, Iron, Fish,
and the like, shall now make use of our Moneys in the place of those
Necessaries which were most absurd to affirm, or that the Merchant had not
rather carry out Wares by which there is ever some gains expected, than to
Export Money which is still but the same without any increase.

But on the contrary, there are many Countries which may yield us very
profitable Trade for our Money, which otherwise afford us no Trade at all,
because they have no use of our Wares, as namely the East Indies for one in the
first beginning thereof, although since by industry in our Commerce with those
Nations, we have brought them into the use of much of our Lead, Cloth, Tin, and
other things, which is a good Addition to the former Vent of our Commodities.

Again, some Men have alleged, that those Countries which permit Money to be
carried out, do it because they have few or no VVares to Trade withal: but we
have great store of Commodities, and therefore their Action ought not to be our
Example.

To this the Answer is briefly, that we have such a quantity of VVares as does
fully provide us of all things needful from beyond the Seas; why should we then
doubt that out Moneys sent out in Trade, must not necessarily come back again
in Treasure; together with the great Gains which it may procure in such manner
as is before set down? And on the other side, if those Nations which send out
their Moneys, do it because they have but few VVares of their own, how come
they then to have so much Treasure, as we ever see in those Places which suffer
it freely to be Exported at all times, and by whomsoever? I answer, Even by
Trading with their Moneys; for by what other means can they get it, having no
Mines of Gold or Silver?

Our Human actions ought especially to be considered in their ends
Thus may we plainly see, that when this weighty Business is duly considered in
its end, as all our Humane Actions ought well to be weighed, it is found much
contrary to that which most Men esteem thereof, because they search no further
than the beginning of the Work, which missinforms their Judgments, and leads
them into Error: For if we behold the Actions of the Husbandman in the Seedtime
when he casts away much good Corn into the Ground, we will rather account him
a Madman than a Husbandman: but when we consider his Labors in the Harvest,
which is the end of his Endeavors, we find the VVorth and Plentiful Increase
of his actions.

CHAP. V. Foreign Trade is the only means to improve the Price of our Lands.
IT is a common saying, That Plenty or Scarcity of Money makes all things Dear,
or Good, or Cheap; and this Money is either gotten or lost in Foreign Trade, by
the over or underballancing of the same, as I have already showed. It rests
now that I distinguish the seeming Plenties of Money from that which is only
substantial and able to perform the Work: For there are diverse VVays and Means
whereby to procure plenty of Money into a Kingdom, which do not Enrich, but
rather Empoverish the same, by the several Inconveniences which ever accompany
such Alterations.

As first, if we melt down our Plate into Coin (which suits not with the
Majesty of so great a Kingdom, except in cases of great Extremity) it would
cause Plenty of Money for a time, yet should we be nothing the Richer, but
rather this Treasure being thus altered is made the more apt to be carried out
of the Kingdom, if we exceed our means by excess in Foreign Wares, or maintain a
War by Sea or Land, where we do not Feed and Cloth the Soldiers, and supply
the Armies with our own Native Provisions, by which disorders our Treasure will
soon be exhausted.

Again, if we think to bring in store of Money by suffering Foreign Coins to pass
current at higher rates than their intrinsic value, compared with our
Standard, or by debasing or enhancing our own Moneys; all these have their
several Inconveniences and Difficulties, (which hereafter I will declare) but
admitting that by this means plenty of Money might be brought into the Realm,
yet should we be nothing the Richer; neither can such Treasure so gotten long
remain with us. For if the Stranger or the English Merchants bring in this
Money, it must be done upon a valuable Consideration, either for Wares carried
out already, or after to be Exported, which helps us nothing, except the Evil
occasions of excess or War aforementioned be removed, which do exhaust our
Treasure: for otherwise, what one Man brings for Gain, another Man shall be
forced to carry out for necessity; because there shall ever be a Necessity to
balance our Accounts with Strangers, although it should be done with loss upon
the rate of the Money, and Confiscation also if it be intercepted by the Law.

How we must get Treasure to make it our own
The Conclusion of this Business is briefly thus: That as the Treasure which is
brought into the Realm by the Balance of our Foreign Trade, is that Money which
only does abide with us, and by which we are enriched: so by this Plenty of
Money thus gotten (and no otherwise) do our Lands improve. For when the Merchant
has a good dispatch beyond the Seas for his Cloth and other VVares, he does
presently return to buy up the greater Quantity, which raises the Price of our
VVools and other Commodities, and consequently does improve the Landlords Rents
as the Leases expire daily: And also by this means Money being gained, and
brought more abundantly into the Kingdom, it does enable many Men to buy Lands,
which will make them the Dearer. But if our Foreign Trade come to a Stop or
Declination by neglect at home, or injuries abroad, whereby the Merchants are
impoverished, and thereby the VVares of the Realm less issued, then do all the
said Benefits cease, and our Lands fall of Price daily.

CHAP. VI. The Spanish Treasure cannot be kept from other Kingdoms by any
Prohibition made in Spain.
ALL the Mines of Gold and Silver, which are as yet discovered in the sundry
Places of the World, are not of so great Value as those of the West Indies
which are in the Possession of the King of Spain: Who thereby is enabled not
only to keep in Subjection many goodly States and Provinces in Italy and
elsewhere, (which otherwise would soon fall from his Obeisance,) but also by a
continual War, taking his Advantages, does still enlarge his Dominions,
ambitiously aiming at a Monarchy by the Power of his Moneys, which are the very
Sinews of his Strength, that lies so far dispersed into so many Countries, yet
hereby united, and his Wants supplied both for War and Peace in a plentiful
manner from all the parts of Christendom, which are therefore Partakers of his
Treasure by a Necessity of Commerce; wherein the Spanish Policy has ever
endeavored to prevent all other Nations the most it could: The Policy and
Benefit of Spain by the Trade to the East Indies.
For finding Spain to be poor and barren to supply itself and the West Indies
with those Varieties of Foreign Wares, whereof they stand in need, they knew
well that when their Native Commodities come short to this purpose, their
Moneys must serve to make up the reckoning; whereupon they found an incredible
Advantage to add the Traffic of the East Indies to the Treasure of the West:
For the last of these being employed in the first, they stored themselves
infinitely with rich Wares to barter with all the parts of Christendom for
their Commodities, and so furnishing their own Necessities, prevented others
for carrying away their Moneys: Which in Point of State they hold less
dangerous to impart to the remote Indians, than to their Neighbor Princes,
lest it should too much enable them to resist (if not offend) their Enemies.
And this Spanish Policy against others is the more remarkable, being done
likewise so much to their own Advantage; for every Ryal of Eight which they
sent to the East Indies, brought home so much Wares as saved them the
disbursing of five Ryals of Eight here in Europe, (at least) to their
Neighbors, especially in those times when that Trade was only in their hands:
but now this great Profit is failed, and the Mischief removed by the English,
Dutch, and others which partake in those East India Trades, as ample as the
Spanish Subjects.

It is further to be considered, that besides the Disability of the Spaniards
by their Native Commodities to provide Foreign Wares for their Necessities,
whereby they are forced to supply the want with Money, they have likewise that
Canker of War, which does infinitely exhaust their Treasure, and disperse it
into Christendom even to their Enemies, part by Reprisal, but especially
through a necessary Maintenance of those Armies which are composed of
Strangers, and lie so far remote that they cannot feed, cloth, or otherwise
provide for them out of their own Native Means and Provisions, but must receive
this Relief from other Nations: The effects of different Wars concerning
Treasure.
Which kind of War is far different to that which a Prince makes upon his own
Confines, or in his Navies by Sea, where the Soldier receiving Money for his
Wages, must every day deliver it out again for his Necessities, whereby the
Treasure remains still in the Kingdom, although it be exhausted from the King:
But we see that the Spaniard (trusting in the Power of his Treasure,)
undertakes Wars in Germany, and in other remote Places, which would soon
beggar the richest Kingdom in Christendom of all their Money; the want whereof
would presently disorder and bring the Armies to Confusion, as it falls out
sometimes with Spain it self, who have the Fountain of Money, when either it is
stopped in the Passage by the force of their Enemies, or drawn out faster than
it flows by their own Occasions; whereby also we often see, that Gold and
silver is often so scant in Spain, that they are forced to use base Copper
money, to the great Confusion of their Trade, and not without the undoing also
of many of their own People.

But now, that we have seen the Occasions by which the Spanish Treasure is
dispersed into so many places of the World, let us likewise discover how, and
in what Proportion, each Country does enjoy these Moneys, for we find that
Turkey, and diverse other Nations, have great plenty thereof, although they drive
no Trade with Spain, which seems to contradict the former Reason, where we say
that this Treasure is obtained by a Necessity of Commerce. But to clear this
point, we must know, that all Nations (who have no Mines of their own,) are
enriched with Gold and Silver by one and the same means, which is already
showed to be the Balance of their Foreign Trade: And this is not strictly tied
to be done in those Countries where the Fountain of Treasure is, but rather
with such Order and Observations as are prescribed. For suppose England, by
Trade with Spain, may gain and bring home Five Hundred Thousand Ryals of Eight
yearly; if we lose as much by our Trade in Turkey, and therefore carry the Money
thither, it is not then the English but the Turks which have got this Treasure,
although they have no Trade with Spain from whence it was first brought. Again,
if England, having thus lost with Turkey, do notwithstanding gain twice as much
by France, Italy, and other Members of her general Trade, then will there
remain Five Hundred Thousand Ryals of Eight clear Gains by the Balance of this
Trade: And this Comparison holds between all other Nations, both for the manner
of getting, and the Proportion that is yearly gotten.

But if yet a Question should be made, whether all Nations get Treasure and
Spain only lose it? I answer, No; for some Countries by War, or by Excess, do
lose that which they had gotten, as well as Spain by War and want of VVares
does lose that which was its own.

CHAP. VII. The Diversity of Gain by Foreign Trade.
IN the course of Foreign Trade there are three sorts of Gain, the first is that
of the Commonwealth, which may be done when the Merchant, (who is the
Principal Agent therein,) shall lose. The second is the Gain of the Merchant,
which he does sometimes justly and worthily effect, although the Commonwealth
be a loser. The third is the Gain of the King, whereof he is ever certain, even
when the Commonwealth and the Merchant shall be both lofers.

Concerning the first of these, we have already sufficiently showed the Ways
and Means whereby a Commonwealth may be Enriched in the course of Trade;
whereof it is needless here to make any repetition, only I do in this Place
affirm, that such happiness may be in the Commonwealth, when the Merchant in
his particular shall have no occasion to rejoice. As for Example, suppose the
East India Company send out one hundred thousand Pounds into the East Indies,
and receive home for the same the full value of three hundred thousand Pounds;
Hereby it is evident, that this Part of the Commonwealth is trebled, and yet I
may boldly say that which I can well prove, that the said Company of Merchants
shall lose at least Fifty thousand Pounds by such an adventure, if the returns
be made in Spice, Indico, Callicoes, Benjamin, Refined Saltpeter, and such
other bulky Wares in their several Proportions, according to their Vent and Use
in these parts of Europe. For the Freight of Shipping, the Insurance of this
Adventure, the Charges of Factors abroad, and Officers at home; the Forbearance
of the Stock, His Majesty's Customs and Imposts, with other petty Charges
incident, cannot be less than two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds, which
being added to the Principal, produces the said Loss. And thus we see, that
not only the Kingdom, but also the King by his Customs and Imposts may get
notoriously, even when the Merchant notwithstanding, shall lose grievously;
which gives us good occasion here to consider, how much more the Realm is
enriched by this noble Trade; when all things pass so happily, that the
Merchant is a Gainer also with the King and Kingdom.

In the next place I affirm, that a Merchant: by his laudable endeavors, may
both carry out and bring in VVares to his Advantage, by Selling and Buying them
to good Profit, which is the end of his Labors; when nevertheless, the
Commonwealth shall decline and grow Poor by a Disorder in the People, when
through Pride and other Excesses, they do consume more Foreign VVares in value
than the Wealth of the Kingdom can satisfy and pay by the Exportation of our
own Commodities, which is the very Quality of an Unthrift who spends beyond his
Means.

Lastly, the King is ever sure to get by Trade, when both the Commonwealth and
Merchant shall lose severally as afore-written, or jointly, as it may and does
sometimes happen, when at one and the same time our Commodities are
over-ballanced by Foreign Wares consumed, and that the Merchant's success prove
no better than is before declared.

But here we must not take the King's Gain in this large sense, for so we might
say that his Majesty should get, although half the Trade of the Kingdom were
lost; we shall rather suppose that whereas the whole Trade of the Realm of
Exportations and Importations, is now found for to be about the Yearly value of
Four Millions and a half of Pounds; it may be yet increased Two hundred
thousand pounds per Annum more by the Importation and Consumption of Foreign
Wares. By this means we know that the King shall be a Gainer near Twenty
thousand pounds, but the Commonwealth shall lose the whole Two hundred
thousand Pounds thus spent in Excess. And the Merchant may be a Loser also when
the Trade shall in this manner be increased to the Profit of the King; who,
notwithstanding, shall be sure in the end to have the greatest Loss, if he
prevent not such Unthrifty Courses as do impoverish his Subjects.

CHAP. VIII. The Enhancing or Debasing our Moneys, cannot Enrich the Kingdom
with Treasure, nor hinder the Exportation thereof.
THere are three ways by which the Moneys of a Kingdom are commonly altered.
The first is, when the Coins in their several Denominations are made current at
more or less Pounds, Shillings, or Pence, than formerly. The second is, when
the said Coins are altered in their Weight, and yet continue current at the
former Rates. The third is, when the Standard is either Debased or Enriched in
the Fineness of the Gold and Silver, yet the Moneys continue in their former
Values.

In all occasions of want or plenty of Money in the Kingdom, we do ever find
diverse Men, who using their Wits for a Remedy to supply the First and preserve
the Last, they fall presently upon altering the Moneys; for, say they, the
raising of the Coins in value, will cause it to be brought into the Realm from
diverse Places, in hope of the Gain; and the Debasing of the Moneys in the
Fineness or Weight will keep it here for fear of the Loss. But these Men
pleasing themselves with the beginning only of this weighty Business, consider
not the Progress and End thereof, whereunto we ought especially to direct our
Thoughts and Endeavors.

A Notable service for Spain.
For we must know, that Money is not only the true measure of all our other means
in the Kingdom, but also of our Foreign Commerce with Strangers, which therefore
ought to be kept Just and Constant, to avoid those Confusions which ever
accompany such alterations. For first, at Home, if the common Measure be
changed, our Lands, Leases, Wares, both Foreign and Domestic, must alter in
proportion: And although this is not done without much Trouble and Damage also
to some Men, yet in short time this must necessarily come to pass; for that is
not the Denomination of our Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, which is respected,
but the intrinsic value of our Coins; unto which we have little reason to add
any further Estimation or Worth, if it lay in our power to do it, for this
would be a special Service to Spain, and an act against our selves to indear
the Commodity of another Prince. Money is the measure of our other means.
Neither can these courses which so much hurt the Subjects, any way help the
King, as some Men have imagined: for although the Debasing or Lightning of all
our Money should bring a present Benefit (for once only) to the Mint, yet all
this and more would soon be lost again in the future great Incoms of His
Majesty, when by this means they must be paid yearly with Money of less
intrinsic value than formerly: Nor can it be said, that the whole Loss of the
Kingdom would be the Profit of the King, they differ infinitely: for all Men's
Estates, (be it Leases, Lands, Debts, Wares, or Money) must suffer in their
Proportions, whereas His Majesty should have the Gain only upon so much ready
Money as might be new Coined, which, in comparison, would prove a very small
matter; All the ready Money in this Kingdom is esteemed at little more than one
Million of Pounds.
for although they who have other Estates in Money, are said to be a great
Number, and to be worth Five or Ten thousand Pound per Man, more or less, which
amounts to many millions in all; yet are they not possessed thereof all
together, or at once; for it were Vanity and against their Profit to keep
continually in their hands above Forty or Fifty Pounds in a Family to defray
necessary Charges, the rest must ever run from Man to Man in Traffic, for
their Benefit, whereby we may conceive, that a little Money (being made the
measure of all our other means) does Rule and Distribute great matters daily to
all Men in their just Proportion: And we must know likewise, that much of our
old Money is worn light, and therefore would yield little or no profit at the
Mint, and the Gain upon the Heavy, would cause our vigilant Neighbors to carry
over a great Part thereof, and return it presently in pieces of the New Stamp;
nor do we doubt that some of our own Countrymen would turn Coiners, and
venture a Hanging for this Profit; so that His Majesty in the end should get
little by such Alterations.

Yea, but say some Men, If His Majesty raise the Money, great store of Treasure
would also be brought into the Mint from Foreign Parts, for we have seen by
Experience, that the late raising of our Gold ten in the Hundred, did bring in
great store thereof, more than we were accustomed to have in the Kingdom; the
which as I cannot deny, so do I likewise affirm, that this Gold carried away
all or the most part of our Silver, (which was not over-worn or too light) as
we may easily perceive by the present use of our Moneys in their respective
qualities: And the Reason of this Change is, because our Silver was not raised
in proportion with our Gold which still gives advantage to the Merchant, to
bring in the Kingdom's Yearly Gain by Trade in Gold rather than in Silver.

Secondly, If we be inconstant in our Coins and and thereby violate the Laws of
Foreign Commerce; other Princes are vigilant in these Cases, to alter presently
in proportion with us, and then where is our hope? Or if they do not alter,
what can we hope for? For if the Stranger-merchant bring in his Wares, and find
that our Moneys are raised, shall not he likewise keep his Commodities until he
may sell them dearer? And shall not the Price of the Merchant's Exchange with
Foreign Countries, rise in Proportion with our Moneys? All which being
undoubtedly true, why may not our Moneys be carried out of the Kingdom as well,
and to as much profit, after the raising thereof, as before the Alteration?

But peradventure some Men will yet say, that if our Moneys be raised, and
other Countries raise not, it will cause more Bulloin and Foreign Coins to be
brought in than heretofore. If this be done, it must be performed either by the
Merchant who has exported Wares, or by the Merchant who intends to buy off our
Commodities: And it is manifest that neither of these can have more Advantage
or Benefit by this Art now, than they might have had before the Alteration of
the Money. For if their said Bulloin and Foreign Coins be more worth than
formerly in our Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, yet what shall they get by that,
when these Moneys are Baser or Lighter, and that therefore they are risen in
Proportion? So we may plainly see, that these innovations are no good means to
bring Treasure into the Kingdom, nor yet to keep it here when we have it.

CHAP. IX. A Toleration for Foreign Coins to pass current here at higher Rates
than their Value with our Standard, will not increase our Treasure.
Merchants do or ought to know the Weight and Fineness of Foreign Coins.
THE discreet Merchant for the better directing of his Trade, and his Exchanges
by Bills to and from the several Places of the World where he is accustomed to
deal, does carefully learn the Parity or equal Value of the Moneys according to
their Weight and Fineness compared with our Standard, whereby he is able to
know perfectly the just Profit or Loss of his Affairs. And I make no doubt, but
that we Trade to diverse places where we vent off our Native Commodities yearly,
to a great Value, and yet find few or no Wares there fitting our use, whereby
we are enforced to make our returns in ready Money, which by us is either
carried into some other Countries to be converted into Wares which we want, or
else it is brought into the Realm in Specie; which being tolerated to pass
current here in Payment, at higher rates than they are worth to be Coined into
Sterling Money; that seems very probable that the greater Quantity will be
brought in: but when all the Circumstances are duly considered, this Course
likewise will be found as weak as the rest to increase our Treasure.

First, the Toleration itself does break the Laws of intercourse, and would
soon move other Princes to perform the same acts, or worse, against us. And so
frustrate our hopes.

Secondly, If Money be the true Measure of all other means, and Foreign Coins
tolerated to pass current amongst us, at higher rates than they are worth
(being compared with our Standard) it follows, that the Commonwealth shall
not be justly distributed, when that passes by a false Measure.

Thirdly, If the Advantage between ours and Foreign Coins be but small, that
will bring in little or no Treasure, because the Merchant will rather bring in
Wares upon which there is usually a competent Gain. And on the other side, if
we permit a great Advantage to the Foreign Coins, then that Gain will carry away
all our Sterling Money; and so I leave this Business in a Dilemma, and
fruitless, as all other courses will ever prove, which seek for the Gain or
Loss of our Treasure, out of the Balance of our general Foreign Trade, as I
will endeavor yet further to demonstrate.

CHAP. V. The Observation of the Statute of Employments to be made by
Strangers, cannot Increase, nor yet Preserve our Treasure.
TO keep our money in the Kingdom is a Work of no less Skill and Difficulty than
to augment our Treasure: For the Causes of their Preservation and Production
are the same in Nature. The Statute for Employment of Stranger's Wares into our
Commodities, seems at first to be a good and a Lawful way leading to those
ends; but upon the Examination of the Particulars, we shall find, that it
cannot produce such good Effects.

The Use of Foreign Trade is alike to all Nations.
For as the Use of Foreign Trade is alike unto all Nations, so may we easily
perceive what will be done therein by Strangers, when we do but observe our own
proceedings in this weighty Business, by which we do not only seek, with the
vent of our own Commodities, to supply our wants of Foreign Wares, but also to
enrich our selves with Treasure: All which is done by a different manner of
Trading, according to our own Occasions and the nature of the Places whereunto
we do Trade; as namely, in some Countries we sell our Commodities and bring
away their Wares, or part in Money; in other Countries we sell our Goods and
take their Money, because they have little or no Wares that fit our turns:
Again, in some Places we have need of their Commodities but they have little
use of ours; so they take our Money which we get in other Countries: And thus by
a course of Traffic, (which changes according to the Accurents of time) the
particular Members do accommodate each other, and all accomplish the whole Body
of the Trade, How Foreign Trade is destroyed.
which will ever languish, if the Harmony of her health be distempered by the
Diseases of Excess at home, Violence abroad, Charges and Restrictions at home
or abroad, but in this Place I have occasion to speak only of Restriction,
which I will perform briefly.

There are three ways by which a Merchant make the returns of his Wares from
beyond the Seas, that is to say in Money, in Commodities, or by Exchange. But
the Statute of Employment does not only restrain Money, (in which there is a
seeming Providence and Justice) but also the Use of the Exchange by Bills,
which does violate the Law of Commerce, and is indeed an Act without Example in
any place of the World where we have Trade, and therefore to be considered,
that whatsoever (in this kind) we shall impose upon Strangers here, will
presently be made a Law for us in their Countries, especially where we have our
greatest Trade with our vigilant Neighbors, who omit no care nor occasion to
support their Traffic in equal Privileges with other Nations. And thus in the
first place, we should be deprived of that Freedom and Means which now we have
to bring Treasure into the Kingdom, and therewith likewise we should lose the
Vent of much Wares, which we carry to diverse places, whereby our Trade and our
Treasure would decay together.

Secondly, If by the said Statute we thrust the Exportation of our Wares (more
than ordinary) upon the Stranger, we must then take it from the English, which
were injurious to our Merchants, Mariners, and Shipping; besides the hurt to
the Commonwealth, in venting the Kingdom's Stock to the Stranger, at far lower
rates here, than we must do if we sold it to them in their own Countries, as is
proved in the third Chapter.

Thirdly, Whereas we have already sufficiently showed, that if our Commodities
be over-ballanced in value by Foreign Wares, our Money must be carried out. How
is it possible to prevent this by tying the Stranger's hands, and leaving the
English loose? Shall not the same Reasons and Advantage cause that to be done
by them now, that was done by the other before? Or if we make a Statute
(without example) to prevent both alike, shall we not then overthrow all at
once? The King in his Cuostms, and the Kingdom in her Profits; for such a
Restriction must of necessity destroy much Trade, because the diversity of
Occasions and Places, which make an ample Trade, require that some Men should
both Export and Import Wares; some Export only, others Import; some deliver our
their Moneys by Exchange, others take it up; some carry out Money, others bring
it in, and this in a greater or lesser Quantity, according to the good
Husbandry or Excess in the Kingdom, over which only if we keep a strict Law, it
will rule all the rest, and without this all other Statutes are no Rules either
to keep or procure us Treasure.

Lastly, To leave no Objection unanswered, if it should be said, that a Statute
comprehending the English as well as the Stranger, must needs keep our Money in
the Kingdom: What shall we get by this, if it hinder the coming in of Money by
the decay of that ample Trade which we enjoyed in the Freedom thereof? Is not
the Remedy far worse than the Disease? Shall we not live more like Irishmen
than Englishmen, when the King's Revenues, our Merchants, Mariners, Shipping,
Arts, Lands, Riches, and all decay together with our Trade?

Yea, but say some Men, we have better hopes than so; for the Intent of the
Statute is, that as all the Foreign Wares which are brought in shall be employed
in our Commodities, thereby to keep our Money in the Kingdom: So we doubt not
but to send out a sufficient Quantity of our own Wares over and above, to bring
in the Value thereof in ready Money.

Although this is absolutely denied by the Reasons afore-written, yet now we
will grant it, because we desire to end the Dispute: For if this be true, that
other Natitions vent more of our Commodites, than we consume of theirs in
value, then I affirm, that the overplus must necessarily return unto us in
Treasure, without the Use of the Statute, which is therefore not only fruitless
but hurtful, as some other like restrictions are found to be when they are
fully discovered.

CHAP. XI. It will not increase our Treasure to enjoin the Merchant that
exporteth Fish, Corn, or Munition, to return all or part of the Value in Money.
VIctuals and Munition for War, are so precious in a Commonwealth, that either
it seems necessary to restrain the Exportation altogether, or (if the Plenty
permits it) to require the return thereof in so much Treasure; which appears
to be reasonable and without difficulty, because Spain and other Countries do
willingly part with their Money for such Wares, although in other occasions of
Trade they straightly prohibit the Exportation thereof: All which I grant to be
true; yet notwithstanding, we must consider that all the Ways and Means which
(in course of Trade) force Treasure into the Kingdom, do not therefore make it
ours; for this can be done only by a Lawful Gain, and this Gain is no way to be
accomplished but by the Overbalance of our Trade, and this Overbalance is
made less by restrictions: Some restrictions hinder Trade.
Therefore such Restrictions do hinder the Increase of our Treasure. The
Argument is plain, and needs no other Reasons to strengthen it, except any Man
be so vain to think that Restrictions would not cause the less Wares to be
exported. But if this likewise should be granted, yet to enjoin the Merchant to
bring in Money for Victuals and Munition carried out, will not cause us to have
one Penny the more in the Kingdom at the Years end; For whatsoever is forced in
one way, must out again in another way: because only so much will remain and
abide with us, as is Gained and Incorporated into the Estate of the Kingdom by
the Overbalance of the Trade.

This may be made plain by an example taken from an Englishman, who had
occasion to buy and consume the Wares of diverse of Strangers for the Value of
one thousand Pounds, he sold them to the said Strangers, and presently forced
all the Money from them, there remained only four hundred Pounds to the said
Englishman, for Overbalance of the Wares bought and sold; so the rest which
he had received was returned back from whence he forced it. And this shall
suffice to show, that whatsoever courses we take to force Money into the
Kingdom, yet so much only will remain with us as we shall gain by the Balance
of our Trade.

CHAP. XII. The Undervaluing of our Money which is delivered or received by
Bills of Exchange here or beyond the Seas, cannot decrease our Treasure.
THE Merchants Exchange by Bills, is a Means and Practice whereby they that
have Money in one Country, may deliver the same to receive that again in another
Country, at certain Times and Rates agreed upon, whereby the Lender and the
Borrower are accommodated without transporting of Treasure from State to State.

These Exchanges thus made between Man and Man, are not contracted at the equal
value of the Moneys, according to their respective Weights and Fineness: First,
because he that delivers his Money, does respect the Venture of the Debt, and
the time of Forbearance; but that which causes an under or over-valuing of
Moneys by Exchange, is the Plenty or Scarcity thereof in those Places where the
Exchanges are made. For Example, when here is plenty of Money to be delivered
for Amsterdam, then shall our Money be under-valued in Exchange, because they
who take up the Money, seeing it so plentifully thrust upon them, do thereby
make advantage to themselves, in taking the same at an undervalue.

And contrariwise, when here is Scarcity of Money to be delivered for Amsterdam,
the Deliverer will make the same Advantage, by over-valuing our Money which he
delivers. Plenty of Money makes the Exchange cheap, and all other things dear.
And thus we see, that as Plenty or Scarcity of Money in a Commonwealth does
make all Good, things Dear or Cheap; so in the Course of Exchange it has ever
a contrary Working; wherefore in the next Place, it is fit to set down the true
Causes of this Effect.

As Plenty or Scarcity of Money do make the Price of the Exchange high or low,
so the Over or Under-ballance of our Trade does effectually cause the Plenty or
Scarcity of Money: And here we must understand, that the Balance of our Trade
is either General or Particular. The General is, when all our yearly Traffic
is jointly valued, as I have formerly showed; the Particular is when our Trade
to Italy, France, Turkey, Spain, and other Countries are severally considered;
and by this latter Course we shall perfectly find out the Places where our Money
is under or over-valued in Exchange: For although our general Exportations of
Wares may be yearly more in value than that which is Imported, whereby the
difference is made good to us in so much Treasure; nevertheless, the Particular
Trades do work diversely: For peradventure the Low Countries may bring us more
in value than we sell them, which if it be so, then do the Low Country
Merchants not only carry away our Treasure to balance the Account between us,
but also by this means Money being plentiful here to be delivered by Exchange;
What kinds of Plenty or Scarcity of Money make the Exchange high or low.
it is therefore undervalued by the Takers as I have before declared; and
contrary wise, if we carry more Wares to Spain, and other Places, than we
consume of theirs, then do we bring away their Treasure, and likewise in the
Merchant's Exchange we overvalue our own Money.

Yet still there are some who will seem to make this Plain by Demonstration,
that the Under-valuing of our Money by Exchange, does carry it out of the
Kingdom: For say they, we see daily great store of our English Coins carried
over, which pass current in the Low Countries, and there is great advantage to
carry them thither, to save the Loss which the Low-Country-men have in the
Exchange; for if one Hundred Pounds sterling delivered here, is so much
undervalued, that Ninety Pounds of the same Sterling Money, carried over in
Specie, shall be sufficient to make repayment and full Satisfaction of the said
hundred Pounds at Amsterdam: Is it not then (say they) the Undervaluing of our
Money which causes it to be carried out of the Realm?

To this Objection I will make a full and plain Answer, showing, that it is not
the Undervaluing of our Money in Exchange, but the Over-ballancing of our Trade
that carries away our Treasure. For suppose that our whole Trade with the
Low Countries, for Wares brought into this Realm, be performed only by the
Dutch for the Value of Five hundred thousand Pounds yearly; and that all our
Commodities transported into the said Low Countries be performed only by the
English for Four hundred thousand Pounds yearly. Is it not then manifest, that
the Dutch can Exchange only four hundred thousand Pounds with the English upon
the Par pro Pari, or equal value of the respective Standards? So the other
Hundred thousand Pounds which is the Overbalance of the Trade, they must of
necessity carry that away in Money. And the self-same Loss of Treasure must
happen, if there were no Exchange at all permitted; for the Dutch carrying away
our Money for their Wares, and we bringing in their Foreign Coins for their
Commodities, there will be still one hundred thousand Pounds loss.

Now let us add another Example, grounded upon the aforesaid proportion of
Trade between us and the Low Countries. The Dutch (as before written) may
Exchange with the English for 400000 Pounds and no more, upon the equal Value
of the Moneys, because the English have no further means to satisfy. But now,
Suppose that in respect of the Plenty of Money, which in this Case will be here
in the hands of the Dutch to deliver by Exchange, The Undervaluing of our Money
in Exchange is the Strangers Loss and our Gain.
our Money (according to that which has been already said) will be under-valued
Ten per Cent. then is it manifest, that the Dutch must deliver Four hundred and
forty thousand Pounds to have the Englishman's Four hundred thousand Pounds in
the Low Countries. so that there will then remain but 60000 Pounds for the
Dutch to carry out of the Realm, to balance the Account between them and us.
Whereby we may plainly perceive that the Undervaluing of our Money in Exchange,
will not carry it out of the Kingdom, as some Men have supposed; but rather is
a Means to make a less Quantity thereof to be Exported, than would be done at
the Par pro Pari.

Further, Let us suppose that the English, Merchant carried out as much Wares
in Value, as the Dutch Merchant brings in, whereby the Means is equal between
them to make their returns by Exchange, without carrying away of any Money to
the Prejudice of either State. And yet notwithstanding, the Dutch Merchant for
his occasions or advantage will forsake this Course of Exchange, and will
venture to send part of his Returns in ready Money.

To this the Answer is, that hereupon it must follow of Necessity, that the
Dutch shall want just so much means in Exchange with the English, who therefore
shall be forced to bring in the like Sum of Money from beyond the Seas, as the
Dutch carried out of this Realm; so that we may plainly perceive, that the
Moneys which are carried from us within the Balance of our Trade are not
considerable, for they do return to us again; and we lose those Moneys only
which are made of the Overbalance of our general Trade: That is to say, That
which we spend more in value in Foreign Wares, than we utter of our own
Commodities. And the contrary of this, is the only means by which we get our
Treasure. 1. The Canker of England's Commonwealth. 2. Free Trade. 3. Lex
Mercatoria. 4. The Center of Trade.

In vain therefore has Gerard Malines labored so long, and in so many Printed
Books, to make the World believe that the Under-valuing of our Money in Exchange
does exhaust our Treasure, which is a mere Fallacy of the Cause, attributed
that to a Secondary Means, whose effects are wrought by another Principal
Efficient, and would also come to pass although the said Secondary Means were
not at all. As vainly also has he propounded a remedy by keeping the Price of
Exchange by Bills, at the Par pro Pari, by Public Authority, which were a
Newfound Office without Example in any part of the World, being not only
Fruitless, but also hurtful, as has been sufficiently proved in this Chapter,
and therefore I will proceed to the next.

CHAP. XIII. The Merchant who is a mere Exchanger of Money by Bills, cannot
Increase or Decrease our Treasure.
THere are certain Merchants which deal only upon all advantages in the
Exchange, and neither Export nor Import Wares into the Kingdom, which has
caused some Men to affirm, that the Money which such mere Exchangers bring in or
carry out of the Realm, is not comprehended in the Balance of our Foreign
Trade; for (say they) sometimes when our Sterling Money has been undervalued,
and delivered here for Amsterdam at 10 per Cent. less than the equal Value of
the respective Standards, the said mere Exchanger may take here one thousand
Pounds Sterling, and carry over only nine hundred thereof in Specie, which will
be sufficient to pay his Bill of Exchange. And so upon a Greater or Lesser Sum,
the like Gain is made in three Months time.

But here we must know, that although this mere Exchanger deal not in Wares,
yet notwithstanding the Money which he carries away in manner afore-written,
must necessarily proceed of such Wares as are brought into the Kingdom by
Merchants. So that still it falls into the Balance of our Foreign Trade, and
works the same Effect, as if the Merchant himself had carried away that Money,
which he must do if our Wares be over-ballanced, as ever they are when our Money
is undervalued, which is expressed more at large in the 12th Chapter. And on
the contrary, when the mere Exchanger (by the said advantages) shall bring Money
into the Kingdom, he does no more than necessarily must be done by the Merchant
himself, when our Commodities overbalance Foreign Wares. But in these
Occasions some Merchants had rather lose by delivering their Money at an
undervalue in Exchange, than undertake to hazard all by the Law; which,
notwithstanding, these mere Exchangers will perform for them in hope of Gain.

CHAP. XIV. The Admirable Feats supposed to be done by Bankers and the
Merchant's Exchange.
ALthough I have already written something concerning the Merchant's Exchange,
and therein of the Uunder-valuation of our Money, and of the mere Exchanger,
with their true Causes and Effects; Nevertheless it will not be impertinent to
pursue this Business yet a little further, and thereby not only to strengthen
our former Arguments, but also to avoid some cunning Delusions which might
deceive the Unskilful Reader of those Books entitled, Lex Mercatoria, Page
409. and The Maintenance of Free Trade, p. 16. wherein the Author, Gerard
Malines lets down the admirable Feats (as he terms them) which are to be
done by Bankers and Exchangers, with the Use and Power of the Exchange: But how
these Wonders may be effected, he altogether omitteth, leaving the Reader in a
strange Opinion of these dark Mysteries, which I cannot think he did for want
of Knowledge; for I find him Skilful in many things which he has both Written
and Collected concerning the Affairs of Merchants, and in Particular, he
Discourses well of diverse Uses, Forms, and Passages of the Exchange, in all
which as he has taken great pains for the Good of others, so do his Works of
this kind deserve much Praise: But where he has disguised his own Knowledge
with Sophistry to further some private ends, by hurting the Public Good; there
ought he to be discovered and prevented; unto which performance (in this
Discourse of Treasure) I find my self obliged, and therefore I intend to effect
it by showing the true Causes and Means whereby these Wonders are done, which
Malines attributes to the sole Power of the Exchange. But first, for Order, I
think it fit to set down the Particular Feats, as they stand in his said Books.

The admirable Feats to be done by Exchange.
1. To lay their Money with Gain in any place of the World, where any Exchange
lies. 2. To gain and wax Rich, and never meddle with any Prince's Commodities.
3. To buy any Prince's Commodity, and never bring Penny nor Peny-worth into the
Realm, but do that with the Subject's Money. 4. To grow Rich, and live without
Adventure at Sea or Travel. 5. To do great Feats having credit, and yet to be
naught worth. 6. To understand whether in conjecture their Money employed on
Exchange, or buying of Wares will be more Profit. 7. To know certainly what the
Merchants gain upon their Wares they Sell and Buy. 8. To Live and Increase upon
every Prince's Subjects, that continually take up Money by Exchange, and whether
they Gain or no. 9. To wind out every Prince's Treasure out of his Realm,
whose Subjects bring in more Wares than they carry out of the Realm. 10. To
make the Staple of Money run thither where the rich Prince will have it to be
brought, and pay for it. 11. To unfurnish the Poor Prince of his provision of
Money, that keeps his Wares upon Interest-Mony, if the Enemy will seek it. 12.
To furnish their need of Money that tarry the Selling of their Wares in any
Contract, until they make them come to their Price. 13. To take up Money to
engross any Commodity, either new come, or whereof they have some store, to
bring the whole Trade of that Commodity into their own hands to sell both at
their Pleasure. 14. To hide their carrying away of any Prince's Money. 15. To
fetch away any Prince's fine Money, with his own, or any other Prince's base
Money. 16. To take up Princes base Money, and to turn into his fine Money, and to
pay the Deliverer with his own, and gain too. 17. To take upon credit into
their hands for a time, all the Merchant's Money that will be delivered, and pay
them with their own, and gain too. 18. To make the Realm gain of all other
Realms, whose Subjects live most by their own Commodities, and sell yearly the
Overplus into the World, and both Occupy that increase yearly, and also their
old store of Treasure upon Exchange. 19. To undo Realms and Princes that look
not to their Commonwealth, when the Merchant's Wealth is such, that the Great
Houses conspire together so to rule the Exchange, that when they will be
Deliverers, they will receive in another Place, above the Standard of the Mint
of the Prince's Money delivered: And when they will be takers, they will pay the
same in another Place under the Standard of the Mint of the Prince's Money taken
up. 20. To get ready Money to buy any Commodity that is offered cheap. 21. To
compass ready Money to get any ossered Bargain out of another Man's hands, and
so by out-bidding others, oftentimes to raise the Wares. 22. To get a Part and
sometimes all his Gains, that employeth Money taken up by Exchange in Wares, and
so make others Travel for their Gain. 23. To keep Princes for having any
Customs, Subsidies, or Taxes upon their Money, as they employ it not. 24. To
value justly any Wares they carry into any Country, by setting them at that
Value, as the Money that bought them was then at by Exchange in the Country
whither they be carried.
If I had a Desire to amplify in the Explanation of these Wonders, they would
afford me Matter enough to make a large Volume, but my intent is to do it as
briefly as possibly I may without obscurity. And before I begin, I cannot
choose but Laugh to think how a worthy Lawyer might be dejected in his laudable
Studies, when he should see more cunning in Lex Mercatoria by a little Part of
the Merchant's Profession, than in all the Law-Cases of his Learned Authors;
For this Exchange goes beyond Conjuring; I think verily, that neither Doctor
Faustus, nor Banks his Horse, could ever do such admirable Feats, although it
is sure they had a Devil to help them; but we Merchants deal not with such
Spirits, we delight not to be thought the Workers of Lying Wonders, and
therefore I endeavor here to show the Plainness of our Dealing (in these
supposed Feats) to be agreeable to the Laudable Course of Trade.

And first, To lay our Money with gain, to any place of the World where Exchange
lies. How can this be done (will some Men say) for Amsterdam, when the Loss by
Exchange is sometimes Eight or Ten per Cent. more or less for one Month's
usance? The answer is, That here I must consider, The Principal efficient cause
of Loss by Exchange
First, that the Principal efficient Cause of this Loss, is a greater Value in
VVares brought from Amsterdam, than we carry thither, which make more
Deliverers than Takers here by Exchange, whereby the Money is undervalued, to
the Benefit of the Taker: Hereupon the Deliverer, rather than he will lose by
his Money, does consider those Countries, unto which we carry more VVares in
value than we receive from them; as namely, Spain, Italy, and others; to which
Places he is sure (for the Reasons aforesaid) that he shall ever deliver his
Money with Profit. But now you will say, that the Money is further from Amsterdam
than before; How shall it be got together? Yes, well enough; and the farther
about will prove the nearest Way home, if it come at last with good Profit;
the first Part whereof being made (as we have supposed) in Spain, from thence I
consider where to make my second Gain; and finding that the Florentines send
out a greater Value in Cloth of Gold and Silver, wrought Silks, and Rashes to
Spain, than they receive in Fleece VVools, West India Hides, Sugar and
Cochineal, I know I cannot miss of my purpose, by delivering my Money for
Florence; where (still upon the same Ground) I direct my course from thence to
Venice, and there find that my next Benefit must be at Franckfort or Antwerp,
until at last I come to Amsterdam by a shorter or longer Course, according to
such occasions of advantage as the Times and Places shall afford me. And thus
we see still, that the Profit and Loss upon the Exchange, is guided and ruled
by by the Over or Under-ballance of the several Trades which are Predominant
and Active, making the Price of Exchange high or low, which is therefore
Passive, the contrary whereof is so often repeated by the said Malines.

To the Second, Fourth, Fourteenth, and Twenty Third, I say, that all these are
the proper Works of the mere Exchanger, and that his Actions cannot work to
the Good or Hurt of the Common wealth, I have already sufficiently showed in
the last Chapter, and therefore here I may spare that labor.

To the Third, It is true, I can deliver one Thousand Pounds here by Exchange,
to receive the Value in Spain, where with this Spanish Money I can buy and bring
away so much Spanish Wares. But all this does not prove, but that in the End
the English Money or Commodities must pay for the said Wares: For if I deliver
my Thousand Pounds here to an Englishman, he must pay me in Spain, either by
Goods already sent, or to be sent thither; or if I deliver it here to a
Spaniard, he takes it of me, with intent to employ it in our Wares; so that
every way we must pay the Stranger for what we have from him: Is there any
Feats in all this worthy our admiration?

To the Fifth, Thirteenth, Twentieth, and Twenty First. I must answer these
Wonders by heaps, where I find them to be all one Matter in diverse Forms; and
such froth also, that every Idiot knows them, and can say, that he who has
credit can Contract, Buy, Sell, and take up much Money by Exchange, which he may
do as well also at Interest: yet in these Courses they are not always gainers,
for sometimes they live by the Loss, as well as they who have less credit.

To the Sixth and Seventh. Here is more poor stuff; for when I know the current
Price of my Wares, both here and beyond the Seas, I may easily conjecture
whether the Profit of the Exchange, of the Gain which I expect upon my Wares
will be greater. And again, as every Merchant knows well what he gains upon the
Wares he Buyeth and Sells; so may any other Man do the like, that can tell
how the said Merchant has proceeded: But what is all this to make us admire
the Exchange?

To the Eighth and Twelfth. As Bankers and Exchangers do furnish Men with Money
for their occasions, so do they likewise who let out their Money at Interest,
with the same hopes and like advantage, which many times notwithstanding fails
them, as well as the Borrowers often labor for the Lender's Profit.

To the Ninth and Eighteenth. Here my Author has some secret Meaning, or being
conscious of his own Errors, does mark these two Wonders with a in the Margin.
For why should this great Work of Enriching or Impoverishing of Kingdoms, be
attributed to the Exchange, which is done only by those means that do Over or
Underballance our Foreign Trade, as I have already so often showed, and as the
very words of Malines himself in these two Places, may intimate to a Judicious
Reader?

To the Fifteenth and Sixteenth, I confess, that the Exchange may be used in
turning Base Money into Gold or Silver; as when a Stranger may coin and bring
over a great Quantity of Farthings, which, in short time, he may disperse or
convert into good Money, and then deliver the same here by Exchange, to receive
the Value in his own Country; or he may do this Feat by carrying away the said
good Money in Specie, without using the Exchange at all, if he dare venture the
Penalty of the Law. The Spaniards know well who are the common Coiners of
Christendom, that dare venture to bring them store of Copper-mony of the
Spanish Stamp, and carry away the Value in good Ryals of Eight, wherein,
notwithstanding all their cunning devices, they are sometimes taken tardy.

To the Seventeenth. The Bankers are always ready to receive such Sums of Money
as are put into their hands by Men of all Degrees, who have no Skill or good
Means themselves to manage the same upon the Exchange to Profit. It is likewise
true, that the Bankers do repay all Men with their own, and yet reserve good
Gain to themselves; which they do as well deserve for their ordinary Provision
or Allowance, as those Factors do which Buy or Sell for Merchants by
Commission: And is not this likewise both Just and very Common?

Lex Mercatoria, page 410. Maintenance of Free Trade p. 17.
To the Eleventh. I must confess, that here is a VVonder indeed, that a poor
Prince should keep either his Wars or VVares (I take both together as the
Author sets them down both ways differing in his said two Books) upon
Interest-Mony, for what needs the Enemy of such a poor Prince deal with the
Bankers, to disapoint him or defeat him of his Money in time of want, when the
Interest itself will do this fast enough; and so I leave this poor Stuff.

To the Nineteenth. I have lived long in Italy, where the greatest Banks and
Bankers of Christedom do trade, yet could I never see nor hear, that they did,
or were able, to rule the Price of Exchange by Confederacy, but still the
Plenty or Scarcity of Money in the course of Trade, did always overruled them,
and made the Exchanges to run at high or low Rates.

Exchange hinders not Princes of their Customs.
To the Twenty Second. The Exchange by Bills between Merchant and Merchant in
the course of Trade, cannot hinder Princes of their Customs and Imposts: For
the Money which one Man delivers, because he will not, or has not occasion to
employ it in VVares another Man takes, because he either will, or has
already, laid it out in Merchandise. But it is true, that when the Wealth of a
Kingdom consists much in ready Money, and that there is also good Means and
Convenience in such a Kingdom to Trade with the same into Foreign Parts, either
by Sea or Land, or by both these Ways; if then this Trade be neglected, the
King shall be defeated of those Profits; and if the Exchange be the Cause
thereof, then must we learn in what manner this is done, for we may Exchange
either amongst our selves, or with Strangers; if amongst our selves, the
Commonwealth cannot be enriched thereby; for the Gain of one Subject is the
Loss of another. And if we Exchange with Strangers, then our Profit is the Gain
of the Common wealth. Yet by none of these ways can the King receive any
Benefit in his Customs. Let us therefore seek out the Places where such
Exchanging is used, and set down the Reasons why this Practice is permitted; in
search whereof, we shall only find one Place of note in all Christendom, which
is Genoua, whereof I intend to say something as briefly as I can.

The present State of the Commonwealth of Genoua.
The State of Genoua is small, and not very Fertile, having little Natural
Wealth or Materials to employ the People, nor yet Victuals sufficient to feed
them; but nevertheless, by their Industry in former times by Foreign Trade into
Egypt, Soria, Constantinople, and all those Levant Parts for Spices, Drugs,
Raw Silks, and many other Rich Wares, with which they served the most Places of
Europe, they grew to an incredible Wealth, which gave life unto the Strength of
their Cities, the Pomp of their Buildings, and other singular Beauties. But
after the Foundation and Increase of that Famous City of Venice, the said
Trades turned that way. And since likewise the greatest Part thereof does come
into England, Spain, and the Low Countries, by Navigation, directly from the
East Indies, which alterations in the Traffic, has forced them of Genoua to
change their course of Trading with Wares, into Exchanging of their Money:
which, for Gain, they spread not only into diverse Countries where the Trade is
performed with Merchandise; but more especially, they do therewith serve the
want of the Spaniards in Flanders and other Places, for their Wars, whereby the
Private Merchants are much Enriched, but the Public Treasure by this Course is
not increased, and the Reasons why the Commonwealth of Genoua does suffer this
Inconvenience, are these.

First, and Privcipally, they are forced to leave those Trades which they
cannot keep from other Nations, who have better means by Situation, Wares,
Shipping, Munition, and the like, to perform these Affairs with more advantage
than they are able to do.

Secondly, They proceed like a wife State, who still retain as much Trade as
they can, although they are not able to procure the Twentieth Part of that
which they had. For having few or no Materials of their own to employ their
People, yet they supply this want by the Fleece-wools of Spain, and Raw Silks
of Sicilia, working them into Velvets, Damasks, Sattens, Wollen-drapery, and
other Manufactures.

Thirdly, Whereas they find no means in their own Country to employ and Trade
their great Wealth to Profit, they content themselves to do it in Spain and
other places, either in Merchandise, or by Exchanging their Moneys for gain, to
those Merchants who trade therewith in Wares. And thus, wheresoever they live
abroad for a Time, circulting the World for Gain; yet in the end, the Center of
this Profit is in their own Native Country.

Lastly, The Government of Genoua being Aristocracy, they are assured, that
although the Public get little, yet if their Private Merchants gain much from
Strangers, they shall do well enough, because the Richest and Securest Treasure
of a Free State, are the riches of the Nobility, (who in Genoua are Merchants)
which falls not out so in a Monarchy, where between the comings in of a
Prince, and the means of Private Men, there is this Distinction of Meum and
Tuum but in the Occasions and Dangers of a Republic or Commonwealth, where
Liberty and Government might be changed into Servitude, there the Proper
substance of private Men is the public Treasure, ready to be spent with their
lives in defense of their own Sovereignty.

To the Twenty Fourth. If a Merchant should buy VVares here, with intentions to
send them for Venice, and then value them as the Exchange comes from thence to
London, he may find himself far wide of his reckoning: For before his Goods
arrive at Venice, both the Price of his VVares and the Rate of the Exchange,
may alter very much. But if the meaning of the Author be, that this Valuation
may be made after the Goods arrive, and are sold at Venice, and the Money
remitted hither by Exchange; or else the Money which bought the said VVares
here, may be valued as the Exchange passed at that time from hence to Venice;
Is not all this very common and easy Business, unworthy to be put into the
Number of Admirable Feats?

To the Tenth. Although a rich Prince has great Power, yet is there not Power
in every rich Prince to make the Staple of Money run where he pleases: For the
Staple of any thing is not where it may be had, but where the thing does most
of all abound. VVhereupon we commonly say, that the Spaniard, in regard of his
great Treasure in the West Indies, has the Fountain or Staple of Money, which
he moves and causes to run into Italy, Germany, and the Low Countries, or
other Places where his occasions do require it, either for Peace or War.
Neither is this effected by any singular Power of the Exchange, but by diverse
Ways and Means; fitting those Places where the Money is to be employed. For if
the Use thereof be upon the Confines of France to maintain a War there, then
may it be safely sent in Specie on Carriages by Land; if in Italy, on Galleys
by Sea; if in the Low Countries, on Shipping by Sea also, but yet with more
danger, in regard of his Potent Enemies in that Passage. Wherefore in this
Occasion, although the Exchange is not absolutely necessary, yet is it very
useful. And because the Spaniards want of Gommodities from Germany and the
Low Countries is greater in value, than the Spanish Wares which are carried
into those Parts, therefore the King of Spain cannot be furnished there from
his own Subjects with Money by Exchange, but is and has been a long time
enforced to carry a great Part of his Treasure in Galleys for Italy, How the
Italians are enabled to furnish Spain with Money in Flanders.
where the Italians, and amongst them the Merchants of Genoua especially, do
take the same, and repay the Value thereof in Flanders, whereunto they are
enabled by their Trade with many rich Commodities, which they send continually
out of Italy into those Countries, and the Places thereabouts, from whence the
Italians return no great value in Wares, but deliver their Money for the Service
of Spain, and receive the Value by Exchange in Italy out of the Spanish
Treasure, which is brought thither in Galleys, as is afore-written.

So that by this we plainly see, that it is not the Power of Exchange that does
enforce Treasure, where the rich Prince will have it, but it is the Money
proceeding of Wares in Foreign Trade that does enforce the Exchange, and rules
the Price thereof high or low, according to the Plenty or Scarcity of the said
Money; which in this Discourse, upon all occasions, I think I have repeated near
as often as Malines in his Books, does make the Exchange to be an essential
Part of Trade, to be Active, Predominant, Overruling the price of Wares and
Moneys, Life, Spirit, and the Worker of Admirable Feats. All which we have now
briefly expounded; and let no Man admire why he himself did not take this
Pains, for then he should not only have taken away the great Opinion which he
labored to maintain of the Exchange, but also by a true Discovery of the right
Operation thereof, he should utterly have overthrown his Par pro Pari; which
Project (if it had prevailed) would have been a good Business for the Dutch,
and to the great Hurt of this Commonwealth, as has been sufficiently proved
in the 12th. Chapter.

Now therefore let the learned Lawyer fall cheerfully to his Books again, for
the Merchant cannot put him down, if he have no more skill than Admirable
Feats, when they may be so easily known and done in the Course of Trade? Well
then, if by this Discovery we have eased the Lawyer's Mind, and taken off the
Edg of his admiration, let him now play his Part, and take out a Writ of Error,
against the Par pro Pari; for this Project has misinformed many, and put us to
trouble to expound these Riddles.

Nay, but stay a while, can all this pass for current, to slight a Business
thus, which (the Author says) has been so seriously observed by that Famous
Council, and those worthy Merchants of Queen Elizabeth of Blessed Memory, and
also condemned by those French Kings, Lewis IX. Philip the Fair, and Philip de
Valois, with Confiscation of the Banker's Goods? I must confess, that all this
requires an Answer, which in part is already done by the Author himself. For he
says, that the Wisdom of our State found out the Evil, but they missed of the
remedy: and yet what Remedy this should be, no Man can tell, for there was none
applied; but all Practice and Use in Exchange stand still to this Day, in such
Manner and Form as they did at the time when these Feats were discovered, for
the State knew well, that there needed no Remedy, where there was no Disease.

Well then, how shall we be able to answer the Proceedings of the French Kings,
who did absolutely condemn the Bankers, and confiscated their Goods? Yes well
enough, for the Bankers might perhaps be condemned for something done in their
Exchanges against the Law, and yet their profession may still be Lawful, as it
is in Italy and France itself to this day. Nay, we will grant likewise, that
the Banks were banished, when the Bankers were punished; yet all this proves
nothing against Exchangers, for Kings and States enact many Statutes, and
suddenly repeal them, they do and undo; Princes may err, or else Malines is
grossly mistaken, Maintenance of Free Trade p. 76, 77, 78, 79.
where he sets down 35 several Statutes and other Ordinances, enacted by this
State in 350 Years time, to remedy the decay of Trade, and yet all are found
defective; only his reformation of the Exchange, or Par pro Pari, is effectual,
if we would believe him; but we know better, and so we leave him.

I might here take occasion to say something against another project of the
same Brood, that lately attended upon the Success of this Par pro Pari, as I
have been credibly informed, which is, the Changing and Rechanging here within
the Realm, of all the Plate, Bullion and Moneys, Foreign or Sterling, to pass
only by an Office, called, The King's Royal Exchanger, or his Deputies, paying
them a Penny upon the Value of every Noble: which might raise much to their
private Good, and destroy more to the public Hurt. For it would decay the
King's Coinage, deprive the Kingdom of much Treasure, abridge the Subjects of
their just Liberty, and utterly overthrow the Worthy Trade of Goldsmiths, all
which being Plain and Easy to the weakest Understandings, I will therefore
omit to amplisie upon these Particulars.

CHAP. XV. Of some Excesses and Evils in the Commonwealth, which
notwithstanding, decay not our Trade nor Treasure.
IT is not my Intent to Excuse or Extenuate any the least Excess or Evil in the
Commonwealth, but rather highly to Approve and Commend that which by others
has been Spoken and Written against such Abuses. Yet in this Discourse of
Treasure, as I have already set down affirmatively, which are the true Causes
that may either Augment or Decrease the same: So is it not impertinent to
continue my negative Declarations of those Enormities and Actions which cannot
work these Effects, as some Men have supposed: For in redress of this important
Business, if we mistake the Nature of the Malady, we shall ever apply such
Cures as will at least delay, if not confound the Remedy.

Let us then begin with usury, which if it might be turned into Charity, and
that they who are Rich would lend to the Poor freely; it were a Work pleasing
to Almighty God, and profitable to the Commonwealth. But taking it in the
Degree it now stands, how can we well say. That as Usury Increases, so Trade
Decreaseth? For although it is true, that some Men give over Trading, and buy
Lands, or put out their Money to Use when they are grown Rich or Old, or for
some other the like Occasions; yet for all this it does not follow, that the
Quantity of the Trade must lessen; for this Course in the Rich, gives
opportunity presently to the Younger and Poorer Merchants to rise in the World,
and to enlarge their Dealings; to the Performance whereof, if they want means
of their own, they may, and do, take it up at Interest: So that our Money lies
not dead, it is still Traded. How many Merchants, and Shopkeepers have begun
with little or nothing of their own, and yet are grown very Rich, by Trading
with other Men's Money? Do we not know, that when Trading is Quick and Good, many
Men, by means of their Experience, and having credit to take up Money at
Interest, do Trade for much more than they are worth of their own Stock; by
which Diligence of the Industrious, the Affairs of the Commonwealth are
Increased, the Moneys of Widows, Orphans, Lawyers, Gentlemen, and others, are
employed in the Course of Foreign Trade, which themselves have no skill to
perform. We find at this present, that notwithstanding the Poverty we are
fallen into by the Excesses and Losses of late times, yet that many Men have
much Money in their Chests, and know not how to dispose thereof, because the
Merchant will not take the same at Interest, (although at low Rates) in regard
there is a stop of Trade in Spain and in France, whereby he cannot employ his
own Means, much less other Men's Moneys. So that for these, and some other
Reasons which might be alleged, we might conclude, contrary to those who
affirm, that Trade decreaseth as Usury increases, for they rise and fall
together.

In the next Place, We hear our Lawyers much condemned; the Vexation and
Charges by multiplicity of Suits do exceed all the other Kingdoms of
Christendom; but whether this proceed from the Lawyer's Covetousness, or the
Peoples Perverseness, is a great Question. And let this be as it may, I will
enquire not farther therein than our present Discourse does require, concerning
the Decay of our Trade, and Impoverishing of the Kingdom. Sure I am, that Suits
in Law make many a Man Poor and Peniless, but how it should make us Trade for
less by one single Penny, I cannot well conceive. For although amongst the great
number of them who are Vexed and Undone by Controversies, there be ever some
Merchants; yet we know, that one Man's Necessity becomes another Man's
Opportunity. I never knew, as yet, a Decay in our Trade and Treasure for want
of Merchants, or Means to employ us, but rather by excessive Consumption of
Foreign Wares at home, or by a Declination in the Vent of our Commodities
abroad, caused either by the ruinous Effects of Wars, or some alterations in
the times of Peace, whereof I have spoken more fully in the Third Chapter. But,
to conclude with the Lawyers, I say, that their Noble Profession is necessary
to all, and their Cases, Quillets, Delays and Charges, are mischievous to many;
these things indeed are Cankers in the Estates of Particular Men, but not of
the Commonwealth, as some suppose, for one Man's Loss becomes another Man's
Gain; it is still in the Kingdom, I wish it might as surely remain in the right
Places.

Lastly, All kind of Bounty and Pomp is not to be avoided; for if we should
become so Frugal, that we would use few or no Foreign Wares, how shall we then
vent our own Commodities? What will become of our Ships, Mariners, Munitions,
our poor Artificers, and many others? Do we hope that other Countries will
afford us Money for All our Wares, without Buying or Battering for Some of
theirs? This would prove a vain Expectation; it is more Safe and Sure to run a
middle Course, by spending moderately, which will purchase Treasure
plentifully. Again, the Pomp of Buildings, Apparel, and the like, in the
Nobility, Gentry, and other able Persons, cannot impoverish the Kingdom; if it
be done with curious and costly Works upon our Materials, and by our own
People, it will maintain the Poor with the Purse of the Rich, which is the best
Distribution of the Commonwealth. But if any Man say, that when the People
want Work, the then Fishing Trade would be a better Employment, and far more
Profitable; I subscribe willingly. For in that great business, there is means
enough to employ both Rich and Poor, whereof there has been much said and
written; It rests only, that something might be as well effected for the
Honor and Wealth, both of the King and his Kingdoms.

CHAP. XVI. How the Revenues and Incoms of Princes may justly be raised.
NOw that we have set down the true Course by which a Kingdom may be enriched
with Treasure; In the next Place, we will endeavor to show the Ways and Means
by which a King may justly share therein, without the Hurt or Oppression of his
Subjects. The Revenues of Princes as they differ much in quantity, according to
the Greatness, Riches and Trade of their respective Dominons; so likewise is
there great diversity used in procuring the same, according to the Constitution
of the Countries, the Government, Laws and Customs of the People, which no
Prince can alter, but with much difficulty and Danger. Some Kings have their
Crown Lands, the first Fruits upon Ecclesiastical Livings, Customs, Tolls and
Imposts, upon all Trade to and from Foreign Countries; Loans, Donations and
Subsidies, upon all necessary occasions. Other Princes and States leaving the
three last, do add unto the rest, a Custom upon all new Wares transported from
one City, to be used in any other City or Place of their own Dominions, Customs
upon every alienation or sale of live Cattle, Lands, Houses, and the Portions
or Marriage Money of Women, Licence-mony upon all Victualing-Houses and
Innkeepers, Head-mony, Custom upon all the Corn, Wine, Oil, Salt, and the like,
which Grown and are Consumed in their own Dominions, etc. All which seem to be
a Rabble of Oppressions, serving to enrich those Princes which exact them, and
to make the People Poor and Miserable which endure them; especially in those
Countries where these Burdens are laid at heavy rates, as 4, 5, 6, and 7, per
Cent. But when all the Circumstance and Distinction of Places are duly
considered, they will be found not only necessary, and therefore lawful to be
used in some States, but also in diverse respects very profitable to the
Commonwealth.

First there are some States, as namely Venice, Florence, Genoua, the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, and others, which are singular for Beauty, and
excellent both for Natural and Artificial Strength, having likewise rich
Subjects: yet being of no very great Extent, nor enjoying such Wealth by
ordinary Revenues, as might support them against the sudden and powerful
invasions of those mighty Princes which do inviron them; they are therefore
enforced to strengthen themselves, not only with Confederates and Leagues,
(which may often fail them in their greatest need) but also by massing up store
of Treasure and Munition by those extraordinary courses before-written, which
cannot deceive them, but will ever be ready to make a good Defense, and to
offend or divert their Enemies.

Neither are these heavy Contributions so hurtful to the Happiness of the
People, as they are commonly esteemed: For as the Food and Raiment of the Poor
is made dear by Excise, so does the Price of their labor rise in proportion;
whereby the Burden (if any be) is still upon the Rick, who are either idle, or
at least work not in this kind, yet have they the Use, and are the great
Consumers of the Poors Labor: Neither do the Rich neglect in their several
Places and Callings to advance their Endeavors, according to those times which
do exhaust their Means and Revenues; wherein, if they should peradventure fail,
and therefore be forced to abate their sinful Excess and idle retainers; what
is all this but happiness in a Common wealth, when Virtue, Plenty and Arts,
shall thus be advanced all together? Nor can it be truly said, that a Kingdom
is impoverished, where Loss of the People is the Gain of the King, from whom
also such yearly Incoms have their annual issue to the Benefit of his Subjects;
except only that part of the Treasure which is laid up for the Public Good;
wherein likewise they who suffer have their safety, and therefore such
contributions are both Just and Profitable.

Yet here we must confess, that as the best things may be corrupted, so these
taxes may be abused, and the Common wealth notoriously wronged when they are
vainly Wasted and Consumed by a Prince, either upon unworthy worthy Persons,
such as deserve neither Rewards nor Countenance from the Majesty of a Prince;
but these dangerous Disorders are seldom seen, especially in such States as are
aforementioned, because the disposing of the Public Treasure is in the Power, and
under the Discretion of many; Neither is it unknown to all other Principalities
and Governments, that the end of such Excesses is ever ruinous, for they cause
great Want and Poverty, which often drives them from all order to exorbitance,
and therefore it is common Policy amongst Princes to prevent such Mischiefs
with great Care and Providence, by doing nothing that may cause the Nobility to
despair of their safety, nor leaving any thing undone which may gain the good
Will of the Commonalty, to keep all in due Obedience.

But now before we end this Point in hand, we must remember likewise that all
Bodies are not of one and the same Constitution; for that which is Physic to
one Man, is little better than Poison to another: Some States can not subsist,
but by the means of Heavy Taxes.
The States aforewritten, and diverse others like to them, cannot subsist by the
help of those extraordinary Contributions, whereof we have spoken, because they
are not able otherwise in short time, to raise sufficient Treasure to defend
themselves against a Potent Enemy, who has Power to invade them on the sudden,
as is already declared. But a Mighty Prince, whose Dominions are great and
United, his Subjects many and Loyal, his Countries rich both by Nature and
Traffic, his Victuals and Warlike Provisions plentiful and ready, his
Situation easy to offend others, and difficult to be Invaded, his Harbors
good, his Navy strong, his Alliance powerful, and his ordinary Revenues
sufficient, Princes, who have no just cause to say extraordinary and heavy
Taxes upon their Subjects.
Royally to support the Majesty of his State; besides a reasonable Sum which may
be advanced to lay up yearly in Treasure for future Occasions: shall not all
these Blessings (being well ordered) enable a Prince against the sudden
Invasion of any Mighty Enemy, without imposing those Extraordinary and Heavy
Taxes? Shall not the Wealthy and Loyal Subjects of such a Great and Just
Prince, maintain his Honor and their own Liberties with Life and Goods, always
supplying the Treasure of their Sovereign, until by a well-ordered War he may
enforce a happy Peace? Yes verily, it cannot otherwise be expected. And thus
shall a mighty Prince be more powerful in preserving the Wealth and Love of his
Subjects, than by Treasuring up their Riches with unnecessary Taxes, which
cannot but alter and provoke them.

Yea, but say some Men, we may easily contradict all this by Example taken from
some of the greatest Monarchs in Christendom, who, besides those Incomes which
here are termed ordinary, they add likewise all, or the most of the other heavy
Contributions. All which we grant, and more; for they use also to sell their
Offices and Places of Justice, which is an act both base and wicked, because it
robs worthy Men of their Merits, and betrayeth the Cause of the Innocent,
whereby God is displeased, the People oppressed, and Virtue banished from such
unhappy Kingdoms: Shall we then say, that these things are lawful and necessary
because they are used? God forbid, we know better, and we are well assured that
these Exactions are not taken for a necessary Defense of their own Right, but
through Pride and Covetousness to add Kingdom to Kingdom, and so to usurp the
right of others: The finister ends which some great Princes have in laying
heavy Taxes upon their Subjects.
Which Actions of Impiety are ever shadowed with some fair pretense of Sanctity,
as being done for the Catholic Cause, the Propagation of the Church, the
Suppression of Heretics, and such like Delusions, serving only to further
their own Ambition, whereof, in this Place, it shall be needless to make any
larger Discourse.

CHAP. XVII. Whether it be necessary for Great Princes to lay up Store of
Treasure.
BEfore we set down the Quantity of Treasure, which Princes may conveniently
lay up yearly, without hurting the Commonwealth, it will be fit to examine
whether the Act itself of Treasuring be necessary: For in common conference we
ever find some Men, who do so much dote or hope upon the Liberality of Princes,
that they term it Baseness, and conceive it needless for them to lay up store
of Treasure, accounting the Honor and Safety of great Princes to consist more
in their Bounty than in their Money, which they labor to confirm by the
Examples of Caesar, Alexander, and others, who hating Covetousness, achieved
many Acts and Victories by lavish Gifts and liberal Expenses. Unto which they
add also the little Fruit, which came by that great Sum of Money which King
David laid up and left to his Son Solomon; who, notwithstanding this, and all
his other rich Presents, and wealthy Traffic in a quiet Reign, consumed all
with Pomp and vain Delights, excepting only that which was spent in Building of
the Temple. Whereupon (say they,) if so much Treasure, gathered by so just a
King, effect so little, what shall we hope for by the Endeavors of this kind
in other Princes? Sardanapalus left Ten Millions of Pounds to them that flew
him. Darius left Twenty Millions of Pounds to Alexander that took him; Nero
being left rich, and extorting much from his best Subjects, gave away above
Twelve Millions of Pounds to his base Flatterers, and such unworthy Persons,
which caused Galba after him to revoke those Gifts. A Prince who has store of
Money, hates Peace, despises the Friendship of his Neighbors and Allies,
enters not only into unnecessary, but also into dangerous Wars, to ruin and
overthrow (sometimes) of his own Estate: All which, with diverse other weak
Arguments of this kind, (which for brevity I omit) make nothing against the
Lawful Gathering and Massing up of Treasure by wise and provident Princes, if
they be rightly understood.

For first, concerning those worthies who have obtained to the highest top of
Honor and Dignity, by their great Gifts and Expenses, who knows not that this
has been done rather upon the Spoils of their Enemies than out of their own
Coffers, which is indeed a Bounty that causes neither Loss nor Peril? Whereas
on the contrary, those Princes which do not providently lay up Treasure, or do
immoderately consume the same when they have it, will suddenly come to Want and
Misery; Excess and Bounty brings Beggary, which makes most Men devise in their
heads how to extort and get Money into their hands.
for there is nothing does so soon decayas Excessive Bounty, in using whereof
they want the means to use it. And this was King Solomon's Case notwithstanding
his infinite Treasure, which made him over-burthen his Subjects in such a
manner, that (for this Cause) many of them rebelled against his Son Rehoboam,
who thereby lost a great Part of his Dominions, being so grossly misled by his
young Counselors. Therefore a Prince that will not oppress his People, and yet
be able to maintain his Estate, and defend his Right, that will not run himself
into Poverty, Contempt, Hate, and Danger, must lay up Treasure, and be thrifty;
for further proof whereof I might yet produce some other Examples, which here I
do omit as needless.

Only I will add this as a necessary Rule to be observed, that when more
Treasure must be raised than can be received by the ordinary Taxes, it ought
ever to be done with equality to avoid the Hate of the People, who are never
pleased except their Contributions be granted by general consent: For which
purpose, the Inventions of Parliaments is an excellent Policy of Government, to
keep a sweet Concord between a King and his Subjects, by restraining the
Insolency of the Nobility, and redressing the Injuries of the Commons, without
engaging a Prince to adhere to either Party, but indifferently to favor both.
There could nothing be devised with more judgment for the common Quiet of a
Kingdom, or with greater care for the Safety of a King, who hereby has also
good means to dispatch those things by others, which will move Envy, and to
execute that himself which will merit Thanks.

CHAP. XVIII. How much Treasure a Prince may conveniently lay up Yearly.
THus far we have showed the Ordinary and Extraordinary incomes of Princes, the
Convenience thereof, and to whom only it does necessarily and justly belong, to
take the Extraordinary Contributions of their Subjects. It rests now to
examine what proportion of Treasure each particular Prince may conveniently lay
up yearly. This business does seem at the first to be very Plain and Easy; for
if a Prince have Two Millions yearly Revenue, and spend but one; why should he
not lay up the other? Indeed I must confess, that this Course is ordinary in
the Means and Gettings of Private Men, but in the Affairs of Princes it is far
different; there are other circumstances to be considered, for although the
Revenue of a King should be very great, Foreign Trade must give proportion to a
Princes Treasure which is laid up yearly.
yet if the Gain of the Kingdom be but small, this Latter must ever give Rule
and Proportion to that Treasure, which may conveniently be laid up yearly; for
if he should mass up more Money than is gained by the Overbalance of his
Foreign Trade, he shall not Fleece but Flea his Subjects, and so with their ruin
overthrow himself for want of future Sheerings. To make this Plain, Suppose a
Kingdom to be rich by Nature and Art, that it may supply itself of Foreign Wares
by Trade, and yet advance yearly 200000 l. in ready Money: Next, Suppose all the
King's Revenues to be 900000 l. and his Expenses but 400000 l. whereby he may
lay up 300000 l. more in his Coffers yearly, than the whole Kingdom gains from
Strangers by Foreign Trade; who sees not then at all the Money in such a State,
would suddenly be drawn into the Prince's Treasure, whereby the Life of Lands
and Arts must Fail and Fall to the ruin both of the Public and Private Wealth?
A Prince whose Subjects have but little Foreign Trade cannot lay up much Money.
So that a King who desires to lay up much Money, must endeavor by all good
means to maintain and increase his Foreign Trade, because it is the sole way,
not only to lead him to his own ends, but also to enrich his Subjects to his
farther Benefit: For a Prince is esteemed no less powerful, by having many rich
well affected Subjects, than by possessing much Treasure in his Coffers.

But here we must meet with an Objection, which peradventure may be made
concerning such States (whereof I have formerly spoken) which are of no great
Extent, and yet bordering upon mighty Princes, are therefore constrained to lay
extraordinary Taxes upon their Subjects, whereby they procure to themselves
very great incomes yearly, and are richly provided against any Foreign
Invasions; yet have they no such great Trade with Strangers, as that the Over
balance or Gain of the same, may suffice to lay up the one half of that which
they advance yearly, besides their own Expenses.

To this the Answer is, that still the Gain of their Foreign Trade must be the
Rule of laying up their Treasure, the which although it should not be much
yearly; yet in the time of a long continued Peace, and being well managed to
advantage, it will become a great Sum of Money, able to make a long Detence,
which may End or Divert the War. Neither are all the Advances of Princes
strictly tied to be massed up in Treasure, for they have other no less
necessary and profitable Ways to make them Rich and Powerful, by issuing out
continually a great Part of the Money of their yearly Incomes to their Subjects
from whom it was first taken; as namely, by employing them to make Ships of
War, with all the Provisions thereunto belonging, to build and repair Forts, to
buy and store up Corn in the Granaries of each Province for a Years use (at
least) aforehand, to serve in occasion of Dearth, which cannot be neglected by
a State but with great Danger, to erect Banks with their Money, for the Increase
of their Subjects Trade, to maintain in their Pay, Colonels, Captains,
Soldiers, Commanders, Mariners, and others, both by Sea and Land, with good
Discipline, to fill their Storehouses, (in sundry strong Places) Munition for
War ought to be kept in diverse Places of the State to prevent the Loss of all
by Treachery in one Place.
and to abound in Gunpowder, Brimstone, Saltpetre, Shot, Ordnance, Muskets,
Swords, Pikes, Armours, Horses, and in many other such like Provisions fitting
for War; all which will make them to be feared abroad and loved at home,
especially if care be taken that all (as near as possible) be made out of the
Matter and Manufacture of their own Subject, which bear the Burden of the
yearly Contributions; for a Prince (in this Case) is like the Stomach in the
Body, which if it cease to digest and distribute to the other Members, it does
no sooner corrupt them, but it destroys itself.

Thus we have seen, that a small State may lay up a great Wealth in Necessary
Provisions, which are Princes Jewels, no less precious than their Treasure; for
in time of need they are ready, and cannot otherwise be had (in some places) on
the sudden, whereby a State may be lost, whilst Munition is in Providing: So
that we may account that Prince as poor who can have no Wares to buy at his
need, as he that has no Money to buy Wares for although Treasure is said to be
the Sinews of the War, yet this is so because it does provide, Unite and Move
the Power of Men, Victuals, and Munition, where and when the Cause does
require; but if these things be wanting in due time, what shall we then do with
our Money? The Consideration of this, does cause diverse well-governed States to
be exceeding provident, and well furnished of such Provisions, especially those
Granaries and Storehouses with that famous Arsenal of the Venetians, are to be
admired for the Magnificence of the Buildings, the Quantity of the Munitions
and Stores both for Lea and Land, the Multitude of the Workmen, the Divernty
and Excellency of the Arts, with the Order of the Government. They are rare and
worthy Things for Princes to behold and imitate; for Majesty, without
providence of competent Force, and Ability of necessary Provisions is
un-assured.

CHAP. XIX. Of some different Effects, which proceed from Natural and
Artificial Wealth.
IN the latter end of the Third Chapter of this Book, I have already written
something concerning Natural and Artificial Wealth, and therein showed how much
Art does add to Nature; but it is yet needful to handle these Particulars apart
that so we may the better discern their several Operations in a Commonwealth.
For the effecting whereof. I might draw some comparisons from Turkey and Italy,
or from some other remote Countries, but I will not range so far, having Matter
sufficient herein Great Britain, and the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
to make this Business plain: Wherefore, in the first Place, we will begin with
England briefly, and only in general terms, to show the Natural Riches of this
Famous Nation, with some principal Effects which they produce in the
Disposition of the People, and Strength of the Kingdom.

If we duly consider Englands Largeness, Beauty, Fertility, Strength, both by
Sea and Land, in multitude of Warlike People, Horses, Ships, Ammunition,
advantageous situation for Defense and Trade, number of Seaports and Harbors,
which are of difficult access to Enemies, and of easy outlet to the
Inhabitants Wealth by excellent Fleecewools, Iron, Lead, Tin, Saffron, Corn,
Victuals, Hides, Wax, and other natural Endowments; we shall find this Kingdom
capable to sit as Master of a Monarchy. For what greater Glory and Advantage
can any powerful Nation have, than to be thus Richly and Naturally possessed of
all things needful for Food, Raiment, War, and Peace, not only for its own
plentiful use, but also to supply the Wants of other Nations, in such a
measure, that much Money may be thereby gotten yearly, to make the happiness
complete. For Experience tells us, that notwithstanding that excessive
Consumption of this Kingdom alone, to say nothing of Scotland, there is
exported Communibus annis of of our own Native Commodities for the Value of
Twenty two hundred thousand Pounds Sterling, or somewhat more; so that if we
were not too much affected to Pride, monstrous fashions, and Riot, above all
other Nations, one Million and an half of Pounds might plentifully supply our
unnecessary wants (as I may term them) of Silks, Sugars, Spices, Fruits, and
all others; so that Seven hundred Pounds might be yearly treasured up in Money
to make the Kingdom exceeding Rich and Powerful in short time. But this great
Plenty which we enjoy, makes us a People not only Vicious and Excessive,
wastful of the Means we have, but also improvident and Careless of much other
Wealth that shamefully we lose, which is, the Fishing in his Majesty's Seas of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, being of no less consequence than all our other
Riches which we Export and Vent to Strangers, The fruits of Idleness which are
Englands common reproaches among Strangers.
whilst in the mean time (through lewd Idleness) great multitudes of our People
Cheat, Roar, Rob, Hang, Beg, Cant, Pine, and Perish, which by this Means and
Maintenance might be much increased, to the further Wealth and Srength of
these Kingdoms, especially by Sea, for our own Safety, and Terror of our
enemies. The Endeavors of the Industrious Dutch, do give sufficient testimony
of this Truth, to our great shame, and no less peril, if it have not a timely
Prevention: For, whilst we leave our wonted honorable Exercises and Studies,
following our Pleasures, and of late years besotting our selves with Pipe and
Pot, in a Beastly manner, sucking Smoke, and drinking Healths, until Death
stares many in the Face; the said Dutch have well-near left this Swinish Vice,
and taken up our wonted Valor, which we have often so well performed both by
Sea and Land, and particularly in their Defense, although they are not so
thankful as to acknowledge the same. The Netherlanders Ingratitude.
The sum of all is this, that the general Leprosy of our Piping, Potting,
Feasting, Fashions, and Mis-spending our time in Idleness and Pleasure
(contrary to the Law of God, and the Use of other Nations) has made us
effeminate in our Bodies, weak in our Knowledge, poor in our Treasure, declining
in our Valor, unfortunate in our Enterprises, and contemned by our Enemies. I
write the more of these Excesses, because they do so greatly waste our Wealth,
which is the main Subject of this whole Book's Discourse for all Christendom to
admire and fear, if we would but add Art to Nature, our Labor to our Natural
Means; the neglect whereof has given a notable Advantage to other Nations, and
especially to the Hollanders, whereof I will briefly say something in the
next-Place.

But first, I will deliver my Opinion concerning our Clothing, which although
it is the greatest Wealth and best Employment of the Poor of this Kingdom; yet
nevertheless we may peradventure employ our selves with better Safety, Plenty,
and Profit, in using more Tillage and Fishing, than to trust so wholly to the
making of Cloth? for in times of War, or by other occasions, if some Foreign
Princes should prohibit the Use thereof in their Dominions, it might suddenly
cause much Poverty and dangerous Uproars; especially by our Poor People, when
they should be deprived of their ordinary Maintenance, which cannot so easily
fail them, when their Labors should be divided into the said diversity of
Employments, whereby also many thousands would be the better enabled to do the
Kingdom good Service in occasion of War, especially by Sea: And so leaving
England, we will pass over into the United Provinces of the Netherlands.

As Plenty and Power do make a Nation Vicious and Improvident, so Penury and
Want do make a People Wise and industrious: Concerning the last of these, I
might instance diverse Commonwealths of Christendom, who having little or
nothing in their own Territories, The Hollanders Improvement and Industry.
do notwithstanding purchase great Wealth and Strength, by their industrious
Commerce with Strangers, amongst which the United Provinces of the
Low Countries are now of greatest Note and Fame: For since they have cast off
the Yoke of Spanish slavery, how wonderfully are they improved in all human
Policy? What great means have they obtained in defending their Liberty against
the Power of so great an Enemy? And is not all this performed by their
continual Industry in the Trade of Merchandise? Are not their Provinces the
Magizines and Store houses of Wares for most places of Christendom, whereby
their Wealth, Shipping, Mariners, Arts, People, and thereby the Public
Revenues and Excise are grown to a wonderful Height? If we compare the Times of
their Subjection, to their present Estate, they seem not the same People; Those
Princes which willingly support the Dutch would as resolutely resist the
Spaniard
for who knows not that the Condition of those Provinces was mean and Turbulent
under the Spaniards Government, which brought rather a greater Charge then a
further Strength to to their Ambition; neither would it prove over difficult
for the Neighbor Princes in short time, to reduce those Countries to their
former Estate again, if their own safety did require the same, as certainly it
would if the Spaniard were sole Lord of those Netherlands, but our Discourse
tends not to show the Means of those Mutations, otherwise than to find out the
chief Foundation of the Hollander's Wealth and Greatness: For it seems a wonder
to the World, that such a small Country, not fully so big as two of our biggest
Shires, having little natural Wealth, Victuals, Timber, or other necessary
Ammunitions, either for War or Peace, should notwithstanding possess them all
in such extraordinary Plenty, that besides their own wants, (which are very
great) they can and do likewise serve and sell to other Princes, Ships,
Ordnance, Cordage, Corn, Powder, Shot, and what not, which by their industrious
Trading they gather from all the Quarters of the World: Much Policy, but little
Honesty.
In which courses they are not less injurious to supplant others, (especially
the English) than they are careful to strengthen themselves And to effect this,
and more than has been said, (which is their War with Spain) they have little
Foundation, besides the Fishing, which is permitted them in His Majesty's Seas,
being indeed the Means of an incredible Wealth and Strength both by Sea and
Land, as Robert Hichcock, Tobias Gentleman, and others have published at large
in print, to them that list to read. And the States General themselves in their
Proclamation, have ingeniously set out the Worth thereof in these words
following, Part of the States Proclamation, dated in the Hague, 19. July, 1624.
The great Fishing, and catching of Herrings, is the chiefest Trade and
principal Gold Mine of the United Provinces, whereby many Thousands of
Households, Families, Handicrafts, Trades and Occupations, are set on work,
well maintained and prosper, especially the Sailing and Navigation, as well
within as without these Countries is kept in great estimation; Moreover many
returns of Money, with the Increase of the Means, Convoys, Customs, and
Revenues of these Countries, are augmented thereby and prosper, with other
words following, as is at large expressed in the said Proclamation, set forth
by the States General for the Preservation of the said Trade of Fishing;
without which it is apparent that they cannot long subsist in Sovereignty; for
if this Foundation perish, the whole Building of their Wealth and Strength both
by Sea and Land must fall; for the multitude of their Shipping would suddenly
decay, their Revenues and Customs would become small, their Countries would be
Depopulated for want of Maintenance, whereby the Excise must fail, and all
their other Trades to the East Indies, or elsewhere must faint. So that the
Glory and Power of these Netherlands, consists in this, Fishing of Herrings,
Ling, and Cod, in his Majesty's Seas. It rests therefore to know, what Right
or Title they have thereunto, and how they are able to Possess and Keep the
same, against all other Nations.

The Answer to these two Questions is not difficult: For first, It is not the
Netherlandish Author of Mare Liberum, that can entitle them to Fish in His
Majesty's Seas. For besides the Justice of the Cause, and Examples of other
Countries, which might be alleged, I will only say, that such Titles would be
sooner decided by Swords, than with Words; I do believe indeed, that it is free
for the Fish to come thither at their Pleasure, but for the Dutch to carry and
carry them away from thence without His Majesty's License, I harbor no such
Thought. There may be good Policy to connive still, and so long to permit them
this Fishing as they are in perfect league with England, and in War with Spain.
But if the Spaniards were Masters of the United Provinces, as heretofore, it
would nearly concern these Kingdoms to claim their own Right, and carefully to
make as good use thereof, for Increase of their Wealth and Strength, to oppose
that Potent Enemy, as now the Netherlanders do, and are well enabled for the
same Purpose: By which particular alone they are ever bound to acknowledge
their strong Alliance with England, above all other Nations; for there is none
that has the like good Means to lend them such a Powerful maintenance. Fishing
and Money compared.
Nor were it possible for the Spaniard (if he had those Countries again) to make
a new Foundation with the Power of his Money, to increase his Strength, either
by Sea or Land, to offend these Kingdoms, more than he is now able to perform,
with the Convenience of those Provinces which he has already in his
Possession; for it is not the Place, but the Employment; not the Barren
Netherlands, but the Rich Fishing, which gives Foundation, Trade, and
Subsistence to those multitudes of Ships, Arts, and People, whereby also the
Excises and other public Revenues are continued, and without which Employment
all the said great Dependences must necessarily disbandon and fail in very
short time. For although, I confess, that store of Money may bring them
Materials (which they altogether want) and Arts-men to build them Shipping, yet
where are the Wares, to Freight and Maintain them? If Money then shall be the
only means to send them out in Trade, what a poor number of Ships will this
employ? Or if the uncertain Occasions of War must support them, will not this
require another Indies, and all too little to maintain the Tenth Part of so
many Ships and Men as the Hollanders do now set on work by the Fishing, and
other Trades thereon depending? But if it be yet said, that the Spaniard, being
Lord of all those Netherlands, his Expense of the present War there will cease,
and so this Power may be turned upon us. The Answer is, that when Princes send
great Forces abroad to invade others, they must likewise increase their Charge
and Strength at Home, to defend themselves; and also we must consider, that if
the Spaniard will attempt any thing upon these Kingdoms, he must consume a
great Part of his Treasure in Shipping, whereby the Means of his invading Power
of Money and Men to land, will be much less than now it is in the
Low Countries: Nor should we regard them, but be ever ready to beard them, when
our Wealth and Strength by Sea and Land, might be so much increased by the
Possession and Practice of our Fishing, of which particular I will yet say
something more where occasion shall be offered, in that which follows. And
here in this Place I will only add, that if the Spaniard were sole Lord of all
the Netherlands, he must then necessarily drive a great Trade by Sea, to supply
the common Wants of those Countries, whereby in occasion of War, we should have
means daily to take much Wealth from him; whereas now the Spaniard using little
or no Trade in these Seas, but employing his Ships of War to the uttermost of
his power, he only takes, and we lose great matters continually.

Now concerning the second Question, Whether the Hollanders be able to Possess
and Keep this Fishing against all other Nations. It is very probable, that
although they claim now no other right than their own freedom in this Fishing,
seeming to leave the like to all others; yet if the Practice of any Nation
should seek either to Fish with them, or to supplant them, they would be both
ready and able to maintain this Golden Mine, against the strongest Opposition,
except England, whose Harbors and In-lands, with other daily reliefs, are very
needful, if not absolutely necessary for this Employment, and whose Power also
by Sea, is able (in short time) to give this Business disturbance, and utter
Ruin, if the Occasion should be so urgent as before supposed; Neither is it
enough for any Man to contradict all this by saying, the Hollanders are very
strong by Sea, when both Sea and Land encounter them with a greater Power: We
must observe from whence their strength grows, and if the Root be once spoiled,
the Branches soon will wither; and therefore it were an Error to esteem, or
value them according to the present Power and Wealth, which they have obtained
by Trade or Purchase; for although this were far greater than indeed it is, yet
would it soon be consumed in a chargeable War against a Potent Enemy, when the
Current of those Accidents may be stop^ and turned by preventing the substance
itself (which is the Fishing in His Majesty's Seas) that gives foundation, and
is the very Fountain of their strength and happiness: The United Provinces (we
know) are like a fair Bird suited with goodly borrowed plumes; but if every
Fowl should take his Feather, this Bird would rest near naked: Nor have we ever
seen these Netherlands as yet, in their greatest Occasions, to set forth near
so many Ships of War at once as the English have often done, without any
hindrance of their ordinary Traffic. It is true indeed, they have an infinite
number of weak Ships to fish with, and fetch Corn, Salt, etc. for their own
Victualling and Trading, the like to setch Timber, Plank, Boards, Pitch, Hemp,
Tar, Flax, Masts, Cordage, and other Ammunitions, to make those multitudes of
Ships, The Netherlands Ploughs.
which unto them are as our Ploughs to us, the which except they stir, the
People starve; their Shipping therefore cannot be spared from their Traffic
(as ours may if occasion require) no not for a very short time, without utter
ruin, because it is the daily maintenance of their great multitudes which gain
their living but from hand to Mouth, upon which also depends the great Excises,
and other public Revenues, which support the State itself: Neither indeed are
those Vessels strong or fit for War; and in their proper use of Fishing and
Trade, they would become the Riches, or the Purchase of a Potent Enemy by Sea,
as they partly find by one poor Town of Dunkirk, notwithstanding their great
charge of Men of War, strong Convoys, and other commendable diligence, which
continually they use to prevent this Mischief: But if the Occasion of a more
powerful Enemy by Sea, should force them to double or treble those Charges, we
may well doubt the Means of their continuance, especially, when (by us) their
Fishing might nevertheless be prevented, which should procure the Maintenance.
Men who speak by Affection or Tradition, not from reason. The Hollanders main
supportance is England's good Alliance.
These and other circumstances make me often wonder, when I hear the Dutch
vain-gloriously to brag, and many English simply to believe, that the United
Provinces are our Forts, Bulwarks, Walls, Outworks, and I know not what,
without which we cannot long subsist against the Spanish Forces; when in truth,
We are the main Fountain of their happiness, both for War and Peace; for Trade
and Treasure, for Munition and Men; spending our blood in their Defense; whilst
their People are preserved to conquer in the Indies, and to reap the Fruits of
a rich Traffic out of our own Bosoms; which being assumed to our selves, (as
we have Right and Power to do) would mightily increase the Breed of our People,
by this good means of their Maintenance, and well enable us against the
strongest Enemy, and force likewise great multitudes of those Netherlanders
themselves to seek their living here with us for want of better maintenance:
Whereby our many decayed Sea-Towns and Castles would soon be re-edified, and
Populated in more ample manner than formerly they were in their best Estate.
And thus these forces being united, would be ever more ready, sure and
Vigorous, than a greater Strength that lies divided, which is always subject to
Delays, Diversion, and other Jealousies, of all which we ought not to be
ignorant, but perfectly to know, and use our own strength when we have
occasion, and especially, we must ever be watchful to preserve this Strength,
lest the Subtilty of the Dutch (under some fair shows, and with their Money)
prevail, as peradventure they lately practiced in Scotland, to have had a
Patent for the Possessing, Inhabiting, and Fortifying of that excellent Island
of Lewis in the Orcades; whose Situation, Harbors, Fishing, Fertility,
Largeness, and other advantages, would have made them able (in short time) to
offend these Kingdoms by sudden Invasions, and to have defended the aforesaid
Fishing against His Majesty's greatest Power, add also to send out and return
home their Shipping prosperously that way, to and from the East and
West Indies, Spain, and Streights, and other Places, without passing through
His Majesty's narrow Seas, where in all occasions, this Kingdom now has so
great advantage to take their Ships, and prevent their best Trades, which would
soon bring them to ruin, whereby (as they well know) we have a greater Tie and
Power over them than any other Nation. And howsoever the said Island of Lewis
might have been obtained in the Name of Private Men, and under the fair
pretense of bringing Commerce into those remote Parts of Scotland; yet in the
end, when the Work had been brought to any goad Perfection, the Possession and
Power would no doubt have come to the Lords, the States General, even as we
know they have lately gotten diverse places of great Strength and Wealth in the
East Indies, in the Names and with the Purse of their Merchants, whereby also
their actions herein have been obscured, and made less notorious unto the
World, until they had obtained their Ends, which are of such consequence, that
it does much concern this Nation in particular, carefully to observe their
proceedings, for they notoriously follow the Steps of that Valiant and Politic
Captain, Philip of Macedon, Where Force fails yet Money prevails; thus hopes the
Hollanders.
whose Maxim was, That where Force could not prevail, he always used Bribes and
Money, to corrupt those who might advance his Fortune; by which Policy he gave
Foundation to a Monarchy; and what know we but that the Putch may aim at some
such Sovereignty, when they shall find their Indian attempts and other subtle
Plots, succeed so prosperously? Do we not see their Lands are now become too
little to contain this sweling People, whereby their Ships and Seas are made
the Habitations of great multitudes? And yet, to give them further breed, are
they not spared from their own Wars, to enrich the State and themselves by
Trade and Arts? Whilst by this Policy many thousands of Strangers are also
drawn thither for performance of their Martial Employments, whereby the great
Revenue of their Excises is so much the more increased, and all things so
subtly contrived, that although the Foreign Soldier be well paid, yet all must
be there again expended; and thus the Wealth remains still in their own
Countries; nor are the Strangers enriched which do them this great Service.

I have heard some Italians Wisely and Worthily Discourse of the Natural
Strength and Wealth of England, which they make to be matchless, if we should
(but in part) apply our selves to such Policies and Endeavors as are very
commonly used in some other Countries of Europe; and much they have admired,
that our Thoughts and Jealousies attend only upon the Spanish and French
greatness, never once suspecting, but constantly embracing the Netherlands as
our best Friends and Allies; when in truth, (as they well observe) there are no
People in Christendom who do Undermine, Hurt, and Eclipse us daily in our
Navigation and Trades, both abroad and at home; and this not only in the rich
Fishing in His Majesty's Seas (whereof we have already written) but also in our
Inland Trades between City and City, in the Manufactures of Silks, Wools, and
the like, made here in this Kingdom, wherein they never give Employment or
Education in their Arts to the English, but ever (according to the Custom of
the Jews, where they abide in Turkey, and diverse places of Christendom) they
live wholly to themselves in their own Tribes. So that we may truly say of the
Dutch, that although they are amongst us, yet certainly they are not of us, no
not they who are Born and Bred here in our own Country, for still they will be
Dutch, not having so much as one Drop of English Blood in their Hearts.

More might be written of these Netherlanders Pride and Ambitious Endeavors,
whereby they hope in time to grow Mighty, if they be not prevented; and much
more may be said of their cruel and unjust Violence used (especially to their
best Friends, the English) in matters of Blood, Trade, and other Profits, where
they have had Advantage and Power to perform it; but these things are already
published in Print, to the View and Admiration of the World, wherefore I will
conclude, and the Sum of all is this, That the United Provinces, which now are
so great a Trouble, if not a Terror to the Spaniard, were heretofore little
better than a Charge to them in their Possession, and would be so again in the
like Occasion, the Reason whereof I might yet further enlarge; but they are not
pertinent to this Discourse, more than is already declared, to show the
different Effects between Natural and Artificial Wealth: The first of which, as
is most Noble and Advantageous, being always ready and certain, so does it make
the People Careless, Proud, and given to all excesses; whereas the Second
enforces Vigilance, Literature, Arts and Policy. My wishes therefore are, that
as England does plentifully enjoy the one, and is fully capable of the other,
that our Endeavors might as worthily conjoyn them both together, to the
Reformation of our vicious Idleness, and greater Glory of these Famous Kingdoms.

CHAP. XX. The Order and Means whereby we may draw up the Balance of our
Foreign Trade.
NOw, that we have sufficiently proved the Balance of our Foreign Trade, to be
the true Rule of our Treasure; It rests that we show by whom, and in what
manner the said Balance may be drawn up at all times, when it shall please the
State to discover how we prosper or decline in this Great and Weighty Business,
wherein the Officers of his Majesty's Customs, are the only Agents to be
employed, because they have the Accounts of all the Wares which are issued out
or brought into the Kingdom; and although (it is true) they cannot exactly set
down the Cost and Charges of other Men's Goods bought here or beyond the Seas;
yet nevertheless, if they ground themselves upon the Book of Rates, they shall
be able to make such an estimate as may well satisfy this Enquiry: For it is
not expected, that such an account can possibly be drawn up to a just Balance,
it will suffice only, that the Difference be not over great.

How we must value our Exportations and Importations.
First therefore, concerning our Exportations, when we have valued their first
cost, we must add Twenty five per Cent. thereunto, for the Charges here, for
Freight of Ships, Insurance of the Adventure, and the Merchant's gains; and for
our Fishing Trades, which pay no Custom to His Majesty, the Value of such
Exportations may be easily esteemed by good Observations which have been made,
and may continually be made, according to the Increase or Decrease of those
Affairs, the present Estate of this Commodity being valued at One Hundred and
Forty Thousand Pounds issued yearly. Also we must add to our Exportations, all
the Moneys which are carried out in Trade by License from His Majesty.

2 dly. For our Importations of Foreign Wares, the Custom-Books serve only to
direct us concerning the Quantity, for we must not value them as they are rated
here, but as they cost us with all Charges laden into our Ships beyond the
Seas, in the respective Places where they are bought: For the Merchan^'s Gain,
the Charges of Insurance, Freight of Ships, Customs, Imposts, and other Duties
here, which do greatly indear them unto our Use and Consumption, are,
notwithstanding, but Commutations amongst our selves; for the Stranger has no
part thereof: Wherefore our said Importations ought to be valued at Twenty Five
per Cent. less than they are rated to be worth here. And although this may seem
to be too great allowance upon many rich Commodities, which come but from the
Low Countries, and other Places near hand, yet will it be found reasonable,
when we consider it in gross Commodities, and upon Wares laden in remote
Countries, as our Pepper, which cost us, with charges, but Four pence the
Pound: So that when all is brought into a Medium, the Valuation ought to be
made as afore-written. And therefore, the Order which has been used to
multiply the full Rates upon Wares, inwards by Twenty, would produce a very
great Error in the Balance; The Trade to the East Indies, is not only great in
it self, but it does also make our other Trades much greater than they were.
for in this manner the Ten Thousand Bags of Pepper, which this Year we have
brought hither from the East Indies, should be valued at very near Two Hundred
and Fifty Thousand Pounds, whereas all this Pepper in the Kindom's Account,
cost not above Fifty Thousand Pounds, because the Indians have had no more of
us, although we paid them extraordinary dear prices for the same. All the other
Charges (as I have said before) is but a Change of effects amongst our selves,
and from the Subject to the King, which cannot impoverish the Commonwealth. But
it is true, That whereas Nine Thousand Bags of the said Pepper are already
Shipped out for diverse Foreign Parts, These and all other Wares, Foreign or
Domestic, which are thus transported Outward, ought to be cast up by the
Rates of His Majesty's Custom-mony, Multiplied by Twenty, or rather by Twenty
Five, (as I conceive) which will come nearer the Reckoning, when we consider
all our Trades, to bring them into a Medium.

3 ly. We must remember, that all Wares Exported or Imported by Strangers, (in
their Shipping) be esteemed by themselves; for what they carry out, the Kingdom
has only the first Cost and Custom: And what they bring in, we must rate it as
it is worth here, the Custom, Impost, and petty Charges only deducted.

Lastly, There must be good notice taken of all the great Losses which we
receive at Sea in our Shipping, either Outward or Homeward bound: For the Value
of the one, is to be deducted from our Exportations, and the Value of the other
is to be added to our Importations; for to Lose and to consume does produce one
and the same Reckoning. Likewise, If it happen that His Majesty does make over
any great Sums of Money by Exchange, to maintain a Foreign War, where we do not
Feed and Cloth the Soldiers, and provide the Armies, we must deduct all this
Charge out of our Exportations, or add it to our Importations; for this Expense
does either carry out, or hinder the coming in of so much Treasure. And here we
must remember the great Collections of Money, which are supposed to be made
throughout the Realm yearly, from our Recusants by Priests and Jesuits, who
secretly convey the some unto their Colleges, Cloisters, and Nunneries beyond
the Seas, from whence it never returns to us again in any kind; Two Contraries
which are both pernicious.
therefore if this Mischief cannot be prevented, yet it must be esteemed and set
down as a clear Loss to the Kingdom, except (to Balance this) we will imagine,
that as great a Value may perhaps come in from Foreign Princes to their
Pensioners here, for Favors or Intelligence, which some States account good
Policy, to purchase with great Liberality; the Receipt whereof,
notwithstanding, is plain Treachery.

There are ^et some other petty things which seem to have reference to this
Balance, of which the said Officers of His Majesty's Customs can take no
notice, to bring them into the Account. As namely, the Expenses of Travelers,
the Gifts to Ambassadors and Strangers, the Fraud of some Rich Goods not entered
into the Custom-House, the Gain which is made here by Strangers by Change and
Re-change, Interest of Money, Insurance upon Englishmens Goods and their Lives:
Which can be little when the Charges of their living here is deducted; besides,
that the very like Advantages are as amply ministered unto the English in Foreign
Countries, which does counterpoize all these things, and therefore they are not
considerable in the drawing up of the said Balance.

CHAP. XXI. The Conclusion upon all that has been said, concerning the
Exportation or Importation of Treasure.
THE Sum of all that has been spoken, concerning the Enriching of the Kingdom,
and the Increase of our Treasure by Commerce with Strangers, is briefly thus.
That it is a certain Rule in our Foreign Trade in those Places where our
Commodities exported, are over-ballanced in value by Foreign Wares brought into
this Realm, there our Money is under-valued in Exchange; and where the contrary
of this is performed, there our Money is over-valued in Exchange; and where the
contrary of this is performed, there our Money is over-valued. But let the
Merchant's Exchange be at a high Rate, or at a low Rate, or at the Par pro
Pari, or put down altogether; Let Foreign Princes enhance their Coins, or debase
their Standards, and let His Majesty do the like, or keep them constant, as
they now stand; Let Foreign Coins pass current here in all Payments, at higher
Rates than they are worth at the Mint; Let the Statute for Employments by
Strangers stand in force, or be repealed; Let the mere Exchanger do his worth;
Let Princes Oppress, Lawyers Extort, Userers Bite, Prodigals Wast; and lastly,
Let Merchants carry out what Money they shall have occasion to use in Traffic.
Yet all these Actions can work no other Effects in the course of Trade, than is
declared in this Discourse. For so much Treasure only will be brought in or
carried out of a Commonwealth, as the Foreign Trade does Over or Under-ballance
in value. And this must come to pass by a Necessity beyound all resistance. So
that all other Courses, (which tend not to this End) howsoever they may seem to
force Money into a Kingdom for a time, yet are they (in the End) not only
fruitless but also hurtful: They are like to Violent Floods which bear down
their Banks, and suddenly remain dry again for want of Waters.

Behold then the true Form and Worth of Foreign Trade, which is, The great
Revenue of the King; The Honor of the Kingdom; The Noble Profession of the
Merchant; The School of our Arts; The Supply of our Wants; The Employment of
our Poor; The Improvement of our Lands; The Nursery of our Mariners; The Walls
of the Kingdoms; The Means of our Treasure; The Sinews of our Wars; The Terror
of out Enemies. For all which great and weighty Reasons, do so many well
governed States highly countenance the Profession, and carefully cherish the
Action; not only with Policy to Increase it, but also with Power to protect it
from all Foreign Injuries: Because they know it is a Principle in Reason of
State, To Maintain and Defend that which does Support them and their Estates.

FINIS.
These Books following, are Sold by Tho. Horn at the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange LONDON.
HVdibrass Complete in 3. parts, the Author Samuel Butler, 8 vo. Lex Mercatoria
Complete, with all the Books of Merchants Accounts, fol. Boyer's French
Dictionary, 4 to. -- Idem, in 8 vo. Toriano's Italian Dictionary, fol. Oldham's
Poems complete, 8 vo. The Perfect method of Merchants Accounts, by John
Collins, fol. Plutarch's Lives in 5 Vol 8 vo. by several Hands. -- Morals, in 5
Vol. 8 vo. Grand Cyrus, in 10. Vol. a Romance, 12 o. Archbishop Tillotson's
Works, fol. Pools Annotations on the Bible, 2 Vol. fol. The Works of Sr.
William Davenant; fol. Dampiers Travels, in 2 Vol. 8 vo. Letters written by a
Turkish Spy, in 8 Vol. 12 o. Charon of Wisdom, in 2 Vol. 8 vo. Bp. Burnet's
History of Reformation, 2 Vol. fol. -- Exposition on the 39 Articles, fol.
Anatomy of an Horse, fol. Sr. John Chardin's Travels into Persia, fol. History
of the Kingdom of Syam, fol. Coals Dictionary, English and Latin, 8 vo.
Cambden's Britannia, fol. Montaign's Essay' s 3 Vol. 8 vo. Aesop's Fables, by
Sr. Roger L'Estrange, fol. -- Idem, by Dr. W. Pope 8 vo. Baker's Chronicle of
England, fol. Lord Bacon's Essay 's, 8 vo. Misson's Travels, in 2 Vol. 8 vo.
Hales Contemplations, 8 vo. Lock, on Human Understanding, fol. Wing's Art of
Surveying Land, fol. Sturmy's Mariners Magazine, fol. History of the Council of
Trent, fol. Wiseman's Surgery, fol. Dr. Scots Christian Life, all the parts
complete, 8 vo. English Gardner, 4 to. Lassel^'s Travels into Italy, 8vo.
Dafforn's English Merchants Companion, 4 to. Evelyn, of Medals, fol. Dryden's
Translation of Virgil, fol. Book of Rates of the Customs, 12 o. Horneck's
Crucified Jesus, 8 vo. -- Great Law of Consideration -- Best Exercise. Systema
Agriculturae, fol. -- Complete Gardner, 8 vo. Charnock's Works, 2 Vol. fol.
Taylor's Life of Christ, fol. -- Cases of Conscience, fol. The Works of Ben.
Johnson, fol. Lives and opinions of the Ancient Philosophers, by Diogenes
Laertius, 2 Vol. 8 vo. Gage's Survey of the West Indies, 8 vo. Buccaneers of
America, 8 vo. History of Don Quixot, in 2 Vol. 8 vo. Bible in Italian, by
Diodati, fol. Sr. William Temples Works, 8 vo. Common Prayer in Italian, 12O.
Gordon's Geographical Grammar, 8 vo. Playford's Singing Psalms, 8 vo. Boyle's
Seraphick Love, 8 vo.
Also Bibles and Common Prayer Books in all Volumes; and Sea Charts; likewise
Bills of Lading in English, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, and French.
And Setts of Books for a Merchants Compting-House, of the best Paper, and
Binding.


