CLAVIS BIBLIORVM. THE KEY Of the BIBLE, Vnlocking The Richest Treasury of the
Holy Scriptures.

WHEREBY The 1 Order, 2 Names, 3. Times, 4 Penmen, 5 Occasion, 6 Scope, and 7
Principal Parts, Containing the Subject Matter of every Book of Old and New
Testament, are familiarly and briefly opened: For the help of the weakest
capacity in the understanding of the whole BIBLE.

By FRANCIS ROBERTS, A. M. Pastor of the Church at Augustines, LONDON.

Col. 3.16 Let the word of Christ in dwell in you richly in all wisdom.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for George Calvert, and are to sold at his
shop at the sign of the Half Moon in Watling-street, near to Paul's stump. 1648.

AN EPISTLE To the READER.
THere is no one duty more commanded, or commended in the Word of God, or more
practiced by the Saints of God, then the diligent and conscientious reading of
the holy Scriptures. Our Savior Christ commands us not only to read them, but
to John ^.39.
search into them. The Apostle Paul commands us not only to have them with us,
but Col. 3.16.
in us; and not only to have them in us, but to have them dwelling and abiding
in us, richly in all wisdom. David professes of himself that the Psalm, 40.8,
Law was in the midst of his bowels. And that he had ^sal. 119.1.
hid the word in his heart, that he might not sin against God. Austin says
of himself August. Sacrae scripturae tuae sunt sanctae delitiae meae.
, that the holy Scriptures were his holy delight. And Hierome tells us of one
Nepotianus, who Longa and assidua meditatione Scripturarum pectus suum fecerat
Bibliothecam Christi. Hier. epistola ad Heliod. in Epitaphium Nepotiani.
by long and assiduous meditation of the holy Scriptures, had made his breast
the Library of Jesus Christ. And for my part, I have always observed, that the
more holy and humble any man is, the more he delights in the holy Scriptures;
and the more profane and proud any man is, the more he slighteth and
undervalueth them. Cursed is that speech of Politian that proud Critic, that
he never spent his time worse then in reading the Scriptures. And famous is the
Answer of Basil to that cursed Apostate Julian who said of the Sciptures,
(...). Pezelii Mellificium historicum in vita Iuliani.
That he had read them, understood them, and condemned them; But Basil answered
him excellently: That he had read them, but not understood them, for if he had
understood them, he would not have condemned them. No man that has the Holy
Spirit, but will love those books which were written 1 Pet. 1.21,
by holy men as they were moved by the Holy Spirit. As David said of Goliah's
sword. 1 Samuel* 21.9.
There is none to that, give it me, So may I say of the Holy Scriptures. There
are no books like these Books, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, and to make the man of God
absolute, and perfect unto every good work. And therefore let me persuade all
men to read these books, and not only to read them, but to Psalm. 1.1, 2.
meditate in them day and night: And to hide them in their hearts as a divine
cordial, to Ps. 116.92.
comfort them in these sad days; as a Psalm. 119.105.
divine lamp, to guide them in this hour of darkness; and Ephesians. 6.13.
as part of the whole Armor of God, to enable them to resist temptation, in
this hour of temptation, that is now coming upon the whole earth. And when
they read them, 1 To read them with an humble heart, for God has promised to
give Jam. 4.6.
grace to the humble, and Ps 25.9.
to teach the humble his way. 2 To read the^ with prayer, that God would Psalm.
119.18.
open their eyes, that they may understand the wonders of his law. 3 To read
them with a godly trembling, for fear least with the spider these should suck
poison out of their sweet flowers, and 2 Pet. 3.16.
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, as they that are unstable and
unlearned. 4 To read them with a Job. 7.17.
purpose to practice what they read. He that practices what he understands,
God will help him to understand what he understands not. 5 To read them in an
orderly and methodicall way; And for their better help herein, to take this
ensuing Treatise in their hands. It is short and pithy; It sets the whole Bible
before them, in an orderly, plain and perspicuous manner, and helps them to
understand every book. The Author of it is a godly learned Minister, well
known and very well esteemed on in this famous city. The Book it self is
called the Key of the Bible, because it unlocks the richest Treasury of the
Holy Scriptures. Take this Key with you, whenever you go into this Treasury.
And pray unto him that has the Rev. 3.7.
Key of David, that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man
opens, that he will open this Treasury unto you. The Rabbis say that there
are four Keys that are in Gods keeping. The Key of the clouds, The Key of the
womb, The Key of the grave, The Key of food. I may add that there is a fifth
Key also in Gods bestowing, which is the Key of the Scriptures. The God that
made these books, can only un-riddle these Books. And therefore when you use
this Key, pray for that other Key, and pray unto Christ to deal with you as he
did with his Apostles, Luke ^^.45.
To open your understanding that you may understand the Scriptures. So prays,

Your Servant in Christ Jesus, EDMUND CALAMY.

Imprimatur,

EDMUND CALAMY.

AN INTRODUCTORY Advertisement TO THE READER; Containing some General
Directions for the Right Understanding of the Holy Scriptures; And how this
present Treatise is to be improved most advantagiously to that end.
THe Holy Scriptures are the Act. 7.38.
lively Oracles of the living God, unfolding the secrets of his will to man:
The Epistle of Jesus Christ, Revealing from heaven the saving mysteries of his
sweetest love unto his Church: and the Blessed Charter of the Saints, which no
Tract of time shall reverse; whereby they hold of God all their present
enjoyments, in the life that now is, and all their future hopes of that life
which is to come. Chrysostom: in Gal. Hom. 1.
Chrysostom prefers Scripture before Angels; and says Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Col.
Hom. 9.
Get you Bibles, the medicines of the soul. Job. 23.12.
Job esteemed them more then his necessary food. Paul Romans 7.22.
delighted therein touching the inward man. David preferred them before Psalm.
19.9. and 119.103
the honey and honey-combe; before Psalm. 119.162.
great spoil, Ps. 119.72.
thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119.14.
all riches, and therefore accounted them his Psalm. 119 111.
heritage, his Psalm. 119.24.
Counselors, his Psalm. 119.50.
comfort, etc. Yea professes Psalm. 119.20.
his heart did break for longing to Gods judgments at all times. And every
godly and truly blessed man should make the Scriptures his Psalm. 1.1, 2.
delight, and meditate therein night and day.

Notwithstanding how many gracious souls are there, whose delight it is to
repair often to this Sanctuary of the Scriptures, (as August. de Civit. dei l.
20. c. 32. prope fin.
Augustine styles them) but cannot tell what they see there, of the Lord, and
of his glory; who frequently read in this blessed Book, but (like the Act.
8.30.31.
Ethiopian Eunuch) understand not, or not to purpose, what they read? And this
comes to pass, 1 Partly, through the sublimity of those supernatural and
heavenly mysteries therein revealed, whereby 2 Pet. 3.16.
some things are hard to be understood. 2 Partly through the obscure and
mysterious manner of Scriptures, revealing many things, whereby the Lord would
exe^cise the sharpest and deepest apprehensions of men. 3 Partly through defect
of some familiar Manu-duction into the whole Bible, and the several Books of
Old and New Testament therein contained, which might like a Clew of thread
conduct into these sacred Treasuryes, and like a Key unlock this Cabinet of
Christ's richest Jewels. Whereupon, after much deliberation how this might be
best effected, apprehending that some brief and solid Discovery of the 1
Order, 2 Names 3 Times, 4 Penmen 5 Occasion, 6 Scope, 7 Principal parts of the
Books in the Bible, would much conduce o ripen Christians in Bible-knowledge,
spreading before their eyes in A General view the current of the whole
Scriptures: I entered upon this Task and finished it (by divine assistance) in
such sort as is represented in the ensueing Treatise. It was immediately
intended for the help and benefit of some special godly friends, (whom I shall
ever highly respect and honor) but through importunity is now made public for
the good (I hope) of many. The Lord make it as useful, as it was intended, and
is desired.

By way of Preface, be pleased to pause a little with me upon the serious
consideration of 1. The worth of Scripture-knowledge. 2. The way how to attain
to it. That will quicken Christians to Scripture-study. This will help them to
Scripture-understanding.

Scripture-knowledge is of great worth and consequence to every Christian. Or,
The Holy Scriptures are most worthy of all Christians constant study, and
utmost endeavors to understand them. For,

1. The Author inventing and inditing the Holy Scriptures is God blessed for
ever, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; 2 Timothy 3.16.
all Scripture is divinely inspired. Hence called the Romans 3.2.
Oracles of God; Col. 3.16.
The word of Christ. And the Act. 28.25.
Saying of the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.
For the Prophecy came not at any time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. We are apt to value, desire to
study and understand the books of godly, learned, judicious men's making: How
much more should we to the utmost endeavor to understand the Scriptures, which
are the only Books of Gods making? Men's writings are too much mingled with
vanity, ignorance, folly, mistakes, imperfections, infirmities and corruptions,
savouring much of a carnal spirit when most spiritual: But Gods word is
satisfactorily full, without all vanity: most wise Psalm. 19.7, 9.
faithful and true, without all falsehood or folly; Completely Psalm. 19.7. and
2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
perfect, beyond all imperfection; Psalm. 19.8.
most pure, and Psalm. 119.140.
exceedingly refined, without all corruption, and without all carnal mixtures;
wholly spiritual, sweetly resembling that most spiritual spirit that did
indite them.

2. The Amanuenses or Penmen of the Holy Ghost for the Scriptures, were not
contemptible or ordinary, but incomparable and extraordinary persons. As Moses
the Numb. 12.3.
meekest man on earth; the peculiar favorite of God, with whom Exodus 33.11.
God talked face to face; the Deuteronomy. 34.10.
Nonesuch of all the Prophets in Israel. Samuel Psalm 99.6. Jer. 15.1. with 1 Samuel 7.9, 10. and 12.16, 17, 18.
that mighty man in prayer. David the King, that Act. 13.22.
man after Gods own heart. King Solomon, that 1 King. 3.12. Neh. 13.26.
wisest of all the Kings, whom God honored with the 2 Samuel 7.13.
building of the Temple. Daniel in whom was found Dan. 9.12.
an excellent spirit, and great dexterity in Dan. 2.25, 28, 30, 47.
expounding secrets and mysteries. John Joh. 13.23.
the disciple whom Jesus loved above all the rest, Joh. 21.7, 20.
who leaned on Jesus breast. Paul 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
who was caught up into the third heavens, whose writings (says Chrysostom. de
sacerd. l. 4.
Chrysostom) like a wall of adamant, compass about or surround all the
Churches. In a word 2 Pet. 1.21.
all of them holy men of God, moved by the Holy Ghost. These being the Penmen,
how incomparable and extraordinary must their writings needs be; who would not
study them, and earnestly pry into them?

3. The matter of the Scripture is most invi^ing, able to allure the hearts of
men and Angels to the study of them, yea to transport and ravish their spirits
in the understanding of them. Herein are revealed most profound and
inexplicable mysteries. The nature of the blessed God, Simple, without
composition; Genesis 17.1.
All-sufficient, without any external addition, ^am. 1.17.
immutable, without all shadow of alteration; Psalm 90.2. and 102.26, 27.
Eternal, 1 King. 8.27. Jer. 23.24.
Immense, Incomprehensible, Psalm. 139.1, 12.
Omnipresent, and wholly Psalm 147.^.
Infinite, without all limitation, etc. The Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1 Cor. 8.6.
Unity of essence; The 1 John 5 7.
Trinity of Persons; The father not being the Son, nor either of them the Holy
Ghost; yet all of them the Holy God. The Secrets of Gods eternal counsels,
especially touching the Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6.
electing of his own in Christ, predestinating them to the adoption of
children, when all others are passed by. The curious Order of the Creation, to
bring his purposes to pass. The Permission of man's fall from the Pinnacle of
his natural integrity, that thereby he might take occasion to glorify the
height of justice and mercy in raising him up by Christ to a far higher pitch
of supernatural felicity. The Person and office of Jesus Christ the Mediator,
and both altogether Is. 9.6.
wonderful, 1 Timothy 2.5. and 3.16.
God and man united in one person, to unite God and man in one Covenant; The
Son of God became the Son of man, to make the sons of men sons of God; A King
to subdue all our enemies to us, and us to himself. A Prophet, to unveyle the
bosom secrets of his father unto us. A Priest, offering up himself upon
himself, by himself; offering up himself the sacrifice, as man; upon
himself, the Alta^, as God; by himself, the Priest, as God-man. Christ was
humbled, and thereby we exalted; Christ wounded, we healed, Christ accused, we
cleared; Christ condemned, we justified and acquitted; Christ accursed, we
blessed; Christ slain, and we live; and Christ conquered, that so we might be
more then Conquerours through Christ that loves us. What shall I say? In
Scripture is revealed, how enemies are reconciled, Sinners justified, Aliens
adopted, Beggars made Heirs and coheirs with Christ, and how dust and ashes
shall be glorified for evermore.

Here are unfolded the Jer. 31.31. to 3^. Heb. 8.8. etc.
Covenant of grace, wholly made up of heavenly cordials. The 1 Timothy 4.8.
Promises of the life that now is, and that which is to ^ome, 2 Pet. 1.4.
exceeding great and previous. The 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. Psalm. 94.19.
comforts of God able to counterpoise the deepest disconsolations* and Romans
7.12.
Commands surpassing all the laws in the world, in holiness, Justice and
goodness.

Here are discovered, The miseries of all that a^e in the first Adam, the
felicities of all that are in the second Adam, and the way how poor souls are
translated from those miseries to these felicities.

Here you shall find God descending to man, In preparing all Spiritual
privileges for sinners in Jesus Christ our Savior, In tendering richest Grace
by Covenant-Promises and Ordinances, and In applying these preparations and
tenders actually to the Soul by the Spirit: 2 Man ascending unto God, by the
Spiritualizing of his Nature, Acting of his Faith, Aspiring of his desires,
Fervency of his prayers, and Holy tendency of his Conversation: Yea both God
and man sweetly closing together in a most intimate Communion in Jesus Christ,
which is as another Paradise, and Heaven on earth.

In a word, what is there not in Holy Scriptures? Are we poor? Here Is a
Treasury of riches. Are we sick? Here Is a Shop of (...). Chrysostom. in Coloss.
Homil. 9.

Omnis Scriptura Divinitus inspirata, utilis est ad Docendum: H^c ipsa de causa
a Spiritu Sancto scripta est, ut veluti ex communi quodam sanitatis font,
omnes nobis ex hac remedia propriis p^ssionibus asssumamus Aug. in Psalm. Pro.
egom.


Soul Medicines. Are we fainting? Here Is a Cabinet of Cordials. Are we
Christlesse? Here Is the star that leads to Christ. Are we Christians? Here Is
the bands that keep in Christ. Are we afflicted? Here Is our Solace. Are we
persecuted? Here Is our protection. Are we deserted? Here Is our recovery Are we
tempted? Here Is Ephesians. 6, 17*
our sword and Victory. Are we young? Here Is our beauty. Are we Old? Here Is our
wisdom. While we live, here is the Rule of our conversation; when we dye,
here is the hope of our Glorification. So that I may (with Adoro Scripturae
plenitudinem. Tertull. Advers. Hermogen.
Tertullian, I Adore the fullness of the Scripture. Oh blessed Scriptures! who
can know them, and not love them? Who can love them, and not delight to
meditate in them night and day? Who can meditate in them and not desire to love
them, love to desire them, and both desire and love to understand them? This is
the Book of Books; (as David said of Goliath's Sword there is none like that.
Said one, Ex aliis paleae viles, hinc grana leguntur
Aurea: tu paleas linquito, grana lege.


I may Engish it, Other writings chafe unfold,
Scriptures yield the purest gold.
Others dote on chasty games,
Gather thou these golden Grains.


Take away our Papers (said Auferantur de medio chartae nostrae, procedat in
medium codex Dei: Audi Christum dicentem, Audi veritatem loquentem. August
Enarrat. in Psalm. 57.
Augustine) and bring amongst us the Book of God; he^re Christ saying, hear
Truth speaking, etc. I may close up this Paragraph with his words, who thus
emphatically expresses himself, Sacra Scriptura est liber vit^e cujus origo
eaterna, cujus incorporalis essentia, cujus cognitio Vita, cujus scriptura
indelebilis, cujus inspectus desiderabilis, cujus Doctrina facilis, cujus
scientia dulcis, cujus profunditas inscrutabilis, cujus verba innumerabili^;
and unum tantum verbum, Omni^. Hug. de Arc. No^.
The Sacred Scripture is the Book of life, whose Original is eternal, whose
essence is incorporeall, whose knowledge is life, whose writing is indelible,
whose inspect is desirable, whose Doctrine is easy, whose knowledge is sweet,
whose depth is unsearchable, whose words are innumerable; and only one word,
All.

4. The form of the Scripture, both Inward and Outward, if well considered,
commands all possible endeavors and industry for the understanding thereof.

1. The Inward form, is, That accurate conformity of the things laid down in
Scripture to that infallible and eternal truth of Gods own understanding that
indicted and revealed them. Writings compiled by men carry in them a conformity
to the idea in their understanding, which being subject to ignorance, error
and corruption, through the imperfection that is in them, must needs produce
writing^ semblably imperfect, ignorant, erroneous and corrupt: But no such
thing can be incident unto the Scriptures, which are conform to the Divine
understanding of 1 Timothy 1.17.
the only wise God, which is Psalm. 147 5.
infinite, Rom 11.33.
unsearchable, and wholly admirable which is all Ioh. 1.5.
Light without any darkness at all; all Humana omnia dicta argumentis and
testibus egent: Dei autem sermo ipse sibitestis est. Quia necesse est quicquid
incorrupta veritas loquitur, incorruptum sit testimonium veritatis. Salvian. de
Gubern. Dei. l. 3.
Truth, without the least error; All perfect, without any shadow of
imperfection; all pure, without any color of Corruption. So that the
Scriptures of themselves cannot lead us unto error, but the more we truly
understand them, the more our minds shall be enriched with truth, and elevated
to a conformity to the supreme truth of God.

2. The Outward form of the Scriptures, o^ manner how things are therein
revealed, is not only plain and easy, nor only dark or difficult, but
rather Deus in Scripturis quasi amicus familiaris loquitur ad cor Doctorum and
indoctorum. August. Epist. 3
mixed of both; some things being facile, 2 Pet. 3.16.
some things being hard to be understood; some places are such shallowes,
wherein lambs need not be afraid to made, some again such deeps as Elephants
may be enforced to swim. Magnisice and salubriter spiritus Sanctus ita
Scripturas Sanctas modificavit, ut locis apertioribus, fami occurrerer,
obscurio^ibus fastidia de^orgerer. Nihil enim fere de illis obscuritatibus
eruitur, quod non pla^^ssime. dictum alibi reperiatur. Aug. de Doct. Christ. l.
2. c. 6.

In omni Copia Scripturarum Sanctarum, pascimur apertis, e^ercemur obscuris:
illic fame^ pellitur, h^c fastidium. Augdo verb. Dom. Sermon. 11.


By plainness God nourishes the weakest, by obscurenesse he exercises the
accutest, (As Augustine has intimated). That facility occasion not our
contempt of Scriptures, there are interwoven some difficulties; that
difficulties deter not from the study of Scripture, there are intermingled
some facilities. For as Verbi Dei altitudo exercet studium, non denegat
intellectum. Si enim omnia clausa essent, nihil esset unde revelarentur
obscura. Rursus si omnia tecta essent, non esset unde alimentum anima
perciperet, and haberet vires quibus posset ad clausa pulsare. August. de verb.
Apostoli. Sermon. 13. c. 1. ad init. Tom. 10.
Augustine notes, If all were shut up, how should obscure things be revealed?
If all things were hid, whence should the soul have ability to knock for the
opening of things shut up? Is therefore our Capacity weaker? Here Is relief for
our infirmity: Is our apprehension deeper? Here Is work enough for the sharpest
perspicacity. So that the most ignorant need not be afraid, the most
intelligent need not be ashamed, of endeavors after Scripture understanding.

5. The End is manifold and excellent, for which God committed his word to
writing, and that writing to us. viz. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
For Doctrine, that Faith and Truth may be asserted; For Reproof or
conviction, that error may be confuted: As Athanasius said, Heretics are to
be stoned with Scripture Lapidandi sunt Haeretici Sacrarum literarum
Argumentis. Athan. Cont. Ari. Or. 2

Haeretici sunt luci^ugae Scripturarum. Tertull. de resur. Carnis.


Arguments; For correction of manners enormous or offensive; For instruction in
the paths of righteousness; and for Romans 15.4.
consolation that drooping dejected distressed spirits may not be overwhelmed.
Now then if we study not to understand Scriptures, How in Doctrinals, They ^
Assert the Truth, 2 Confute error; How in Practicals, They 1 Direct in
well-doing, 2 Correct for ill-doing; we frustrate the chief ends and scope why
the Scriptures were imparted unto us.

6. How acceptable is our study and understanding of the Scripture unto God!
For,

1. He commands us this way to bestow our selves Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures. Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ indwell in you richly in all wisdom. Not be, but dwell
with you: not dwell with you, but dwell in you, yea indwell in you, Greek: Not
dwell in you, but dwell in you richly: nor only dwell in you richly, but in all
wisdom.

2. He Commends them that have industriously acquainted themselves with the
Scripture. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Timothy, that from a child he had known the Holy Scripture, able to make him
wise unto Salvation. Act. 18.24.
Apollos, That he was an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures. The Act.
17.11
Bereans, that they were more noble then those of Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so. And he makes it one Character of the godly
blessed man Psalm. 1.1, 2.
that His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein he meditates day and
night.

3. He condemns the contrary unskilfulnesse in the Scriptures, as the Heb. 5.13.
infirmity of Babes. Yea as the root of all error in spirituals; Mark 12.24.
Mat. 21.29.
do ye not err because ye know not the Scriptures?

Appositely says Chrysostom to this purpose; Chrysostom Hom. de Lazar.
Ignorance of the Scriptures has brought forth Heresies, has brought in
corruption of life, has turned all things upside down. -- Ignorance of the
Scriptures is a very Hell. And elsewhere he says, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad
Coloss. Hom 9.
It is the cause of all evils to be ignorant of the Scriptures. Qui nescit
Scripturas, nescit Dei virturem, ejus que sapientiam* ignoratio Scripturarum
ignoratio Christi est. Hieron in proem. Isa^.
Hierom also to like purpose; He that knows not the Scriptures, knows not the
power of God, and his wisdom. The ignorance of Scriptures is the ignorance of
Christ.

4. In a word, He promises happiness to the right understanding of the
Scriptures. Joh. 13.1^
If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them. And sometimes notably
rewards them that endeavor to understand them. While the Act. 8.28 29. etc.
Ethiopian Eunuch read the Prophet Isaiah, that he might understand it* the
Lord sent Philip to instruct him and to convert him; The Eunuch was Baptized,
and went on his way rejoicing.

7. Finally, The true and solid understanding of the Scripture, is the
foundation of all possible benefit or advantage by the Scripture. For how
should we forsake sin, Tit. 1.11
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and labor to get out of our carnal
condition, till by Scripture we be convinced of the sinfulness of sin, and
danger of our natural condition? How should we desire Christ earnestly, or
accept Christ delightfully, till we understand by the Scripture what want we
have of Christ what worth there is in Christ? Till we understand Scripture-
Principles, how shall we receive them? Till we understand Scripture-Promises,
how shall we believe them? Till we understand Scripture-commands, how shall we
obey them? Till we understand Scripture-directions, how should we follow them?
And till we understand Scripture-comforts, what supporting sweetness can we
expect from them? O therefore labor diligently to understand the Counsels of
God, then you will be in more immediate capacity of reaping all spiritual
benefits by the word of God, Verus cibus and potus qui ex verbo dei sumitur,
Scientia Scripturarum est. Hicron. in Eccle. c. 3.
The understanding of the Scriptures* (says Hierome) is the true meat and
drink which we have from the word of God. Therefore (as he says elsewhere)
Congrua de testimoniis Scripturarum ligna quae^entes, aedificemus domum
sapien^ae in nobis. Hicronym. in Aggeum. ^. 1.
Let Us fetch fit timber out of the Scriptures, to build in our selves an house
of wisdom.

Hitherto of the worth of Scripture-knowledge; way how to attain it. That Holy
Scriptures may be more profitably and clearly understood, certain Rules or
Directions are to be observed and followed. These Directions might be digested
into two Ranks, viz.

I. Some more special and peculiar, more particularly concerning Scholars,
As, 1 The competent understanding of the Original languages, Hebrew, Caldee,
and Greek; wherein the Scriptures were written. 2 The prudent use of Logic,
for orderly and methodicall Resolution of the Text, etc. 3. The subservient
helps of other Arts, as Rhetoric, Natural Philosophy, etc. Without which it
is impossible satisfactorily to interpret the Scriptures. For as Negant
plerique nostros secundum Artem scripsisse. Nec nos obnitimur Non enim secundum
Artem scripserunt sed secundum gratiam, quae super omnem Artem est.
(Scripserunt enim quae spiritus iis loqui dabat) Sed tamen ii qui de art
scripserunt, de eorum. Scriptis artem invenerunt; and condiderunt Commenta
Artis and Magisteria, etc. ^mbr. Ep. l. 8. Epist. Lxiii.
Ambrose well observes, Though Penmen of Scripture wrote not according to Art,
but according to Grace, which is above all Art (for they wrote what the spirit
did Dictate to them;) yet they that have written of Art, have found an Art in
their writings, etc. 4 The benefit of humane Histories to illustrate and clear
the divine. 5 The conferring of ancient translations with the Originals,
especially the Greek version of the Old Testament by the Lxxii. much followed
in the Allegations of the New Testament, and the Syriack version of the New
Testament. 6 The prudent use of the most Orthodox learned and judicious
Commentators. 7. Constant caution, that all Tongues, Arts, Histories,
Translations, and Comments be duly ranked in their proper places in a
subserviency under, not a Regency or Predominancy over the Holy Scriptures,
which are to control them all. For when Hagar shall once usurp over her
Mistress, its high time to cast her out of doors, till she submit herself.
Many such things ought be insisted upon, but that is besides my present
intention.

II. Some more general and common directions, which may be of use to all sorts
of Christians, learned or unlearned: especially unto the people, for promoting
whose understanding in this blessed Book of God, these ensuing Rules,
faithfully followed, may (through divine blessing) prove abundantly
advantageous. viz.

I. Rule.
Beg Jam. 1.5.
wisdom of the only wise God, who gives liberally and upbraids not. That by
Gods wisdom you may know Gods mind; by the assistance of that spirit which
indicted the Scripture; you may discern the true sense and meaning of the
Scriptures. For what the woman said of Jacobs well, may much more be affirmed
of these wels of salvation, John 4.11.
Thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. Scripture mysteries are
profound, Our capacities very shallow; when we know most, 1 Cor. 13.9.
we know but in part; therefore pray with Hierome, Ego cupio intrare in
domu^tuam, i. e. Ecclesiam and volo intrare per viam tuam rectam. quae est ista
via? lectio Scripturarum. Dirige viam meam ne in Scripturis ^uis per quas
ingredi cupio in Ecclesiam tuam, corruam. Omnis qui ^ale intelligit scripturas,
in via dei corruit. Hi^ron. in Ps. 5.
I desire to enter into thy house the Church, by thy way the Scriptures; O
direct my way, lest I fall in thy Scriptures by which I desire to enter.
Entreat the Lord to anoint thine eyes with eye salve, Rev. 3.18.
that thou may see; to Luke 24.45.
open thine understanding, as sometimes he did the Apostles, to understand the
Scriptures. When thou set thy self to peruse the Scripture from day to
day, forget not to dart up David's sweet petition unto God, Ps. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.

II. Rule.
Labor sincerely after a truly gracious spirit, then thou shall be peculiarly
able to penetrate into the inward marrow and mysteries of the Holy Scriptures.
He will best comprehend Scripture meaning in his head, that has got the
Scripture law written in his heart; Nunquam Pauli sensum ingredieris, nisi
Pauli spiritum imbiberis. Bernard ad ^ratr. de Mont.
Thou will never (says Bernard) understand Paul's meaning, unless thou
drinkest of Paul's spirit. Gracious persons are Heb. 10.32, 33, 34
illuminated persons; 1 John 2.27.
they have the anointing that teaches them all things, viz. necessary to
salvation. The Lord delights to impart his secrets to them that fear him.
Psalm. 25.12, 14.
What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose. -- The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant, Christ has promised peculiarly to Joh. 14.21, 22, 23.
maniest himself to them that love him, so as not unto the world; and where
Christ is so manifested, the sense of Scripture is singularly manifested; for
Christ is the Kernel of the Scripture. The graceless man though by light of
nature, and accomplishments of Art, he may know much of Scripture theoretically
and speculatively, yet his light is but darkness, he reaches not to the life
of understanding; knows Gods mind in Scripture, only as we know far Countries
by Maps: But the gracious person understands the Scriptures experimentally,
feelingly, as a Traveller knows remote countries in which he has actually
been. 1 Cor. 2.14.15, 16.
The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. But he that is spiritual judges all things, -- we have the mind
of Christ.

III. Rule.
Peruse the Scripture still with an humble selfe-denying heart. Be not puffed
up, or conceited with thine own knowledge, or other perfections; 1 Cor. 8.2.
He that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know.
Empty vessels are most receptive; so are selfe-emptying minds, It is a great
help to knowledge Deo meo gratias ago, quod ignorantiam meam non igno. Pro;
said one.
not to be ignorant of our ignorance; for ^ense of want spurs on endeavors
after enjoyment. The fructifying showers quickly glide away from the lofty
hills, but they stay and soake into the low valleys. God that Prove. 3.34 ^am 4.6
and 1 Pet. 5.5.
resists the proud, yet gives grace to the humble and lowly; And among other
graces the grace of knowledge and understanding: For Pro. 11.2.
with the lowly is wisdom. Psalm. 25.9.
The meek (or humble) will he guide in judgment; and the meek will he teach
his way. Thus Christ says, Matthew. 11.25.
I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, but have revealed them unto Babes? whence
Becanus Homines clatos, superbos, qui suo judicio praesentes sunt, and proprio
ingenio multum tribuunt, non assequi legitimum Scripturae sensum* etc. Becanus.
notes, that such as are proud and attribute to their own wisdom, attain not
to the true sense of Scripture. Be therefore clothed with humility in use of
Scripture, that true Scripture-knowledge may increase.

IV. Rule.
Familiarize the Scripture to thy self, by constant and methodicall exercise
therein. Method and order, as it is the mother of memory, so it is a singular
friend to a clear understanding. The generality of the Scripture, have such a
contexture and coherence one part with another, that small insight into it will
be gained, by reading it confusedly, disorderly; therefore read the whole in
Order. Diverse have published Directions, how to read over the whole Scripture
methodica^ly, once a year, etc. consult them.

But be constant in perusal and studying of the Scriptures; hereby Scripture
phrase and sense will become familiar and facile. How hard at first to write,
to play on an instrument* etc. but by multiplying Acts, men get habits and
write, play, etc. with facility and dexterity. Use not Scripture only by fits
and starts, in some good pangs or moods, etc. but habitually converse with
Scripture, trade in them, Psalm. 1.2.
meditate therein night and day; Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ, (not only lodge or sojourne in you, but even) dwell in
you. Hence those commands of God to his people of old. Josh. 1.8.
This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night. -- Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
These words shall be in thine heart, and thou shall whet them diligently upon
thy children, and shall talk of them, when thou sit in thine house, and
when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, etc.

V. Rule
Understand Scripture according to the Theological Romans 12.6.
Analogy, or Certain rule of faith and love. Anomaly, i. e. Irregularity, is
some deviation from the rule, or exception against the rule; To this here
Analogy is opposed. By this Analogy, understand, A certain Epitome of
Scriptures, or brief Abridgement of Christian Religion, collected out of the
plain places of Scripture, according to which other dark and figurative
expressions in Scripture are to be explained. This Analogy of faith and love,
Paul charges Timothy to hold fast, 2 Timothy 1.13.
saying, Hold fast [(...)] i. e. That [ Delineation, Draught, Platform,
Pattern, or,] form of sound words, which thou have heard of me in faith and
love, which is in Christ Jesus. Where seems to be intimated, a Systeme, or
form of doctrine, communicated from Paul to Timothy, according to which
Timothy was to steer as by a Compass. This form of doctrine is described here
1* By the general nature of it. A form of sound words, A draught or model of
wholesome doctrine. 2. By the principal parts of it, into which it is
branched* viz. 1 Faith, 2 Love. Faith, compriseth credenda, All things to be
believed, as in the Creed taken out of Scripture. Love contains facienda, All
things to be done, as in the Decalogue, Lords prayer and Sacramental
Institutions, which are Scripture; into these two, the whole Body of divinity
is usually distributed. 3. By the primary foundation upon which this form of
sound words is built, viz. Christ Jesus; compare herewith, 1 Cor. 3.11. Ephesians.
2.20. So that if in any place of Scripture, the word, or letter of the text be
repugnant to the Analogy of faith and love, it is not to be understood properly
and literally, but improperly and figuratively. As for instance, Matthew. 26.26,
28. Mark 14.22, 24. Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
This is my body, -- This is my blood, etc. This cannot be understood properly,
that the bread and wine are Christ's body and blood, for that is contrary to the
Analogy or rule of faith, which tells us that Christ's human nature is ascended
into heaven, Act. 3.21.
whom the heavens must contain till the restitution of all things; therefore
it is to be understood figuratively, and in a ^acramentall sense, The sign
being put for the thing signified, by a Met^^ymie. So we are commanded John 6.
To eat Christ's flesh, -- Matthew. 5.29, 30.
To pluck out our right eye, cut off our right hand, if they offend us. We
cannot read any of these literaelly and properly, for that were against the
Analogy or rule of love, Exodus 20.13.
Thou shall not kill; therefore we must seek for a spiritual and improper
sense, viz. Eating Christ's flesh, not carnally with our teeth, but spiritually
by faith, i. e. believing in Christ crucified, etc. As also denying all
corruptions, corrupt affections, inclinations, or occasions, though as dea^ and
useful, as right hand or right eye unto us. Thus this rule faithfully
followed, will clear many hard and intricate passages in Scripture. It is
therefore of singular consequence to every one that desires solidly to
understand the Scriptures, to be well grounded in the fundamentals and
Principles of Christian Religion, without which, like a ship without ballast, a
man Ephesians. 4.14.
shall be carried away with every wind of vain doctrine, perverting or
mistaking the Scriptures.

VI. Rule.
Be well acquainted with the 1 Order, 2 Titles, 3 Times, 4 Penmen, 5 Occasion,
6 Scope, and 7 Principal parts of the books both of the Old and N. Testament.
These will much promote the solid and judicious understanding of the whole
Bible in a short space. For 1 Hereby you shall have the very Idea or character
of every book, lively describing the nature and Contents of it before your
eyes, as in a Map, before you begin to peruse them. 2 Hereby you shall have a
Clew to conduct you, a Compass to sail and steer by, in the perusal of any
book; 3 Hereby also you shall have a summary Recapitulation or Recollection of
the chief Aim, and subject matters of every book, much tending both to help
judgment, and strengthen memory, after the Perusal of any book of old or New
Testament. And therefore this course must needs be as an useful Key, to unlock
the rich Cabinet of the Holy Scriptures, and to discover the precious Treasures
thereof unto you.

Now this is the Intent and Scope of this Manual, this small Treatise; viz. so
familiarly to open and unfold. The 1 Order, 2 Titles, 3 Times, 4 Penmen, 5
Occasion, 6 Scope, and 7 Principal Parts of the Books of Old and New
Testament. That the whole Tenor of the Bible, might be spread open in a
General view, to the meanest capacity. For, 1. The Order of the Books,
especially of the Historical Books (observed all along, and compendiously
represented in the two Tables, before the Old and New Testament,) more
evidently help to discover the Order of Histories and matters handled therein,
and the Order of Gods governing his Church in several conditions. 2. The
Titles, 1 Some of them summarily signify to us the chief matter of the Book, as
Genesis, The Generations of the heaven and earth: Exodus Israel's departure out
of Egypt, etc. 2 Some of them declare the isntrumental Authors, or Penmen of
them, as the Titles of Prophets Books, Isaiah, etc. who being extraordinary men
of God, guided by the Spirit, their books are of divine Authority. 3 Some
denote the Churches or particular persons for whose sakes immediately some
parts of Scripture were penned, which affords light to diverse passages therein.
3. The Times of the Books set forth, Partly, the length or space of time, in
which things related were done, as in Historical Books, which serve to
disclose the connection and continuance of the History and Chronology. Partly
the time or season, when the books were written, which serves to clear the
understanding of diverse particular passages, which otherwise would be very
difficult, both in the Prophets, and in the Apostles. See therefore those two
Tables, for the Timeing of the Prophets and Epistles, p. 104. to 107. and p.
177. to 186. Distinguish well betwixt times and times, and you dissolve many
knots. 4. Penmen, being holy men of God extraordinarily inspired, intimate to
us the divine Authority of their writings. This incites faith, love, and awful
Reverence to their books. 5. The Occasion upon which the books were written,
together with 6. The Scope, drift, or End of the book, being well considered,
give great light to the whole Book; the whole frame, disposition and chief
Arguments handled in the book, having a singular tendency to the Scope;
therefore as the Archer fixes his eye steadily on the mark, when he would
shoot accurately: so still fix your thought upon the Occasion and Scope of
every book, when you would peruse them understandingly. 7. The Principal parts
of the Book, here Analytically laid down, exhibit clearly to your view, both
the chief Subject, or matters insisted upon in every Book; as also the
methodicall and orderly coherence of all the parts of the book with one
another. Books looked upon confusedly, are but darkly and confusedly
apprehended: But considered distinctly, as in these distinct Analyzes or
Resolutions into their Principal parts, must needs be distinctly, and much
more clearly discerned.


This the chief Purpose and Aim of this Book; By these particulars to
familiarize the Scriptures unto Christians, that delight to converse with God
in his own book; To whom I earnestly commend this direction, for the more
profitable use of this Book, viz. That 1 Before they read any Book of
Scripture, they would first read what is in this Key said of that Book. 2 In
reading they would still remember the Occasion and Scope of the book, and now
and then compare the Principal Parts here, with the Text: And 3 After the
Perusal of the Book, they would read again what this Key speaks of it. Hereby
the understaning will be cleared, the Memory confirmed.

VII. Rule.
Heedfully and judiciously observe the accurate Concord and Harmony of the Holy
Scriptures: though written by several persons at several times, in several
places; yet one and the same spirit inditing all, is still like himself,
consonant to himself in all. The Discord is in our minds, rather then in Gods
word. Hence Cum cord nostro nos concordemus: and Scriptura sancta in nulla
part discordat. Aug. De verb. Dom. Ser. 16.
Augustine, let us be at concord in our own heart, and the Scripture will have
no discord in it. There are Principally five notable respects, in which
Scriptures sometimes seem most contrary, repugnant and opposite one to another,
when yet they are not dissonant, but consonant and sweetly concording one with
another, As, 1 When the Word or Phrase is used in several Places, not in the
same, but in several senses and Acceptations. 2 When they treat not of the
same, but of several subjects. 3 When they speak not of the same, but several
parts of a thing. 4 When they speak not in several places according to the
same, but several respects. 5 When they intend not the same, but several
times. These things well considered, will lay a notable foundation for
reconciling all places of Scripture that seem to be any way opposite one to
another. Take the illustrations of the^ severally.

1. Scriptures seem opposite, but are not, when the same Ex verbis sensum
sequamur, and ex sensu rationem intelligamus, and ex ratione veritatem
apprehendamus. Hilar. de Trinit. l. 5.
word or phrase in several places is used not in the same, but in several
senses and acceptations; for the same words have often times several
significations. In such case, distinguish the several Acceptations, and the
Scriptures agree. As Paul says, Phil. 2.12.
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. But John says, 1 John
4.18.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, etc. These
places are not opposite: because the word [ Fear] in John signifies a base
servile stavish fear; in Paul, a filial childlike religious fear. In this sense
it is said of the 2 King. 17.32, 33 with v 34.
Samarita^s, they feared the Lord: and again they feared not the Lord, i. e.
they feared the Lord servilly, and hypocritically for his Lions, but they
feared him not religiously* ^ilially, sincerely. Not to fear God aright, is
not to fear him at all. Again Christ says, John 8.51.
If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. But Paul says, Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed to all men once to dye; yet here is no opposition; for Christ
speaks of death spiritual and eternal: Paul of death temporal or corporal.
Further Jeremiah says, Jer. 17.5.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man; Christ says, John. 653.
except ye eat^ the flesh of the Son of man, -- ye have no life in you, by
eating understand believing, v. 47. yet here is no opposition. [ Man] signifies
either mere man, who is vain, deceitful, etc. Of him Jeremiah speaks: Or man
subsisting in the second person of God; of him Christ speaks. Moses says, God
Genesis 2.3.
rested on the seventh day from all his work, But John 5.17.
Christ says, My father works hitherto and I work, yet here is no
opposition; For the works of God are either Works of Creation, whereby new
kinds of Creatures are made; so Moses intended that God rested from his work;
or Works of Conservation and Providence, sustaining and governing his works
created, so Christ meant the father and he wrought still. Add hereunto; Christ
says, Luke 14.26.
If any man come to me and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple, But Paul says, Col. 3.19.
Husbands, love your wives, Ephesians. 5.29.
No man ever yet hated his own flesh, yet no opposition; for Hatred is taken
either Properly and absolutely; so understand Paul: or comparatively, a less
love being counted hatred; of that, understand Christ. Moreover Paul says,
Romans 3.28.
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the law. But Jam. 2.24.
James says, ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only, yet no real opposition; For Justification in Paul's sense,
signifyes an isntrumental Application of Gods righteousness, viz. Jesus
Christ to our selves, and so Faith alone justifies before God: but
Justification in Iame's sense signifies a Declarative Manifestation of the
Truth of that Faith whereby we are justified, by the fruits and works of it.
Paul speaks of our justification before God: James of our justification before
men. Paul of the justification of our persons by Faith: James of the
justification of our Faith it self, by works.

2. Holy Scriptures seem opposite but are not, when they treat not of the
same, but of several subjects, or several matters. As, Christ promised the
Apostles, Joh. 16.13
When the Spirit of Truth should come, he should guide them into all truth. But
Paul testifies, that Peter erred, and Ga^. 2.11. etc.
was to be blamed; here are several Subjects, viz. Doctrine and Practice, As
to Doctrine the Apostles erred not therein, because they had it immediately
from God. But as to matter of Practice, Peter there erred, dissembling
fellowship with the Gentiles for fear of the Jews. Nor were any of the
Apostles exempted from sin and error in Practice. Again, It is said in one
place, That ^ King. 2*^1.
Elijah went up by a whirlewind into heaven. And in another, Mal. 4.5.
Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord. Yet these places oppose not one another, because
here are several Subjects spoken of; the former being Elijah the Tishbite; the
latter John the Baptist, the New Testament- Elijah, so called because he came
Luke 1.17.
in the Spirit and power of Elijah. Furthermore, John the Baptist being asked,
if he were Elias, Joh. 1.21
Answered, I am not; And yet Matt. 11.14 and 17.11, 12. Mark. 9 11 12, 13.
Christ says, John Baptist was that Elias which was for to come. viz. Not
personally, but virtually; so here is no opposition.

3. Scriptures seem opposite but are not, when though they speak of the same
matter or subject, yet they intend not the same, but several parts thereof. As
Paul says, Romans 7 18
In me dwells no good thing, And yet he says, Romans 7.22
I delight in the Law of God; which doubtless is good. Yet these oppose not,
because in the former Paul speaks of his carnal unregenerate part, in me,
that is my flesh, dwells no good thing: in the latter of his spiritual
regenerate part, I delight in the Law of God, after the inner man. Again;
Christ says, Joh. 14.28.
My father is greater then I. But Paul, says, Phil. 2.5, 6.
Christ Jesus being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God. Yet no opposition; for in Christ's person are two Natures, viz. See
Joh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16 Gal. 4.4.
of God and man; Now as Christ is God, so he is equal to the Father, as Paul
meant: As Christ is man so the Father is greater then he, as himself said.

4. Scriptures seem opposite and contrary, but are not, when they speak of
things, not in the same, but in several respects, notions or considerations.
For the several respect, removes all contradiction or opposition. As Christ
says, Joh. 5.31
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. But elsewhere he
says Joh. 8.14
Though I bear record of my self, yet my Record is true. Yet here is no
opposition indeed, because Christ speaks of bearing witness of himself in
several respects; In the former place, of bearing witness to himself,
disjunctly and solely without the Father, so his witness were not true: In the
latter of bearing witness of himself, conjunctly or jointly with the Father;
so his witness of himself is true. Again John says 1 John 3.9
, He that is borne of God, commits not sin, nor can sin. -- And yet
elsewhere, Joh. 1.8.10.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, etc. Yet here is no
real opposition; for in some respects they that are born of God, may be said
to sin, in some respects they sin not. They have sin original in them; and
actual sin, through infirmity, etc. is done by them, while they are in this
world: But they sin not as unregenerate men sin. viz. See all these particulars
largly opened in my Believers Evidences for eternal life. cap. 2. p. 38. etc
1 Not against the Gospel-Remedy, Jesus Christ. 2 Not as under the Reign of
Sin; 3 Not with a full will; 4 Not presumptuously; 5 Not habitually; 6 Not
with allowance of themselves in any bosom corruption; 7 Not totally and
Finally. Furthermore, God says Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord, I change not; And elsewhere says Jer. 18.8.10
I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. -- And I will repent
of the good wherewith I said, I would benefit them. Yet no real contradiction;
for in some sense God cannot repent, viz. Affectively, in respect of his
essence, no nor in respect of his eternal Decree: In some sense, after the
manner of men he is said to repent, viz. Effectively, in respect of his works
which he effects, when he does something cross to what he had formerly done,
as when he drowned the world, which he had made; dethroned Saul, whom he had
anointed King, etc. Add to these; it is said of Christ's Kingdom Isai. 9.7.
Luk, 1.33.
It shall have no end, but be established for ever. But Paul says, 1 Cor. 15
24.
Christ at the end shall deliver up the Kingdom to God even the Father. Yet no
real opposition, For, Christ's Kingdom may be considered in diverse respects,
viz. 1 As it is Essential belonging to Christ as God: So he he shall never
deliver up his Kingdom. 2 As Oeconomicall, Dispensatory or Mediatory; The
Mediatory Kingdom of Christ is considerable in respect of, The substance of
it, so Christ our Mediator shall be head of his Church, and mystical body for
ever; The Circumstance of it, or manner of administration of it, by Word,
Sacraments, Effusion of the Spirit, etc. And thus at last Christ shall deliver
up the Kingdom to the Father, for then God in Christ, face to face, shall be
an endless Sabbath, Sermon, Sacrament, all in all.

5 Finally, Scriptures may seem but are not really opposite, when they intend
not the same, but several times. Or at least when they speak of the same
times in several respects. Distinguish wisely the times, and respects, and the
opposition cease, As 2 King. 15.33.
Iotham the son of Vzziah is said to Reign sixteen years in Jerusalem; And
yet mention is made of the 2 King. 15 30.
twentieth year of Jotham son of Uzziah. Notwithstanding here is no real
opposition in this computation; For Iotham reigned alone only 16. years: but
he reigned with his Father Vzziah (who could not mannage-the affairs of the
Kingdom, being smitten with leprosy) 4. years before; in all 20 years. Again,
Matthew says, Mat. 17.1.
After six days, Jesus takes Peter, James, and John his brother, and brings
them up into an high mountain apart. But Luke says Luke 9.28
, About an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter, and John and James,
and went up into a mountain -- yet no opposition: For 1 either it may be said,
Luke's expression of, [ about an eight days after,] has a latitude, and may
bear a day under: and Matthew's expression has a latitude, [ After* six
dayes] and may bear a day or two over: 2 Or Matthew numbers the days
exclusively, Luke inclusively. Furthermore the time of the Government by
Judges, in the Sea Key of the Bible. p. 137.
Book of Judges, is computed to be about two hundred ninety and nine years. But
Paul in his Sermon at Antioch, says, Act. 13.19, 20.
And when he had destroyed seven Nations in the Land of Canaan, he divided
their Land to them by Lot, And after that, he gave unto them Judges, about the
space of four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the Prophet. Here seems
to be a great opposition, but if things be well examined, there is none at all.
Yet it may not be dissembled that this is so hard a knot, that it much puzzles
writers satisfactorily to unty it. 1 Partly, because this Computation of 450.
years, is so punctually confuted by this text, viz. to begin after Canaan was
divided by Lot, and to end at Samuel exclusively. (...)Partly, Because that
noted Chronology mentioned in 1 King. 6.1. assures us expressly, That the time
from Isreal's coming out of Egypt till the beginning of the building of the
Temple in the fourth year of Solomon, was precisely but 480. years. But if we
allow for the time of the Judges 450. years, in this account; we shall find the
whole time from going out of Egypt till the Temples founding, will arise to
591 years in all, viz. From Their departure out of Egypt, till their entrance
into Canaan 40. year Thence to Ioshuah's death, about 17. y. Thence to Elies
death, ( for Samuels time is included in Saul's Reign, Act. 13.21.) according
to this supposition. 450. y. Thence to the Death of David, 80. y. Thence to the
founding of the Temple in Solomon's fourth year, 4. y. In all, 591. years.
So that in these regards, it is no easy matter clearly and undoubtedly to
reconcile these times. Many opinions are offered in Writers to this end, yet
most of them, if not all, labor under some inconvenience or other. To omit the
variety of opinions, Let it suffice to mention only two, which learned men seem
most to incline unto. ^ez. Annot. in Act. 13.20. Ludovic. De Dieu Animadvers.
in Act. Apost. c. 13. v. 20.
Some think, that here Paul intended not to reckon up the time while the
Judges ruled, (because so it were impossible to reconcile these four hundred
and fifty years with those four hundred and eighty years, in 1 King. 6.1. as
has been intimated): but to point out at what time God gave Israel Judges,
viz. after these things which were declared. v, 17, 18, 19. viz. from the birth
of Isaac, (which seems to be noted in that phrase, God chose our fathers, v.
17. among all people God choosing Abraham, among all Abraham's children choosing
Isaac, and making a Covenant with him,) till the beginning of Judges, which is
computed to be four hundred forty seven years, that is about four hundred and
fifty years, wants but three years; and its usual in Scripture to put the
round number for the punctual number. This Computation they make thus, From
Isaac's birth, to Jacobs birth, years 60. From Jacobs birth to the going down
into Egypt 130. Thence to the Coming forth of Egypt, 210. Thence to the
entering into the land of Canaan 40. Thence to the dividing of the Land by Lot,
7. Which make up in all 447.


But this opinion is attended with these two inconveniences. 1. The present
text in the Acts seems plainly to confine us for these four hundred and fifty
years, between the dividing of the land of Canaan by Lot, and the beginning of
Samuels Rule; which limits this Computation transgresses. 2. The number
computed does not exactly amount to four hundred and fifty, wants three.
Beroaldus, with others.
Others therefore to avoid these inconveniences, confine and bound their
computation according to this text, to the space of time betwixt the dividing
Canaan by Lot, and Samuels Rule. And they think Paul reckoned up all the years
mentioned in the Judges, and so they compute both the years of the Judges, and
the years of Isreal's oppressors, distinctly and severally; (though the years
of the Oppressors are indeed comprised under the years of the Judges) and both
together do punctually make up the four hundred and fifty years, here
mentioned in the Acts. As follows, The Judges mentioned in the Book of
Judges, governed in all. 299. years. To these add the forty years of Eli, who
so long judged Israel, 1 Samuel 4.18. 40. So the whole time of the Judges rule,
till Samuel, was, 339.


Isreal's Oppressors were 1. Cushan who oppressed them, Judges 38. 8 years 2.
Moab, Judge. 3.14, 18. 3. Iabin, Judge. 4.3. ^0. 4. Midian, Judge. 6.^. 7. 5.
Ammon Judge. 10.8. 18. 6. Philistims, Judge. 13.1. 40. So the whole time of their
Oppressors, was 111.


Now add these together* viz. the years of their Judges, and the years of
their Oppressors, three hundred thirty and nine, and one hundred and eleven,
and the total resulting is four hundred and fifty years exactly; (only th^s
inconvenience remains, the same years are reckoned twice over, yet it is not
in the same, but several respects). Now if out of the number of years, from
departure out of Egypt, till the Founding of the Temple, as first computed viz.
-- 591, You subduct the years of the Oppressors of Israel under their Judges,
which seems to be twice reckoned up, viz. one hundred and eleven years. The
remain is just four hundred and eighty years, according to that of 1 Kings
6.1. And so the Scripture on all sides are reconciled accurately; And therefore
this opinion seems most to be embraced.

VIII. Rule.
Learn that excellent Art of explaining and understanding the Scriptures, by
the Scriptures. The Scriptures in some places speak more darkly and dubiously,
in other places they express the same things more clearly and certainly: Ubi
apertius sententiae ponuntur, ibi descent dum est quomodo in locis
intelligantur obscuris. Aug. de Doct. Christian. l. 3. c. 25.
the doubtful are to be explained by the certain, as dark places by those
that are clear, As Augustine notes; As, Peter being to prove to the Jews
Christ's resurrection by Scripture, viz. Psalm. 16.10.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption: he alleges for clearing this another Scripture to evince that
this promise was made to David concerning Christ, and could not properly be
intended of David himself, Act. 2.^5. to 32.
Men and brethren let me speak freely to you, of the Patriarch David, that he
is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is with us unto this day. Therefore
he being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath, etc.
Certainly Scripture is the best expounder of it self, Scripture-exposition of
it self, (as Aug. de Doct. Chri. l. 3. c. 28.
Augustine, and before him Iren. l. 4. c. 63.
Irenaeus observed) is most regular and safe. Let us (says Chrysostom. in Genesis
Hom. 13.
Chrysostom) attend to the Scope of Scripture, which interprets it self and
suffers not his hearer to err. The gold was not sanctified (says Orig. in
Matthew. Hom. 25.
Origin) without the Temple, no more any sense but what is drawn out of the
Scripture. And most excellently Hilar. de Trinit. l. 1. -- Retulerit magis quam
Attulerit. --
Hilary, He is the best Reader, who interprets sayings by sayings; who brings
not an interpretation to Scripture, nor imposes a sense upon Scripture, but
finds a sense in Scripture, and draws it from Scripture, etc.

Now that we may more successefully and clearly understand Scripture by
Scripture, these ensueing particulars are to be observed.

1. That Jesus Christ our Mediator, and the salvation of sinners by him, is
the very substance, marrow, soul, and Scope of the whole Scriptures. As many
Joh 5.39 Act. 3.18. etc. Act. 7 52. and 10 43. Romans 10.4. 2 Cor 3.14, 16. Gal.
3.24. 1 Cor. 2.2. Revel. 19.10.
passages not obscurely intimate unto us. What are the whole Scriptures, but as
it were the spiritual swadling-cloathes of the Holy child Jesus? 1 Christ is
the truth and substance of all the types and shadows. 2 Christ is the matter
and substance of the Covenant of Grace under all administrations thereof; under
the Old Testament Christ is veyled, under the New Covenant Revealed. 3 Christ
is the Center and meeting place of all the Promises, for 2 Cor. 1.20.
in him all the promises of God are yea, and they are Amen. 4 Christ is the
thing signified, sealed, and exhibited in all the Sacraments of Old or New
Testament, whether ordinary or extraordinary. 5 Scripture- Genealogies are to
lead us on to the true Line of Christ. 6 Scripture- Chronologies, are to
discover to us the times and seasons of Christ. 7 Scripture- laws, are Gal.
3.20.
our Schoolmasters to bring us unto Christ; the Moral by correcting, the
Ceremonial by Directing; and 8 Scripture- Gospel is Christ's light, whereby we
know him; Joh 10.4.5.
Christ's voice whereby we hear and follow him; Christ's cords of love whereby
we are drawn into sweet union and Communion with him; yea it is the Romans 1.16.
1 Cor. 1.18.
power of God unto Salvation unto all them that believe in Christ Jesus. Keep
therefore still Jesus Christ in your eye, in the perusal of the Scripture as
the end, Scope, and substance thereof. For as the Sun gives light to all the
heavenly bodies: so Jesus Christ Mal. 4.2
the Sun of righteousness gives light to all the holy Scriptures.

2. Still remember how Jesus Christ is revealed in Scripture, gradually in
Promises and Covenants, till the noon day of the Gospel shined most clearly.
Especially in these more remarkable Periods of time: 1 To Adam immediately
upon his fall, most obscurely and imperfectly. 2. To Noah more clearly then to
Adam. 3. To Abraham, Isaac and Jacob more clearly then to Noah. 4. To Moses and
Israel at Mount Sinai more clearly then to Abraham. 5. To David and his seed
more clearly then to Moses. 6. To Israel after the Babylonish captivity, more
clearly then to David. 7. To the Church under the N. Testament, the N. Covenant
is laid open more clearly then to all others. For, 1 God is a God of order, and
he makes known his gracious contrivances orderly: 2 Christ and salvation by
him are treasures too high and precious to be disclosed all at once to the
Church: 3 The state of the Church is various, she has her infancy, her youth,
and all the degrees of her minority, as also her riper age; and therefore God
revealed Christ not according to his own ability of revealing, but according to
his Churches capacity of receiving: 4 This gradual revealing of Christ suits
well with our condition in this world, which is not perfect but growing on to
perfection, fully attainable in Heaven only. Now this gradual unveiling of the
Covenant and promises in Christ, is to be much considered throughout the whole
Scripture; that we may see the wisdom of Gods Dispensations, the Imperfection
of the Churches Condition here, especially in her minority, and the usefulness
of comparing the more dark and imperfect, with the more clear and complete
manifestations of the mysteries of Gods grace in Christ.

3. Well compare the texts, you would understand, with the Context: and note
the Ille qui cor habet, quod praecisum est ju^gat Scripturae and legate
superio^a vel inferiora, and in ve^iet sensum, qu^m pravus vol^bat male
interpretari. Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon 49.
coherence. For (though some Scriptures are laid down in certain independing
Aphorisms, like an heap of gold rings or distinct Jewels, as most part of the
Proverbs; yet) the generality of the Scriptures is concatenated or linked
together part with part like a golden chain, intwisted or woven together like
a curious silken web, one thing so depending upon another, as Dictotum
intelligentia, aut ex praepositis, aut ex consequentib^s expectetur. Hilar. de
Trini^. l. 6.
that they mutually help to the interpreting of one another. Consider therefore
still the coherence and dependence, otherwise you will run into a thousand
misunderstandings. As where it is said, 1 Pet. 4.18.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where etc. A weak Christian perhaps is
discouraged hereby, thinks he shall scarce ever come to heaven: now the context
clears it, for the Apostle speaks 1 Pet 4.17.
that judgment [or affliction] must begin at the house of God, Gods people;
and thence argues to the certainty of wicked men's greater punishments: so that
here [ scarcely be saved] is to be understood not of spiritual and eternal
salvation from hell, but of temporal salvation from temporal afflictions and
persecutions, from which the righteous shall not be free.

4. Compare dark places with clearer, what is in one place veyled, is in
another oft-times unveyled. As, with Parables Matthew. 13.3. etc. with v. 18. etc.
confer the exposition; with visions, Rev. 1.12, 13, 16, 20.
the Interpretation; with laws, Matthew. 5.21. to the end of the chapt.
the explication thereof, etc. For as In iis quae aperte in Scriptura posita
sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent sidem, moresque vivendi. August. de
doctrine. Christian. l. 2. c. 9. Ad obscuriores locutiones illustrandas de
manifestioribus suman^ur exemplo. ibid. ubi apertius sententiae ponuntur, ibi
discendum est quomodo, in locis intelligantur obscuris. Aug. de doct.
Christian. l. 3. c. 25.
Augustine has observed, In those things that are plainly laid down in
Scripture, are found all things containing faith and manners; and places
obscure are to be illustrated by those that are manifest.

5. Explain those places, wherein any matter or subject of Divinity is touched
only occasionally or accidentally, with sundry other places wherein it is
handled and insisted upon purposely and professedly, which are the very seat
and chief fountain of the Argument. As if you would understand James, c 2.
touching justification by works as well as faith, where justification is spoken
of more accidentally; compare it with the Epistle to the Romans, c. 2, 3, 4
etc. wherein justification is purposely and fully handled. So if you would
truly understand any texts about the matter of Creation, consult with places
where the Creation is professedly handled, as in Genesis c. 1. and c. 2. and Psalm.
104.

6. Parallel Types, with Anti-Types or things typified. The Types more
familiarly lead us to the understanding and apprehending of things typified,
and consequently more firmly fix them in our memories: The Anti-types more
evidently unfold and unveyle the Types unto us. As, the Type of the brazen
Serpent, Number. 21.9 with Joh. 3, 14 15.16.
paralleld with Christ the truth. The Type of Mannah, Exodus 16 15. etc. and
17.6. with 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. John 6.
and water out of the Rock, with the Antitype Christ, whose body and blood are
meat and drink indeed, etc.

7. Carefully ponder what Prophecyes and Promises are already actually
fulfilled, and what remain further to be fulfilled in their season. For so
far as any Scripture clearly testifies the fulfilling of any of them, so
far we have a clear and undoubted Commentary upon them, As Isa. 7.14.
fulfilled and so cleared, Matthew. 1.22, 23. So Exodus 12.46. fulfilled and
cleared, John 19.26. So Isa 61.1, 2. fulfilled and cleared, Luke 4.18, 19.21.
with many such like; And where Prophecyes or Promises are found to be yet
unfulfilled, we shall thereby be incited to study them, and the intended time
of their Accomplishment, exercising faith and prayer thereupon.

8. Finally, Parallel heedfully the Old and New Testament together; and
specially all those places in the Old Testament, which are in any respect
alleged in the New Testament, whether 1 the phrase and words only, or 2 the
sense and matter only, or 3 both words and matter, be cited. This would give
wonderful light to many hundreds of passages in the Bible. And for this end I
have with much care and diligence compiled, a Parallel of the Places of the Old
Testament, any way alleged in the New; and had once resolved to have inserted
it in this place; But to avoid prolixity, I must now forbear it, least the
Porch prove too big for the building.

IX. Rule.
The last Direction I shall commend to the Reader for the improvement of
heavenly dexterity in, and understanding of the holy Scriptures, is; Endeavor
sincerely to practice Scripture, and you shall solidly understand Scripture* Is
divinas Scripturas recte legir, qui verba vertit in opera. Bernard. in Tract.
de Ord. vitae.
Bernard said truly, He rightly reads the Scriptures that turne^s Words into
works; Knowing into Doing. The mightiest man in practice, will in the end
prove the mightiest man in Scripture. Theory is the guide of Practice, Practice
the Life of Theory. Where Scripture-contemplation and experience meet both
together in the same person, true Scripture understanding must needs be
heightened and doubled. To this effect is Christ's promise ^ohn 7.16, 17.
My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God. To like purpose subscribes
the experience of David. Ps. 119.98.99 100.
Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for they
are ever with me. I have more understanding then all my Teachers: for thy
testimonies are my meditation. I understand more then the Ancients; because I
keep thy Precepts.

These things (Christian Reader) I thought fit to commend to thee by way of
Preface; But shall detain thee no longer from the Perusal of the Book it
self. The Lord, that Isa. 48.17.
teaches his people to profit, advance thy spiritual profiting abundantly by
both: So prays

He who earnestly desires to be serviceable to Jesus Christ, and useful to his
Church and people, Fran. Roberts.
Augustine's, London, Aug. 26 -- 1647 Aug. 21 -- 1648
CLAVIS BIBLIORVM. THE KEY OF THE BIBLE: Unlocking The richest Treasury of the
Holy Scriptures.
THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, Romans 1.2. were written by Moses, the Prophets, the
Apostles, and other holy men of God, Luke 16.29.31. Ephesians. 2.20. and 3.5. and 2
Pet. 1.21. The Covenant of God with man in Christ the Mediator, that
substantial or begotten WORD, John 1.1. is the Principal Subject Revealed and
explained in the whole Scripturall, or written WORD.

Gods COVENANT with man in Christ is represented to us in Holy Scripture
principally two ways. viz. 1. As Promised, fore-prophecied and typified In
Christ to be manifested afterward in the flesh. Hence called the Covenants of
Promise, Ephesians. 2.10. Covenants, not Covenant: because of the several
Publications of the Covenant with more and more Augmentations, in several
Points or Periods of time. Thus the Covenant is made known in all the Books of
Scripture, written before Christ's coming: which are therefore called the
OLD-COVENANT, Heb. 8.13. or the OLD TESTAMENT, 2 Cor. 3.14.

2. As performed, fulfilled and actually accomplished in Christ already come,
and manifested in our flesh in fullness of time, Gal. 4.4, 5. Heb. 9. Heb. 10.
Thus the Covenant is most clearly and fully unveyled to us in all the Books of
Scripture written since Christ's coming; which are therefore styled the NEW
COVENANT or the NEW TESTAMENT Heb. 8.8. Matthew. 26.28. Heb. 9.15.

Thus the whole BIBLE is distributed into the 1 Old; and 2 New Testament.

THE OLD TESTAMENT.
THE OLD TESTAMENT, (revealing the Covenants of promise) in respect of the
Penmen whom the Holy Ghost employed to write the Books thereof, is disparted by
the Holy Ghost himself into two general heads, viz. 1 Moses, and 2 the
Prophets, Luke 16.29.31. and 24.27. John 1.45. or, The Law of Moses; and the
Prophets, Act. 28.23.

J. MOSES.
MOSES ( the man of God, Psalm. 90.1. The first Penman of Scripture:) was an
Ebrew borne in Egypt, after the worlds creation about 2432 years, before Christ
about 1496. years; Mose^ is the seventh from Abraham, a New Henoch, who was the
seventh from Adam. So was Eber the seventh from Enoch; and Isaac the seventh
from Eber. All excellent among ordinary men. As the Sabbath in regard of the
six other days. The view of Holy Script. p. 133.
The seventh from Abraham, the father of the faithful, 1 Chronicles. 6.1, 2, 3. and
2.1. and 1.34. As Enoch was the seventh from Adam the father of the world, Jude
14. When Moses was borne he was very fair, Act. 7.20, 21, 22. He was
marvellously saved from death being drawn out of the water, whence his name
MOSES, i. e. Drawn-forth, was given to him, Exodus 2 10 He was nourished by King
Pharao^s daughter for her own son, Ex. 2.9, 10. Act. 7.21. Learned in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians, and mighty in words and in deeds, Act. 7.22. He
lived in Pharaohs Court 40. years, and then left the Court, choosing rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, etc, Act. 7.23. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
He was a stranger, a shepherd in the land of Madian 40. years, Act. 7.29.30.
Exodus 3. thence God called him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance. He fed Israel most faithfully 40. years, Numb. 12.7. Heb. 3.2.5.
being in the Church in the wilderness, Act. 7.38. with the Angel that spoke to
him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers, where he received the lively Oracles
to give unto us, and commanded us a law which is the inheritance of the Church
of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33.4. Of all the Prophets that arose in Israel, there was none
like Moses whom God knew face to face, Deuteronomy. 34.10. He dyed 120. years old, his
eye not being dim nor his natural strength abated, and was buried of God, no
man knowing of his sepulcher to this day. Deuteronomy. 34.5.6.7.

MOSES wrote the Law of God in the five first Books, called in Greek the
Pentateuch, i. e. The five-fold-volume. At first it seems to be written in one
volume or Roll, there being such a continued connection of Book with Book,
Exodus 1.1. Levit. 1.1. Number. 1.1. Deuteronomy. 1.1. But was afterward, according to
the several subject matters therein contained, divided into five several Books,
Containing 1 An History of things past: 2 A Covenant between God and his Church
then present: 3 And a Prophecy of further grace to come, now exhibited by Jesus
Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.15. etc. John 5.46. and 1.17. In Propounding of which things,
(as Ainsworth observes) Moses has a veil upon his glorious face: for in the
Histories are implied Allegories, Gal. 2.24. And in the Laws are types and
shadows of good things to come; the body whereof is of Christ, Heb. 9.9. and
10.1. Col. 2.17. In Genesis ( which History ends with Isreal's going down
into Egypt,) we have the image of a natural man, fallen from God into the
bondage of sin. In Exodus, is the type of our Regeneration, and State renewed
by Jesus Christ. In Leviticus the shadow of our mortification, whilst we are
made sacrifices unto God. In Numbers, our spiritual warfare, whereunto we are
mustered, and armed to ^ight the good fight of faith. In Deuteronomie, the
Doctrine of our sanctification, and Preparation to enter into our heavenly
Canaan, after Moses death, by the conduct of Jesus the son of God. So H.
Ainsworth in his Preface before his Annotat. on Genesis etc.

Genesis.
i. e. Generation, so called by the Greek; because it sets forth the
Generations of the heavens and of the earth, in their first creation, Genesis 2.4.
The Hebrews name their Books of the Old Testament, either 1 From the Prophets,
the Penmen of them. Or 2 From the Principal subject or Argument handled in
them: Or 3 From the first Hebrew word wherewith they begin, as the 5. Books of
Moses, and the Lament. of Jeremiah. Hence Genesis is called in Hebrew (...)
Bereschith i. e. In the beginning.

Penman. It is not probable this Book was written by Moses whilst a Private
man, and a shepherd in Madian, in the desert: but rather after he was a
Public person, and furnished with a Prophetic spirit; otherwise the credit
and authority of this History would be too much enfeebled. Nor is it absurd
which some Hebrew writers think, who refer this writing to that of Exodus
24.12. Come up to me into the mount, and be thou there, and I will give thee
the Tables of stone, and the Law, and the Precepts, which I have written to
teach them. Understanding by the Tables, the Decalogue: by the Precepts all the
Ceremonial, and Judicial Ordinances: and by the Law all other writings of
Moses, whether Historical or Dogmaticall, D. Paraeus in Prolegom. in Genes. p.
14.15. in fol.

This Book as it is absolutely the ancientest writing extant in the world: so
it is most compendious; being an History of 2369 years, as Ainsw. thinks, or
rather of 2368 as Iunius and Paraeus comput. Iun. Annot. in Genesis 1. Parae.
Prologom. in Genes. This may appear in three eminent Intervals or Periods of
time recorded in Genesis. viz. I. From the Creation to the beginning of the
flood, in Noah's 600th year, through 10 Generations; 1656 years. Genesis 5. and
6.11. viz. From Adams Creation to Seth's Nativity, 130 years. From Seth to
Enos, 105. From Enos to Cainan 90. From Cainan to Mahalee^ 70. From Mahaleel to
Iared* 65. From Iared to Enoch, 162. From Enoch to Mathusalah. 65. From
Mathusalah to Lamech, 187. From Lamech to Noah's birth, 182. From Noah's birth
to the beginning of the flood, 600 in all 1656. II. The second Period of time,
is; From the beginning of the flood, through other 10 Generations to Abraham's
birth, 352 years, Genesis 11. viz. From the Flood to Arphaxad, 2 years. From
Arphaxad to Selah, 35 years. From Selah to Heber, 30 years From Eber to Peleg,
34 years. From Peleg to Reu, 30 years. From Reu to Serug, 32 years. From Serug
to Nachor, 30 years. From Nachor to Terah, 29 years. From Terah to Abraham, 130
years. In all 352 years. So that Abraham was borne in the 2008 year from the
Creation. III. The third Period, is; From Abraham's birth to Joseph's death,
through four Generations, 360 years, viz. From Birth of Abraham to the birth
of Isaac, 100 years, Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. From Isaacs birth to Jacobs birth,
60 years, Genesis 25.26. From Jacobs birth to his going down into Egypt, 130
years, Genesis 47.9. From Jacobs descent into Egypt to his death, 17 years, Genesis
47.28. From death of Jacob to the death of Joseph 53 years, which may be thus
gathered. Joseph died when he was 110 years old, Genesis 50.26. He stood before
Pharaoh when he was 30 years old, Genesis 41.46. After the seven years of plenty,
in the third year of famine Jacob came into Egypt, in the one hundred and
thirtieth year of Jacob, and fourtieth year of Joseph, Genesis 45.6. Joseph
lived with his father in Egypt seventeen years. Therefore when his father dyed,
Joseph was 57 years old. Consequently he lived after his fathers death 53
years, Genesis 50.26. So that the total of this third Intervall, amounts to 360
years. And therefore 1656 and 352 and 360 being added together: This History of
Genesis, is evidently an History of 2368 years continuance.


The scope of Genesis, is to set forth, The Generation of the world: The
corruption thereof by sin: The Restoration thereof by Christ the seed of the
woman, together with the Government of the old world before the flood, and the
foll^^ing world after the flood, especially of the Church of God in particular
families in both.

Principal parts of this Book. In Genesis are described* I. The Original 1 Of
the world. chap. 1. 2. Of Mankind, and so of the Church. chapter 2.3. Of sin and
punishment thereof, chapter 3. II. The Government. 1. Of the Old World before the
Flood, where are 1. The Propogation of sin and punishment from Adam to
posterity. c. 4. 2. Preservation of the Church in the sinful world. c. 5. 3.
Judgments of God upon the world, Foretold. c. 6. Inflicted, c. 7. 2. Of the
World following after the Flood; according to the times of diverse renowned
Patriarchs, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob. 1. Noah, whose 1 Deliverance from the
Flood c. 8. 2. Benediction. c. 9. 3. Family, 1 as united, c. 10. 2 as dispersed
c. 11. are recorded. 2. Abraham, touching whom are laid down 1 His Calling from
his Country and kindred c. 12.1 to ver. 10. 2. His going down, Into Egypt, ver.
10. to the end, Into Canaan c. 13. 3. His rescuing of Lot, c. 14. 4. His
dealing with God, who, 1 Promises him issue c. 15. 2 Performs to him by Hagar.
c. 16. 3 Makes a Covenant with Abraham; whereof note, The form c. 17. The
fruit or effect of it 1 On Gods part, viz. Communication of his Counsels to
him. chapter 18. and of his Benefits chapter 19, 20, 21. 2 On Abraham's part diverse
sweet fruits, viz. 1 The obedience of his faith, c. 22. 2 His Humanity c. 23. 3
His Piety in the matching of his son c. 24. 3. Isaac, whose 1 Posterity, c.
25. 2. Peregrination into the land of Egypt, c. 26. 3. Benediction of his two
sons, c. 27. are mentioned. 4. Jacob, whose three Peregrinations are declared.
viz. I. Into Mesopotamia, wherein note, 1. His journey c. 28. 2. His Arrival
and marriage, c. 29. 3. His increase in goods, and children c. 30. II. Into
Canaan, where observe, His passage hither, c. 31. 4 His abode there, where the
things that befell him are recited, viz. 1. His meeting of his brother Esau,
with 1 preparation for it, c. 32. 2 manner of it, c. 33. His daughter Dinah's
defilement c. 34. 2. Rachels death c. 35. and 3. Isaacs death and burial by
Jacob and Esau, where is mentioned Esaus race, c 35.36. Selling of Joseph c.
37. Incest of Judah, c. 38. III. Into Egypt: of which Peregrination of Jacob,
are mentioned, The Antecedents, The Manner, and Consequents. Antecedents. viz.
1. Joseph's being made known to the Egyptians, and to his own kindred. To the
Egyptians in Prison, c. 39.48. out of Prison to the King and his people. c. 41.
To his own, Not at their first coming into Egypt to buy corn. c. 42. But at
their second coming, c. 43.44.45. where all the circumstances thereof are
noted. 2. Joseph's sending for his father, c. 45. Manner, 1. Of Jacobs going
thither, c. 46. 2. Of Jacobs being there, Where note, his conference with
Pharaoh c. 47. His blessing of Joseph c. 48. His Prophetical benedictions to
all his sons, c. 49. Consequents upon Jacobs death c. 50.




Exodus.
i. e. Going-out; or Departure, so called by the Greek, because it declares
Isreal's Departure out of Egypt, after they had been long-oppressed there under
Tyrannical servitude. In Heb. (...) veelleh schemoth, i. e. And these are the
names, Exodus 1.1.

Scope; To set forth Gods governing and ordering of his Church, now reduced and
united into one body, out of all the several families of Israel. This is the
Church in the wilderness, Act. 7.38.

Exodus is an History, from the death of Joseph till the erecting of the
Tabernacle, for about 142. years. viz. From death of Joseph to the birth of
Moses, 60 years. As Iunius computes. Annot. in Ex. From Moses birth to the
Departure out of Egypt. 80 years, Exodus 7.7. From the departure out of Egypt,
to the erecting of the Tabernacle two years Exodus 40.17. in the second year.
viz. the second year after their coming out of Egypt. Iun. Annotat.

Principal Parts of this Book. Exodus contains an Historical Narration of I.
Gods Actions for Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt. Things done of God, were
Before, In, or After Isreal's deliverance. I. Before their deliverance, are 1.
His permission of the Egyptian Tyranny over them, which was the occasion of the
deliverance c. 1. 2. His Preparation both of Instruments and Actions, for
deliverance 1. Of Instruments. viz. Moses who is Borne c. 2. Called c. 3. Aaron
c. 4. 2. Of Actions viz. Words c. 5.6. Signs, both Confirming their words c.
7. and Punishing the Egyptians for not letting Israel go, with ten plagues,
viz. 1 Turning water into blood, c. 7. 2 Frogs, 3 Lice, 4 And a mixed swarm of
Flies, c. 8. 5 Pestilence, 6 Boyles, 7 Hail, c. 9. 8 Locusts, and 9 Darkness,
c. 10. 10 Death of the firstborn, Foretold, c. 11. Fulfilled, c. 12. II. In
their deliverance, where note 1. The^r departure, Egresse or going out, Acted
c. 12. Attested for the benefit of Posterity, with signs and observations c.
13. 2. Their Progress or going on. Whereof 1 Their passing through the Red
sea, c. 14. 2 Their thanksgiving for this wonder of mercy in a gratulatory
Song, c. 15. III. After their deliverance, when God did 1. Supply them with
food and necessaries c. 16. 2. Defend them from evils c. 17. 3. Appoint
Judicatories, for all matters of difference, that might fall out among them c.
18.
II. Gods institutions, in which regard consider Gods Prescriptions, Isreal's
performances. I. Gods prescriptions, where note, 1. Preparation of the people
c. 19. 2. The promulgation of his laws, 1 Moral with their Appendixes, c. 20.
2 Judicial both in humane and sacred things c. 21, 22, 23. 3 Ceremonial.
Touching the Ceremonial laws, here are laid down, 1. The Preparation to them
c. 24. 2. The parts of them. viz. 1 The Tabernacle with the Appurtenances and
Utensils thereof, c. 25.26, 27. 2 The Priests and their Ornaments or Vestments
for Ministration, c. 28. 3 Sacrifices, c. 29. and diverse sacred things, c. 30.
3. The close of ceremonial directions, c. 31. II. Isreal's performances of Gods
Prescriptions. Here consider Isreal's obedience. 1. About Morals; 1 Violated by
idolatry, c. 32. 2. Restored and renewed again By reconciliation with God, c.
33. and Renewing of the Tables, c. 34. 2. About Ceremonials; viz. 1. The Parts
of the Tabernacle; The matter chap. 35. The fashioning of the Tabernacle, c.
36. and of the Ark, c. 37. The making of sacred things belonging, To the
people, c. 38. To the Priests, c. 39. 2. The total disposing, ordering, and
erecting of the Tabernacle, c. 40.




Leviticus
Vajikra. i. e. And he called. This being the first Hebrew word in the Hebrew
text, beginning this book.

Scope of this Book. To make known Leviticall Laws Sacrifices and Ordinances,
and by those shadows to lead Israel by the hand to Jesus Christ the true Priest
and sacrifice of the Church, See Levit. 11.44. and 20.26.

This Book relates the memorable words, Acts and Leviticall Ceremonial Laws
made known from God to Israel, for one Months space viz. from about the
beginning of the second year, after Isreal's departure out of Egypt, the
Tabernacle being already reared, till the beginning of the second month of the
same year, As Jun. in Annot. compare Exodus 40.17. with Numb. 1.1. which was in
the year, from the worlds Creation, 2514. As Ainsw. computes.

Principal Parts. Leviticus describes the sacred Ceremonial law* 1. Of things.
2. Of Persons. 3. Of Actions.

I. The Ceremonial law of things, c. 1. to c. 8. either according to the
substance of them, as of 1. Burnt-offerings, c. 1. 2. Meat Offerings, c. 2. 3.
Peace Offerings, c. 3. 4. Sin Offerings, in case of ignorance, c. 4. or of
infirmity, c. 5. Or, according to the Rite and Ceremony of them, c. 6.7.

II. The Ceremonial law of persons, c. 8. to 16. viz. 1. Of the Priests, In
their consecration to their office, c. 8. In their discharge of their office,
either according to Gods assistance, c. 9. Or men's infirmity, c. 10. 2. Of all
the people, touching whom are laws about their sanctification, both from
uncleanness without them, in matter of their food, c. 11. or In them* By
reason of 1 Childbearing, c. 12. 2 Leprosy, whereof its Rise and State, c.
13. Its cure, c. 14. 3 Issue of seed or blood, c. 15.

III. The Ceremonial Law touching Actions, Necessary or Voluntary.

1. Necessary, whereof are laid down The Particulars and the Confirmation of
them. 1 the Particulars of these Necessary Actions, are 1. In purification,
Common to the whole Church, c. 16. Proper to every godly person, c. 17. 2. In
Sanctimony or Holiness, Both of the people; 1 To be observed, not only in
their own bodies, c. 18. but also among one another mutually, c. 19. 2 To be
maintained in their judgments, c. 20. As also in the holiness of the Priests
in their Persons, c. 21. Things, c. 22. 3. In exercise Ecclesiastical, In
legal Times c. 23. In legal Rites, c. 24. Political, c. 25. 2 The
Confirmation or obsignation of these particular laws, by Promises and Threats,
c. 26.

2. Voluntary, viz. touching vows, c. 27.

Numbers
in Numbering the Tribes and Families of Israel, and of their journeys from
Egypt to Canaan. In Hebr. its called (...) Bammidbar i. e. In the Desert*
Because this is the first word of this Book in the Hebrew text.

Numbers contains an History from the beginning of the second month of the
second year, after Isreal's coming ^ut of Egypt, to the beginning of the
eleventh month of the fourtieth year. viz. 38. years and upwards, as Iun. and
Ainsw. observe. And this may remarkably be evinced, by comparing Numb. 1.1. and
36.13. diligently with Deuteronomy. 1.3. which, as above, demonstrate both the
beginning and ending of this History of Numbers.

Scope. Lively to set forth the rich blessing of God upon Israel, in their
wonderful increase; his vigilant providence over them in all their wilderness
journeyes and difficulties; and yet his severity against their corruption, for
which many of them perished in the wilderness, after they had been delivered
out of Egypt, so that they could not enter into his rest because of their
unbelief, Heb. 3.19. Jude ver. 5.

Principal Parts.

This Book of Numbers contains an Historical narration of Isreal's 1
Preparation for their Journey, 2 Journey it self, and 3 of their Station,

I. Isreal's Preparation for their Journey, wherein three things.

I. The Numbering of them, which was 1. Civil, both of all the heads of the
people according to the families, c. 1. and of the order of the Tribes in their
Tents, c. 2. 2. Sacred, where is reckoned up, both the number of Levites and
other officers about the Tabernacle c. 3. as also their order and ministry c.
4. II. Laws, 1. Common about Sanctimony, whether necessary c. 5. or voluntary,
c. 6. 2. Particular for the Princes offering of every Tribe, at the dedication
of the Tabernacle and Altar. c. 7. For the Levites service, c. 8. III. The
manner 1. Of their sanctification and order, c. 9. And of their Journeying, c.
10.
II. Isreal's journeys, which are distinguished by the history of their eight
notable Murmurings in their way, viz. 1. Irksomenesse of their Journey. 2.
Loathing of Mannah, c. 11. 3. Aarons and Miriams emulation against Moses, c.
12. 4. Their unbelief at Kadesh, where are recorded, Their murmuring c. 13. The
judgment of God for it c. 14. Their reconcilement to God afterward, c. 15. 5.
The envy of the Levites and others against the Priests, c. 16. 6. The
indignation of the people for the precedent judgment, where are set down both
their Murmur^ng, c. 16.41, 42, 43. and their Reconcilement, c. 16. verse. 44. to
the end, and c. 17, 18, 19. 7. Murmuring for want of water, c. 20. 8. Murmuring
because of the way, and the light bread, and so were plagued with fiery
serpents, c. 21.

III. Isreal's Station, State or condition when they were now nigh to the
possession of their inheritance, c. 21. to the end of the Book. Here is set
down a double State or Condition. 1. Of the people themselves. 2. Of their
inheritance.

1. Of the people themselves, either as 1. overcoming their enemies, and
possessing the land, c. 21. 2. Tempted by Magical Arts and enchantments, c.
22, 23, 24. 3. ^nsnared with, and plagued for idolatry and fornication c. 25.
4. Reconciled to God and numbered for the entering upon the inheritance, c. 26.
5. Furnished with a new Governor Ioshuah, that was to succeed Moses, c. 27. 6.
Instructed in sacred things, Necessary, c. 28, 29. Voluntary, c. 30.

2. Of the inheritance, which is considered, either 1. In part, As possessed,
c. 31. As assigned to Gad, Reuben, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, c. 32.
(Here by way of digression is a summary recapitulation of the several stations
of Israel in their march through the wilderness, c. 33.) 2. In whole, And that
either, As it is circumscribed with Bounds or Borders, whereof the manner of
dividing the land, c. 34. Or as it is circumscribed with laws, Both of refuge
for the manslayer, that slew any unawares, c. 35. And of successions in their
inheritances. c. 36

Deuteron:
i. e. The second law, or Law repeated, Thus denominated by the Greek, because
this book contains a Repetition of Gods law given by Moses to Israel, AS in
Hebrew it is sometimes from the same ground called (...) mischneh i. e.
Repetition of the law. From the first words in the Book its called (...) Elleh
Haddebarim, i e. These are the words, or only (...) Debarim, i. e. The words.

Penman of this Book, as of all the four former Books was Moses, who also
wrote the History of his own death aforehand in the last chapter by a
Prophetic spirit; or Joshua wrote it for him. Alsted. Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c.
118.

This Book contains the History of but a few days, viz. from the beginning of
the eleventh month, to about the seventh day of the twelfth month of the
fourtieth year, after Isreal's departure out of Egypt, for Moses began to speak
these words, in the first day of the eleventh month of the said fourtieth
year, Deuteronomy. 1.3. which was a little before his death; he died when he was one
hundred and twenty years old Deuteronomy. 34.7* after which Israel mourned for Moses
in the land of Moab thirty days, Deuteronomy. 34.8. this determines the time of the
History? As Iun. well observes.

Thus Alsted in Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 118. computes the time of this
History. viz.

1. The first Part of this Book contains the History of the first day of the
eleventh month of the fourtieth year, after their coming out of Egypt, c. 1,
2, 3* 4. 2. The second part contains the History of the second day, c. 5. to
11* 3. The third part contains the History, (as is probable) of four days at
most c. 11. to 26. 4. The fourth part contains the History of one day, c.
27.28. 5. The fifth contains the History also of one day, c. 29, 30. 6. The
sixth contains the History of one day, c. 31. etc. 7. The 7th part contains
the History of their mourning for Moses thirty days c. 34.

Proof hereof may be drawn from the History of Joshua, by computing backwards
from the day of the Passover. For in the land of Canaan the first Passover
was celebrated, in the one and fourtieth year after Isreal's coming ou^ of
Egypt, on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan Josh. 5, 10. Before which they
were circumcised, which probably took up four days, Josh. 5. One day they
were passing thorough Jordan, two days in preparation for it. Add to these
the time of searching out the land, and lastly the thirty days mourning. And
thus going backwards, we shall find that Deuteronomie contains an History of
but a very few days.

Scope. That the law formerly given of God may by this New Repetition of it be
more declared, confirmed and applied to the present condition of Israel; and
they thereby fitted and better prepared for the promised Canaan, upon which
they were entering.

Principal Parts, are; The Preface; Narration; and Conclusion of the Book. I.
Preface or Prologue, c. 1. to 5. containing, 1. A Narration. 1. Of Gods calling
of Israel from Horeb to the promised Land. c. 1. 2. Of the execution of this
call, Both by divine conduct against their enemies. c. 2. And by appointment to
enter the Land. c. 3. 2. An exhortation to obed. c. 4.


II Narrative containing the main bulk and substance of the book, c. 5. to 32.
viz. The Law, and Confirmation thereof.

I. The Law, showing the way of well living. 1. Universal. c. 5. 2.
Particular; where, Of the Decalogues Principle, and things Principled. 1. The
Principle of the Decalogue is Gods love, whereof you have, 1. The Proposition.
Wherein note. 1. The manner and object of it, c. 6. 2. The opposites, Idolatry,
c. 7. Ingratitude, c. 8. Pride, c 9. 2. The Conclusion. c. 10.
2. The things Principled, touching, 1. The place of divine worship c. 11* 12.
2. The manner, c. 13.14. 3. The time, c. 15.16. 4. The persons which are to
perform worship to him. Who are informed according to the three parts of the
soul, and this either jointly or severally. Jointly. 1. According to the
Rational part; Where, Of persons Ecclesiastical and Political together, c.
17. Of persons Ecclesiastical apart, c. 18. Of persons Political apart, c.
19. 2. According to the Irascible part, in case of war c. 20. 3. According to
the Concupiscible part, c. 21, 22. Severally, where are both Laws, c. 23, 24,
25. And the close of them, c. 26.

II. The confirmation of the Law by certain Arguments, viz. 1. Signs c. 27. 2.
Promises and threats. c. 28. 3. By solemn renewing of the Covenant: partly, 1
By word, Comminatory, c. 29. Promissory, c. 30. 2 By writing and instruments,
c. 31.
III. Conclusion of the whole book c. 32, 33, 34. Which is either, I.
Prophetical and Hortatory, wherein is a double Prophecy. 1. Common, touching
the Church of the Jews till the time of the Messiah* c. 32. 2. Special,
containing the blessing of the 12 Tribes c. 33. 2. Historical, concerning the
death of Moses, c. 34.


IJ. THE PROPHETS.
THe PROPHETS wrote all the Books of the Old Testament, besides the Pentateuch
of Moses. These Prophets inspired infallibly by the Holy-Spirit of Prophecy,
wrote Books of three several sorts, viz. 1 Historical, 2 Dogmaticall or
Doctrinall, and 3 Prophetical. The Hebrews thus distinguish the Books of the
Old Testament. 1. (...) Thorah i. e. The Law. viz. the five books of Moses. 2.
(...) Nebi^m i. e. The Prophets. The Prophets they distinguish into two sorts,
viz. 1. (...) Nebiim Rishonim i. e. The former Prophets; perhaps so called
because they treat of the first Prophets, These are four, viz. Joshua, Judges,
Samuel and Kings. And 2 (...) Nebiim Acharonim i. e. the later Prophets; which
they reckon up in four Books also. viz. Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the
twelve minor Prophets which were anciently, joined all in one volume, lest they
through their smalnesse should be lost; That phrase seems to favor this, It
is written in the Book of the Prophets, Act. 7.42. the Prophet Amos being
cited, which is one of the Minor, or lesser Prophets. 3. (...) i. e. The
writings; by way of emphasis. See the Reason hereof in Rivet. Isag. ad sucr.
scrip. c. 29. Sect. 16. The Greek calls these Books, (...); Hagiographa i. e.
The holy writings, upon some such ground. Of this sort are eleven in this order
in Hebrew, Ruth; Psalms; Job; Proverbs; Ecclesiastes; Song of Songs;
Lamentations; Daniel; Esther; Ezra; Chronicles; under Ezra comprehending
Nehemiah, which sometimes is called the second of Ezra, and the two Books of
the Chronicles being reckoned as but one Book.

But the former Distribution of the PROPHETS books into 1 Historical, 2
Doctrinall, and 3 Prophetical, (being both more consonant to the matter of
these books, and to the method of our Bibles) shall here be followed.

I. HISTORICAL BOOKS.
THE HISTORICAL BOOKS of the Prophets Relate the History of the Jews, and of
the Church of God among them, from the death of Moses, which was, when he was
one hundred and twenty years old, Deuteronomy. 34.7. Joseph Ant. l. 4. c. 3. In 2493
year of the world; Helvic. until the Period of the Persian Monarchy, possessed
by Alexander the Macedonian, called Alexander the great, who conquered the
Persians, and got Dominion of Asia, about Ann. 3614 after the worlds Creation,
Helvic. in Chronolog. So that these Books contain an History of about 1121
years continuance.

Of this History of the Jews, and of the Church of God, there are two
Principal Parts or Periods; viz. 1. Of the Israelites Entrance into the
promised land. 2. Of their Government and Condition, after that entrance.

Joshuah.
1. Isreal's entrance into the promised land, is described in the Book of
JOSHUAH. So called from the chief subject handled therein, viz. The Acts of
Ioshuah, the successor of Moses, the Governor and chief Captain of Israel,
under whose conduct they conquered the Land; Divided it by Line and Lot among
the Tribes; and possessed it, according to all Gods faithful promises in that
behalf unto their Fathers, Josh. 21.43, 44, 45. and 23.14, 15.

Penman of this Book some conceive to be Ioshuah, because it bears his name.
But that Reason is not cogent; 1 partly because the Books of Judges, Ruth, and
Kings, bear their name, yet not Penned by them: 2 partly because the
denomination of this Book is rather from the Subject matter, then the Author.
Other think Eleazer the High Priest (whose death is recorded Josh. 24.33.
Gathered together the chief materials of which this Book is compiled. It being
the Priests duty, to leave upon Record all memorable Ecclesiastical affairs for
the benefit of after ages, and propagation of Religion. This more probable: but
not certain. Alsted. Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 119. Johan. Calvin. Argument. in
Lib. Iosuae.

This book contains an History of almost eighteen years. viz. From the death
of Moses to the death of Joshuah. Iun. Arg. in lib. Iehosh. Gerh. loc. prim. de
Scriptura. in exegesi. Sect. 125.

Scope. Of this book to demonstrate Gods exact faithfulness in performing all
his Promises made to the Fathers; that all his people may be encouraged to
trust to him the better for ever* Josh. 21.45. and 23.14, 15.

Principal parts.

In this Book is an History of Ioshuah's Life and Death.

I. Of Joshua's Life. Wherein consider* 1. His vocation. God calls him to be
Governor of Israel in Moses stead, c. 1. 2. His Administration, both in time
of war, and Peace. 1. In time of war, Whereof is laid down; 1. A Narration.
1. Of sending the Spies to search the Land, c. 2. 2. Of the passing through
Jordan, where The Antecedent passages and manner of it, c. 3. The Consequents
upon it. c. 4.5. 3. Of the Seiges and Victories; His first Victory over
Jericho, c. 6. The impediment of his proceedings, the Accursed thing, c. 7. His
manifold and happy success after removal of the Accursed thing, he conquered
all the Country c. 8, 9, 10, 11. 2. A Repetition of his warlike exploits, etc.
c. 12.
2. In time of Peace. Wherein are, 1. The distribution of the land of Canaan,
under which are described, 1 The borders of the Land, c. 13. 2 The manner of
the distribution, by Lot. c. 14. 3 The parties among whom the Land was divided,
viz. The Israelites c 15. to 20. 4 The menslayers, etc. c. 20 5 The Levites c.
21. 2. The dismission and remanding of the Reubenites, Gadites and half tribe
of Manasseh to their Lot on the other side Jordan. c. 22 3. The exhortation and
charge of Joshuah to the people before his death, c. 23.


II. Of Ioshuah's death, and the things immediately Antecedent, and Consequent
thereto, c. 24.
II. Isreal's condition and Government after their entrance into the Promised
Land. Which is Historically described, what it was. 1. Before their carrying
away into Babylon. 2. During the Captivity. 3. After the Captivity.

I. Before their carrying away into Babylon, and that either under the Judges,
or the Kings.

I. Under the Judges.

And here we have two Histories, viz. One Common and General: Another
Particular.

Judges
I. THe Common or General History, is the Book of JUDGES, so called, not from
the Authors of it, but from the subject matter of it, in Hebr. (...) Shophtim,
i. e. Judges.

Penman of this Book the Hebrews think to be Samuel. Alsted. Praecog. Theol.
l. 2. c. 119. Others think that every Judge recorded the things acted in his
own days respectively: and that Samuel, or Ezra, or Jeremiah, or King
Hezekiah, (whose men copied out some of Solomon's Proverbs, Prove. 25.1.)
collected and digested them into one volume. Hugo Cardinal^s in Prolog. in
hunc. lib.

This book contains an History of Isreal's Polity, and the state thereof from
the death of Ioshuah, till the Priesthood of Eli. How during that time Israel
oftimes Apostatized from God, for which God delivered them into their enemies
hands; but upon their conversion to him, he saved them by Judges raised up from
among their Tribes, out of their enemies hands. It is an History of about 299
years, which may be thus computed.

From Ioshuah's death, to Othniel's 40 y. Judge. 3.11. From Othniel's death to
Ehud's and Shamgar's 80* y. 3.30. Thence to Deborah's death 40 y. 5 31. Thence
to Gideons death-40 y. 8 28 Thence to Abimilech's death 3 y. 9 22. Thence to
Tholah's death 23 y. 10 2 Thence to Iair's death 22 y. 10 3 Thence to Iephte's
death 6 y. 12 7 Thence to Ibzan's death 7 y. 12 9 Thence to Elon's death 10 y.
12 11 Thence to Abdon's death 8 y. 12 14 Thence to Samson's death-20 y. 16 31
Scope of this book, to show what happy Haleyonian days Gods Church enjoyes
under pious magistrates. How severe God is against the sins, especially the
idolatry of his own people: and yet how he remembers mercy in midst of severest
judgments.

Principal parts. This book being a Glass discovering Isreal's calamity, and
the cause thereof their sin. Describes their sin; I. As General, Universal and
Common to all the tribes, viz. by the 1. Kinds or sorts of their sins. 1.
Negligence in driving the Canaanites out of the land. c. 1. 2. Perfidiousnesse,
in Apostatizing from God to Idols. c. 2.
2. Effects or fruits of their sins. viz. Five several oppressions by their
enemies, i. e. 1. Syrians, c. 3. 2. Canaanites c. 4. and 5. 3. Midianites,
where of Gideon's 1. Call. c. 6. 2. Acts Polemical c. 7. and Political. c. 8. 3
Successor, Abimilech c. 9. 4. Ammonites. Here 1. The cause and effect of the
oppression, Isreal's Apostasy and Repentance c. 10. 2. The Remedy. viz. war
undertaken against Ammonites c. 11. Ephraimites. c. 12. 5. Philistines. Sampson
being avenger: Samsons Birth c. 13. Prosperity c. 14. adversity c. 15. and
death c. 16. are at large delineated.

II. As special viz. 1. Idolatry, Of one family c. 17. Of the Tribe of Dan c.
18. 2. Lust of uncleanness, Perpetrated, c. 19. Punished c. 20, 21.


Ruth
II THe particular History under the Judges, is the Book of RUTH, so styled
from RUTH the Moabitesse, a Gentile ( Moab being one of the incestuous sons of
Lot Genesis 18.) concerning whom this Book treats, especially of her marriage with
Boaz, whose Pedigree, by a Prophetic spirit, is brought down to K. David, Ruth
4.18. to the end, Ruth bearing to Boaz, Obed; the Grandfather of David, of whom
according to the flesh Christ came, Matthew. 1.5, 6. The Chald. Paraphrast thinks
that Ruth was the daughter of Eglon King of Moab, but that is not proved by any
Scripture, nor is it likely that a Kings daughter would marry a Stranger, and
leave her native Country to seek bread in another land, says Gerh. Augustine
refers the time of this History, to the Beginning of the Kings. Aug. l. 2. de
Doctrine. Christian. c. 8. Joseph. l. 5. Antiq. and Hugo Cardinalis refer it
to the time of Eli, the Priest. D. Kimchi in c. 1. Ruth. and other of the
Rabbines (as some note) conceive; That, Boaz who married Ruth, was that Judge
which is called Ibzan Judge. 12.8. who immediately succeeded Iephte. Iunius and
Tremellius comparing this History of Ruth with Matthew. 1.5. are of opinion, that
this History fell out in the days of Deborah. Annot. in Ruth 1.1.

But its certain it fell out in the time of the Judges, Ruth 1.1. though the
particular time perhaps cannot so punctually be demonstrated.

Penman of this History is not certainly known. Hebrews think Samu^l penned
it. Alsted. in Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 119.

Many Writers annex this Book of Ruth as an Appendix to the Book of Judges, as
they do the Lamentations, to the Prophecy of Jeremiah. Andr. Rivet. Isag. ad
sacr. Script. c. 29. p. 501.

Scope of this Book. To delineate part of the Genealogy of Christ, Ruth 4.18.
etc. compared with Mat. 1.5.6. And to show that salvation by Jesus Christ
belongs to sinners of the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews: Christ deriving
his line not only from Jews, but also from Gentiles and sinners, for the
raising up of their Hope and Consolation in him.

Principal parts. In this History are described.

1. Ruths Distress in her widowhood c. 1. 2. Ruths Deliverance from this
distress, which is 1. Inohoate. 1. By her gleaning in Boaz his field with his
approbation, c. 2. 2. By her lodging at Boaz his feet in the threshing floor at
her mothers appointment, he being a near Kinsman c. 3. 2. Consummate, By Boaz
his marrying of her c. 4.

II. Under the Kings.

And here we have three Histories compiled in six books viz. the two Books of
Samuel, the two Books of Kings, and the two Books of Chronicles, which
Histories set forth the State of the Kingdom of Israel three ways. viz. 1. As
the Kingdom was United of which the two Books of Samuel. 2. As The Kingdom
was Divided, of which the two Books of Kings. 3. As the Kingdom was both United
and Divided, of which the two Books of Chronicles. As Trelcatius in Oeconomia
Bibliorum, well observes,: And as the matter of these Histories does clearly
evince.

I. The UNITED State of the Kingdom of Israel, is described what it was, both
under the Kings. 1. By Election. and 2. By Succession. And how it increased and
flourished whilst so united.

I Samuel
I UNder Kings by ELECTION, The kingdoms Condition is recorded in the I. Book
OF SAMUEL. So called, either from the matter or subject herein handled. viz.
The History of SAMUEL, which takes up a great part of the Book. As Alsted. in
Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 120. Or also from the isntrumental efficient cause,
or Penman of this of this Book, Samuel being supposed to have penned this Book,
till c. 25. David the rest. Gloss. ordinar. Iunius and Trem. are of opinion,
that Samuel had a great share in penning of these two Books that bare his name;
and that Nathan the Prophet, and Gad the Seer penned part thereof, from that
intimation, 1 Chronicles. 29.29. which words of Samuel, Nathan and Gad seem to be
the two Books of Samuel, penned by them three. Iun. in Annot. in 1 Chronicles.
29.29. By the Greek and Latin, it is also called the 1. Book of Kings, because
the later part of it contains the History of Saul, the first King of Israel.

This history treats of the last Judges, viz. Eli, and Samuel, and of the first
King, viz. Saul. Declaring when and upon what occasion the Lord changed the
government by Judges into a Regal government, viz. In days of Samuel, and upon
occasion of the extreme wickedness of both Elye's and Samuels Sons, c. 1. to
9. As also how Saul carried himself both in life and death: and how God
prepared David for the Throne, Saul being rejected. It is an history of about
80 years continuance. viz. Under Ely 40 years, 1 Samuel 4.18. And under Samuel
and Saul 40 years, Act. 13.21.

Scope. To discover man's mutability, but Gods immutability in all the
Revolutions and alterations of Families, and Commonwealths: viz. In their
Constitution, Administration, and Alteration.

Principal parts.

This book treats of the affairs of Israel under a double kind of civil
Government, I. Aristocraticall under Samuel the Prophet and Judge. Whose, 1.
Birth is recorded, c. 1. 2. Calling. Where, of Eli his Predecessor, and of his
Sons; whose I. Grievous sin is recorded, c. 2. II. Severe punishment is, 1,
Foretold by Samuel. c. 3. 2. Inflicted by God. where, of the war, Acted c. 4.
Finished, where we have a descripti^n. 1. Of the Philistines punishment, c. 5.
And of their restoring the captivated Ark, c. 6. 2. Of Isreal's Repentance, c. 7.
II. Monarchical, under a King. 1. To be elected, what a one he was like to
be, c. 8. 2. Actually elected, what a one he proved; evidenced, in Saul, David*
1. Saul, described. 1. As elected, where are laid down his calling, c. 9.
Unction, c. 10. Warlike success, c. 11. 2. As rejected. The causes of which
rejection are recited, viz. 1. The peoples sin, c. 12. 2. Saul's unbelief, c.
13. Rashness in judging, c. 14. And disobedience, c. 15. 2. David. Touching
whom are declared, His 1. Election. Where note 1. His call, c. 16. 2. His
Preparatory 1 conquest of Goliath c. 17. 2 Advancement into Saul's family, c.
18. 2. Ejection. David being exiled. 1. In his own Country, c. 19, 20. 2. Out
of his Country, c. 21. to 30. 3. Advancement. 1. By his Victory, c. 30. 2. By
Readiness Death, c. 31.





II Samuel
II UNder Kings by SUCCESSION. In this respect the Kingdome's state is declared
in the II. of SAMUEL. So called for Reasons formerly mentioned. Its also by the
Greek and Latin styled The second Book of Kings, because therein the History of
David the second King of Israel is continued.

This is an History of about 40 years continuance, 2 Samuel 5.5. An History of
David's Kingdom. may well be called The Annals of David.

Penman; some think to be the High Priest; or some Disciple of Samuel, who yet
for honors sake gave the Book his Masters name. Alsted. Praecog. Theol. l. 2.
c. 120. But rather it is probable that the latter part of the I. Of Samuel; and
this whole Book of the II. Of Samuel, were Penned by Nathan the Prophet, and
Gad the Seer. 1 Chronicles. 29.29.

Scope. To declare Gods Faithfulness in delivering of his own from distresses.
That diverse great infirmities are incident to Gods uprightest servants. And
That (like checker-worke) their prosperity is intermingled with crosses and
calamities.

Principal Parts. In this Book; (which is a description of David's Kingdom) we
have a Narration of David's 1 Life and 2 Death.

I. David's Life is represented as it was 1 Glorious; and as it was 2
Ignominious. 1. As it was Glorious in his Royal inauguration. Where consider
things, 1. Antecedent viz. 1. His mourning for Saul's death, c. 1. 2. His
return into Judea, c. 2. 3. His war with the House of Saul, c. 3.4. 2.
Concomitant. He is confirmed King by all Israel, c. 5. 3. Consequent, viz. 1.
Ecclesiastical, as His fetching up the Ark to Sion c. 6. His purpose of
building God an House, c. 7. 2. Polemicall or warlike, c. 8. 3. Political, or
civil, c. 9, 10.
2. As it was Ignominious; and that 1. By his sins, Adultery and Murder,
committed c. 11. corrected c. 12. 2. By his sorrows. 1. Private, 1. In Amnon,
by his Incest, c. 13. 2. In Absalom, where are declared, his Restitution, c.
14. His Sedition begun c. 15. Continued c. 16. Concluded, c. 17, 18, 19. 2.
Public. 1. Sedition of the people, c. 20. 2. Famine three years, c. 21.


II. David's death. Occurrents Antecedent thereunto. 1. His gratulatory and
laudatory Psalm, c. 22* 2, His sweet Swanlike Song, and Testament, c. 23. 3.
The Pestilence upon his numbering the people, c. 24.
II. The DIVIDED state of the Kingdom of Israel, and how upon that division it
decreased and came to ruin, is laid down in the two Books of Kings.

This d^vision and decay of the Kingdom is laid down two ways. 1. According
to the causes and Beginnings thereof. 2. According to the Progress thereof.

I Kings
I. ACcording to the causes, and first beginnings of this Division and decay
thereupon ensuing. These are set forth in the I. of KINGS. This book is styled
in (...) 1. Melacim. i. e. 1. Of Kings. By the Greek and Latin the III. of
Kings. The history of the Kings both of Judah and Israel, being the subject
matter of the book.

In this book the causes and first beginnings of the Kingdoms division and
decay are laid down, partly by way of Opposition of the flourishing state of
David's kingdom united under Solomon, c. 1. to c. 11. Partly by way of
Exposition of the occasions (viz. Solomon's sins, Gods justice, Solomon's
death, c. 11.) and of the first beginnings of the division and decay of the
kingdom under Rehoboam, to whom only two Tribes were left subject, Judah and
Benjamin, 1 King. 11.21. And under Jeroboam to whom the other ten Tribes
revolted: and afterward under their successors severally. So that in this
book are the Acts of five Kings of Judah after Solomon, viz. Rehoboam, ^bijam,
Asa, Iehoshaphat, Iehoram: and of eight Kings of Israel, viz. Jeroboam, Nadab,
Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Omri and Tibni, Ahab, Ahaziah.

This is an history of 118. years viz. Under Solomon 40 years, 1 King. 11.42.
Under the rest of Kings of Judah, 78. years, for Rehoboam Reigned 17 years. 1
King. 17.31. -- Ab^jam 3 years. 1 King. 15.2. -- Asa, 41. years. 1 King.
15.10. -- Iehoshaphat, 17. years. 1 King. 22.51. -- In all 118 years.

Penman of this book, and also of the second book of Kings is conceived not to
be any one man, but diverse. Though the Hebrews would have them to be written
by Jeremiah. Others think that the Churches history, which was written by
diverse, was digested and collected into volumes, either by E^ra; Gerh. loc.
Com. 1 de Scriptura. in Exegesi.. 129. Or by the chief Priests and Prophets as
the Churches Pub. Actuari^s. Alsted Proecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 120. However, it
seems evident, that the beginning of 1. of Kings, touching Solomon's Reign, was
written by Nathan, Abijah and Iddo, 2 Chronicles. 9.29. See Iun. in loc. And other
parts by Iehu son of Canani, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. See Iun. Annot* ibid. And by the
Prophet Isaiah, (as Iunius thinks*) partly in his Prophecy, par^ly in the Book
of Kings, 2 Chronicles. 26.22.

Scope. To show how the Piety of Kings, preserves their kingdoms in unity, and
flourishing Prosperity: But the sins and wickedness of Kings, especially their
idolatry, whereby they divide themselves from God, brings Divisions into their
Kingdoms, and consequently ruin upon themselves, their families and Dominions.

Principal parts, might be pointed out, according to the periods of every
several Kings reign, but rather thus. This book contains the increase and
decrease of the kingdom of Israel.

I. Increase of the Kingdom under Solomon; whose Life and Death are recorded.
1. Solomon's Life. Therein consider his 1. Election, c. 1, 2. 2. Administration
or Government of the Kingd^m, where note 1. His great Prudence, c. 3, 4. 2. His
Magnificence in Building, The Temple, c. 5, 6, 8. His own house, In Lebanon, c.
7. The Kings house more public, c. 9. 3. His condition, Prosperous, c. 10.
Adverse, c. 11.
2. Solomon's death, c. 11.
II. Decrease of the Kingdom once Divided; and this under 1. The Kings of Judah
1. Rehoboam, c. 12, 14. 2. Abijah, c* 15.3. Asa, c. 15. 4. Iehoshaphat. c, 22.
5 Iehoram, c. 22. ver. 50. 2. The Kings of Israel contemporary to the Kings of
Judah, viz. 1. Jeroboam c. 12, 13, 14. 2 Nadab, c. 15. 3. Baasha, c. 16.4.
Elah, 5. Zimri 6. Omri, c. 16.7. Ahab. 1 whose stock is recorded, c. 16. from
ver. 28. 2 Whose prosperous state is declared, In respect of Elijahs Presence.
Here are considered, Elijah's Ambassadge to the King, c. 17, 18. Elijah's
exile, c. 19. In respect of Ahabs double victory, c. 20. 3 Whose Acts and
manners are described, c. 21. 4 Whose Death is delineated, c. 22. 8. Ahaziah,
c. 22. ver. 51. etc.

II Kings
2. ACcording to the Progress and Growth of the Kingdom's division, and the
miserable calamities, growing and increasing thereupon, This is related in the
11. of KINGS called in Hebr. (...) 11. Melacim, i. c. The second of Kings, By
the Greek and Latin, The IV. of Kings. The History of the Kings being still
continued in this Book.

This Book is an History of about 320. years, under 12. Kings of Israel, and
16. Kings of Judah.

Under 12. Kings of Israel, 162 years.
Ahazia 1 year. 1 Kings 22.52. Ioram 11 year. 2 Kings 3.1. and 8.25. Iehu 28
year. 2 Kings 10.36. Iehoahaz 17 year. viz. 15 alone, and two with his son, 2
Kings 13.1.10. Ioash 16 year. 2 Kings 13.10. Jeroboam 41 year. 2 Kings 14.23.
Zechariah 6 months 2 Kings 15.8. Shallum 1 month 2 Kings 15.13. Menachem 10
year. 2 Kings 15.17. Pekachijah 2 year. 2 Kings 15.23. Pekah 20 year. 2 Kings
15.27. Hosheah who reigned 18 y. viz. 9 y. free. 2 Kings 17.1. and 9. y. a
tributary to the King of Assyria, by whom at last he was carried captive, ver.
6.
Under 16 Kings of Judah, 320 year.
Iehoram 12 y. viz. 8. alone, and 4. with his father Iehoshaphat 2 Kings 8.17.
Ahazia 1. y. 2 King. 8.26. Athalia 6 year, 2 Kings 11.3. Ioash 40. y. 2 King.
12.1.39. Iunius. Amaziah 29 year 12 of which in exile, -- 2 Kings 14.2.
Azariah or Vzziah 52. year. 2 Kings -- 15, 5. Iotham 16. year. 2 King 15.33.
-- 15. year Iun. Ahaz 16. year, 2 Kings 16.2. -- 14. year Iun. Hezekiah 29.
year, 2 King. 18.2. Manasses 55. year, 2 King. 21.2. Ammon 2 year, 2 Kings
21.19. Josiah 31. year. 2 King. 22.1. Ioahaz 3. months. 2 Kings 23.36.
Ichoiakim 11 year, 2 Kings 23.36. Ichoiachin three months. 2 Kings 24.8
Zedekiah 11. year, 2 Kings 24.18. Thence till Iehoiakins advancement, 26. year,
2 Kings 25.27, 30.
Penmen of this 11. of Kings, See in Penmen of 1. of Kings.

Scope; to delineate Gods verity in his Promises and Threats, together with his
severity in his judgments. The continual Revolution of Families and States,
The mischief of sin, especially in Magistrates, dividing them and their people
from God, and consequently themselves amongst themselves, till both Kings,
people and Kingdoms be ripe and ready for desolation.

Principal parts, may be considered either according to the Reign of the
several Kings of Israel and Judah, as before. Or as follows; This Book
declares.

The state of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah; together with their defection
and declining, 1. Severally of the Kingdom of Israel under 1. Ahaziah, c. 1.2.
2. Ioram, where of Elishah's miracles, c. 3.4.5. Oracles or Prophecies, c,
6.7.8. 2. Jointly of Israel and Judah, paralleled as it were together, c. 9. to
18. 3 Severally of the Kingdom of Judah, whose 1. Weakening, is recorded 1.
Under a good King Hezekiah, c. 18. 19.20. 2. Under a bad King Manasseh, c.
20.21. 2. Reparation is endeavored by Josiah, c. 22.23. 3. Subversion is 1.
Begun c. 23. 24. 2. Accomplished c. 25.



III. The UNITED and DIVIDED State of the kingdom is laid down in the two
Books of Chronicles, with some further Additions and Amplifications to the
former Histories. This is done two ways.

I Chron.
1. ACording to the UNITED State of the kingdom in I. OF CHRONICLES, so called
because the Acts of former times are herein Recorded, or Chronicled. In Hebr.
(...) Dihre Haijamim, i. e. THE WORDS OF DAYS, because they are as a Sacred
DIARY; reporting the Acts and Occurrents in the Church of God, and Civil States
both Domestique and Foreign. Munsterus not unfitly styles them Libros Annalium,
i. e. The Books of Annals. Annals barely declaring matters of fact for diverse
years in order; as, Gellius notes l. 5. N. A. c. 18. These two Books are the
CHVRCHES ANNALS. In Greek these two Books are called (...), Bibloi
Paralipomenon, i. e. The Books of things omitted: or, THE BOOKS OF REMAINS:
because some things omitted, or not fully described in the Pentateuch, Ioshuah,
Judges, Ruth, Samuel and Kings, are here Summarily explicated, and supplied.

This I. of Chron. Principally insists upon the History of David, Relating his
Genealogy from the first Adam and so forwards toward the second Adam; wherein
the 12. tribes and their families, etc. are recorded c. 1. to 10. And his
famous Acts c. 10. to the end of the Book; so that this Book is a Compendious
Chronology of all the former Books to the Books of Kings, of things from the
worlds Creation, till about the year 2985. viz. of Genesis -- 2368 y. All
which have been above particularly explained and demonstrated. So the I. of
Chronicles is the longest History of any one Book in the whole Bible. Exodus
142. y. All which have been above particularly explained and demonstrated. So
the I. of Chronicles is the longest History of any one Book in the whole Bible.
The other Books of Moses 39 y. All which have been above particularly explained
and demonstrated. So the I. of Chronicles is the longest History of any one
Book in the whole Bible. Joshuah 17. almost 18 y. All which have been above
particularly explained and demonstrated. So the I. of Chronicles is the longest
History of any one Book in the whole Bible. Judges -- 299 y. All which have
been above particularly explained and demonstrated. So the I. of Chronicles is
the longest History of any one Book in the whole Bible. I. Of Samuel 80 y. All
which have been above particularly explained and demonstrated. So the I. of
Chronicles is the longest History of any one Book in the whole Bible. II. Of
Samuel 40 y. All which have been above particularly explained and demonstrated.
So the I. of Chronicles is the longest History of any one Book in the whole
Bible.


Hierom calls the Chronicles, Instrumenti veteris Epitomen, etc. The Epitome of
the Old Testament; and that it is of such Consequence, that whosoever would
arrogate to himself the knowledge of the Scriptures without it, does but mock
and abuse himself. Hieronym. in Ep. ad Paulin. And again styles it, Totius
divinae Historiae (...), i. e. The Chronicle of the whole Divine History. Hier.
in Prolog. Galeat.

Penman of this and the second Book is uncertain. R. Salomo. R. D. Kimchi,
think it was Ezra. Says Alsted in Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 120. Iunius also is
of the same judgment. Iun. Annot. in 1 King. 11.41. and in his argument before
1 Chronicles. The Argument that generally inclines them all to this opinion, is,
That the same words which are used in the close of the Chronicles 2 Chronicles.
36.23. are also used in the beginning of Ezra. Ezr. 1.1, 2, 3.

Scope. The primary Scope of this Book seems to be this; Clearly to describe
the Line and Genealogy of CHRIST, the Messiah promised to David, Abraham, and
Adam: That when in fullness of time Christ should be revealed and performed;
the Church might infallibly know, that he was the Promised SEED OF THE WOMAN.

Principal Parts. This first Book of Chron. describes the Israelitish kingdom
in its 1 Foundation, and 2 Administration.

I. Foundation. Where, of 1. The General Genealogy of all Nations from Adam to
Jacob, c. 1. Here is a Chronicle of 1 The Pentateuch. 2 Ioshuah. 3. Judges.
2. Particular Geneal of the Nation of Israel by the twelve Tribes, c. 2. to 9.
Here is a Chronicle of 1 The Pentateuch. 2 Ioshuah. 3. Judges.

II. Administrat^on under. 1 Saul, whose 1 Genealogy is in c. 9. 2 Death c. 10.
2 David whose 1. Kingly condition, c. 11, 12, 14. 2 Acts 1 Sacred, restoring
Gods ^orship, in respect of the 1 Place, c. 13, 15, 17, 22. 2 Persons
ministering in the 1 Tabernacle c. 16 2 Temple, c. 23. 24, 25, 26 Here is a
Chronicle of the two Books of Samuel.

2 Polemical or Martial, c. 18, 19, 20. 3. Political, c. 21.27.
3. Death, c. 28, 29. where is declared how David before his Death in a Solemn
Assembly at Jerusalem took his leave of his Kindred. Set Solomon or his Throne,
after he had given him Directions about the Temple, and himself with his
Princes had offered willingly toward the building of it.


II Chron:
2. ACcording to the UNITED and DIVIDED state of the kingdom in the II of
CHRONICLES. So called for the reasons formerly alleged.

This book relates the history of the Israelitish State from the beginning of
king Solomon's Reign, till their return from the Babylonish Captivity, which
fell out about the first year of Cyrus king of Persians. Setting down both the
union and flourishing condition of the kingdom, under Solomon. but the
division and decay of the kingdom thence ensuing, till it came to utter ruin.
So this book contains an History of about 472 years.

From Solomon to carrying away of Iechonias, 401. As Jun. and Tremell. compute.
In the Captivity, -- 70 As Jun. and Tremell. compute. Under Cyrus the Persian,
-- 1. As Jun. and Tremell. compute.
So that this book is an Epitome or Chronicle of the two Books of Kings, with
Additions. If we consider the books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, all
together, they contain an Historical Narration, How the kingdom of Israel 1
Began under Samuel: 2 Increased under David: 3 Flourished under Solomon: and 4
Failed under Zedekiah; thus it endured almost 565 years.

Penman, see in 1. of Chron.

Scope, For substance the same with that of the two books of Kings.

Principal parts.

This book contains an Historical Narration of the kingdom of Israel's, I.
Flourishing, or increase under King Solomon. Touching Solomon are recorded, his
1. Virtues, c. 1. 2. Buildings. 1. Sacred, viz. The Temple, where, 1. His
preparation for it, c 2. 2. His extruction or building of it, viz. Of the
Temple, containing* c. 3. And of the Holy utensils, contained in it, c. 4. 3.
His Dedication of the Temple, partly by Dedicated things, especially the Arc
brought into the Temple c. 5. Partly by praise and prayer, c. 6. Partly by
Sacrifice, c. 7. 2. Civil, viz. Several Cities which he builded, c. 8.
3. Condition and Death, c. 9.
II. Fading, or decrease under the following Kings of Judah and Israel (the
kingdom being divided) till the return from Captivity in the Reign of Cyrus.
Where note five concussions of shakings of the Kingdom under these ensuing
Kings. viz. Rehoboam, c. 10, 11, 12 Abia, c. 13 Asa, c. 14, 15, 16 Jehoshaphat,
c. 17, 18, 19, 20 Jehoram, c. 21 Ahaziah, c. 22 Joash, c. 23, 24 Amaziah, c. 25
Uzziah, c. 26 Jotham, c. 27 Ahaz, c. 28 Hezekiah, c. 29, 30, 31, 32 Manas^eh,
c. 33 Amon, c. 33 Josi^h, c. 34, 35 Joahaz, c. 36. Jehoakim, c. 36. Jechoniah,
c. 36. Zedekiah, c. 36.



II. After the people of Isreal's CAPTIVITY in which regard we have their
REDUCTION, or bringing back from the Captivity of Babylon Hystorically
declared: And that two ways. 1. According to the truth and manner of it. 2.
According to the fruit and event of it.

Ezra.
1 THe truth and manner of Gods peoples RETURN FROM BABYLON, is contained in
the book of EZRA. So called from Ezra the Penman of it; whose Acts also are the
chief subject matter of it. Some count and call Ezra a Prophet. Lactant. lib.
4. Just. c. 11. but Augustine doubts whether he may be called a Prophet, Aug.
l. 18 de Civit. Dei c. 36. Hierome says he was Iosedech, whose son was Jesus
the High Priest. See Ludovic. Viv. in Lib. 18 de Civit. dei. c. 36. But how can
he be denied to be a Prophet, when Christ himself styles all the books of the
Old Testament Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.29.31?

This is certain, Ezra was a Priest, Ezr. 7, 11, 12. He was of the house and
lineage of Aaron; see his pedigree, Ezr. 7.1.2, 3, 4, 5. A most expert and ready
Scribe in the Law of Moses, Ezr. 7.6, 10, 11. He was sent with Commission by
Artaxerxes from Babylon to Jerusalem, etc. ver. 11. etc.

Zerubbabel restored the Temple: Ezra the worship of God: Nehemiah the City
Jerusalem.

This book, and that of Nehemiah following, are by the Hebrews, reputed as but
one volume, and that is called by them the I. of Ezra, this the II. of Ezra.
Hieronym. in Epist. ad Paulin. and Lactant. Instit. l. 4. c. 11. The Greek and
Latin divide them (as our English) into two books, the former being ascribed to
Ezra, the latter to Nehemiah. The Book of Ezra, in Order well follows the
Chronicles; for the very words which conclude the Chronicles, 2 Chronicles. 36.
last, do begin this Book of Ezra, Ezra 1.1, 2, 3. not only intimating, that
Ezra was probably Penman of them both, but also that in this Book the History
is continued. In Ezra is declared the Jews return from Babylon. And it is an
History for about 146. years, viz. From the Edict of Cyrus, to the nineteenth
year of Artaxerxes Mnemon. As Iunius computes, of Cyrus and Cambyses 9 Magi 1
Darius Histaspis 36 Xerxes 22 Artaxerxes Longimanus 40 Darius Nothus 19
Artaxerxes Mnemon 19


Scope. To evidence how punctually faithful and alsufficiently able God is, in
performing of his Promises to his Church and people in their season, touching
their deliverance and Restoration, against all impediments, improbabilities
and seeming impossibilities. For he made Cyrus an heathen King his shepherd,
and nursing father to his Church, to bring them out of Babylon, wherein they
were as helpless and hopeless, as dead bodies or dry bones in a grave. Ezekiel.
37. 2, 3, 11, 12, 13. To build the Temple and Jerusalem, Isa. 44. 28. and 45.
1. etc. compared with Ezra 1.1, 2. etc.

Principal parts. In this Book are laid down, touching the Jews return, 1.
The causes of their return from Babylon, viz. 1. Isntrumental, Cyrus his
Grant, c. 1. 2. Material, Persons returning, c. 2. 3. Final, the Restoration
of the Temple, and worship of God, c. 3. 2. The Impediments of their Return,
1. Recited, viz. The Samaritanes. c. 4. and the Ruler of Canaan, c. 5. 2.
Removed, by the Renewing of Cyrus his Edict, c. 6. 3. The success of their
Return, where are described, 1 Ezra's Commission, c. 7. 2. His execution of
his Commission, c. 8. 3. The Reformation of mixed marriages, which are
Described, c. 9. Abolished, c. 10.


Nehemia:
II. THe Fruit and Event of the Jews RETURN FROM BABYLON, is laid down in the
Book of NEHEMIAH. So called, 1 partly because Nehemiah was Penman of it, Neh.
1.1. 2 Partly because the Acts of Nehemiah are the Principal subject matter of
the Book, Nehemiah being the great Repairer and Restorer of the holy City
Jerusalem. It is by some called the II. of Ezra; because the History begun by
Ezra touching the Jews return from Babylon is here continued. Nehemiah is
supposed to aeb the same who is called the Tirshatha Ezr. 2.63. So Munsterus.
Neh. 8.9. which signifies, a Cup Bearer, Gerh. exeg. in loc. 1. de Scrip.. 132.
but in the Chaldee tongue is a Title of Dignity and Honor. R. Aben Ezra. says
Gerh. Translated Legatus Regis; i. e. The Kings legate, Ambassador or
Commissary. by Iun. and Trem. (who yet interpret this rather of Shazbazzar,
whom many think to be Zerubbabel:) In the margin of our English Bibles it is
rendered, Governor. He was the son of Hachaliah, Neh. 1.1. and Cup Bearer to
King Artaxerxes, in the twentieth year of his Reign, Neh. ^.11. and 2.1. The
kings Palace was at Shushan, Neh. 1.1. that being the Metropolis of Persia,
which Darius Hystaspis built. Plin. N. H. l. 6 c. 27.

In this Book are declared the happy fruits of the Jews return both in
reference to the Politic and Ecclesiastic state. It contains an History of
about 55 years, as Gerh. Loc. Com. Supradict. and Iunius in Annot. show. viz.

From the twentieth year of Artaerxes Mnemon Neh. 2.1. 24 Thence of Darius
Ochus 23 Thence of Asrenes 3 Thence of Darius the last 5
Scope, To let us know how deep and desperate the distresses of the Church may
grow, before God will restore her. How difficult, slow and perplexed a work the
work of Reformation is, both by reason of adversaries to be opposed, and
Public corruptions to be removed. How easily and wonderfully God can bring
Reformation to perfection against all impediments whatsoever, when he is
resolved to carry it on. What excellent and useful instruments, pious and
faithful Magistrates are for the accomplishing both of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Reformation; Nehemiah being a lively Pattern of a true
Reformer indeed.

Principal parts. This Book sets forth the Restoration of Jerusalem, and
this By.

I. Reparation of the walls, gates and buildings where consider 1. The cause of
it. 1. Principal God* c. 1. 2. Isntrumental, Nehemiah, c. 2. 2. The work it
self. 1. Begun. c. 3. 2. Hindered by impediments; External. c. 4. Internal.
c. 5. Mixed c. 6. 3. Perfected. c. 6.
II. Reformation both of the state Politic and Ecclesiastic, c. 7. to 13.
Hereunto appertain. 1. The Custody of the City. The Number of the Captives that
returned, ( viz. 49942. Neh. 7.66.67.) and the Oblation c. 7. 2. A Description
of two Festivals. c. 8. 3. The peoples public repentance in a Solemn Fast,
testified by a Solemn Covenant made and subscribed for Reformation c. 9, 10.
4. The inhabitants of Jerusalem, viz. Rulers, Volunteers, and men chosen by
lot. c. 11. 5. The number and offices of the Priests: with the Dedication of
the walls of Jerusalem, c. 12. III. Correction of such corruptions and
miscarriages, as had risen in Judea, in Nehemiah's absence* c. 13.
Esther.
III. Under the JEWS CAPTIVITY in Babylon, and other places out of Judea; The
condition of the Church is described in the Book of ESTHER; styled by the
Hebrews (...) megillath Esther, i. e. The volume of Esther, so denominated
from Esther the Queen a Iewesh, whose faithful service, done for the oppressed
Church and people of God in extremity of straits, is the primary subject of
this Book. Some writers exclude this Book out of the Canon of Scripture, as
Melito in Eusebius, lib. 4. c. 25. Athan^sius in Synopsi. and Nazianzen. in
Carm. de Script. But the Hebrews and primitive Christians with other writers
unanimously receive it as part of the Canon.

Penman is not so unanimously determined upon among Authors. Some thinks it was
written by the men of the great Synagogue. R. Moses is said to be of this
opinion. Or by Ioachim the Priest, son of Jesus the High Priest. Philo Iudeus
in Chronol. Or, by Mordecay, as is conjectured partly from chap. 9.20, 23. As
The Latin Fathers. The ground of whose conjecture seems to come short. Or by
Ezra or Nehemiah, who wrote the two former Histories of the Church of like
Nature. Isidorus. Alsted. Praecog. Theol l. c. c. 120. But Eusebius in his
Chronicles, supposes that the Penman was after Ezra.

This Book contains an History of the Church under the Reign of Ahashuerus
King of Persia, from the third year of his Reign, Esth. 1.1, 2, 3. till the
end of his Reign, viz. about 20. years (for he reigned in all about 21. or 22.
years) This Ahashuerus is conceived to be Xerxes son of Hystaspis, Ezr. 4.6.
Iun. Annot.

The time of this History is thus computed.

Ahashuerus makes his feast in his third year, -- Esth. 1.3.

Marries Esther, in his seventh year, Esth. 2.16.

Haman conspires against the Jews, and is hanged, in his twelfth year, Esth.
3.7. and 7.10.

Thence Esther reigns till the end of his Reign, Mordecai being chief
Governor, 10. y. Helvic. chron.

S^ope, most lively to manifest; How singularly vigilant God is over his Church
in extremest straits and deepest dangers; not only to preserve her from them,
and advantage her by them; but also to return the plots of her cruel enemies
upon their own heads, when they are nearest execution.

Principal parts. This Book declares the Jews deliverance from Hamans plot,
both by what means and in what manner it was delivered.

I. Means of deliverance, Esther advanced. Of whose advancement, here is 1. The
occasion c. 1. 2. The manner of it. c. 2. II. The manner of the deliverance,
where are laid down 1. Hamans cruel Plot against the Jews. c. 3. 2. The
peril ensuing upon this Plot, 1. Generally to all the Jews. c. 4. 2.
Particularly to Mordecai himself. c. 5. 3. Gods countermining of Hamans
undermining design. 1. By advancement of Mordecai. c. 6. 2. By ruining of, 1
Haman. c. 7. 2 Of the rest of the Jews enemies. whose slaughter was
Impetrated, c. 8. Perpetrated. c. 9. 3. By producing out of all an happy,
prosperous quiet condition to his own people.


II. DOCTRINAL BOOKS.
The DOGMATICAL, or DOCTRINALL Books. Thus far of those Books which are more
properly Historical; Now of the Books which were written in the same times
with the former, which declare to us the will of God in a more Doctrinall way,
and therefore for distinction sake called, DOCTRINALL. They are also called the
Poetical Books, because it is conceived that they, or most of them in Hebrew
were written in Meter, or Poetical Measures; which now are not so easy to be
found out.

These DOGMATICALL Books contain in them Doctrines. 1. Of more special and
particular reference to some particular individual person. 2. Or of more
General reference and respect to all.

Job.
1. DOctrines of more special reference to a particular person* are laid down
in the Book of JOB. so called, because that precious man Job and his various
condition is the chief subject matter of the Book. Some think that there
never was such a man in the world as this Job of which this Book speaks: but
account this book rather Parabolicall, then Historical. R. Moses Ben. Maimon
in more Nebuchim part 3.. 22. And Thalmud Ord. 4. Tract. 3. But this dream is
sufficiently refelled by that honorable mention that is made of this renowned
Job in other Scriptures both in Old and New Testament Ezekiel. 14.14, 20. Iam.
5.11.

Who this Job was, is more doubted.

1. Some think that Job came of Nahor Abraham's brother, and that he was the
third from Nahor: thus; Nahor -- Vz -- rIob; and that he lived about that time
that Israel was in Egypt. Alsted. Chron. p. 100 and p. 115. and p. 502. And
Hieronym. in Q. Hebr. Tom. 4. fol. 96. Seems to incline hereunto, especially,
seeing Job is said to dwell in the Land of Vz, Job 1.1. and Vz was one of
Nahors sons, Gent 22.^1. But that Land seems not to have received its name of
Vz coetaneous to Abraham; but rather from Vz son of Aram, Sem's Nephew
presently after the flood, Genesis 10.23. As Gerh. well notes, in exegesi. loc*
Com. de Scrip.. 136.

2. Others rather are of opinion, that Job is the same which Iobab King of the
Idumeans, of the race of Esau Genesis 36.34. And that (...) might be changed into
(...); the name Iobab into Job; either from the custom of the Hebrew tongue,
which ofttimes changes one letter for another; or from the Aramick, Idumean,
or other dialect of the Country where he sojourned; or from the change of his
condition in the world; while prosperous he might be called Iobab, the letter
being doubled; when in distress his name contracted into Job. See the like in
case of Abraham, Genesis 17.5. Of Naomi, Ruth 1.20.

This latter opinion is urged by Arguments not to be neglected. 1. From the
circumstances of place. Iobab lived in the Land of Idumea, Genesis 36.33. Job in
the Land of Vz, a chief tract in Idumea, Job 1.1. Lam. 4.21. Hence Kings of
Edom are called Kings of the Land of Vz, Ier. 25.20. 2. From description of
their possessions, Iobab had Regal Majesty Genesis 36.33. Job had a Princely
state, not usual to private men, Job 1.1, 2, 3. And also Princely Dignity,
Habit, and Office, Job 29.9, 12, 14. 3. From Similitude of names. As Moses
reckons up among Esau's sons, one Eliphaz who brought forth one Theman builder
of a Town of his own name, Genesis 36.10, 15. So Jobs History mentions, Eliphaz
the Temanite Job 2.11. Many Authors, as the LXX interpret. at the end of Job.
Eusebius. demonstr. Evangel. l. 1. c. 5. Ambros. in Com. in Romans 9. August. de
Civit. dei, l. 18. c. 47. Gerh. quo supr. 134. vid. Mercer. in Praefat in Lib*
Job and Com. in Job 1.1

Penman of this book is not certainly known. Some think it was Solomon; but
that is scarce probable, Job living so long before Solomon, and many Penmen of
Holy Scripture intervening betwixt them. Some that Job penned this book
himself, because the expressions and speeches of Job are laid down in such
emphaticall and patheticall terms. Some rather think that Moses wrote Genesis
and Job about the same time, viz. a little before Isreal's departure out of
Egypt, in the year of the world, 2452. Alsted. Chron. p. 100. R. Solomon, and
other Hebrews favor this opinion.

Scope, To evidence as in a mirror the wise, just and fatherly Providence of
God to his own faithful and upright servants, even in midst of manifold,
deepest, strangest and longest afflictions. Hebrews say, Job's calamity lasted
12 months. Suidas says, seven years.

Principal Parts. In this book Jobs threefold condition is described viz. His
Prosperity, His Adversity, and his recovery out of all his distresses.

I. Jobs Prosperity, is described c. 1.1, to ver. 6. II. Jobs Adversity, is
deciphered to us. 1. By the Occasion, variety and extremity of it, c. 1. ver.
6. to chap. 3.1. 2. By the distemper of his spirit under the extremity of his
dolours, c. 3. 3. By the Dialogue had under his Affliction, wherein this Q. is
for substance fully discussed, Whether strange, heavy, and long afflictions be
infallible signs either of Gods hatred, or of afflicted persons Hypocrisy?
Likewise Jobs Faith, patience, courage, perseverance and commendable deportment
is interwoven in the Dialogue; though now and then he discovered some
infirmities. Here consider the dispute betwixt Job and his three friends and
the Moderatours of the Dispute. 1. The Dispute has in it 8 several Acts. 1.
Eliphaz his first reproof c. 4.5. And Jobs Answer, c. 6, 7. 2. Bildads first
reproof of Job, c. 8. And Jobs answer, c. 9, 10. 3. Zophar's first rebuke c.
11. With Jobs answer, c. 12, 13, 14. 4. Eliphaz his second reproof, c. 15. And
Jobs defense, c. 16, 17. 5. Bildad's second rebuke, c. ^8. Jobs answer, c. 19.
6. Zophar's second reproof, c. 20. Jobs answer c. 21. 7. Elephaz his third
reproof, c. 22. Jobs answer, c. 23, 24. 8. Bildad's third reproof, c. 25.
Jobs answer by showing Gods Majesty, c. 26, 27, 28. and by paralleling his
present calamity with his former felicity, c. 29, 30, 31. 2. The Moderatours in
this dispute are, 1. Elihu; who first reproves Jobs friends, c. 32. Job
himself c. 33. 2. Renders the Reasons of his reproof drawn from the Majesty
of God, c. 34. 3. Exhorts Job to Repentance, c. 35. 4. Returns to the
description of Gods Majesty, c. 36, 37. 2. God himself who reprehends and
convinces Job of ignorance, and infirmity, by Arguments drawn from the
Creation and Gubernation. 1. Of the Meteors c. 38. 2. Of other creatures,
especially of the more considerable creatures, viz. The Lion, c. 39. Elephant,
c. 40. Whale, c. 41.


III. Jobs recovery out of his adversity, described. 1. By his preparative to
it, viz. Jobs penitential confession of his sin, etc. This was the sweet fruit
of the Dialogue with Job. 2. By the manner of his Restitution etc. c. 42.
2. Doctrines of more general reference unto all sorts of persons, are
contained partly in David's, partly in Solomon's Books, whereof some were written
originally in prose, others in Meter, Trelcat. in Oecon. Bibl.

Psalms.
1. IN David's Book viz. That which was (if not wholly, as some think, August.
de Civitat. Dei, l. 17. c. 14. Yet) principally Penned by David, i. e. THE BOOK
OF PSALMS. It is called in Hebrew, by the latter Hebrews (who gave names or
Titles to Books, (...) Sepher Tehillim. i. e. The Book of Hymns, or Praises:
because the Divine Praises of God are the chief subject matter of the Psalms.
In the Old Testament, THE PSALMS OF ISRAEL 2 Samuel 23.1. Because penned for the
use of the Israel of God. In the New Testament, (...) The PSALMS Luk 24.44.
And (...) i. e. The BIBLE or BOOK OF PSALMS, Luke 20.42. Act. 1.20. Because
the Psalms are digested into one volume. The Greek calls it also (...) i. e.
The Psalter; from the Psaltery a musical instrument, used in singing of the
psalms. Anciently it was called Soliloquium i. e. The Soliloquy; because it
contains the Saints sweetest and secret talkings with God in prayers and
praises, and Gods with them in precious returns. Parva Biblia, and Summarium
V. Test. i. e. The little Bible, and the Summary of the Old Testament. Luth
Totius Scripturae Epitome. i. e. The Epitome of the whole Scriptures. Athanas.
in Epist. ad Marcel. It is a compendium of all divinity, a common shop of
Medicines for the soul, an universal storehouse of good Doctrines profitable
to every one in all conditions. Basil in Psalm. 1. By August. lib. Psalmoru^
Prol. its called Tutela pueris, juvenibus ornamentum, solatium senibus,
mulieribus aptissimus decor. i. e. A safeguard for children, an Ornament to
youth, a solace to aged men, and the fittest comeliness for women. The psalms
are a Jewel made up of the Gold of Doctrine, of the pearls of comfort, of the
Gemmes of prayer. This book is a Theater of Gods works. A sweet field and
Rosary of promises. A Paradise of sweet fruits and heavenly delights. An ample
Sea wherein tempest-tossed souls find richest pearls of consolation. An
heavenly school wherein God himself is chief instructor. The abridgment,
flower and quintessence of Scriptures. A glass of divine grace, representing
to us the sweetest smiling fatherly countenance of God in Christ. And a most
accurate Anatomy of a Christian soul, delineating all its affections,
motions, temptations, plunges with their proper remedies. Incipientibus primum
efficitur elementum, proficientibus incremen^um, perfectis stabile firmamentum,
totius Ecclesiae vox una. i. e. It is rudiment for the young, increase for the
proficient, firm establishment for the perfect, its as but one voice of the
whole Church. August. ibid.

In a word, Quid est quod non discatur in Psalmis? Non omnis magnitudo
virtutis, non norma justitiae, non pudicitiae decor, non prudentiae
consummatio, non patientiae regula, non omne quicquid potest dici bonum
procedit ex ipsis? Dei scientia, perfecta praenunciatio Christi in carne
venturi, and communis resurrectionis spes, suppliciorum metus, gloriae
pollicitatio, mysteriorum revelatio. Omnia prorsus in his velut magno quodam
and communi thesauro recondita atque conferta sunt bona. i. e. What is it that
may not be learned in the Psalms? Does not the greatness of all virtue, the
Rule of Righteousness, the gracefulness of charity, the Consummation of
prudence, the law of patience, and every thing that may be called good, flow
from them? The knowledge of God, the perfect Prediction of Christ to come in
the flesh, the common hope of the Resurrection, the fear of punishments, the
Promise of glory, the revelation of mysteries, yea all good things are hid and
heaped together in these Psalms, as in some great and common Treasury. Aug. in
lib. Psalmorunt Prolog. For, if we look at the matter of the Psalms, how rich
is it! Consider,

In the Book of Psalms 1. God deals with us, by 1. Information; thence arise
Psalmi (...), the Didacticall or Teaching Psalms. 2. Exhortation; thence the
(...) or (...), i. e. the Hortatory Psalms; or Admonitory Ps. 3. Consolation;
thence the (...), i. e. Consolatory Psalms. 4. Narratio^ of things already
past; thence (...), i. e. the Historical Psalms. 5. Prediction, or
foretelling of things to come; thence Psalmi (...), i. e. the Prophetical
Psalms.
2. We deal with God, by 1. Prayer; whence Psalmi (...), i. e Petitory or
Praying Psalms. 2. Praise and thanksgiving; thence Psalmi (...), i. e. the
Gratulatory or Thanksgiving Psalms.



Penmen of the Book of Psalms are supposed by some to be many; and the Titles
of diverse Psalms do import as much unto us. Ten Penmen are enumerated. viz.
David, Solomon, Moses, Asaph, Ethan, Heman, Ieduthun, and the three sons of
Korah; but Augustine thinks David was Penman of them all, de Civitat. dei l.
17. c. 14. However David penned greatest part of them, as the Titles and
Testimonies in the New Testament do intimate.

Some think that Ezra after the Babylonish Captivity, collected these Psalms,
(before dispersed) into one volume. Some think this was done by King Hezekiah's
friends or servants before the Babylonish Captivity, Athanasius in Synopsi.

Sum and Scope of the Psalms, seems to be. To set out the sweet intercourse and
Communion betwixt God and his Church and people in all outward Conditions, and
inward soul cases; how therein they are weak or strong* believe, hope, joy,
lament, confess, pray, vow, praise the Lord, etc. as occasion requires; and
how God tries, delivers, comforts, supports, encourages, instructs, enables
them, and faithfully deals with them, in all variety of their cases and
conditions. But every particular Psalm has his particular Scope; handling
distinct matters upon distinct occasions. Some being penned before, some under,
some after the Babylonish Captivity, as is evident.

Principal parts. This Book is by the Hebrews divided into five Books, viz.

1. From Psalm. 1. to the end of Psalm. 41. concluded with, Amen and Amen. 2.
From Psalm. 42. to the end of Psalm. 72. shut up with. Amen and Amen. Ended* are
the Prayers of David son of Iesse. 3. From Psalm. 73. to the end of Psalm. 89.
closed with, Amen and Amen. 4. From Psalm. 90. to the end of Psalm. 106. ended
with, Amen, Halelu-jah. 5. From beginning of Psalm. 107. to the end of Psalm.
150. concluding with Halelu-jah.
This Division seems to arise from the peculiar close of these five Psalms.

Or thus, The Psalms are either 1 Directed from man to God, as the 1 Praying,
and 2 Thankesgiving Psalms. 2 Or from God to man. As the Psalms which are 1
Hortatory, 2 Consolatory, 3 Didacticall. 4 Prophetical.

The Particular unfolding of the Penman, Kind, Occasion, Matter, Scope and
Principal Parts of every Psalm severally; will make a large Appendix to this
Tract, and is reserved till some other opportunity.

2. In Solomon's Books, (the wisest of Kings, 1 King. 3.12. and 4.29.) His
Books are three, which according to the several Doctrines, and matters
comprised in them, we may distinguish into 1 Proverbiall, 2 Penitential and 3
Nuptial. It is hard to say at what time these several Books were penned by
Solomon, yet perhaps the Nuptial Book, was penned in his younger years, when
his affections were more warm, active, lively in spirituals. The Proverbiall
Book in his manly ripe age, when his prudence and parts were at highest, most
grave, solid, settled: And the Penitential Book in his old age* after all the
vain courses which he had lost himself in, as the current of the Book seems
clearly to evidence.

Proverbs.
1. HIs Proverbiall Book called the PROVERBS OF SOLOMON, because though it
contain other's Proverbs, yet most are Solomon's Prove. 1.1. In Hebr. (...)
Mis^le Shelomoh, i. e. either Similitudes, or excelling sentences, that
overcome and bear rule over the rest, from mashal, which notes dominion.

This book was penned not by one, but by diverse: and that not at one, but at
several times. Solomon penned the nine first chapters, in that Order, as they
are, as also c. 10. to c. 25. Cartwright in loc. Solomon was Author of the
Proverbs also, from c. 25. to c. 30. But the men of Hezekiah King of Judah
copied them out, Prove. 25.1. probably they collected them out of other writings
of Solomon, and ranked them in this Order, wherein we now have them. Alsted.
Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 120. Cartw. in Prove. 25.1. and Iun. ibid. who thinks
they extracted these Proverbs out of the Records of the Acts of Solomon, and
digested them into a body; most of these Proverbs appertaining to Ethicall and
Civil administration. The thirtieth chapter was penned by Agur son of Iakeh,
c. 30.1. of him we read elsewhere no further mention in Scripture. He was a
Prophet, Prove. 30.1. His Proverbiall Prophecy is annexed to Solomon's Proverbs,
perhaps because of mutual resemblance between them.

The 31th chapter contains the Proverbiall instructions, with which Bathsheba
trained up Solomon (here called Lemuel) in his tender years, which instructions
King Solomon committed to writing afterward. Iun. in loc. Cartw. in loc.

The Scope. To instruct men in true wisdom and understanding, the very head
and height whereof is the sincere fear of the Lord, Prove. 1.2. to 8. To this
end the Book is filled with choice succinct sententious Aphorisms, Adages, or
Proverbs, compendiously holding forth duties of Piety to God, Equity to man,
Sobriety toward ones self.

General Distribution of the Book take thus.

I. Here Is Solomon's Preface to his Proverbs, which has a methodicall texture and
coherence in it self, c. 1. to 10. II. Here is the whole Body or Book of the
Proverbs themselves, which are either, 1. Solomon's own Proverbs, which or most
part are pithy, distinct Aphotismes, without method, dependence, coherence,
etc. and these. 1. Written by Solomon himself, c. 10.1. to c. 25.1. 2. Written
by him, and collected by the men of King Hezekiah, as c. 25.1. to ^.30.1. 2. Or
others Proverbs by way of Appendix annexed to Solomon's. viz* 1* Of Agur. c. 30.
2. Of Bathsheba, but written by Solomon, c. 31.

Ecclesi:
2. HIs Penitential Book, Solomon's Retractations or Recantations, called in
Hebr. (...) i. e. The WORDS OF THE PREACHER Eccles. 1.1. and to the same sense
in Greek, Latin, and English, ECCLESIASTES, or The Preacher, because Solomon
being furnished with wisdom and manifold experience touching the vanity of
all things besides true Religion, preaches the same to the Church for the
instruction and warning of all Gods people: This Book he wrote in extreme Old
age, Repenting of his fall: This seems to be one of his last Acts, according
to that, 2 Chronicles. 9.29.

Scope of this Book is to evidence wherein a man's true happiness consists.
viz. not in any sublunary, natural, created excellency, all such being vanity
of vanities, extremest vanity and vexation of Spirit; but only in true sincere
fear of God, and truth of Religion, compare Eccles. 1.2. with Eccles. 12.13,
14.

Principal parts; To this end, touching true happiness, he insists upon it,
1. Negatively, showing where it is not to be found. viz Generally, not in any
mere, natural, sublunary treasure in this world. Specially, not in 1.
Knowledge of all natural things. 2. Pleasures, or sweetest earthly delights.
3. Highest Honors, Or 4. Compleatest riches, c. 1. to c. 7. 2. Positively and
Affirmatively, wherein true felicity is to be found, and this he shows. 1.
Particularly, declaring what are the degrees and means of happiness, so far
as a man may attain thereunto in this imperfect life, c. 7. to c. 12.8. 2.
Summarily in the close of the whole Book, c. 12.8. to the end.


This Book is an undeniable Argument of Solomon's repentance after his Relapse,
and consequently of his salvation.

Song of Songs.
3. HIs Nuptial Book treating of the spiritual Contract, and Marraiage betwixt
Christ and his Church, called the SONG OF SONGS, which was Solomon's, c. 1.1.
and CANTICLES, because of all Solomon's Songs, which were 1005. 1 King. 4.32.
This was the choycest and most excellent; the matter thereof being one of the
sweetest spiritual mysteries. viz. the Churches spiritual espousals to, and
Communion with Jesus Christ, that great mystery, Ephesians. 5.32.

Scope of this Song, is, (under the Metaphor or Allegory of lovers upon
Contract, and intending marriage,) to shadow out to us that sublime spiritual
happy union and Communion betwixt Christ and his Church, inchoate in this life,
more imperfectly with the Jews, more perfectly with the Gentiles: Consummate
in the life to come. This is carried on dialogue-wise betwixt Christ and his
Church; His friends and her Damsels, being the four speakers, especially the
two first. As is the Custom of a Bridegroom and a Bride.

Principal parts, of this Song of Songs.

I. The Inscription, denoting the 1 kind of writing; 2 Excellency 3 and Penman
of it c. 1.1. II. The substance of the Song, Streaming out a Torrent of
spiritual love betwixt Christ and the Church, laid down Dialogue-wise, in a
familiar Colloquy betwixt 1 Christ as the Bridegroom. 2 The Church as the
Bride, and 3 the friends of them both rejoicing in the marriage; All in a
continued Allegory. Herein are particularly, 1. The Ardent desires of the
Church after Christ, as impatient of his absence: with Christ's acceptance
thereof. c. 1. ver. 2. to 9. 2. The Reciprocal invitatory Commendations of one
another; and the mutual gratulations and contentment of Christ and the Church
in one another, c. 1.9. to the end of c. 2. 3. The Churches renewed desires
night and day, at home and abroad, in the City in the fields (as it were) to
bring Christ nearer to her self, c. 3.1. to 6. yea rather to have her self
brought immediately to the full enjoyment of Christ in heaven, v. 6. to the
end. 4. Christ most affectionately Prayseth his Church in her Members,
professing himself ravished with her faith, graces, and spiritual beauty, c.
4.1. to 15. which is amplified, 1. By the Churches selfe-denying acknowledging
all her graces to come from Christ as the fountain, v 15. 2. By her Prayer for
his influence to make her (as a Garden of spices) more and more fruitful; and
for his presence to accept her fruit, v. 16. 3. By Christ's satisfying her
desires, coming into his Garden, Accepting the fruits thereof, and welcoming
his friends, c. 5.1. 5. The Churches Spiritual Desertion, in Christ's
withdrawing himself from her. Where are, I. The occasion of it, Her carnal
Scurity, c. 5.2.3. II. The Manner of it; withdrawing, yet leaving some
quickening grace behind him. v. 4, 5. III. The Consequents of it, in respect
of, 1. The Church her self, v. 4, 5, 6. 2. The Watchmen abusing her, ver. 7.
3. The Daughters of Jerusalem, whom she charged to signify her distress to
her beloved, ver. 8. This charge is amplified, 1 Partly by the inquiry of the
Daughters of Jerusalem, what Christ is? ver. 9. 2 Partly by the Churches
Patheticall description of Christ's transcendent excellencies, ver. 10. to the
end. 3 Partly, by the inquiry of the daughters of Jerusalem, after Christ, c.
6.1. 4 Partly by the Churches declaring to them, where Christ was, viz. He was
now returned, and gone down into his Garden c. 6.2. 5 Partly by her
affectionate complacency in Christ returned, ver. 3. 6. Christ's sweet and
consolatory deportment toward his Church after her Desertion, and his return
to her. Wherein, 1. He assures her she is as precious in his eyes, and as dear
to his heart as ever, c. 6.4. to 11. 2. He declares his desire after the
Spiritual Spring of the Churches graces, after the winter of her afflictions,
ver. 11. 3. He discovers the Rapture of his ravished affections to her, most
sweetly inviting her to himself, ver. 12, 13. most highly commending her
throughout, c. 7.1. to 8. and promising his presence, and what he will do for
her; that she may become most delightful to him, v. 8.9. 7. Finally, the
Church reciprocates her utmost affection to Christ, for his love. And this, I.
More Generally c. 7.10. II. More Particularly, Her desire, 1 That Christ and
she may go together to view their Husbandry, whether their plants did flourish
and fructify, viz. The Gospel thrive, ver. 11, 12 13. 2 That she may enjoy
Christ most intimately and familiarly, c. 8. 1, 2, 3. 3. That the Daughters of
Jerusalem may not disturb him, ver. 4. 4. That it may be considered, what she
has forgone and undergone for Christ's love, ver. 5. 5. That Christ would give
her a fuller 1 Confirmation of his love, setting her as a seal upon his heart:
and a fuller 2 Manifestation or evident assurance thereof, Setting her as a
Seal upon his Arm, strengthening, helping her, etc. and this because she
bears to Christ an invincible and unquenchable love, ver. 6, 7. 6. That the
Gentiles called A little Sister, may be called, and incorporated into the
Church with the Jews, ver. 8, 9, 10. This is amplified by Christ's common care
of both, as one Vineyard, kept by himself, not by others, as Solomon's was*
ver. 11, 12. Christ teaching his Spouse her duty, To her neighbors in
publishing and bearing witness to his Truth; To himself in Prayer and
Thanksgiving, ver. 13.
III. The Conclusion of the Song, containing the Churches most Ardent Desire
after Christ's second coming, that the marriage betwixt Christ and her self,
may be completely consummated in Heaven those Mountains of spices, c. 8.14.
III. THE PROPHETICAL BOOKS.
THus far of Books Historical and Doctrinal, Now to the Books Prophetical.
For distinction sake they are called PROPHETICAL, because the matter of them
is principally Prophetical, though many Historical and Doctrinal passages are
also inserted in them all along; as there are many prophecies of things to
come, dispersed up and down the other Books, which yet are principally
Historical and Doctrinal.

These Prophetical Books are in all 16, ( Lamentations being counted an
Appendix to Jeremiah) they may be considered, 1. According to the times of
their prophecy and writing. 2. According to their Order as set in our Bibles.
They are not placed in our Bibles in that method and Order as they were at the
first spoken and written by the prophets.

I. According to the times wherein they were first prophesied and written.
These times are for most part discovered in the beginning of the several
Prophesies, and of such we may determine certainly: or they may be collected
from other Scriptures, or the matter of the Prophesies, of which we cannot
conclude altogether so clearly.

These times may be referred (as the Historical books) to three principal
Periods, viz. 1. Before, 2. Near or under. 3. After the Babylonish captivity.
And if in these three periods we parallel these Prophets, with those Historical
Books, they will notably help to clear and explain one another.

I. Before the transportation of Israel into Babylon, These Prophets prophesied
and wrote, viz. 1. Under Vzziah King of Judah, and Jeroboam the second, King of
Israel. JONAH, he prophesied before or about beginning of Ieroboams Reign, See
2 King. 14 25. As Iun. notes in Jonah 1.1. About the close of his Reign,
thinks Drusius in Quaesitis Epist. 9. 1. AMOS. See Amos 1.1.
2. Under Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah Kings of Judah, and Jeroboam King
of Israel. HOSEA. Hos. 1.1. JOEL. Joel prophesied about the same time with
Hosea, as is thought; because the things prophesied in Joel, relate to the
days of Vzziah and Jeroboam. See Iun. Annot. in Joel 1.1. ISAIAH. Isa. 1.1.
(here the days of King Jeroboam are not mentioned.) MICHAH. Only under Iotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Mich. 1.1.
3. Under Josiah. JEREMIAH. Till the eleventh year of Zedekiah, Jer. 1, 2, 3.
being compared with Ier. 51.64. Iun. Annot. ibid. LAMENTATIONS. Written by
Jeremiah, upon occasion of King Josiah's Death 2 Chr. 35.25. ZEPHANIAH. Zeph.
1.1. OBADIAH. Seems to be contemporary with Jeremiah, compare his prophecy with
Ier. 49.7. etc. And Ezekiel. 25. 13. etc. See Iun. in Obad. 1. NAHVM. About the
close of Iosiah's Reign as the matter of the Book, and the harmony of the
History import. So Iun. in Nah. 1.1. HABBAKKVK. About the end of Iosiahs
Reign, or in his sons Reign, Iunius in Hab. 1.1.

II. Near upon, and under the Babylonish Captivity. DANIEL. In the third year
of Iehoiakim's Reign, Dan. 1.1. EZEKIEL. In the fifth year of King
Iehoiakin's Captivity, Ezekiel. 1.1, 2, 3.
III. After their return from Babylons Captivity. HAGGAI. In the second year
of Darius, and the sixth month, Hag. 1.1. ZECHARIAH. In the second year of
Darius, the eighth month, Zech. 1.1. MALACHI* Last Prophecy of the
Old Testament. Reproves the corruptions after building of the Temple. See Iun.
in Mal. 1.1.

II. According to their Order as they are placed in our Bibles. And so they are
resolved into two Ranks, viz. 1. The Greater Prophets, viz. The four first
(the Lamentations being annexed as an Appendix to Jeremiah,) so called, not
because these had greater authority, then the others, but from the greatness
of their Books; The prophecy of Isaiah, being near as big or bigger then all
the lesser prophets, together. 2. The Lesser Prophets. viz. The twelve latter,
Hosea, etc. Which were digested into one volumne of old by the Jews, (called
the Book of the Prophets, Act. 7.42.) some of them being very small, lest any
of them should be lost. All these books are named from their Penmen, except the
Lamentations.

I. The Greater Prophets, are ^he Books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel.

Isaiah
ISAIAH. This Book is set first, (though in time Jonah, Amos, Hosea, and Joel,
seem to have been before him) perhaps, because of the excellency of the
Prophecy, most frequently, fully and clearly prophesying of Christ, as if
Christ had been exhibited already, had suffered already. Hence the Ancients
called him Evangelisticus Propheta, and Propheticus Evangelista, The
Evangelicall Prophet, and Prophetical Evangelist, Or the Evangelist and
Apostle of the Old Testament. Christ and his Apostles greatly esteemed this
Book* it being oftener alleged in the New Testament, then any other Book of the
Old Testament* except the psalms. Some observe Isaiah to be quoted sixty times,
the Psalms sixty four times. Alsted. Ethiopians had great respect to this
Book as appears, Act. 8.27.28.

Time of this Prophecy was in four Kings Reigns, Isa. 1.1. if we reckon from
the death of Vzziah, Isa. 6.1. till the fifteenth year of King Hezekiah, when
the Babilonish Ambassadors came to Hezekiah and saw all his Treasures, 2 King.
20. 12, 13, 14. He must at the least prophecy forty five years: but its
probable he prophesied longer.

Scope; To hold forth the true Messiah clearly, as the only sufficient Remedy
against all sin and misery.

General parts, This Prophecy is either.

1. Comminatory, as it is for the most part, till c. 40. these promises are now
and then inter-woven; Herein 1. The Jews are threatened, c. 1. to c. 13. 2.
Enemies of the Jewesh Church are threatened, for the Churches benefit, c, 13. to
c. 29. 3. The Jews again are threatened with the Babylonish Captivity, c. 29.
to 40. 2. Promissory, and that 1. For the Restoration of the Old Church of the
Jews from the misery of that Captivity, c. 40. to c. 49. 2. For the completing
and consummation of the Churches glory in Gospel times by Christ himself, c.
49. to the end of the Prophecy.
Jeremiah.
JEREMIAH. He was of the Town of Anatho^h, Jer. 1.1. a very young man when he
began to prophecy, Ier. 1.6.

Time of his prophecy was in days of Josiah, Iehoiakin and Zedekiah, Jer. 1.2,
3. which must needs be forty three years at least by computation, both in
Judea and Egypt.

Scope. To divorce the Jews in his times from their many horrid sins,
denouncig heavy judgemenas against them: But to comfort the true servants of
God in their lowest misery, with promises of Christ, and threatenings against
all their enemies.

General parts. Herein are 1. The Preface, containing the vocation of
Jeremiah, c. 1. 2 The Prophecy it self, which is directed both against the Jews
and the enemies of the Jews, ^ Against the Jews 1. in Judea, under King
Josiah, c. 2. to c. 21. Under Iehoiachim and Zedekiah, c. 21. to c. 43. 2. In
Egypt, c. 43.44.45. 2 Against the Jews enemies. viz. Egyptians, c. 46.
Philistines and Tyrians, c. 47. Moabites. c. 48. Ammonites, Edomites, etc. c.
49. Babylonians, c. 50.51. 3. Conclusion Historical, annexed to the Prophecy,
by some other then Ierem^ah, c. 52.


Lamenta:
UNto the prophecy of JEREMIAH may be annexed as an Appendix the Book of
LAMENTATIONS. called in Hebr. (...) Kinoth, i. e. Lamentations; 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
and (...) Echah, viz. the first Hebrew word of the Book (as many other Books
are named by the first word of the Book). This Book seems to be penned by
Jeremiah the Prophet, upon the death of that precious King ^osiah, 2 Chronicles.
35.25. when the Jews fell to their sinful confidence in Egypt, which
Beginnings of sorrows and miseries gave Jeremy occasion, (he knowing by the
spirit of Prophecy the judgments which should befall them) to lament all the
miseries from Iosiahs death, till the destruction of the Temple and Jerusalem,
and captivity of the people in Babylon. The four first chapters are penned
alphebetically, (as many Psalms are for help of memory in such an excellent
piece as this is,) In 1.2, 4. chapters, every verse begins with a distinct
letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, c. 3. has only every third verse so beginning.
Most mournful melting, patheticall affections abound in the whole Book. Greg.
Nazianzen. Affirmed thus of himself, As often as I take this Book into my hands,
and read the Lamentations, I perceive my speech to be stopped, and I am
overwhelmed with tears, and methinks I see that Calamity as it were set before
mine eyes, and I join Lamentations with Jeremiah; Greg. Nazianzen. Or. 12.
page 202. Paris, 1630.

Scope, seems to be this* Lively to point out the severity and impartiality of
Gods judgments, even against his own dearest people the Jews for their
iniquities, inviting them to repentance, faith and prayer, for obtaining of
Gods favor in pardoning of sin, and removal of judgment.

Principal parts. Are: I. Narratory, wherein are contained. 1. A most
Patheticall Description of the woeful miseries, overwhelming Jerusalem and
Judea, yet all acknowledged to be most justly inflicted for their sin, c. 1. 2.
A mournful expostulating lamentation for the desolating miseries upon all
persons and affairs, Civil or Ecclesiastical in the whole Kingdom, c. 2. 1.
to 19. 3. The Prophets counsel to them to Convert to God and pray; and he
gives them a form of words, c. 2. verse 19.20, 21, 22. 4. The Churches sad
complaints (in one man's person) of Gods many and heavy afflictions upon her, c.
3. 1. to 18. 5. The Arguments of comfort, wherewith the Church supported her
self in these extremities v. 18. to 42. 6. How the Church eased her heart in
crying to God for her self, against her enemies, v. 42. to the end. 7. Most
Patheticall Aggravations of her calamities. c. 4.1. to 21.
II. Minatory, against the enemies of Israel, c. 4.21. III. Promissory, to the
afflicted daughter of Sion, c. 4.22. IIII. Petitory, wherein the Church of God,
1 bewaileth her miseries, 2 Acknowledges sin to be the cause thereof, 3
Deprecats his wrath, 4 And implores his mercy, c. 5.


Ezekiel.
EZEKIEL. He was descended of the Priestly stock, Ezekiel. 1.3. Prophesied in the
land of Chaldea, to the Captives and Gentiles, in the fifth year of
Iehoiachin's captivity, Ezekiel. 1.1, 2, 3.

Scope. To comfort the Church of God in Captivity, and to instruct them how to
behave themselves therein, amongst profane Heathenish Idolaters.

General parts. Herein are,

I. The Preface setting forth the Prophets calling to this office; Gods call,
c. 1. Ezekiels fearfulnes, c. 2. Gods confirming and strengthening him, c. 3.

II. The Prophecy it self, containing three Ranks of Sermons preached at
several times, to several persons, etc. 1. To the Jews, whom he sharply
rebuks and threatens for their impieties in seventeen several sermons, c. 4.
to c. 25. 2. To the enemies of Gods people, whose ruin and destruction he
foretells in eight sermons, c. 25. to c. 33. 3. To the Jews, exhorting them to
repentance, and encouraging them to hope, not only for an inchoate deliverance
from Babylons slavery, and that in six sermons, c. 33. to c. 40. But also for a
consummate spiritual deliverance from spiritual misery by Christ the Messiah,
and this is set out in vision 1 Of the new Temple to be erected, c. 40.41, 42.
1 Of the new Worship of God to be restored, c. 43.44. 3 Of the new Jerusalem,
and new earth that should be discovered, c. 45.46, 47, 48.

Daniel:
DANIEL, Daniel was carried captive with the Jews into Babylon, Dan. 1.6.
living and prophesying among the Captives, a long time, foretold future events
to the end of the world. Was a man of an excellent spirit, Dan. 5.12. Author of
this Book, Matthew. 24.15. Dan. 12.4.

Scope, To display unto Gods Church and people Gods wise and faithful dealings
with them in all states, from days of Nebuchadnezzar till Christ, for the
comfort of the Jews, and from Christ to the end of the world, his peculiar
Providence over his own in all their distresses and deliverances, for the
comfort of the Saints under the New Testament.

General Parts. This book relates principally two sorts of matters, viz. 1.
Matters done already for time past, laid down Historically, c. 1. to 7. and
these things are reported 1. Summarily. c. 1. 2 Severally under the Babylonian
Monarchy, whereof we have 1 The Rise, c. 2.3. 2 The Growth, c. 4. 3 The close,
c. 5. Or under the Persian Monarchy, c. 6. 2. Matters to be done afterward for
future, laid down Prophetically, c. 7. to the end of the book. He prophecies,
1. Of future Calamities, where, in days of Belshazzar, he had a double vision
Of the four beasts c. 7. Of the Ram and He-goat, c. 8. In the time of the
Persian Monarchy, where he has a double vision, One in the first year of
Darius the Mede, c. 9. The other in the third year of Cyrus, c 10. with the
exposition of them c. ^1. 2. Of the Elects deliverance from these calamities,
both before and after Christ to the worlds end; though calamities of the Saints
be sharp and long, yet at last deliverance shall fully come, and the promise
thereof not fail, but be exactly fulfilled, c. 12.


2 The Lesser Prophets or Minor Prophets so called, not because they had lesser
Authority from God for their Prophetical office, but because their Books are
of a far less bulk and volume then the former. They are twelve, Hosea, Joel,
etc.

Hoshea
HOSHEAH. he was son of Beeri, Prophesied the same time that Isaiah did, Hos.
1.1. with Isa. 1.1. 2. He prophesied (as is probable) longer then any other of
the Prophets; in all about seventy years. Principally deals against the ten
Tribes of Israel, now and then against Judah. His style is sharp and succinct,
which makes him somewhat more dark and obscure.

Scope, To convince the Jews, especially the ten Tribes of their many great
iniquities, especially of their idolatryes, and to persuade them to repentance
with hope of mercy.

General parts. This Prophecy is either I. Parabolicall, comprehending two
Types. The first being propounded, c. 1. Accommodated, c. 2. The second in, c.
3. In both which under the Person of a Prophet, he signifies in himself future
events, and evils that should befall the Kingdom and kingly house of Israel,
Captivity. Blindness of the people, Illumination and Conversion of a remnant
by Christ. II. Plain and naked, And so it is, Comminatory, and Consolatory. 1.
Comminatory, which is laid down chiefly in three sermons, or special
Prophecies, viz. 1. Against all Israel, for their vanity, inhumanity, impiety;
too evident in the Kingdoms present bad Government, dehorting Judah from
Isreal's sins, both by the horror of their injustice and fear of punishment,
c. 4. 2. Against Priests, Israel, and the kings house, threatening ruin for
their spiritual whoredom, and obstinate backsliding from God, observance of
humane Traditions, carnal con^idence in foreign Aid of Assyrians, Contempt of
Gods word, casting off Gods Covenant, and other wickednesses and hypocrisies,
c. 5, 6, 7. And all this under the Person of a judge. 3. Under the Person of an
Herald, he proclaims Gods judgments against them and the causes thereof.
viz. for their defection from his worship and spiritual Kingdom, and from the
temporal Kingdom of David, Hypocrisy, departing from all good, secure
joyfulnesse, sacrilege and other hereditary sins, threatening poverty,
deportation, loss of Gods worship, death and devastation, c. 8, 9, 10 2.
Consolatory, which contains two sermons. 1. Under the person of a Father, God
promising in Christ, that (though neither Prophet, law, mercies nor judgments
had brought them to repentance, yet) his Elect should be converted, embrace
Christ and the promises, c. 11. 2. Dissuading them from Per^idiousnesse,
Idolatry, Avarice, Pride, he promises, (the wicked being destroyed) to
preserve a remnant, and to heal the penitent, c. 12, 13, 14. in c. 14. putting
on the person of a Friend.


Joel.
JOEL. Joel was son of Pethuel, Joel 1.1. Some think this Pethuel was Samuel
so called, i. e. A perswader of God, Because what he asked of God in Prayer, he
obtained. Alst.

Scope; to convince the Jews of their sins by occasion of an imminent famine
and to draw them to repentance, holding forth many inviting promises to the
penitent.

General Parts. This Prophecy is, 1. Comminatory, threatening a grievous famine
(taking occasion thereof, by the Loc^sts Caterpillars, and Palmer worms, the
forerunners of a famine) laboring to make the people sensible of present
evils, and sins the cause thereof* c. 1.

2. Hortatory, stirring them up to public repentance, c. 2. ver. 1. to 19.
Which Exhortation is urged, 1. By promises to his people both touching,
Temporal deliverances from present evils, ver. 19. to 28. Eternal
Evangelicall mercies in Christ, ver. 28. to the end of the chap. 2. By threats
against their adversaries on every side, c. 3.

Amos.
AMOS. Amos an heardman of Tekoa, yet furnished with a Prophetical spirit,
Amos 1.1. Severely denounces judgments; is thought to be slain by Amaziah
the Priest.

Scope, To hold forth the severity of Gods judgments against his Churches
enemies, and his Church it self; for their sins. Annexing some Evangelicall
Promises to a Remnant.

General Parts Herein are, I. Comminations. 1. Against the enemies of the
Church, for their insolences against his people, etc. c. 1. 2. Against the
Jews and Israelites themselves for their own wickednesses* which threatenings
are laid down. 1. More plainly against their Idolatry, c 2, 3. Violence, c. 4.
Impiety, Pride, inhumanity, luxury, c. 5.6. 2. More darkly and obscurely under
three several Types, the first c. 7. The second c. 8. The third c. 9. ad ver.
11. II. Consolations and Evangelicall Promises, c. 9. ver. 11. to the end.


Obadiah.
OBADIAH. Who he was, is not evident by Scripture, but only by this Book, that
he was a Prophet. He prophesied against the Edomites or Idumeans, who came of
Edom, which is Esau, Genesis 36, 1.8, 19. and hated Israelites Jacobs race, as
Esau hated Jacob himself.

Scope, To threaten ruin to the Edomites, for their enmity against the
Israelites, and to comfort the Church with promised Salvation and deliverance
in Christ.

General parts.

1. A Commination of imminent ruin to the Edomites for their enmity against
the Israelites ver. 1. to 12. 2. A Prohibition of Edom from further injur^ng
his people, ver. 12. to 17. 3. Ample promises of deliverance and salvation to
the Church, by the kingdom of Christ, from all her enemies. ver. 17, to the
end.
Jonah.
JONAH. He was son of Amitta^, Jonah 1.1. Some call him The Prophet and Apostle
of the Gentiles; because he was sent to preach to Ninive the Metropolis of the
Assyrians, a Gentilish City. This Book is chiefly Historical.

Scope. To show how God invited the City of Niniveh to repentance by Jonas
preaching.

General parts.

1. Gods first calling of Jonas to preach, to Niniveh, with Jonas his refusal,
Gods humbling him for it, and the effects of that humiliation, Jonas his
Prayer, and deliverance, c. 1, 2. 2. Gods second calling of him to the same
task, together with Jonas his obedience, Ninive's Repentance, Gods forbearance
of the Judgment threatened, and Jonas his passionate causeless discontent, c.
3, 4. Nineveh Repenting, aggravated Israel's and Judah's impenitency.
Micah:
MICAH. He is described, Mic. 1.1. Coetaneous to Esaias, imitator of Esaias,
compare them together. Prophesied in corruptest times.

Scope. To threaten destruction to Judah and Israel for their great impieties
fomented among them by their Rulers and Prophets; but to comfort the remnant of
the Elect by Evangelicall Promises in Christ.

General parts.

I. His first Sermon. 1. Minatory, both in general against Judah and Israel
for their sins, c. 1, 2. and in especial against Magistrates for their
injustice, c. 3. 2. Consolatory, through the mercies of God, and the coming of
the Messiah c. 4, 5. II. His second Sermon, contaninig Gods 1. contestations
against their sins c. 6. 2. Gods Consolations of his Elect remnant, with
Gospel promises, c. 7.
Nahum,
NAHUM. He is described, Nah. 1.1. About same time that Jeremiah prophesied in
Judea, Nahum prophesied against Nineveh the Metropolis of Assyria, relapsing to
impiety after Jonas his preaching; before Babylons Captivity.

Scope. To comfort the Jews and the godly Israelites by the denouncing of
judgments against the Assyrians, who under Pull, Tiglath-Pelesar, Salmanazar,
Senacherib and Esarhaddon their Kings, grievously infested Israel: Esarhaddon
carrying Israel Captive to Assyria in days of Mannasseh.

General parts.

I. A Preface to the prophecy from the Nature of God, 1. Most potent and severe
against all his wicked enemies, c. 1. ver. 2. to 7. 2. Kind and gracious to the
godly and faithful, ver. 7. II. Denunciation of judgment against Nineveh, and
the kingdom of Assyria, under the Metaphor of a mighty blood that should at
last destroy them, c. 1.8, 9, 10. Together with the causes of those judgments
ver. 11. to the end of the chap. III. Amplification of these threatened
judgments, 1. Partly by a lively Ad-umbration and description of them, c. 2. 2.
Partly by a Narration of the causes procuring these judgme^ts, viz Their
Cruelties, whordoms, sorceries, Idolatries, c. 3.1* to 8. 3. Partly by
confirmation of these threatenings fore-prophecied, by example of Gods
judgments upon Alexandria in Egypt, c. 3.8. to the end.
Habakk:
HABAKKUK. As Nahum prophesied against Niniveh and Assyrians; so Habakkuk
against both Jews and Babylonians.

Scope. Both to warn the Jews of their overthrow by the Chaldeans for their
sins, and to comfort them afterward by their enemies destruction, but their
own life of Faith in deepest afflictions. The prophesy is laid down
Dialoguewise.

General parts.

I. The prophets Complaint and Expostulation to the LORD against the extreme
wickedness of the Jews, c. 1.2, 3, 4. II. The LORDS answer to the prophet,
threatening great calamities to the Jews by the proud destructive Caldeans.
ver. 5. to 12. III. A second Expostulation of the prophet, against the cruel
oppression of Jews, as well good as bad, under the wicked blaspemous King of
Caldeans, ver. 12. to the end of the chap. IIII. Gods second answer to the
Prophet. 1. Directing the good to manage such deep afflictions under the
Caldeans, viz. By living by Faith in hope of deliverance, c. 2.1, to 5. 2.
Threatening to be avenged upon the Caldeans for all their wickedness and
cruelty against his people, ver. 5. to end of the c. V. The prophets sealing up
the Doctrine of the life of Faith in his excellent prayer penned in his own and
the Churches name, c. 3.

Zephania,
ZEPHANIAH. His stock, and the time of his prophecy is described, c. 1.1. He
was coetaneous to Jeremiah, prophesied the same things for substance, but far
more briefly and succinctly. He prophesied against both Jews and foreign
Nations.

Chief Scope. To Reprove the wickedness of the Jews, especially of the
Princes and many of the people, for hankering after Idolatry, expecting it
should be set up again, Hiding their Idols; even after that glorious
Reformation of King Josiah. And to comfort the Elect remnant with Evangelicall
promises, and Reformation by Christ.

General parts.

1. A most severe denunciation of desolation and other judgments to befall all
sorts both in Jerusalem and Judea, for their secret idolatries, oppressions and
injurious coveteousnesse, c. 1. 2. An exhortation of the Jews to Repentance
and self-Reformation both the graceless Jews and those that had some sparks
of Grace appearing in them. Partly by the exemplary formidable judgments which
God would execute upon foreign Nations in sight of the Jews, c. 2. Partly by
threatenings of judgments against Jews themselves for their sins if they
repented not, c. 3.1. to 8. 3. A sweet consolation made up of Evangelicall
promises touching the calling of the Gentiles, Restoration of the Church,
pardon of sins, Purity and everlasting glory by Christ, c. 3.8. to the end.

Haggai.
HAGGAI. Of him and the time of his prophecy, See Hag. 1.1.

Scope. To quicken the Jews that had returned from the Babylon^sh Captivity,
(being now extreme ingratefully dull in the work of Reformation,) to lay
aside all sluggish delays and excuses, and to make haste with the repair of
the Temple.

General parts.

I. Gods sharp reprehension of the ungrateful sluggish Jews for their great
sin in not repairing the Temple, c. 1.1. to 12. II. Gods singular encouragement
of the Jews to fall speedily and vigorously to this work, by diverse sorts of
excellent promises* viz. 1. Of his promoting and perfecting the work, when
they should sit close to it, c. 1.12. to the end. 2. Of the surpassing glory
that he would communicate to this latter Temple (though the structure was not
so stately) beyond that of the former Temple. c. 2.1. to 10. 3. Of Gods
singular benediction upon the Corn and all the fruits of the earth for their
use, if they would buckle diligently to this Temple-worke, ver, 10. to 20. 4.
Of the glorious excellency of Christ's kingdom, the perfection and complement
of all Reformation, ver. 20. to the end.
Zechariah
ZECHARIAH, His descent and the time of his Prophecy, See in Zech. 1.1.

Scope, To encourage and incite the people returned from Captivity, especially
the Governors, Zerubbabel and Joshuah, to the building of the Temple.

General parts. This Prophecy seems to comprize the sum of five Sermons
severally preached by the Prophet. viz.

I. His penitential sermon calling the Jews to repentance. This is prefixed as
A Preface, before the following Sermons of mercy and judgment, to prepare f^r
the receiving of that, the avoiding of this, Zech. 1, 1.2. to 7. II. His
visionall Sermon. viz. His Prophetical visions, which are in all eight, some
very obstruse; some light may be brought to them, by comparing them with
Daniels Prophecy. These visions seem to be delivered at once; are contained
from c. 1, 7. to c. 7, 1. These visions are I. Uisions of Mercy, as 1. The
vision of men on horse back among the myrrtle-trees in the bottom: pointing
out Christ's singular presence with, and providence over his Church, in lowest
state, c. 1. 7. to 18. 2. The vision of four Carpenters, etc. intimating how
God would break and scatter the horns of his Churches enemies, c. 1.18. to the
end. 3. The vision of the man with the measuring line in his hand to measure
Jerusalem, promising the Restoration and re-peopling of Jerusalem, c. 2. 4.
The vision of Ioshuah the High Priest in filthy garments, and Satan at his
right hand accusing him: Showing that though sins of people and Priest might be
objected against them, and their intercessors, yet they had another High
Priest, who would plead their cause, pardon their sin, build the Temple, and
quiet his Church, viz. Christ the Branch, c. 3. 5. The vision of the golden
candlestick and the two olive trees standing by it: declaring that Gods grace
alone is sufficient for the reparation and preservation of his Church, without
all other created means, against greatest mountains of opposition, c. 4. II.
Uisions of judgment. c. 5. and 6. The vision of the flying Book: and of the
Ephah. evidencing, that though their state should be restored, and his Church
established amongst them: yet he would severely punish them for their sins at
present, and subvert them for future, if their sins grow riper and riper, c. 5.
III Uisions of comfort, viz. c. 7. The vision of four chariots drawn with
four sorts of Horses; coming out from between two Mountains of brass;
Comfortably pointing out, the Provident Decrees and Counsels of God immovable
as mountains of brass, and directing (for his Providence begins and steers
all actions) the course and motion of the four chariots and horses, ( viz.
either the four Empires of the earth, or (as some think,) the Angels of
heaven, those ministering spirits) for the fulfilling of his will for his
Churches good; so that whatsoever his Church had or should further suffer under
them, was foreseen and fore-appointed by God himself; a great comfort to them
that were come out of captivity already, and to them that as yet remained in
captivity, c. 6.1. to 9. 8. The vision or rather the Historical Praediction of
what was really to be done, for his Churches comfort, viz. the oblation of some
Jews which came from Babylon, as Ambassadors from the rest, and the typical
coronation of Ioshuah the High Priest under which is declared the Kingdom and
Priesthood of Christ, together with the reestablishment and enlargement of the
Church under him, c. 6.9. to the end. III. His Casuisticall Sermon, wherein the
Prophet at large resolves the Jews in a Case of conscience touching Fasting,
proposed to him and the Priests, with many other Lessons excellently inserted,
c. 7. and c. 8. IV. His Prophetical Sermon, foretelling future events, c.
9.10. and 11. wherein are principally considerable. 1. Threatenings of
destruction to the Churches enemies, Land of Hadrach, Damascus, Hamath, etc. c
9, 1. to 7. 2. Promises of deliverance and protection to his Church against al
their enemies, c. 9, 7, 8 3. Promissory predictions of Christ's Incarnation,
Kingdom, and the Benefits thereof to his people, from whom all comfort and
salvation principally flows, c. 9, 9. to c. 11, 1. 4. Denunciations of
dreadful judgments even to the Jews themselves, for their ungrateful and
abominable rejection of Christ and his Gospel, c. 11. V. His Evangelicall
Sermon, peculiarly belonging to the Church which Christ had gathered by his
Gospel, c. 12.13, and 14. wherein are laid down many sweet privileges of the
Church. 1. The Churches victory over all her enemies, to whom she shall be A
cup of trembling, A Burdensome stone, A torch of fire in a sheaf c. 12, 1. to
7. 2. The Churches safety and protection only from the Lord. c. 12, 7, 8. 3.
The Benefits enwrapped in this salvation for the Church, viz. 1 Heart-wounding
repentance for their sins that pierced Christ, c. 12, 9. to the end, 2
Remission of all sins to the penitent by faith in the blood of Christ, c. 13,
1. 3 Purifying of the Evangelicall doctrine from all pollution and desilement,
v. 2. to 7. 4. A select separation of the remnant appertaining to the Election
from the drossy multitude, c. 13.7. to c. 14, 1^. 4. The removal of all the
Churches ruined enemies, from offending the Church any more, or su^duing them
to the Church, and consecrating all their wealth to holy uses, c. 14, 12 to the
end of the Book.
Malachi.
MALACHI. he prophesied after the Babylonish captivity, the Temple being now
repaired, and the public worship restored, against the many notorious
corruptions remaining among them, even after such wonderful mercyes. He is the
last Prophet of the Old Testament, deciphering out in the close of his Book
John the Baptist, the first Prophet of the New Testament, Mal. 4.5, 6. with
Luke 16.16.

Scope. To call the I^wes, after this Reparation of Gods Temple and worship, to
Repentance, from their many and foul corruptions; especially the coming of
Christ the Messiah, the great Reformer and Refiner of his Church, being so
near at hand.

General parts. Besides the Title, herein are wrapped up in one continued
Sermon, these principal matters.

I. A Preface (aggravating the ungrateful wickedness of the Jews) drawn
from Gods singular love in Election of them in Jacob, when he rejected the
Edomites in Esau. c. 1.2. to 6. II. A sharp contestation against the People,
especially the Priest the keepers of the law, for their corruptions. viz. 1.
Against their contempt and pollution of the worship of God, which Priests
should have vindicated, by office c 1.6. to c. 2.10. 2. Against their corrupt
Marriages, both Marriages with infidels, and Polygamies. c. 2 10. to 17. 3.
Against the wickedness and perverseness of many, that made a mock of Gods
justice and judgments, c. 2.17. to c. 3.7. 4. Against their Sacrilege, in
robbing God of Tiths and Offerings etc. c 3.7. to 13. 5. Against their
Atheistical contempt of Gods fear, worship, and true repentance c. 3.15. to
4.5. III. An earnest invitation of all to repentance, that so they might be
prepared, duly to entertain the Messiah, who with his forerunner John the
Baptist, in the spirit and power of Elias, was now immediately to appear in
humane flesh, c. 4, 5, 6.
Thus far of the Old Testament, wherein the New Testament is veiled: Come we
next to consider of the New Testament, wherein the Old Testament is Revealed.

THE NEW TESTAMENT.
THE NEW TESTAMENT, Revealing fully and clearly the NEW COVENANT in Christ, and
the Spiritual administrations thereof, is contained in the Books written since
Christ's manifestation in the flesh. In Reading of the Old Testament, the veil
is untaken away: -- But (in the NEW TESTAMENT) the veil is done away in
Christ. And we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory. 2 Cor. 3.14.18. in
the Books of the Old Testament, God describes to us, The Old Covenant of Grace
in Christ veiled under Promises, Prophecies and Types: In the Books of the New
Testament The Lord delineates to us The New Covenant of Grace in Christ
unveyled, actually exhibited and performed; Christ being the body and substance
of all those ancient Types and Shadows, John 1.17. Hebr. 10.1. Coloss. 2.17.
The Center and meeting place of all the Prophecyes and Promises, Luke 1.70. and
24.27. Acts 10.43. 2 Cor. 1.20.

The Books of the New Testament are either 1 Historical. 2 Epistolicall, or 3
Prophetical, as further appears in the annexed Table.

I. HISTORICAL BOOKS.
THE HISTORICAL BOOKS of the New Testament are such a^ contain principally
matters of Fact, though matters of Faith and Doctrine are also interwoven. The
Histories of the New Testament, are I. Of Christ the head of the Church. II. Of
the Church of Christ, his body.

The HISTORY OF JESUS Four Evangelists, wherein Christ's Genealogy, Nativity,
Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, are described.
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, are usually called by way of emphasis, The four
Evangelists, because they alone wrote the Evangelicall History of Jesus Christ.
Matthew and John were Apostles Matthew. 10.23. Mark 3.18, 19. Mark and Luke were
(though not Apostles, yet) holy Apostolical men, the Apostles disciples,
Companions and assistants in the work of the Ministry.

The general and common Scope of these four Histories, and of the writing of
them is that which John expresses in particular, viz. That we might believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God; and that believing we might have
life through his name, John 20.31. Particular ends, and occasions may be noted
in the particular considerations of them.

This one History of Jesus Christ, is written by four several Penmen. The
Reasons thereof are worthy to be inquired into.

Ancient writers (who much please themselves with the mysteriousnesse of
Numbers) have excogitated diverse; Some fetch a Reason from the four Rivers of
Paradise. Origin. Some, from the four rings of the Ark wherein the the Tables
of the law were contained, Hieronym. Some from the four chief, Cardinal winds
Iraen. Advers. Haeres. l. 3. c. 11. Some think that the Gospel being to be
dispersed to the whole world, the world being divided into four chief parts,
therefore there were foure-Evangelists, and hence this History of Christ,
written by four Evangelists, is called Sancta Quadriga Domini i. e. The Lords
chariot drawn of four, wherein Christ rides as in triumph throughout the
world, to spread abroad the sweet odor of his knowledge, etc. D. Aurel.
Augustine. de consensu. Evangelistarum, lib. 1. c. 5, 6, 7. Tom. 4. August.
Expos. in Evang. Joan. Tract. 36. Iraen. quo supra Most accommodate that of the
four Haec autem animalia tria, sive leo, sive homo, sive vitulus in terra
gradiuntur: unde isti tres Evangelistae in his maxim occupati sunt, quae
Christus in carne operatus, and quae precepta mortalis vitae exercendae carnem*
portantibus tradidit. At vero Joannes super nubila infirmitat^s Humanae velut
Aquila volat, and lucem incommutabilis veritatis acutissimis atque firmissimis
o^ulis cordit in^u^tur. Aug. de consens. Evang^ de 1. c. 6. Tom. 4.
living creatures, Ezekiel* 1.5. and Rev. 4.6. to the number of the Evangelists,
but severally. Ambrose gives, the Man to Matthew, who begins with Christ's
pedigree; The Lion to Mark, who begins his History of the Lyon-like ministry of
John Baptist, that Evangelicall Elias, Christ's immediate forerunner; The Calfe
to Luke, who begins* his Gospel with the Nativity of Christ, and that in a
stable, there being no room for him in the Inn; and the Eagle to John, who in
the beginning of his Gospel soars aloft to that high mystery of Christ's
Divinity and Godhead, D. Ambros. Praefat. in Evang. secund. Luc. But leave we
these notions of wit, which seem rather to be similitudes, allusions, or
Allegories, used for illustration, rather then Arguments for demonstration, why
these four should write our blessed Saviors History.

We may rather conceive Christ's History was written by these four.

1. Because God, who appointed many witnesses of Christ's doctrine and works,
etc. not only to Jerusalem, all Judea, and Samaria, but to the utmost parts of
the earth, Act. 1.8. and 10.39, 41, 24. did peculiarly stir up these four
persons by his spirit to this work; for holy men writ who were moved, and as
moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. 2. This History of Christ, is the
History of Histories, of greatest worth in it self, and concernement to us:
and likely to be most opposed by the Devil, and the wicked world, etc. therefore
God (that requires two or three witnesses, for confirmation of things, Deuteronomy.
17. 6. Heb. 10.28.) makes use of four witnesses to write Christ's story, that
by the writings of four, every thing might he established, beyond suspicion.
3. That we may see the authority of the Gospel, depends not upon the Penmen
thereof, but upon the Holy Ghost that indites it, and therefore this History is
written, not only by Matthew and John, Apostles, who were eye and earewitnesses
of what Christ did and spoke; but also by Mark and Luke the Apostles followers,
who steadfastly believed the Apostles report, Luke 1.1, 2. though not^
eyewitnesses themselves, yet were incited thereto by the spirit. 4. That this
Gospel-History might be completed, one explaining what another left obscure,
for matter or order, one supplying what another had omitted, As, Matthew, who
wrote first, (as Pareus thinks Proem. in Matthew. p. 599.) viz. in the ninth
year after Christ's ascension, for the most part relates the things done, but
seldom insists upon the order of doing them. Mark who wrote next, viz. in the
tenth year after Christ's ascension, briefly relates what Matthew did more
largely, ( Mark being as an Abstract, or Epitome of Matthew,) but withal he
more insists upon the ordering and timing of things done. Luke, who wrote in
the fifteenth year, after Christ's ascension, having seen others writings,
propounds to himself to write of things from the very first, and that
methodically; It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of
things, from the very first, to write unto thee in Order, Luke 1.3. In many
things he shows the order of things by circumstances, and in most agrees with
Mark, whence Tertullian calls Lukes Gospel, Digestum Historiae Evangelicae, i.
e. An orderly digesting of the Evangelicall Story: but sometimes things
manifest in Matthew and Mark, he puts not in their own place. John who wrote
his Gospel in the two and thirtieth year after Christ's ascension, professedly,
(as Eusebius in hist. Eccles. testifies) adds the Acts of Christ in the first
year of his Ministry, omitted by the rest. And in the rest of his History, he
not only insists much upon Christ's doctrine not formerly spoken to, but also
expressly notes the Feasts of certain distinct years, incident in the time of
Christ's ministry, intimating that the Evangelicall History penned by others,
should be distributed into certain years, according to those Feasts. 5.
Finally, though the Holy Ghost could by one and the same contexture of words,
have given us the History of Christ's words and deeds, (as Gerson notes) yet
not without some great mystery therein, he pleased, sub quadam concordissima,
(si it a dicipossit) dissonantia -- i. e. under a certain Harmonious and most
concording dissonancy, (if we may so speak) to excite the minds of the
faithful, to the more humble and vigilant investigation of the truth; that so
it might appear, the four Evangelists) did not speak by mutual Conspiration,
but by divine Inspiration.
Matthew.
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW. The English word [ Gospel] comes from the old
Saxon word, [ Godspel] i. e. Good speech* The Greek word signifies
Good-tydings, or a Good-Message: This word Gospel in New Testament, is of
several acceptations. It is used.

1. In bad sense for a false pretended Gospel, Gal. 1.6, 7. 2. In good sense
and that either 1. Properly, and so the word is used, either 1. Generally, For
the Doctrine or Promise of salvation freely by Christ to all that will believe.
Thus the Gospel is everlasting, Rev. 14.6. one and the same under Old and New
Testament, Gal. 3.8. 2. Specially, for the Doctrine of grace in accomplishing
the Promise by Christ exhibited, this is peculiar to the New Testament Romans
1.1.2. 2 Cor. 4.4.
2. Metonymically. 1. For the Preaching, or Ministry of the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9.12.14. 2. For the History of Christ, who is the prime Subject of the Gospel.
Thus the Books of the four Evangelists are called Gospells.


This Book is called The Gospel according to Mat. because he was Penman of it.
Matthew, an Hebr. name, in Syriack (...) Mattha, some derive it from (...) Mas.
i. e. Tribute, others from (...) Mathach, i. e. to extend, to explain, etc. So
that Matthew should sound as much as, An explainer, viz. of Scripture. But
rather it is to be derived from (...) Nathan i. e. he has given or bestowed,
whence (...) Matthan, A gift; so Matthew no^es a Gift, viz. of God, vid. Greg.
Gregori Lexicon sanctum, Sect. 858. p. 641. Matthew was also surnamed Levi, in
Hebr. i. e. associated, Mark. 2.14. Luke 5.29. so he had two names. He was the
son of Alpheus Mark. 2.14. By profession a publicane, sitting at the Receipt
of Custom, Luke 5.27. Mark. 2.14. with Matthew. 9.9. his calling was very
infamous among the Jews, yet Christ calls him from the Receipt of custom, to be
a disciple, who presently obeyed, and made Christ a great feast, Luke 5.27,
28.29. Mark 2.14, 15. Matthew. 9.9, 10. He was one of the twelve Apostles. Matthew.
10.3. Penman of this book, Authority whereof was never questioned by the Church
of Christ. He is called, A most faithful Commentator of the Gospel, by Tertul.
lib. de carne Christi, c. 22. p. 310. edit Franeher, 1597. He preached the
Gospel to sinners, not only by word, but by exemplary correcting his own life*
Chrysostom. in Praesat. oper. imperfect.

Matthew wrote his Gospel as some think in the one and twentieth year after
Christ's ascension, Iraen. l. 3. c. 1. Or the fifteenth year, As Nicephorus l.
2. c. 45. Or the ninth year after Christ's ascension, as Pareus Proem. in
Matthew. p. 599. and Alsted in Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 123. p. 710

Occasion of Matthews Gospel, some declare thus. Matthew after he had first
preached to the Hebrews, and thence was to go to the Gentiles, he committed his
Gospel to writing; that so he might supply and compensate his absence by his
writing, left behind with them, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3, c. 24. and out of
him Nicephorus l. 2. c. 45

The language, in which Matthew wrote, some think was Hebrew; tha^ he being an
Hebrew, wrote in Hebrew to the Hebrews, diverse Ancient writers embrace this
opinion, Iraen. l. 3. c. 1. Athan^s. in Synops. p. 141. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l.
3. c. 24. Nazianz. in Carm. Hieron. Praefat. in 4. Evang. ad Damas. and in c.
11. Hoseae. August de consens* Evang. l. 1. c. 2. Nicephor. l. 4. c. 32. And
that it was translated into Greek, By John the Evangelist, as some; By James,
as others; By Luke and Paul, as others; By Mark, as others are of opinion. Some
think he wrote not in pure Hebrew, but in Syriack, being the Dialect then most
commonly used, Alsted. Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 123. But others Judge, Matthew
wrote not his Gospel originally in Hebrew, but in Greek, and that upon these
grounds* 1. The Hebrew Gospel of Munsterus his Edition is such for language, as
it is improbable it should be written by Matthew, or any other skillful in the
Hebrew tongue. 2. The same Authors who report Matthew, to have writ in Hebrew,
acknowledge the Greek Gospel of Matthew in the Apostles times, to be commended
to the Church as Authentic. Iren. l. 3. c. 39. Hieron. in Catal. illustr.
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 34. and 39. and l. 5. c. 10. etc. 3. The other Apostles
originally wrote in the Greek tongue, (as then most common) and that not only
promiscuously to all both Jews and Gentiles, but peculiarly when they wrote to
the Jews. As Author of the Epistle to Hebrews, Peter, James. And their
Apostolical function required them to write in the most known tongue, as most
to edifying. 4. Matthew's style plainly agrees with Mark's, differs not much
from John's, and though therein there be some Hebraismes, so there are in most
books of the New Testament* 5. Matthew interprets Hebrew names by Greek,
therefore he wrote in Greek not in Hebrew, e. g. Immanuel Matthew. 1.23.
Golgotha, Matthew. 27.33. Eli Eli lamasabachtani, Matthew. 27.46. 6. None can
certainly tell who should be the Author of the Greek version, if Matthew wrote
in Hebrew. And this opinion tends to destroy the credit and authority of
Matthew's Gospel in Greek.

Stope, To evidence to all, but especially to the believing Hebrews, with whom
he had preached, that this Jesus Christ, was the true Messiah; the true
promised seed of David and Abraham, Matthew. 1.1.

Principal parts. This History describes.

I. Christ's Birth, and there, His Genealogy, Conception, Nativity, Place where,
and some Consequents thereupon, c. 1.2. II. Christ's Life, wherein are
deciphered, 1. The things done in reference to Christ's threefold office. viz.
I. Priestly; His inauguration by John's public promulgation, c. 3. II. Kingly,
he combats with Satan and conquers him, c. 4. III. Prophetical, which he
executed. 1. Alone by himself, and that either, As a Prophet only, teaching, 1
The Causes of Godliness, c. 5. 2 The Duties of Godliness, c. 6. 3 The
impediments unto Godliness, c. 7. As a Prophet and King jointly, doing
miracles, c. 8. and 9. 2. Together with, or by his Apostles in their mjnistry,
c. 10. 2. The authority and esteem that Christ had. 1. With his own, c. 11. 2.
With others, both 1 Ecclesiastical Persons who conferred with him, that they
might ensna^e him and accuse him, c. 12. 2 And Political, whether with the
people, who flocked no hear him preach. c. 13. Or with the Magistrate, Herod's
opinion of him, c. 14.
III. Christ's death. Set forth by the Antecedents, Manner, and Consequents of
it. I. By the Antecedents of it, comprised in his journey to Jerusalem, wherein
no^e, 1. Whence he went, the term from which, viz. From Galilee, c. 15.
compared with c. 19. 1. while Christ was in Galilee. 1. He answers the
Pharisees and Sadduces about a sign, c. 16. 2. He is transfigured to encourage
both himself and his Apostles against his passion, c. 17. 3. He preaches
humility and love to his disciples, c. 18. 2. What way he went, viz. through
the coasts of Judea, where are recorded his words and deeds, c. 19. and 20. 3.
Whither he went, the term to which, viz. To Jerusalem. Here are declared, 1.
How he was entertained at Jerusalem, c. 21. 2. What he did there, viz. He
disputed with Sadduces and Pharisees, c. 22. Accused the Pharisees of
Hypocrisy, etc. c. 23. Foretold Ierusalems destruction, and the signs of his
coming to Judgment, c. 24. Admonishes all to prepare for the last judgment,
and describes it. c. 25.
II. By the manner of his death, where note 1. The Preface, or Harbenger of it,
his Agony in the Garden, Judas his Treachery, etc. c. 26. 2. The Progress made
to bring him to his end, both in the Ecclesiastical and Civil consistory. c.
27. 3. The Consummation of his passion, c. 27. III. By the Consequents of his
death, c. 28.

Mark.
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK. So denominated from Mark the Penman of it.

MARK, some derive from the Hebr. (...) Marak. i. e. He has polished, etc. As
Hebrews. Others rather take it to be a Latin name (made a Denizon in the
Greek tongue) and derived from the month of March, because Mark was borne in
that month, it being usual so to denominate men that were born in March,
Probus. He was also called John Act. 12.12. and 15.37. viz. John Mark. His
Father seems not to be mentioned in Scripture. His mother was that Mary in
whose house they were praying for Peter, when Peter brought out of prison by
the Angel, came and knocked at the door, Act. 12.12. He was cousin to Barnabas,
his Sisters Son, Col. 4.10. Though he was not an Apostle, yet he was an
Apostolical man. Some think he was one of the 70 Disciples. Hieronym* If so,
he both heard and saw Christ. However he was the follower of Paul and Barnabas,
Act. 12.25. And they had him to their Minister, Act. 13.5. Afterward when
there arose a sharp controversy betwixt Paul and Barnabas about Mark; Paul and
Barnabas departed a sunder, and Barnabas took Mark along with him to Cyprus,
Act. 15.37, 38, 39. And after this (as some think) Mark lived with Peter, who
calls him Marcus my son, 1 Pet. 5.13. From whose mouth he wrote the Gospel, as
some think, yet others are of opinion, there were two Marks, Vid* Jacob.
Laurent. in 1 Pet. 5.13. Irenaeus styles him The Disciple and interpreter of
Peter. Iraen. advers. Heraes. l. 3. c. 1. p. 229. edit. Colon. 1596.

Mark wrote his Gospel two years after Matthew, as some think, vid. Annotat.
in Irenaeum quo supr. p. 229.230. And he wrote it upon occasion of the request
of some Brethren at Rome, as some conceive. Epiphan Haeres. 51. Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. l. 6. c. 11. and l. 1. c. 15. Niceph. lib. 2. c. 15. Hieron. Catal.
illust. That conceit of Baronius that he wrote his Gospel in Latin, is rejected
as groundless. Gerh. loc. com. de Sac. Script. exeg. c. 9.. 244.

Scope; To describe the true Christ, and to prove that Jesus is the Christ. And
this he does compendiously, as Matthew had done before more Copiously. He also
notes the Series and Order of the History.

Principal parts. An Historical Narration of Christ's life, and death is
orderly and compendiously laid down; I. Christ's life and conversation is
described, 1. By his forerunner John Baptist, c. 1. 2. By things done by Jesus
Christ, either, 1. Before his transfiguration; as the Oracles which he
preached, and the Miracles which he wrought; The splendor and glory of both
which are much augmented, both by men, and by God. I. By men, and those both
Christ's friends, and Christ's Foes, 1. Christ's friends, as By Matthewes calling
to the Apostleship, c. 2. By the 12 Apostles being sent forth to preach, c. 3.
By the peoples flocking together to hear Christ's Doctrine, c. 4.5. 2. Christ's
foes, viz, By Christ's own Countrymen that despised him, c. 6. By the Scribes
and Pharisees, cavilling at him and his Disciples, c. 7.8. II. By God, in his
trans-figuration, c. 9. 2. In his Trans-figuration, c. 9. 3. After his
trans-figuration, where we have Christ's acts. 1. Before his entering into the
Holy City, c. 10. 2. At his entering into Jerusalem, c. 11. 3. After his
entrance, his 1. Disputation with the Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians.
c. 12. 2. Predictions of Ierusalem's destruction, and the end of the world, c.
13.


II, Christ's Passion and Death, is set forth, 1. By the Antecedents of it, c.
14. 2. By the manner of it, c. 15, 3. By the Consequents of it. His Burial,
Resurrection, Ascension, etc. c. 15.16.



Luke.
THe Gospel according to LUKE. So denominated from Luke the Penman of it,

LUKE some account an Hebrew name (...) Lokam, i. e. To him the Resurrection;
Theophilact thinks, that Luke and Cleophas first met Christ after his
Resurrection. But this is less probable, because Luke testifies, that he wrote
this History of Christ, according as things were delivered to him by Ministers
of the word, that were eyewitnesses -- Luke 1.1.2. Others rather count Luke a
Latin name from Lucius. Lucius derived a Luce Orient, i. e. from the morning
light, they were wont to impose this name upon such as were borne in the
morning, about Sunrising, etc. He was of Antioch in Syria, as Hieronym. and
Theophylact. By particular vocation, a Physician, Luke the beloved Physician,
Col. 4.14. And some think he was a most excellent Painter. Niceph. l. 6. c. 16.
and l. 15. c. 14. He was a faithful and constant companion of Paul, 2 Timothy
4.11. His fellow labourer, Philem. 24. And some think Luke is intended by that
brother whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches, 2 Cor. 8.18.
Bez. in loc. intimates this was Hierom's opinion. Though Chrysostom rather
thinks it was Barnabas, to whom Calvin subscribes, Calv. in loc. Piscat in loc.
Luke was an inseparable Companion of Paul and his fellow-worker in the Gospel;
says Irenalis l. 3. c. 14. Paul's follower; and though not an Apostle, yet
Apostolical; says Tertull. advers. Marcion. l. 4. c. 2. That Luke was most
skillful in the Greek tongue, not only Hieronym. in Isaiah c. 6. testifies;
but also his very style clearly evidenceth. Whereupon one says, It is known to
the learned, that Luke observed a more pure Hellenisme then the rest of the
Evangelists, Causab. Exerc. 2. c. 1. Paul converted Luke at The^es, think
Hieronym. Eusebius* and Niceporus. Luke lived a single life, and taught first
in France, Italy, Macedonia, and Dalmatia; thinks Epiphan. His death is
variously reported; he lived 84 years says Hieron. in Catal. and then dyed in
Bithynia. Hicrony. in Catal. At Ephesus, thinks Dorotheus. He was hanged on a
fruitful Olive Tree; thinks Nicephorus.

He wrote his Gospel about fifteen years after Christ's Ascension Niceph. and
that in the parts of Achaiah, Hieronym.

Occasion of his writing, some say was the appointment of Peter or Paul, that is
doubtful. Probably the request of Theophilus (supposed to be some eminent
Senator) to whom he directs both his Gospel, and the Acts. Though some take
this name Theophilus, for any go^ly man, Lover of God. Luke himself clearly
sets down one occasion, viz. The unsuccessefull attempts of many who wrote
false Gospels, Luke 1.1.2.

Scope, Besides the general aim of all the Evangelists, Luke seems
particularly to intend to supply what others had omitted, and to record things
from the very first, and that methodically in order; that Theophilus might know
the certainty of things wherein he had been instructed, Luke 1.3, 4.

Principal parts. In Lukes Evangelical History, are, I. The Preface to the
whole History c. 1. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. II. The Body of the History it self, which
contains a Narration of, I. Christ's life, Private or public. 1. Private
where 1. Of things before his Nativitie, and of his conception, c. 1. 2. Of his
Nativity it self, and his education, c. 2. 2. Public in the Ministry of the
Gospel, where are, I. His instalment into his public Ministry, c. 3. II. His
executing of his Ministry. 1. By himself alone, both in teaching, c. 4. and in
acting, c. 5. 2. By his Disciples also, which Disciples are either, Primary,
the 12 Apostles called and instructed, c. 6, 7, 8. And sent forth, ^. 9. Or
secondary, as the 70 Disciples sent to preach, c. 10.
II. Christ's Death is described. 1. By the Antecedents of it, viz. Christ's
words and works in his journey to Jerusalem; here are considerable, 1. The
term from which Christ went, from Galile c. 9. v. 51. 2. His passage it self,
wherein Christ discoursed of Gods worship and service, inward, and outward. 1.
Inward, as 1. Prayer, c. 11. 2. Faith, c. 12. 3. Repentance, whereof are laid
down, The Motives c. 13. The impediments, c. 14. The effects or fruits, c. 15.
2. Outward, viz. 1. Of eschewing evil, i. e. The abuse of riches c. 16. And
scandal c. 17. 2. Of doing good duties, c. 18.
3. The term to which he came, viz. to Jerusalem, where of his 1.
Entertainment c. 19. 2. Disputation, c. 20. 3. Prophecy c 21.
2, By the manner of it. Beginning of his Passion, c. 22. Progress c. 23.
Period, c. 23. 3. By the consequents of his death, c. 24.




John.
THe Gospel according to JOHN. This book is thus entitled from the Penman of
it, viz. Not John the Baptist (as he is surnamed Luke 1.63.) Nor John surnamed
Mark, Act. 15.37. but John the Apostle, compare Matthew. 10.2. with John 21.20,
24. This is the Disciple which testifyeth of these things, and wrote these
things. He wrote also three Epistles; and the Revelation in Patmos. JOHN is
Originally an Hebrew name, viz. (...) Iochanan. 1 Chronicles 12.22. Ierem. 40.13. it
is also sometimes written (...) I^hochanan, as in 1 Chronicles. 26.3. It is
compounded of (...) Jehovah, the proper and essential name of God, and (...)
chanan i. e. He has been gracious; whence comes (...) chen i. e. Grace; so
that JOHN imports, THE LORD HAS BEEN GRACIOUS; or, THE GRACE OF THE LORD. This
John was the son of Zebedee, and brother of James, all of them Fishermen by
trade: Matthew. 4.21. and 10.2. Mark 1.19. Luke 5.10. Salome (mentioned Mark 15
40. and 16.1.) is supposed to be John's mother. As John was with his Father,
and Brother in the Ship, mending their nets, Jesus called him and his Brother,
Matthew. 4.21. Luke 5.10. It is thought that John lived a single life: yet some
are of opinion that John was the Bridegroom at Cana in Galilie. Ioh. 2.1.9. It
is certain; that John was one1 of the three whom Christ took up with him to
mount Tabor to behold his trans-figuration, Matthew. 17.1. etc. Mark 9.2. Luke
9.28. etc. And z one of the two, whom Christ sent to prepare his last
Passover, Luke 22.8. And 3 that Disciple whom Jesus peculiarly loved above all
the rest, Ioh. 13.23. and 19.26. and 20.2, and 21.7.20. 4 Who leaned on Jesus
breast at supper; and 5 to whom Christ by a private token discovered that Judas
should betray him, Ioh. 13.23, 24, 25, 26. And 6 to whom Christ dying on the
Cross, commenced his own mother, Ioh. 19.25, 26, 27. After Christ's Ascension,
John, with Peter, healed miraculously the lame man as they were going into the
Temple, Act. 3.3, 4, etc. Preached boldly against all prohibitions, Act. 4.13,
19. Was sent to Samaria having received the word, from the Apostles at
Jerusalem, Acts 8.14. Tertullian says, that the Apostle John, after he in Rome
had been cast into burning Oil, and suffered nothing thereby, was banished
into an Island Tertul. lib. de Praescriptione adversus Haereticos cap. XXXVI. p.
211 edit. Franeker. 1597. Nero slung him into the burning Oil, as is thought:
Domitian Banished him into the Isle Patmos Rev. 1.9, 10. Whence its supposed,
he returned under Nerva; came to Ephesus in the 97 year of his age, where he
lived and taught till he was 99. He made his Sepulcher with his own hands. Left
his Disciples, Papias at Jerusalem; Policarpus at Smyrna; and Ignatius at
Antioch. He is supposed to write his Gospel toward the end of his life.
Alsted. Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 123. John's Gospel has still been had of most
high account with Antiquity. See Basil. in Homil. sub Princ. Joan. Chrysostom in
Prolog. Comment. super Joan* Ambros. l. 3. de sacram. c. 2. Cyrill in Prolog.
Joan. Hieronym. Proem. Comment. in Matthew. August. de Civit. dei. l. 10. c. 29.
and Tract. 56. in Joan.

Occasion of John's writing his Gospel, Ecclesiastical Writers tells us was
twofold. viz. 1. To oppose and confute the blasphemous heresies of Ebion and
Cerinthus, who denied the Divinity of Christ; hence John so clearly asserts it,
John. 1. See Iren. Advers. haeres. l. 3. c. 11. p. 257. edit. Colon. 1596.
Hieronym, in Proem. Comment. in Matthew. 2. To supply what the other three
Evangelists had omitted, who principally relate things done by Christ, but for
one year wherein Christ suffered, after John was cast into prison, Eusebius. Hist
l. 6. c. 13. ex Clem. Alexandr.

Scope of John's writing is expressly noted, John 20.31. These are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that
believing ye might have life through his name.

The Principal parts, or General Branches of this Hist. are, I. A Description
of Christ's Person according to his divine and humane nature, c. 1. II. A
Delineation of Christ's office, discharged by him in his four ominent journeys
to Jerusalem, viz. 1. At the feast of the Passover, John 2.12, 13. Here are
considerable 1. The term whence he went, from Cana of Galilee, c. 2. 2. His
abode there, the doctrine that he preached, and the Acts he did, c. 2.14. etc.
and ^ 3, and 4.1, 2, 3. 3. His return from Jerusalem through Samaria, and his
deeds and act^ there, c. 4. 2. At the feast of Pentecost* wherein 1. He cured
him that had the palsy thirty eight years, c. 5. 2. He fed the multitude above
five thousand with five loaves and two fishes, and preached himself the true
Mannah, c 6. 3. At the feast of Tabernacles, where are 1. Christ's coming to
Jerusalem, c. 7, 1. to 15. 2. His abode there; during which, he taught, c. 7,
14. to the end. He disputed, c. 8. He cured the man borne blind, c. 9. He
preached himself, the true shepherd of his sheep, c. 10. 3. His return
thence beyond Jordan, c. 10.40. etc, whence he came again into Judea to
Bethany, to raise Lazarus from the dead, c. 11. 4. At the Celebration of the
true Passover, when Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us. Where Christ's
death is described by the Antecedents, Manner, and Consequents of it. 1. By the
Antecedents going before his death, viz. 1. His actions, entering into the City,
c. 12. Washing his disciples feet at supper, c. 13. 2. His words spoken, either
At supper, c. 13, 31. to the end, and c. 14. as they were going to the garden
of Gethsemane, 1 Warning his disciples of the worlds persecution, c. 15. 2
Comforting them against the Cross, c. 16. 3 Praying for them and all his
Elect, c. 17. 2. By the manner of his Passion, 1. In the garden, c. 18, 1. to
15. 2. In the Highpriests palace, c. 18, 15. to 28. 3. In the Hall of
judgment before Pilate, c. 18, 28. to c. 19. v. 17. 4. In the place of
execution, c. 19. ver. 17. to the end. 3. By the Consequents of his Passion,
viz. Christ's appearing after his Resurrection, 1. To Mary Magdalene and the
disciples in Judea, c. 20. 2. To the disciples fishing in Galilee, c. 21.




The Acts:
THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST, his body, and that in the purest
Primitive Apostolical times, is contained in the Acts OF THE HOLY APOSTLES. So
denominated from the principal subject matter of this Book, viz. The Acts of
the Apostles in the infancy of the Primitive Church, therein recorded
Historically.

Penman of this History was Luke the beloved Physician, who also wrote the
Gospel (of whom see what is there spoken) as appears 1. By the Preface or
Introduction here prefixed, wherein he mentions the former Treatise of the
Gospel penned by him; names Theophilus to whom he directed particularly this
History of the Apostles, as well as that History of Christ; and also he
connects or knits this Book to his Gospel, by continuing the History where he
formerly left. viz. At the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ, which
here is somewhat more fully described, and what followed thereupon, Act. 1.1,
2. So that his Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles are but as one continued
History. 2. By the very style, which seems notably to indigitate Luke unto us,
partly it being complete and polished Greek becoming Luke an accurate Grecian,
who had also most diligently perused the Septuagint version; partly it being
replenished with Hebraismes, suitable to Luke's native Genius, being by country
a Syrian of Antioch, (the Syrian language being one of the Hebrew dialects)
partly because herein sometimes is the Language of a Physician, very agreeable
to Lukes profession, as Act. 17.16. His spirit was stirred in him. (...) i. e.
His spirit was in a Paroxysme; the word is used by Physicians to signify a
sharp fit of an ague, fever, etc. and again, the Contention was so sharp, (...)
i. e. there befell a Paroxysme, -- this word is not used in all the New
Testament by any, but Luke, and Paul, (whose companion Luke was) 1 Cor. 13.5.
Heb. 10.24. 3. By the consent of ancient and modern writers. No doubt this
Book was written by Luke of Antioch, the Physician, Hieron in Praefa^. Act.
Luke the follower of the Apopostle and companion of all his Travel, wrote the
Gospel, -- and put forth also another excellent volume entitled the Acts of
the Apostles. Hieronym. de vir illustr. And again, the Acts, of the Apostles
seem to import a bare history of the infancy of the newborn Christ, but if we
know Luke the Physi^ian to be the penman of them, whose praise is in the
Gospel, we shall consider also that all his words are a medicine for a
languishing soul. Hieron. praefat. in Act. and out of him Beda, (...) i. e.
The book of the Acts which Luke wrote. Oecumen. in Scholiis. None but the
unlearned and unskilful, can doubt whether Luke were Penman of the Acts, etc.
Erasmus.

Occasion. It is thought that Luke wrote this History at Rome, during Paul's
imprisonment there. Hieron. de vir illustr. And that at the request of the
faithful brethren at Rome: and by the command of Paul, Dorotheus and Nicephor.
Hist. l. 2. c. 43. Alsted. Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 123. The time of writing is
referred to the sixtieth year of Christ, the fourth of Nero, 27th. after Paul's
conversion. But the peculiar guidance of the Holy Ghost, was the principal
cause of Lukes writing both this and the former Book.

Scope. To describe unto us the Rise, Growth, State and practice of the
Primitive Christian Church in her infancy, in the purest Apostolical times,
how she observed and obeyed Christ's Commandments to his Apostles, after his
Resurrection and before his Ascension, speaking to them of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.2, 3. and this both in matters of
faith, worship, Church Communion, and Church Government; that herein the
Primitive Church might be an exemplary Pattern to the following Churches in
all succeeding ages. So that this is a most useful Book to the Church of God.

Principal branches. The Acts of the Apostles, are laid down in this History,
1. More generally. The Acts of all the Apostles. I. After Christ's Resurrection,
till his Ascension, c. 1, 1. to 12. II. After Christ's Ascension till the feast
of Pentecost. viz. Their devotion, and their Election of Matthias to the
Apostleship in room of Judas, c. 1, 12. to the end. III. At the feast of
Pentecost, how they preached and walked after they had extraordinarily received
the Holy Ghost, c. 2. IIII. After the feast of Pentecost, viz. 1. How the
Apostles, (upon report of the miracle that Peter and John had wrought upon the
lame man, and the doctrine they had boldly taught, against all the oppositions
and threats of the Priests and Elders) powered forth their prayers against the
enemies of Christ and his Gospel. c. 3, 4. to 32. 2. How themselves provided
for the necessities of Christians that wanted, c. 4, 32. to c. 5. 3. How they
wrought wonders to the conversion of many, c. 5, 12. to 17. 4. How the Apostles
were imprisoned and beaten for preaching Jesus Christ, and how stoutly they
behaved themselves under these sufferings. c. 5, 17. to the end. 5. How thu^
Apostles appointed seven Deacons to take care of the poor, whereof Steven
being one, wrought miracles, disputed, was accused, answered his Accusation,
and is barbarously stoned to death, c. 6. and 7. 6. How the Apostles continuing
at Jerusalem, in the great persecution occasioning the dispersion, sent Peter
and John to Samaria to preach to them. The Holy Ghost also sending Philip to
baptize the Ethiopian Eunuch, and to preach, c. 8. In which persecution, Saul
being a great actor, was wonderfully converted and called to the Apostleship,
c. 9, 1. to v. 32.
2 More specially. The Acts of Peter and Paul are storied. I. Peter's acts. viz.
1. His miracles wrought, recovering Aeneas and raising Dorcas from death, c. 9,
32. to the end. 2. His doctrine, preached to Cornelius a Gentile, c. 10.
Defended against them of the circumcision, that opposed his communion with the
uncircumcised, c. 11. 3. His imprisonment and miraculous release, c. 12. II.
Paul's Acts are recorded according to four remarkable per^grinations or
journeys which he took; viz. 1. His first journey was with Barnabas, to the
Gentiles. His Deeds and Acts in that journey, are in c. 13.14. 2. His second
journey with Silas, from Antioch to Jerusalem, where 1. The occasion of the
journey, viz. the doctrine of certain coming from Jerusalem, That
circumcision was necessary to salvation; whereupon that famous Synod was called
at Jerusalem, c. 15. 2. Paul's Deeds and Acts, while he was in Asia, c. 16. 3.
Paul's Deeds and Acts while he abode in Graecia, until he returned again to
Antioch, c. 17. to c. 18. verse. 22. 3. His third journey undertaken for the
Ephisians sakes, where note 1. Whence he went. c. 18.23, etc. 2. What way he
traveled, Going, c. 19. Coming, c. 20 3. Whither he came, viz. to Jerusalem.
c. 21.22, 23. Then to Cesarea, where consider things done under Felix, c. 24.
under, Festus, c. 25. under ^grippa, c. 26. 4 His fourth and last Journey which
he took toward Rome, c. 27, 28.




II. EPISTOLICAL BOOKS.
THE EPISTOLICAL BOOKS of the New Testament, are, All the Epistles, written by
the Apostles; the Apostles being oft-times unable to instruct by their
personal presence, supplied that by writing Epistles. These Epistles are
either written, 1. To the Believing Gentiles, Or 2. To the Believing Jews; as
was formerly noted,

The Apostle Paul wrote his Epistles, which are either 1. General written to
whole Churches: Or 2. Particular to some select particular persons. Some do
rank Paul's Epistles thus, according to the persons to whom they were written,
viz.

Paul's Epistles were written either To whole Churches, either in Europe, as to
the Churches at Rome. -- in Italy. Corinth. in Grecia Thessalonica in Grecia
Philippi. -- in Thracia
Asia, as to the Churches at Galatia in Asia Minor Ephesus in Asia Minor
Colosse in Asia Minor
Judea, and in other Nations dispersed, as the Epistle to the Hebrews.
To particular persons; as to Timothy. Titus. Philemon.



Others endeavor, and that not unprofitably to marshall Paul's Epistles, in the
Order of times and seasons, wherein they were severally written, which Order is
not observed as they are placed in our Bibles. And though the punctual time
when every Epistle was written, cannot evidently and infallibly be demonstrated
either by the Epistles themselves, or other Ecclesiastical Histories, yet we
may have good probabilities hereof, as may appear in this Type or Table
ensuing, viz.

Paul's Epistles were written, 1. Before his Bonds and Captivity at Rome. 2. In
his Bonds and Imprisonment there.

I. Before his Bonds and Captivity at Rome, as these seven Epistles in this
Order, viz. 1. First of all seems to be written the I. To Thessal. From Athenes
by Tychicus. For Paul by reason of the tumultuous Jews going from Thessalonica
to Berea, and thence to Athenes Act. 17. thence he confirms the Thessalonians
in the faith by his first Epistle, written about seventeen years after his
Conversion, ninth year of Claudius, and nineteenth year after Christ's
passion, when the Council at Jerusalem was held. Hieron. 2. About the same
time, and in the same place Paul seems to have written the II. To Thessal. by
Tychicus also. For what he had written in the former of Christ's coming, and of
the end of the world, he further explaines in this, and vindicates. 3. The I.
To Timothy seems written by Paul, from Laodicea, of Phrygia Palatina, sent by
Tychicus the Deacon, when returning the second time from Jerusalem, he passed
through the Region of Galatia and Phrygia, Acts 18.23. and before he returned
to Ephesus, Acts 19.1. For he promises to Timothy, that he would shortly come
thither. 1 Timothy 3.14. viz. in the nineteenth year after his Conversion, (as is
thought) in the eleventh of Claudius, and the one and twentieth after Christ's
death. 4. Next seems written the I. To Corinth, from Ephesus, while Paul stayed
there, Act. 19.9. (and this rather then from Philippi, as the Greek postscript
intimates,) and before he went through Macedonia,) 1 Cor. 16.5. for he passed
through Macedonia, after his three years abode at Ephesus. See Acts 19.1.8.10.
compared with Act. 20.1. about the end of which time he is supposed to write
this Epistle at Ephesus before Pentecost. For he says, I will tarry at
Ephesus, until Pentecost; 1 Cor. 16.8. which when he wrote, he seems plainly to
be at Ephesus: And this Pentecost went before that Pentecost, when he intended
to be at Jerusalem, Act. 20.16. which fell out about the sixty fourth year
after Christ's death, in the ninth of Nero, which year coming to Jerusalem with
the Contribution, he was cast into Bonds, in the thirtieth year after his
Conversion, Athanas. in Synops. Chrysostom. 5. Not much after this first
Epistle, Paul wrote his II. To Corinth, from Philippi when after Demetrius his
tumult, he left Ephesus and came into Macedonia, Acts 20.1, 2, 3. for then he
must needs come to Philippi, (which was the first city upon the coast of
Macedonia, Act. 16.12.) Hither refer that promise of his that he would come
to Corinth, with them of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 9.4. that is there said to be done,
when after he had passed thorough Macedonia into Greece, he had stayed three
months, Ast. 20.2, 3. and after, we never read that he returned into Greece.
6. In the same passing through Macedonia; At Nicopolis not far distant from
Philippi, before he came into Greece, Paul is supposed to have written his
Epistle To Titus whom he calls from Creet to Nicopolis, because there he had
determined to winter, Tit. 3.12. though he seems after to have altered his
purpose, and to have wintred in Grecia, as is thought at Corinth. 7. The
eminent Epistle to the Romans seems to have been written, whilst Paul was
wintring at Corinth. For after that, we read not that he returned to Corinth,
but having wintred in Greece because of the treacheries of the Jews, returning
through Macedonia, he came into Syria with the Contribution, whence at last he
was carried bound to Rome, in the sixty fourth year of Christ, the ninth of
Nero, and in the thirtieth year after his own Conversion. So that the II. To
Corinth, To Titus, and To the Romans, all these three seems to bewritten, as is
said, and all within the space of half a year: but the Epistle to the Romans
seems to be the last he wrote before he came captive to Rome. Origin and
Chrysostom prove it was written after both the Epistles to Corinth: because in
both those Epistles he stirs them up to a Collection for the poor Saints at
Jerusalem, 1 Cor. 16.1. to 6. 2 Cor. 8. and 9. which contribution he says he
had received from the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia, Romans 15.25. to carry it
into Judea; and he brought it to Jerusalem, in his last journey into Syria,
described Act. 20. and 21. as himself testifies in his Apology before Felix,
Act. 24.17.
II. In his Bonds and imprisonment at Rome, and this under, 1. His former. 2.
His later imprisonment. I. Under his former imprisonment, when he was in more
free custody at his first coming to Rome Act. 28.16, 20, 30, 31. Then probably
he wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews, for he promises the Hebrews to come and
see them, Heb. 13.23. therefore then he had some hopes of liberty, or it may be
he had liberty at that time and preached in Italy. whence perhaps the Epistle
is said to be written, not from Rome, but from Italy. II. Under his latter
imprisonment when he was clapped up in close^ restraint. Then he wrote his other
six Epistles (in which he mentions his chains) and probably he wrote them in
this order, viz. 1. To the Galatians to whom he writes that he bears in his
body the mark^^ of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17. i. e. either his chains,
torments, or brands. 2. To the Ephesians, to whom he mentions his chain, Ephesians.
6.20. 3. To the Philippians, whom he salutes in the name of diverse of Caesar's
household, Phil. 4.22, 4. To the Colossians whom he requests to remember his
bonds, Colossians 4.18. 5, To Philemon, Paul wrote being a Prisoner and now
aged, Phil. 9. and it is thought he wrote this Epistle after his first Apology,
in which all men forsook him, but the Lord stood by him, and delivered him from
the mouth of the Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17. Therefore having some dawnings of hope that
he should be delivered, he desires Philemon to prepare him a lodging, for I
trust (says he) that through your prayers I shall be given unto you, Phil. 22.
but the Lord had otherwise determined. Some think this Epistle was written
after the II to Timothy, because there he bids Timothy and Mark to come to him,
whom here he intimates to be with him, ver. 1.24. But others collect rather the
contrary, 1 Partly because here he desires a lodging to be provided for him,
ver. 22. but in that Epistle he is not solicitous about his lodging, but about
his departure out of this life, 2 Timothy 4.6. 2 Partly because, there he
complains that Demas had forsaken him, 2 Timothy 4.10. But here he salutes
Philemon in Demas his name, ver. 24. Therefore this Epistle was written before
Demas his desertion, or Demas had returned again unto him. 6. Last of all, a
little before his Martyrdom (whichfell out in the thirty seventh year of
Christ, in the fourteenth year of Nero, and in the thirty fifth year after his
own conversion) Paul wrote his II. to Timothy, as all Circumstances evince, and
the Epistle it self intimates. I am now ready to be offered, and the time of
my departure is at hand, 2 Timothy 4.6.


This noting the several times of the Apostles writing his Epistles is
useful, To let us see why the Apostle wrote so variously about the same
things, as Circumcision and other Ceremonies, As; To the Romans, that they
should receive the weak, etc. about Ceremonies and indifferent things, Romans
14. 1. etc. But to the Galatians, and Colossians, utterly condemns use of
Circumcision, etc. Gal. 5.2. etc. Col. 2, the reason is the difference of
times, Chrysostom. Ceremonies were always Mortales, mortal; at Christ's death
became Mortuae, dead; only Moses must be honorably buried, for the weak Jews
the use of them was permitted a while; but after that they became Mortiferae,
deadly to them that used them.

But here Paul's Epistles shall be considered according to the method and
distribution of all the Books of the New Testament first proposed: and that the
rather, because so we shall view them as they stand in order in our Bibles.

And first of Paul's General Epistles to whole Churches, which are nine, viz.

Romans.
THe Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the ROMANS. So denominated, 1. Partly from
the object to whom the Epistle is written, viz. The believing Romans, Romans
1.7. When this Epistle was written, there was so famous a Church at Rome, that
their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World, Romans 1.8. Yea there were
even in Caesar's household that had received the faith. Phil. 4.22. But by whom
or when was the Church of the Romans first planted? Answ. Scripture is silent,
Papists say by Peter, Bel^^m. de Pont. Romans l. 2. c. 2. But Peter never was at
Rome, much less planted the Church there D. Pareus in Romans 16. Pub. II.
Barnabas is supposed to have preached Christ at Rome, and to have converted the
Romans, under the Reign of Tyberius, if Clement may be believed. Recognition.
Clementis lib. 1. But now Rome is as infamous as once it was famous, being the
seat of Antichrist, Rev. 17, 9, etc. the Spiritual Egypt Rev. 11.8. Sodom
Rev. 11.8. And Babylon devoted to destruction, Rev. 18.2, etc. 2. Partly from
the Penman of the Epistle, viz. Paul, Romans 1.1.

PAUL is a Latin name from Paulus, i. e. a little one, so the Romans were wont
to call them that were of a lesser stature, he seems most to be delighted with
this Roman name, being appointed Apostle to the Gentiles. Some think he first
had this name given him, upon occasion of his conversion of Sergius Paulus the
Deputy, Act. 13.7.9.12* Hieronym. de claris Script, Before he was called Saul,
i. e. desired, asked, etc. From the Hebrew (...) Shaal, i. e. he has asked,
desired, etc. It is not likely that he changed his name Saul into Paul: but
rather that he had two names, as all the Jews had that were freeme^ of Rome;
Saul then denoted his nation and Religion, Paul signified his Roman freedom.
And Scripture favors this that he had two names, saying, Saul, which also is
Paul, Act. 13.9. The History of Paul is notably described in the New Testament,
especially in Phil. 3. 1 Timothy* 1. And in Act. 13. to the end of the Book, but
more summarily, Act. 22.3, to 22. and 26.4. to 24. He was a Jew by Nation; of
the Tribe of Benjamin; of the Province of Cilicia; borne in the City Tarsus,
(which being a Colony and having the privilege of the Roman freedom, Paul
though of Jewish Parents, yet says he was a Roman freeborn, Act. 22.7.28.)
circumcised the eighth day; brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; a great
proficient above many in the Jewish Religion; in his Zeal persecuting all that
seemed to oppose it; held the garments of those that stoned Stephen, consenting
to his death; made havoc of the Church, etc. But at last, as he was in his
Circuit of persecution, he was miraculously converted of a Wolf to become a
Lamb, and of a Persecuter to be a prime Apostle, in his Apostleship he suffered
and labored more then all the rest of the Apostles; was peculiarly sent to
teach the Gentiles. At last he was carried bound to Rome, and there he was be
headed by Nero in seventeenth year after Christ's Ascension, in the fourteenth
year of Nero, and thirty fifth year after his conversion, and buried in the
Ostiense way. Hieronym. He wrote fourteen Epistles, of which one said, As often
as I read Paul, me thinks I hear not words so much as thunders, Paulum
quotiesc^nque lego, videor mihi non verba au^dire, sed tonitrua. Hieronym.
contr. Iovinian. de Epist. Paulin.

His Epistle to the Romans, though no^ first written, yet is set first. 1. By
reason of the dignity of the Romans to whom it was written, Rome being the
Seat of the Empire, and Head of the World. 2. Because of the largeness of the
Epistle, this being the longest of all the Epistles. As Isaiah is set first
being the longest of all the Prophets. 3. But especially from the dignity of
the matter, and dexterity in handling it. The Body of Divinity is so admirably
herein handled, espicially the principal points of Election, Reprobation,
Redemption, Faith and Justification by Faith, etc. that it is deservedly called
by some Clavis Theologiae, the Key of Divinity; and Methodus Scripturae, the
Method of Scripture.

When it was written, See in former Table. Where it was written, is to be
considered. Origin in Praefat. Comment. thinks at Corinth. 1. Because he
commends Phaebe to the Romans, Romans 16.1. She was a servant to the Church at
Cenchrea, which is a Port of Corinth. 2. Because he salutes them in the name of
Gaius his Host, etc. Romans 16.23. And Gaius a Corinthian, and there Baptized by
Paul 1 Cor. 1.14. 3. Because he salutes them in the name of Erastus
Chamberlain of the City, Romans 16.23. Who abode at Corinth, 2 Timothy 4.20. 4. The
postscript testifies thus much.

Occasion and Scope of this Epistle seems to be this. The report that Paul had
received of some disagreements both in judgment and affection, in them of the
Church of Rome, who were partly believing Jews, partly believing Gentiles. The
Jews either wholly opposing the Gospel, or mingling Law and Gospel together in
the case of Justification* and all of them excluding the Gentiles from the
fellowship of Christ, and despising them, insisting too much upon the
Prerogative of the Jew: Contrariwise the Gentiles, knowing that the Jews were
rejected of God, and the Gentiles implanted in their stead, too much insulted
over them as a people cast away, boasting of their own wisdom and virtues, and
using their Christian liberty with offense. Now to reconcile these
Controversies, and to settle them both in the truth, and in unity of judgment
and affection, the Apostle being hindered from coming to them deals by letters;
Demonstrating that neither Jews had cause to boast of their righteousness and
Prerogatives, nor Gentiles of their wisdom: both of them naturally being
liable to eternal condemnation notwithstanding, and both of them being to be
justified by Faith in Christ alone, and that they should not abuse Grace, but
walk in newness of life, etc.

General parts. In this Epistle to the Romans are chiefly three parts.

I. A Preface to the whole Epistle, c. 1.1. to 17, II. A Treatise, containing
the main substance of the Epistle, which is either, Informatory and Doctrinall.
or Hortatory, and Practical. 1. Doctrinall, viz, Touching the cause of our
justification, more near, more remote. 1. More near cause of justification
Where, 1. The false cause, viz. Works, is removed, c. 1.17. to end. c. 2. and
3.1, to ver. 21. 2. The true cause, viz. Faith, is 1. Defended from Calumnies,
c. 2.21. to the end, and c. 3. 2. Confirmed by Abraham's example, and
testimonies, c. 4. 3. Explicated by the fruits or effects thereof; 1. Inward,
viz. Peace with God, and full assurance of Faith, c. 5. 2. Outward, viz. 1
Newness of life, c. 6. 2 Freedom from the curse of the Law, c. 7. 3 Constancy
in the state of Grace, against all condemnation, notwithstanding al infirmities
or afflictions, within or without them that are in Christ, c. 8.

2. More Remote cause of justification viz. Predestination where, of 1. The
Jews rejection, described, 1. By the cause thereof, Gods pleasure, the Jews
unbelief, c. 9. 2. By the signs and effects thereof, their blindness c. 10.
2. The Jews Restoration, and of the remnant to be saved, c. 11.

2. Practical and Hortatory, inciting to good-works, and duties; either, 1.
General, toward God and man, c. 12. 2. Special duties, either in 1. Things
necessary, toward Superiors, c* 13* 2 Things indifferent and Arbitrary,
toward inferiors, and the more infirm in Faith, c. 14. and, c. 15. ver. 1. to
14.

III. A conclusion of the whole Epistle, consisting of 1 Excuses about his
freedom in writing to them, his not coming to them; and other advertisements
touching his purpose of seeing them, and his desires of their prayers, c. 15.
ver. 14. to the end. 2. Commendations and Salutations, c. 16.
I Corinth:
THe first Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the CORINTHIANS.

So denominated from the Penman thereof, Paul (of whom in Epistle to the
Romans) and from the object to whom he wrote it, viz. The Corinthians; or the
Church of God at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. Corinthians was an eminent City of Achaia
(which Achaia by an Isthmus was annexed to Greece, near to Athens) seated in an
Isthmus, or a little tract of Land betwixt two Seas, the Aegean and Ionian Sea,
A most famous Mart, very populous, and flowing with wealth, it was Lumen and
decus totius Graeciae. Cic. pro leg. Manil. i. e. The Light and glory of all
Greece: yet very infamous for luxury and multitudes of vices. Once utterly
destroyed by L. Mummius the Roman Consul; but after for the opportunity of
situation restored to its ancient splendor by Augustus. D. Pareus in prolegom.
in I ad Corinth. Paul coming from Athens to Corinth, laid the first foundation
of a Church there, 1 Cor. 3.10. He was the^r Spiritual Father that begot them,
1 Cor. 4.15. Converting, by his preaching, Crispus and Sosthenes chief Rulers
of the Jewish Synagogue there; and many other Corinthians; among whom Paul
continued preaching, a year and six Months; God assuring him by night in a
Vision, that he had much people in that City. Act. 18.1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 17. And
this Church of Corinth grew one of the most eminen^ Churches for all manner of
spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7.

When and where this Epistle was written, See in the Table before Epistle to
Romans. As the Epistle to Romans is set first for Doctrine of Faith: So this
is set second for Doctrine of Church Government, excellently handled therein.

Occasion of writing this Epistle, seems to be twofold. 1. The information
that Paul had from them of the House of Cloe, of the many and woeful distempers
that infested the Church of Corinth after Paul's departure, as 1 Schisms and
Divisions 1 Cor. 1.11. etc. 2 Many notorious scandals, as Lusts, Incest,
Covetousness, Lawsuits, etc. 1 Cor. 5. and 6. 3 Idolatrous Communion with
Infidels in their Idoll-feasts, 1 Cor. 8. and 10. 4 Uncomely habits in public
Assemblies, 1 Cor. 11.3, to 17. 5 Prophanations of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor.
11.17. to the end. 6 Barbarous confusion in their public Church Assemblies, 1
Cor. 14. And 7 finally such Epicure-like profanesse, as to deny the
Resurrection and eternal life, 1 Cor. 15.12, etc. 2. The writing of some of
the Corinthians unto the Apostle for satisfaction in some particular cases, as
1 about Marriage. 2 About Things sacrificed to Idols. 3 About Spiritual gifts.
4 About Prophesying. And 5 about charitable Collections for the Saints in
Judea. 1 Cor. 7.1.

Scope. The Apostle therefore in this Epistle principally endeavors, To apply
healing medicines speedily to all the evils and maladies that began to grow in
that Church; and to give them satisfactory Resolutions in all the particulars,
wherein they craved his advise from the Lord.

General parts. In this I. Epistle to Corinthians, consider I. The exordium or
Preface to the whole Epistle, c. 1. v. 1. to 10. II. A Treatise of several
subjects, according as the present state and necessity of the Church required,
in respect of their present corruptions abounding; and Paul's Resolution in
some doubts propounded. Herein therefore the Apostle, 1. Sharply taxes their
Schisms and divisions about their Ministers, and their diversity of gifts, as
eloquence, etc. for which some factiously admired one, some another, c. 1, 10.
to c. 5. Herein note 1. An emphaticall exhortation to unity, c. 1.10. to 14. 2.
Paul's tacit clearing himself from being any cause of these divisions among
them, either 1 By His Baptism, he baptizing very few, and none in his own name,
v. 14. to 17. or 2 By his Preaching amongst them, for he preached Christ
crucified, not with wisdom of words to entice them, but in demonstration of
the spirit and power to save them, yet his doctrine was far above the reach
of carnal men c. 1, 17. to the end and, c. 2. 3. He shows why he preached to
the^ so plainly, because they were carnal, c. 3, 1. to 5. 4. That their
Teachers should be no such cause of divisions; They are but Ministers, can do
nothing without God, and therefore he warnes their Teachers to take heed that
they build upon Christ the foundation; and people not to admire men's persons,
c. 3, 5. to the end. 5. He directs them what account to have of him and his
Ministry, and how little cause they have to prefer their other eloquent
teachers before him, c. 4. 2. He severely reproves diverse notorious scandals
amongst them. As 1. Their suffering of the incestuous person among them, who
should have been delivered to Satan by their Church Governors, c. 5. 2. Their
covetous and quarrelsome lawsuits even before Infidels, c. 6, 1. to 12. 3.
Their fornications, which they counted as indifferent things, c. 6.12. to the
end. 3. He resolves their doubts or questions propounded to him, touching 1.
Marriage, and therein concerning 1. Conjugall benevolence, c. 7.1. to. 8. 2.
The unmarried and widows, v. 8, 9. 3. Divorce, v. 10. to 25. 4. Virgins, v*
25. to the end.
2. Idolothytes, or things sacrificed to Idols, showing that they ought not
(under pretense of Christian liberty,) eat to the scandal of their brethren, c.
8: as he preached without wages (which yet were due to him) that he might avoid
the calumny of his Antagonists; and became all things to all men to gain them.
c. 9. By other arguments he condems eating things sacrificed to Idols, as being
idolatry, or communion with devils, and inconsistent with communion with Christ
in his supper, c. 10. and c. 11.1.
4. He directs and endeavors to reform their practice in diverse particulars.
1. How men and women are to behave themselves in point of their outward Habits,
in public Assemblies, c. 11, 2. to 17. 2. How the Lords Saints ought to be
managed and received c. 11. v. 17. to the end. 3. How all spiritual gifts are
to be employed for promoting the Churches profit and preserving the unity of
the mystical body, c. 12. beyond all which gifts, grace, as love, etc, is much
to be preferred; yea gifts without grace are as nothing, c. 13. 4. How they
should prophecy, ( the woman still keeping silence in their Churches) c. 14. 5.
He condemns and confutes the profane error of them that denied the
Resurrection, c. 15. 6. He instructs them about the Collections for the Saints
at Jerusalem, ^c. 16, 1.2, 3, 4.
III, The Conclusion of the whole Epistle, with certain advertisements about
more private affairs, exhortations to certain duties, and salutations, c. 16.5.
to the end


II Corinth.
THe II. Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the CORINTHIANS, So called from Paul
the Penman of it. (of whom see before in Epistle to the Romans) and from the
parties to whom he wrote, viz. The Church at Corinth, (of which see in I. to
Corinth.) and to all the Saints in all Achaia, 2 Cor. 1.1. probably there being
many Saints in that Province, who could not so safely and conveniently meet in
Church-Assemblyes, but were dispersed up and down by reason of the turbulency
of those times. Calvin in loc.

When this Epistle was written, see before in the Table.

Occasion of this Epistle seems to be, those Calumnies and aspersions cast upon
Pa^ls words and actions by false Apostles and other his adversaries after his
former Epistle; they charged him with l^vity, that he came not to them
according to his premise: with pride and tyrannical severity, because of the
incestuous person: with less^ning the authority of the law: and that however he
was glorious in his letters, yet in person he was but base, etc. Paul therefore
wipes off these aspersions, and shows that he wrote not his former Epistle to
them for any such ends, but for promoting of their salvation. So that this
Epistle is for most part of it Apologeticall, viz. Paul's Apology against his
adversaries calumnies, and this the end and Scope of it; as also to testify his
love to them, and to prevent his having sorrow from them, when he should come
unto them. 2 Cor. 2.3, 4.

Principal parts. are I. An introduction or Exordium to his Epistle, c. 1, 1.
to 8. II. The substance of his Epistle, containing a Treatise Apologeticall and
Hortatory. 1. In the Apologeticall or excusatory part of he Epistle. 1. He
purges himself both from the charge of l^vity and temerity that he came not
to them according to his promise, 1 Cor. 16.2. to 8. And of severity in the
case of the incestuous person, showing them the true causes of his absence,
wherein (to clear himself from severity, etc,) he inserts his exhortation to
them, touching the restoring and comforting of the incestuous person,
excommunicated according to his former Epistle, but now repenting c. 1, 8. to
the end, and c. 2. 2. He commends and magnifies his ministry to them, 1 Partly
from the effect it had on them, Converting them, c. 3, 1. to 6. 2 Partly from
the subject matter of his ministry, viz. The Gospel far surpassing the law in
glory, c. 3, 6. to the end. 3 Partly from his undaunted constancy in preaching
the Gospel, notwithstanding all afflictions thereupon incident unto him, those
afflictions working for him a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
c. 4. His assurance of which glory he demonstrates upon diverse grounds, c. 5.
2. In the Hortatory part of the Epistle, He exhorts the Corinthians, and
beseeches them 1. To walk worthy of the Gospel, and not to receive the grace
of God in vain, and this is done more Generally, c. 6, 1, to 14. More
specially by avoiding the fellowship of insidels and idolaters, c. 6, 14. to
the end, and c. 7, 1. 2. To bear him like affection in receiving his doctrine
and exhortations, as he bears toward them for their repentance; and kindness
to Titus, c. 7, 2. to the end. 3. To a liberal contribution, to the poor
Saints at Jerusalem, and in Judea; and this by many emphaticall Arguments, c.
8, and c. 9. 4. To behave themselves with such du^ifull obedience to his
doctrine and ministry, that he may have cause to use lenity and gentleness
toward them, and not be put to exercise that severity against them which he
intended against some, c, 10. whereupon (that he may vindicate himself and his
Apostleship from contempt in their eyes, who preferred the false Apostles
before him) he enters upon a necessitated and forced commendation of himself
and his Apostleship by many considerations, c. 11. and c. 12.

III. The Conclusion of the whole Epistle, 1. With Comminations of severity and
sharpness, which he will use toward them, if they repent not, c. 13, 1. to
11. 2. With valedictory exhortations and salutations, c. 13. v. 11, 12, 13, 14.



Galatians.
THe Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the GALATIANS. So entitled from the Penman
Paul, who wrote it: and from the Churches in Galatia to whom he wrote it. Gal.
1.1, 2. Galatia, so called from Galli, i. e. The French, that came and
inhabited there, who called the country after their name. That they were
French, all agree; but from what part of France they came, is less evident;
see Calvin's judgment herein, Calv. in Argum. Epist. ad Galat. Galatia was an
ample Province of Asia Minor, near to Phrygia, into which anciently entered a
people from Gallia of Europe, and seated themselves betwixt Bithynia and
Cappadocia, as is testified by Strabo. l. 12. Justin. l. 25. ab initio. Livi.
l. 8. decad. 4. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 5. c. 32. The more principal cities in the
Province of Galatia, (as Appianus in Chronolog. fol. 44. notes) were these
Synopa, Pompriopolis, Claudiopolis, Ancyra, (the Metropolis, famous for an
ancient Council there,) Laodicea, Antioch and Nicopolis, D. Pareus in Com. in
Gal. 1.2. Paul with Silas and Timothy, traveled through the region of Galatia
once, but were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia, Act.
15.40. and 16.1, 2.3.6 But afterward he went over all the Country of Galatia
and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples, Act. 18.23. In which
country of Galatia, in most of the famous cities, Paul had planted famous
Churches of Christ, as is conceived, Gal. 1.8. etc.

Occasion. It seems by the current of the Epistle, that after Paul's departure
from Galatia, having planted the Gospel there: there came among them false
Apostles and corrupt teachers, who endeavored to disgrace Paul's Apostleship
among them, and to pervert the purity and simplicity of the Gospel among them,
and to pervert the purity and simplicity of the Gospel of Christ, by mixtures
of legal doctrines: urging the observance of both moral and ceremonial law,
and particularly of circumcision, as necessary to Justification; so mingling
and blending together Law and Gospel, works and faith, Iudaisme and
Christianisme: tending dangerously to the subversion of that Church.

Scope. Hence the Apostle yearning over these Churches, writes this Epistle to
them, to recover them out of this error in that fundamental point of
Justification: to convince them of Justification by faith only; to demonstrate
unto them the nature and use of moral and ceremonial law: and incite them to
a holy Christian Conversation.

Principal parts of this Epistle, to this end, are, I. An Exordium, preface,
or entrance into the Epistle, wherein he notably asserts the divine authority
of his Apostleship, against false Apostles denying it, c, 1, 1. to 6. II. A
Treatise containing matters, Reprehensory, Informatory or doctrinall, and
Hortatory* I, Reprehensory, wherein he sharply taxes them that they had so
soon fallen from the Gospel doctrine of Justification by faith, which he had
preached to them, to an opinion of Justification by the works of the law, c. 1,
6. to c. 3, 1. To this end that he may more fully convince them of their error
in forsaking the Gospel which he preached, he shows, after his serious
obtestation, 1. How he had his doctrine from God, who called him to preach to
the Gentiles, c. 1, 11. to 16. 2. How faithfully he had preached the Gospel
committed to him, withstanding all legal mixtures in point of Justification,
c. 1, 16. to c. 3, 1. II. Informatory or Doctrinall, wherein he asserts and
proves the doctrine of Justification by faith alone, and not by legal works,
by many Arguments, c. 3, 4. As for example, because 1. They received the spirit
not by preaching of the law, but by preaching of faith, c. 3, 1. to 6. 2.
Abraham the father of the faithful was justified by faith; consequently so
must his faithful seed be justified whether Jews or Gentiles, c. 3, 6. to 15.
3. The heavenly inheritance is not by law, but by promise, therefore of faith,
c. 3, 15. to 19. And here by way of prolepsis to prevent objections, he shows
what was the use of the law before Christ, and why the ceremonial law is
abolished at Christ's coming; c. 3, 20. to c. 4. v. 12. And he lenisies the
sharpness of his former rebukes, by signifying his humble, modest and tender
carriage toward them, c. 4, 12. to 21. 4. The very testimony of the law it
self condemns this Justification by the works of the Law, as he evidences in
the Allegory of Hagar and Sarah, c. 4, 21. to the end.
III. Hortatory, here the Apostle exhorts them 1. Constantly to persist in
their Christian Liberty from the ceremonial law, c. 5, 1. to 13. 2. Not to
abuse their Christian liberty, v. 13. 3. To several general duties of
Christianity, c. 5, 14. to c. 6, 11.
III. A Conclusion of the whole Epistle containing, 1 A Testification of his
love unto them, in writing to them with his own hand. 2 A commonefaction
against false teachers. 3 An opposition of his own example against that of the
false Apostles, he preaching the Gospel sincerely, walking accordingly, and
being willing to suffer for it; and his 4 Valediction, c. 6, 11. to the end.


Ephesians.
THe Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the EPHESIANS. So denominated from the
Saints at Ephesus to whom Paul wrote, Ephesians. 1.1. EPHESUS was a city on the shore
of the Ionian sea, looking toward the west of Asia Minor, of old a city of
great traffic, but much addicted to magic Arts, and to superstition, there
being the Temple of the great goddess Diana, Act. 19, Paul came to Ephesus at
first, and reasoned with the Jews in their Synagogues, but tarried not there
at that time, because he hasted to keep the feast at Jerusalem, Acts 18, 19,
20, 21. After that he came a second time to Ephesus, and continued there
preaching and disputing for two years and three months, and so planted a
famous Church there, Act. 19.1, 8, 10. etc. 1 Cor. 16.9, till by the uproare at
Ephesus he was necessitated to depart, Act. 20.1. yet after his departure into
Macedonia, Act. 19.1, 2. he committed the care and inspection of the Church at
Ephesus unto Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.3, 4. etc. And Paul being afterward at Miletus,
called thither the Elders of Ephesus, exhorting and encouraging them in their
charge, knowing they should see his face no more, Acts 20.17. to the end. After
Timothy, it is supposed John the Evangelist was Bishop of this Church.

When and Whence this Epistle was written, See in Table before Epistle to
Romans.

Occasion of Paul's writing to the Ephesians, was not Schisms and Scandals, as
in the Church of Corinth; nor false doctrine supplanting justification by
faith, that fundamental point, as in the Church of Galatia; But the Apostles
singular tenderness and provident care of this Church, (he being not now far
from his death,) lest they should faint or be discouraged by his bonds at Rome,
and be weary of the Gospel through the Cross.

Scope, To encourage the Ephesians to constancy in faith and piety, and growth
therein, notwithstanding all his or their tribulations for the Gospel.

Principal Parts, To this end, are* I. The Inscription or Exordi^in of the
Epistle, c. 1, 1, 2. II. The Body of the Epistle being Doctrinall and
Hortatory. 1. Doctrinall, wherein he laid down Gods benefits to them and us, or
the causes of salvation. 1. Gods eternal and free Predestination of us to
adoption in Christ, through faith, c. 1. 2. Redemption by the blood of Christ,
and effectual vocation by his grace, c. 2. 3. Publication of the riches of
Christ by the Gospel, especially by his ministry to the Gentiles. c. 3.
2. Hortatory, wherein by way of gratitude for former benefits, he stirs them
up to diverse Christian duties, which are either, 1. More general and common to
all Christians, c. 4. and c. 5, 1. to 22. 2. More special and peculiar to some
particular relations, as to, 1. Husbands and wives, c. 5.21. to the end. 2.
Parents and children, c. 6, 1. to 5. 3. Masters and servants, c. 6, 5. to 10.


III. The Conclusion of the Epistle, wherein he encourages them to be strong
and constant against all temptations, through the help of the complete Armor
of God, described; shows why he sent Tychicus to them, and so concludes, c. 6,
10. to the end.


Philippi:
THe Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the PHILIPPIANS. So entitled because
written by Paul to the Saints, Bishops and Deacons at Philippi, Phil. 1.1.
PHILIPPI was the name of two cities, viz. one in Thessalie, at first called
Dathos, but after Philippi from Philip of Macedo who repaired it. Alsted.
Praecog. Theol. l. 2. c. 124. Another a city of Macedonia, situate in the
confines of Thracia, in the fields whereof Pompey was overcome by Caesar; and
after Brutus and Cassius, by Anthony and O^^avi^s. This latter Philippi, is
here meant to this Philippi, Paul came, being warned by vision to go into
Macedonia, Act. 16.9. to the end of the chapt. Here Lydia and the Iailor were
converted, and Paul here laid the foundation of a slourishing Church, Calv.
Argum. in Ep. ad Philip.

When and Whence this Epistle was written, see in former Table, etc.

Occasion, the Church at Philippi sent their bounty to Paul now Prisoner at
Rome, to support him and supply his wants there, by Epaphroditus their Pastor,
who doubtless coming to Paul, disclosed to him the spiritual stare of that
Church, whereupon Paul writes this Epistle from Rome, by Epaphrodit us Phil.
2.25.

Scope. To confirm the Philippians in faith and Godliness, to warn them
against Seducers, and to testify his thankfulness for their bountiful
remembrance of him, in his distresses.

Principal Parts, to this and are I. An Exordium or Preface to his Epistle, c.
1, 1, 2. II. The Substance of the Epistle, wherein he 1. Confirms them in the
faith, by Promising to them Gods perfecting grace, Praising their zeal,
Testifying his love to them, Removing the Scandal of the Cross, and
Intimating his great desire for the furtherance and joy of their faith, c. 1,
3, to 27. 2. Exhorts them to Piety, viz. to bearing the Cross, unity, humility
of mind, and purity of life, c. 1, 27. to c. 2, 19. 3. Commends their
faithful Ministers, Timothy and Epaphroditus, c. 2, 19. to the end. 4. Warnes
them of the false Doctrine of false Apostles, that would mingle works with
faith in Justification, opposing against them his own example, desiring the
Philippians to imitate him, c. 3. 5. Encourages them in diverse particular and
general duties, c. 4, 1. to 10. 6. Gratefully commemorates their bounty to
him, c. 4, 10. to 21.
III. The Conclusion of the Epistle, with salutations and a valediction, c. 4,
21, 22, 23.


Colossians
THe Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the COLOSSIANS. So entitled from the
Colossians to whom Paul wrote this Epistle, to the Saints and faithful
Brethren in Christ, which are at Colosse, Col. 1.2. These Colossians were not
that people dwelling in Rodes (called Colossians from that huge Colossus or
Image of the Sun 70 Cubits high, there erected: But rather those inhabitants
of Colosse a chief City in Phrygia in Asia Minor, near unto Hierapolis and
Laodicea; as Hierome and Chrysostom think. And this Epistle it self seems
to intimate thus much, wherein he mentions Epaphr^s his zeal for them at
Colosse, Laodicea, and Hierapolis, Col. 4.13. Bids them salu^e the brethren in
Laodicea, ver. 15. and that this Epistle be read in the Church of the
Laodiceans, ver. 16. Now Laodicea and Hierapolis are near Colosse, but far
distant from Rhodes, as learned writers import. Xenophon in 1. de expedit.
Cyri; writes, That after he entered into Phrygia, he went straight (...) i. e.
Unto Colosse a City of universal resort, rich, and great. Eusebius. in Chronic.
says, That three Cities of Asia, Laodicea, Hierapolis and Colosse fell with
one and the same earthquake. And Plin. in Not. Hist. l. 5. c. 32. Seats not
Colosse in any Island, but among the Cities of the Continent.

When and whence this Epistle was written, see in the former Table.

Occasion. Epaphras fellow laborer with the Apostles, had in Colosse with
other Ministers planted a Church. The Faith preached to the Colossians was
impugned, Partly by some converted out of Iudaisme who urged the Ceremonies of
the Law as necessary to Salvation, confounding Christ and Moses together:
Partly by some converted out of Gentilisme, who obtruded Philosophical
subtilties upon them, counting the simplicity of the Gospel too much below wise
men, and so blended Theology with Philosophy, The Apostle therefore being
prisoner at Rome, writes to them to instruct and stablish them in the true
Doctrine of the Gospel taught them by Epaphras against all the impostures of
false Teachers.

Scope. To show, That all hope of man's Salvation is grounded in Christ alone,
and that therefore we should fully rest our selves in the Faith of Christ, and
live according to Gospel Rules, rejecting all Mosaicall Ceremonies, and
Philosophical speculations.

Principal parts. In this Epistle are, I. The Preface, containing, 1. The
Inscription, c. 1.1, 2, 3. 2. The Entrance into the Epistle, wherein he
commends their Faith and other graces, and wishes their growth therein, v. 3.
to 12. II. The body of the Epistle consisting of matters Doctrinall and
Practical. 1. Doctrinall, where he, 1. Describes Jesus Christ and his benefits
most lively* that he is the true son of God, head and Savior of his Church
most all-sufficient, c. 1.12, to c. 2.8. 2. Confutes Seducers that obtruded on
the Colossians either Philosophical notions, or Mosaicall antiquated
Ceremonies, c. 2.8. to the end. 2. Practical, where he instructs and exhorts
them in Practical duties either 1. General, common to all Christians, c. 3.1,
to 18. 2. Special, peculiar to some Relations, Husbands, Wives, Parents,
Children, Masters and Servants, c. 3.18. to c. 4.2. where he annexes some
general exhortations ver. 2. to 7.
III. Conclusion of the whole Epistle, containing some private Affairs and
Salutations, c. 4.7. to the end.


I Thessal:
THe first Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the THESSALONIANS. So denominated,
because written by Paul to the Church of the Thessalonians. 1 These. 1 1. And
they from their City These. which was the Metropolis or mother City in
Macedonia, Situate on the edge of the Macedonian shore: Anciently it was
called Thermae, and thence the Thermaick Haven. Suidas.
Some give this reason of the change of the name; Philip King of Macedonia in a
memorable Battle in these parts overcame the People of Thessaly. For monument
of which Victory, the neighboring City was reedified and enlarged, and named
Thessalonica; as it were, (...) i. e. put the victory to another. It was sold
by Andronicus to the Venetians, but they did not long enjoy it; for it was; as
other parts of Greece, quickly possessed by the Turks. Is now a famous Empory
for Indian Marchandice, (but under the Dominion and Idolatry of the Turks)
known by the name of Saloniki. Maginus in Geograph.

In Thessalonica God pleased to plant a Church by the Ministry of Paul and
Silas, converting both Jews and Greeks. See the History of it, Act. 17.1. etc.
There the unbelieving Jews moved with envy, raised tumults against Paul and
Silas, and also against the Saint^ that entertained them, Jason etc. 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. So that Paul and Silas were glad to fly away by night to Berea ver. 10.

Occasion (as may appear from Act. 17. And 1 These. 2. and 3, 1.2,) was this.
Paul being forced by tumults to depart from Thessalonica, and fearing least the
Church there newly collected should be hazzarded through fear of troubles and
persecutions; and going to Athens, he sends Timothy back to confirm the
Thessalonians in the Faith, and report their stare to him. Where^^on Timothy
informing him of their constancy notwithstanding persecutions, and of all their
affairs, from Athenes Paul wrote this Epistle to them for their encouragement.
when this Epistle was written, see in Table above.

Scope. To encourage the Thessalonians both to constant perseverance in Faith
and Grace received, notwithstanding all tribulations befalling him or them; As
also to make progress and go on therein unto perfection.

Principal parts, To this end are, I. The Inscription of the Epistle, c. 1.1.
II. The substance or Subject matter of the Epistle is Hortatory. He Exhorts,
I. To constancy and perseverance in the Faith, c, 1.2. to c. 4. Whereunto he
urges them. 1. From the consideration of God; rich grace bestowed on them by
the Apostles Ministry, and the general fame thereof in the Churches of Christ,
c. 1.2. to the end. 2. From the graciousnesse of the instrument whereby they
were converted, viz. Paul whose Boldness, Sincerity, Meeknes and Amiable
behavior to them is declared c. 2.10. to 13. 3. From their own experience of
the efficacy of the Doctrine of Faith, c. 2.13. to the end. 4. From the
Apostles care and tenderness over them, who (though he could not come himself
to them, yet) sent Timothy to them to comfort and establish them, c. 3.
II. To progress in grace toward perfection therein 1. In general, c. 4.1,
2, 3.2. In particular, he exhorts them to certain duties (wherein perhaps they
were Defective, or Endangered) as 1 Chastity, c. 4.4, 5. 2 Justice, ver. 6, 7,
8. 3 Brotherly love, ver. 9, 10. 4 Care of quiet and peaceable living together
in Christian Society, ver. 11, 12. 5 Moderation of sorrow and lamentation for
the dead in Christ; declaring what shall become of the Dead, what of the Living
at Christ's second coming, v. 13. to the end. After this he meets with that
curious question that might be moved, but when shall these things be? Showing
it shall be sudden, though the particular time when, is not known; therefore
they should always be prepared, c. 5.1, to 12. 6 Due respect to the public
Ministry over them c. 5.12, 13. 7 And he shuts up his Exhortation with an heap
of Christian duties concisely couched together, ver. 14. to 23. III. The
conclusion of the Epistle, with Supplications for them, Salutations, and
Valediction ver. 23. to the end.



II Thessal.
THe second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the THESSALONIANS. So styled for the
Reason above. When and Whence this Epistle was written, See in former Table.

Occasion seems to be some information, or Reports which the Apostle had
received; touching their Persecutions for the Gospel; Touching false teachers,
who insinuated to them (perhaps taking occasion by some passages of the former
Epistle about Christ's second coming) that Christ's second coming wo^ld be
speedily, in that age; and touching exorbitant walking of some, in idleness;
Church Discipline mean while sleeping. The whole current of the Epistle
intimates this occasion.

Scope. 1 To comfort the Church of Thessalonians against all Persecutions for
Christ. 2 To inform them of their mistake about the second coming of Christ,
that it could not be presently. And 3 to exhort them to diverse Christian duties.

Principal parts, to these ends.

I. Inscription and salutation, c. 1.1, 2. II. Body Of the Epistle, being 1.
Consolatory against all sufferings and persecutions c. 1.3. to the end. 2.
Monitory, warning them against that erroneous Doctrine which any false Teachers
might suggest unto them, ^s if Christ's Second coming were at hand: wherein he
prophetically assures them that before Christ's coming, there will be an
Apostasy, and a Revelation of Antichrist that man of sin, c. 2. 3. Hortatory,
wherein he peremptorily prescribes Reformation of certain corruptions in
manners and practice among them, interlacing diverse sharp reproofs thereof.
Because he deals somewhat sharply with them, 1. He premiseth an insinuative
preface wherein, 1* He begs their prayers. 2 Persuades himself confidently of
their obedience. 3 And Prays for them, c. 3.1. to 6.2. He prescribes the
Reformation of two evils, viz. 1 The remissness of Church Discipline toward
inordinate walkers, ver. 6. to 11. 2 The neglect of manual labor by some
contrary to the Apostles Rule, ver. 11. to 16.
III. The conclusion of the whole Epistle, with Supplications, Salutations and
Valediction, ver. 16. to the end.
Thus far of Paul's nine general Epistles, written to whole Churches: Next
come to be considered Paul's four particular Epistles, directed to certain
particular persons, viz. Two to Timothy, and one to Titus about affairs
Ecclesiastical; and one to Philemon about matters Oeconomicall. Those Epistles
to Timothy and Titus, Augustine would have him that is a Teacher in the Church
to have always before his eyes* Augustine. de Doctrine Christian. l. 4* c. 16.

I Timothy
THe first Epistle of the Apostle Paul to TIMOTHY. So denominated from Timothy
to whom Paul wrote.

TIMOTHY Is a Greek name; Signifies, An Honourer of God. Probably his Godly
Parents desired he might be such an one when they gave him this name: and he
proved an excellent instrument of Honor to God both in Doctrine and
conversation, according to the happy Omen and presage of his name. He is
supposed to be of Lycaoni^, in Asia. His Father was a Greek, his Mother a
Jewesse who believed, Act. 16.1. her name Eunice, daughter of Lois his
Grandmother; both sincere believers, 2 Timothy 1.5. From a child they trained him
up in the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15. Whence Paul is persuaded that the like
Faith dwelt in him, as did in his mother and Grandmother, 2 Timothy 1.5. His
Father being a Greek, he was not Circumcised after the custom of the Jews,
but being come to maturity, Paul circumcised him, for the gaining of the Jews
by his Ministry, Act. 16.3. And having good commendation of him by the brethren
of Lystra and Iconium, Paul made him his companion in travels throughout the
Churches, Act. 16.2, 3, 4. etc. Sometimes Paul sent him as a Messenger to the
Churches; whereupon Paul makes such an honorable mention of him and his
works, Act. 19.22. Romans 16.21. 1 Cor. 4.17. And 16.10. Phil. 2.19, 20, 21, 22.
1 These. 3.2, 6. Gives him diverse excellent Titles, calls him his brother, 1
These. 3.2. Heb. 13.23. His beloved son and faithful in the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.17.
His natural son in the Faith, 1 Timothy 1.2. His dearly beloved son, 2 Timothy
1.2. The Minister of God; and his fellow laborer in the Gospel of Christ, 1
These. 3.2. His work-fellow, Romans 16.21. Yea Paul joins Timothy with himself
in the inscriptions of diverse Epistles to the Churches, that so he might both
commend Timothies worth and authority to the Churches, as also propound him as
an exemplary pattern to all faithful Ministers. See 2 Cor. 1.1. Phil. 1.1.
Col. 1.1. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1. Philem. 1. At last after many travels with
Paul by Sea and Land, Paul returning into Asia committed the care of the Church
of Ephesus to him, whom he knew to be so able and trusty, 1 Timothy 1.3. etc.
Which he happily taught, and governed about fifteen years; but at last more
grievously inveighing against the Idolatrous worships of Diana; under Nero the
Christians cruel Enemy, he was slain of the Gentiles with Arrows and Stones,
as is testified by Eusebius Hist. l. 3. c. 14. Some think that his bones,
together with the relics of Andrew and Luke were translated to Constantinople
by Constantine the Emperor. As Hieronym. and Nicephorus.

When this Epistle was written, see in the Table above.

Occasion and Scope. The Apostle being to depart into Macedonia, left Timothy
at Ephesus, that he might prevent unsound Doctrine, and ordain Elders for that
Church. Compare Act. 20. 1 Timothy 1.3. etc. That therefore Timothy might the
better know how to behave himself in that Church in all Ecclesiastical
affairs, he writes to him this Epistle, not knowing how long he should be
absent from him. 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. So that this Epistle may not unfitly be
styled* St. Paul's Directory for right mannaging of the Office of the Ministry
in the Church of God.

Principal parts, to this end; are I. The Inscription of the Epistle, c. 1, 1,
2. II. The matter or Substance of the Epistle, which is chiefly by way of
practical instruction or direction. He directs Timothy, 1. Touching ^aith how
to maintain against the teachers of the Law, the truth of the Gospel
wonderfully committed to Paul) notwithstanding all impediments, and to add to
faith a good conscience, c. 1, 3. to the end. 2. Touching Ecclesiastical
worship, for whom they should pray, c. 2.1. to 8. How men and women should
behave themselves in prayer, and in public assemblies, c. 2, 8. to the end. 3.
Touching Church officers. 1 How Bishops and Deacons with their wives ought to
be qualified, c. 3 1. to 14. To which he annects, the end or Scope of his
writing this Epistle to Timothy, viz. That he might know how to govern the
Church, the house of God, the pillar of truth, giving an Epitome of
Gospel Truth, c. 3, 14. to the end. which he amplifies by a Prophetical
prediction of the Apostasy, from the faith which should come to pass in the
latter times, c. 4.1. to 6. 2 How Timothy should behave himself both in his
doctrine and conversation, c. 4.6. to the end. How in private reproofs, c. 5,
1, 2. How toward widows, c. 5, 3, to 17. How toward Elders* c. 5, 17. to the
end. What duties he should teach servants, and how he should carry himself
toward them that teach otherwise, and count Gain godliness, c. 6. to 17. And
how he should instruct rich men, c. 6, 17, 18, 19.
III. The Conclusion of the Epistle, exhorting Timothy to keep that which was
committed to him, and to avoid profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of
science, etc. c. 6, 20.21.


II Timoth:
THe second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to TIMOTHY. So denominated from Timothy
to whom Paul wrote. A Description of this Timothy, see in former Epistle.

Occasion. The Apostle having left Timothy at Ephesus to take care of the
Church there, 1 Timothy 1.3. when he departed from the Elders of Ephesus, after he
had called them to Miletus, and given them charge of the flock, they all wept
sore, Acts 20.36, 37. probably, Timothy was one of those that powered out tears,
2 Timothy 1.4. and perhaps the Apostle, that he might comfort Timothy lamenting
him, intimated some hopes of his return unto him, 1 Timothy 3.14. But Paul mean
while being carried away captive to Rome, and by his bonds hindered from coming
again to Timothy, thought it necessary by this Epistle to stablish and comfort
him, both against the Apostles sufferings and martyrdom approaching as also
against all the pressures and persecutions of the Church, and that he should be
moved by none of them, to desert or neglect the faithful, keeping of that
excellent treasure of truth, committed of trust to him, 2 Timothy 1.8, 13. and
2.1, 2, 3.4. and 4.1, 2, 5, 6. etc. and that they might more effectually be
comforted in one another, he desires him to come shortly to him, 2 Timothy 4.9.
that so they might take their last farewell one of another. For this was Paul's
last Epistle (as his Swan-like Song) a little before his death, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7.

Scope, To stir up and strengthen Timothy, to constancy and fidelity, in
discharge of his ministerial office, and the keeping and asserting of the
truth, deposited and committed of trust to him; against all the present dangers
and persecutions impending him or the Apostle for the same, in these perilous
times.

Principal parts. to this end are I. An Inscription of the Epistle, c. 1, 1,
2, together with an insinuative patheticall proem, testifying his singular
affection to Timothy, v. 3, 4, 5. II. The substance of the Epistle, which is
chiefly Hortatory and Consolatory. Herein he, 1. Exhorts and encourages him to
constancy and faithfulness in all the work of the Ministry committed to him,
notwithstanding all the Apostles afflictions endured for the truth, all the
troubles Timothy might incur in defense of the truth, and the unfaithfulness
of some revolting from the truth, c. 1, 6. to the end, and c. 2. 2.
Prophetically forewarnes him of the perillousnesse of the last days,
especially by reason of wicked hypocrites and Seducers, c. 3, 1. to 14. 3. Most
earnestly incites and charges him to be constant in the faith, according to the
Scriptures which he knew from a child, and to be instant in preaching the word,
against all discouragements, after the Apostles example, who had finished his
course, and now shortly was to receive his Crown, c. 3, 14. to c. 4, 9.
III. Conclusion of the Epistle, with 1 Some particular directions, c. 4, 9. to
16. 2 Narration of his own affairs, v. 16, 17, 18. 3 Salutations, v. 18. to
22. and 4 Valediction, v. 22.


Titus.
THe Epistle of Paul to TITUS. So entitled from the name of the person to whom
he wrote, Tit. 1.1, 4. Titus is evidently a Greek name, either derived from
(...) Titus, i. e, A Dove; (as Jonah in Hebrew has his name from a Dove,) or
rather from (...) Tio i. e. to honor, esteem, etc. thence (...), Titos i. e.
Honored; a fit name for him, that was truly honored both by God and man.
Titus was by Nation a Grecian, a Gentile, and uncircumcised probably till his
death, Gal. 2.3. yet effectually converted by Paul to the faith, hence called
his natural son after the common faith, Tit. 1.4. yea he calls him his
Partner and fellow-helper. 2 Cor. 8.23. and his brother, 2 Cor. 2.13. having
enjoyed him as a companion of his travels, Gal. 2.1. a comfort in his sorrows,
2 Cor. 7.6. and having used him as a Legate or messenger unto diverse Churches,
and betrusted him with the Collections for the poor Saints in Judea, 2 Timothy
4.10. 2 Cor. 8.6, 16, 17. Paul having planted a Church in the Isle of Creta,
now called Candy, he left Titus there behind him to finish the work, appointing
him to set in order things that were wanting, and to ordain Elders in every
city, Tit. 1.5. and there it is thought, he died and was buried.

Occasion and Scope, Paul having left Titus in Creet to order things wanting,
etc. in the Church now planted there, and perceiving that in his absence false
Teachers, erroneous in judgment, and scandalous in life, crept in, seeking to
destroy the faith, by mingling Christ and Moses together, to disturb
Church Government planted, and to disjoyne the practice from the profession of
piety. Paul therefore sollicitous for the Church, writes this Epistle to Titus,
both to strengthen and gain Authority to his ministry there against all
contempt; as also to direct him, how to order and stablish things wanting in
the Church, how to repress distempers and disorders arising, and how to
demean himself, both in doctrine and conversation, toward several sorts of
Persons.

Principal parts to this end I. An Inscription, c. 1, 1, to 5. II. Substance
of the Epistle, (of like nature to the I. To Timothy) wherein he 1. Declares
for what ends he left Titus in Creet, c. 1, 5. 2. Directs him in reference to
these ends. 1. What qualifications are requisite in Bishops, or Elders both for
life and doctrine, c. 1, 6. to the end. 2. How Titus should accordingly approve
himself in the ministry, both in his doctrine and life, and that toward both
aged men and women, as also toward servants, c. 2. and generally toward all
Christians, how he should teach them to behave themselves, both toward
magistrates, and mutually toward one another, backing the same with ^ogent
Arguments, c. 3, 1. to 12.
III. A Conclusion of the whole Epistle consisting of more private directions,
salutations, and his Apostolical valediction, c. 3, 12. to the end.



Thus of Paul's Epistles written to particular persons about Ecclesiastical
affairs. Now of his Epistles written to particular persons, yea to a Church,
Philem. 1.2. about Oeconomicall or Household affairs. viz.

Philemon.
THe Epistle of Paul to Philemon. So called because peculiarly and in the first
place directed to him, Philem. 1.2. PHILEMON, as some think sounds like an
Hebrew name, and signifies, The mouth of bread, so denoting his beneficence and
bounty relieving them with bread, etc. that were poor and needy, See v. 7.
Hieron. Others rather taking this Etymon to be uncertain, count Philemon a
Greek name, signifying Kissing, from (...) Philema. i. e. A kiss, So
intimating his kindness.

This is not that ancient Comic poet, called Philemon, which Paul seems to
have read, by some expressions in his Epistles, as 1 Timothy 2.12. and 5.23. Tit.
2.3. The fragments of which poet are extant, collected by Henr. Steph. But this
Philemon is supposed to be by Country a Phrygian, as Theophylact. and in
particular a minister of the Church at Colosse, an eminent town in Phrygia.
Paul here calls him fellow laborer, Phil^m. v. 1. viz. in preaching the Gospel;
and a Partner, v. 17* compare Philem. v. 1, 2. with Col. 4.17, He is called a
Bishop by Anselme, an Evangelist by Hierom. And here is mention of the Church
in his house, v. 2. Probably, Philemon was converted or much edified by Paul's
ministry, from that intimation, v. 19. was dear to Paul* he calls him brother
v. 7, 20. his dearly beloved. v. 1. He is commended for his faith in Christ,
and bountiful love to all the Saints, verse. 5.7. Though rich, yet is suspected
to be sornewhat too covetous, from that expression, v. 18, 19. We find no
mention of him in Scripture, but only in this Epistle.

Occasion. Onesimus servant to Philemon, had much wronged him in purloyning his
goods, (it is probably thought he stole some money from him) and so ran away
from him to Rome, where (providence so ordered things,) hearing Paul preach he
was converted, and ministered to Paul in prison. But Paul understanding the
cause of his depar^ing from his Master, sends Onesimus back again to his master
with this Epistle, persuading him to forgive him, and entertain him again.

Scope. To reconcile Onesimus, now converted, to Philemon his master, whom he
had much wronged formerly, being unconverted, and had run away from him.

Principal parts, of this most elegant and patheticall Epistle, to this end,
are I. The Preface or Exordium to the Epistle, containing 1. The inscription,
v. 1, 2, 3. 2. The Apostles Gratulation at Philemons faith in Christ, and
liberal love to the Saints, v. 4. to 8, hereby he indears both himself and
his request to Philemon. II. The Proposal of his request to Philemon, more
generally, and after more particularly, viz. that he would again receive
Onesimus, whom he had sent to him, v. 8. to 13. III. Cogent Arguments, pressing
this request, (every word almost being an Argument) some of which are couched
in the Proposal of his request; As 1. Onesimus is converted, v. 10. 2. Now he
will be a profitable servant, v. 11. 3. Onesimus was dear to Paul* as his own
bowels, v. 12, 4. Paul's prizing Onesimus his service, v. 13.14. 5. Providence
seemed so to overruled his departure by converting him in the interim, as if
God would prepare him for constant service, v. 15. 6. He is now not a servant,
so much as a brother in Christ, v. 16. 7. Paul that makes this request, is
Philemons Partner, v. 17. 8. Philemon shall not loose by receiving him, v. 18,
19. 9. Paul shall reap the fruit of sweet refreshing in the grant of this
request, v, 20. IIII. The Conclusion of the Epistle, containing 1. Paul's hope
of Philemons gratifying him. 2. His request to prepare himself a lodging. 3.
Salutations. 4. And the Apostolical valediction, v. 21. to the end.


Hitherto of the Epistles written to the by Paul: Now of the Epistles written
to the believing Jews by several Apostles.

Hebrews.
THe Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the HEBREWS. So entitled in the Greek
Copies, from the Penman writing it, and the parties to whom he wrote. The
Syriack version has it, The Epistle to the Hebrews.

HEBREWS. So denominated not from Heber, Selah's son, Sem's grandechild
mentioned Genesis 10.24. But rather from Abram the father of the faithful. and
that not from the name Abram, which is written with (...) whereas Hebrews, is
written originally with (...) viz. (...) Hhhibri. but from the Epithet given
first to Abram, viz. Abram the Hebrew, Genesis 14.13. Abram being called (...) i.
e. the Hebrew from (...) To pass over or pass thorough, Genesis 12.6. because
from Mesopotamia he passed over Euphrates into Canaan, and so passed thorough
the land. compare Genesis 12.1. to 7. with Act. 7.2, 3, 4. So that Abram the
Hebrew, sounds as much as Abram the Passenger, or the Passer-thorough. Hence
Abrams posterity are called Hebrews, which name seems somewhat more worthy then
the name Jews, because the name Jews came but from Judah, Jacobs son the kingly
stock. To Hebre^s by nation, but now become Christians by profession, this
Epistle was written. Some think the Apostle wrote only to those Hebrews that
dwelt in Jerusalem and Judea, because he promises to see them, Heb. 13.23. but
Peter seems to testify this Epistle was written to the dispersed Hebrews;
compare 2 Pet. 3.15. and 3.1, 2. with 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. Why might not the Epistle
be written to them all?

Penman of this Epistle is not so infallibly agreed upon by learned men. Some
of old ascribed it to Luke, or Barnabas, or Clement, Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. Platin.
in vit. Petri, p. 10. and Hieronymus. Some to Barnabas, Tertullian. See Erasin.
Annot. in Act. 1. p. 199. Some to Apollos, Luther in Genesis 48. fol. 643. De Luc.
Osiander in Praefat. ad Hebr. Calvin himself, though in his Argument, before
this Epistle, he says, he cannot be brought to think it was Paul's, yet after
seems to incline to that opinion, that Paul wrote it, Calv. Com. in Heb. 13,
13. But that Paul was Penman of this Epistle, was the unanimous opinion of all
the ancient Greek writers, (except Caius mentioned by Nicephorus l. 4. c. 34.)
and of diverse Latin Authors, ancient and modern. See Gerh. loc. com. de
Script. sacr. loc. 1. Exeges. Sect. 275. and D. Pareus Proem in ep. ad Hebr.
Sect. 1. G. Whitaker disp. de sacr. script. q. 1. c. ult. That the Apostle Paul
was Penman of this Epistle, may be evinced by diverse considerable Arguments, As
1. All the Greek Copies of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (except one wherein the
Title was only, (...) i. e. To the Hebrews) have this Title (...) i. e. The
Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews. Th. Bez. in Annot. ante ep. ad
Hebr. 2. The Testimony of Peter is most considerable; As our beloved brother
Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has written unto you. As
also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these things, in which are some
things hard to be understood, etc. 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. wherein note with Gerh.
Piscat. and others, 1. That Paul wrote to them also to whom Peter wrote, But
Peter wrote to the Hebrews, both his Epistles, 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.
Therefore Paul wrote to the Hebrews, either this Epistle is that which Paul
wrote to the Hebrews, or its lost. That it should be lost, is unlikely, when
Gods providence has preserved such a small Epistle, and of private
concernment, as his Epistle to Philemon, for the use of the Church, but
doubtless what Paul wrote to the Hebrews, was more large and full, and
touching the mystery of salvation by Christ crucified, as most necessary to
them who stuck too much to the Leviticall Priesthood, as if it should be
perpetuated, and stumbled at Christ c^ucified; and this is the Argument of this
Epistle. 2. That Paul wrote to them of the same things that Peter wrote. Herein
Peter's Epistle, and this to the Hebrews, agree, as That by Christ are given to
us, all things pertaining to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. That Jesus
Christ is the son of God in whom the father is well pleased with us, of whom
the Prophets spoke, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18.19. So these things are largely
handled, Heb. 1.1. to c. 10.19 Peter exhorts them to faith and holiness, 2
Pet. 1.5. to 16. and 3.1. to 15. So the Epistle to the Hebrews, c. 2, 1. to 5.
and 3.1, 6. to the end and c. 4. and 6.11, 12. and c. 10, 19. to c. 13, 20*
Peter shows the danger of Apostasy, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. So the Epistle to the
Hebrews, c. 6, 4. to 9. and 10.26, to 32. 3. That Paul wrote wisely, much
wisdom appears both in words, matter and method of this Epistle to the
Hebrews. 4. That herein are some things hard to be understood, as about
Apostates, Heb. 6. and Heb. 10. as about predestination, Romans 9. c. 11. and
Ephesians. 1.
3. Paul's zeal and affection was great to the Hebrews, Romans 9.1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
and can we think he should never write to them that were so exceeding dear to
him, and what could he write more proper and necessary for them, then touching
the abrogation of the Leviticall Priesthood, and the excellency of Christ's
person and office; which this Epistle treats of, above any other? 4. Mention is
here made of Timothy his brother, and that he is set at liberty, Heb. 13.23.
elsewhere Paul calls Timothy his brother, 1 These. 3. 2. Philem. 1. and in what
account Timothy, ( Paul's companion) was with Paul, See Annot. in 1 Timothy before.
5. The Author of this Epistle mentions his bonds, Heb. ^0.34. and 13.23. and
this is Paul's manner in his Epistles, Romans 16.21. 1 Cor. 16.10, 11. 2 Cor. 1.1.
Col. 1.1. 1 These. 1.1. and 3.2. 2 These. 1. 1. Philem. 1.9.10. 6. The character
of the style and language in this Epistle, seems so plainly to be the same with
Paul's in his other Epistles, that they indigitate Paul to be the Penman Well
consider and parallel the ensuing places. Heb. 1, 2, 3. -- with Col. 1.14, 15,
16, 17. Heb. 5, 12, 13. -- with 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Heb. 9.15. -- with Romans 3.25.
Heb, 10.34. -- with Phil. 1.13. and Philem. v. 1, 9, 10. Heb. 10.34. -- with 1
These. 2.14. Heb. 10.36. -- with Gal 3.22. Heb. 11.11, 12. -- with Romans 4.18,
19. Heb. 12.1. -- with 1 Cor 9.24. Heb. 13.7. -- with Philip. 2.25.29. Heb.
13.9. -- with Ephesians. 4.14. Heb. 13.15, 16. -- with Romans 12.1, 2. Heb. 13.17. --
with 1 These. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.18 -- with 2 Cor. 1.11, 12. Act. 23.1.24.16.
Heb. 13.20, 21. -- with 1 These. 5.23. Romans 15.23. and 16.20. 2 Cor. 23.13.
Phil. 49.
7. Finally, that which the Apostle himself counts as it were the character
and seal of all his Epistles, his Token, 2 These. 3.17, 18. The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen; is the valedictory close of this
Epistle, Heb. 13.25.


These Arguments may strongly persuade that the Apostle Paul was Penman of this
Epistle, and consequently, that this Epistle is of Apostolical, yea of divine
Authority, as well as his other Epistles. Nor are the objections usually
brought to the contrary, of such difficulty, but that they may easily receive
satisfactory Answers. And are answered by Bez. Pareus and Piscator in their
Prologue before this Epistle. Gerh. exeges. loc. Com. 1. de script. sacr. cap.
10. Sect. 277. etc.

When and Whence this Epistle was written, See in former Table.

That it was not written in Hebrew by P^ul, an Hebrew to the Hebrews, and so
translated into Greek, by Luke or Barnabas as some think, viz. Clem Alexan.
S^rom. l. 4. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 3^. Hieronym. in Catal. script.
illustr. etc. But rather that Paul wrote this Epistle at first in Greek, may be
probably believed upon these ensuing grounds, vid. Fran. Iunium paral. l. 3. in
c. 9. hujus Epist. p. 479.

1. The style and phrase of this Epistle seems rather to Grecize, then to
Hebraize, there being fewer Hebraismes in this Epistle, then in Paul's other
Epistles.

2. The places alleged out of the old Testament, are not alleged according to
the Hebrew original, but the Greek version of the LXXII.

3. The Hebrew names are interpreted, as Melchi-zedek, King of righteousness,
and Salem, peace, Heb. 7.1, 2.

4. Most Jews then understood the Greek tongue, especially those that lived in
Asia Minor.

5. Peter and James wrote their Epistles to the dispersed Jews in Greek, and
Paul wrote all his other Epistles to the Gentiles in Greek; why then should we
imagine this to be written in Hebrew?

6. The Ancient writers testify not, that they have seen any original Hebrew
Copy of this Epistle.

Occasion, seems to be the infirmity and affliction of the believing Hebrews.
For the whole current of the Epistle, seems to intimate, That though they had
entertained Christ, yet they adhered too much to Moses and the Leviticall
Priesthood, and perhaps some of them had some hesitancy about Christ, whether
he were the promised Messiah: and yet for their entertaining of Christ so far
as they did, they seem not only to be reproached by their Countrymen, as
Apostates from the Law, but were greatly persecuted for Christ; the Apostle
understanding this their s^ate, wrote to instruct and support them herein; vid.
Athanas. in Synops.

Scope. For confirmation and comfort, of the weak and afflicted Hebrews, to
evidence that Jesus Christ is true God and man, like us in all things, (only
sin excepted,) and therefore the only true Messiah, promised in the Old
Testament, and exhibited in the New; that he is the Churches only King, Prophet
and Priest, able to save all that come to him to the uttermost, having by
offering up himself once, for ever perfected them that are sanctified, and
abrogated the Leviticall Priesthood and law, and therefore that they ought to
believe in him, persevere in faith, and walk worthy of Christ and his Gospel.

Principal parts. to this end. This Epistle is partly Doctrinall, partly
Practical.

I. Doctrinall and Informatory touching Christ himself, viz. In respect of 1.
His Person; That he is 1. The eternal son of God, c. 1. 2. True man, taking
flesh of the seed of Abraham, c. 2. And therefore his Doctrine to be more
hearkened to then the word of Moses or Angels. 2. His Office, viz. 1.
Prophetical, Wherein he far surpassed Moses, whom therefore we must believe
and obey lest we lose the eternal, as Israel the temporal Canaan c. 3, 4. 2.
Sacerdotall or Priestly, wherein Christ is asserted by the Apostle, to be out
great High Priest, To this end, 1. He compares him to Aaron in his call to his
Office, c. 5.1. to 6. 2. He preferres him before Aaron, c. 5, 6. to 11, (and
being to speak further of this mystery, by way of digression he taxes their
dullness in understanding, and warnes them against Apostasy, c. 5.11. to the
end, and c. 6.) Christ is preferred before Aaron, 1. In excellency of order,
being of Melchisedeck's order, who was above Levi, Christ also being made of
this order by an Oath, and that for ever. c. 7. 2. In Excellency of Sacrifice
and Ministry beyond Aarons, he being Mediator of the New and lasting Covenant,
the old being antiquated, c. 8. He entering into heaven, not an earthly
Tabernacle, with his own blood, not blood of beasts; Once, and not often; has
purged the Conscience not only the flesh; and this not for a season, but for
ever c. 9, and 10, 1. to 19.
3. Regal in diverse places.

II. Practical and Hortatory to Christians, Whom he exhorts 1. To Faith and
constancy therein, 1. From the peril of Apostasy; and the great reward, c.
10.19. to the end. 2. From the cloud of faithful examples to be followed, c.
11. 2. To diverse Religious exercises. 1. To patience and constancy under the
cross, c. 12.1. to 14. 2. To Peace and holiness, 14. to 18. 3. To
entertainment of the Gospel, v. 18. to the end. 4. To Charity, c. 12.1, 2, 3.
5. To Marriage-chastity ver. 4. 6. To Contentment ver. 5.6. 7. To follow the
Faith and constancy of their teachers, ver. 7. to 16, 8. To Benisicence, ver.
16. 9. To due respect to Church Governors ver. 17. And so concludes his
Epistle ver. 18. to the end.

Thus of the Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the believing Hebrews.

Now follow seven other Epistles, some of them evidently, the rest of them
probably, written to believing Hebrews. viz. The Epistle of James, Jam. 1.1.
The two Epistles of Peter; compare 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. with 2 Pet. 1.1.2. and 3.1.
The first Epistle of John seems probably written to all the believing Hebrews,
especially in Asia Minor; for 1. the Greek title calls it a Catholic or
general Epistle Zanch. Prolegom. in 1 Joan. Ep. p. 6, Bez. Annot. in 1 Joan.
Because generally written to all the Jews. (Though some think it was written to
the Parthians, among whom were many Jews of the old Captivity and dispersion
of the ten Tribes, whence Parthians are thought to be named in the first
place, Act. 2.9. Possilius in Indic. operum Augustine. August. l. 2. Q. Evang.
c. 39.) 2. The very matter of the Epistle being directed against the
blasphemous errou^s broached among the Jews, especially those of Ebion and
Cerinthus against the Divinity of Christ, seems to imply that it was
principally written to the Iewe^. The second Epistle of John is to an Elect
Lady, probably a believing Hebrew, of great wealth and worth. For he warns both
her and her children of the Heresies and seducers that opposed the person of
Christ after the manner of his first Epistle. And he intimates his intention of
visiting them shortly. Gaius, ^o whom he wrote his third Epistle, is not
obscurely intimated there to be a believing Jew, 3 Ioh. v. 1, 2, 6, 7. As
Piscat. in loc. notes. Finally the Epistle of Jude seems written to the
dispersed believing Jews. 1 In the Greek title it being called Catholic or
General. 2 And for the matter of it being of like nature with 2 of Pet. even
as an Abstract of it; against the Seducers of those times, as the samenesse of
words and phrase import.

These seven Epistles are by some called, Catholic; by some Canonical.

Catholic, or General; not in respect of the universal concernment of the
matters contained in them, for such is the matter of Paul's Epistles also: but
in respect of the parties to whom these Epistles are written, viz. Not to any
particular Church, as the Epistle to the Romans, Corinth, etc. Nor to
particular persons as the Epistle to Timothy, Titus, Philemon: But generally to
the believing Jews dispersed in several Countries. In this respect diverse
Latin, especially Greek writers call them Catholic, viz. Greek Scholiast. (as
Bez. Annot. ante Epist. Iac. observes.) Origin apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 19.
Dionys. Alexandrin. apud Eusebius. l. 7. c. 20. Eusebiu^ Hist. l. 2. c. 22. Cyril
Hierosolym. Catech. 17. Hieronym* in Catal. Script. etc. Though properly the
second and third Epistle of John cannot be called Catholic, yet being joined
to John's first Epistle, which is Catholic, by use they come to be so called,
though abusively.

Canonical; not that these seven Epistles only, or peculiarly, among al^
others are Canonical and A^thentique; that were to derogate from other
Epistles of Paul; but because they contain Canons or Rules of Christian life.
Ger. loc. ^om. exeg. loc. 1. c. 10.. 291. Beza thinks they were by mistake
called Canonical (perhaps for Catholicall) for 1. why should not also Paul's
Epistles be called Canonical? 2. Greek writers do not so call them. 3. Latins
have, though groundlesly, doubted of the authority of the Epistle of James, and
second of Peter. Therefore its not probable they would call them Canonical.
Bez. Annot. ante Epist. Jacob. and D. Pareus in prolegom. in Epist. Iacobi.

James.
THe Catholic Epistle of JAMES the Apostle. So styled in the Greek Copies.
Bez.

Penman hereof was James. Iam. ^.1. James in Greek and Latin is the same with
the Hebrew Iakob, which signifies A supplanter. Genesis 25.25.27. 36. But what
James this was, is not so easily determined. There were three of that name (as
some learned Authors are of opinion) two of them Apostles, and one of the 70
Disciples, viz. 1. James the son of Zebedee, brother to John, Matthew. 4.21.22.
and 10.2. He was with Christ at his transfiguration, Mat. 17.1. He was called
James the greater, either in respect of his age, or of his stature, or of his
calling to the Apostleship. The Syriack interpreter seems to ascribe this
Epistle to this James, as Tremellius renders it, Tres Epistolae, etc. i. e*
Three Epistles of three Apostles before whose eyes our Lord did trans-figure
himself, viz. Of James, Peter, and John. But (as Pareus notes, Proem. in
Epist. Iac.) the Kings edition translated by G. Fabritius has it thus, In
nomine Domini I^shua Meschicho sigillamus tres Epistolas: Iaakoub, and Petri,
and Iouchanon. i. e. In the name of the Lord Jesus the Messiah, we Seal the
three Epistles of James, and Peter, and John. This speaks not particularly of
James the greater. Besides, this James was pu^ to death by Herod Agrippa, in
the second year of Claudius. See Act. 12.1, 2. but this Epistle seems to be
writt^n afterward to the convert Jews dispersed, afte^ Claudius had cast both
Jews and Christians out of the City of Rome, Act. 18.1, 2. Su^ton in Claud. c.
25.2. James the son of Alpheus, an Apostle also, Matthew. 10.3. Act. 1.3.
Brother of I^de, Iud. 1. Called sometimes James the less, for distinction from
the former James, Mark. 15.40. and the brother of the Lord, Gal. 1.19. Matthew.
13.55. Mark. 6.3. Either 1 because he was the son of Joseph (the supposed
Father of Christ) by a former wife, as diverse both Greek and Latin Fathers
think See Jacob. Laurentii Com. in la. 1.1. p. 1^.12. Or rather ^ he is called
the Lords brother (after the Hebrews manner of speaking) because he was Cousin
germane to him, his Mother being that Mary wife of Cleophas, (as some think)
which was Sister to the blessed Virgin, Mark. 16.1. Hieronym. advers. He^uid.
lib. Theodoret. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 1. Ignatius thinks he was called the
Lords Brother because he so exactly resembled Christ in countenance, and
conversation, as if they had been twins, and that he was surnamed Iustus.
Ignat. in Epist. 2 ad Joan. Seniorem. This James is conceived to be Penman of
this Epistle, it being most suitable to an Apostle of unlimited Commission to
take care of all the Tribes dispersed. The matter of the Epistle becomes an
Apostolical Spirit. Nor (says Pareus) does any thing solidly contradict this
opinion; who there answers objections against it. Therefore if the Epistle be
Apostolical, it is questionless of Divine Authority. 3. As for the third
James called Oblias, of the number of the seventy Disciples, Bishop of
Jerusalem, some question whether there were such an one; others count it most
unlikly that he should be Penman of this General Epistle, that was confined
him self to a Particular charge.

Occasion and Scope. James taking notice that the twelve Tribes dispersed were
under great Temptations and trials of affliction; and also that too many among
them contented themselves with a fruitless profession of Faith without the
concurrent practice of Holiness: w^ites unto them, principally to comfort and
support them under their present sharp trials and tribulations, Iam. 1.2. etc.
5.7, to 12. As also to exhort them to join good works and an holy life to
their Faith, without which their Faith was but a dead carcass, c. 2.14. to the
end.

Principal parts. In this Epistle are, I. A superscription, c. 1.1. II.
Substance of the Epistle, which is chiefly Hortatory (here and there some few
Doctrinals being inserted.) They are exhorted, 1. To Patience and Prayer under
the outward Tentations of the cross c. 1.2, to 13. 2. To ascribe the inward
Tentations to sin, to themselves, not to God, c. 1. ver. 13. to 19. 3. To right
hearing of the word c. 1.19. to 26. 4. To true Religion and undefiled, c. 1.26,
27, 5. To avoid respect of persons, c. 2.1, to 14. 6. To join unto Faith the
proper fruits of good-works, without which Faith is but false and dead, and not
that Faith that justifies, c. 2.14. to the end. 7. To avoid the sinful abuses
of the tongue, c. 3. 8. To restrain their corrupt lusts and the pernicious
fruits thereof, c. 4.1, to 8. 9. To walk penitently and holily, c. 4. 8. to 13.
10. Not to undertake humane Actions with vain confidence, but with dependence
upon Gods providence, c. 4.13. to the end. 11. Not to abuse riches, etc. c. 5,
1. to 7. 12. That the Godly patiently bear the injuries of the rich, c. 5.
verse. 7. to 12. 13. To take heed of all rash swearing, ver. 12. 14. To use
Prayer, especially as an Antidote against afflictions, ver. 13. to 19. 15. To
reduce an erring brother, ver. 19, 20.


I Peter.
THe first Catholic Epistle of PETER the Apostle. So called, partly in
reference to the dispersed Jews to whom generally this Epistle is directed (as
was fore noted); partly in respect of Peter the Apostle Penman of it, 1 Pet.
1.1.

PETER [(...)] a Greek name. Not the Proper name, but rather the Surname of
this Apostle, Act. 10.5. His proper name was Simon, an Hebrew name (...) i. e.
An hearer. From (...) To Hear. Act. 10.5. Ioh. 1.43. Christ surnamed him
Peter. This surname was 1 Promised to him by Christ when he was first called to
be Christ's Disciple, Ioh. 1.43. 2. Given to him by Christ when he called him to
the Apostleship, etc. Mark. 10.16. Luke 6.14. 3. Confirmed to him by Christ
also, upon Peter's firm and excellent confession of Christ, Matt. 16.17. Peter
in Greek is the same with Kephas or Kipha in Syriack, both signify a Stone.
Christ gave him this name by Anticipation, in reference to that firm and solid
Confession of Faith touching Christ, which Peter should, yea did make; and on
which Faith confessed, as on a Rock, Christ did promise to build his Church,
etc. Matthew. 16.16. etc. Which was fulfilled, Peter preaching the first Sermons
whereby both Jews and Gentiles were converted to Christ, and the first
foundation of the Christian Church after Christ was laid, Act. 2.14. etc. 10
34. etc. Which was the Privilege conferred by Christ upon Peter peculiarly
above all the Apostles. Peter was the son of Iona, and brother of Andrew; by
trade they were Fishers, whence Christ called them to be Fishers of men, Matthew.
4.18. ^eter had his notable Eminencies; As 1. (...) singular courage, zeal,
and boldness for expressing himself, Matthew. 26.3. Luke 22, 23. Act. 2.14.
Hereupon counted one of the three pillars of the Primitive Church, Gal. 2.9. 2.
He made that admirable Confession of Christ, Matthew. 16.16. 3. He was one of the
three which Christ took up into the Mount to see his glorious transfiguration,
Matthew. 17.1. etc. Mark. 9.2. Luke 9.28. 4. He was one of the three which Christ
took out from his Apostles to accompany him in his bitter Agony, Matthew. 26.36,
37. etc. 5. Christ after his resurrection eminently restored him to the
exercise of his Pastoral office, by his threefold profession of his sincere
love to Christ, after his threefold denial of Christ, Ioh. 21.15, 16, 17. He
had also his remarkable Infirmities. 1. Inconsiderately cut off Malchus his
Ear, Matthew. 26.51. etc. 2. Self-confidently presumed against denying Christ,
Matthew. 26.31. to 36. 3. Shamefully denied Christ thrice, and every time worse
then other, Matthew. 26.69, to 75* 4. And walked not with a right foot in the
beginning of his Ministry, drawing the Gentiles to Iudaize among the Jews,
etc. Gal. 2.14. etc.

When and Whence this Epistle was written. It Is more then probable Peter wrote
this Epistle by Sylvanus to the Jews of the dispersion while he was now at
Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.12, 13. There was a Babylon in Chaldea, Psalm. 137. A Babylon
in Egypt. And in resemblance hereunto the mystical Babylon, viz. Rome, Rev.
14.1. and 16.19. and 17.5. and 18.2* 10, 21. Now Papists themselves upon this
place generally contend, that here by Babylon is meant Rome, that they may
prove Peter was at Rome, Fenardent. in loc. But they forget how herein they
confess Rome to be that wicked Babylon destined to destruction, Rev. 17. and
18. Luther leaves every man to abound in his own sense which Babylon it was.
Pareus thinks that Babylon in Chaldea is to be here understood, where Peter the
Apostle of the Circumcision preached to the Jews: and that no one reason can
be given why Peter should conceal the name of Rome, had he intended Rome. D.
Par. Com. in 1 Pet. 5.13. From that phrase, if any man suffer as a Christian, 1
Pet. 4.16. intimates that this Epistle was written after Antioch, had received
the faith, for there the disciples were first called Christians, Act. 11.26.
and it was about the same time, that James was crowned with Martyrdom, Act.
12.1, 2.

Occasion. The strangers that came up to Jerusalem at Pentecost, were many of
them converted by Peter's Sermon, and so baptized Acts 2. to whom therefore
Peter here writes, as to newborn babes, 1 Pet. 2.2. weak, and as yet unsettled
in the faith, and upon their return into their own countries, much exercised
for Christ's sake with afflictions and crosses, as the current of the Epistle
manifests.

Scope. That therefore the Apostle as a spiritual father, might confirm these
his children in faith, against all troubles and persecution, he writes to them
all this Epistle, assuring them, that the faith or doctrine of grace wherein
they stood, was the true grace of God, and cons^quently he exhorts and stirs
them up to persevere therein. To grow and abound in grace and godliness. This
the great drift of both his Epistles, See 1 Pet. 5.12. and 2 Pet. 3.1. etc.

Principal parts of the Epistle to this end, are, I. The Inscription, c. 1, 1,
2. II. The Substance of the Epistle it self, which is principally Hortatory,
in reference to that grace of God. He incites them, 1. To the constant exercise
and improvement of that grace of God, whereby they are brought into a
regenerate and sanctified state; and this concerns them all in their general
calling as Christians, c. 1, 3. to c. 2. v. 13. 2. To the due exercise of
grace, in respect of their respective conditions and relations wherein they
stand toward others. And this exhortation concerns them severally, according
to their respective particular callings and conditions. viz. How 1. Subjects
are to behave themselves toward magistrates, c. 2, 13. to 18. 2. Servants
toward their masters, ver. 18. to end. 3. Wives toward their husbands, and
husbands toward their wives, c. 3, 1. to 8. 4. All brethren toward one
another, v. 8. 5. Distressed and afflicted ones toward oppressors and
Persecutors, c 3, 9. to c. 5, 1. 6. Presbyters toward their flocks, and the
younger toward the Elder, c. 5, 1. to middle of v. 5. 7. How all of them
should carry themselves toward others, themselves, and God, v. 5. to 10. And
so he sweetly closes up the whole series of his exhortations, with a
patheticall prayer to the God of all grace, for their stablishment and
perfection in grace after their short afflictions: concluding it with a
grateful doxology unto God, v. 10, 11. III. Conclusion of the Epistle,
containing an intimation of his Scope in writing, salutations, and a
valediction, c. 5, 12, 13, 14.


II Peter:
THe II. Catholic Epistle of PETER the Apostle. The Apostle himself calls
this his Second Epistle. He writes it to the same people, to whom he wrote his
first, viz. To the believing Jews dispersed, and in effect to the same end, 2
Pet. 3.1, 2. and 1.12, 13, 14, 15.

Some few writers have doubted of the Authority of this Epistle, (as also of
that of James, of the second and third of John, and of the Epistle of Jude,) as
Eusebius intimates, Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 22. Hieronym. in Catal. vir.
illustr. in Petro. Nor is it found in the Syriack version.

B^t diverse cogent Arguments persuade us that this is an Apostolical Epistle,
and written by Peter, As 1. The inscription mentions the same Penman of this
Epistle with the first, viz. Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of Jesus
Christ. 2 Pet. 1.1. He that wrote this Epistle, testifies, that he must shortly
put off this his Tabernacle, as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed him, 2 Pet.
1.14. to whom did Christ show this but to Peter? John 21.17. 3. He that wrote
this Epistle, was with Christ upon the Mount at his transfiguration, beheld his
majesty, -- and heard that voice of the father from heaven, when he was with
Christ on the holy Mount, This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, 2
Pet. 1.16, 17, 18. Now there were only three, viz. Peter, James and John in the
Mount with Christ, at his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.1, 2. therefore it must be
written by one of them three, (and by whomsoever of them, it is of
Apostolical, yea of divine Authority,) but unto James or John none ever yet
ascribed it, nor is there any reason so to do, but many to the contrary:
therefore it must needs be confessed to be written by Peter. 4. He that writes
this Epistle, calls it his Second Epistle, and intimates he wrote them both to
the same persons, viz. the dispersed believing Jews. compare 2 Pet. 1.1. and
3.1. with 1 Pet. 1.1. 5. He that wrote this Epistle calls Paul his beloved
brother, commends him, and approves the Authority of his Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.15,
16. which were too much for any, but for an Apostolical pen. 6. An holy
Apostolical spirit breathes throughout this whole Epistle, both in his
exhortations to holy duties, monitions against false-teachers and Apostasy, and
predictions of things to come. 7. The style and phrase Apostolical and
consonant enough to that of Peter's first Epistle. Hist. Magd. Cent. 1. l. 2. c.
4. 8. To all these may be added the consent of ancient Writers, that count this
Epistle Canonical and Apostolical, Council. Laodicen. Can. 59. Carthaginens.
3. Athanas. in Synops. Damascen. l. 4. c. 18. Epiphan. Here Is. 76. August. l. 2.
De Doctrine. Christian. c. 8. And Beda in Comment. wonders how any should doubt
of the Authority of this Epistle, when the Penman has put his name in the
beginning, and testifies he was with the Lord in the holy mount.

So that this Epistle is of unquestionable authority.

Peter made this Epistle a little before his death, 2 Pet. 1.14.

Occasion and Scope. Peter considering, that shortly he must put off the
Tabernacle of his body 2 Pet. 1.14. that some were too negligent of making
their calling and election sure; that there then were, and afterward would be
false teachers and seducers in the Church, and scoffers against the second
coming of Christ; Therefore Peter wrote this Epistle to stir them up, by
putting them in remembrance of those things which had been preached among them,
2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14. and 3.1, 2. specially inciting them to progress in grace,
to watchfulness against false teachers and scoffers, and to a preparedness
for the coming of Christ, as the whole current of the Epistle evidences.

Principal parts.

I. Inscription of the Epistle, c. 1, 1, 2. II. Substance of the Epistle, which
is 1. Hortatory, exhorting them to progress and perseverance in grace and
piety, c. 1. 2. Monitory, warning them to take heed of those heretical and
blasphemous seducers which should creep into the Church, threatening destruction
to them, c. 2. 3. Prophetical, foretelling of sensual scoffers against
Christ's coming in the last days: and of the day of judgment, the new heavens
and new earth; whereunto they should prepare themselves by piety, c. 3, 1. to
17. III. Conclusion of the Epistle, with a summary recital of his former
exhortations, and with a doxology unto our Lord Jesus Christ, c. 3, 17, 18.
I John.
THe first Catholic Epistle of JOHN the Apostle. This Epistle has this Title
in all the ancient manuscript Copies. Bez. Annot. ante hanc Ep. Which as Beza
there well advertiseth us, we are thus to understand, viz. The first Epistle of
John the Apostle which is Catholic; for of all John's Epistles, this only is
Catholic or General, the other two being particular. viz. The 2d to the
Elect Lady and her children; The 3d to Gaius, and therefore it were improper to
call it the first General Epistle in any other sense.

Penman of this Epistle, is John the Apostle, as is evident. 1. From the Greek
Title, (...) i. e. The first Catholic Epistle of John the Apostle; thus all
ancient Greek Copies have it. Bez. 2. From his manner of speaking of Christ,
asserting his divinity in diverse passages of this Epistle, as 1 John 1.1, 2.
and 2.22.23, 24. and 5.5, 6, 7. etc. and calling him the Word 1 John 1.1. and 1
John 5.7. John being most sublime in asserting the Godhead of Christ, John 1.1,
2, 3. etc. and Rev. often; and no writers in the New Testament, stiling Christ
the Word but John in his Gospel, John 1.1, 14. in his Revelation, Rev. 1.2. and
19.13. and here in this Epistle. 3. From that eminent and singular Character of
John's spirit. viz. The spirit of love, most predominant and conspicuous all
along this Epistle, as in his Gospel and Revelation. John was the disciple whom
Jesus loved above all his disciples. John 13.23. and 19.26. and 20.2. and 21.7,
20. He was a mere compound of sweetest love; in all his writings, breaths
nothing in a manner but love* Hence excellently Calvin, Haec Epistola, prorsus
digna est ejus discipuli spiritu, qui prae aliis ideo a Christo dilectus fuit,
ut ipsum nobis familiarem redderet. i. e. This Epistle is altogether worth the
Spirit of that disciple, which was therefore beloved of Christ above the rest,
that he might render him familiar unto us. Calv. Argum. in 1. Joan. Of John,
see more in Annot. on Gosp. of John. John therefore being the undoubted Penman
of this Epistle, it is of unquestionable Authority, Eusebius and Hieronymus
testify, That there never was doubt in the Church about the Author or Authority
of this Epistle. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 25. Hieronym, in Catalog.
Augustine calls it satis dulcem and satis memorabilem in Ecclesia dei, quod in
ipsa charitas maxim commendetur. i. e. A most sweet Epistle and most memorable
in the Church of God, because love is especially commended therein. Aug. Praef.
in 1. Joan. Ep. and says that orbem ter^arum ipsa edificavit, i. e. It has
edified the world, Aug. Tract. 7.

When and Whence this Epistle was written, John wrote his Gosp. at Ephesus,
Iraen. l. 3. c. 1. advers. haeres. This Epistle seems to be written after his
Gospel. He wrote it when he was now old; thinks Hierome. And being old, he
departed not from Asia, therefore is probable he wrote it at Ephesus, Zauch.
Prolegom. in 1. Joan. p. 6. John lived after the other Apostles and wrote after
them.

Occasions. I. John observed that in his days there were many heretical
Teachers, Seducers, which he calls Antichrists, (and by a prophetical spirit
foresaw that afterward there would arise many more.) Epiphanius reckon^ up
these before and in John's days, viz. 1. Simonians. 2. Menandrians. 3.
Saturnilians. 4. Basilidians. 5. Nicolaitanes* of whom Rev. 2. 6. Gnostics. 7.
Carpocratians, from Carpocrates in Asia; who taught men must sin, and do the
will of all the devils; otherwise they could not enter into heaven. 8.
Cerinthians and Merinthians, from Cerinthus and Morinthus, who denied Christ's
divinity, said he was not before Mary, that he was a mere man. 9. Habionits,
who held the same heresy. 10. Nazaraei, that urged Moses law, See Epiphan. in
Panario. l. 1. Tom. 2. II. John took notice of diverse carnal believers, who
made great profession of knowledge, faith and piety toward God, who yet lived
ungodly to the scandal of the Gospel. III. Finally, John considered how
necessary it was to encourage true believers in faith, and promote them to
assurance of their interest in eternal life. These gave John Occasion of
writing this Epistle by way of remedy.

Scope. The blessed Apostle John in this Epistle principally levels at these
three ends.

1. To detect and confute heretical and Antichristian Seducers, and warn the
believers against them and their false Doctrine. These things have I written to
you, concerning them that seduce you 1 John 2.26. particularly and especially
proving, That Christ is true and eternal God, against Corinthians and
Hebionites, c. 1. That Christ is true man, and assumed true flesh, against
Cerdonians, Manichees, Priscillianists and Valentinians, (which by a
Prophetical spirit, he foresaw would follow,) c. 4. That Jesus is the true
Christ, the promised Messiah against Iew^ and Nazarites, c. 2. That the Father,
Word and holy Ghost, are three true distinct Persons, of one essence; against
Sabelli^ns, etc. c. 5. That they that are born of God ought not, nay, as such,
cannot commit sin; and such as do not righteousness are of the devil, not of
God, against the Carpocratians, c. 3. 2. To stir up all that profess to know
God and believe in him, that they walk in light, not in darkness, 1. John 1.5,
6, 7. as Christ walked, that they keep the Commandments, especially abound in
love, 1 John 2.4, 5, 6. and all along the Epistle. 3. To provoke true believers
to growth in faith and grace; and to help forward their assurance of their
interest in eternal life.
This last end is clearly professed in 1 John 5.13. These things have I written
unto you, that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that
ye have eternal life. -- And therefore it is most singularly observable of
this sweet and precious Epistle, what a multitude of Marks, Signs or
Discoveries of believer's spiritual State, are here plainly and purposely laid
down for this end, more then in any other so short a piece of Scripture in the
whole Bible. Which Signs are here reduced to several heads, and set down for
the help and comfort of the Readers, in some of which, at least the weakest (if
a sincere Christian*) may find abundant soule-refreshing, and
heart-establishment.

I. Evidences, Signs or Discoveries of Gods love to us. 1. Christ's being sent
to lay down his life for us, that we might live by him, 1 John 3.16. and 4.9,
10. 2. Adoption, That we should be called the sons of God, 1 John 3.1. 3. Our
not loving the world, nor the things of the world inordinately, 1 John 2.15,
16, 17. 4. Our love to God, which is an effect, or reflexive beam of Gods love
to us, 1 John 4.19.
II. Evidences or Signs of our Regeneration, Sonneship, etc. 1. That the world
knows us not, 1 John 3.1. 2. True believing that Jesus is the Christ, 1 John
5.1. 3. Not committing sin, 1 John 3.9. and 5.18. Especially in respect of that
great sin of sins, The wicked one touches him not, 1 John 5.18. 4. Hope (if
not assurance) that we shall be conform to God in his glorious appearing, 1
John 3.2, 3. 5. In hope of glory, purifying our selves as God is pure, 1 John
2.3. 6. Overcoming erroneous heretical spirits, 1 John 4.1, 4. 7. Overcoming
the world by faith, 1 John 5.4, 5. 8. Doing of righteousness, 1 John 2.29. and
3.10. 9. True love of the brethren, 1 John 3.10.14. and 4.7.
III. Evidences or Signs that we are of the truth, of the true number of Gods
people. 1. Having an unction from the holy one teaching us all things, 1 John
2.19, 20, 27. 2. The Testimony of an upright heart or conscience, 1 John 3.19,
20, 21. 3. Perseverance with the faithful in Christ and the truth 1 John
2.19.27.
IIII. Evidences or Signs of being in light, not in darkness; in life, not in
death. 1. Having the Son, 1 John 5.11.12. 2. Loving, and not hating our
brother, 1 John 2.9, 10, 11. and 3.14, 15.
V. Evidences or Signs of the true knowledge of God. 1. Keeping his
Commandments, 1 John 2.3, 4. 2. Denial of sin, 1 John. 3.6. 3. Mutual love
of one another, 1 John 4.7, 8.
VI. Evidences or Signs of our love to God and Jesus Christ. 1. The casting
out of base fear, 1 John 4.18. 2. Not loving the world, and things in the
world inordinately, 1 John 2.15.16. 3. Keeping of his Commandments and his
Word cheerfully, 1 John 2.5. and 5.3. 4. Opening our bowels of compassion to
brethren in need, 1 John 3.17. and 1 John 5.1. 1 John 4.11, 12, 20, 21.
VII. Evidences or Signs of our Communion with God and Jesus Christ. 1. His
spirit given us, 1 John 3.24. and 4.13. 2. The Truth's abiding in us, 1 John
2.24. 3. Confessing that Jesus is the Son of God, 1 John 4.15. 4. Not doing
sin 1 John 3.6, 8. 5. Love to God and dwelling therein, 1 John 4.16. 6.
Walking in light, not in darkness. 1 John 1.5, 6 7. 7. Walking as Christ
walked, 1 John 2.6. 8. Keeping his Words and Commandments, 1 John 2.3, 4, 5.
and 3.23, 24. 9. Brotherly love, 1 John. 4.12.
VIII. Finally, Evidences or Signs of true brotherly love, or love of Gods
children. 1 John 5.1*2. 1. Knowing of God, 1 John 4.7, 8. 2. Loving of God, 1
John 5.1, 2. 3. Keeping Gods Commandments, 1 John 5.2. 4. Not loving in word
and in tongue, but in deed and in truth, 1 John 3.18. 5. Real compassion to
our brother in need, yea even hazzarding our life for him in some cases 1 John
3.16, 17.

By these Evidences, Signs or Characters of our spiritual Estate, clearly
laid down in this Excellent Epistle, the weak in faith may become strong in
Assurance, and the strong may become stronger: yea all that truly believe in
the name of the Son of God, (if the fault be not their own) may hereby come to
know, that they have eternal life. All which Evidences I shall endeavor very
shortly (God willing,) more fully to open and unfold in a distinct Treatise,
called,
Believers Evidences for eternal life. A subject which, I hope, to gracious
hearts will be most welcome and seasonable, in these sad afflicting days; To
help forward their Assurance for heaven, when they can have no assurance of any
thing on earth,

Principal parts. in reference to these excellent ends are.

I. The Proem to the whole Epistle, declaring, 1. What the Apostle treats of.
viz. Of Christ the word of life. viz. His person, God-man: and his office. 2.
What he is about to say of Christ; not any novelty, but what was from the
beginning; not any uncertainty, but that whereof they were infallible
witnesses. 3. To what purpose he will treat of these things, that they may have
Communion with God, and so their joy be full, they become happy, c. 1.1.2.3, 4.
II. The Substance of the Epistle it self, which is either, 1. Practical, full
of heavenly exhortations. viz. 1. To holiness of life and conversation. viz.
1. Not to walk in darkness, but in light, c. 1. v. 5, 6, 7. 2. Not to deny sin
to be in us, but penitently to confess it, c. 1, 8, 9, 10. 3. To avoid sin,
and yet if sin overtake us to repair to Christ our Propitiation c. 2, 1, 2.
4. To add to our knowledge of God, true obedience to his Word, c. 2, 3. to 9.
5. To brotherly love, c. 2, 9. to 15. 6. To take heed of inordinate love of the
world. c. 2, 15, 16, 17, 2. To beware of the dangerous Antichrists, and
heretical Seducers, abounding in the world, especially ^orinthians and
Ebionites denying Christ's Godhead, c. 2, 18. to the end. 3. To abandon
practicing of sin, as inconsistent with the state of grace, contrary to the
wicked seducements of the Carpocratians forementioned, who taught men to sin,
c. 3, 1. to 11. 4. To sincere real brotherly love, by many Arguments, c. 3,
11. to the end. and c. 4, 7. to the end. 5. To take heed of believing every
spirit, but to try them, especially such as deny Christ's Manhood, (as after did
the Cerdonians, Manich^es, Priscillianists and Valentinians,) c. 4, 1. to 7.
2. Dogmaticall, wherein he asserts that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God,
and true man, and this from diverse Arguments and Testimonies which we should
believe, that we may have eternal life begun, c. 5, 1. to 14. for perfecting
whereof we should pray; where he directs us how, and for whom to pray, c. 5.14.
to 21.
III. Conclusion, with a serious monition against idolatry, c. 5, 21.
II John.
THe second Epistle of JOHN the Apostle. This Epistle of John is nor, as the
first, Catholic or General: but Particular, being written to particular
persons, viz. The Elect Lady, and her children. Who she was, is not known; Some
think that ELECT was her prop^r name: but that is improbable, for then John
would not have said, To the Elect Lady; but, To the Lady ELECT. Some turn this
into an Allegory, and say that by the Elect Lady John intended the whole
Christian Church: But this is most unlikely, and plainly repugnant to this
Epistle it self, for, 1. To write to the whole Christian Church under the
Notion of an Elect Lady is so unusual, that we find no such thing done in all
the New Testament. 2. This Epistle not only mentions this Lady and her
children, v. 1.4. But also sends her salutations from the children of her Elect
Sister, v. 13. 3. The Apostle speaks of his intention to come and see her, and
speak face to face. Which cannot be understood of the whole Christian Church,
ver. 12. She is thought to be some eminent religious Matron of great Estate,
who much relieved and supported the members of the Church in her days. Bez.
Annot. in 2 Joan. Piscat. in 2 Joan.

Penman. Some think was another John then the Apostle, as is testified by
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 39. But this seems to be a plain mistake, for 1.
The Greek Copies call it in the Title, The second Epistle of John the Apostle.
2. The matter of the Epistle is not only Divine and Apostolical; but notably
owns John to be the writer, wherein Christian love, walking in the truth, and
taking heed of Seducers and Antichrists, are pressed as in the first Epistle of
John. So that this is John's genuine language. Compare these passages among
others, viz. 1 Ioh. 2* 7. with 2 Ioh. 5. -- and 1 Ioh. 2.23. with 2 Ioh. 9. --
and 1 Ioh. 4.1, 2, 3. with 2 Ioh. 7. -- and 1 Ioh. 5.3. with 2 Ioh. 6. etc. 3.
The Salutation is plainly Apostolical. ver. 1, 2, 3. And notably relisheth of
John's Spirit. 4. Both ancient and modern Writers, account this Epistle
Canonical, and ascribe it unto John the Apostle, Council. Carthagin. 3. Can.
4.7. Council. Laodic. c. ult. Hieronym, in Epist. 85. ad Euagrium. August. de
Doctrine. Christian, l. 2. c. 8. Sentent. Episcoporum Council. Carthaginens. apud
Cyprian. Sent. 81. Cyprian op. edit. 1593. p. 449. Beda. Piscat. Bez. in 2
Johan. So that this Epistle being written by John the Apostle, is of
unquestionable authority.

Occasion. Some think that John's familiar Christian acquaintance with this
Elect Lady, gave him Occasion of writing this Epistle. Others rather think it
was written against the Antichristian Heresy of Basilidis and his followers,
who taught that Christ was not a true man but a phantasm, and therefore that he
neither did, nor suffered those things which he is said to do and suffer.
Epiphan. Here Is. 24. Compare 2 Ioh. 7.

Scope. To incite the Elect Lady and her children, To persevere in the truth,
and carefully to shun all heretical Seducers, that bring not Christ's Doctrine.
A^ also to adorn the truth, with love and good works.

Principal parts. To this end, are, I. The inscription of the Epistle,
containing* 1. The writer. 2. Persons written to. 3. A testification of the
Apostle's and other's sincere love to the Lady and her children. 4. His pious
wish o^ supplication for them, ver. 1, 2, 3. II. The substance of the Epistle,
wherein the Apostle, 1. Congratulates with the Lady, that some of her children
walked in the truth, ver. 4. 2. Exhorts to constancy in the ancient Doctrine of
love and truth, ver. 5, 6. 3. Warnes them against Seducers, denying Christ's
incarnation, showing the danger of them, and forbidding all fellowship with
them, ver. 7. to 12. III. The conclusion of the Epistle with, 1. Intimation
that he omits writing many other things, hoping to come to them and speak them
by word of mouth, verse 12. 2. Salutations from her Sisters children, ver. 13.


III John.
THe third Epistle of JOHN the Apostle. This Epistle is not General, but
Particular; written to Gaius.

Penman of this Epistle, also was John the Apostle, and therefore it is
Authentic and Canonical. Both these are ev^dent by all the four Reasons
alleged touching John's second Epistle. And the word, phrases, and method of
these two Epistles harmoniously agree, as an in^entive Reader may well observe.
John directs this Epistle, To the well-beloved Gaius, but what Gaius this was
is not so evident. Scripture mentions three persons of this name, viz. 1. Gaius
of Macedonia, Act. 19.21, 2. Gaius of Derbe, Act. 20.4. 3. Gaius of Corinth, 1
Cor. 1.14. Whom Paul calls, Gaius mine host, and of the whole Church, writing
from Corinth to the Romans. Romans 16.23. This Gaius was a man eminent for
Hospitality, especially to the Ministers and members of the Church of Christ.
Perhaps this Gaius of Corinth was the Gaius to whom here John also writes, for
1. He is singularly commended here for his charity and hospitality, 3 Ioh. ver.
5, 6. 2. The consent of writers subscribes hereunto. See Lorin. Comment. in 3
Johan. Epist. ver. 1. However he was a very eminent man in the Church.

When or where this Epistle was written, is not certainly known.

Occasion. The bountifulness and Hospitablenesse of Gaius, which John had some
occasion to improve toward some Ministers that went to preach to the Gentiles,
who seem to have brought this Epistle from John to Gaius, See ver. 6, 7, 8.

Scope, To request Gaius, according to his wonted bounty and benevolence to the
Saints, to bring forward on their journey certain Ministers that went to preach
the Gospel to the Gentiles. To brand Diotrephes, and commend to him Demetrius.

Principal parts.

I. The Inscription, mentioning, 1. Who wrote this Epistle. 2. To whom. 3. The
wel-wishing Prayer for him, verse 1, 2. II. The Substance of the Epistle, which
is partly, 1. Gratulatory, wherein he rejoices at Gaius his 1. W^lking in the
truth, ver. 3, 4. 2. Charity and Hospitality to the Brethren and strangers,
ver. 5, 6. 2. Hortatory, wherein by diverse Arguments insinuated, he exhorts him
to bring on their journey certain brethren that went to preach the Gospel to
the Gentiles, ver. 6, 7, 8. Intimating that he wrote to the Church about this
matter also, but fears it would be to little effect, because of Diotrephes his
pride, contemning the Apostle; neither receiving the brethren himself, nor
suffering others to do it, whom therefore he threatens, ver. 9, 10, 11. But
contrariwise commends Demetrius, ver. 13.
III. Conclusion of the Epistle, with 1. An Apology for his writing so short an
Espistle, because he trusted shortly to see him. 2. Salutations, ver. 13, 14.
Jude.
THe Catholic (or general) Epistle of the Apostle JUDAS. Thus denominated,
from the Penman who wrote it, and from the persons to whom it was written, viz.
the same to whom Peter wrote his second Epistle; For substance being both the
same.

Penman. Judas the brother of James, Jud. 1. This is Originally an Hebrew name,
viz. (...) Iehudah, i. e. Praise; from (...) Hodah, i. e. He has confessed, he
has praised. This name was first given to the fourth son of Iakob, because
at his birth his mother praised the Lord. Genesis 29.35. Matthew. 2.6. There were
two Apostles that had this name, viz. 1. Judas Iscariot that had the bag, and
betrayed Christ, Matthew. 10.4. And afterward in some sort repented, Restored
the thirty pieces, hanged himself, Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5. So that he burst asunder
in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out, and so he went to his own place,
Act. 1.18, 25. 2. Judas the brother of James, Luke 6.16. Act. 1.13. viz. Of
James the son of Alpheus, who was famous at Jerusalem among the Apostles,
Act. 15. And 21.28. Where he is conceived to keep his chief abode, that he
might teach the Jews that resorted thither out of all Nations; unto which
Jews especially Judas here seems principally to write, and therefore mentions
James. Bez. Annot. in Iud. 1. This Judas is also called Lebbeus, i. e. Hearty;
and surnamed Thaddaeus which is in Syriack the same with Judas in Hebrew,
Matthew. 10.3. This Judas is supposed to preach the Gospel in Mesopotamia,
Pontus, Egypt and Persia, where the Magi slew him for his free and faithful
reproving of their superstitions.

Authority of this Epistle, (though suspected heretofore by some, and that upon
very inconsiderable grounds; Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 23. Yet) is now
generally acknowledged to be Divine; especially considering that, 1. Judas the
brother of James, one of the Apostles wrote it, Jude 1. 2 Pet. 1.21. 2. The
matter of it, yea and most of the very phrases and words, are the same with
those of the second Epistle of Peter, if diligently compared. See the Parallel
by P. Pareus Com. in Jude. 3. Antiquity have received this Epistle as
Authentic, and part of the Divine Canon. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
and lib. 3. c. 22. Hieronym. in Catal. vir Illustr. Council. Laodicens. Council.
Carthaginens. Athanasus, Augustine and others who recite the Catalogue of the
Books of Scripture, reckon Iudes Epistle among the rest.

Arguments or Objections to the contrary are invalid. These the principal.

Object. 1. This Epistle recites Histories no where else to be found in
Scripture, as the contending of Michael the Archangel, with the Devil about the
body of Moses, Jude 9.

Answ. 1. Diverse stories are pointed at in New Testament. Which we find not in
the Old Testament. As that Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, 2. Tim. 3.8.
That at Mount Sinai, Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12.21.
Shall therefore these Epistles Authority be suspected? 2. These stories (though
formerly unwritten, but happily derived by tradition from hand to hand, yet)
now are written by guidance of the Spirit of God. And the writing of them
rather assures us of the truth of these Histories, then detracts from the
Authority of the Books wherein they are recorded. 3. This story has some
footsteps in Deuteronomy. 34.9. Whereupon some say, The Angel would have buried Moses,
but the Devil challenged Moses to be his own, because of his killing the
Egyptian, and therefore withstood him. But others better; God knowing Isreal's
pronenesse to Idolatry, least they should commit Idolatry with Moses dead body
(as after they did with the brazen Serpent) buried him no man knowing where,
and the Devil, endeavoring to discover it, the Angel withstood him.

Obj. 2. Jude mentions the Prophecy of Enoch, ver. 14, 15. The Old Testament
has no such Prophecy.

Ans. 1. Some think in Iudes time there was a Canonical Book of Enoch extant,
as Tertull. lib. de Habit muliebr. Beda com. in Ep. Iud. 2. Others say better
then they, suppose Enoch's Book were Apocryphal, yet in Apocryphal Books
there is some truth, and why may not this Apostle allege this passage out of
Enochs Prophecy, without approving that whole Book, or disvesting this Epistle
of its Authority; as well as the Author to the Hebrew, allege some passages
out of the Book of Maccabees, Heb. 11. Or Paul some Sentences out of Heathen
Authors and Poets, 1 Cor. 15.32. Tit. 1.12. Act. 17.28. 1 Timothy 2.12. and 5.23.
Tit. 1.3. 3. Others think this Prophecy of Enoch was rather real then verbal,
viz. Respecting the Order of the Patriarchs, that as Death by reason of sin
had Reigned over the six first Fathers, Adam Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalelel,
Iared, but could not touch the seventh, Enoch: so death shall Reign ove^ the
world 6000 years, (which shall so long continue) but in the 7000. years,
eternal life shall begin; and death shall be swallowed up in Victory. 4. But
others best of all understand here, as the Text seems evidently to carry it,
Enochs verbal Prophecy, which though not written, yet Jude received by
Tradition, or rather by Revelation of the same spirit of God by which Enoch
prophesied, and here recorded as part of the Divine Canon.

Obj. 3. Jude alleadges other Apostles sayings, ver. 17. Therefore seems
rather to be a Disciple of the Apostles, then an Apostle himself, especially
seeing he calls not himself an Apostle, but the servant of Jesus Christ, ver.
1. And therefore this Epistle not authentical.

Ans. 1. Though it could be proved Jude was no Apostle, yet it therefore
follows not, his Epistle is not Authentical. Mark and Luke, not Apostles, yet
the three Books they wrote are of unquestionable authority. The authority of
Books of Scriptur are not from the Penmen writing them, but from the Spirit of
God inditing them. 2. Daniel cites Jeremiah, Dan. 9.2. Ezekiel cites Daniel,
Ezekiel. 14.19. Were they therefore not Prophets, but Prophets Disciples? Peter
alleges Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. Was Peter therefore no Apostle but
only a Disciple? 3. Iudes alleging the other Apostles deroga^es not from the
authority of his Epistle, but proves that Jude wrote after both Paul and Peter,
in whose Epistle these predictions are extant, 1 Timothy 4.1. etc. 2 Timothy 3.1. 2
Pet. 2.1. etc. 4. Finally, though Judas here call not himself an Apostle, that
argues not therefore he was not an Apostle. James in his Epistle, John in his
three Epistles, Paul in his Epistle to the Philippians, and in both his
Epistles to the Thessalonians superscribe not themselves Apostles* were they
therefore no Apostles? But Judas here styles himself the brother of James, and
that is full as much as if he had styled himself an Apostle, for the texts are
express that Judas the Brother of James was one of the twelve Apostles. See
Luke 6.16. Act. 1.13.

Obj. 4. But Jude the Apostle taught in Persia, and therefore had he written
this Epistle, he would rather have written it in the Persian, then Grecian
tongue.

Ans. 1. Its not infallibly certain that Jude was in Persia when he wrote this
Epistle. 2. No necessity of the Apostles writing in the language of the people
with whom they then lived. Matthew lived among the Ethiopians, Paul at Rome
when he wrote some of his Epistles, yet they wrote not in Ethiopick or Latin,
but in Greek. Greek being then the most common language in the world, the Holy
Ghost would have Greek to be the Original language for New Testament, as the
Hebrew especially for the Old. And Iudes Epistle is Catholic or General, and
therefore was written in Greek the general tongue.

When and Where this Epistle was written is uncertain. Some think this Apostle
was in Persia, or Asia Minor when he wrote it, viz. A year before he dyed, and
that he there dyed, anno 68. after Christ. Niceph. l. 4. c. 40.44. Probably he
wrote after both Paul and Peter, to whose writings he seems to have reference,
v. 17. the whole Epistle is as an Abstract of Peter's second Epistle.

Occasion, seems from the current of the Epistle, to be those abominable
heresies of the Simonians, Nicolaitanes, Gnostics, etc. abounding in those
times times who held Sin to be indifferent, women and al things to be common,
etc. Oecumen. Epiphan. in Haeres. Gnostic. Sec. Iud. 3.4.

Scope. To warn all the faithful in those times of the cursed and detestable
Heretics and Seducers that were cunningly crept in among them, that they
contend earnestly for the truth against all their damnable errors and
Heresies; and for purity and holiness of life, against all their impure
lustful licentious and ungodly p^actices. Jude 3, 4, 8, 10, 20, 21.

Principal parts. To this end are, I. Inscription of the whole Epistle,
expressing, 1. Penman who wrote this Epistle. 2. Parties to whom it was
written. 3. The Salutation of them, ver. 1, 2. II. The substance of the
Epistle, wherein are laid down, 1. The maine Proposition or Exhortation, To
contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints ver. 3. There
being so many lascivious heretical men crept in among them, ver. 4. 2.
Arguments enforcing this exhortation upon them, against these lascivious
Heritiques, demonstrating the damnablenesse and destructivenesse of their
ways, 1. By examples of Gods vengeance for like impieties and impurities in
former times, viz. Upon Israel for unbelief, ver. 5. Upon Angels for Apostasy,
ver. Upon Sodom and Gomorrha etc. For their lusts, ver. 7.

These examples he applies to these Seducers, 1. Describing them by their, 1.
Uncleanness, ver. 8. 2. Despising and reproaching Magistrates, ver. 8, 9. 3.
Impudency in reviling what they know not, ver. 10. 4. Brutish intemperance in
carnal pleasures, ver. 10. 5. Cruelty to their brethren. 6. Covetousness. 7.
Seditiousnesse, ver. 11. 8. Epicurisme in meats and drinks, ver. 12. 9.
Hypocrisy. 10. Instability. 11. Deadness and Barrenness to all good fruit,
ver. 12. 12. Wrathfulnesse. 13. Shameful uncleanness. 14. Levity and
inconstancy, ver. 13. 2. Threatening them, in general with woe, ver. 11, in
particular with eternal destruction, ver. 13.


2. By Testimonies, 1. Of Enoch. ver. 14.15. To which he adds further
descriptions of their viciousness, ver. 16. 2. Of the Apostles themselves. v.
17, 18. where he further describes these Heretics by their Separation from
Church assemblies, by their want of Gods Spirit. v. 9.
3. Hortatory Directions by way of Remedy, for 1. Mutual edification. 2.
Prayer, v. 20. 3. Love of God, ver. 21. 4. Different course to be taken by them
in recovering several persons from seducements, v. 22, 23. 5. Zeal against
all impurity, v. 23

III. Conclusion of the whole Epistle with adoxology to God, who is able to
keep them without spot and blameless, etc. v. 24, 25.


III. THE PROPHETICAL BOOK, Viz. THE Revelat.
THE PROPHETICAL BOOK of the New Testament, prophetically foretelling what
shall be the future condition of the Church of Christ in all ages, to the end
of the world, is the REVELATION OF JOHN THE DIVINE. This may well be called a
Prophetical Book; For 1 The Holy Ghost himself diverse times styles it A
Prophecy, Rev. 1.3. and 7.10, 18.19. 2 And the nature of the Book is chiefly
Prophetical, as the Series of the Book implies; and also some passages plainly
testify, that it treats of things, which must shortly come to pass, Rev. 1.1.
and things which shall be hereafter, Rev. 1.19.

Title, This book in Greek is called [(...)] i. e. The Apocalypse (or
Revelation,) of John the Divine* whereby are indigitated to us, both the nature
of the Book, and the Penman of it.

Nature of the Book, A Revelation. so called, because it Reveals and makes
known unto us secret hidden mysteries, and future events. Its true, this
Revelation, is not without mixture of much intricatenesse and obscurity, (as
all prophecies are enigmaticall and ambiguous to men, till they be effected,
but when the time prophesied is come, then they have a more clear, and certain
exposition. So Iraen. Advers. Haeres. l. 4. c. 43.) And this to exercise the
Reader to search out the truth, as August. de Civitat. dei, l. 20. c. 17. has
well observed.

Penman or isntrumental Author of it, viz. John the Theologue or Divine. What
John this was, some question. Eusebius mentions two John's, whose monuments were
to be seen at Ephesus, viz. John the Evangelist, who wrote the Gospel, and 1
Epistle of John: and John the Presbyter, who wrote 2. and 3. Epistle of John,
and the Revelation, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 39. To him also seems to
incline, Dionys. Alexandrinus in lib. de Repromissionibus, But that this is a
great mistake, and that JOHN the Evangelist and Apostle was Penman of this
Revelation, may be cleared by these considerations.

1. This Title attributes it to John the Divine. This Epithet we read no where
to be given to John the Presbyter, but belongs to John the Apostle and
Evangelist, [(...)] by way of peculiar emphasis, because like an Eagle he
soars aloft, writes more sublimely of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, both in
this Book, (in which D. Par^us has observed XLVIII. Arguments of Christ's
Divinity) as also in his Gospel, John 1.1. etc. and in his 1. Epistle. And the
King of Spaines Bible, of Montanus Edition, has this Greek Title before the
Revelation, [(...)] i. e. The Revelation of the Holy Apostle, and Evangelist
John the Divine, which Title clears this matter, and is consonant to Rev. 1.1,
2. (whether it were prefixed by John, or after by the Church,) nor is it any
way probable that Christ sent his Angel to any other John, then to the Apostle
with this Revelation.

2. John the Penman of this Book is so descr^bed, that John the Apostle and
Evangelist seems plainly to be indigitated, Revel. 1.1, 2. His servant John:
Who bare record of the word of God, and of the Testimony of Jesus Christ. Now
how notably did John bear record of the word of God, and testimony of Jesus
Christ? see John. 1.1.2.14. and 1 John 1, 1. and 5.9. compared with Revel.
19.13.

3. The style much resembles that of John's Gospel and Epistles. As for
instance; It is peculiar to John to style Christ, The word. compare John
1.1.14. 1 John 1.1. and 5.7. with Revel. 1.2. In his Gospel he styles Christ
the Lamb of God John, 1.29.36. so in the Revelation Christ is called the Lamb
at least 28. times.

4 That John who wrote this Revelation, had it in the I Will Patmos made known to
him, who was there for the name of God and Testimony of Jesus Christ Rev. 1.9.
And Histories mention no other John, but only John the Apostle to be in Patmos.
Banished thither by Domitian the Emperor for the Gospel's sake, near to period
of his Reign, (as Funccius computes) about the ninety seventh year after
Christ. See Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 16. and 18.

5. To these might be added the Harmonious consent of ancient Fathers, who
unanimously conclude, that John the Apostle penned this Book. Dionys. Areopag.
who was Paul's disciple, Act. 17. who wrote about the sixtieth year after
Christ, in those writings ascribed to him, calls the Apocalypse, A secret and
mystical vision of the beloved Disciple, Dionys. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 3.
Justin Martyr, who wrote in the one hundred and fiftieth year after Christ,
ascribes the Apocalypse to John, one of the Apostles of Christ. Justin. in
Dial. ad Tryphon. To which passage Eusebius relating, says, Justin mentions
the Apocalypse of John, plainly saying it is the Apostles, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
l. 4. c. 18. Irenaeus, who wrote in the eightieth year after Christ, says, And
what things soever John the disciple of the Lord saw in the Apocylapse --
Iraen. Advers. Haeres* l. 4 c. 50. and l. 4. c. 37. p. 373. A. Coloniae 1596.
To these might be added the suffrage of many more, as of Greek Fathers, Clem.
Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 12. Athanas. in Synops. Epiphan. Haeres. 51.54, 76.
Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Psalm. 91. of Latin fathers, as Tertull. contra Marcion l.
4. Cyprian. de e^hort. Martyr. c. 8.10.11.12. Ambros. in Psalm 50 and l. 3. de
spir. sanct. c. 21. August. de Civi^. dei l. 20. c. 7. and de Haeres. c. 30.
and de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 18. videantur Annot. in Irenae. l. 5. c. 30. p.
490. Colon. 1596. but in so plain a case these may suffice.

So that by all this, its plainly evident that the Penman of the Revelation was
John the Apostle, that wrote the Gospel, and the Epistles. The unfolding of his
name, and who he was more particularly, See in Annot. to John's Gospel.

Authority of this Book, is not Humane, but Divine. For,

1. This book was indicted by Jesus Christ himself the faithful and true
witness, who sent his Angel to testify the same to John the Apostle, and by
him to the Churches. The Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him, to
show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and
signified it by his Angel unto his servant John -- Rev. 1.1. and toward the
close of the book he says, I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you
these things in the Churches, Rev. 22.16. Note, this Revelation was given by
John the Apostle to the Churches, by an Angel to John, by Jesus Christ to that
Angel, by God to Jesus Christ: How punctually then is the Divine Authority of
it asserted?

2. It was penned by John the Apostle of Christ (who was divinly inspired and
acted by the Holy Ghost) as has bin formerly manifested, and therefore it is
of divine Authority, especially considering that this blessed Apostle was
commanded by Jesus Christ to write this Book, Saying I am Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last: and wh^^ thou see write in a Book, -- write the things
which thou have s^en, and the things which are, and the things which shall b^
hereafter, Rev. 1.11 19. See also Rev. 2.1.8.12.18. and 3.1, 7, 14. and 14.13.
and 19.9. and 21.5.

3. The nature of the book imports the divine Authority of it. For 1. It is
eminently Prophetical, speaking of things that shall be hereafter, Rev. 1.1,
19. and 22.7, 10, 18, 19. and the prophecies of this book, are touching future
events in reference to the Church to the end of the world, till the Church, the
Lambs wife, shall be fully ready for complete marriage with the Lamb, Rev.
19.7, 8, 9. So that neither ancient writers nor any other, but such as were
inspired with a spirit of prophecy from the al-knowing God, could foretell
these things to come, Isa^. 41.22. 2. In the prophetical expressions of it, it
is consonant to other prophetical books, and gives light to them, Daniel,
Zechariah, especially Ezekiel, As in the particulars of eating up the Book,
Rev. 10.9, 10. with Ezekiel. 2.8. and 3.3. of sealing Gods promise, Rev. 7.2, 3.
with Ezekiel. 9. of the four living Creatures, Rev. 4.6, 7. with Ezekiel. 1.5.6. of
Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.8. with Ezekiel. 38.2. and 39.1. of the measuring of the
Temple and City, Rev. 21.15. with Ezekiel. 40.3. etc. Of the two olive trees, etc.
Rev. 11.4. with Zech. 4.3, 11, 14. etc. 3. Many things foretold in this Book
prophetically, are fulfilled and come to pass actually, As Interpreters have
observed in many particulars. Therefore this Book is of divine Authority,
Ierem. 28.9.4. Promise of explaining how long the Idolatrous and Tyrannical
Kingdom of Antichrist should last, was made to Daniel the Prophet, Dan. 12.4,
9. which some conceive to be fulfilled in these Apocalypticall visions, Rev. c.
11. and 12. and 13. and 17. etc. And had not Christ under the New Testament
left his Church some prophetical Record, for her comfort against the horrid
cruelty, idolatry and darkness of the Antichristian Dominion, showing when it
should have an end, and how happy at last the Church should be, all her enemies
being universally made the footstool of the Lamb; she were in a worse
condition then under the Old Testament; which were absurd.

4. As the Holy Ghost by Moses, the first Penman of the Canon of the Old
Testament warned the Jews against adding to or diminishing from the word of
God, ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall you
diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 9.2. and 12.32. So by the Apostle John the last Penman
of the Canon of the New Testament, Jesus Christ warns all persons that hear
the words of this Prophecy; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this Book: And if any man shall
take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his
part out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things
which are written in this Book, Rev. 22.18, 19. By which severe Commination,
the integrity and divine Authority of this Book is asserted by Christ, against
all whom Christ foresaw, would either endeavor to infringe the Authority of
it, or corrupt the purity of it. Hereby then the whole divine Canon is sealed
up, as fully now complete, and divinely Authentical, after which we are to
expect no more Scripture from God.

5. The general current of best Antiquity, except some few particular persons,
and diverse of them guilty of such heresies as this Book condemns, has
embraced this Book, and accounted it of divine Authority. As those formerly
cited, to prove John the Apostle to be Penman of it, and many more that might
be enumerated. As that ancient Ancyran Council, held before the Nicene. in
Append. as also the third Council of Carthage, Can. 47. Cyprian frequently
alleges the Revelation among the other Canonical books, as De exhort.
martyrum, c. 8. c. 11. c. 12. Testimon. Advers. Iudaeos l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3.6,
11. etc.

6. The Cavils and Objections, against the divine Authority of this Book,
reckoned up by Erasmus or others, how weak and unsatisfactory they are, may
appear in several writers, who have confuted them. Especially vid. Bez.
Prolegom. in Apocylaps. Ioannis. and Gerh. loc. Com. De scrip. sac. in exeges.
cap. 10. Sect. 294. ad sin. cap.

Excellency of this Book is most considerable For,

1. The conveyance of it at first to the Church is singular. From God to Jesus
Christ; From Jesus Christ to an Angel; From the Angel to John, whom Jesus
peculiarly loved above all his Apostles and Disciples, Rev. 1.1. And this to
John when in exile for Christ in the Isle Patmos; and that not on a common day*
but on the Lords day, the Queen of days; and ^o John in Patmos, on the Lords
day, not in an ordinary but extraordinary composure and elevation of his soul,
when he was in the spirit, caught up (as it were) and transported in an holy
ecstasy and spiritual Rapture, that he might the more attend to these
mysteries revealed, and have more immediate un-interrupted Communion with Jesus
Christ the Revealer, Rev. 1, 9, 10. etc. what can all this import, but some
singularly eminent treasure for the Church in this book, whereby the Church in
her deepest tribulation, may be (with John) spiritually intransed and ravished
with many surpassing grounds of joy, and consolation?

2. The style is stately and sublime, and may wonderfully take the highest
notion; The expressions quick, piercing and patheticall, and may pleasingly
penetrate the dullest affection. The whole contexture is so full of divine
majesty, that it commands an awful Reverence in all gracious hearts that read
it.

3. The matter of it is most heavenly and spiritual, and that in exceeding
great variety, notably describing the Divinity of Christ, His offices and the
benefits of them, clearly pointing out Antichrists Seat, Tyranny, Rise,
Growth, Power, Acts and Fall, and most lively delineating the Churches
condition, what it was in the Primitive times after Christ, and what it should
be afterward till the worlds end; how sad, yet s^fe under Antichrists
dominion; how sweet and happy after Antichrists destruction; how comfortable
at the day of judgment; and how glorious in heaven with Jesus Christ for
evermore. What Saint would not thirst much to read and here, more to
understand, but most of all to enjoy these things? Some of them are laid down
most mystically in abstruse visions, to exercise the judgments of the wisest;
some more familiarly to succor the infirmity even of the weakest. In some
places the Lamb may wade, in others the Elephant may swim. Those prevent
contempt, these anticipate discouragement. Ioao^imus Abbas prefers this
Prophecy, before the Prophecy of all other Prophets. Beza says, That those
things in other Prophets, which were not fulfilled after Christ's coming, the
holy spirit has heaped them all together in this precious book, and also added
others so far as was needful or useful for the Church to know them, Bez.
Prolegom. in Apoc. Oecolampadius calls this book, The best Paraphrast of all the
Prophets. Ioh. Oecolamp. Praefat. in Dani^l. Hierome says, Apocalypsis tot
habet sacramenta quot verba. Parum dixi, pro merito voluminis, laus omnis
inferior est; in verbis singulis multiplices latent intelligentiae, i. e. The
Revelation has as many mysteries as words. Its but a little I say, all praise
is too low for the merit of this volume; manifold understandings lie hid in
every word. Hieron. in Epist. ad Paulin.

4. The Book it self is complete, capable of no Addition or Detraction, but
upon severest Penalties, Rev. 22.18.19.

5. The Penman Eminent, viz. John that beloved disciple, that sweet compound of
love. It was Moses his honor who was Gods peculiar favorite, to be Penman of
the first Book of the Old Testament. And it was John's honor who was Christ's
peculiar favorite, to be Penman of the last Book of the New Testament; oh what
divine love and favor is made known unto the Church, in all the volumes
between the Arms of these two favorites!

6. Finally, God counts them blessed souls, that read, hear and keep the
words of this Prophecy. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, and keep these things that are written therein, Rev.
1.3. A blessed Book, that renders them blessed, who are practically versed in
it.

The time when this Revelation was written, was when John was banished into the
I Will that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, Rev. 1.9.10. John was banished into Patmos, by that cruel persecutor
Domitian, in the fourteenth year of his Reign, says Hieron. Catal. illustr.
vir. in vit. Joan. Domitian reigned in all but fifteen years, as Helvic.
observes, and his fourteenth year was in the ninety fourth year after Christ,
Helvic. in Chronol* in the ninety sixth after Christ, says Pareus Prolegom. in
Apocal. c. 5. This Book is conceived to be written after all the Books of the
New Testament.

Occasion of this Revelation seems to be this. John being banished into the
I Will Patmos, Rev. 1.9, 10. doubtless gave himself to prayer, and sacred
meditations about the affairs of Christ and his Church, whereupon Jesus Christ
appeared to his beloved disciple, in a spiritual ravishment, showing him what
was his pleasure, both touching the present Churches of Asia, and touching his
whole Church to the end of the world; thus comforting him: and commanding John
to write his visions, for the comforting of them.

Scope of this book is,

Generally, To make known by John unto the Churches both the things that then
were, and that should be thereafter, Rev. 1.19.

Particularly. 1 To inform the Church of the many sharp conflicts she should
have with Satan and his instruments, especially Heretics, persecuting Tyrants,
and Antichrist himself, that so she might not dream only of Halcyon days,
but might prepare more and more for the worst of storms* 2 To discover and
point out in lively Colors that grand Antichrist, that the Church might run
and read, and most infallibly know who he is. 3 As also to support and comfort
the Church and all the faithful, over all their tribulations, with the hopes
of the utter overthrow of Antichrist and all their enemies; of their own
joyful triumphs over them; and of the happy condition which the Church shall
afterward enjoy, partly in this world, but chiefly in the world to come.

Though this book be most obscure and intricate, yet these things may somewhat
facilitate the understanding of i^, If we shall,

1. Keep the maine scope of the Book, still in our eye.

2. Compare the passages and phrases of the Revelation, with those of other
Prophecies, as Rev. 11.4. with Zech. 4.3, 11, 14. Rev. 10.9, 10. with Ezekiel.
2.8. and 3.3. -- Rev. 4.6, 7, 8. with Ezekiel. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. -- Rev. 20.8. with
Ezekiel. 18.2. and 39.1. -- Rev. 21.15. with Ezekiel. 40.3. etc.

3. Parallel with this Prophecy, the subsequent Histories after John's time,
the Histories of the Roman Empire and Church, which testify clearly what
cruelty and persecutions the Roman Emperors successively raised up against
Christians: with what subtilty and fraud the B. of Rome did by degrees,
(through the folly, cowardice, negligence, etc. of the Emperors,) step up into
their throne, and subjugate not only Rome, the Seat of the Empire, but also
the whole Empire it self to his dominion and pleasure, whence we may derive
not a little light, to see what is meant by the opening of the Seals. The Stars
falling from heaven to earth. The beast speaking great and blasphemous things.
The beast and false Prophet. The image of the beast. And the whore riding upon
the beast with seven heads and ten horns, and ruling in the city on the seven
hills, etc.

4. Consider prudently the experience of later and present times; how
accurately does the description of the Beast and scarlet whore agree, to the
Papacy? of the Locusts, to the Roman Clergy, and of the Frogs coming out of
the mouth of the Dragon, the beast and the false Prophet, to the Jesuits and
Roman Emissaries, compassing sea and land, and creeping into Kings palaces, to
gather them together, to the war of the great day of God almighty.

5. Finally, if we shall diligently read, meditate and pray, that the holy
spirit, who revealed these things to John, would reveal their sense and
meaning to us, These things may help us to untie many knots, and render many
difficulties easy.

Principal parts. In the Book of Revelation are chiefly considerable, 1 The
Preface, 2 The Substance of the Book, and 3 The Conclusion.

The Preface, which is ^. General, in Matter, Author, Penman, and Profit of
this Book, c. 1. ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. Special or particular, in reference to the
seven Churches of Asia Minor, and in them to the whole Catholic Church,
figured by them, wherein are, 1. A Nomination of persons writing and written
to. 2. The Salutation. 3. And a glorious Description of Jesus Christ, ver. 4.
to 9.

The Substance or Body of this Prophetical 1. v. 9. to c. 22. v. 6. Wherein is
contained a Narration of the State of the Church. I. Militant on earth. c. 1.
v. 9. to c. 20. v. 11. II. Triumphant in heaven, c. 20. v. 11. to c. 22. v. 6.

The Condition of the Church Militant is declared 1. For present, what it was
when John wrote the Revelation, c. 1. v. 9. to c. 4. v. 1. 2. For future, what
it should be till the judgment day. c. 4. v. 1. to c. 20. v. 11.

I. Uision.
I. Touching the State of the Church then present. viz. The Asian Churches
principally; are laid down two things, viz. 1. A Preparation to the discovery
of it, by A Vision of seven Golden Candlesticks and seven Stars. This is
John's first vision. And here we have a description, both of John who had the
vision: as also of the vision it self; both in respect of the 1 Form of it.
The 2 Effect it had upon John, and the 3 Consequents ensuing thereupon. viz.
The Comforting of John, Command to write the vision, and the Interpretation of
the vision, c. 1. v. 9. to the end of the chapter. 2. A Narration or
Description of the Condition of Christ's Church then present, and this in Seven
distinct Epistles, directed to the seven Angels of those seven Asian Churches.
viz. 1. Of Ephesus, c. 2. v. 1. to 8. 2. Of Smyrna, c. 2. v. 8. to 12. 3. Of
Pergamus, c. 2. v. 12. to 18. 4. Of Thyatira, c. 2. v. 18. to the end of the
chapter. 5. Of Sardis, c. 3, 1. to 7. 6. Of Philadelphia, c. 3. v. 7. to 14. 7.
Of Laodicea, c. 3. v. 14. to the end of the chapter* In all which Seven
Epistles* the same method is generally observed by the spirit of Christ, viz.
Every Epistle, containing 1. A Description of Jesus Christ, suitable to the
vision of him, in c. 1. formerly. 2. A Narratio^ of the Good commendable; or
Evil condemnable in the Angel of every Church, and so in every Church. 3.
Promises or Threats, proportionable to their virtues or vices, 4. Hortatory
Conclusions, inciting to attention,


II. Touching the state of the Church for the future, especially the European
Churches, This is insisted upon more largely and more mystically. Which in sum
amounts to thus much, viz. To Pre-monish the Church of her great tribulations
in this world, 1 By persecuting Tyrants, 2 Then by persecuting Heretics, 3 At
length by Antichrists most cruel Oppressions both corporal and spiritual.
Against all which the holy-Ghos^ intermingles many comforts to the Church, as
that 1 God will be with her in all her distresses and not forsake her. 2 Her
troubles shall not be endless, nor overlong. 3. Her enemies shall all of them
at last be utterly destroyed. 4. The Church shall at last be set in a safe and
happy condition in this world, but especially in the world to come. Now all
these things are laid down visionally, in six other visions, remarkably
distinct from one another, viz. II. Vision. c. 4, 5, 6, 7. III. Vision. c. 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, IIII. Vision. c. 12, 13, 14. V. Vision. c. 15, 16. VI. Vision. c.
17, 18, 19. VII. Vision. c. 20, 21, 22. to v. 6. All which Visions seem to be
comprised in two distinct Prophecies, or Systemes of Visions, parallel and
contemporary to one another. Both revealing the mysteries for substance, but
the later proceeding more punctually to particulars, as some are of opinion;
Others rather think the former Prophecy comprehends the destinies of the Roman
Empire, under seven Seals and seven Trumpets; The later Prophecy, the destinies
of the Church, or of Christian Religion. The I. Prophecy beginning with the B.
Sealed with 7. Seals c. 4. v. 1. ending c. 11. II. Prophecy, beginning c. 12.
v. 1. (yet so as to take in some passages mentioned in the fifth Trumpet, as
the Little book, the measuring of the Temple, the outer Court, the two
Witnesses) continuing to the end of the Book. Now the sober considering, and
wise comparing of these two distinct Prophecies with one another, may (as some
think,) singularly serve to clear many difficulties throughout this Book,

II. Uision.
THE I. PROPHECY BEGINS.
The State of the Church future is revealed to JOHN, in a mysterious vision of
A Book sealed with seven Seals, (All the particular mysteries in which Book,
what man on earth can certainly and infallibly open, unless he had John's
Apocalypticall Key?) Here consider the I. Preparatorys to the opening of the
Seals, viz. 1. The Vision of God sitting upon a glorious Throne in heaven, c.
4. wherein are ^. The Transition to this vision, v. 1. 2. The Description of
God enthroned in heaven, v. 2, 3. 3. Em^le^es of Majesty about the Throne, viz.
1 Twen^y ^oure Elders, 2 Lightnings, Thunders, Voices, 3 Seven Lamps, i. e. the
seven Spirits of God, 4 A Sea of glass, 5 Four living Creatures, 6 The Songs
of Praise, presented to him that sat on the Throne by the four Beasts, and
^^enty four Elders, verse. 4. to the end of the chapter. 2. The vision of a
Book, in the hand of him that sat on the Throne, sealed with seven Seals, c.
5. Here note 1. The sealed Book described, v. 1. 2. The inability of all
creatures to open the book, v. 2, 3, 4. 3. The Lambs ability to open it, who
stood before the Throne, v. 5, 6, 7. 4. The four beasts and twenty four
Elders Gratulation, with Adoration to the Lamb for opening it* verse. 8. to the
end of the chapter.
II. The Opening of the seven Seals themselves in Order, c. 6, 7, 8. In the
opening of which Seals is revealed to John, what shall be the future State of
the Church of God, from that time to the end of the world. In the Seventh of
which Seals are brought in seven Trumpets; and in the Seventh of which
Trumpets, are brought in Seven vials of the wrath of God, full of the Seven
last plagues. More particularly consider here the I. Seal opened, where 1 The
attention required, 2 The matter revealed in it, viz. A white horse etc. c. 6.
verse 1.2. II. Seal opened, where 1 Attention called for. 2 The mystery
revealed, A Red horse, etc. c. 6. v. 3.4. III. Seal opened, where 1 Attention
is incited. 2 The Mystery revealed, A Black horse, his rider having Balances
in his hand, A spiritual famine threatened, c. 6. v. 5, 6. IV. Seal opened,
where 1 Attention is stirred up 2 Matter Revealed, A pale horse and his rider
Death, hell following, etc. c. 6. ver. 7.8. V. Seal opened, where note 1 What
was seen, souls under the Altar, martyred. 2. What these souls did, cried for
vengeance. 3. What they obtained, 1 White Robes for present, 2 Promise of
complete glory with their fellow martyrs, c. 6. v. 9.10.11. VI. Seal opened,
setting forth God^ dreadful judgments upon the enemies of the Church, for
their bloody cruelties exercised to death upon the Saints, as was intimated in
the fifth Seal. Here are considerable, 1. The Signs seen by John, viz. A
great earthquake, The Sun became black, etc. c. 6, v. 12, 13, 14. 2. The
things signified, viz. Kings, great men, etc i. e. all sorts and degrees of
Persecutors, in horror and despair at their wits ends, by reason of Gods
judgments coming upon them from Christ so terribly, as if the very
judgement-day were come, c. 6. verse. 15.16.17.



III. Uision.
VII. Seal opened. Here consider 1 Preparatories to it, 2 Mysterious Contents
of it.

1. Preparatories to it, are in c. 7. fore-arming the Church with previous
consolations against all ensuing miseries that were to come upon it: Against
which evils the Holy Ghost here comforts the Church. 1. By that security, which
the Angel of God, sealing the servants of God in their foreheads, shall afford
them in midst of troubles, c. 7, 1. to 9. 2. By that triumphant victory, which
after their great tribulation, all the faithful shall have over all their
miseries and enemies, c. 7. v. 9. to the end of the chapter. 2. Mysteries
revealed in the opening of this seventh Seal; being far more, and those more
intricate to understand, then in the opening of any of the other six Seals.
Events following the opening of the seventh Seal, are either I. Preparatory,
as 1. Silence in heaven for half an hour, portending great things to follow,
c. 8.1. 2. Vision of seven Angels with seven Trumpets, v. 2. 3. Vision of
another Angel, and his actions, viz. offering up of incense; and casting the
fire of the Altar into the earth, c. 8. v. 3. 4, 5. 4. Preparation of the seven
Angels to sound their Trumpets v. 6. II. Executory, viz. the Angels actual
sounding of their seven Trumpets. c. 8. v. 7. etc. to c. 12.1. I. Trumpet
sounded, where consider, 1. The Sign following* Hail and fire mingled with
blood cast upon the earth, 2 The effect thereof, viz. The third part of trees
burnt, etc. c. 8. v. 7. II. Trumpet sounded, where 1. The Sign following, viz.
A great mountain burning with fire cast into the sea. 2. The effect ensuing,
the third part of the sea became blood, etc. c. 8. v. 8.9. III. Trumpet
sounded, where, 1. The Sign ensuing thereupon. A great star fell from heaven
-- called wormwood, 2. The effects thereof, viz. The third part of the waters
became bitter, and many died of them, c. 8. v. 10, 11. IV. Trumpet sounded,
where 1. The Sign. viz. The third part of sun, moon and stars smitten. 2. The
effects thereupon. viz. day and night shone not for a third part, c. 8. v. 12.

Here is annexed (by way of Preparatory Transition to the other three
Trumpets,) John's vision of an Angel flying through the midst of heaven,
denouncing three Woes by reason of the three last Trumpets, c. 8, 13.

I. Woe.
V. Trumpet sounded, where note 1. The Sign appearing, viz. A star falling
from heaven to earth. 2. The four effects of this star falling, viz. He
opens the bottomless pit, Thence raises up smoke. Darkens Sun and air
with the smoke, and brings Locusts unto the earth out of the smoke, which
LOCUSTS are variously and notably described. 3. The Conclusion shutting up the
Calamities of this Trumpet, and forewarning of them that follow, c. 9. 1. to 13.

II. Woe.
VI. Trumpet sounded, c. 9. v. 13. to the end of the chapter. Herein consider,
1. The Command to loose the four Angels bound in Euphrates, v. 13, 14. 2.
Execution of this command, v. 15. 3. The Description of the large Army of
Euphratean Horses and Horsemen, v. 15, 16, 17. 4. The Calamitous effects
wrought by them, v. 18, 19, 20, 21.

VII. Trumpet, Concerning which note. 1. Preparatories to it. 2. Sounding of it.

I. Preparatoryes to it (it being the Trumpet of highest concernment, because
when that shall be sounded, The mystery of God shall be finished* as he has
declared to his servants the Prophets, c. 10, 7.) are very largely premised, c.
10, 1, to c. 11.15. Which seems principally to be Consolatory to the Church,
against all her former and future tribulations, and this by the Vision of a
mighty Angel come down from heaven, viz. Jesus Christ himself the Angel of the
Covenant. Touching whom here are, 1. The Angels description, c. 10. ver. 1. 2.
The Angels Actions, 1. Held a little Book in his hand, 2. Set his right foot on
the Sea, his left on the land. 3. Roared as a Lion; 7. thunders ecchoing again.
4. Swore that time should be no more, but when the 7th Angel should sound, the
mystery of God should be finished, c. 10. v. 2. to 8. 3. The Angels commands to
John, 1. To eat the little Book in the Angels hand, that he might Prophecy* c.
10.8, 9, 10, 11. 2. To measure the Temple, Altar, and worshippers, but not the
Court; for it should be trodden under foot of the Gentiles 42. months, c. 11.
v. 1, ^. 4. The Angels promises concerning his two Winesses, and their
Prophecy, and how after they shall be killed by the Beast upon the finishing of
their testimony. They shall again Revive, c. 11. v. 3. to 14.

Thus the Second Woe is ended, and the third hastneth, v. 14.

III. Woe.
II. Sounding of the seventh Trumpet, wherein the Mystery of God is finished.
And the Churches Miseries ended, c. ^ 1. v. 15. to the end of the chap. where
consider, I. Things heard in heaven, viz. 1. Great voices, saying* The
Kingdoms of this world are become the Lords, and his Christ's, etc. ver. 15. 2.
The triumphant song or gratulation of the 24. Elders unto God, for honoring
himself, and for the coming of his judgment to reward the Saints, and destroy
the earth, ver. 16. 17, 18. II Things seen etc. In Gods Temple opened in
heaven, viz. 1. The Saints Rewards, The Ark of his Testament, i. e. Jesus
Christ. 2. The wickeds Rewards, Lightnings, voices, thundrings, earthquakes and
great hail, ver. 19.

The former Prophecy ends.

IV. Uision
THE II PROPHECY BEGINS.
Hitherto of the I. Prophecy, or Systeme of Visions, Denoting (as is thought by
some) more especially the Condition of the last Empire viz. the Roman: Now to
the II Prophecy or Systeme of Visions, (contemporary with the former both in
the Seals and Trumpets) foretelling chiefly the future condition of the Church
till the judgment day. Herein chiefly are set down, 1. The Tribulations and
Persecutions of the Church by several enemies. 2. The deliverance of the
Church by her enemies destruction. 3. The happy condition of the Church, upon
her deliverance. Though the common opinion of interpreters (who take not any
notice of 2 contemporary Prophesies, and their Synchronismes, but judge these
Visions to be one continued Prophecy,) bring all that follows under the
seventh Trumpet, thus. viz. The sounding of the seventh Trumpet is propounded,
I. Summarily, c. 11.15. to the end of the chap. II. Plenarily, and this either,
1. By way of Recognition and fuller explaining of the former Seals and
Trumpets, in a digression, c. 12, 13, 14. 2. By way of Prediction of things
future under the seventh Trumpet more largely, c. 15, 16, 17, etc. For
substance these will come much to one. (But lets follow the former.)

I. The Persecutions of the Church by several enemies greatly distressing her
in this whole fourth Vision, c. 12. ver. 1. to c. 15. ver. 1. More particularly
here note, I. The Persecution of the woman that brought forth the man-child,
viz. Both Jesus Christ, and the Primitive Church of the Jews (as some are of
opinion) even from her infancy; and this by Dragon, i. e, (as is expounded c.
12. ver. 9.) Satan* c. 12. v. 1. to 17. II. The Dragons Persecution of, and
making war with the remnant of her seed.
Viz. ( as some think) with the Church of the Gentiles, where consider, 1. The
Dragons Resolution and endeavors thus to persecute, c. 12. v. 17. 2, The
instruments of Persecution, incited and employed by the great Red Dragon, viz.
1. The Beast rising up out of the Sea having seven heads and ten horns, c.
13. ver. 1. to 11. 2. The Beast rising out of the earth, having two horns like
a Lamb, and speaking as a Dragon, etc. c. 13. ver. 11. to the end of the chap.
3. The event of this Persecution, viz. The Saints Victory through their
constant and faithful confession of Christ even to Martyrdom, this their
victory being exellently amplifyed by the Causes, and Effects of it, c. 14. 1.
to the end of the chap.


V. Uision.
II. The Deliverance of the Church, by the destruction of her enemies
represented in the Vision of the 7. Vials full of the wrath of God, the 7. last
plagues, poured out upon the eart^ by 7. Angels, Here are, the I. Preparatories
to the pouring out of the Vials c. 15, throughout. II. Pouring out of the Vials
of the wrath of God upon the earth, c. 16.1. etc. viz. I. Vial poured out, c.
16. ver. 2. II. Vial poured out, v. 3. III. Vial poured out, v. 4. to 8. IV.
Vial poured out, v. 8, 9. V. Vial poured out, v. 10, 11. VI. Vial poured out,
v. 12. to 17. VII. Vial poured out, c. 16.



This pouring out of the VII. Vial, is laid down, 1. More Summarily, 2. More
Plenarily.

I. More Summarily and compendiously c. 16. ver. 17. to the end of the chap.

VI Uision.
II. More plenarily and copiously, c. 17, 18, 19, and 20 to ver. 11. Wherein
diverse mysteries are most lively explicated, which formerly were heretofore
more obscurely mentioned. Notably pointing out the Rise, Seat, Reign,
Vassals, Success, and at last the fatal Ruin of Antichrist and all the
Churches enemies. So that this part affords no small light to the Prophetic
part of the Revelation. Here consider, 1. The judgment of the great whore. 2.
The event thereupon.

I. The judgment of the great whore c. 17, 18, 19. Where are, 1. A notable
description of the great whore, that is to be judged; By Visionall
Representation, c. 17.1. to 7. By real explanation thereof, v. 7. to 16. 2. The
instruments that shall destroy the Whore. viz. The ten horns, which are ten
Kings, etc. c. 17. ver. 16, 17, 18. 3. The Emphatical promulgation of the woeful
ruin of Babylon, the Seat of the great whore, This is done by three Angels,
1. The first Angel declares the inevitable certainty of Babylons ruin, c.
18..1, 2, 3. 2. The second warning all God's people to come out of her, sets
forth the grievousnesse of her destruction, with the sad lamentations of all
her friends and vassals, ver. 4. to 21. 3. The third Angel, under the type of a
great Millstone cast into the Sea, as it were seals up the irrecoverablenesse
of her ruin, ver. 21, 22, 23, 24. 4. The gratulatory exaltations of the
heavenly company 1 for the judgment of the whore, 2 for the preparation of the
Lamb's wife for marriage with him, c. 19. ver. 1. to 11. 5. The final and
total conquest of the Lamb and his Armies, over the beast and false Prophet,
and the Kings of the earth and their Armies, c. 19. v. 11. to the end of the
chap. Hitherto of the judgment of the great Whore.


VII. Or last Uision.
II. The event following after the judgment of the great Whore; which is
chiefly threefold, 1. The safety of the Saints (surviving the ruin of
Babylon) from the seducements of the Dragon, the Devil and Satan, being chained
up 1000 years, c. 20.1.2, 3. 2. The reviving of the Martyrs, and reigning with
Christ 1000. years, the rest of the dead not living again till the 1000.
years were finished, c, 20. v. 4, 5, 6. 3. The Saints miraculous deliverance
from, and victory over Gog and Magog; (Satan, after the 1000. years expired,
being loosed out of prison.) c. 20. v. 7. to 11.


Hitherto (as is conceived) has been Revealed the future state of the Church
as Militant on earth.

The condition of the Church as triumphant in heaven, is described both in
respect of the 1. Inchoation* and 2. Duration of it.

1. The Inchoation or beginning of the Churches triumph, shall be at the last
and general judgment: which is pathetically described, c. 20. v. 11. to the
end of the chapt. 2. The Duration or Continuance of it; viz. Eternal happiness
in Heaven, which is most gloriously set forth, c. 21. throughout etc. 22. ver.
1. to 6.
The Conclusion of this whole Prophecy; which 1. Principal, containing a
confirmation of the whole Prophecy of this Revelation, by the Testimony, 1. Of
the Angel, by whom the Lord showed these things to John, c. 22. v. 6. 2. Of
Christ himself, who gave this Revelation, ver. 7. 3. Of John that received
this Revelation, ver. 8, 9. 4. Of Christ again, ver. 10 to 18. 5. Of John
denouncing heavy judgments upon all that shall add to, or take from this
Prophecy, ver. 18, 19. 6. Of Christ testifying these things, Promising his
speedy coming; amplified by John's earnest request in his own and the Churches
behalf, ver. 20.
2. Less Principal, containing the Apostolical Salutation to all the 7.
Churches and faithful Saints to whom this Revelation was written, ver. 21.


He that testifies these things, says; I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come
LORD JESUS.

Rev. 22.20. D. Bernard. Medit. Devot. c. 4. Praemium est videre deum, vivere
cum Deo, vivere de Deo; esse cum Deo esse, in Deo, quierit omnia in omnibus:
habere Deum qui est Summum Bonum. Et ubi est summum bonum, ibi est summa
felicitas, summa jucunditas, vera libe^tas, perfecta charitas, aeterna
securitas, and secura aeternitas: ibi est vera laetitia, plena scientia, omnis
plenitudo, and omnis Beatitudo.

Sic cum Deo homo Beatus erit, in cujus conscientia peccatum inventum non
fuerit. Videbit Deum ad voluntatem, habebit ad voluptatem, fruetur ad
jucunditatem. In aeternitate vigebit, in veritate fulgebit, in bonitate
gaudebit.

1 Timothy 1.17. (...).

The Holy Scriptures are contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament.
I. The Books of the Old Testament, are I Moses. He wrote the Law of God in five
Books called the Pentateuch i. e. The-five fold-volumne. These Books according
to the Greek are called Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numbers. Deuteronomie.
II. The Prophets, their Books are either I. Historical; containing the
History, of 1. Israel's entrance into the promised Land, viz. -- Joshua.
2 Isreal's Condition and Government after their entrance into Canaan, 1 before
their carrying away into Babylon, either under 1. Judges. And here we have ^he
1. General Hist. Judges.
2. Particular Hist. Ruth.

2 Kings, and this as the Stat^ of the Kingdom was I. United under Kings by 1.
Election. I. Samuel.
2. Succession. II. Samuel.

II. Divided, and that according to the 1. Beginnings of this Division, in I.
Kings.
2. Progress of this Division, in II. Kings.

III. United and Divided, as in I. Chronicles. II. Chronicles.


2. After their Captivity; Here their return from Captivity is declared,
According to the 1. Truth and manner of it, in Ezra.
2. Fruit and event of it, in Nehemiah.

3. Under their Captivity in Babylon, and elsewhere; in Esther.


II. Doctrinall, or poetical containing Doctrines, 1. Of more special
reference to A particular person, viz. -- Job.
2. Of more General reference to all sorts of persons, in 1. Dauid^ Book,
principally penned by him, viz. Psalms.
2. Solomon's Books which are, either 1. Proverbiall. -- Proverbes.
2. Penitential. -- Ecclesiastes.
3. Nuptial, viz. Song of Songs.



III. Prophetical written either by, the 1. Greater Prophets who wrote, either
1. Before the Captivity of Babylon, viz. Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations.
2. Neer^ upon, and under the Captivity, viz. Ezekiel Daniel

2. Lesser Prophets, who Prophesied and wrote, either 1. Before Israel's
transportation into Babylon, viz Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Ionab Micah Nahum
Habakkuk Zephaniah.
2. Afte^ Isreal's return from Babylons Captivity. viz. Haggai Zechariah
Malachi.




II. The Books of the New Testament, See in the Table, at p. 140.


The Books of the New Testament, are either I. Historical, describing unto us
the History of 1. Christ the Head of the Church; whose Genealogy, Birth, Life
Doctrine, Miracles, Death and Resurrection, are recorded by four Evangelists.
Matthew. Mark. Luke. John.
2. The Church, Christ's body, whose primitive plantatio^, state and
augmentation both among Jews and Gentiles, is delcared in the Acts of the
Apostles.

II. Epistolicall, as all the Epistles written by the Apostles, either 1. To
believing Gentiles, as Paul's Epistles, 1 General, which Paul wrote unto whole
Churches about matters of general and publ^ke concernment, as ^he Epistles to
the Romans. I. Corinthians. II. Corinthians. Galatians Ephesians Philippians
Colossians I. Thessalonians II. Thessalonians.
2 Particular, to particular persons touching 1 Public Ecclesiastical
affairs, as the Epistles to I. Timothy. II. Timothy. Titus.
2. Private Oeconomicall affairs, as his Epistle to Philemon.


2. To the believing Jews, as it is probable al these Epistles were, viz. 1
The Epistle (probably written by Paul) to the Hebrews.
2. The 7. Epistles commonly called, General, or the Catholic Epistles of
James. -- James
Peter. I. Peter II. Peter.
John General. -- I. John.
Particular. II. John III. John

Jude. -- Jude,



III. Prophetical, foretelling what shall be the future state and condition of
the Church of Christ to the end of the world, written by John, the Apost. viz.
The Revelation*




