Sr. Walter Ralegh Knight.


MAXIMS OF STATE.

Written by Sir WALTER RALEIGH.

Whereunto is added His Instructions to his SON; AND The Son's ADVICE to his
Aged Father.

LONDON, Printed by W. Bentley, and are to be sold by W. Shears, at the sign of
the Bible, over against the North door of Paul's. 1650.

THE CONTENTS.
Page. OF Government. 1 Of Policy. 2 Of Monarchy. 3 Of Aristocracie, or
Senatory State. 5 Of Free State, or Popular State. 6 Of ^yranny. 7 Of
Olygarchie, or the Government of a few. ibid. Of a Commonwealth. 8 Of causes
of States, and Commonwealths in general. 10 Of founding a State. ibid. Of
Causes preserving a State or Commonwealth. 15 Of Mysteries or Sophisms. ibid.
Of Axioms or Rules of preserving a State. 19 Rules for preserving of a kingdom.
Hereditary. 25 Rules for preserving of a kingdom. Conquered. 25 Kingdoms
hereditary are preserved at home by the ordering of a Prince. ibid. Kingdoms
new gotten, or purchased by force, are preserved by 10. Rules. 35 Rules
politic of Tyrants. 41 Sophisms of a barbarous and professed tyranny. 42
Sophisms of the sophistical, or subtle Tyrant, to hold up his State. 46 Of
preservation of an Aristocracie. 52 Of preservation of an Olygarchie, by
Sophisms. ibid Of preservation of an Olygarchie, by Rules. ibid Of Conversion
of States in general. 59 Causes of conversions of States are of two sorts:
General and Particular. ibid. Particular causes of Conversion of State, are of
two sorts. 60 Of sedition. 61 Causes of sedition are of two sorts. ibid. Of
alteration without violence. 64 A Method, how to make use of the Book before^
in the reading of the story. 67 Old age is not ever unfit for public
Government. ibid. Example of the like practice in Charles the Fifth. 68 Of
observation for the Affirmative and the Negative. ibid. Of defense for David in
marrying Abishag. 70
Political Nobility.
Of Adoniah aspiring to the Kingdom. 71
Observations.
Of ways of such as aspire to the Kingdom, and marks to discern them. 73
Political Prince. 75
THE TABLE Of the Chapters contained in Sir Walter Raleigh's INSTRUCTIONS to
his SON.
CHAP. Page. VIrtuous persons to be made choice of for friends. 1 I. Great care
to be had in the choosing of a Wife. 4 II. Wisest men have been abused by
flatterers. 10 ^V. Private Quarrels to be avoided. 11 ^. Three Rules to be
observed for the preservation of a man's estate. 17 VI. What sort of servant^
are most fit to be entertained. 20 VII. Brave rags wear soonest out of fashion.
2^ VIII. Riches not to be sough^ by evil means. ibid^ IX. What Inconvenience
happen to such as deligh^ in Wine. 2^ X. Let God be thy Protector and
Directour in all the Actions. 2^
MAXIMS OF STATE.
OF GOVERNMENT.
GOVERNMENT is of two sorts. 1. Private, of himself. Sobriety. Of his Family;
called O^^onomie. 2. Public, of the Commonwealth; called Poli^ie. A man must
first Govern himself, e're he be fit to govern a Family: And his Family, e're
he be fit to bear the Government in the Commonwealth.

Of Policy.
Policy is an Art of Government of a Commonwealth, and some part of it
according to that State, or form of Government wherein it is settled for the
public good.

State, is the frame or set order of a Commonwealth, or of the Governors that
rule the same, specially of the chief and Sovereign Governor that commands
the rest.

The State or Sovereignty consists in 5. points.

1. Making or anulling of Laws. 2. Creating and disposing of Magistrates. 3.
Power over life and death. 4. Making of War, or Peace. 5. Highest o^ last
appeal.
Where these five are, either in one or in more, there is the State.

These five points of State, rest either in, 1. One Monarchy or Kingdom. 2.
Some few chief men for virtue and wisdom, called an Aristocracie. 3. Many,
called a Fr^e-State, or Popular State.


These three sorts of Government have respect to the common good, and therefore
are just, and lawful States.

These 3. degenerate into 3. other Governments. viz. 1. Monarchy, 2.
Aristo^racie, 3. Popular Est^t,
into 1. Tyranny. 2. Oligarchie. 3. Commonwealth o^ Government of all the
common and baser sort, and therefore called a Commonwealth by an usurped
Nickname.


These all respect their own, and not the public good, and therefore are
^ailed Bastard Governments.

I. Monarchy.
A Monarchy, or Kingdom, is the Government of a State by one Head, or chief,
tending to the common benefit of all.

Monarchy, or Kingdoms, are of three sorts touching the right, or possession
of them; viz.

1. Hereditarie, by de^cent, as the English, French, etc. 2. Elective, by
suffrage of the other Orders, or some of them, as the Polonian. 3. Mixed, or of
both kinds; viz. by Descent, yet not tied to the next of blood, as the ancient
Jewish State.
Monarchies are of two sorts touching their power or authority; viz.

1. Entire. Where the whole power of ordering all State matters, both in peace
and war, does by law and custom appertain to the Prince, as in the English
Kingdom, where the Prince has power to make Laws, League, and W^r; To create
Magistrates; to pardon life: Of appeal, etc. Though to give a contentment to
the other degrees, they have a suffrage in making Laws, yet ever subject to the
Princes pleasure, nor Negative will. 2. Limit^d or restrained, that has no
full power in all the points o^ matters of State, as the Military King that
has not the Sovereignty in time of peace, as the making of Laws, etc. But in
War only, as the Polonian Kings.
II. Aristocracie, or Senatorie State.
AN Aristocracie is the Government of a Commonwealth by some competent number
of the better sort, preferred for wisdom and other virtues for the public good.

Aristocracies are of three sorts, viz. Where the Senators are chosen, for 1.
Virtue, Riches, and the Common good, as the Venetian. 2. Virtue and the public
good without respect of wealth, as sometimes the Roman, when some of the
Senators were fetched from the plough, and some from the Schools. 3. Virtue
and wealth, more respecting their private, than their public good, which
inclines toward an Oligarchie, or the Government of the Richer or nobler
sort, as in Rome toward the end.


III. Free State, or Popular Sta^e.
THe Popular State is the Government of a State by the choiser sort of people,
tending to the public good of all sorts; viz. with due respect of the better,
nobler, and richer sort.

In every Just State, some part of the Government is, or ought to be imparted
to the People; As in a Kingdom, a voice or suffrage in making Laws; and
sometimes also, in levying of Arms (if the charge be great, and the Prince
forced to borrow help of his Subjects) the matter rightly may be propounded to
a Parliament, that the tax may seem to have proceeded from themselves. So
consultations, and some proceedings in Judicial matters, may in part be
referred to them. The reason, least seeing themselves to be in no number, nor
of reckoning, they mislike the state, or kind of Government: And where the
multitude is discontented, there must needs be many enemies to the present
State. For which cause, Tyrants, (which allow the people, no manner of dealing
in State matters) are forced to bereave them of their wits and weapons, and all
other means whereby they may resist, or amend themselves, as in A^shland,
^urk^y, etc.

IV. Tyranny.
A Tyranny is the swerving, or distort^g of a Monarc^ie, or the Governm^^^ of
one, tending not to the public good, but the private benefit of himself, and
his followers. As in the Russe and Turkish Government, where the State and
Wealth of other o^^ers, are employed only to the upholding of the greatness of
the King or Emperor. This is the worst of all the Basta^d States, because it
is the perverting of the best Regiment, to wit, of a Monarchy, which
resembles the Sovereign Government of God himself.

V. Oligarchie, or the Government of a few.
AN Oligarchie is the swerving, or the corruption of an Aristocracie; or the
Gov^^nment of some few, that are of the Wealthier or Nobler sort, without a^y
respect of the public good. The chief end of these Gover^^^^s, is, their own
greatness and enriching. And therefore their manner is, to prepare fi^ mean^ to
uphold their Esta^es. This St^te is not wholly so bad, as is the Tyranny, and
yet worse than the Commo^-wealth, because it respects the good of a few.

VI. Commonwealth.
A Commonwealth is the swerving or depravation of a F^ee, or popular State, or
the Government of the whole multitude of the base and poorer sort, without
respect of the other Orders.

These two States, to wit; The Olig^^chie, and Commonwealth, are very adve^se
the one to the other, and have many b^ckerings between them. For that the
richer or nobler sort, suppose a right or superiority to appertain unto them in
every respect, because they are superior, but in some re^pects only, to wit,
in Riches, Birth, Parentage, etc. On the other side, the Common People suppose,
there ought to be an equality in all other things, and some State matters;
because they are equal^ with the Rich or Noble, touching their Lib^^tie,
whereas indeed neither the one nor the other are simply equal or superior, as
touching Government and fitness thereunto, because they are such, to wit,
because they are Rich, Noble, Free, etc. But because they are Wise, Virtuous,
Valiant, etc. and so have fit parts to Govern a State.

These several States are sometimes mixed, and inter wrought one with the
other, yet ever so, as that the one has the preheminent predomination over the
other, as in the humors and complexions of the body. So in the Rom^n State,
the people had their Plehis^^ta, and gave the suffrage in the election of
Magistrates: Yet the Senate (as the State stood) for the most part swayed the
State, and bare the chief rule. So in the Ven^tian State, the Duke seems to
represe^^ a Mon^rch, and the S^nate to be his Counc^l: Yet ^he Duke has no
power in State matt^rs, but is like a head set on by art, that hears no
brain. And so that State is S^natorical or Aristocratical.

Causes of States and Commonwealths in general.
Causes of States or of Commo^-wealths are of 3. sorts, viz. 1. Founding, or
settling a State where to be considered. 1. Measure. 2. Parts, and their
Qualities.
2. Preserving a State. 3. Changing, and altering a State.


Founding a State.
In founding a State are to be considered 2. things.

1. Proportion. 2. Parts.
PRoportion, is a Just Measure or Mediocritie of the State, whereby it is
framed and kept in that Order, as that neither it exceed nor be defective in
his kind, to wit, so that a Monarch b^ not too Monarchical, nor strict, or
absolute, as the ^usse Kings; nor Aristocratical, that is over-mated or
eclipsed by the Nobility, as the Scottish Kingdom, but ever respective to the
other degrees. That Aristocratie be not to magnificent nor entire to it self,
but communicate with the people some commodities of State or Government, as the
V^netian, and sometimes the Roman allowed the people to elect certain
Magistrates out of themselves, to have a Tribune, to make Plebiscita, etc. So a
Free State or Commonwealth that it be not over popular, viz. That it depress
not to much the richer, wiser, nor learneder sort; but admit them to offices
with a Caution out of the rules and mysteries of that State. That they seek no
alteration of the present State. The reason, because the moderate States in
their several kinds (as all other things that observe the mean) are best framed
for their continuance, because they give less cause of grudge, envy, and
affecting the Wealth, Honor, and Liberty which they see in others that govern
the State; And so are less subject to stirs and commotions, and easiest kept in
their present State wherein they are set.

Parts.
THe Parts of the State, or those Magistrates that bear place or sway in the
public Government.

Parts or Partakers of Public Government, are 1. Council or Senate, which
consul^eth of all matters pertaining to War and Peace, Magistrates, etc. in
admitting of whom there ought to be a more special care, that they may be men
expert in matter of Policy, because it is their Trade and Vocation, as men use
to choose Pilots, and Masters of Ships, such as know the Art of Navigation, and
not Husbandmen, etc. And so ^he contrary. 2. Magistrates and Officers, which
are to be executioners of that which is consulted, and found to be expedient
for the Commonwealth, wherein are to be observed, the kinds of Magistrates,
that they be such as fit that kind of Government; The time of their
continuance, and the manner of their election or appointing, by whom, out of
whom, and in what manner they be chosen. 3. Judges; To determine in Civil, and
Criminal matters, where are to be observed, out of whom they are to be chosen;
what kinds are necessary, and the manner o^ Judgment, and Judicial proceeding.


In Magistrates are to be observed.

1. Kinds of Magistrates as,
1. Civil

1. Superior, which are to be such and of that kind as agree with the State,
as Consuls for a year, and not perpetual Dictatours in a Senatorie State.
Praetors, and Censors, that oversee manners and orders of the people.

For a Kingdom Lieutenant of Shires, Marshals, Masters of Horse, Admirals, etc.

Inferior, as conservatous of Peace, Constables, etc.

Overseers of youth, that take care for their education for civil and warlike
exercise.

Clarks of the Market that provide for the quantity, and price of victual.

Ediles for Buildings, Streets, Bounds.

Questours, or Treasurers, to keep and dispense the public Treasury.

A^^uaries, or Reco^ders, which keep the public Records.

Ga^l^rs, to keep prisons and Prisoners.

Surveyours of woods and fields, etc.

2. Ecclesiastical.

1. As Bishops or Pastors, Elders, Wardens.

2. Time of Magistrates, whereof some are perpetual, some for a time, viz. for
more years, a year, half a year, according to the necessity of the
Commonwealth, and not perpetual; or at least not Hereditary in a Kingdom.
Yearly in an Aristocracie, or half yearly in a Free State.

3. Manner of choice, by whom and how to be chosen, where especially they are
to be chosen by suffrage, and not by Lot.


Causes preserving a State, or Commonwealth.
In preserving of States, 2. things required.

1. Mysteries, or Sophisms. 1. General to all States. 2. Particular, for every
several State.
2. Rules, or Actions. 1. General, for all States. 2. Particular, for every
State.

Mysteries, or Sophisms.
MYsteries, or Sophisms of State, are certain secret practices, either for the
avoiding of danger, or averting such effects as tend to the preservation of the
present State, as it is set or founded.

State Mysteries are of two sorts.

1. General: That pertain to all States; as first, to provide by all means,
that the same degree, or part of the Commonwealth, do not exceed both in
Quantity and Q^ality. In Quantity, as that the number of the Nobility, or of
great persons, be not more, than the State or Commonwealth can bear. In
Quality, as that none grow in wealth, liberty, honors, etc. more than it is
meet for that degree; For as in weights, the heavier weights bear down the
Scale: So in Commonwealths, that part or degree that excels the rest in
Quality, and Quantity, overswayeth the rest after it, whereof follow
alterations, and conversions of State. Secondly, to provide by all means, that
the middle sort of people exceed both the extremes, ( viz.) of Nobility and
Ge^t^y, and the base rascal, and begarly sort. For this makes the State
constant and firm, when both the Extremes are tied together by a middle sort,
as it were with a band, as for any conspiracy of the rich and beggarly sort
together, it is not to be feared. To these two points, the Particular rules or
Sophisms of every Commonwealth, are to be applied. 2. Particular: That serve
^or preservation of every Commonwealth, in that form of State wherein it is
settled as in a Kingdom. That the Nobility may be accustomed to bear the
government of the Prince, especially such as have their dwelling in remote
places from the Princes eye, it is expedient to call them up at certain times
to the Princes Court, under pretense of doing them honor, or being desirous to
see, and enjoy their presence; and to have their children, especially their
eldest, to be attendant upon the Prince, as of special favor toward them and
theirs, that so they may be trained up in duty and obedience toward the
Prince, and be as Hostages for the good behavior, and faithful dealing of
their Parents, especially, if they be of any suspected note. To that end serves
the Pe^si^^ practice, in having a Band, or Train of the S^trapa's children, and
other Nobles to attend the Court; which was well imitated by our Train of
H^n^^men, if they were of the Nobler sort. Again, sometimes to borrow small
sums of his Subjects, and to pay them again, that he may after borrow greater
sums and never pay: So in an Oligarchy, least it decline to a Popular State,
they deceive the people with this and the like Sophisms, ( viz.) They compel
their own sort, to wit, the rich men, by great penalties, to frequent their
Assemblies for choosing of Magistrates, for provision of Armor, warlike
Exercises, making an Execution of Laws, etc. By that means seeming to bear a
hard hand over the richer, but to suffer the poorer, and meaner sor^ to be
absent, and to neglect those Assemblies under pretense, that they will not draw
them from their business, and private earnings,: Yet withal to cite thither
some few of them, ( viz.) so many as are easily over matched by the ^icher
sort, to make a show, that they would have the people or poorer sort, partakers
likewise of those matters, yet terrifying those that come to their Assemblies,
with the tediousness of consultations, greatness of Fines, if they should
mis-do, to the end, to make them unwilling to come again, or to have to do with
those Consultations; by which means, the richer sort do still govern the State,
with the peoples liking, and good contentment.
Axioms.
Axioms or Rules of preserving the state are, 1. G^neral, that serve for all
Commonwealths. 2. Particular, that serve for every several State.


General Rules.
1. THe first and principal Rule of Policy to be observed in all States, is to
profess, and practice, and maintain the true worship and Religion of Almighty
God prescribed unto us in his word, which is the chief end of all government.
The Axio^, That God be obeyed simply without exception, though he command that
which seems unreasonable, and absurd to Humane policy; as in the Jews
Commonwealth, That all the men should repair yearly to one place to worship
God four times, leaving none to defend their coast, though being beset with
many Enemies. Not to sow the seventh year, but to suffer the ground to rest
untilled without respect or fear of famine, etc.

2. To avoid the causes of Conversions, whereby States are over-thrown, that
are set down in the Title of conversions; For that Common-vvealths (as natural
bodies) are preserved by avoiding that which hurts the health and State
thereof, and are so cured by contrary medicines.

3. To take heed, that no Magistrate be created or continued contrary to the
Laws and policy of that Stat^. As that in a S^nate, there be no^ created a
perpetual Dict^tor, as Caesar in Rome. In a Kingdom, that there be no Senate,
or Convention of equal power with the Prince in State matters, as in Poland.

4. To create such Magistrates as love the State as it is settled, and take heed
of the contrary practice, as to advance Popular persons in a Kingdom, or
A^istocracie. And secondly, to advance such as have skill to discern what does
preserve, and what hurts or alters the present Stat^.

5. To that end to have certain Of^icers to p^y abroad, and to observe such as
do not live and behave themselves in sit sort, agreeable to the present State,
but de^^e rather to be under some other form, or kind of government.

6. To take heed that Magistracies be not sold for money, nor bribe in their
Offices, which is specially to be observed in that Commonwealth which is
governed by a few of the richer sort; For if the Magistrate gain nothing but
his Common Fees, the common sort, and such as want honor, take in good part
that they be not preferred, and are glad rather that themselves are suffered to
intend private business. But if the Magistrate buy and sell matters, the common
people are doubly grieved, both because they are debarred of those preferments,
and of that gain they see to grow by them, which is the cause that the Germ^in
Oligarchi^s continue so firm; for both they suffer the poorer sort to grow into
wealth, and the richer sort are by that means freed, and secured from being
under the poor.

7. To take heed that the State, as it is settled and maintained, be not
overstuct, nor exceed in his kind; ( viz.) That a Kingdom be not too
Monarchical, nor a Popular State too Popular: For which cause it is good, that
the Magistrates sometimes yield of his right touching honor, and behave
themselves familiarly with those that are equal unto them in other parts,
though inferior for place and Office; And sometimes popula^ly with the common
people, which is the cause that some Commonwealths, though they be very
simply, and unskilfully set, yet conti^^e ^^rm, because the Magistrates behave
themselves wi^ely, and with due re^pect toward the r^st that are without
honor; and therefore ^ome kind of Modera^^ Popularity is to be used in every
^ommon-wealth.

8. To take heed of small beginnings, and to meet with them even at the first,
as well touching the breaki^g and altering of Laws, as of other rules which
concern the continuance of every several State. For the disease and alteration
of a Commonwealth, does not happen all at once, but grows by degrees, which
every common wit cannot discern, but men expert in POLICY.

9. To provide, that that part be ever the grea^er in number and power, which
favors the S^ate as now ^t sta^ds. This is to be observed as a very Oracle in
all Common-weal^hs.

10 To observe a mean in all the degrees, and to suffer no part to exceed, or
decay over much. As first for p^efe^ments, to provide that they be rather small
and short, than great and long; and if a^y be grown to overmuch greatness, to
withdraw or diminish some part of his honor. Where the Sophisms are to be
practiced ( viz.) to do it by parts and degrees; to do it by occasion, or
color of law, and not all at once. And if that way serve not, to advance some
other, of whose virtu^ and faithfulness, we are fully assur^d, to as high a
degree, or to a greater honor; and to be the friends and followe^s of him that
excels, above that which is meet. As touching wealth, to provide, that those
of the middle sort (as before was said) be more in number; and if any grow
high, and overcharged with wealth, to use the So^^isms of a Po^ula^ State, viz.
to send him on Embassages, and Foreign Negotiations, or employ him in some
Office that has g^^at charges, and little honor, etc. To which end, the
Edil^ship served in some Commonwealths.

11. To suppress the Factions, and quarrels of the Nobles, and to keep other
that are y^^ free from joyni^g with them in their partakings and Factions.

12 To increase or remit the common Taxes and Contributions, according to the
wealth, or want of the People and Common-wealt^. If the people be increased in
Wealth, the Taxes and Subsidies may be increased. If they be poor, and their
Wealth diminish, specially by dearth, want of Traffic, etc. to forbear Taxes
and Impositions, or to take little. Otherwise grudge and discontentments must
needs follow. The Sophisms that serve for Imposi^itions, are these, and other
of like sort, to pretend business of great charge, as War, building of Ships,
making of Havens, Castles, Fortifications, etc. for the Common defense;
sometimes by Lotteries and like devises, wherein some part may be bestowed, the
rest reserved for other expenses; but Princely dealings needs no pretenses.

13 To Provide that the Discipline and Training of youth of the better sort be
such as agrees with that Commonwealth: As that in a Kingdom, the sons of
Noble men to be attendant at the Court, that they may be accustomed to
obedience toward the Prince: In the Senatory State, that the sons of the
Senators be not idly, nor over daintily brought up, but well instructed and
trained up in Le^rning, Tongues, and Martial Exercise; that they may be able to
bear that place in the Commonwealth, which their Father held, and
contrariewise, in a Popular State,

14. To take heed, least their Sophisms, or secret practices for the
continuance and maintenance of that State, be not discovered; least by that
means they refuse and disappoint themselves, but wisely used, and with great
secrecy.

Particular Rules.
Rules and Axioms, for preserving of a Kingdom.

Hereditary. Conquered.
Kingdoms Hereditary, are preserved at home by the ordering,
1. HImself, viz. By the tempering and moderation of the Princes Power and
Prerogative. For the less and more temperate their Power and State is, the
more firm, and stable is their Kingdom and Government; because they seem to be
further off from a Master-like, and Tyrannical Empire; and less unequal in
condition to the next degree, to wit, the Nobility, and so less subject to
grudge and envy. 2. Nobility; viz. By keeping that degree and due proportion,
that neither they exceed in number more than the Realm, or State can bear, as
the Scottish Kingdom, and sometime the English, when the Realm was overcharged
with the number of Dukes, Earls, and other Nobles; whereby the Authori^y of the
Prince was eclipsed, and the Realm troubled with their Factions and Ambitions.
Nor that any one excel in Hono^r, Power, or wealth, as that he resemble another
King within the Kingdom, as the house of Lancaster within this Realm, To that
end, not to load any with too much Hono^r or preferment, because it is hard
even for the best, and worthiest men, to bear their greatness, and high Fortune
tempera^ely, as appears by infinite examples in all States. The Sophism for
preventing, or reforming this inconvenience, are to be used with great caution
and wisdom. If any great person be to be abated, not to deal with him by
calumniation, or forg^d matter, and so to cut him off without desert,
especially if he be gracious among the people, after the Machiavilian Policy,
which besides the injustice, is an occasion many times of greater danger
toward the Prince. Nor to withdraw their Honor all at once, which makes a
desperate Coffeehouse in the party, and a commiseration in the peole, and so
greater love, if he be gracious for his virtue, and public service. Nor to
banish him into foreign Countries, where he may have opportunity of practicing
with Forr^ign States, whereof great danger may ensue, as in the example of
Coriolanus, Henry the fourth, and such like. But to use these, and the like
Sophisms, viz. To abate their greatness by degrees, as David Ioabs, Justinian
Bellisarius, etc. To advance some other Men to as great, or greater Honor, to
shadow, or over-mate the greatness of the other. To draw from him by degrees
his friends, and followers by prefe^ments, rewa^ds, and other good and lawful
means; especially, to be pr^vided that these great men be not employed in great
or powerful affairs of the Commonwealth, whereby they may have more
opportunity to sway the State. 3. People, viz. So to order and behave himself,
that he be loved, and reverenced of the People. For that the Prince need not
greatly fear home-conspiracies, o^ foreign Invasion, if he be firmly loved of
his own people. The reason, for that the Rebel can neither hope for any forces
for so great enterprise, nor any refuge, being discovered and put to flight, if
the multitude affect their Prince: But the Common people being once offended,
has cause to fear every moving, both at home and abroad. This may be effected
by the Prince, if he use means and art of getting the favor of the people, and
avoid those things that breed hatred and contempt; viz. if he seem as a Tutor,
or a Father to love the people, and to protect them, if he maintain the peace
of his Kingdom; For that nothing is more popular, nor more pleasing to the
people, than is peace. 4. If he show himself oftentimes graciously, yet with
State and Majesty to his people, and receive complaints of his suppliants, and
such like. 5. If he sit himself sometimes in open Courts, and place of Iustic^,
that he may seem to have a care of justice among his people. If he bestow many
benefits and graces upon that City, which he makes the seat of his Empire, and
so make it sure and faithful unto him, which is fit to be in the middle of his
Kingdom, as the hear^ in the middle of the body, or the Sun in the middle of
Heaven, both to divide himself more easily into all the parts of his Dominions;
and least the furthest parts^ at one end move, whilst the Prince is in the
other. I^ he go in progress many times to see his Provinces, especially, those
that are remote. 6. If he gratify his Courtiers and Att^n^ants in that ^ort,
and by such means, as that he may seem not to pleasure them with the hurt and
injury of his people, as with Monopolies, and such like. 7. If he commit the
handling of such things as procure envy, or seem grievous to his Ministers, but
reserve those things which are grateful, and well pleasing to himself, as the
French Kings, who for that purpose, as may seem, have erected their Court at
Paris, which acquitteh the Prince from grudge and ^nvy, both with the Nobles
and the People. 8. If he borrows sometimes sums of money of his people, though
he have no need, and pay the same justly without defalca^ion of any part by his
Exchequer, or other Officer. 9. If he avoid all such things as may breed
^atred, or contempt of his person, which may be done, if he show himself not
too light, inconstant, hard, cruel, ^sfeminate, fearful, and dastardly, etc.
But contrariwise, Religious, Grave, Just Valiant, etc. Whereby appears the
false doctrine of the Machiavilian Policy, with far the betmeans to keep the
people in obedience, than love, and reverence of the people toward the Prince.
10 If the Prince be well furnished with Warlike provision, which is to be
rumoured, and made known abroad: if it be known, that he is reverenced, and
obeyed by his peoples at home. 11. If he provide so much as lies in him, that
his neighbor Kingdoms grow not over much in power and Dominion; which if it
happen, he is to join speedily with other Princes, which are in like danger to
abate that greatness, and to strengthen himself and the rest against it. An
oversight of the Christian Princes toward the King of Spain. 12. If he get him
Intelligencers by Reward, or other means, to detect or hinder the designs of
that Prince, with whom he has differences, if any thing be intended against
his State. Or at least have some of his own Lydging abroad, about that Princes
Court, under color of Embassage, or some other p^etence; which must be men of
skill and Dexterity to serve for that turn. 13. To observe the Laws of his
Country, and not to encounter them with his Pr^rogative, nor to use it at all
where there is a Law, for that it makes a secret and just grudge in the
peoples hearts, especially if it tender to take from them ^^^ir commodities,
and to bestow them upon other of his COURTIERS and Ministers. 14. To provide
especially, That that part, which favors the State as it stands, be more
potent, than the other which favors it not, or desires a change. 15. To
make special choice of good and sound men to bear the place of Magistrates,
especially, of such as assist the Prince in his Counsels, and Policies, and not
to lean over much to his own advise, contrary to the rule of Machiavil, who
teaches, That a Prince can have no good counsel, except it be in himself; his
reason, because if he use the counsel of some one, he is in danger to be
over-wrought, and supplanted by him; and if he counsel with more, Then he shall
be distracted with the differences in opinions. As if a Prince of great, or
mean wisdom, could not take the Judgment of all his Counsellorurs in any point
of Policy, or of so many as the himself thinks good, and to take it either
by word, or in writing; and himself then in private peruse them all, and so
after good and mature deliberation, make choice of the best, without any
distraction or binding himself to the direction of one. For the Proverb is
true, that two eyes see more than one; and therefore the advises, and
Consultations of a Senatory State, is compared by some to a Feast, or dinner,
where many contribute toward the shot, by which means they have more variety
of dishes, and so better fare; and yet every man may make choice of that dish,
that s^rve^h him best ^or his health and appeti^e. 16. The Prince himself is to
sit sometimes in place of public justice, and to give an experiment of his
wisdom and equity, whereby great reverence and estimation is gotten, as in the
example of Solomon, which may seem the reason, why our Kings of England had
their Kings Bench in place of public Justice, after the manner of the ancient
Kings that ^ate in the Gate; where for better performing of this Princely duty,
some special causes may be selected, which may thoroughly be deba^ed and
considered upon by the Prince in private, with the help and advise of his
learned Council, and so be decided publicly, as before is said, by the Prince
himself; At least, the Prince is to ^ake accomp^ of every Minister of public
Justice, that it may be known, that he has a care of Justice, and doing right
to his people, which makes the Justic^rs also to ^e more ^^reful in performing
of their duties. 17. To be moderate in his Taxes, and impositions; and when
need does require to use the Subjects purse, ^o do it by Parliaments, and with
their consents, making the cause apparent unto them, and showing his
unwillingness in charging them. Finally, so to use it, that it may seem rather
an offer from his Subjects, than an exaction by him. 18. To stop small
beginnings; unto ^his end to compound the dissentions that arise amongst the
Nobles, with caution, that such as are free be not drawn into parts, whereby
many times the Prince is endangered, and the whole Commonwealth set in a
combustion; as in the example of the Barons Wars, and the late Wars of France,
which grew from a quarrel betwixt the Guision Faction, and the other Nobility.
19. To stir up the people, if they grow secure, and negl^gent of A^mour, and
other provision for the Commonwealth, by some rumor or fear of danger at
home, to make more ready when occasion requires. But this seldom to be used,
least it be supposed a false Alarm, when there is need indeed. 20. To have
special care, that his children, especially, the heir apparent, have such
bringing up as is meet for a King, viz. in learning, specially of matters
pertaining to State, and in Martial exercise, contrary to the practice of many
Princes, who suffer their children to be brought up in pleasure, and to spend
their time in hunting, etc. which by reason of their defects, afterward is a
cause of mis-government and alteration of State.
II. Kingdoms new gotten, or purchased by force, are preserved by these means.
1. FIrst, if they have been Subjects before to his Ancestors, or have the
same tongue, manners, or fashions, as have his own Country, it is an eas^^
matter to retain such Countries within their obedience, in case the Princes
blood of the said country be wholly extinct. For men of the same quality,
tongue, and condi^ion, do easily shole, and combine themselves together, so
much the rather, if the people of that country have served before, and were
not accustomed to their own Lib^r^y, wherein specially is to be observed, that
the laws and customs o^ that purchased Country be not altered nor innovated,
or at least it be done by little and little. So the ^urgundians and Acquitains
were annexed to France. The reason, because partly they have been accustomed to
serve, and partly, for that they will not ^asily agree about any other to be
their Prince, if the Blood Royal be once extinguished. As for the invasion of
a foreign Country, whereunto the Prince has no right, or whereof the right
heir is living,; It is not the part of a just Civil Prince, much less a Prince
Christian to enforce such a country; and therefore, the Machiavilian practices
in this case, to make sure work by extinguishing wholly the Blood Royal, is
lewd and imper^inent: The like is to be said of murdering the Natives, or the
greatest part of them, to the end he may hold the rest in sure posession. A
thing not only against Christian Religion, but it is inhumane injustice,
cruel, and barbarous.

2. The safest way is, (supposing a right) that some good part of the Natives
be transplanted into some other place, and our Colonies, consisting of so many
as shall be thought meet, be planted there in some part of the Province,
Castles, Forts, and Havens, seized upon and more provided in fit places, as the
manner was of the Babylonian Monarch, which Transplanted 10. Jews: And of the
Romans in France, Tribes of the Germany, Br^tany, and other places. The reason:
1. For that otherwise Forces of Horse and Foot, are to be maintained within the
Province, which cannot be done without great charge. 2. For that the whole
Province is ^roubled and grieved with removing and supplying the Army with
victuals, carriages, etc. 3. For that Colonies are more sure and faith^ul, than
the rest.

As for the Natives that are removed from their former ^ears, they have no
means to hurt, and the rest of the Natives being free from the inconvenience,
and fearing that themselves may be so served if they attempt any thing rashly,
are content to be quiet.

The Turks practice in Asia, where the chief grounds and dwellings are posessed
by the Soldiers, whom they call, Timariotae.

That the Prince have his seat and his residence, in his new purchase,
especially, for a time, till things be well settled; especially, if the Province
be great and large, as the Turks in Greece: The reason; 1. Because the presence
of the Prince avails much to keep things in order, and get the good will of
his new Subjects. 2. They conceive that they have refuge by the Princes
presence, if they be oppressed by the Lieutenants, and inferior Governors:
Where it will be convenient for the winning the peoples hearts, that some
example be made of punishing of such as have committed any violence or
oppression. 3. Because being present, he sees and hears what is thought and
attempted; and so may quickly give remedy to it, which being absent, he cannot
do, or not do in time. 4. If the Prince himself cannot be present to reside,
then, to take heed that the charge of Governing, or new purchases be committed
to such as be sure men, and of other meet quality, that depend wholly upon the
Princes favor, and not to Natives, or other of their own Subjects, that are
gracious ^or their Nobil^^y, or Virtue; especially, if the Province be great,
and somewhat far distant, which may soon seduce the unsettled affections of
those new subjects. As for such Governors, as depend wholly upon the Princes
favor, being not born, but created Noble, they will not so easily suffer
themselves to be won from their duty, and in case they would revolt, yet they
are not able to make any great strength, for that the people obey them but as
instruments and ministers, to keep them in Subjection, and not for any ill will.


4. To have the children of the ch^e^ Noble men, and of greatest Authority,
Hostages with them in safe keeping, the more the better: For that no bound is
stronger, than that of nature, to contain the Parents and Alies in obedience,
and they the rest. 5. To alter the laws but by degrees one after another, and
to make other that are more behovefull for the establishing of the present
Govern^ment. 6. To keep the people quiet and peaceable, and well affected so
much as may be, that they may seem by being conquered, to have gotten a
protector, rather than a Tyrant; For the Common People, if they enjoy peace,
and ^e not distracted nor drawn from their business, nor exacted upon beyond
measure, are easily con^ained under obedience; Yet notwithstanding, they are to
be dis^used from the practice of Arms, and other Exercises which increase
courage, and ^e weakened of Armor, that they have neither spirit, ^or will to
rebel. 7. If the^e be any ^action in the Country, to take to him the defense
of the better and stronger part, and to combine with it, ^as Caesar in Fra^^e.
8. To look well to the Borders, and confining Provinces, and if any rule there
of great, or equal power to himself, to join league with some other Borderers,
though of less strength, to hinder the attempts (if any should be) by such
neighbor Prince. For it happens often, tha^ a Country in^e^ted by one
neighbor Prince, ^calleth in another, of as great, o^ greater power, to
assist, and rescue it from the other that invadeth it; So the Romans were
called into Greece, by the AEtolians; the Saxons, by the Britains, the Danes,
by the Saxons. 9. To leave their Ti^les and dignities to the Natives, but the
command and Authority, wholly to his own. 10. Not to put much trust, nor to
practice to often the Sophisms of Policy, especially those that appertain to a
Tyrannical State, which are soon de^ected by men of Judgment, and so bring
discredit to the Prince, and his Policy among the wiser, and better sort of his
subjects, whereof must needs follow very ill effects.


The Sophisms of Tyrants, are rather to be known, than practiced, (which are
for the supporting of their Tyrannical States,) by wise and good Princes, and
are these, and such like as follow.

Rules Politic of Tyrants.
RVles practiced by Tyrants are of 2. sorts. viz. 1. Barbarous, and Pro^essed,
which is proper to those that have got head, and have power sufficient of
themselves, without others help, as in the Tu^kish, and Russe Government. 2.
So^histical, and Dissembl^d; As in some States that are repu^ed for good and
lawful Monarchies, but inclining to Tyrannies, proper to those which are not
yet ^^tled, nor have power sufficient of themselves; but must use the power and
help of others, and so are forced to be Politic Soph^st^^s.


I. Sophisms of a Barbarous and professed Tyranny.
TO expel and banish ou^ of his country all ho^est means, whereby his people
may a^tain to learning, wisdom, valor, and other virtues, that they might be
fit for that estate, and ^ervile condition. For that these two, learning, and
martial exercise, effect two things most dangerous to a Tyranny: viz. Wisdom,
and Valor. For that men of spirit and understanding, can hardly endure a
Servile State. To this end, to forbid learning of li^eral Arts, and Martial
exercise; As in the Rus^e Government, so Julian the Apo^tata dealt with the
Christians. Contrariwise, to use his people to base occup^tions, and Mechanical
Arts, to keep them from idleness, and to put away from them all high thoughts,
and manly conceits, and to give them a liberty of drinking drunk, and of other
base and lewd conditions that they may be sotted, and so made unfit for great
enterprises. So the Egyptian Kings dealt with the Heb^ews; So the Russe
Emperor with his Russe people: And Charles the fifth with the Neth^rlanders,
when he purposed to enclose their Privileges, and to bring them under his
absolute Government.

2. To make sure to him, and his State, his Military men by reward, liberty,
and other means, especially, his Guard, or Praetorian ^and; That being
partakers of the spoil and benefit, they make like that State, and continue
firm to it; as the Turk, his Ianizaries; the Russe, his Boyarens, etc.

3. To unarm his people of weapons, money, and all means, whereby they may
resist his power; And to that end, to have his set and ordinary exactions, viz.
Once in two, three, or four years, and sometimes yearly, as the Turk and Russe;
who is wont to say, That his people must be used as his flock of sheep, viz.
Their fle^c^ taken from them, least it overlade them, and grow too heavy; That
they are like to his beard, that the more it was shaven, the thicker it would
grow. And if there be any of extraordinary wealth, to borrow of them in the
mean while, till the Tax come about, or upon some devised matter, to confiscate
their goods, as the common practice is of the Russe and Tu^k.

4. To be still in Wars, to the end, his people may need a Captain; and that
his Forces may be kept in practice, as the Russe does yearly against the
Tartar, Pol^nian, and Sweden, etc.

5. To cut off such as excel the rest in wealth, favor, or nobil^ty; or be of
a pregnant, or a spiring wit, and so are fearful to a Tyrant, and to suffer
none to hold Office, or any honor, but only of him; as the Turk, his Bas^^^s;
and the Russe, his ^u^zzes.

6. To forbid Guild^, Brotherhoods, Feastings, and other Assemblies among the
people, that they have no means or opportunity to conspire, or confer together
of public matters, or to maintain love amongst themselves, which is very
dangerous to a Tyrant, the Russes practice.

7. To have their Beagles, or listeners in every corner, and parts of the
Realm; especially, in places that are more suspect, to learn what every man
says, or thinks, that they may prevent all attempts, and take away such as
mislike their State.

8. To make Schism, and Division among his Subjects, viz. To set one Noble man,
against another, and one Rich man against another, that through Faction and
disagreement among themselves, they may be weakened, and attempt nothing
against him, and by this means entertaining whisperings, and complaints, he may
know the secrets of both parts, and have matter against them both, when need
requires. So the Russe made the Faction of the Ze^^ky, and the Oppress^nie.

9. To have strangers for his Guard, and to entertain Parasites, and other base
and servile fellows, not too wise, and yet subtle, that will be ready for
reward to do and execute what he commands, though never so wicked and unjust.
For that good men cannot flatter, and wise men cannot serve a Tyrant.

All these practices, and such like, may be contracted into one or two, viz. To
bereave his subjects of will and power to do him hurt, or to alter the present
State. The use is Caution, not Imitation.

II. Sophisms of the Sophistical, or subtle Tyrant, to hold up his State.
1. TO make show of a good King, by observing a temper and mediocritie in his
Government, and whole course of life; To which end, it is necessary, That this
subtle Tyrant, be a cunning Politician, or a Machiavilian at the least, and
that he be taken so to be, for that it makes him more to be feared and
regarded, and is thought thereby, not unworthy for to Govern others.

2. To make show not of severity, but of gravity, by seeming reverent, and not
terrible in his speech, and gesture, and habit, and other demeanor.

3. To pretend care of the Commonwealth; And to that end, to seem loath to
exact Tributes, and other Charges; and yet to make necessity of it, where none
is: To that end, to procure such War as can bring no danger toward his State,
and that might easily be compounded, or some other chargeable business; and to
continue it on, that he may continue his exaction and contribution so long as
he list. And thereof to employ some in his public Service, the rest to hoord
up in his Treasury, which is sometimes practiced even by lawful Princes, as
Edward the fourth in his Wars against France, when having levied a great sum of
Money throughout his ^ealm, especially of the Londoners, he went over Seas, and
returned without any thing doing.

4. Sometimes to give an account by open speech, and public writing, of the
expense of such Taxes and Impositions, as he has rec^ived of his ^ubjects,
that he may so seem to be a good Husband, and frugal, and not a robber of the
Commonwealth.

5. To that end, to bestow^ some cost upon public buildings, or some other
work for the Common good, especially upon the Ports, Forts, and chief Cities of
his Realm, that so he may seem a benenefactour, and have a delight in the
adorning of his Country, or doing some good for it.

6. To forbid feastings, and other meetings, which increase love, and give
opportunity to confer together of public matters, under pretense of sparing
cost for better uses, To that end, the Curfieu Bell was first ordained by
William the^ Conqueror, to give men warning to repair home at a certain hour.

7. To take heed that no one grow to be overgreat, but rather, many equally
great, that they may envy, and contend one with another; and if he resolve to
weaken any of this sort, to do it warily, and by degrees; If quite to wreck
him, and to have his life, yet to give him a lawful trial, after the manner of
his Country; And if he proceed so far with any of great power and estimation,
as to do him contumely, or disgrace, not to suffer him to escape, because
contumely and disgrace, are things contrary unto Honor, which great spirits do
most desire, and so are moved rather to a revenge for their disgrace, than to
any thankfulness, or acknowledging the Princes favor for their pardon or
dismistion; True in Atheists, but not in true Christian Nobility.

8. To unarm his people, and store up their weapons, under pretense of keeping
them safe, and having them ready when service requires, and then to arm with
them, such and so many as he shall think meet, and to commit them to such as
are sure men.

9. To make schism or division under hand among his Nobility, and betwixt the
Nobility and the people, and to set one Rich man against another, that they
combine no^ together, and that himself by hearing the griess and complaints,
may know the secrets of both parts, and so have matter against them both, when
it lists him to call them to an account.

10. To offer no man any contumely or wrong, specially, about women's mat^ers,
by attempting the chastity of their Wives or Daughters, which has been he ruin
of many Tyrants, and conversion of their States. As of ^arquinius, by Brutus,
Appius, by Virginius, Pisistratus, by Harmodius, Alexander Medices, Duke of
Florence, Aloisus of Placentia, Rodericus, King of Spain, etc.

11. To that end, to be moderate in his pleasures, or to use them closely, that
he be not seen; For that men sober, or watchful, or such as seem so, are not
lightly subject to contempt, or conspiracies of their own.

12. To reward such as atchieve some great or commendable enterprise; or do any
special action ^or the Commonwealth, in that manner as it may seem, they could
not be better regarded, in case they lived in a Free State.

13. All rewards and things grateful, to come from himself, but all
punishments, exactions, and things ungrateful, to come from his Officers, and
public Ministers; And when he has effected what he would by them, if he see
his people discontented withal, to make them a Sacrifice to pacify his
Subjects.

14. To pretend great care of Religion, and of serving God, (which has been
the manner of the wickedest Tyrants) for that people do less fear any hurt from
those, whom they think Virtuous and Religious, nor attempt likely to do them
hurt, for that they think that God protects them.

15. To have a strong and sure Guard of foreign Soldiers, and to bind them by
good turns, that they having at least profit, may depend upon him, and the
present State; As C^ligula, the German Guard, where the Nobility are many and
mighty. The like is practiced by Lawful Kings, as by the French King.

16. To procure that other great persons be in the same fault, or case with
them, that for that cause they be forced to defend the TYRANT, for their own
safety

17. To take part, and to join himself with the stronger part; if the Common
people, and mean degree be the stronger, to join with them; if the Rich and
Noble, to join with them. For so that part with his own strength, will be ever
able to overmatch the other.

18. So to frame his manners and whole behavior, as that he may seem, if not
perfectly good, yet tolerably evil, or somewhat good, somewhat bad.

These Rules of Hypocritical Tyrants, are to be known, that they may be
avoided, and met withal, and not drawn into imimitation.

Preservation of an Aristocracie.
RUles to preserve a Senatory State, are partly taken from the common Axioms,
and partly from those that preserve a Kingdom.

Preservation of an Oligarchie, by Sophisms. Rules.

1. IN Consultations and Assemblies, about public affairs, to order the
matter, that all may have liberty to frequent their Common Assemblies, and
Councels,; But to impose a Fine upon the richer sort, if they omit that duty.
On the other side, to pardon the people, if they absent themselves, and to bear
with them under pretense, that they may the better intend their Occupations,,
and not be hindered in their Trades, and earnings.

2. In Election of Magistrates, and Officers: To suffer the poorer sort to vow,
and abjure the bearing of Office, under color of sparing them, or to enjoin
some great charge, as incident to the Office, which the poor cannot bear. But
to impose some great Fine upon those, that be Rich, if they refuse to bear
Office, being Elect unto it.

3. In judicial matters: In like manner to order, that the people may be absent
from public Trials, under pretense of following their business. But the Richer
to be present, and to compel them by Fines, to frequent the Court.

4. In Warlike exercise and Arms: That the poor be not forced to have Armor,
Horse, etc. under pretense of sparing their cost, nor to be drawn from their
Trades by Martial Exercises; but to compel the Richer sort to keep their
proportion of Armor, Horse, etc. by excessive Fines, and to exercise themselves
in Warlike matters, etc.

5. To have special care of instructing their Children in liberal Arts,
Policy, and Warlike exercise, and to observe good order and discipline. For as
Popular States are preserved by the frequencie, and Liberty of the People, so
this Government of the Richer, is preserved by discipline, and good o^der of
Governors.

6. To provide good store of Warlike furniture, especially of Horse, and
Horsemen, and of Armed m^n, viz. Pike, etc. which are proper to the gentry, as
shot, and light furniture, are for a Popular Company.

7. To put in practice some points of a Popular state; viz. To lade no one man
with too much preferment; To make yearly, or half years Magistrates, etc. For
that the People are pleased with such things, and they are better secured by
this means from the Rule of one. And if any grow to too much greatness, to
abate him by the Sophisms fit for this State.

8. To commit the Offices and Magistracies, to those that are best able to bear
the greatest charges for public matters, which both tends to the
conservation of this State, and pleases the people, for that they reap some
relief, and benefit by it.

9. To the same end, To contract marriages among themselves, the rich with the
rich, etc.

10. In some things which concern not the Points, and matters of State, as
Electing Magistrates, making Laws, etc. to giv^ an equality, or sometimes a
preferment to the Common People, and not to do, as in some Oligarchies they
were wont; viz. To swear against the People, to suppress and bridle them; but
rather contrary; To minister an Oath at their admission, That they shall do no
wrong to any of the People; and if any of the richer offer wrong to any of the
Commons, to show some example of severe punishment.

For other Axioms that preserve this State, they are to be borrowed from those
other rules that tend to the preserving of a Popular, and Tyrannical State; for
the strict kind of Oligarchie, is kin to a Tyranny.

Preservation of a popular State; Sophisms. Rules or Axioms.

1. IN public Assemblies and Consultations about matters of State, creating of
Magistrates, public Justice, and Exercise of arms, to practice the contrary to
the former kind of Government, to wit, an Oligarc^ie. For in Popular States,
the Commons and meaner sort are to be drawn to those Assemblies, Magistrates,
Offices, Warlike Exercises, etc. by mulcts and rewards, and the richer sort
are to be spared, and not to be forced by fine, or otherwise, to frequent these
Exercises.

2. To make show of honoring and reverencing the richer men, and not to swear
against them, as the manner has been in some Popular States; but rather to
prefer them in all other matters, that concern not the State and public
Government.

3. To elect Magistrates from among the Common^ by Lot, or Ballating, and not
to choose any for their wealths sake.

4. To take heed, that no man bear office twice, except it be Military, where
the pay, and salary, etc. is to be reserved in their own hands, to be disposed
of by a Common Counsel, etc. And to see that no man be too highly preferred.

5. That no Magistracy be perpetual, but as short as may be, to wit, for a a
year, half year, etc.

6. To compel Magistrates when their time expireth, to give an account of their
behavior and government, and that publicly before the Commons.

7. To have public Salaries and allowance for their Magistrates, Judges, etc.
And yearly dividents for the common people, and such as have most need among
them.

8. To make Judges of all matters out of all sorts, so they have some aptness
to perform that duty.

9. To provide that public Judgments and Trials be not frequent; and to that
end to inflict great Fines and other punishments upon Pettifoggers and
Dilators, as the law of requital, etc. Because for the most part the richer and
nobler, and not the Commons are indicted and accused in this Commonwealth,
which causes the rich to conspire against the State; whereby many times the
popular State is turned into an Oligarchie, or some other Government. Hereto
tends that Art of Civil Law, made against Accusers and Calumniatours: Ad
S^natus-consultum Turpilianum, l. 1. de Calumniatoribus.

10. In such free States as are popular, and have no revenue, to provide that
public Assemblies be not after: because they want salary for Pleaders and
Orators; And if they be rich; yet to be wary, that all the revenue be not
divided amongst the Commons. For, that this distribution of the Common revenue
among the multitude, is like a purse or barrel without a bottom. But to
provide, that a sufficient part of the revenue be stored up for the public
affairs.

11. If the number of the poor increase too much in this kind of State, to send
some abroad out of the Cities into the next Country places, and to provide
above all, that none do live idly, but be set to their trades. To this end, to
provide that the richer men place in their Farms and Coppiholds, such decayed
Citizens.

12. To be well advised what is good for this State, and not to suppose that to
be fit for a popular State, that seems most popular; but that which is ^est
for the continuance thereof: And to that end, not to lay into the Exchequer, or
Common-Treasurie, such goods as are confiscate, but to store them up as holy
and consecrate things, which except it be practiced, confiscations, and fines
of the Common people would be frequent, and so this State would decay by
weakening the people.

Conversion of States in general.
COnversion of a State, is the declining of the Commonwealth, either to some
other form of Government, or to his full and last period appointed by God.

Causes of conversions of States are of two sorts: General and Particular.
GEneral, ( viz.) 1. Want of Religion: viz. of the true knowledge and worship
of God, prescribed in his word; and notable sins that proceed from thence in
Prince and people, as in the examples of Saul, Uzziah, the Jewish State; the
four Monarchies^ and all other.

2. Want of wisdom and good Council to keep the State, the Prince, Nobles, and
people in good temper, and due proportion, according to their several orders
and decrees.

3. Want of Justice, either in administration (as ill Laws, or ill
Magistrates) or in the execution, as rewards not given where they should be, or
there ^estowed where they should not be, or punishments not inflicted where
they should be.

4. Want of power and sufficiency to maintain and defend it self; viz. Of
provision, as Armor, Money, Captains, Soldiers, etc. Execution, when the
means or provision is not used, or ill used.

2. Particular: To be noted and collected out of the contraries of those rules,
that are prescribed for the preservation of the Commonwealths.

Particular causes of Conversion of States, are of two sorts.
1. Foreign: By the over-greatness of invasion of some foreign Kingdom, or
other State of meaner power, having a part within our own, which are to ^e
prevented by the providence of the chief, and rules of policy for the
preserving of every State. This ^alleth out very seldom for the great
diff^cul^y to overthrow a foreign State. 2. Domestic: Sedition or open
violence by the stronger part. Alteration without violence.

Sedition.
SEdition is a power of inferiors opposing it self with force of Arms against
the superior power, Quasi ditio secedens.

Causes of Sedition are of two sorts.
1. General.

Liberty Richer

WHen they, that are of equal quality in a Commo^-wealth, or do take themselves
so to be, are not regarded equally in all, or in any of these three.

Or, when they are so unequal in quality, or take themselves so to be, are
regarded but equally, or with less respect than those that be of less de^ect in
these three things, or in any of them.

Honor
1. IN the Chief: Covetousness or oppression, by the Magistrate or higher
Power, ( viz.) when the Magistrates, especially the Chief, increases his
substance and revenue beyond measure, either with the public or (private
calamity, whereby the Governors grow to quarrel among themselves as in
Olygarchies) or the other degrees conspire together, and make quarrel against
the Chief, as in Kingdoms: The examples of Wat Tyler, Jack Straw, etc.

2. In the Chief: Injury, when great Spirits, and of great power, are greatly
wronged and dishonored, or take themselves so to be, as Coriolanus, Cyrus
minor, Earl of Warwick. In which cases the best way is to decide the wrong.

3. Preferment, or want of preferment; wherein some have overmuch, and so wax
proud and aspire higher: or have more or less, than they deserve as they
suppose; and so in envy and disda^, seek Innovation by open saction, so Caesar,
etc.

4. Some great nec^ssity or calamity; So Xerxes after the ^oil of his great
Army. And Sena^harib after the loss of 185. in one night.

2. Particular.

1. Envy, when the chief exceed the mediocri^y before mentioned, and so
provokes the Nobility, and other degrees, to conspire against him; as Brutus
Cassius, etc. against Caesar. 2. Fear, viz. Of danger, when one or more
dispatch the Prince, by secret practice or force, to prevent his own danger, as
Artab^nus did Xerxes. 3. Lust or Lechery, as Tarquinius Superbus, by Brutus;
Pisistratindae, by Armodius; Appius by Virginius. 4. Contempt; For vile quality
and base behavior, as Sardanapalus by Arbaces; Dionysius the younger by Dion.
5. Contumely; When some great disgrace is done to some of great Spirit, who
stands upon his honor and reputation, as Caligula by Chaereas. 6. Hope of
Advancement, or some great profit, as Mituridates, Anobarsanes.
Chief.

Other d^gr^es.

Other degrees.

Alteration without violence.
CAuses of alteration without violence are; 1. Excess of the State; when by
degrees the State grows from that temper and mediocrity wherein it was, or
should have been settled, and exceeds in power, riches, and absoluteness in
his kind, by the ambition and covetousness of the Chiefs immoderate taxes, and
impositions, etc. applying all to his own benefi^, without respect of other
degrees, and so in the end changes it self into another State or form of
Government, as a Kingdom into a Tyranny, an Oligarch^^ into an Aristocraci^.

2. Excess, of some one or more in the Commonwealth; viz. When some one or
more in a Commonwealth grow to an excellency or excess above the rest, either
in honor, wealth, or virtu^; and so by permission and popular favor, are
advanced to the Sovereignty: By which means, popular States grow into
Oliga^chies; and Oligarchi^s and Aristocracies into Monarchi^s. For which cause
the Athenians and some other free States, made their Laws of Ostrocismos, to
banish any for a time that should excel, though it were in virtue, to prevent
the alteration of their State; which because it is an unjust Law, it is better
to take heed at the beginning to prevent the means, that none should grow to
that height and excellency, than to use so sharp and unjust a remedy.

FINIS.
A METHOD, how to make use of the Book before, in the reading of the Story.
DAVID being seventie years of age, was of wisdom, Memory, etc. sufficient to
govern his Kingdom; 1. Reg. Cap. 1.

Old age is not ever unfit for public Government.
DAvid being of great years, and so having a cold, dry, and impotent bodi^,
married with Abishag, a fair maid of the best complexion through the whole
Realm, to revive his body and prolong his life, 1. Reg. Chap. 1. verse. 3.

Example of the like practice in Charles the fifth.
DAvid being old and impotent of bo^t^, by the advice of h^s Nobles and
P^isitians, marri^d a young maid called Abishag, to warm and pres^rve his old
bodi^.

Observation.
VVH^ther David did well in m^^rying a maid? and whether it be lawful for an
old decayed and impotent man, to marry a young woman; or on the other side,
for an old, worn, and decrepite woman, to marry a young and lusty man?

For the affirmative.
ARG. The end of marriage is Society and mutual comfort; b^^ th^r^ may be
Soci^tie and mutual comfort in a marriage betwixt an old, and young party;
Ergo, it is Lawful.

Answ. Society and comfort is a cause and effect of marriage; but none of the
principal ends of marriage: which are: 1. Pr^creation of children, and so the
continuance o^ mankind. 2. The av^iding of Fornication.


As for comfort and society they may be betwixt man and man, woman and woman,
where no marriage is, and therefore no proper ends of marri^ge.

The Negative.
ARG. 1. That conjunction which has no respect to the right and proper ends,
for which marriage was ^rdained by God, is no lawful marriage. But the
conjunction betwixt an old im^otent, and young party has no respect t^ the
^^ght end, for which marriage was ordain^d by God. Therefor it is no lawful
marriage.

2. No contract, wherein the part^e cont^acting, binds himself to an
impossible condition, or to do that which he cannot do, is good or lawful. But
the contract o^ marriage by an impoten^ person, wit^ a young party, binds
him to an impossible condition to do that which he cannot d^, viz. to perfo^m
the duties of Marriage; Therefore it is unlawful.

For the same cause, the civil Law determines a nullity in these m^r^iages,
except the woman know before the infi^mitie of the man, in which case she ca^
have no wrong, being a thing done with her own knowledge and cons^nt, because
Volenti non fit injuria: -- In legem Julian. de adulteriis leg. Si uxor, etc.

It provideth further, ^or the more certainty of the infirmiti^, That three
years be expired before the dissolution of the marriage, because that men that
have been infirm at the first, by reason of sickness, or some other accident,
afterward proved to be sufficient: De repudiis leg. in causis.

Defense for David, in marrying Abishag.
IT was rather a Medicine, than a marriage, without any evil, or disordered
affection.

2. It was by the persuasion of his Nobles, and Phisiti^ns.

3. It was for the public good, to prolong the life of a worthy Prince.

4. It was with the knowledge and consent of the young maid, who was made
acquainted with the Kings infirmity, and to what end she was married unto him;
who if she did it for the common good, and for duties sake, having withal the
gift of continency, she is to be commended; if for ambition, or some vain
respect, it is ^er own, and not David's fault.

Political Nobility. Adoniah aspiring to the Kingdom.
FIrst, took the advantage of David's affection and kindness toward him, and
made him secure of any ill dealing. Secondly, of his age and infirmities,
disabling his Father as unfit for Government. Thirdly, blazed his title, and
Right to the Crown. Fourthly, got him Chariots, Horsemen, and Footmen, and a
guard to make show of State. Fifthly, being a comely, and goodly Person, made a
popular show of himself, and his qualities. Sixthly, joined to himself in
Faction, Joab, the General of the Army, who was in displeasure for murdering
of Abner, and Amaza, and feared that David would supply Benajah in his place,
and so was discontented. And Abiather the high Priest, that was likewise
discontented with David, for the preferment of Zadoch. Seventhly, had meetings
with them, and other his confederates, under pretense of a vovv, and offering
at the Fountain of Raguel, in the co^^ines of Judea. Eighthly, made a show of
Religion by Sacrificing, etc. Ninthly, made himself familiar with the Nobles
and people, and entertai^^d them with feasting. Tenthly, drevv into his part
the chief Officers of the Court, and Servants to the King, by rewards,
Familiarity, etc. Eleventhly, disgraced and abased the Competitour, and such
as he knevv would take part with him, and concealeth his ambition, and
purpose from them. Tvvelftly, had Jonathan a Favorite of the Court, and near
about the King to give him intelligence, if any thing were discovered, and
moved at the Court, whilst himself was in hand about his practice.
OBSERVATIONS. Ways of such as aspire to the Kingdom, and marks to discern
them.
FIrst, they wind into the Princes favor by service, officiousness, flattery,
etc. to plant him in a good opinion of their loyalty and faithfulness, thereby
to make him secure of their practices. 2. They take advantage of the Princes
infirmities, age, impotencie, negligence, sex, etc. And work upon that by
disabling the Prince, and secret detracting of his State, and Government. 3.
They blaze their Title, and claim to the Crown, (if they have any) with their
friends and favorites. 4. They provide them in secret of extraordinary
forces, and furniture for the Wars, make much of good Soldiers, and have a
pretense (if it be espied) of some other end, as for the Kings honor, or
service, and to be in readiness against foreign enemies, etc. 5. They make
open show of their best qualities, and comeliness of their persons (which though
it be vain as a dumb show, it is very effectual to win the liking of the
popular sort, which according to the rul^ of the election of Kings, in the Bees
Commonwealth; think that Porma est digna imperare) Activitie, Nobility,
Ancestrie, etc. 6. To have their blazers abroad, to set out their virtues, and
to prepare their friends in every Province. 7. To draw into their part, and
make sure unto the^, of the chief P^ers, and men of best quality, such as are
mightiest and most gracious with the soldiers, and the Military men, and most
subtle and politic, especially such as be ambitious and discontent with the
State. 8. To have meetings for con^e^rence under some pretense of some
ordinari^ matter in some convenient place, not too near, nor too far off, but
where friends may best resort and assemble unto them without suspicion. 9. To
take up a show, and pretense of Religion, more than before, and beyond the
practice of their former life. 10. They use popular courtesy (which in a great
person is very effectual) feasting, liberaliti^, gaming, etc. 11. To be over
liberal, and win to them by gifts, familiarity, etc. the chief Officers of the
Court, and Governors of Shires. 12 To have some near about the Prince, to keep
them in credit, and remove suspicion, if any rise. 13. To disgrace such as
they know to be sure and faithful to the Prince, and present State, or to the
competitour, and to bring them into contempt by slander, detraction, and all
means they can, and to ^onc^al the designs from them, least they be discovered
before they be too ripe. 14. To have some spy ^^ar about the Prince, to
advertise them if any i^ckling of suspicion arise, whilst themselves are
practicing.
Note the practices of Absalom: ^ Sam. chap. 16. And of Cy^us minor in
Xenophon; (...). cap. 1.

Political Prince.
David being a most worthy and excellent Prince for wisdom, valor, religion,
and justice, and so highly deserving of the commonwealth, yet grown into age,
grew withal into contempt, and had many, both of his Nobles, and common people,
that fell from him; first with Absalom, then with Adoniah, who affected the
Kingdom, and rebelled against him: For remedy whereof, he stirred up himself to
public actions, which might show his vigor and sufficiency to manage the
affairs of his Kingdom.

1. AFter the victory against Absalom, he forced himself to ^orbear mourning,
and showed himself to his discontented Army, when all were like to fall from
him, for his unreasonable sorrow and lamentation for his son.

2. After the victory, he caused a g^n^ral convention to be ass^mbled o^ the
whole nation, to bring him home with honor to Jerusalem, which was a renewing,
and re-establishing of him. 2 Samuel 19. 12.

3. He gave an experiment of his power and authority, by deposing a person of
great authority and estimation, to wit, Joab, General Captain of the Army,
and advancing Amasa to his place.

4. He sent kind Messengers to Jerusalem, and to other chief and head towns,
and special men of Judea, his contributes, putting them of their alliance with
him, with these words, That they were of his own flesh and blood, with
protestation of his special love and affection toward them, to provide them
with the like kindness and affection toward him.

5. He assembled a Parliament of his whole realm, and took occasion upon the
designing of his successor, to commend unto them the succession of his house,
and the continuance and maintenance o^ Gods tru^ worship and religion then
established, and gave a grave and public ch^rge to his Successor, now
designed, touc^ing the manner of his government, and maintaining of religion.
1. Chron. 12. 13.

6. He showed his bounty and magnificence in cong^sting matter for the
building of the Temple, as gold, silver, brass, etc. And caus^d it to be
published and made known to the Parliament and whole Nation, 1. Chron. 22. 13.

7 He revived the Church Government, and set it in a right order, assigning to
^v^ry Church, Officers, his place and function.

8. He suppressed the faction of Ado^niah, and ordained Solomon his Successor,
1 Reg. 1. 22. By these means, h^ retained his Majesty and Authority i^ his
old age, as appears by the effect; ^o^ that being bedridden, he suppressed the
fa^ction of Adoniah, (which was grow^^ mighty, and was set on foot) with h^^
bare commandment, and si^nification (...) his pleasure, and so he dyed in peace.

FINIS.

