CONTROVERSIAL DISCOURSES RELATING TO THE CHURCH, BEING AN ANSWER TO Dr.
SHERLOCK'S DISCOVRSE CONCERNING The NATURE, UNITY, and COMMUNION OF THE
CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

By B. D.

Credidi propter quod locutus sum. psalm. 115.



Printed at DOWAY, M. DC. XCVII.

THE PREFACE.
DR. Sherlock's Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the
Catholic Church came forth in the Year 1688. not long before the great
Revolution that has happened among us, and through the unsetlednesse of the
times, the watchful care over the press, and the difficulties of sending a
Copy of an Answer to be printed beyond sea, he has had ever since all the
advantage of a Noncontradiction, which is to be cried up and admired by men of
his own persuasion without any check and control. But seeing of late our
Adversaries begin again to traduce their inoffensive neighbors in print on the
account of their Faith, there can be no fair excuse now for any longer silence
since the publication of the Peace and the opening of the seas, and it will be
expected, that we say something to Dr. Sherlock in behalf of the Catholic
Church, if our Cause can afford us any thing to say against his Principles; it
being a thing very natural for men to speak when they are spoken to, to defend
themselves when they are attacqued, and to return Answers when their silence
is like to redound to the prejudice of the Cause which they have espoused. It is
for this reason that I have been induced to draw the following Discourses out
of the obscurity wherein they have lain for several Years, which if
Protestants will but read with the same impartialitie as they read Books of a
much lesser concern, I make no doubt, but they will find more than sufficient
grounds to question the truth of the Drs. Anticatholique Notions, which have
nothing else to recommend them to any man's esteem besides their Noveltie and
singularity, which are the things of all others which ought to be most
suspected in matters of Religion.

The most proper way of answering him would have been by a just and methodical
Treatise of the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic Church as they
are settled in our Principles. But by reason our Authors, who have writ very
copiously on these subjects, are in every one's hands, I shall make use of no
other method than his own, and follow him step by step with as much brevitie as
is consistent with clearness, by which means I may chance to give the Reader
as great a satisfaction as if my thoughts were swelled into a Book of a greater
bulk, seeing I shall take notice of every thing which he shall offer of any
seeming moment, and omit only those things that have little or no opposition to
our Principles.

The grand Principle whereon he pretends to build his whole Discourse is, that
the Church in Heaven and Earth is the one Church, and the one Body of Christ.
We are no strangers to this Position, which we are as well acquainted withal as
with any Article of our Creed: neither do I remember that any of our Schoolmen,
or other Divines who are seldom sparing in starting objections against
themselves, have taken notice of any ground for any objectlon that might be
taken from thence against our Doctrins; or that any of our Protestant
Adversaries have at any time made any use of it to justify their separation
from us, as they might very easily and and effectually have done, if the Drs.
inferences from thence be necessary. So that the glory of this great action
is due to him alone, and the weapons whereby he defends his Church are not
only his own but of his own invention too, which I suppose has been the cause
of that great satisfaction in his undertaking which he discouvers in the
following Citations out of him.

He tells us in his Preface, that after all that is said on one side and the other
he is very sensible, that there will never be an end of these wranglings
(between Catholics and Protestants) without settling the true Notion of the
Catholic Church, which tho a great many good things have been said about it,
he thinks was never thoroughly done yet. And although immediately after this he
pretends to leave the censure of what he has written on this subject to others,
yet he sufficiently insinuates in these words, that he takes his own
performance to be in a singular manner effectual above all others. For in case
no Protestant Writer has hitherto attained to the true Notion of the Catholic
Church, it is manifest that both he and all of his persuasion may be mistaken
herin, if his Notion prove to be wrong. Wherefore he must either pretend to
certainty that his Notion is right, whereby he makes all Protestant Writers to
be Punies to himself in wit and abilities; or else grant, that for any thing
he knows, both he and all those who have writ before him may be mistaken about
it, whereby he excludes all pretense of certainty, that the Protestant
Churches are not guilty of the Heresy and Schism wherewith we Charge them;
because their freeness from these crimes cannot be certainly known without
being certain that they perform the necessary Conditions of Communion with
the Catholic Church, and this performance cannot be certainly known withour
being certain what is the true Notion of the Catholic Church. It deserves a
very serious remark, that Dr. Sherlock, after the Reformation has been above an
Age and an half in the world, starts up at last and tells us, that the first
Reformers had not the true Notion of the Catholic Church, from whence it is
evidently inferred, that they separated from the Catholic and visible Church
of their time, without knowing what necessary obligations they might have of
being visibly united to it. Can any prudent Man resolve with himself according
to this account that these Reforming Heads were pushed on by the Spirit of God
to do what they did?

He talks again with the same assurance p. 8. The whole Church, sais he, both
in Heaven and Earth are united to Christ in the same covenant, which makes it
his One Mystical Body: and it was necessary to lay the foundation here; for
without this, it is inpossible to understand what the Unity of the Church on
Earth means, most of the mistakes in this matter being plainly owing to that
first and Fundamental imstake about the Notion of Catholic Unity, as that
includes the universal Church, part of which is translated into Heaven, and
part still Militant on Earth. I suppose he designs in this passage to reflect
on the Writers of the Church of England, who will never confess ignorance,
that the Church in Heaven and Earth are united to Christ in the same covenant,
nor rest satisfied with his cajoling aknowledgment, that they have said a great
many good things about the Notion of the Catholic Church, when he tells them,
that it is impossible to understand what the Unity of the Church on Earth
means without his Principles, and that they have been no less than
fundamentally mistaken in all their Discourses about Catholic Unity, whereby
the honor of this great discovery belongs to him exclusively to all others.

He then censures the Presbyterians p. 29. in these words, These who have been
aware of this, that the Church in Heaven and Earth is but one Church, have
hence concluded, that the Catholic Church is only the number of the Elect;
that none but truly good men, who are renewed and sanctified by the H. Spirit,
are Members of Christ's My^al Body, which makes the Church on Earth as
invisible to us as the Church in Heaven. Here he owns the Presbyterians whom he
grants to be separatists from his Church, to be better skilled in the
Principles of Christianity than the most learned Penmen of his own Communion,
as not denying, but that they are well acquainted with this unqu^stionable
Principle of the Christian Faith that the Church in Heaven and Earth is but one
Church, and laying to their charge only, that they make a wrong use of it, I
am much mistaken if it will not appear herafter, that he has no great reason to
value himself above the Presbyterians for making a better use of it than they
do. At present I desire it may be taken notice of, that he blames these People
for making the Church on Earth as invisible to us as the Church in Heaven, and
p. 54. he professes to believe that there always has been, and always will be,
a true Visible Church to the end of the World, and yet in the same Page he
teaches those who hold that the Church may be sometimes invisible, how they may
make this Position good, which is a sign that the Presbyterians err not much
in the use they make of it in this particular, if they err any thing at all.
For what Divine or Minister of the Gospel will show separatists a way how they
may defend such Doctrins as he accounts erroneous?

In the next place he falls upon Catholics. Others, sais he, when they talk
of the unity of the Church, never think of the Church in Heaven, and therefore
advance such a Notion of Church unity as excludes the Church in Heaven as if
the Church on Earth were the whole Church of Christ, or that the Church in
Heaven and Earth were not one Church; or that the Notion of Church-unitie must
not relate to the whole Church, but only to one part of it. This charge
against us shall be considered anon. What I observe now is, that he will have
us as well as the Presbyterians to make an ill use of his principle, although in a
different manner from them. For if he make us as ignorant of it as his
Church-of-England Divines, he cannot but know that this is notoriously false;
and I am verily persuaded, if the truth were known, that the first knowledge he
had of it was from our Authors, and perhaps from the Author of the Aggreement
between the Church of England and the Church of Rome etc. (if he were a
Catholic) because he takes notice of it in his Answer to this Book p. 74. For
which reason methinks he might have been more civil in his language to him,
since he has furnished him with such a Principle as he thinks has put an end to
the vain and arrogant pretenses of the Church of Rome.

Lastly, he censures the Independents, who by considering that the Unity of
the Church con^s in the Union of all the parts and members of it to Christ,
have no regard at all to the Unity of the Church on Earth as that also is one
Body and Communion. We are beholding to him for his civilitie in ranking us
before this People. The last words of this quotation are very remarkeble: and
since he holds it for an error to deny the Church on Earth to be one Body
and Communion, it will be a strong prejudice against his Notion of
Church-unitie, if the unity of the Church on Earth cannot be maintained in his
Principles.

It is plain from all these places, that Dr. Sherlock makes full account that
he has done our business for us; but I hope the contrary will appear in the
following Discourses, which I shall not submit, as he does, to the judgment of
any indifferent Reader, but to that of the learned, who are best able to judge
of the conclusivenesse of reasonings that are managed after a speculative and
scholastique way, which the frequent occasions I have received from his new and
singular Principles, and the manner of proposing his Arguments have unavoidably
drove me to in several places.

AN INDEX OF Several remarkeble Points in the following Discourses.
CHAPTER I.
N. 6 and seq. It is no Argument, that the Unity of the Church on Earth does
not consist in it is union to the Pope, because the unity of the Church in
Heaven does not consist therein.

N. 10. and seq. It is no Argument, that the unity of the Church on Earth does
not consist in joining together in external and Visible Acts of worship, because
the union of the Church in Heaven and the Church on Earth does not consist in
joining together in such Acts of worship.

N. 12. and seq. The unity of the Church consists in joining together in the
same Liturgy considered according to it is substance, uiz the Consecration of
the Sacramental Elements, and the Oblation of them.

N. 15. and seq. Among Revealed Truths there is no distinction of some that are
fundamental and others Non-fundamental, that is, of some that are necessary
and others that are not cessarie to be believed after they are sufficiently
proposed to our belief.

N. 20. The unity of the Church necessarily consists in the same Sacraments.

N. 21. and seq. The unity of the Church's Communion is destroyed without a
common Right of giving and receiving the Sacraments among the Faithful: which
common Right is shown to be inconsistent with Dr. Sherlock's Principles.

N. 30. and seq. The unity of the Church consists in the same Ceremonies, as
they are considered with relation to the Power that has approved, and enjoined
them.

N. 36 and seq. The lawfulness and innocence of our worship of Saints is shown.

N. 54 and seq. An examination of S. John's Testimony in his Rev. Chap. 19.
and Chap. 22. alleged against our worship, and Invocation of Angels.

N. 58. and seq. An examination of S. Paul's testimony ad Col. 2. 18. alleged
against our worship of Angels; where Theodoretus his wordsupon this Text and
the 35. Canon of the Council of Laodicea are considered.

N. 71. and seq. Catholics pay no Divine Honors to Saints when they erect
Temples, and Altars that bear their names.

N. 79. and seq. It is shown that the unity of the Church may, nay de facto
does consist in some Articles of Faith as have not always been the explicit
faith of the Cath. Church.

N. 84. and seq. The Notion of the Gospel Covenant settled.

N. 92. and seq. The Notion of our Mystical union to Christ as our Spous settled.

CHAPTER II.
N. 2. and seq. Dr. Sherlock's ^ssential unity of the Church on Earth
considered.

N. 8. and seq. It makes the Church Invisible.

N. 15. and seq. A double Visibilitie assigned to the Church, and neither of
them aggreeing to the Protestant Church.

N. 17. and seq. Supposing the Dr. could make out the sensible Visibilitie of
the Church, yet it is Invisible in his Principles so as not to be
distinguisheble from Heretics and Schismatiques.

N. 31. and seq. Dr. Sherlock knows not where to find the Catholic Church.

N. 41. and seq. He makes the Notion of the Church on Earth to be essentially
distinct from it is Essential unity.

N. 46. He will have Faith to belong to the Notion of the Church in Heaven.

N. 48 Coetus Fidelium is shown not to be a complete Definition of the
catholic Church.

N. 49. and seq. As the said Definition is managed by him it comprehends
Excommunicated Persons, Schismatiques and Heretics, and makes the Faith of
the Catholic Church contradictorie.

N. 59. S. Cyprian's Definition of a Church delivered, and

N. 62. and seq. Shown to belong to the Catholic Church.

N. 64. and seq. S. Cyprian holds that S. Peter's Successors belong to the
Definition of the Catholic Church, as having a superior In risdiction over
the other Bishops.

N. 75. and seq. And calls the Catholic Church one Bishoprique because of this
Supeririour Jurisdiction.

N. 84. and seq. The true meaning of a Canon related by S. Cyprian, and
alleged by Protestants against the superior Jurisdiction of S. Peter's
Successors over their Brethren the other Bishops.

N. 89. and seq. In what sense it is that S.Cyprian sais that every Bishop
holds part of the one Bishoprique of the Catholic Church with full Authority
and Power.

N. 97. and seq. The solution of Objections which are made against the Doctrine
which affirms the Jurisdiction of Bishops to be de Jure Divino.

N. 108. and seq. The Clergy belong to the Definitiof a Church in propriety
of speech.

N 122. In what sense it is that we hold Bishops and Pastors to be the Church.

N. 129. and seq. In what sense it is that we affirm Bishops and Pastors to
represent the Catholic Church in a General Council.

N. 138. and seq. A Right and Power in Bishops to censure and excommunicate
those who will not profess to believe as they do, without an infallible
assurance that their own Faith is true, is repugnant to natural reason.

N. 146 and seq. A Divine Institution may be proved by consequences lawfully
drawn from Principles of Faith.

N. 153. An Authority in the Church and the Authority of the Church are one
and the same thing.

N. 157. and seq. The Authority and infallibility of the Catholic Church
assembled in general Councils asserted, and shown at large out of the 15. of
the Acts.

N. 199. and seq. The famous passage which Protestants produce out of S.
Cyprian's Preface to his Council of Carthage against the Authority of General
Councils fully examined.

N. 204. and seq. It is no Argument against General Conncils, that their
Definitions never put an end to Disputes without the assistance of the Temporal
Power.

N. 210. and seq. It is possible to hear the Catholic Church, seeing Christ
commands us to hear it under pain of being Heathens.

N. 223. An examination of a passage out of S. Paul 1. ad Cor. 1. viz J am of
Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas etc. which is alleged by the Dr.
against a Vicarious Head of the Church on Earth.

N. 232. The Dr. is abundantly satisfied that there always has been from the
first planting of Christianity, and that there always will be to the end of
the world a true visible Church. And yet. 50. he does not think that the Church
must needs be owned to fail if there should be no visible Organized. Church
with whom we could hold Communion.

N. 233. Which is shown to be a great inconsequence, and a contradiction to his
former Assertion.

N. 240. That Argument is shown to be good which proves from the perpetual
visibilitie of the Roman Church, that it is the Indefectible Church, of which
our Savior promised, that the Gates of hell should not prevail against it.

N. 241. That Argument maintained to be good, which proves the Church to be
infallible because it is Indefectible.

N. 145 When our Savior sais, that the Gates of hell shall not prevail against
his Church, these words infer the infallibility of the Church, whether they
are considered as a Promise, or as a Prophecy.

CHAPTER I. Concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church in Heaven and Earth.
. p. 6. HIs Grand Principle, as I have said in the Preface, is this, that the
whole Church in Heaven and Earth is the One Church, from whence he concludes,
that to place the Unity of the Church in any thing that can concern only one
part of the Church, but not the whole, as suppose, that part which is on Earth,
not that which is in Heaven, is manifestly absurd, because it does not give an
account, how the whole Church is One, and yet the Oneness of the Church
properly relates to the whole, not to a part, for a part be it never so much
one, can be but One part, not the One Church.

1. Reply. All this and more that he has said there to this purpose is very
true, if by One Church we understand the Church as it is taken in the greater
Latitude, that is, as it comprehends the Church in Heaven and the Church on
Earth; but it is impertinently alleged by him as a Principle to offend us
withal. For what Catholic, or what Man of common sense was there ever yet in
the world, who endeavored to make the Church One as the word Church is taken
in the greater Latitude, by such an Unity as can concern only one part of it?

. 2. Ib. From hence, sais he, we may learn wherein the unity of the Church does
not consist, and and wherein it does consist; and he first considers wherein the
Unity of the Church does not consist. As first, the unity of the Church does
not consist in it is being One Organized Politic Body, under the government of
One Visible Head upon Earth.

2. Reply. This is a terrible blow, and although it be aimed at the Pope, yet it
neither hurts him, nor any one of his belief. For it is no Doctrine of ours,
that the Pope is Head of the Invisible as well as of the Visible Church, that
is, that he is Head of the Church taken in the greater Latitude,
notwithstanding the frivolous reasons which, he sais, are apt to make him
suspect it. He knows well enough, that this is none of our Doctrine, nay he sais,
that he supposes it is not, and therefore he sets down in behalf of us this
Reply to his Inference which we willingly admit, viz that when we speak of the
unity of the Church, we mean only the unity of the Church on Earth, and that
the Pope is the Visible Head of this unity.

. 3. p. 7. To which he Answers, that then we must grant, that we speak very
improperly, because the Church on Earth is not that One Church which is the one
Body of Christ, and therefore the unity of the Church does not consist in the
Headship of the Pope, but that we ought to say, that the unity of the Church
on Earth consists in it is union to the Pope.

3. Reply. This is mere trifling; for when he had drawn an insignificant
Inference against us, and alleged for us a just answer to it, he here tells us
that we speak improperly, that seeing our Doctrine cannot justify his Inference,
he may show the necessity of it from our improper words and expressions. He
would have cone much better and more like a fair disputant, if he had blotted
out that Inference, after he had reflected on the false supposition which it
proceeded on. But this would have spoiled a pretty compact Paragraph, where the
reasoning was strong and all clear, if we had held the same Doctrine which it
supposes: and seeing we do not, this Paragraph must be published with the rest,
and our improper words must pass for a just occasion for it.

4. But pray, Sr, why do we speak improperly? We use the same manner of speech
as our Forefathers have done before us, which has been so proper and clear till
this your new way of putting an end to wranglings, that none of your writers
that I know of, have ever found any fault with us for the same. When we dispute
with Protestants about the Church we speak li^e Controvertists, that is, we
take the word Church in that sense wherein it is the subject of the differences
that are between us. We have no dispute with you about the One Church as it
includes the souls in Heaven and the Faithful on Farth, which may engage us to
use twenty words when two or three will do the business. And supposing we had
any such dispute, yet there would be seldom any occasion for distinguishing
terms, when the cause of the dispute hic and nunc would sufficiently determine
the sense of these words One Church. We hold that the Church is Infallible in
defining matters of Faith, that we are all bound to submit to her Decisions,
that she has the power of granting Indulgences etc. Now who is there among you,
who will desire us to explain, what we mean by the word Church in the said
Propositions, whether we mean the Church in Heaven, or the Church on Earth, or
both together? And if it be ridiculous to demand further light, when you are
under so great a certainty of our meaning by the word Church in the aforesaid
Propositions, it must needs be so too when you tell us, that we speak improperly
when we say that the B. of Rome is Head of the Church, and desire to learn from
us of what Church we affirm him to be the Head, whether of the Church in
Heaven, or of the Church on Earth, or of both together? Sure our Savior does
not speak improperly when he sais Dic Ecclesiae, Si autem Ecclesiam non
audierit etc. Portae inferi non praevalebunt adversus eam etc. which places
relate to the Church on Earth, whatever their further meaning be. Finally,
custom which is a secure Principle to rely on for the sense of words, is a
sufficient warrant for us to retain the same terms we use at present, and
therefore I shall still make bold as often as I say that the B. of Rome is Head
of the Church, to signify thereby, that he is Head of the Church on Earth
without fearing your reproaches of speaking improperly.

. 4. He 2. Answers our aforesaid Reply, that therefore we must quit all our
Arguments for the Pope's Headship, taken from the Church's being One, the One
Body of Christ; for the Church on Earth is not this One Body of Christ, and
therefore it does not follow, that because Christ has but One Body, therefore
the Church on Earth must have One Vifible Head.

5. Reply. We may easily quit all our Arguments for the Pope's Headship taken
from the Church's being One, the One Body of Christ, if by these terms be
meant the Church as it includes the B. souls in Heaven, and the Faithful on
Earth. For I know of no Arguments we have that are derived barely from thence;
neither do we say, that because Christ has but One Mystical Body, therefore the
Church on Earth must have One Visible Head, but only that because Christ has
but One Mystical Body on Earth whereof he is the Invisible Head, therefore the
Church on Earth as it is also a Visible Body and Society must have One
Visible Head. The Dr. has no reason to quarrel at the terms of One Mystical
Body on Earth, because he grants the Church on Earth to be Mystically One, and
on the other side, he cannot be ignorant, that it is called by S. Paul the
Body of Christ 1. at Cor. 12. Vos estis Corpus Christi. Neither does it
follow, because the Church on Earth is Christ's Body, that therefore he has two
Bodies, but only that every part of it has the denomination of the whole, as
it happens in the Body of a Man, where if the hand or leg be wounded, we say
that his Body is wounded, although his hand or leg is not his whole Body, but
only an integral part of it. Thus likewise we say, that the Church as it is
taken in the greater Latitude is but One, and yet the Dr. will not deny, but
that the Church on Earth is One also, and will not take it well, if any one
infer from hence, that Christ has two Churches, because one and one make two.

. 5. Ib. He thirdly answers, Nay they must confess, that the formal and
essential unity of the Church on Earth does not consist in it is union to the
Pope, because the Church on Earth is one with the Church in Heaven, they being
both but One Church, and therefore must have the same essential unity; for how
they should be One by two sorts of unity, that is, be One without the same
formal unity, is very mysterious and near akin to a contradiction. And
therefore since the unity of the Church in Heaven does not consist in it is
union to the Pope, no more does the unity of the Church on Earth, the unity
being the same in both.

6. Reply. The Church on Earth may be considered two ways, either as it is a
part of the Mystical Body of Christ, or as it is a Visible Society. If it be
taken under the former consideration, there can be no difficulty in granting,
that it is formal and essential unity does not consist in it is union to the
Pope for the reason given, uiz because seeing the Unity of the Church in Heaven
does not consist in it is Union to the Pope, so neither does the Unity of the
Church on Earth. But if it be taken under the second consideration, nothing can
hinder, but that it is formal and essential unity may consist in it is union to
the Pope. The Dr. himself, if he own One Visible Church, is bound to admit of
some Union which is essential to it as it is thus considered, which is distinct
from that Unity whereby it is united to the Church in Heaven, let him place
this Unity in what he pleases.

7. It is no strange thing that a Body of men should be capable of different
Unions to different extremes, and that these Unions should be all essential to
this Body, if it be considered as a Body in different respects. Thus a Body
of Vassals which is united, and pays obedience to their immediate Prince who
has a Superior Lord over him, is not hindered from paying obedience, and being
united to this Superior Lord in all such matters, and services, as are
required by the conditions of their immediate Lord's Tenure. Neither does this
hinder, but that they may be united to God who is both Lord over their
immediate Lord, and the Lord that is Superior over him. And it would be very
ridiculous to affirm, that it is near akin to a coutradiction, to say that
this Body of Vassals is One by two or three sorts of Unities, which signifies
no more, but that they are One two or three sorts of ways.

8. And as a Body of Vassals may be One two or three sorts of ways, so
likewise may a part of it be One by means of an Unity which is not common to
the other part; as supposing the Prince has no Superior Lord over him, but
depends immediately on God for the power which he has over part of them. In
which case the whole Body is One by being under the same Prince's
Jurisdiction, and and yet is not One if we consider the nature of the Prince's
Jurisdiction. For part of them are One by acknowledging a Superior Lord over
their Prince and them, and the other part is One by acknowledging no other
Superior over them but God and their immediate Prince. Now I hardly think that
any Man of sense will endeavor to prove, that one part of this Body of
Vassals cannot be united to their Superior Lord, because they are united to the
other part which is not united to him. And yet this undoubtedly follows, if the
Unity of the Church on Earth cannot consist in it is Union to the Pope, because
it is united to the Church in Heaven whose Unity does not consist in it is
Union to the Pope. Wherefore seeing the same Collective Bodies may be One and
not One in different respects, nothing can hinder but that the Church on Earth
which is Mystically One with the Church in Heaven, may be Visibly One in it
self by being united to the Pope, although it be not One, but distinct from the
Church in Heaven under this consideration.

9. When the Dr. writ this answer, he was unmindful of another Doctrine which is
inconsistent with it, and which he has laid down p. 38. viz that the Catholic
Church is united in One Body to Christ only, who is the only Head of his
Church, but that particular Bodies (of Christians) are under the government of
particular Bishops, which makes a particular Church, and is essential to the
Definition of it. Which words import, that it is absolutely necessary for
particular Bodies to have Bishops over them to whom they are to be united,
before they can be Churches; as for example Canterbury or York with the
Countries adjacent to them cannot be Churches, unless they have Bishops. This
is a very surprising Assertion from one who proves, that the Unity of the
Catholic Church on Earth cannot subsist in it is Union to the Pope, because it
is One with the Church in Heaven whose Unity does not consist in it is Union to
the Pope. For certainly particular Churches on Earth are as much One with the
Church in Heaven as the whole Church on Earth can be, and by consequence if the
Unity of the whole Church on Earth does not consist in it is Union to the Pope
because it is One with the Church in Heaven, the Unity of particular Churches
on Earth does not consist in their Union to particular Bishops, because these
Churches are likewise One with the Church in Heaven, whose Unity does not
consist in it is Union to parti^ular Bishops. And thus the Drs. Discourse
against us is re^crted upon himself, for particular Churches on Earth are One
with the Church in Heaven, they being all but One Church, and therefore must
have the same essential unity: for how they should be One by two sorts of
unity, that is, be One without the same formal unity, is very mysterious, and
near akin to a contradiction. And therefore seeing the unity of the Church in
Heaven does not consist in it is union to particular Bishops on Earth, no more
does the union of particular Churches on Earth con^ therein, the unity being
the same in both. By which means the Faithful are as little bound to be united
to particular Bishops as to the Pope. If the Dr. be desirous to overthrow the
Pope's universal Pastorship, he must seek out better reasons against it, than
because the Church in Heaven and Earth are One Church.

. 6. P. 8. After these Answers to our Reply he proceeds to conclude 2. from
his grand Principle, that the unity of the Church does not consist in joining
together in the external and visible Acts of Worship, or in maintaining mutual
correspondence, and intercourse with one another because the Church in Heaven
and Earth are One without them, and so may distant Churches on Earth be without
any such visible correspondence.

10. Reply. What a strange consequence is this, The Church in Heaven has no
external and visible Acts of Worship, and yet is one with the Church on Earth.
Therefore particular Churches on Earth may be One among themselves without
joining together in the external and visible Acts of worship! I see not why the
following consequence may not pass muster in like manner. The Church in Heaven
has no external and visible Acts of Worship, and yet is One with the Church on
Earth. Therefore particular Churches on Earth may be One among themselves,
although they have no external and visible Acts of Worship. Nay I see not why any
one may not draw the following consequences, viz The Church in Heaven has no
Faith, and yet is One with the Church on Earth. Therefore particular Churches
on Earth may be One among themselves without Faith; as likewise the Church ^n
Heaven has no Sacraments, and yet is One with the Church on Earth. Therefore
particular Churches on Earth may be one among themselves without Sacraments; or
thus, The Church in Heaven and Earth are one without any reciprocal and common
Right of giving and receiving the Sacraments from each other. Therefore
particular Churches on Earth may be One among themselves without any such
reciprocal and common Right, which shall be proved false presently. The Drs.
thoughts are so fixed upon the invisible Union whereby the Church in Heaven and
Earth become the One mystical Body of Christ, that he seems to have wholly
forgotten, that the Church on Earth is one Visible Society by our Lord's
Institution, and that whenever we break the Conditions of this visible Society
which are not such as are common to the Church in Heaven, we at the same time
forfeit our Union with the Church in Heaven.

11. These words external and visible Acts of worship may signify either 1.
the Liturgy; or 2. the Sacraments; or 3. Preaching; or 4. mere Ceremon^es, as
Ceremonies do not import Religion, nor the immediate worship of God, but only
the garnishing of the dishes that are served up in God's House, that is, the
decent, grave, and solemn ways whereby we use to express our Religion and
Worship of him. In which sense Ceremonies may be said to be external and
visible Acts of worship. I suppose this Author means to say, that the Unity of
the Church does not consist in any of these external Acts of worship, since the
Cause of the Reformation, which he has all along before his eyes, requires that
it should be so. I shall therefore consider them all in their order.

12. As to the first, if the word Liturgy signify no more than (as
Protestants have Christened it) a Common prayer, or public Service made by the
Church, wherein she offers up her Supplications to God, and wherein the Minister
sometimes takes him^ and distributes the Communion to the People, there can be
no dispute, but that the Unity of the Church does not necessarily consist in
joining together in it, and the same Doctrine which is delivered below
concerning Ceremonies must be applied to it as it is taken in this sense. But
if it signify the same thing still, as it did before the pretended Reformation
of the Church, viz Mass, or the Unbloudie Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of
our Savior as a Propitiation for the living and the dead, it may be considered
either according to it is Form, or according to it is substance. If it be
considered according to it is Form, that is, according to the manner of it is
performance, it is several parts, collects and variations suitable to the
seasons and Festivals of the year, the same Doctrine that is delivered below
concerning Ceremonies must here likewise be applied to it, at it is taken in
this sense. Neither can the Unity of the Church necessarily consist in joining
together in it, because the manner of offering this Sacrifice has never been one
and the same throughout the Catholic Church, as neither is it at this day,
many of the Oriental Christians who communicate with the sea Apostolic,
making use of the Liturgies of S. James, S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, which are
likewise common to the Schismatiques in those parts. And although the present
Roman way of offering this Sacrifice has prevailed in most parts of the West
ever since the first planting of Christianity among them, yet many Ancient
and famous Churches in these Countries have had, and still have some special
differences of their own annexed to it. Nay the Bishops of Rome have in several
Ages made several additions and alterations in the form of it, according as
they judged it to conduce most to the edification of the Faithful.

13. But if the Liturgy be considered precisely according to it is substance,
that is, the Consecration of the Sacramental Elements and the Oblation of them,
the Unity of the Church necessarily consists either in joining together in it,
or in joining together to renounce it. For those who own this Sacrifice, hold
it for a Fundamental Article of their Faith, which if it be, all Christians
ought to join in it; and if it be not, all Christians ought to renounce it. So
that here is a difference in a matter of Faith in the Unity whereof the Unity
of the Visible Church principally consists, since Roman Catholics hold an
Unbloudie Sacrifice to be a Revealed Truth, and Protestants account it for an
idolatrous Fiction.

14. If it be said, that an Unbloudie Sacrifice is a Non-fundamental Point, and
that therefore the Unity of the Church on Earth may well subsist without the
belief of it, although it should chance to have been Revealed: I answer, that the
Church on Earth cannot be One with the Church in Heaven, unless every Revealed
Truth be Fundamental and necessary to be believed.

15. For it is impossible to conceive how the Church on Earth should be one
with the Church in Heaven, if the Faith of the Church on Earth does not
correspond with the Vision of the Church in Heaven in all such Points as are
sufficiently proposed to her belief; for the Church on Earth should believe
nothing to be true, which the Church in Heaven does not see to be true, nor
believe any thing to be false, which the Church in Heaven does not see to be
false; for seeing the translation of souls into Heaven changes their Faith into
Vision, the Objects of their Faith are still supposed to be unalterably the
same when they are seen, as they were before when they were only believed.
Wherefore if the Church in Heaven sees any Object of our Faith to be otherwise
than as we believe it to be, she cannot be One with the Church on Earth,
neither can the Church on Earth be united to the Lord of Truth to whom the
Church of Heaven is united, but has renounced the Gospel Covenant which was the
Medium of their Union together and of both of them to Christ. There is to be
only one Faith on Earth, because there is only one Vision among the B. souls
in Heaven (I mean only one Vision in relation to such Objects of our Faith as
are Revealed in the Gospel.) The Vision of the Church in Heaven shall be the
touchstone of our Faith, because it contains the truth of the Gospel. And in
this sense we are to understand that saying of our Savior, Joan. 12.
The word which I have spoken shall judge him at the last day. And thus
likewise it shall be true what is said of the Apostles, that they shall judge
the twelve Tribes of Israel, by convincing them, that every tittle of what they
preached on Earth was infallibly true by the ocular experience which they have
had thereof in the Divine Essence.

16. Again. There is no Point which the Church on Earth has a sufficient Light
to judge that it is Revealed by God, which does not afford a necessary Object
of Happiness to the Church in Heaven, because there is no such Point which does
not argue in God some necessary perfection relating either to his Wisdom,
Justice, Power, Mercy, Goodness, or some other Attribute in the knowledge and
love whereof the Happiness of the Church in Heaven consists. Now nothing can
be an unnecessarie and Non-fundamental Object of Faith to the Church on Earth,
which is a necessary Object of love to the Church in Heaven, because the belief
of those Objects which make the Church in Heaven Happy, is ordained by God as
a means to lead the Church on Earth to the enjoyment of the same happiness.
Does Dr. Sherlock think, that we shall ever enjoy or have a sight of those
perfections in God, which he has designed as a reward of our Faith, if we
positively disbelieve such Divine Revelations as have a connection with them?
Does he think that God will ever save us, if we reject those means which he has
appointed for our salvation, as al do who disbelieve a Revealed Truth when
there is sufficient light to know it? If he not conceive this, let him grant,
that the Church on Earth cannot be One with the Church in Heaven, unless every
Body and Congregation whereof it is composed, concur all alike in the same
Points of Faith. And methinks a man of his Principles, if he will but seriously
examine the Truth of them, should be well disposed to close with me in this
Conclusion. For seeing in his way the Catholic Church upon Earth is composed
of many several Bodies of Christians who are at variance among themselves,
what Doctrins are Fundamental and what not, and seeing every one of them hopes
to be saved by the belief of such Doctrins as they account Fundamental, it is
impossible, that they should be all of them One with the Church in Heaven,
unless the Church in Heaven be said to see Contradictions in God; because all
these Bodies if they are taken Collectively believe Contradictions, and all of
them but one must necessarily refuse to give their assent to God when he speaks
to them with sufficient clearness. For as God has Revealed but one Truth, so
he cannot propose any more than one Truth to the belief of men. Which shows the
necessity of maintaining, that such Gospel Truths as the Church in Heaven sees
in God and which are sufficiently proposed to the belief of the Church on
Earth, are to be found all together only in one Congregation of Christians who
are of the same denomination, which Protestants universally deny, and which we
affirm to be most true of such Christians, as communicate with S. Peter's
Chair all the world over.

17. I said above, that The Faith of the Church on Earth ought to correspond
with the Vision of the Church in Heaven in all such Points as are sufficiently
proposed to her belief; From whence the Dr. may chance to object, that one and
the same Faith is not sufficiently proposed to all the disagreeing Bodies of
Christians that compose the Catholic Church; as for example, that the Real
Presence and an Unbloudie Sacrifice are not sufficiently proposed to the belief
of Protestants. And therefore they may be all One among themselves and with the
Church in Heaven, because their Faith corresponds with the Vision of the Church
in Heaven in all such matters as are sufficiently proposed to them. And in case
the Church in Heaven sees any thing to be true which they believe to be false,
or any thing to be false which they believe to be true, this is only in such
Doctrins as are not sufficiently Proposed to their belief.

18. I answer, that the objection would be of verv great force supposing God
had made every person the Proposer of his to own Faith himself, and put the
Scripture into our hands to be interpreted by us according to our own private
humor, and fancy, and reason, without any obligation of conforming our
judgments to any external Authority. But our all-wise Lawgiver who has
ordained that the Faith of his Church shall be but One, has taken other
measures to compass this end, than such as unauoidably tend to the making of
it various and contradictorie, as may be seen below in answer to. 22. Chap. 2.
where I have shown the Infallibility of the Church, and in answer to. 28. ib.
Where I have shown it is Authority in a General Council or Visible Tribunal.
And if the Dr. tell me, that neither the Infallibility nor Authority of the
Church are sufficiently proposed to the belief of Protestants; I answer, that
their disbelief of these Doctrins is no Argument at all that they are not
sufficiently proposed to them, as the Infidelity of the Jews was no Argument,
that our Savior had not given them grounds sufficient to believe in him. No
doubt, but the Jews would have believed in him if they had judged those Motives
and Reasons whereby he proved his Mission, to have been strong, and convincing.
No doubt, but they would never have crucified the Lord of Glory, if they had
known him to be the Lord of Glory. But this ignorance could not excuse them
from the damnable guilt of their Infidelity, because it was voluntarily brought
upon themselves through their spiritual pride and obduracie, which were the
occasion, why those Motives and Reasons which our Savor made use of in order
to their conversion, wanted the good effect which he designed by them. The
Motives were in themselves strong and convincing, but they resolved not be
convinced thereby, because they resolved to continue in their pride and
obduracie which kept them from a conviction. Others who were of a more humble
and docible temper, as the Apostles, the 70. Disciples etc. and the Gentiles in
succeeding times, believed him to be the Messia upon the same Motives which
could not prevail with the Sanedrim, and Pharisees to give any credit to him,
which clearly shows, that his Mission was sufficiently proposed to the belief
of them all, although there did not follow the same conviction in all. For what
can rationally convince one man, may as rationally convince another of equal
parts and endowments, if he be as willing to be convinced. They did not know
him to be the Lord of Glory, but they ought to have known him to be the Lord
of Glory, and the^ ought to have kept their hands innocent from hi^ blood. And
therefore their ignorance became criminally sinful, and their Infidelity which
ensued upon it, was a just forfeiture of their Union with the Church in Heaven,
which saw Christ to be the Messia and the Holy One of God.

19. If the Dr. think fit to deny, that the Mission of our Savior was
sufficiently proposed to the unbelieving Jews, let him make out, if he can, how
their infidelity was a sin. And if he grant that it was sufficiently proposed
to their belief, the consequence is, that the sufficiency of a proposal of a
matter of Faith is not alwais followed with an assent and conviction of mind.
And hence it is plain, that he cannot pretend, that the Infallibility and
Authority of the Catholic Church are not sufficiently proposed to the belief
of Protestants, because they cannot meet with any convincing reasons that are
able to persuade them that they are true, which is no more than what the Jews
alleged against the Mission of the Son of God. The Motives which persuade the
Authority of the Catholic Church are such as have continued the greatest
Lights of Christianity in the Communion of it, such as have converted millions
of souls to the Faith in past Ages, and such as in the present times wherein we
live, extend daily the limits of the Gospel wider and wider, and reduce the
empire of Satan to a narrower compass. They seem weak only to those who are
blind, and inefficacious only to those who are proud and wilful. Antiquity,
Universalitie, Unity, Sanctity, Miracles etc. are no trifling Arguments, but
such as are able to move the most wise, the most wary, and most reflecting
minds in the world. They are just and vehement presumptions of Truth, and if
men will but act according to their nature, and believe what is Credible, it is
impossible but it must be their own fault, if they embrace not those Truths
which they attest and point at. It is not enough to invalidate their force,
that some things like Arguments may be brought against them. For what Truth was
there ever yet so plain, against which there might not be brought some
fallacious and captious appearances of reasoning, which would not seem plain to
some persons, particularly when they were engaged in an opposition by the
instigation of some disorderly passion? The Sanctity of our Savior was called
into question, because of his easy access in conversing with Publicans and
sinners; his Temperance was censured for his being sometimes present at
weddings and great dinners; and his Miracles were traduced as tho they had been
done by the help of the Prince of the Devils. What excellent Inducements were
these to believe in him, and how unworthily were they rejected on frivolous
accounts! A mere color will serve malice to work upon, because it never acts
according to reason. There is no sufficient fence against proud, perverse, and
crooked Spirits, who seeing all things by their own light, vilify when they
ought to esteem, envy when they ought to admire, and hate when they ought to
love. Let Protestants be of an humble and docible disposition, and they will
not want reasons to believe the Authority and Infallibility of the Church.
Let them lay aside presumption in their own abilities, and then they will
easily see the strength of those Motives of Credibilitie which attend the
Church in all she proposes. Saints and Holy men without number have been
influenced by these Motives, and so may they too, if they will do their parts
to dispose themselves for the attaining of Sanctity. Men of the greatest wit
and Judgment have yielded to them, and so may they too, if they will forsake
fancy, and Passion, and interest, which are bad attendants on wit, and
judgment. And if they may be rationally and prudently convinced by them, they
are under an obligation of being convinced by them, and their disbelief of
those Doctrins which they recommend, will be a forfeiture of their Union with
the Church in Heaven, which necessarily sees the truth of all such Doctrins as
God has furnished with so many powerful Motives, as are able to extort from
men a rational and prudent belief of them.

20. As to the 2. If he mean when he sais, that the unity of the Church does
not consist in joining together in the external and visible Acts of Worship,
that it does not consist in the same Sacraments, enough has been already said.
For if the Unity of the Church must consist, as we have seen, in the same
Faith through all it is parts, it must needs consist in the same Sacraments
which are matters of Faith, and the same Principles which evince, that there is
no distinction of Faith into Fundamental and Non-fundamental, will prove
likewise, that there is no distinction of Sacraments into Fundamental and
Non-fundamental.

21. But if he mean, that the unity of the Church does not consist in a mutual
and indifferent Administration of the Sacraments amongst all the parts of it,
so that it may subsist although the several Bodies and Congregations whereof it is
composed, refuse the Sacraments to one another; I answer, that this Assertion
is very false, how serviceable soever it may be to the Reformation, because it
destroys that Right which this Author in his Vindicat. of some Prot. Princ. p.
33. franckly acknowledges that all true Christians have to Communion in all
true Christian Churches. I shall first say somewhat of the nature and causes of
this Right, and then take his answer into consideration.

22. The Church is One Society, One Family, and One House, which names do not
only import a difference of Offices for Government, but likewise certain
common Privileges which every child of the Church has a Right unto, as may be
gathered from the nature of Civil Houses and Societies from whence the Analogy
is taken. It is One Spiritual Family, Society, and House, because the
institution of it by our Savior is for a Spiritual end viz the obtaining of
the Kingdom of Heaven. For which reason the Privileges of those who belong to
this Family are to hear the word of God, to be present at the common Liturgy,
and supplications that are made him, to receive the Sacraments, and to partake
of all other Spiritual favors which were deposited by our Lord in the hands of
the Governors of it for the public good of all those, who shall not forfeit
their Claim to the same.

23. There are certain Conditions requisite for the admission and continuance,
of the Members of all Societies; and thus it is here also in this Societi^ our
Lord has founded. Faith and Obedience are the necessary Conditions of our
admission into it, which being accompanied with suitable dispositions of heart
give us that Right whereby we pretend to the benefit of Christ's Sacraments.
For if I am of the same Faith of the Church, and obedient to the Authority
which Christ has placed therein, and not conscious to my self of any mortal sin,
or in case I am conscious, if I am contrit for it, I am a pious and dutiful
Child of the Church, which is the Right by which I claim the benefit of the
Sacraments of the Church. And if I have a Right to receive them, they cannot be
denied me in whatsoever part of the world I a^ by those who are empowred to
administer the same without a great injustice, and a breach of the just
Oeconomie of the One House, and Family of Christ Jesus. Seeing they are one
with me as I am one with them, there can be no reason why they should exclude
me from a common good, which was committed to them for no other cause, but that
they should dispense it to all those who have a Right to receive it. For the
Governors of this House have not an arbitrarie and Despotical power over the
Members of it, but are to act as Ministers, who depend on the Rules of
Government which Christ Jesus left them upon it is first establishment. So that
the Right we have to partake of the Sacraments is so absolute so long as we
observe the aforesaid Conditions, that whatever Kingdom, Province, and Country
of the World we are in where there are any Apartments belonging to this One
House, we ought to be received therein as frankly and heartily, as tho it were in
the Church where we were born, and had our usual residence. What is here
delivered is no more in substance, than what the Dr. confesses in the Book and
place aforecited, unless it be the Point of Obedience, which I have mentioned
rather to set our Doctrine down complete, than because I am willing at present to
enter into a Cont^oversie with him about it, which shall be done elsewhere.

24. Let us now see whether the Unity of the Church can subsist, although the
several Bodies and Congregations whereof it is made up, refuse the Sacraments
to one another. I am persuaded, that nothing less than the mere force of truth
and the great Authority which appears in Scripture, the Fathers of the Church,
and Christian Principles could extort from him a concession which is so
advantageous to Catholics, as that all true Christians have a Right to
Communion in all true Christian Churches. For the Unity of the Church which
includes this common Right is only consistent with our principles, who make
the Catholic Church to consist of Christians of one denomination, and who are
in a perfect harmony among themselves in all matters relating to Faith, by
which means all the Faithful throughout the world have the same Right, and are
under the same Conditions of receiving the Sacraments. Whereas in the Protestant
way, who will have the Catholic Church to result out of several Bodies and
Congregations of Christians, who disagree in matters of Faith, that is, in such
Points which some of them affirm to have been Revealed by God, and others
again maintain to be false and erroneous, it is impossible, but that there
should be as many different Rights to give and receive the Sacraments as there
are Bodies that disagree in Faith; because the children of each Body are not
common to them all, inasmuch as they are under different Conditions of
receiving the Sacraments, and are only children of their own Body by
professing the Faith of their own Body, from whom alone they have a Right (if
they have any Right at all) to ask the benefit of Christ's Sacraments. Neither
do their Pastors pretend to any Right and Power to dispense them to any others
than such as profess their own Faith, lest they give our Lord's Body to those
who will eat it unworthily

25. I Will give an instance in Catholics and Protestants, and the same may
serve for other disagreeing Bodies, as those of the Greek Church, Nestorians,
Eutychians etc. if this Author account them for Members of the Catholic Church
as he does Catholics and Protestants, and by consequence that they are true
Christians, and by consequence that they have a Right to Communion in all true
Christian Churches. If I who am of the Catholic and Romain Faith, should
apply my self to Dr. Sherlock for the Communion, he would bid me abjure the
B. of Rome's Universal Headship; if to Dr. Stilling fleet, he would require me
to quit my Worship of Saints and Images, and if to the Disciples of Dr.
Tillotson, they would catechize me about Transubstantiation, and the veracitie
of my senses. And as they affirm, that they have no Right, nor Power to give
the Communion to one of my Faith, so neither does the Church whereof I am a
Member, pretend to any Right or Power to give it to any one of their
Congregations. Nay neither I nor any of my persuasion can with a good
Conscience ask it at their hands, as they also believe, that they cannot ask it
at ours. Each of these Bodies looks on the others Faith, worship, and
Sacraments to be so far from appertaining to them so as to join in the
participacion of them, that they judge it impious and profane to pretend any
Right to them. And certainly nothing can be less mine, or more another, than
that which I positively renounce, and which I firmly believe, that I cannot
challenge to be mine with a good conscience. If each of these ^fagreeing Bodies
say, that their Altar belongs only to men of their belief, shall we not say,
that the Altar is theirs, if we will not be of their belief? And it there be
three Bodies who affirm this of their respective Altars, shall we not say,
that each Body's Altars is it is own exclusively to all others? And if each
Body's Altar be it is own exclusively to all others, shall we not say, that
there are three Altars, if there be three Bodies? And if there be three Altars,
shall we not say, that there be three Rights to receive the Sacraments, and
three Churches, that is, three Societies, Houses, and Families of Christ Jesus.

26. One Chimera never comes alone: which observation in Metaphysiques we find
by experience to be true at present. For as great as this absurdity is, yet it
has God himself for it is Author, if any credit be to be given to a certain
Principle of Dr. Sherlock's, which he had not in view when he granted all true
Christians to have a Right to Communion in all true Christian Churches. For he
holds, that each Congregation of the pretended Reformed Church, and every
individual person among them are the proper and sovereign Judges for
themselves, what Doctrins are true, and what false; what are truly Revealed,
and what are only said to be Revealed. Now he cannot deny the same Privilege
to other disagreeing Bodies, which if he grant, he must acknowledge, that they
have as much Right to judge of Faith, and Doctrine, as he himself or any of his
Communion. From whence it follows, that seeing the Right of giving and receiving
the Sacraments is necessarily annexed to the Faith of the givers and receivers
of them, these disagreeing Bodies can only pretend a Right to give and receive
the Sacraments to and from those persons whom they know to profess that Faith
which they judge to be true, which to be sure will be always the same which
they profess themselves. And if they have a Right of judging that their own
Faith is true, and this, as Protestants will have it, by God's appointment,
they must consequently have by God's appointment a Right to give and receive
the Sacraments only to and from those persons whom they hold to profess the
true Faith, that is their own. Wherefore supposing these disagreeing Bodies be
three in number, there are by God's institution and appointment three distinct
Rights to the Sacraments, and the dispensation of them must be said to be so
contracted, and limited by three distinct Conditions, viz three distinct
Faiths, that the Right of giving and receiving the Sacraments in each Body
must terminate within themselves alone, and among the Members of each Body.

27. These three distinct Rights and Altars necessarily infer three distinct
Communions. And then let the Dr. make out the unity of the Church whose whole
mystery, he sais ubi supra, is no more but this, that the whole Christian
Church by the Institution of our Savior is but One Church, and this One Church
is One Communion, that is, One Body and Society whereof all Christians are
Members, and wherein they have a Right to communicate in all Christian
Privileges, and both a Right and obligation to communicate in all Christian
Duties. He must be a very subtle discourser, if he can reconcile this Unity of
the Church with several distinct Rights to administer the Sacraments, which are
nothing else, but so many Rights whereby the disagreeing Bodies of Christians
are empowred to continue in a state of disunion from one another; or show how
they can be One Body and Society, where the advantages are not common to all
the Members that are said to compose it; or how that can be One Family, House,
and Communion in which God has appointed three distinct tables, and the
Overseers and Stewards of each Company are to act so independently of the
Stewards and Overseers of the other Companies, that they are not so much as
obliged to follow their advice and judgment in any thing: and in which each
Company is bound under damnation to eat by it self, and rather to fast than
to take our Lord's Body with any of the other Companies, so long as they
persever in their own Faith, which they are commanded not to forsake whilst
they believe it to be true, and not to mistrust whether it be true, whilst they
are persuaded that it is so by their private reason.

28. From what has been said I infer the vanity of the pretense, that many
disagreeing Bodies of Christians such as I have mentioned above, may be One in
Fundamental Faith. For if this were so, they could not have many distinct
Rights to the Sacraments. because the Right of giving and receiving the
Sacraments is, as I have said, necessarily annexed to the Faith of the givers
and receivers of them, which if it be said to be Fundamentally One among
Christians who differ about Faith and Doctrine, it must be said in like manner,
that there is one common Right of giving and receiving the Sacraments among
them, which we find by manifest experience to be contradicted by the practice
of those disagreeing Bodies, who all thinck it a sin to give the Sacrament to
any others than those of their own Communion and belief.

29. As to the 3. I answer, that seeing preaching is nothing else but the
deliverie of God's word, and God's word is matter of Faith, as the Unity of
the Church necessarily consists in joining together in the same Faith, so it
must needs consist in joining together to deliver and hear the same word of God.

30. As to the 4. If he mean by joining in the external and visible Acts of
Worship, that the Unity of the Church does not consist in the same Ceremonies,
I answer, that his inference may bear a double meaning, either 1. that the
Church would not be One if the same Ceremonies were not observed in all the
parts of it; or 2. supposing that there are different Ceremonies allowed by the
Church in different parts of it, that whoever obstinately opposes them in the
places where they are practiced, does not ceas to be a Member of the Church
although he be excommnnicated for the same. We Catholics do not own Ceremonies
to be necessary to the Unity of the Church in the first of these senses, but
only in the latter, according to which my Answer proceeds.

31. I say therefore, that the Unity of the Church does not consist in
Ceremonies, if they are considered barely as they are in themselves; for under
this consideration they are not Divine, but at most Ecclesiastical things;
whereas the Unity of the Church is supernatural, and results from Faith. The
Unity of the Church cannot consist in any Institution of her own, because the
Church may abrogate what she has established, whenever she has as good reasons
for such an abrogation, as she had for the first establishment of it. And yet
she cannot destroy her own Unity; for this were to destroy her self, which we
are sure she cannot do, because of our Lord's repeated promises to her of
teaching, assisting, and preserving her till the consummation of Ages.

32. But if Ceremonies are considered with relation to the Power that has
approved them, and recommended them to our practice and veneration, they are
thus become of a superior degree to what they were, and are clothed with such
a Dignity, that none may dare to gainsay or slight them, lest he slight the
Authority by which they are countenanced, And we know how dangerous a thing
this is from that saying of our Savior He that despises you despises me. This
is no more in effect than what is acknowledged by the Church of England in the
Chapter of Ceremonies before the Common Prayer Book, where it is likewise said,
that neither the appointment nor alteration of Ceremonies belongs to private
men (as they will have the choice of Faith to do), but only to those who are
authorized thereunto. This new Church was very sensible of the great danger that
might accrue to her, if it were lawful for private men to alter public
regulations, for which reason she has taken care to secure her self from such
factious and innovating spirits, by prefixing in the front of her pretended
Liturgy and Offices such a Rule as she had not observed her self, when she
relinquished the Customs and Ceremonies which had been appointed by her
Catholic Superiors, and received from her Forefathers time out of mind.

33. I suppose this Author who makes Bishops essential to particular Churches,
and to belong to their Definition, will not deny, but that the Members of
particular Churches cannot withdraw themselves from obeying, and communicating
with their Bishops on the account of such Ceremonies as they allow of as
decent, and which are in themselves harmless and innocent. For if a Bishop be
essential to a particular Church, whoever renounces his obedience to him on the
account of such harmless Ceremonies, renounces his Christianity; for although
Christianity do not consist in mere Ceremonies, yet it consists in commanded
Ceremonies as such, which signifies as much as if I should say, that it
consists in Obedience whereby the Diocesans are united to their Bishops. So
that particular Bishops, whom this Author In his Vindie of some Brot. Prino.
etc. p. 96. will have to be the proper Judges what Ceremonies are decent, and
harmless in their respective Districts, may justly excommunicate all those who
shall resist them ^in, unless they can bring a Demonstration that their
Commands are unlawful. I fuppose the Dr. will not say, that those who are thus
excommunicated by their Bishop are One with the Church in Heaven, since a
separation from Christ's Mystical Body is the proper effect of a just
Excommunication. And if they are rightly cut off from Christ's Mystical Body,
it follows that the Unity of a particular Church consists in joining together
in the same Ceremonies. And if it be a necessary condition of Communion with a
particular Church to join together in the same Ceremonies, it must needs be a
necessary condition of communion with the Catholic Church to join together
in the same Ceremonies of a particular Church. For that which makes us Members
of a particular true Church necessarily makes us Members of the Catholic
Church, and that which causes a separation from a particular true Church does
in like manner cause a separation from the Catholic Church.

34. There still remains to examine that part of this passage wherein he sais,
that the Unity of the Church does not consist in a mutual intercourse and
correspondence. Which words are of so great a latitude, that I know not how to
fix a determinate meaning on them. Perhaps he may signify thereby (in case
they do not relate to what has been already considered about the concurrence
of the Church in the same Liturgy, Sacraments, Preaching, and Ceremonies) that
the Unity of the Church may subsist without those demonstrations of love,
esteem, confidence, and concern for one another whether by word or actions, as
is usual among such as are engaged in one common Cause. And I am apt to think,
that this is his meaning by the exceptions which he makes (alitle out of their
order) against our Worshipping our Brethren of the Church in Heaven. For this
Worship is a plain correspondence between us and them, and unless he had said
something to show the unreasonablenesse of it, he could never have pretended to
infer, that distant Churches on Earth might be One without any mutual
correspondence, because the Church in Heaven and Earth are One without it.

35. If this be his meaning, I answer, that where there are no such reciprocal
expressions of Kindness among distant Churches, we may presume that Faith and
Charity are wanting to some of them; for Faith is operative and so is Charity
too. And where we may presume these virtues to be wanting, we may presume that
there is not One Church, as where we feel no heat we presume there is no fire.

36. As to what he sais against onr Worship of Saints, whereby he insinuates,
that there is no mutual correspondence between the Church in Heaven and the
Church on Earth, the nullitie of it appears from this, because he forms his
Arguments from the equivocation that lies in the word Worship, which he
honestly takes in the wrong sense. He cannot be ignorant, and our Authors have
put him in mind of it an hundred times over, that the word worship may either
signify the supreme Honor which is due to God alone; or else an inferior
Honor which may be given to a pure creature. Thus God alone is worshipful as
the word worship is taken in the first sense, and Justices of Peace are
worshipful as the word worship is taken in the latter sense. the nature of
Humane acts is measured from their tendencie to their respective Objects, and
not from their names, which many times are doubtful, and suggest such Notions
as are essentially distinct. Thus the H. Ghost sais To God alone be Honor and
Glory, in which saying the words Honor and Glory must be so understood, as
to signify the Honor and Glory which is due to God alone; so that the
meaning of the Text be, that we ought to give to God alone that Honor and
Glory which are due to him alone. For Honor and Clorie may be given to Kings
likewise, and to other great Personages upon Earth 1. Pet. Chap. 2. And as in
this case the Dr. must explicate the word Honor and Glory after our way, when
he meets with a Quaker who imputes it as a crime to him, and a transgression of
the aforesaid Text, that he Honors his Superiors here upon Earth: so I hope
he will not take it amiss, if we also explicate the word worship, when we are
charged with a breach of the first Commandment by worshipping our betters in
Heaven.

37. Hence the weakness of the Drs. discourse is visible. He sais 1. that it
is as absurd to Worship the Saints in Heaven, as for one Member of the same
Body on Earth to Worship another, because they are the same Body still, and
tho there is a great difference in honor between the Members of the ^ame
Body, yet the relation that is between them will not admit of the Worship of
any Member. For it is no Act of Communion in the same Body for one Member to
Worship another.

38. I answer to this, that we may very laudably Worship the Saints in Heaven,
if there be no greater absurdity by so doing, than for one Member of the same
Body on Earth to worship another. For are we not tied by God's Commands to
honor and re^pect our betters and Superiors on Earth whether Temporal or
Spiritual? And if we are bound to honor them, we are bound to worship them in
that sense wherein I have said that Honor and worship are the same thing.
Neither can it be any inconvenience to this worship of our betters upon Earth,
that we are Members of the same Body, seeing, as the Dr. sais, there is a great
difference in honor between the Members of the same Body, for which reason
the relation that is between them will admit of one Member's Worshipping, that
is, honoring another. Nay it is an Act of Communion in the fame Civil Body
for one Member to worship, that is, to honor another, and in a sort necessary
to humane Society, which being knit and compacted together by the
subordination of Inferiors to their Superiors and betters, cannot well susist
without Inferiors worshipping, that is, honoring their Superiors and
betters, which is a means of continuing them in their duty to them, as being
an acknowledgment of the distance they ought to keep from them, and of the
service they ow unto them.

39. The Dr. may reply, that the word worship is not in use, when we signify
the honor and respect which we show our superiors and betters upon Earth, but
only when we give to God the honor which is due to him.

40. I Answer, that it is in use in the H. Scripture as 1. Chron. Chapter the last,
where the whole Congregation is said to have worshipped God and the King. Which
words being taken out of the Protestant Translation put the matter beyond
dispute. We read it likewise 1. Kings Chapter 25. where A bigail is said to have
worshippeed David, as likewi^ Genesis Chapter 24. where Joseph's Brethren are said to
have worshipped him. Which passages the English Bible renders so as to denote
that Abigail and Joseph's Brethren bowed themselves to the ground; which although
we should grant to be a true translation in all respects, yet seeing
Protestants, whenever we bow our selves to a Saint before his Image, call this
action by the name of worship, there is no reason why Abigail should be denied
to have worshipped David, or Ioseph's Brethren to have worshipped him, when
they bowed themselves to the ground before them. In Latin the case is plain,
for the word colo which answers the English word worship, is indifferently used
to express the honor which we give to God, or man. So is likewise the word
veneror, which signifies the same thing. Neither are we wholly strangers to it
in England, as when we say a worshipful Knight, and give to a Justice of Peace
the same epithete, which corresponds with the Latin words Colendissimus and
venerabilis, And although the use of it be not so common among us as that of
honor, respect, or Veneration, yet there is no reason why we should not allow
it as great a latitude as it has in Latin, whenever the rareness of it is use
is turned to our disadvantage, seeing we know in our souls and consciences
(which are the Repositories of the Prototypes of words) that we signify
thereby no honor which is due to God alone, but such an one as may be paid to
a finit Object. If the vulgar language of this Nation were Latin, or the Dr.
had writ his Treatise in the same tongue, he must have left out most of what he
has written against our worship of the Church in Heaven. For certainly he that
owns it to be lawful to colere or to worship men with an inferior honor,
would blush to maintain it to be unlawful to colere, or to worship the Church
in Heaven with the like honor. Which is an evident Argument, that what he sais
at present is of no great moment; for what is good reason in one language
cannot fail to be so in another.

41. But the Dr. may enquire, whether I am in good earnest when I say that the
word worship signifies no more when we honor the Church in Heaven, than when
we honor our superiors and betters upon Earth? I answer, that for what
concerns the Controversy that is between Catholics and Protestants about our
worship of the Church in Heaven, the signification of that word is exactily the
same in both cases. For the question between us and them is, whether we give
not to the Church in Heaven some Honor which is due only and proper to God
(and in case this be not the question at present, it is ridiculous for Dr.
Sherlock to say, that it is absurd to worship our Fellow Members in Heaven with
an inferior Honor)? To which question we answer, that our worship of the
Church in Heaven supposes them to be Creatures, as much as the honor we give
to our superiors and betters upon Earth supposes them to be Creatures. And so
the word worship suits exactly with our superiors and betters on Earth and the
Church in Heaven, because we believe them to be Creatures both alike, and not to
deserve any honor that is due to God alone.

42. But notwithstanding this, our Divines affirm, that the word worship as it
is applied to the Church in Heaven, imports an honor of a higher Nature than
when it is applied to our superiors, and betters on Earth (and so it fares
likewise with the word colo,) because honor is diversified according to the
diversity of excellence in the Object. Wherefore seeing the state of the Church
in Heaven by means of it is perfect Union with God and fruition of him, is of an
incomparably greater excellence than our Superiors and betters upon Earth
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, hence it is they say, that the word worship as
it is applied to the Church in Heaven, has a special difference of it is own
whereby it is distinguished from the worship of our superiors on Earth. Which
special Difference can afford the Doctor no advantage against us, because it is
occasioned only by the Pre-eminence which the Church in Heaven has over our
superiors and betters upon Earth, which he cannot deny. He may in like
manner, if he pleases, affirm that the honor which is due to Kings is
different from that which is paid to any of their subjects, and give this
reason for it, because as the Dignity of a King is incommunicable to any of his
subjects, so the honor which attends this Dignity as a shadow follows a
Body, ought to be so far his as not to appertain to any of his subjects, no
more than the shadow of his body does to theirs. I say if he affirm this I
know of no body that can reasonably be angry with him, or judge him to be
Heterodox for so doing, whether his opinion be true or false, or the reason
whereby he proves it be of great or small moment.

43. Neither do our Divines only diversifie the worship of the Church in
Heaven from the worship of our superiors on Earth, but they diversifie like
-wise the worship of the B. Virgin both from the worship of the rest of the
Church in Heaven, and of our Superiors on Earth. For although she be a Creature
as much as any Member of the Church in Heaven, and our superiors on Earth, nay
as much as a pismire on Earth, and that under this consideration the word
worship suits as well with any Member of the Church in Heaven and with our
Superiors on Earth as it does to her; yet by reason of her being the Mother of
God, and because she is placed immediately after God by means of this Grace,
Divines assign her such an honor as is answerable to so great a Dignity,
which they express by the name of Hyperdulia, whereas they call the worship of
the other Saints by the name of Dulia. And as they assign to the B. Virgin a
worship different from the rest of the Saints, so whoever pleases may hold that
different worships, or rather different degrees of worship, which are inferior
to the supreme Honor which is due to God alone, belong to the several degrees
of the Hierarchical Orders of Spirits in Heaven, although there want words whereby
to express them.

44. What is here said concerning the distinctions in our worships of the
Church in Heaven is not mentioned, as tho the Catholic Church were engaged to
make it all good, she having declared her self no further, than that we ought
to worship the Church in Heaven, and that it is good and profitable to invoke
them, and crave their assistance, and left it to the consideration of learned
men, whether the worship of the B. Virgin be specifically distinct from that of
the other Saints. We never entertain our selves which any such thoughts as
these when we make our application to them, neither do our Priests when they
catechize the ignorant, take care to instruct them in such niceties, which
conduce little or nothing to their salvation. Neither is it material to know,
whether this worship may be called Religious, or no No doubt, but that it is
not properly Religious as neither is it Divine, because Religion has God for
it is immediate object. But in a loos sense it may be called Religious, because
of the near relation which the Saints have to God, and because we direct our
prayers to them, that we may the more easily save our souls by the enjoyment of
God who is our last end. This worship may be called Religious much after the
same manner as Ceremonies are called Acts of worship, because of their relation
and dependence on the immediate Acts of God's worship, and because they further
and promote the same.

45. Thus much I have thought fit to say, to remove the odium which Protestants
have annexed to the very terms of worship of Saints. What harm is there now in
them after this explication? Can any one discover any thing here which may
justify the Drs. Assertion, that our Worship of Saints is a contradiction to
the belief of One Church? Cannot we worship the Church in Heaven and be One
with them, as well as worship our superiors on Earth, and be One with them.

46. The Dr. may reply, No; because our worship of Saints does not only import
an honor which we do them, but includes likewise our Invocation of them.

47. What if it does? Must we needs break off Union with the Church in Heaven,
because we address our prayers to them to pray to God for us? This is all that
is meant by our Doctrine of Invocation of Saints, notwithstanding the sly
endeavors of some men to persuade the people to the contrary, by calling it
formal Invocation, as tho there lay an Idolatrical malice under these terms,
and an injury to God. It is an unquestionable truth, that Christians upon
Earth may recommend themselves to one another's prayers, and daily experience
teaches, that Protestants formally Invocate, or pray their Ministers to pray
for them, as often as they find themselves under any great affliction of mind
or body, as believing their intercessions with God to be more efficacious than
their own prayers. Now it seems very strange, that such an application to
Ministers should be harmless and laudable in Protestants and yet that our
addresses to the Church in Heaven should be so criminallie evil in us, as to
make us lose our Union with it, when we are certain, that the Saints are free
from sin, and in all things conformable to the Divine pleasure, and we may
presume, that they want neither power nor will to promote our requests with
God, as often as they conduce to his glory.

48. I am told in answer to this, that the case is very plain, why the practice
of Protestants is very good, and ours erroneous, because their Ministers are
present with them, and the Church in Heaven are at a great distance from us.

49. I have often wondered at this common answer to a difficulty so well
grounded as that which I have proposed. For what has distance or present to do
with the injury to God wherewith we a^ charged by our Invocation of Saints? Or
ho^ can they contribute any thing toward the continuance, or forfeiture of our
union with the Church in Heaven? The only inconvenience which may be pretended
to be drawn with any kind of color against our Doctrine to our prejudice is,
that it is a silly thing to pray to the Saints who are at a great distance
from us, which were it true, is not enough to prove it to be a wicked thing. I
suppose if any Protestant at London should desire the English Ambassador's
Chaplain at the Hague to pray for him, as we desire the Saints to pray for us,
he would not be censured by those of his Communion, as tho he had forfeited his
Union with the Church in Heaven by making such a prayer, but only will pass
among them for a mad man, which they cannot affirm of us when we pray to the
Saints, as we shall see presently. Wherefore if it be no crime in Protestants
to pray their Ministers to pray for them, it can be no crime in us to pray the
Church in Heaven to pray for us. For in neither case is there any honor given
to a Creature which is due to God alone, it being certain, that we Catholics
do no more believe the Saints we pray to from the highest to the lowest to be
Gods, or fit objects for Divine honor, than Protestants believe the same of
their Ministers. Nay our Doctrine in the very terms supposes there is but one
God, and that all the Saints in Heaven are dependant on him, seeing our prayers
to them to pray to God for us, supposes the right of granting our petitions to
be solely in God, and all the power they have of being beneficial to us to
depend on his good pleasure.

50. Those Protestants who grant with the Catholic Church, that God has
appointed Guardian Angels to every one of us in this our Pilgrimage, to be
assistant to us and to be the overseers of our lives and actions, should have
no difficulty, one would think, to hold it lawful for us to beg their
intercessions with God in our behalf. For in this suppofition they are as much
present to us, as we are to one another. And what imaginable pretense can there
be, that we offer any injury to God by begging the assistance of his
Favorites, whom he has deputed to us to take care of our spiritual concerns?
It Is incredible, that we can offend him by holding correspondence with our
companions, guides, and Tutors. He speaks to us by their means: why may not we
speak to him again sometimes by the same way? why may we not thank them for
their good offices, and desire their continuance of them? Can any one think,
that God commands, or allows of ingratitude toward Angels, when he forbids it
toward men?

51. We read in the acts of the Apostles Chapter 16. of a Vision which S. Paul had,
wherein we may discover a plain correspondence between Angels and the Church on
Earth. For there appeared to him v. 9. A man of Macedon who prayed him saying,
pass over into Macedonia, and help us. We may reasonably conclude, that the
Spirit, who is here called a Man of Macedon was the Guardian Angel of that
Country. Help us, said the Angel to S. Paul, that is, help the poor
Macedonians by removing their blindness by mea^s of thy preaching; and help me
in the discharge of my duty of providing for their good which manner of prayer
is in use among us toward the Church in Heaven. For thus we pray to S. Paul,
saying, help us, our parents, brethren, and relations, and all that stand in
need of thy assistance upon Earth. And as the Angel prayed not to S. Paul to
help the Macedonians whilst he was in the world, but only inasmuch as he was
an instrument of the Divine Goodness, so neither do we pray to him now he is
in Heaven for any other reason. For we hold, that the help which we receive
from him by his intercession proceeds no less from God's mercy toward us,
than the help which the Macedonians received by his preaching. Thus we see an
Angel become a suppliant to a man and praying for help, which is a term which
gives so much offense to Protestants when they read it in any of our Devotions
to Saints. The Dr. will be hard put to it to give a satisfactorie reason, why
it would have been a crime in S. Paul to have prayed the Angel to intercede
with God for the good success of his preaching, when it was no crime in the
Angel to pray him to preach to the Macedonians. If then the worship and
Invocation of our Guardian Angels be no forfeiture of our Union with the Church
in Heaven, it can be said with as little reason that the Invocation of any other
Angel, or Saint in Heaven implies a crime of so heinous a nature.

52. As to the scruple of Protestants, which way the Saints in Heaven hear, or
understand that we pray to them; I answer, that they cannot know that we pray
to them, or any thing else that passes in this world by virtue of any natural
perfections which they have. Although the lavvfulnesse of their Invocation be a
sacred Truth amongst us, yet it is a matter of Dispute, which way they come to
know our Prayers, whether they see the^ in the Divine Essence wherein they mav
see all creatures, or whether they are conveyed to them by the Ministry of our
Guardian Angels, or other Spirits, God having concealed from our knowledge
many things relating to the government of this world by his invifible Agents.
It is enough for us, that the Saints may know our prayers either of these ways,
without being sollicitous which way it is; and the Authority of the Catholic
Church which has always believed Invocation of Saints, ought with better reason
to persuade us to continue in the profession of this Doctrine, than the
uncertaintie we lie under about the particular way that the Saints hear us,
ought to withdraw us from the practice and belief of it.

53. We are assured by S. John in his Revelat. Chapter 5. that the four Beasts, and
the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one harps,
and golden vialls full of odours, which were the Prayers of the Saints, that
is, of the Saints on Earth; for the felicity of the Saints in Heaven is
complete, and they stand in no need of each others assistance, seeing they all
enjoy God in whom the fulness of all good things is. Now our Doctrine is, that
the four and twenty Elders at this day fill their vials with the prayers of
the Saints after the very same manner as they did when S. John saw them full,
and that it is altogether as unreasonable to doubt, whether they hear our
prayers when we address them to them, because we cannot positively say, which
way they come to hear them, as it is to doubt, whether their vials were full of
prayers in S. John's time, because neither he nor any of his Brethren have left
upon record, which way they came to be full. You may see in the 8. Chap.
another relation how an Angel offered to God the prayers of the Saints.

54. There are two passages in Scripture which Protestants particularly urge
against our worship of Saints. The 1. is out of the same Book of Revelations
Chapter 19. and Chapter 22. where we read that S. John who would have worshipped an
Angel, was forbidden by him to do so, and ordered to worship God. They stand in
great need of Arguments who will make use of this place against us. For it is
plain our of the reason which the Angel gave why he refused this worship, that
S. John took him to be God, and th^re it is no wonder, if the Angel a^pted not
that worship from him which was cu^ to God alone. See thou do it not, said the
Angel, for I am thy fellow servant, which shows that S. John took him for the
Creator and Lord of all things. Otherwise the Angel would never have given
such a reason why he should not worship him. For seeing it is very conformable
to the Gospel for inferiors to honor their betters, we cannot presume, that
the Angel would have given such a reason as destroys this precept of
Christianity. For if it be not lawful to worship an Angel, because he is our
fellow servant, or fellow creature, it must needs be unlawful to worship or
honor men, who are as much our fellow creatures as Angels, nay who by means of
the inequality of their natural perfections are at a greater distance from God
than Angels are. I do not see how any Protestants who hold it lawful to honor
their betters on Earth, can hold it unlawful to fall down, as S. John did, at
the feet of an Angel of peace who should appear to them. Nay natural reason
assures us, that it would be a sin, and a great irreverence to show him no
respect, or do him no kind of worship, considering the Dignity and excellence
of his nature and person, and the incomprehensible greatness of God without
whose order he could not make them a visit. When we honor our betters we
practice humility, which the Angel knew to be a virtue very pleasing to an
Incarnate God, and therefore he would never have forbidden the exercise of it
in S. John for such a reason, as makes the most visible demonstration of it
impracticable among Christians. Quakers need never desire a stronger Argument
than this Text to justify their unmannerlie behavior toward their superiors
and betters, if it be once granted them, that an Angel refused an inferior
worship and honor from S. John, because he was his fellow servant and fellow
Creature.

55. If then the Angel did not forbid S. John to give him an inferior honor
and worship, Protestants cannot gather from this passage any thing that may
tend to the prejudice of our Doctrine of the worship of Saints; for all the
worship we allow them is such an honor as may be given to creatures without
any disrespect to the Creator. And if they can prove, that S. John committed
Idolatry, we condemn him for it as much as the Angel. But there is no great
fear of effecting this any further, than that he committed material Idolatry,
that is to say, that if he had known, or could have known, that the p^rfon with
whom he conversed was not God, he would have been a downright Idolater in
giving him the honor which was due to God alone, which is a crime we can never
suppose the Apostle to have been guilty of. For we may presume, that whilst he
was in these Visions, his mind was filled with thoughts relating to the Glory,
Power, and Majesty of his beloved Master, and that he had a more clear and
perfect knowledge of a God, and of One God by means of those wonderful things
that were revealed to him, than all mankind can possibly have by Natural
discourse, which being joined together with the Faith which he had in our Lord,
can leave no room for a reasonable suspicion, whether he adored something for
God, which he knew or could know to be a creature; particularly considering,
that during the time of his Visions, he was freed from all sensible
distractions and suggestions of the enemy, and his understanding was wholiy
taken up with the regalos of Heaven. His love of God could never grow less
fervorous by the more Graces that were heaped on him, nor his Faith less
lively by finding experimentally that several particulars of it were true.
Which considerations put it out of all doubt, that as long as he was in this
state, the liberty of his will was so far abridged, and limited to what was
good, that he could not possibly prevaricate so far from his Creator, as to
renounce him by preferring a creature before him, or equalling a creature to
him.

56. But letus suppose now, that S. John knew the Spirit with whom he conversed
to be an Angel, yet it will not follow from hence, that the reprehension of the
Angel imports a sinfulness in the worship which S. John gave him. For why
might not the Angel refuse to be worshipped by S. John because of the Dignity
of his Apostolic Character, and the honor which humane nature had attained
to by the Incarnation of the Son of God? And why might not S. John continue to
offer it to him as he did the second time, notwithstanding this refusal, because
of the excellence of the Angel's nature, and the honor which he had of being a
perpetual attendant on the Lamb.

57. That famous Buffoon the Author of the Reflections upon the Devotions of the
Roman Church p. 433. thinks it a sufficient confutation of this reasonable
exposition of this Text, to say that it makes the reprehension which the Angel
gave S. John to be only a Copy of his countenance, and a great Complement, as
tho humility, civilitie, and aggreablenesse of conversation which are such
amiable virtues in this world, ought to pass for imperfections in an Angel. If
it was a Complement, it is not the first time that Angels and Holy persons
have made u^e of them. And I hope the Embassy which Gabriel delivered to the
B. Virgin will be never the worse li^ed, because he called her full of grace;
nor the reception which S. Elizabeth gave to the same Virgin, because she said
to her, whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord is come to me? Nor the
reply which S. Paul Acts 26. made to Aggrippa when he said, I wish that all
here present were as I am, because he added except these chains. The word
Complement for the most part sounds ill, because these expressions of respect
are too often accompanied with flattery, baseness, and vanity; but these is
no reason, why the abuse of a good thing amongst us should make us undervalue
it when it is done by an Angel, or why we should ridicule it, when we are sure
that it is free from any abuse. The reprehension of the Angel was a holy
Complement as having for it is motive the most sublime Mystery of grace: and
where lies the absurdity for an Angel to Complement an Apostle upon the favor
which Man had received from their common Lord? David Psalm. 8. sais of man, that
God at first created him a little lower than the Angels: and seeing God took upon
him afterward, as S Paul ad Heb. 2. 16. ponders, not the nature of Angels, but
of men, it ought not to seem incredible, that an Angel in consideration of this
honor should treat S. John as tho he had been his equal, and not his inferior.

58. The 2. passage is out of S. Paul ad Col. 2. 18. Let no man beguile you of
your reward in a voluntary (and affected) humility, and Worship of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly pussed up by his
steshly mind - not holding the Head etc.

59. I answer, that before Protestants can allege this Authority of S. Paul
against our worship of Angels, they must show wherein that worship and humility
consist which are here forbidden, and what is meant by intruding into those
things which he has not seen, and being vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.
All which particulars relate to some certain sort of seducers of those times of
whom S. Paul advises the Collossians to have a care. There is no reason why we
should conclude all sorts of worship of Angels to be here prohibited, because we
find that worship condemned which is attended with a damnable curiosity, and
pride. If Protestants can produce from among the ancient Monuments of the
Church any undeniable grounds to believe, that the Doctrine of these seducers
was the very same that we hold about the worship of Angels, I shall confess,
that we fall under this prohibition; but if there appear no such evidence, nay
if it do not certainly appear who these seducers were, or what were their
precise errors, I see not why our Doctrine should pass for theirs, and this
Text be alleged as a clear testimony for it is condemnation. There is not in
the whole Text any word that can be wrested to our prejudice, unless it be the
equivocal word worship which has so possessed the mind of the aforesaid
Reflecter p. 430. that he thinks this passage plain enough till men begin to
play tricks with it, as tho we were great cavillers for not suffering the word
worship to bear what sense they pleas, and they very fair Disputants in
expecting that the Controversy should without any more a do be brought to this
issue.

60. I find in Baronius ad An. 60. such an uncertaintie from History, that it
is not easy for a man to resolve with himself, what was the error which S.
Paul pointed at in this place, nor who were the seducers of whom he warns the
Colossians. He there sets down the opinion of S. Hierom. Ep. ad Algasiam who
being consulted by this Lady about this passage ponders it very exactly, and
yet no where sais, that it forbids all sorts of worship of Angels, but only
the worship of the Stars by the Jews; which he proves to have been an old
error of theirs, who possibly might take the Stars for Angels, because the
Pharisees, as Epiphanius reports, believed them to be animated.

61. He afterward mentions Theodoretus upon this place, who affirms that these
seducers drew a great many unwarie Christians to their error, and that this
Heresy continued in Phrygia and Pisidia for some Ages after, for which he is
reprehended by Baronius as guilty of a lapse in History about a Her^sie,
which neither he himself sets down in his Heretical Fables, nor any other
Author whatsoe^er

62. He lastly ^ints you with the error of Cherinthus who believed Christ to
be nothing else but man, and that the Angels were above him, which inclines him
to think that S. Paul reflects upon his followers, which might belikely enough,
were it not for his saying that it does not appear, that these Heretics were
guilty of any superstitious and Idolatrous worship of Angels.

63. For my part upon a serious consideration of the context of this Epistle
till the verse under debate and some verses following, it seems extremely
probable to me, that S. Paul reflects not only upon the Jews for endeavoring
to draw the Colossians to Judaisme which is evident in this Chapter, but also
for endeavoring to persuade them to that Superstitious worship of Angels which
is here condemned; not that I think this to have been the general judgment of
the Jews of those times, but only of a certain sect of them, who having left
the true Tradition of their Forefathers about the worship of Angels, embraced
this Noveltie through their presumptuous speculations and enquiries into the
nature, perfections, and properties of these spirits, and (what is worse)
perhaps into the Nature and Attributes of God. Which I hold to be S. Paul's
meaning when he sais, that these seducers intruded into those things which they
had not seen, and were vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind, pride being
always the main encourager of those who eagerly desire, that their groundless
and airie Notions should pass for truths and demonstrations. I believe
likewise, that he points at the same thing when v. 8. he bids the Colossians to
have a care of being deceived by Philosophy (by which Theodoret understands
probabilem and ad persuadendum aptam Orationem) that is, by captious and
surprising Arguments that were made according to the direction of Artificial
Logique, and turned against any Article of the Faith which they had received,
as for example, against the lawful worship of Angels; which he sufficiently
declares by calling this Philosophy or arguments vain fallacies according to
the Tradition of men, and the Principles of worldly sciences, but not
according to the Principles of Faith which were delivered hy Jesus Christ.

64. But I dare not venture to hold with Theodoretus, that these Jews caused a
Heresy and division in the Church, seeing Scripture is silent in this case, and
Ecclesiastical History and Tradition too, which are the only Principles which
we can certainly rely on for the knowledge of any matter of fact of this
nature which is said to have happened in passed Ages. However I am contented at
present to take no further notice of the exceptions which Baronius makes
against the Authority of this Father in this case, nor of what he sais to
prove, that the Canon of the Council of Laodicea underwritten does not relate
to this pretended Heresy, as Th^tus affirms, to the end I may have an occasion
of showing, that these two most famous pieces of antiquity which Protestants
allege against our worship of Angels can stand them in no stead at all, although
we should allow them all the force of unsuspected History. And by reason I
have no Greek Authors by me in the circumstances I am under at present, and
cannot easily procure them, I shall relate Theodoret's words out of the Latin
Version which are these. Qui legem defendebant eos etiam ad Angelos colendos
inducebant, dicentes fuisse legem per eos datam. Mansit autem diu hoc vitium in
Phrygia and Pisidia. Quocirca Synodus quoque quae convenit Laodiceae, quae est
Phrygiae Metropolis, lege prohibuit ne precarentur Angelos. Et in hodiernum
usque diem licet videre apud illos and finitimos Oratoria S. Michaelis.
Illiergo hoc consulebant, utique humilitate utentes, dicentes universorum Deum
nec cerni, nec comprehendi, nec ad ^um posse perveniri, and oportere per
Angelos divinam sibi benevolentiam conciliare. Those, sais he, who stood in
defense of the Law induced them also to worship Angels, saying the Law was
given by them. This vice has continued for a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia.
Wherefore the Synod which assembled at Laodicea, which is the Metropolis of of
Phrygia, forbad them by a Law to pray to Angels. And even to this day there are
Oratories of S. Michael to be seen among them and their borderers. They
therefore advised them to this (to pray to Angels) making use of the pretense
of humility, saying, that the God of the universe is invisible,
incomprehens^ble, and inaccessible, and that therefore they ought to procure
his good will by Angels. The law which he sais was made to prohibit this
superstitious Invocation of Angels is the 35. Canon of the Council of Laodicea
which runs thus: Non oportet Chrisiianos derelicta Ecclesia abire, and ad
Angelos Idololatriae abominandae congregationes facere: quae omnia interdict a
sunt. Quicumque autem inventus fuerit occultae huic Idololatriae vacans
anathema sit, quoniam derelinquens Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum Filium Dei
accessit ad Idola. Chtistians, sais the Council, ought not to forsake the
Church, and go away, and hold Assemblies of abominable Idolatry toward
Angels: which are things forbidden. Whoever therefore is found to be addicted
to this secret Idolatry, let him be Anathema, because he has forsaken our Lord
Jesus Christ the Son of God, and gone over to Idols.

65. I suppose these two Authorities are plain enough too till men begin to
play tricks with them, that is, till we show that they are impertinently urged
against us, which is no hard matter to do. For it is evident, that the worship
of Angels which the Jews advised the Colossians to was inconsistent with the
Mediatorship of our Savior, which they placed in Angels exclusively to him.
The Law was given by Angels, say they; and therefore Angels are to be our
Mediators with God. God spoke to Mofes by an Angel; and therefore we ought to
treat with God by Angels too. God is invisible; and therefore we must pray to
Angels, that we may have a sight of him. God is incomprehensible; and therefore
it must be by the prayers of Angles, that we come to know what he is. God is
inaccessible; and therefore we must have access to him by Angels. All which
Inferences from a Jews mouth ought to be taken so as to exclude the Mediation
of Christ, whom this perverse generation will not allow to be our Mediator with
God on any account or consideration whatsoever. And as they destroy the
Mediation of Christ, ^o they prove it unlawful for Christians to pray to him,
seeing he is God as well as man. Which may serve for a main reason, why the Canon
sais, that these superstitious Worshippers of Angels forsook our Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God. I do not at all wonder, that the Canon calls this
worship a secret Idolatry, because it substitutes Angels in the place of
Christ, who in consequence of his Incarnation, and as Head of the Church, has
it for an incommunicable prerogative to be the supreme Mediator between his
Father and the Faithful. And although the pretense of this secret idolatry be
humility arising from the consideration of God's Perfections as his being
invisible, and incomprehensible, yet in realitie it destroys the very
foundation of Christianity, (which true humility cannot do), by making God
inaccessible even to such souls as are the most pious, most innocent, and most
affectionate toward him, for want of Goodness to hear their prayers if they
are immediately directed to him. I say for want of Goodness; for if it be an
act of boldness and presumption in us to make our immediate addresses to him
because of this pretcnded inaccessibilitie, what is become of that Love and
Goodness which according to the Gospel inclined him to send his beloved Son
into the world to take our nature upon him, and together with our nature all
our frailties that were purely natural? which consideration leads me to say,
that whoever ascribes to God such an inaccessibilitie as this, must in
consequence of this Principle hold that Christ was not God, seeing the same
invisibilitie, incomprehensibilitie, and inaccessibilitie which in this opinion
of the Jews hinder God from conversing and treating immediately with the
Faithful, will prove a fortiori, that God could not abase himself so low as
to be made Flesh, because by his Incarnation he communicated to human nature the
aforesaid Attributes of invisibilitie, incemprehensibilitie, and
inaccessibilitie together with the fullness of the Divinity, as S. Paul sais
in this Chapter, in ipso inhabitat omnis plenitudo Divinitatis corporaliter,
which is certainly a condescension infinitely lower than to receive immediately
by himself the prayers and petitions of men.

66. None of all these horrible blasphemies and absurdities can be charged upon
our worship of Angels. For as we acknowledge God to be essentially invisible,
and incomprehensible, so we confess him to be essentially Good, which
according to the Gospel engages him to treat us immediately by himself, when
ever we make our addresses to him in his Son's name, for whose sake alone he
bestows his graces and favors on us, being rigorously inaccessible to all such
as sue to him by any other means, or ways whatsoever. And although we hold it
lawful to pray to Angels as well as to his Son (as the Church has practiced in
all Ages) yet we make the intercessions of Angels to be no other than
Appendixes of his Son's Mediation (which we say likewise of our intercessions
for one another here upon Earth), in as much as the efficacy of their prayers
has a necessary connection with our cooperation with the Graces which Christ
has merited for us by his Passion, and an absolute dependence on the Mediation
of Christ, which we never forsake at the very time that we crave the
intercession of Angels. Nay when we pray to them, we implicitly beg the
Mediation of Christ, because we steadfastly believe, that no petitions will be
granted in Heaven, whether they are of Angels, or of Blessed souls, or of holy
men upon Earth without the application of Christ's Merits to this purpose,
which he as our Redeemer, and Sovereign Mediator can only effectually procure
his Eternal Father to accept. Angels may present our petitions in Heaven, but
it must be Christ who takes them, and tenders them to his Father. Angels are no
more than Honorable Officers attending in that Court, who according to the
measures of God's Providence over his Church are enabled to speak a good word
for us, but if their plea be not seconded, and promoted by our Savior, all
they can say signifies nothing with his Father.

67. This is the worship of Angels which we allow, wherein we neither discover
any forsaking of our Lord Jesus Christ, or renouncing his Mediation, or the
^ast sign of Idolatry, which can make a man judge, that it was condemned by
the Council of Laodicea and Theodoretus. Nay we have evident grounds to
believe, that this Council and this Father practiced it no less than we do,
because they admit of the worship of the B. souls in Heaven, which is a Doctrine
so nearly related to our worship of Angels, that they must either stand, or
fall together. The Council in the 34. Canon which immediately goes before that
which I have cited, sais thus in behalf of Christ's Martyrs. Non oportet
omnino Christianum derelict is Martyribus Christi abire ad falsos Martyrs
(Martyrs Haereticorum.) Hi enim alienisunt a Deo. Quicumque autem abire
voluerint, anathema sint. A Christian ought not to forsake the Martyrs of
Christ, and betake himself to false Martyrs (the Martyrs of Heretics.) For
they are aliens from God, and whoever will go after them, let them be Anathema;
where by forsaking (...) Martyrs of Christ, and betaking himself to false
Martyrs is meant the giving to false Martyrs that worship, and honor by
begging their prayers and the li^e which is due to the Martyrs of Christ, or to
^ose who suffered for him in the Communion of his Church. Which interpretation
is shown to be true out of the above cited Canon, wherein the superstitious
worshippers of Angels are said in like manner to forsake our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to go over to Idols, because they gave to Angels that Honor of Mediatorship
which was due to Christ alone. And it is moreover proved out of the 9. Canon of
this Council, which forbids Catholics to frequent the Monuments of Haeretical
Martyrs to pray there. Non concedendum in caemeteria, vel quae Martyria
Haereticorum di^ur, Catholicos orationis gratia and petendae curationis
intrare. It is not allowed for Catholics to repair to the Church yards, or
places where the monuments and shrines are of Heretical Martyrs to pray there,
and to beg a cure for their sickness. From whence I infer, that Catholics
did, and might repair in those times for such ends as these to the places where
the Monuments and Shrines were of Christ's Martyrs, since it is most
incredible, and unreasonable to think, that they should believe it lawful to
pray to Heretical Martyrs (whose Faith they detested) merely because they were
said to die for Christ, and yet that they should believe it unlawful to pray to
their own Martyrs whose Faith they professed, and of whom they could have no
doubt, but that they died for Christ.

61. Theodoretus de cur. Graec. Affect. lib. 8. de Mart. prop. fin. Is as
positive for this Doctrine as we could expect him to be if he were Archbishop of
Compostella at this time. His words are these. Martyrum vero Templa conspicua
cernuntur, magnitudineque praestantia, omni praeterea ornatus genere variata,
splendoremque quodammodo pulchritudinis suae late fundentia, Neque vero haec
per annum semel aut bis, aut quinquies adventamus, sed in eis saepenumero dies
festos peragimus; saepe di^bus singulis eorum Martyrum Domino lauds hymnosque
cantamus. Quique homines prospera sunt valetudine conservari eam sibi a
Martyribus perunt, qui vero aegritudinem aliquam patiuntur, sanitatem corporis
exposcunt. Insuper and steriles viri and mulieres dari sibi filios petunt, qui
vero parents sunt, integra sibi and propria cus^diri quae consequti sunt dona.
Item qui peregre aliquo prosiciscuntur, petunt Martyrs sibi Comites esse in
via, vel potius itineris Duces; qui vero sospites redierunt, gratias agunt
acceptum beneficium consitentes. Non qui se ad Deos accedere arbitrentur, sed
qui orent Dei Martyrs tamquam Divinos Homines Interc^ssoresque sibi eos apud
Deum advocent, ac precentur. Pie vero sideliterque precatos ea maxim consequi
quae desiderant, testantur illa quae votorum rei dona persolvunt manifesta
nimirum adeptae sanitatis indicia. Nam alii quidem oculorum, alii vero pedum,
alii porro manuum simulacra suspendunt ex argento aurove confecta. The Temples
of the Martyrs, sais he, are renouned, of passing greatness, set out with all
sorts of Ornaments, and sending forth as it were the glittering of their
beauty afar off. Neither do we assemble therein once, or twice, or five times
in a year, but we celebrate many festival days in them; nay we meet here
several times in the day to sing praises to the God of the Martyrs. Those who
are in good health, pray of the Martyrs, that it may be continued to them, and
such as are under any sickness, pray that they may recover. Those who are
barren beg children here, and those who have children already, pray that they
may enjoy them in safety. Those who are to begin a journey, ask of the Martyrs
to be their compapanions or rather their guides, and those who are returned
safe, give them thanks, and acknowledge the favor which they have received;
not that they judge that they have recourse to them as to Gods, but as to
divine (glorified) men, to crave their intercession with God for them. Now that
those who ask with devotion and Faith have their petitions granted, is evident
from the Gifts which such as have madeVows bring in acknowledgment of their
cures. For some hang up eyes, others hands and feet made in gold and silver. If
this passage, do not contain the exact Doctrine of the Roman Church at present
touching the invocation and worship of Saints, I am yet to seek for a due
information of my Faith in this particular. And if it do contain this Doctrine,
it is a vain attempt to cite Theodoretus against our worship of Angels, which
comes recommended to us by the same Authority of Scripture, the same
conveyance of Tradition, and the same congruities of reason as the other, and
whatsoever may be said to the prejudice of the one will have the same force
against the other Doctrine, as for example, if playing to Angels be a forsaking
of Christ and a secret Idolatry, praying to Saints will be so too, and the
same course may be taken with all other Arguments, and Objections that are made
against either of them.

69. Now I infer from what has been said, that when Theodoretus affirms of the
Council of Laodicea, that it forbid the Colossians to pray to Angels, he did
not mean, that they should not pray at all to them, but only that they should
not pray to them after a superstitious manner as their only Mediators, which
is the overthrow of Christianity, and a forsaking of Christ and cleaving to
Idols. And when he sais, that in his time there were Oratories to be seen of S.
Michael in Phrygia and Pisidia, we are not to understand him, as tho he
siggnified thereby, that it was a devotion proper to Heretics alone to erect
Oratories in honor of S. Michael and other Angels (for he who allows of great
and magnificent Temples of Martyrs, can never account it an Antichristian
practice to build Oratories in honor of Angels, provided this be done
according to the Rule of the Catholic Faith, and without any encroachment
made upon that Honor which is due to God alone), but only that those Oratories
were still remaining in those parts, and frequented by Heretics, which had
been erected in former times for the superstitious worship which I have
declared. If the Reader pleas to consult Baronius in the place which I have
cited above, he will find mention made of a great many Churches which were
built in the East by Catholics, as likewise in other parts of the Church in
honor of Angels, and in particular that S. Michael was honored by the
Catholics of Colosse with a sumptuous Church, and a solemn annual devotion
by reason of some illustrious wonders which he wrought among this People, which
we ought to ascribe to the special Providence of God, who was pleased by
Miracles to confirm the Catholic Faith about the true worship of Angels in
the same place, where this worship was turned into a most detestable and
Idolatrous practice by Heretics, in case there ever were any such Heretics,
as Theodoretus affirms there were.

70. He 2. sais, that to pay Divine Honors, to erect Temples and Altars to the
greatest Saints advances them above the degree of Fellow Members, and if they
be not Fellow Members, then the Church in Heaven and Earth is not one Church.

71. I answer, that this is a heavy charge; but who are those that pay Divine
Honors and erect Temples and Altars to Saints as to the Proprietors of them?
Not Catholics. And this Author knows as much, or (what is as bad in a
slanderer) he may know as much. The chief and principal end which we propose to
our selves in the erection of Temples and Altars is the glory of God, to whom
alone we offer the dreadful Sacrifice of our Lord's Body Neither do we, as
the Council of Trent has observed with S. Augustine, say in the Mass, I offer
this Sacrifice to thee, Peter, or to thee, Paul, but giving thanks to God for
their victories we implore their Patronage, that they whom we commemorate on
Earth will vouchsafe to intercede for us in Heaven. We offer Sacrifice only to
God in acknowldgment of his supreme Dominion over us and a propitiation for our
sins: and seeing it is evident, that we do not make Peter, or Paul, or any other
Member of the Church in Heaven to be God or Gods, it is a plain case, that
their honor cannot be our ultimate end in the erection of Temples. For we
erect Temples principally for the sake of Altars, and seeing the ultimate end of
Altars and Sacrifices is the Glory of God, the ultimate end of our Temples
must be so too.

72. It Is true we erect Temples and Altars to God in honor of the Saints, which
is far different from giving them Divine honors. For the honor we do the
Saints when we frequent the Temples and Altars which bear their names is to beg
their intercession, which, as I have said, supposes them to be Creatures; to
(...) forth their (...), which the justice of God cannot dislike, seeing they
are due to their merits; and above all other things, that the more frequent
consideration of their virtues may the more easily bring us to an imitation of
them, which is the end of our creation. The Temples (...) Altars which are thus
dedicated are Monuments of their Victories, and (...) we hold not their
Victories to have been the effect of their natural strength, but to be the
Gifts of God, their Temples are by consequence so many Monuments, of God's
power and goodness toward them. They have no other share in the honor of
their Victories, than what can result from their free cooperation with the
grace whereby they gained them, which although it might be a sufficient reason why
a merciful God might crown them, yet it is not looked on by us as a sufficient
reason why we should rob God of his honor, and give it to them.

73. When we erect a Temple or an Altar to God in honor of S. Laurence for
example, this signifies that we offer them to God in memory of his great
goodness in giving to this Saint such an invincible patience, and constancy
as he showed in defense of the Christian Faith. It was an Argument of great
power and goodness in God, to fortify the soul of a poor frail, changeable
mortal with so great vigor as to be able to lie broiling on a gridiron, and to
be turned first on the one side and then on the other, with his senses as quick
as those of his tormentors, and his natural desire of preserving his life as
strong as theirs, and all this for no other reason, but because he would not
renounce his Savior. Now how is it possible for us to forfeit our Union with
the Church in Heaven by erecting a Temple or an Altar to God in memory of this
his great power and goodness toward S. Laurence? And if wedo not forfeit the
said Union by so doing, we cannot forfeit the same by erecting a Temple or an
Altar to him in honor of S. Laurence. For that which deserves to be honored
in S. Laurence is his patience, and constancy, which being the effects of
God's Power and Goodness, when we erect a Temple or an Altar to God in honor
of S. Laurence, we erect them to him in honor of his own Attributes, which no
Protestant will deny to be lawful. We honor God whenever we honor his
Saints, as we honor the Artificer by praising his work. God is wonderful in
his Saints Psalm. 67. And therefore we glorify him in them, because he is
wonderful in them.

74. Although it be a great honor for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that their names
are used to make up God's name, when he is called the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, yet this is no Divine honor. Why then should it be a Divine Honor
to these Saints to erect a Temple to God under that name? You Will say, that this
is no Divine honor to them, and that it is always lawful to erect Temples to
God under any name that he himself has chosen: then, say I, it is no Divine
honor to Marie, Peter, Paul, Laurence etc. whenever we erect a Temple to the
God of Marie, Peter, Paul, Laurence etc because we are to understand all God's
Elect under the name of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob who are expressed in God's
name. And if it be no Divine honor to Marie, Peter, Paul, Laurence etc. to
erect a Temple to the God of Marie, Peter, Paul, Laurence etc. all the honor
which we give to the Saints by the erection of Temples and Altars which bear
their names is allowed for good and lawful. For a Temple which is dedicated to
God in Honor of Marie, Peter, Paul, Laurence etc. imports no higher a degree
of Honor to these Saints, than if the form of dedication were to the God of
Marie, Peter, Paul, Laurence etc. because it is no more than a public
acknowledgment of the Sanctity of these Saints, of their consummated Union
with God, of their power with him, and of their Predestination to Glory, of
all which Privileges and perfections God is held to be the sole Author as much
as if the Temple were dedicated to the God of Marie, Peter, Paul, Laurence etc.

75. Hence it is plain, that we do not advance the Saints above the degree of
Fellow Members of the same Body by erecting Temples and Altars to God in their
Honor, whereby we signify only, that they are more Honorable Members than
any on Earth, which this Author has no reason to except against, seeing he
confesses, that there is a great difference in Honor between the Members of
the same Body.

76. He sais 3. that those who worship Saints destroy the unity of Christ's
Church, by dividing the Church in Heaven, and the Church on Earth, for nothing
is more contrary to the sense of mankind, than to worship those of our own
Communion.

77. I Answer, that it is questionless contrary to the sense of mankind to
worship those of our ownCommunion, if by worship be understood giving them
Divine Honor. But I have sufficiently secured our Doctrine from this calumny,
and if I have not, the Drs. Principles will not fail to do it for me. For it is
a certain truth amongst Protestants, which is likewise owned by this Author,
that the pretended Reformed Churches are not the only Church which Christ has
upon Earth, but that the Roman Church and some other sorts of Christians are
Members of it as well as they, which they cannot be, if they give Divine Honor
to Saints by worshipping them as we Catholics do, as all other Christians in
the world do besides Protestants, neither have we any Controversy with them,
or they wirh us on the account of this Doctrine. Where fore if those who worship
Saints destroy the unity of Christ's Body by dividing the Church in Heaven,
and the Church on Earth, it is manifest, that Protestants alone are united to
the Church in Heaven, because all other Christians in the world whom they call
unreformed, worship Saints. From whence it is likewise evident, that they are
the only true Church which Christ has upon Earth, and that the Roman Church
and other Churches cannot be Members of it, because they destroy the unity of
Christ's Body by their worship of Saints. The great art is to mend one hole so
(...) two

78 Having thus run over such Objections as the Dr. b^ings against our worship
and Invocation of Saints, and proved it to be ^nnocent, I conclude, that seeing
there is a mutual intercourse and correspondence between the Church in Heaven
and the Church on Earth, there ought in like manner to be an intercourse and
correspondence between all the parts of the Church on Earth.

79. Ib. He 3. proceeds to tell us, that the unity of the Church cannot consist
in such Articles of Faith as have not always been the Faith of the Christian
Church. For since the whole Church in all Ages is but One, it can have but One
Faith.... And therefore it is ridiculous to talk of sucha Power in the Church
of every Age as to make, or declare new Articles of Faith, unless there be an
Authority to make a new Church too in every Age.

80. I answer, that it is ridiculous indeed, to say that Christ has left any
such Authority in the world as can make a new Church. Which absurdity does
not follow from our holding, that he has left in the Church a Power to declare
Articles of Faith, that is, that he has given to the Church such an Authority
as may oblige the Faithful of one Age to an explicit belief of some Truths,
which the Church of the preceding Age believed only with an implicit Faith.
Protestants must needs make use of the terms of explicit and implicit Faith as
well as we for all the sport they make with them, unless they will deny the
Authority of the Acts of the Apostles Chap. 10. from whence we plainly gather,
that S. Peter had not from the time that our Savior ascended into Heaven till
this Vision at Joppe an explicit belief 1. that it was lawful to keep company,
or to come in unto a Man of another Nation v. 28. but now, said he, to (...) us
(to whom he was directed by the Vision) God has shown me, that I should not
call any man common or unclean. Nor 2. that it was lawful to eat such meats as
were forbidden by the Law of Moses, as appears from the answer which he
returned to the Voice that bid him arise, kill, and eat, viz Far be it from me,
Lord, for I have never eaten any thing common or unclean v, 13 14. Nor 3. that
it was lawful to preach to the Gentiles, and to take them into the Church, as
appears from what he said to Cornelius, I have found for a truth, that God is
no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears him, and does
what is just is accepted of him, v. 34. 35. as likewise from what he said upon
the amazement which the Faithful of the Circumcision were in who came along
with him, when they saw, that the H. Ghost was poured upon Cornelius and his
Family who were Gentiles, as well as upon him, viz Can any one forbid these men
to be baptized, who have received the H. Ghost as well as we v. 45. 47. Which
reason he gave afterward also to the Faithful at Jerusalem, when they
questioned him for having gone in to men uncircumcised, and eaten with them As
I began to speak, said he, the H. Ghost fell on them as on us at the beginning.
Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, (...) indeed baptized
with water, but ye shall be baptized with the H. Ghost, from which Baptism by
the H. Ghost he concludes the lawfulness of his baptizing the Gentiles by
water, and the justification of his whole conduct toward them thus: For as
much then as God gave them the same grace as he did unto us who believed in the
Lord Jesus Christ: what was I that I could with stand God? Whereupon the
Faithful when they heard these things held their peace, and glorisied God,
saying, then has God also granted unto the Gentiles repentance unto life. Chap.
11. v. 15. 16. 17. 18. Neither 4. had S. Peter an explicit belief, that the
observance of Circumcision was not necessary to salvation before this Vision,
as well because we cannot reasonably suppose, that he who thought it unlawful to
eat any thing that was common and unclean by the Law of Moses, or to keep
company and eat with unciroumcised persons, should believe that Circumcision
which was a solemn obligation to keep the whole Law, did not continue still in
force; as also because in the Council which was held at Jerusalem concerning the
difference which arose about this Sacrament, the proved the Non-necessitie of
it from the descent of the H. Ghost upon Cornelius and his Family, which was
the very Argument from whence he proved it to be lawful to baptize the Gentiles.
Thus we see S. Peter's Faith extended to four Doctrins which he had been never
taught expressly before, they having been of that number of Truths, of which
our Savior spoke, when he said to his Apostles, I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ^e cannot bear them now. Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is
come, he shall guide you into all Truth. Joan Chap. 16. v. 12. 13.

81. This remarkeble passage of Scripture affords us an exact instance to all
that is said at present against the Power which we acknowledge to be in the
Church of declaring Articles of Faith. For as the Dr. concludes, that since the
Church in all Ages is but One, it can have but One Faith, so he ought to
conclude, that since the Church which Christ left in the world was one and the
same Church with that which was in being at the time that Peter had his Vision
at Ioppe, and preached to Cornelius, it could have but One Faith. And yet we
find that S. Peter and the whole Church after this Vision had an explicit
belief of several Doctrins which they believed only implicitly when our
Savior ascended into Heaven. And as he concludes from the Unity and samenesse
of the Faith in all Ages, that it is ridiculous to tall of such a Power in the
Church of every Age as (...) make, or declare new Articles of Faith, unless
then be an Authority to make a new Church too in every Age, so he ought to
conclude, if he will proceed with any consequence to himself, that it is
ridiculous to say that our Savior since his Ascension (...) Heaven has made,
or declared new Articles of Faith, unless he has made a new Church too. And
yet it is very certain, that the Declaration which our Savior made to S. Peter
of the aforesaid Doctrins, and Articles of Faith after his Ascension into
Heaven did not make a new Church.

82. Thus the difficulty which the Dr. has started against us is common to
Protestants as well as to us, and to all those who own the Authority of the
Acts of the Apostles. Let him come off with it as well as he can. As for our
solution, it is very easy and intelligible, and equally shows, that neither S.
Peter's Faith after his Vision at Joppe, nor the Faith of the Church in
following Ages are to be accounted new, notwithstanding the several
Declarations of Faith which have been made since our Savior's A scension into
Heaven. We say there fore, that our Saviors Declaration of the aforesaid
Doctrins to S. Peter did not make new Articles of Faith, or establish a new
Church, but only laid a new obligation on the Faithful of believing them in
exprese terms, which is that which we mean by explicit Faith, wher^s before
they believed them only in their Principles, which is that which we mean by an
implicit Faith. S. Peter before his Vision at Joppe believed the Law of Christ
to be a state of liberty, and that God would build again the Tabernacle of
David out of the Gentiles; the first of which Principles he made use of in the
Council which was held at Jerusalem, to show the uselesnesse of Circumcision
and the Law of Moses among Christians; and the other was managed by S. James to
the same purpose. He believed likewise what our Savior said viz John indeed
baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized by the H. Ghost, from which
saying he proved after this Vision, that it was lawful to reconcile the Gentiles
to Christ, as we have seen above. Therefore he believed implicitly all the
aforesaid Doctrins which were included in these Principles; and after our
Savior had proposed them upon his Vision, he believed them explicitly and in
express terms So that S. Peter's and the Church's implicit Faith were always
the same, because the Principles from whence it was inferred, were revealed and
always believed; as supposing our Savior should propose to my belief the
meaning of several obscure passages in S. John's Revelations, in this case my
faith would not be different from what it is now. I should only have an
explicit Faith of some Truths whereof I have only now an implicit belief. We
have here no coining of a new Faith, nor making of a new Church, but only a
new Declaration and Proposal of such Doctrins as were delivered in the
beginning by the deliverie of those Principles from whence they were deduced.

83. This solution of a difficulty which the Dr. is obliged to remove is a
just answer to what at present he urges against us. For although the Definitions
and Declarations of the Church are new, yet the matters Defined and Declared
were delivered by our Savior either implicitly in such Principles from whence
the truth of them is gathered; or else explicitly and in express Terms. In
both which cases the Faith of the Church is the same, and by consequence the
Church is One and the same in all Ages. For as to the first, seeing the Church
has in all Ages explicitly believed the Principles, it must necessarily have
given an implicit assent to such Doctrins as were contained in them. And as to
the second, the vindication and declaration of a truth which was delivered in
the beginning does no more than restore an Old Truth, and not establish a new
one, and by consequence cannot make a new Church.

. 7. P. 10. 11. After the Drs. endeavors to show us wherein the Unity of the
Church in Heaven and Earth does not consist, he proceeds 2. to tell us wherein
it does consist, viz in the Gospel Covenant by which we are all united in One
Body to Christ, the one and only Head of the universal Church..... The only
Medium or Bond of this union between Christ and his Church is the
Gospel Covenant: for that is the foundation of our relation to Christ. He is
our Head and Husband, our Lord and Savior, we his subjects, Disciples, Spous,
and Body by Covenant.

84. Reply. 'T is strange, that this Author who lays so great a stresse upon
the Gospel Covenant, should not take a little pains to give us an account what
he means by it, it being not a matter evident of it self, and rarely applied
to Controversial uses. I am persuaded, that the Unity of the Church had wanted
a Champion, had not the Ambiguitie that lies in these terms set him upon the
undertaking. Wherefore before I grant it to be the Bond of union between Christ
and his Church, it is fit that I establish the Notion of it, and not pass it
over, as he does by acknowledging the name, and concealing from the Reader the
thing signified by it.

85. We understand by the Gospel Covenant the Covenant which we find mentioned
by the Prophet Jeremie chap. 31. (who is quoted by S. Paul Hebr. chap. 10. v.
16) in these words, Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a
New Covenant with the House of Israel and the House of Judah... This shall be the
Covenant that I will make... I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. The
Prophet calls it a New Covenant, not because all the Elect from the beginning of
the world were not included in it, but because Christ was to preach the Law
which was to be written in our hearts, and to appear as a visible Teacher of
the world after a great number of Ages, wherein men were either totally ignorant
and unmindfull of God, or else tied to the (...) and burdensome observance of
Types and Figures as among the Jews, or of no less ineffectual Sacrifices, as
among the Gentiles. All which were to have an end, and to give way to the Law of
Love, which Christ would write in our hearts.

86. The word Covenant imports a mutual Promise and obligation between two or
more persons, about something that is to be done by the Promisers to the
Honor, or advantage of one another This Notion of a Covenant in general is
easily applicable to the new Covenant, or that which passes between God and man
relating to the Gospel-For the performance of God's Promise to us redounds to
his Honor, and the performance of our Promise to him redounds to our Honor
and advantage. What God promises us is, that we shall be the Spous and Body of
his Son if we will believe in him; and our Promise to him again is, that we
will believe in him in hopes of so great a reward. But it is not sufficient for
men to be comprised under the Gospel Covenant, that they promise to believe in
the Son of God: they must likewise signify this their Promise to him in such a
manner as he himself has enjoined, which has been different in different Ages
of the world. For we Christians accept, and lay hold on God's Promise at the
time of our Baptism, the receiving of which Sacrament is ordained by God as an
expression of our assent to his Proposal to us according to that of our
Savior, He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved. Marc 16. Those who
were of the seed of Abraham had Circumcision appointed them for this purpose,
whence S. Paul calls this Sacrament the seal of the Righteousness of Faith.
Romans 4. Those who were not of the seed of Abraham from the beginning of the
world, who had neither Circumcision, nor Baptism whereby to signify their
assent to God's Proposal to them, might make the same known to his Divine
Majesty by their Faith in Christ who was to come. For these chosen Vessels
having been for many Ages so very extraordinary and few, it may be doubted,
whether there were any Sacraments appointed them for this end, since Sacraments
are ordained for the exterior Union of many, as well as to significa a sacred
thing; especially considering, that as every Divine Revelation that is made us
for our spiritual good is a virtual Promise of a reward that is to be given us
for our belief of it, so our belief of it is a virtual acceptance of the same
reward. But we may with more probability judge, that the Sacrifices which we
read to have been offered by Job (and the like may be said of other Holy men
of his Class) were commanded by God, and accepted by him as an expression of
the belief of the future Incarnation of his Son, and as a Condition of their
becoming Members of his Mystical Body. And it is a matter beyond dispute, that
the Sacrifices of Melchisedech were instituted for this end, seeing Christ our
Lord is a Priest for ever according to his Order. Thus these three states of
men who constitute the one (...) Spous and Body of Carist, make one and the
same Promise to God, although the manner of their expressing it be different.

87. I have only mentioned Faith as a necessary Condition which we promise to
perform in the Gospel Covenant, having followed herin the method of the
Church, which demands of those who come to the Sacrament of Baptism, whether
they believe? But besides Faith there is another Condition no less necessary,
which is Obedience to our Ecclesiastical Superiors, which the Church forbears
to mention because it is included in Faith, which being an assent to all that
God reveals, it is by consequence an assent to all such things as he has
commanded for the validity of his Covenant with us. Now obedience is a matter
of this nature, as the Church has believed in all Ages, and as appears out of
our Savior's words to his Apostles, He that hears you, hears me, and he that
despises you, despises me. Luc. 10. From whence we gather, that seeing we
despise onr Superiors as often as we disobey them, we despise Christ, as often
as we disobey them; and if we despise Christ, we renounce our covenant with
him. And in case this Author will not allow of this Doctrine, which shall be
fully proved in the sequel of these Discourses, he must consequently hold, that
Christ may have a true Church, and that his Mystical Body may subsist, although
all the Christians in the world were absolutely unconnected, disunited, and
independent of one another in matters of Government, and Obedience.

88. Obedience to Ecclesiastical Superiors was no less necessary to the
Gospel Covenant under the Law of Moses than it is now, wherein there is this
only difference, that those who under the Old Law would not acquiesce with the
determination of the Priests, should be put to death, Deuteronomy. 17. whereas under
the Gospel, those who disobey their Pastors are only excommunicated, whereby
they have time given them to (...). In both these cases disobedience is a
forfeiture of the Gospel Covenant; for those who died for it under the Law died
in a state of damnation as outcasts and rebels against the chair of Moses; and
those who die excommunicated for the same under the Gospel will fare no better
unless they are certain of the injustice of their Excommunication, which we
cannot reasonably presume of such as are excommunicated for their errors in
Faith, seeing the Gospel obliges them in such cases to hear those by whom they
are excommunicated as they hear Christ himself. This condition appertained
likewise to all those who neither lived under the Law nor the Gospel, and yet
were Members of Christ's Mystical Body; for although they had only the actual
exercise of Faith, yet seeing their Faith in Christ was an assent to his whole
Law, it must needs have been an approbation of that Obedience to our Superiors
which was to be commanded by it. Those who pass out of this life into Heaven
are freed from the observance of the^e conditions, because their Faith is turned
into (...), whereby they are immediately and completely united to their Lord,
whom they obeyed in their Pastors whilst they were upon Earth. They still
continue in Covenant with him (as this Author (...) p. 12.) because their
enjoyment of him is the end of the Covenant, and a reward of their Faith; and
they ceas not to be his Spous, because he has preferred them to a state of
Glory, So that the Church in Heaven and Earth are under one and the same
Covenant, (...) they are not both of them actually under one and the same
Conditions of continuing in it.

89. Now from what I have said we may learn 1. that the Notion of the
Gospel Covenant is this, A mutual Aggreement between God and some persons whom
he has (...) to this favor, whereby God engages on his part, that they shall
be the Spous and Body of his Son, if they will believe in him, and obey their
Pastors whom he shall set over them, and they again on their part bind
themselves by Promise to the performance of these Conditions.

90. 2. That although the Gospel Covenant be the beginning of our relation to
Christ, as a League that is concluded between two Princes is the beginning and
foundation of the public advantages that are to accrue to each others People,
yet the medium or (...) of our Union to him cannot consist precisely (...), no
more than the advantages of the People can consist merely (...) the League that
is concluded between their Princes. For we may (...) to God in Baptism what is
absolutely necessary for the validity of the Gospel Covenant which we will
not afterward perform. In which case we have no such relation to Christ, that
he should be our Head and Husband, our Lord, and Savior, or that we should be
his Disciples, subjects, Spous, and Body on this account. For baptized
Heretics and Schismatiques are thus in Covenant with Christ, and yet they
belong not to his One Body any otherwise than as deserters belong to the Army
which they have forsaken, which signifies no more but that they ought to be
present in it, and that the General has a right to punish them for their
desertion whenever they fall within his Power.

91. 3. That if the Gospel Covenant be taken so as to signify, not only the
mutual promises which pass between God and man, but likewise the performance
of them, there can be no dispute, but that it is the only Bond or Medium of
union between Christ and his Church, not that Faith and Obedience which are the
things which we promise to God, are the formal reason of our being the Spous
and Body of his Son (as shall further appear below,) but only that they being
Necessary Conditions without which we cannot be it, as soon as they are
performed by us, God makes us his Son's (...) and Spous, whether they are
exercised by us in this life, or ceas by our translation into Glory. And here
enters what S. Paul sais 1. ad Cor. 12. By (...) spirit we are all baptized
into One Body, as likewise ad Ephesians. 3. That the Nations should be Coheirs,
(...) of the same Body, and partakers of his (...) through the Gospel.

92. Having thus established the Notion of the Gospel Covenant, wherein shall we
place the Noti^ on of the Church's Mystical Union to Christ as his Spous and
Body, which is so necessary for the understanding of the Controversy in
hand? If we place it in the profession of Faith, and Obedience to
Ecclesiastical Superiors, we shall exclude the Church in Heaven from being
Members of Christ's Mystical Body, because they are exempt from these
obligations. If we say that it consists in the character which we receive in
Baptism, we shall make Heretics, Schismatiques, and Apostats (supposing they
have been baptized) to be Christ's Mystical Members. And if we say, that it
consists in habitual or Justifying Grace, it will not be true what the H. Ghost
sais, that there are dead Members of Christ's Mystical Body.

93. D Sherlock gives a broad hint p. 13. and 14. that it is one thing for the
Church to be united in One Body to Christ by the Gospel Covenant, and another
thing to be united to him as his Spous and Body, which certainly he would
never have done, had he considered the double meaning which I lately assigned
to the Gospel Covenant. For although, as I have said, the mutual Promises that
pass between Christ and his Church, are the Beginning of the Church's
relation to him, yet seeing these Promises alone cannot unite her to him any
otherwise than as Heretics and Schismatiques are united to him, her complete
Union to him must be by the performance of the mutual Promises, which they make
to each other. And this is the Union which makes her his Spous and Body.

94. I say he hints at such a distinction very clearly, for having asked the
question, how the whole Church (in Heaven and Earth) is but one Body? He
answers that he knows of no other way, but that they are all united to Christ
in the same Covenant, and all who are thus united to him, Christ accounts for
his One Body. After which he sais, that it is true indeed, that the Church is
called also the Body and Spous of Christ, but it is called so for Mystical
reasons, which I willingly grant, but he must know that these Mystical reasons
are the mystical Union where -by the Church is united to Christ as to her
Spous, and wholly indistinct from the performance of God's Promise in the
Covenant, as will appear out of these reasons which I have cited out of him
below N. 96. and which being supposed here, I shall leave it to him to (...)
whether the formation of the church out of Christ's Broken Body be not the
thing which God promised her when he entered into the Gospel Covenant with her.
Wherefore if the Churches formation out of his broken Podie be her Mystical
Marriage to him, and her Mystical Marriage be for (...) Reasons, it follows,
that these Mystical Reasons are the Mystical Union whereby she is married, and
united to him. And if these Mystical Reasons are the Mystical Union whereby she
is married, and united to him, it follows, that she is One Body in Christ not
merely because she is united to him by Covenant, that is, by means of the
Promises which they have made each other, but because she has received from him
the performance of his Promise upon her performance of what she had promised
him.

95. Since the Mystical Union of the Church to Christ is only by way of
similitude, the most effectual way to establish it is Notion will be to consult
the H. Scriptures, where we shall find the similitudes set down, and the
grounds of them, which are the best light we can have to know it is meaning.

96. In the first place the Church is called the Spous and Body of Christ as
well because of the infinite love wherewith he cherishes, supports, and regales
her, as also for certain Mystical Reasons which are delivered by this Author P.
14. 15. 16. 17. and seeing his words are not amiss, I shall make use of them;
for to be sure no others will pleas him half so well. To understand, sais he,
why the Church is called the Spous and Body of Christ we must enquire, why the
Wife is called the Body of the Man, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone,
and the reason of that is, because the Woman was formed cut of the Man......
Thus the B. Jesus out of his great pity and compassion to fallen Man intending
to marry us to himself, and thereby to recover us out of a state of sin and
misery, (...) marries our nature to himself by an Hypostatical union (...)
Man was created first, and the woman taken out of him...... But this is not
enough, that the Husband and Wife partake of the same Nature, but the Woman
must be formed out of the Man, which makes her Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of
his Bone. And thus accordingly the Church is formed out of the Body of Christ,
and is in a Mystical sense his very Flesh and Bones, as S. Paul speaks, We are
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. For the sufferings of
Christ in the Flesh gave life, and being to the Church, he purchased a Church
to himself by his own Blood, that is, he formed (...) himself a Church out of
his broken Bodies as (...) body was broken, and a rib taken out of him to
(...) the Woman.... And as the Woman was formed out of Adam's side, so was the
Church out of Christ's side. For when he was pierced by the soldiers spear,
(...) came out of his side both Water and Blood... And therefore I doubt not,
but the ancient Fathers were (...) the right, who tell us, that the Sacraments
of the (...) Covenant flowed from out of his side which are the formation of
this Spiritual Spous his Church.

97. 2. The Church is likewise said to be the Body of Christ, and he to be
it is Head from the resemblance there is between it and the (...) Body of a
man. For as in the Natural Body (...) are different Members who act by the
virtue, and at the command which they receive from the (...) which is the seat
of reason and of all the senses, (...) in the Mystical Body of Christ there
are different states and Conditions of Members, who (...) from their Head, in
whom the Fullness of the Divinity resides, ability, and directions how to
perform their supernatural operations. S. Paul 1. ad Cor. 12. tells us, that
God has set in his Church some Apostles, others Prophets, others Teachers,
others that work Miracles and cure diseases from above, others that have the
gift of Tongues, and others again who are qualified for Government etc. All
which are Members of this One Body, and in subjection to their Head, who
directs them by his invisible influences to contribute each one their part
toward the consummation of the whole Body in Charity, which is their last
end. So that as in the Natural Body the Spirit and Virtue of the Head is
derived to all the Members through the providential care it has over them,
according to the capacity of every one of them in particular and the
necessity of the whole, so in the Mystical Body of Christ the (...) Spirit of
Christ is lodged in all it is Members, whether they are in Heaven, or struggling
still with temptations on Earth. In the One he dwells by Glory and the
Beatifique Vision, and in the other by Faith, and his other sacred Unctions.
For these diversities of operations proceed all from the same Spirit of their
Head, who lives in them after a more special manner than he does in inanimate
beings, which is only on the account of his Immensitie and Power; or than he
does in Infidels who know not his name, in whom he lives by natural reason; or
than he does in Catechumens, who although they know his name, and believe in him,
yet having not received Baptism, which is the manner whereby they are enjoined
to accept of God's Promises, they can have no right to any (...) of the
Gospel Covenant, nor by consequence to be Members of our Lord's Body; Or than
he does in (...) and Excommunicated Persons, who having renounced their
Obedience to Ecclesiastical Superiors, he lives not in them although they believe
and have received Baptism, so long as they continue in that state, any more
than he does Infidels. Whereas he lives in all such as are Members of his
Mystical Body as a ready Principle of supernatural operations. If they are in
Heaven, he is a Principle of their Happiness; and if they are on Earth, although
they are great (...), yet in virtue of his (...) to them, they are sure of
being assisted by him, whenever they heartily repent of their offenses, and
turn to him. But Catechumens, Schismatiques and Excommunicated Persons are
under an impossibility of repenting as they ought, till they are incorporated
either actually or in voto into Christ's Body, which is the only state to
which he has promised his Grace and assistance.

98. And to carry the Analogy yet further, as in the Natural Body such
services as are proper to each part are communicated to every Fellowmember, and
there is no good so peculiar to any one of them, which all the rest do not
partake of: so it fares likewise in Christ's Mystical Body, where such
meritorious actions as are performed by any Member in particular, redound to
the benefit of them all, according to that of David Particeps ego sum omnium
timentium te. Psalm. 118. By which means we are not only Members of Christ,
but as S. Paul sais ad Ephesians. 4. Members of one another, by contributing toward
one another salvation by such good actions, as are proper to the stations and
places which God has assigned to us; as the eye, the ear, the hand, the foot,
and the belly contribute toward the mutual good of one another by such
operations as are proper to each one in particular. Thus if God has made me a
Pastor of souls here in England, and I discharge my office according to his
Divine Will; or if he has made me poor and afflicted, and I bear my necessities
with patience and resignation, he will in consideration of my Merits have
mercy on my Fellowmembers who are in far distant Countries, as suppose in
Mexico or China. Whereas without such a communication of Merits, whatever good I
may do to my Fellow Members here in England by my example or the like, yet
those in Mexico or China will be never the better for it. Seeing the Church in
Heaven is no longer capable of meriting, their prayers and Intercessions are
the only services that they can render to their Brethren on Earth: but this is
too general a means for all the Fellowmembers to assist one another withal,
and makes them all only of one kind, as suppose an eye, an ear, a hand, or a
belly, because they contribute all alike toward the common good by one and the
same operation. Thus S. Paul's excellent Analogy is fully salved in our
Doctrine, but must needs be very imperfect in the Drs. way, who by denying
Merit, makes it impossible to explicate, how the Mystical Body of Christ has a
complete resemblance with the Natural Body, when the Members of it are only
Members of one another by their being all united to Christ, and not by any
special assistances which their respective stations enable them to afford to
one another. The contrary whereof happens in the Natural Body, where the
Members are one among themselves, not only by their common subjection to their
Head, but by their subserviencie to one another by means of such good offices
as are proper to each of them in particular.

99: 3. Our Savior is compared Luc. 15. to a Vine, and ad Romans 10. to an Olive
tree, and we are said to be his branches, and to derive our growth and
nourishment from him. So that whilst we are not broken off but united to him,
we partake of the fatness of his root, and may bring forth fruit.

100. 4. As in the Natural Body, when any Member is stupefied, or seized with
the dead palsy, it does not cease for all that from being a member of the
Body, although it be an useless one, and afford matter of grief to the other
members; neither is it dead, because it is totally forsaken by the soul which is
the Principle of life, but by reason the ill dispositions it lies under, hinder
it is sensations, so that it cannot obey thehead by the exercise of any vital
motions. So it fares likewise with too many members of Christ's Mystical
Body, who being deprived of Charity are under such ill dispositions, (...)
they are unable to think, or to act any thing so as to pleas Christ their Head
thereby in such a manner as he requires of them; wherein consist the most
proffitable Motions of a Christian and supernatural life. And neverthe less
they ceas not to be Members of Christ's Body, notwithstanding this Spiritual
Palsy, and insensibilitie of their greatest concerns, because they still retain
the spirit of their Head who dwells in their hearts by Faith, as S. Paul sais ad
Ephesians. 3. as likewise 1. ad Cor, 6. v. 19. and (...) ad Cor. 13. v. 5. Their soul
has not totally forsaken them, although their obstructions and bad dispositions
hinder the communication of it is influences; and their Faith (which is the
first Principle of a Christian life), if it be improved, and brought to action,
may retore them again from their spiritual deadness to health, and make them
living Members by partaking of those Blessings and Graces, which abundantly
flow from the Head to all the Members through the working of Charity.

101. I am not ignorant, that S. Paul speaks of the dead Members of Christ's
Body as tho there were no life at all in them, no more than there is in (...)
branch of a tree: which terms are (...) used by Dr. Sherlock on the present
occasion. God forbid that I should disallow of this way of speech, seeing it is
countenanced by Truth it self. However I judge; that it may be understood so
in relation to Charity, which is the permanent and Haebitual Life which we
receive in Baptism; so that who (...) is deprived of this Heavenly Gift is as
much dead in order to any actions that may deserve a reward from God, as a
withered or rotten branch of a tree, or a Body that is forsaken by the soul.
But if it be understood with relation to Christ who is the Efficient Cause of
Charity, that is, of our Regeneration and Newness of spirit, there can be no
inconvenience in saying, that the dead Members of Christ's Body have an
Analogy with Paralytiques, because we are sure that they have Christ dwelling
in them by Faith, who sais of himself that he is Life. So that as we say of a
Paralytique, that he is not absolutely dead whilst his soul continues united to
his Body, but only that he is dead as to his sensations by reason of the ill
dispositions that affect his nerves: so we may say of a dead Member of Christ's
Body, that he is not absolutely dead so long as he has the Lord of Life
dwelling within him by a special presence, which is not common to those who
have Faith and yet are not of his Body, but only that he is dead as to any
good and meritorious actions through the want of Charity.

102. Now from all these Analogies and similitudes we may gather, that to be a
Member of Christ's Mystical Body denotes a special Grace and favor, whereby
our Lord receives us under his more particular care, whereby he looks after our
true and only interest as tho we were parts of himself, and with the same
concern as every one has for his natural Members. For what signifies his
forming us out of his broken Body, but that he has placed us in such a state
wherein we may receive the benefit of his death and Passion, which is signified
by the Prophet Jeremie above, when God sais that he will be our God, and that
we shall be his People? And that he has given us a supernatural strength to
attain the enjoyment of him, which is an end above our natural abilities? And
what fignifies his being as it were the soul of his Church, and the root from
whence she derives her juce and fatness, but that he is ready prepared to do
us good, if we will lay hold on him; that he is our All in All, that he
supports our weakness, mollifies our hardness, enflames our lukewarmnesse,
removes our blindness, and that without an Union with him by means of Faith
and Obedience to our Pastors, as in the Church Militant, or by means of the
Beatifique Vision, as in the Church Triumphant, we are able to do nothing but
what is imperfect and impure, and which will not end in death and destruction.
Wherefore I conclude from all that has been said, that to be a Member of
Christ's Body, or to be Mystically united to him as our Spous imports A
special Relation which all those have to Christ as their last end, who have not
retracted their acceptance of the Graces and favors which he promised them,
through their renouncing the necessary Conditions which he required of them,
and which they promised to perform at what time the Gospel Covenant passed
between them.

103. (...) that it is A special Relation which all those have to (...) as
their last end, because all men whether they are (...) or unbelievers have a
general Relation to him as to their Creator, Preserver, and future Judge, nay
and as to their last (...) too, seeing they were all created to enjoy God. (...)
a Relation to Christ as denotes a state wherein (...) means are to be had which
lead unto him, is only proper and peculiar to the Members of his Body. I say
who have not retracted their acceptance of the Graces and favors etc. that the
Church in Heaven and the Church on Earth may be both comprehended under this
Notion. For it is plain, that the Church on Earth has not made any such
retractation, seeing she actually professes to believe in Christ, and to obey
her Ecclesiastical Superiors, which is the only state wherein Christ dispenses
his favors here upon Earth. And as for the Church in Heaven, she still
continues the acceptance of such graces and favors as are proper to the state
to which she is called, as she did likewise the Necessary Conditions of the
Gospel Covenant, till such time as she was freed by her Spous srom the
observance of them. I say the necessary Conditions of the Gospel Covenant; for
God required of us in Baptism when we entered into Covenant with him, that we
should likewife renounce the Devil and all his pomps, that is, that we should
lead holy and spiritual lives, and we made him a Promise that we would do so,
and yet although we fail herin, we do not ceas to be Members of his Mystical
Body, provided we preserve the true (...) and Ecclesiastical unity, as this
Author P. 20. proves at large against his dissenting Brethren.

104. Thus I have run through the Drs. first Chapter wherein he pretends to
(...) the Unity of the whole Church, as that includes the Church in Heaven and
the Church on Earth, and shall leave it to the Reader's consideration, whether
he has made his attempt good, without clearing the Notion of the
Gospel Covenant, or that of our Mystical Union to Christ as our Spous, which
are the necessary ties that must unite them both together. His discourse
toward the latter end is bent for several leaves rather against his dissenting
Brethren than against us. What remains yet untouched relating to the
differences which Protestants have with us shall be considered in the
examination of his second Chapter, which now lies before me.

CHAPTER II. Concerning the unity of the Catholic Church on Earth.
. 1. P. 30.

HE begins thus. If the whole Church be one, to be sure every part of it must
be one with the whole, and therefore one with it selfie with that same kind of
unity which belongs to the whole.

1. Reply. What then? I Will help him forward. (...) the Church on Earth is a
part of the whole Church. Therefore the Church on Earth is one with the whole,
and therefore one with itself with the same kind of unity which belongs to
the whole. Then thus. But the unity which belongs to the whole is the unity
whereby it is Mystically united to Christ as to it is Spous. Therefore the
Church on Earth is one with the whole, and one with it self by the unity
whereby it is Mystically united to Christ as to it is Spous and Head. I see
nothing oncluded here but what we freely grant, viz that the (...) on (...) is
(...) one with it self, and with the Church in Heaven, by means of the
Mystical Union whereby they are both united to Christ as their Spous.

. 2. He immediately proceeds. So that the Essential unity of the Church on
Earth, that which makes a Church and makes it one, is that all true Churches
are Members of the one Mystical Body of Christ, as being all united to him as
to their Head by the same Covenant.

2. Reply. This is the killing Proposition which is to put and end to the vain
and arrogant Pretenses of the Church of Rome. This is to be the bane of the
Infallibility of the Church, of the Pope's Supremacy, and of the Authority
of General Councils etc. This is to be she shield of the Reformation, and the
defense of the Protestant Cause, which till the publication of this Discourse
has been carried on but very unluckily, although he will have many good things to
have been said in it is behalf. And yet we do not find any one word to make it
good, unless it be that which I have examined above in Reply to this 3.
Answer, N. 6. although it be not a Principle of so great clearness as to be it is
own proof. Nay it is nothing else in effect but a Proposition which he advances
in opposition to our Doctrine. For we affirm, that the Church on Earth has a
Visible Unity Essential to it by Christ's Institution by means of Faith and
Obedience to our Pastors, from whence we show by pressing consequences the
Infallibility of the Church, the Supremacy of the Pope, and the Authority of
General Councils. In answer to which he tells us, that the only Essential
unity of the Church on Earth, that which makes a Church, and it one, is that
all true Churches are Members of the One Mystical Body of Christ, as being all
united to him as to their Head by the same Covenant, that is, that there is no
other Unity Essential to the Church, but that wereby it is united to Christ as
to it is Mystical Head and Spous, from whence he very manfully concludes the
falsenesse of the foregoing Doctrins. Can he think, that we will lay aside our
Faith because he tells us that it is not true, or that any prudent man of his
party will judge, that he has put an end to wranglings by a bare denial of our
Tenets, which all Authors of his Communion who have writ before him, have done
no less than himself? Nay they have brought proofs, such as they are, to
justify their dissent from us; but he brings none, and yet would have the
world think, that he has done more than any of them. He must have a strange
confidence in his own abilities, who can presume, that a simple Affirmation or
Negation of his own will go further than other men's Syllogisms, as it is
certain the Dr. does; for otherwise he would never censure Protestant Writers
for the ill management of their Cause against us, when he to (...) the matter,
produces such a Principle for this purpose as he is sure we will deny, and yet
makes no provision at all for it is defense. Let his Pupils (...) up his
Authority as much as they pleas; we will allow him to have none, but where we
find he (...) reason for what he sais, which it is not likely (...) should have
at present, seeing the only proof of this Proposition is the Authority of his
Person.

3. This Proposition is capable of a good sense as well as of a bad one. For if
the meaning of it be, that the Essential Unity of the Church on Earth, as it
is Christ's Mystical Body, is that all true Churches are united to him as to
their Head by the performance of the Promises that passed between them in the
Gospel Covenant, it is undoubtedly true. Neither do I know of any thing else
that can make a Mystical Church, and make it Mystically One, because the
Relation to Christ which arises from the formation of us out of his broken
Body which he promised us, is that which makes us Members of his Mystical
Body, in consideration of the performance of the Conditions which he required
of (...), viz Faith and Obedience to our Ecclesiastical Superiors, wherein we
place the Essential Unity of the visible Church as such.

4. But the immediate connection which this Proposition has with the last which
I took notice of, evinces that he can have no such meaning as this, from whence
it is very clear, that he designs to say, that the only Essential Unity of
the Church on Earth is the Mystical Union of it to Christ as to it is Spous. For
he having said in the foregoing Chapter, that the Essential Unity of the whole
Church in Heaven and Earth consists in the Union of them both to Christ, and
having at present applied this Doctrine to that part of the whole Church which
is on Earth whose Unity he pretends to establish, it follows, that he allows
of no other Unity as Essential to it; otherwise we might expect an account of
it here which is it is proper place, seeing the Notion of the Church's Unity
must needs be defective without it.

5. Besides, his inferences throughout the second Chapter suppose, that the
Church on Earth has no other Unity Essential to it, but that whereby it is
Mystically united to Christ as to it is Spous. Which Position has engaged him to
maintain, that the Catholic Church is nothing else but the whole Company, or
multitude of individual Christians, who are all singly united to Christ, and
made one in him. From whence he is enforced to hold, that the Clergy do not
belong to the Definition of a Church; that they are not the Church; that the
Church has no Authority, nor any visible Tribunal wherein to exercise this
Authority; that the Faith of General Councils is not necessarily the Faith of
the Church; that the Indefectibilitie of the Catholic Church does not depend
upon the Indefectibilitie of Organized Churches; that it is possible for the
Catholic Church to be unknown and invisible; that the indefectibilitie of the
Church does not prove the Infallibility of any Organized Church. All which
Doctrins and a great many more which I have omitted, suppose that our Mystical
Union to Christ is the only Essential Unity which the Church has. And to put
the matter out of dispute, he sais in express terms p. 47. that the Essential
Unity of the Catholic Church consists only in the union of all Christians
to Christ, which makes them his one Mystical Body; and p. 31. that Christian
Churches are One Body by being all united to one Mystical Head, the Lord Jesus
Christ; not by an external and visible union to each other.

6. And truly if he hold, that it is Essential to the Church on Earth to be
visibly One as well as to be Mystically One, what he sais against us p. 7. to
prove that the formal and Essential Unity of the Church on Earth does not
consist in it is union to the Pope, is very silly. For his Argument runs thus.
The Church on Earth is One with the Church in Heaven, they being both but One
Church, and therefore must have the same Essential unity; for how they should
be One by two sorts of unity, that is, be One without the same formal unity,
is very mysterious and near akin to a contradiction. And therefore seeing the
unity of the Church in Heaven does not consist in it is union to the Pope, no
more does the unity of the Church in Earth, the unity being the same in both.
To which Argument we have a very ready and convincing Answer, if he hold it to
be Essential to the Church on Earth tobe Visibly One; for if this be so, why
may not it is Visible Unity consist in it is Union to the Pope, as well as by any
other visible means? For it cannot follow, because the Unity of the Church in
Heaven does not consist in it is Union to the Pope, that therefore the Unity of
the Church on Earth does not (...) in the same, no more than it follows, because
the Unity of the Church in Heaven does not consist in that wherein Dr. Sherlock
will have the visible Unity of the Church on Earth to consist, that therefore
the Unity of the Church on Earth does not consist in the same. And as in this
Hypothesis he will deny; that it is near akin to a contradiction to say that
such a visible Unity as he allows, is Essential to the Church on Earth, because
he does not pretend, that the Formal and Essential unity of the Church in
Heaven and Earth consists in such an Unity as he judges to appertain only to
the Church on Earth: so we may in like manner say, that it is far from being a
contradiction, to place the visible Unity which we acknowledge for Essential
to the Church on Earth in it is Union to the Pope, because we do not hold, that
the formal and Essential Unity of the whole Church in Heaven and Earth
consists therein, but in another kind of Unity which is distinct from it.

7. Having said thus much concerning the meaning of the aforesaid Proposition,
I would now gladly know, how the Dr. can reconcile the Visibilitie of the
Church on Earth, which he sais p. 18. is plainly taught in Scripture with the
truth of it. For seeing the Church is nothing else but many individuals united
into One Body, if the Essential Union of them together be Invisible (as our
Mystical Union to Christ as our Spous is) the Church must be invisible to. I
shall prove our Mystical Union to be Invisible in my Reply to the Answer which
he returns to this Objection, which was too notorious to be dissembled by him,
and therefore he starts it against himself ubi supra, and takes an occasion to
show his dislike of those who are of opinion, that the Church is composed of no
others but the Elect.

8. As I do not blame him for impugning this Opinion, so I must needs declare
my dissatisfaction at the Answer which he makes to the aforesaid Objection,
which is, that the union of the Church to Christ which he had explained (that
is, her Mystical Union to him as to her Spous) is a visible union, for, sais
he, we are nnited to Christ by the Gospel Covenant, and the Covenant is
visible; the Sacraments of the Covenant Baptism and the Lord's Supper are
visible, the profession of Faith and Obedience to Christ made (...) these
Sacraments are visible also; and therefore the Church which is united to Christ
by a visible Covenant, visible Sacraments, and a visible profession is visible
also.

9. I say, that I am not at all satisfied with this Answer; for by his good
leave, the union to Christ which he had explained is an invisible Union; for it
consists in this, that all those who perform the Conditions of the
Gospel Covenant are united to Christ as to their Spous, and this for Mystical
Reasons which I have cited out of him above Chap. 1. N. 96. viz because they are
formed out of Christ's broken Body, as Adam's body was broken, and a rib
taken out of him to form the woman. Which Mystical Marriage, Relation, and
Formation of us out of his broken Body is a thing which we believe and cannot
see. Will Dr. Sherlock pretend to see, that we are Flesh of Christ Flesh and
Bone of his Bone? It is plain, that we see it not any other way than by Faith,
as we see the B. Trinity. On which account the B. Trinity is as visible to
us, as that we are Flesh of Christ's Flesh and Bone of his Bone. No doubt, but
that the Faith whereby we believe the Church to be Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and
Bone of his Bone is visible by by the visible profession of it; but the Object
of this Faith is no more visible than the B. Trinity. Neither can the
visibilitie of this Union be proved from the visibilitie of the Gospel Covenant
etc. there being a great disparitie between the visible Marriage of Man and
Woman and the Mystical Marriage of the Church to Christ. For the Marriage of
Man and Woman becomes visible by the visible expression of the consent of both
parties being visibly present, which is a visible deliverie of them into each
others power so as to unite them into One Flesh. But in the Marriage of the
Church to Christ, although the Covenant which God makes his Church be visible, yet
it is not visible that it is God's Covenant, which is a truth which we believe
only, and cannot see. And although our acceptance of God's Promise and Covenant
be visible by our visible profession of Faith, yet seeing it is not visible that
the Covenant which we call God's is really his, it cannot be visible, that we
are Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and Bone of his Bone. A visible Marriage cannot
result from the visible consent of one of the Parties, when the consent of the
other party is invisible, nay when it is not visible that the other party is
in rerum natura to give any consent, as it happens between the Church and
Christ who is invisible to her; neither has she any other means of knowing that
he is, or that he is God, than what she has from Faith, which (as I have said)
sees not it is Objects to be true, but judges them to be so upon the Authority
of the Revealer.

10. And thus the Argument which the Dr. uses against those who hold the Church
to be the number of the Elect, is turned against himself; for thus he
discourses against them: The internal Grace which makes a Churchmember is
invisible, and therefore Church Members are invisible too, and then I fear (he
may be sure of it) the Church it self must be invisible, if all the Members of
it are invisible; for invisible Members cannot make a visible Society. Which
Argument will serve as well against him as against them; for the Mystical union
which Essentially makes a Churchmember is an invisible Grace, whereof S. Paul
sais ad Ephesians. 5. Marriage is a great Sacrament, Sign, or Mystery; and therefore
Church Members are invisible too, and then the Church it self must be
invisible; for invisible Members cannot make a visible Society.

11. Notwithstanding what has been here said, it cannot be denied, but that the
Church on Earth is united to Christ by Faith in him, by being baptized in his
name, by feeding on the Sacrament of his Body and Blood etc. p. 51. Which
Union, although it be Mystical, may become visible by the visible profession of
Faith, and visible Sacraments, as Faith it self becomes visible by the visible
profession of it. But it does not follow from hence, that the Church is
visible; for this Union signifies no more than an adhaesion of the Church to
Christ by means of Faith, and the Sacraments, as the understanding and will
adhere, and are united to their Objects by their respective Acts, much after
such a manner and in such a sense, as when we say, Anima est magis ubi amat,
quam ubi animat, or that affection makes two souls one. Mahometans may be thus
said to be united to God whom they pretend to obey by following Mahomet, and
Pagans to be united to their Idols, which, S. Paul 1. ad Cor. c. 8. sais are
nothing. Thus likewise the same Apostle 1. ad Cor. c. 6. sais that whoever
cleaves to a harlot becomes one with her, because of the conjunction of their
wills, as well as of their Bodies. This kind of Union is ^ound among Heretics,
and Schismatiques (...) their unsound Faith and disobedience, as well as in the
true Church, although with this difference, that Heretics and Schismatiques reap
no advantage to their souls thereby, whereas it turns to the merit and salvation
of the living Members of Christ's Mystical Body, as it may likewise to the
dead Members of it, if they will use their best endeavors for the same. I say
this Union is not that Mystical Union which knits the Church in Heaven and
Earth together, by which this Author will have the Church on Parth to be
Essentially united to Christ as to it is Spous, but is distinct and of another
nature from it, as is plain; because it does not necessarily suppose, that we
have any special relation to Christ as our last end, or that we are in such a
state wherein our Lord has appointed us to receive the benefit of his death and
Passion, wherein consists the Notion of our Mystical Union to Christ as our
Spous. This is the Mystical Union which I deny to be visible by the
Gospel Covenant, Profession of Faith and the Sacraments, which besides what has
been already said, the following Considerations will make it impossible for
him to prove.

12, For the Union of Christians to Christ by means of the Gospel Covenant,
Profession of Faith, and the Sacraments imports no more, but that the Christian
Religion may be said to make one among the other Religions that are in the
world, as when we say that there are four Religions in the world, the
Christian, Jewish, Mohammedan, and Pagan; from whence we cannot conclude, that
the Church is visible, but only that the men who are said to constitute the
Church, are visible, and that their Religion is visible, which is not the same
thing as to say that the Church is visible, if the only Essential Unity it
has be that whereby it is Mystically united to Christ as to it is Spous. And yet
we Christians intend to say something more than this by the visible Church,
which signifies a visible Body; for we intend, to signify thereby a multitude
of men, who are linked and tied together by such an Unity as Christ has made
Essential to it, and that this Unity is visible. And in case this Notion be
not admitted, we must change our terms, and not say the visible Church but
visible Professors of Christianity, or at best many disjoined Congregations
and Churches who are become One by a voluntary combination among themselves,
which, one would think, this Author should not well like, who p. 29. will have
the Church on Earth to be also one Body and Communion, and this, if I mistake
him not, by Christ's Institution.

13. Neither are we visibly united to Christ by the Obedience which we visibly
profess to pay him. For seeing it is not visible that Christ is, or that he is
God, it cannot be visible that he lays any Commands upon us. And if it be not
visible that he lays any Commands upon us, it cannot be visible that we obey
him. And if it be not visible that we obey him, it cannot be visible that we
are united to him by the Obedience whlch we prosesse to pay him. Our Faith is
all the evidence we have that he is, or that he is God, and therefore our
Obedience to him cannot bear a greater evidence than the Act of the
Understanding whereby we apprehend him to be, which being obscure, and far from
enabling us to see that he is, the Obedience we pay him must by consequence be
far from being visible. As we believe him to be, so we believe that we obey him
by the performance of those Commands which we believe to be his. And it it
impossible that we should have a greater evidence that we obey him, than we
have that he is, because every Act of our Obedience supposes only the evidence
of our Faith that he is. No doubt, but men visibly perform those Commands
which they believe to be Christ's, but if it be not visible that Christ is, it
cannot be visible that they are his Commands, and if it be not visible that
they are his Commands, it cannot be visible that they obey him by the
performance of them.

14. The Church therefore is invisible, if it is Visibilitie must be taken from
Obedience to Christ's Commands. And it stands to reason that it should be so,
because Christ who is Invisible is a necessary Principle of it is Visibilitie.
The Visible Church is a Visible Body. And who can comprehend a Visible Body,
when the only Power which makes it a Body by commanding over it is Invisible.
A visible Power and visible Obedience the things that constitute a Visible
Body, and when either of them are wanting, we are to seck for a Visible Body.
Will Dr. Sherlock say, that there can be a Visible King whose subjects are
Invisible? It is evidently ridiculous; for the man may be Visible, but his
Kingship is not so. For as a King in the Notion of it imports one who has Power
over many, so a Visible King imports one who has Power over many who are
Visible, How then can be say, that the Church is a Visible Body, and a Visible
Kingdom, when the subjects are only Visible, and the Commanding Power is
Invisible? As a King in the Notion of it (...) one who has Power over many, so
the subjects of a Kingdom import many who are under one. And as a Visible King
imports one who has Power over many who are also Visible, so the Visible
subjects of a Kingdom import many who are under the Power of one Visible Man.
King and Subjects, Head and (...) are Relations, and Relations require the
Coexistence of such Considerations as found the Relation that is between their
Correlates and them, as is plain; for a Father ceases to be a Visible Father
whose Son ceases to be Visible by a translation into a state of Invisibilitie.

15. No such absurdities as these ensue upon our Doctrine, who do not hold the
Church to be Visible by a Visible Union to Christ, whether this be ^ but by a
Visible profession of that Faith which she believes to have been taught by
Christ, and by a Visible Obedience to such Pastors as she believes he has set
over her, by which means she is knit and compacted together, as much as any
Civil Body or Society; and we may in all rigor of speech say that she is
Visible, because the visible profession of Faith and Obedience to her Pastors
makes her in our way to be a Visible Church, and is no less Essential to her
during her Pilgrimage on Earth than her Mystical Union to Christ as her Spous.
Thus the Visibilitie of the Church is it is own proof, and is so plain that
Infidels may see it, because it is the Object of their senses. I say that
Infidels see the Church although they do not believe it, because Christ has
appointed that it shall essentially be as they see it is, and has truly taught
her that Faith which she believes to have received from him, and has truly
commanded her to obey those Pastors whom she believes that he has set over her.
For which reason Infidels do not see the Church when they see true Christians,
if Christ has made their only Essential unity Invisible. Neither do they see
the Church when they see Heretics and Schismatiques, and are acquainted with
their Faith and Obedience, because Christ is not the Author of their Faith,
neither has he ordained them any Governors to continue them in their
separation from the One Church Matters ching judgment in nature whether of
Christians, or Infidels, cannot comprehend how an Union to Christ which is, as
we have seen, Invisible, can make the Church a Visible Body; or how a visible
Obedience can be paid to an Invisible Commanding Power, of whose existence and
Commands those who are said to obey, have no other certainty than by Faith.

16. Besides this sensible Visibilitie, the Church may be likewise said to have
a Rational Visibilitie (if I may have leave to call it so), which arises from
the many and supernatural Motives which make her Authority and Doctrins
evidently Credible, by means whereof Infidels are induced to approve of what
they see, and to unite themselves to the Church by embracing her Faith, and
submitting to her Pastors. We cannot say, that Heretics and Schismatiques are
Visible Churches in this sense neither; for although we see their profession of
Faith, and Obedience to their Pastors, yet by reason we do not see that they
have any Motives of Credibilitie to recommend their Faith and Obedience to our
veneration, we cannot see, that is, we cannot conclude that they are true
Christian Churches. Both which senses of the Church's Visibilitie are commonly
joined by our Divines into one when they speak of the Visible Church, as they
are also in the H. Scriptures. We are easily taught by this way how to
distinguish the Visible Church from Heretics and Schismatiques, which the Dr.
will never be able to effect with all his skill; for how can he pretend to make
a Visible distinction between them, when the Church which is to be
distinguished is, as we have seen, essentially Invisible?

17. But let us suppose now, that he has made out the sensible Visibilitie of
the Church by what he has said in it is defense, yet we shall find, that he is
never the nearer distinguishing of it from Heretics and Schismatiques by the
pretense of Obedience to Christ, if we suppose a great truth, that Obedience to
Christ's Commands has a necessary and essential respect to the meaning which
Christ will have his Commands to be taken in. For in this Hypothesis, if it be
certain (as who can doubt of it?) that the different Bodies of Christians who
are now in the world, put different constructions on Christ's Command's in
Scripture, it necessarily follows, that they are not all of them Christ's
Visible Church, because there is among some of them a notorious Disobedience to
him by not performing his Commands in his own way. I suppose Dr. Sherlock will
aggree with me thus far, especially if any of these Bodies are said to be
Guilty of a Fundamental Disobedience by a Fundamental misconstruction of any
of his Commands. Now seeing Christ's Church is to be found among these Bodies,
which way are we to come to the knowledge of it? This must be done either by
extrinsecal Motives which may give to one or more of them a preference before
the rest, and found an evident Credibilitie that they are Obedient to Christ;
or else by an examination of their Faith and Practices by such intrinsique
Arguments as are drawn from the Text by every one's private reason to prove the
meaning of Christ's Commands. If the trial be made by (...) Motives, the Dr.
must own the Church to be Invisible, that is, not to be distinguisheble from
Heretics and Schismatiques, because he is destitute of any such Motives, for
which reason he lays no claim to them. If it be made by an examination of their
Faith and Practices by Intrinsique Arguments, he must likewise grant that it is
Invisible after the same manner too, because although all those Bodies of
Christians who are Obedient to Christ's Commands are Visible, and such Doctrins
and Practices of theirs whereby they really obey him are Visible too, yet seeing
there can be no certainty in the Protestant way, that they really obey him by
such their Doctrins and Practices, they cannot be Christ's Visible Church so as
to be (...) from Heretics and Schismatiques, no more than those who really
disobey him by their Faith and Practices. And here enters the common saying De
non apparentibus and non (...) eadem est ratio.

18. If any one tell me, that among an hundred Persons there is one who is my
special friend, and all the ^ rer knowing who the person is who bears me such a
kindness, unless he point him out to me? If any one (...) me, that as I walked
in the field, (...) saw a place where there lay hid a great (...) am I ever the
like to be the richer for such a (...), unless (...) lead me to the place, and
tell me where I am to dig? I know that my friend is one among the hundred whom
I see, and yet I see not my friend, because although I see them all, yet I know not
which is he. I am well acquainted with the whole compass of the ground where
the treasure lies, and yet I am not acquainted with the place so as to say this
is it. The same-happens at (...) in the case before us. I am well assured, that
Christ Church is to be found among the (...) Bodies of Christians that are in
the world And yet the Drs. Principles make it impossible to say, that this or
that Body is it. For seeing the certainty we have of discovering which is it,
must depend upon the certainty we have which Body, or Bodies are obedient to
Christ's Commands, we cannot be certain which is Christ's Church, till we are
certain which Bodies are Obedient to Christ's Commands. And what Principle has
the Dr. to afford this certainty? He must necessarily grant, that these
disagreeing Bodies are equally concerned to find out the true meaning of
Christ's Commands delivered in Scripture, and that they are equal in their
natural capacities, and helps of industry in order to the attaining of it.
Which Consideration effectually proves, that no one can be certain in the
Protestant way, which Body, or Bodies pay a real Obedience to Christ's
Commands. For how can any one be certain, that his judgment is in the right in
a matter wherein he is contradicted by an hundred persons as intelligent as
himself, who are thoroughly possessed with his reasons, who are fitly qualified
to understand the force of them, who are equally concerned and interessed not
to be mistaken in them, and of whom he has all the reason in the world to
conclude, that they would most heartily and readily change their sentiments to
his, if they could see that he had reason on his side.

19. I may chance to show the uncertaintie of the private interpretations of
Scripture more forcibly by the following familiar example, than by the most
pressing Metaphysical reasons. Let us suppose, that Dr. Sherlock has a friend
of whom he is fully persuaded by his long acquaintance with him, and
unquestionable experience, that he has as good eyes as himself to discover an
Object of an equal distance from them both. Let us suppose likewise, that this
friend of his and he together in the fields perceive a far off an Object, of
which there starts a dispute what it is, the Dr. affirming it to be a house,
and his friend maintaining it to be a tree. The Dr. gives his friend his
reasons why it should be a house which he disallows: and his friend gives him
his why it should be a tree, wherewith he remains as little satisfied. It would
be a strange presumption, if the Dr. in this Hypothesis should pretend to
certainty, that what he sees is a house and not a tree, when he is evidently
certain that his friends judgment in the case is as good as his own. Which
consideration alone may well make him apprehensive lest he be mistaken, but if
we add to this the distance of the Object from his sight, what he affirms must
needs be uncertain in the highest degree, so that no man of sense would venture
to lay upon the truth of it any thing that he is unwilling otherwise to part
withal.

20. The case is exactly the same at present (according to the Principles of
Protestants) between the several Bodies of Christians, who differ about their
interpretations of Scripture. I will put it between the Church of England and
the Arians, and the same may serve between the Church of England and any of the
other disunited Bodies. These two Bodies have both equal qualifications to
attain the true meaning of Scripture, which is a truth so plain and
incontestable, that the bare proposal of it is a proof sufficient. They both
read in the H. Scripture these words My Father and I are One, and it is
acknowledged on both sides that such words are evidently to be seen there; just
as the Dr. and his friend aggree in this, that they evidently see a bulkie
appearance at a distance from them in the fields. But they differ concerning
the meaning of these words, whether they signify that our Lord and his Father
are One in Nature, or affection? The Church of England affirms the first, and
the Arians the latter only, after the same manner as the Dr. and his friend
dispute, whether the bulkie appearance which they see in the fields be a house,
or a tree? For seeing the meaning of those words is to be deduced by a long
train of consequences, hence it is, that the Truth wants a sufficient
approximation and application to determine their judgments both one way; as the
reason why the Dr. and his friend cannot aggree, whether what they discover be
a house, or a tree is, because they are at too great a distance to discern
evidently those connatural qualities and Accidents of the Object, which being
once perfectly seen would quickly remove all occasions of dispute, and make
them both aggree in the same sentence. The Church of England gives her reasons
why these words My Father and I are One ought to be understood so as to denote
their Unity in Nature, as the Dr. gives his friend his reasons, why he judges
that which he sees to be a house: and the Arians after a mature consideration
of all that she brings to make good this interpretation, return a peremptory
Answer to every particular, and contend, that those words signify only an
Unity of Assection, as the Drs. friend being dissatisfied with his reason why
he judges that which he sees to be a house, gives him an account of his, why he
judges it to be a tree.

21. What grounds for certainty can the Dr. discover in this contest, that the
Church of England puts a truer construction on the aforesaid Text than the
Arians? It would be mere folly forhim in the dispute which he has with his
friend to pretend certainty that what he sees is a house, and not a tree. How
the^ can he pretend to any such thing in behalf of the Church of England
against the Arians? That which makes the pretense to certainty unreasonable in
the first case is, because his friend is evidently as competent a judge in the
debate as himself, which is an indisputable reason why he ought to adjudge a
likelihood of truth to his sentence, and by consequence uncertaintie to his
own. And seeing in the case which I have put between the Church of England and
the Arians, both parties must be acknowledged to be equally capable of finding
out the true sense of the aforesaid Text, it must needs be no less
unreasonable to pretend to certainty, that the Church of England takes them in
the right sense, as tho it were a matter as plain as that there is such a place
as Rome, or that there were no dispute about it amongst any who are called
Christians. For seeing experience teaches us, that when ever there occur
contradictorie reasons to persuade the truth, or falsehood of any matter, the
understanding (so long as these reasons continue of equal force) is necessarily
reduced to a state of suspense, it must needs be a great levitie in any one to
pretend certainty, that he does not actually err by adhering to a Doctrine,
about which two parties of equal Authority and judgment are at variance.

22. It is not enough that men can find a solution to such Objections as are
brought against their interpretations of Scripture, or that they meet with
nothing which causes any doubt or unquietness in their minds, or that in
debates about Religion they always judge that they come off Conquerours. All
which may be ascribed to their passion, or prejudice, and to the dullness as
(...) as to the acuteness of their judgment. And the certainty which results
from this their seeming (...) bears no advantage over the certainty (...)
Disputants in Philosophy, whom we see every day in the Schools to defend with
the greatest (...) imaginable their respective Conclusions, without any actual
doubt that what they affirm is true nimbly solving, distinguishing, and
exposing to public view the insoliditie of any (...) that are brought against
them. And yet when (...) dispute is over, if you ask them whether they (...)
certain, that their Conclusions are true? They will tell you, No; but only,
that they are (...) persuaded they are so. They will confess to you that they
want an evident Principle to ground (...) on, and that seeing their Conclusions
(...) posed by men of great parts and learning, who aspire after the truth as
much as themselves, all that they have said must needs fall short of certainty,
and may for this reason be all false. Now the (...) which Protestants pretend
to in behalf of their Doctrins is exactly of the same nature, they being as
destiture of any certain Principle to prove, that their interpretations of
Scripture contain the true meaning of the H. Ghost, as any Philosopher is of a
Demonstration to sustain a disputable Thesis out of Aristotle. And so seeing
every Conclusion becomes disputable for want of evidence to clear it is Truth,
or to manifest it is falsenesse, after they have strengthened their
interpretations of Scripture with all the plausibilities they can devise, there
will still remain room sufficient for their learned Adversaries to thwart their
judgments. And where there is a reasonable ground for dispute, truth is always
at the bottom uncertain.

23. That which induces Protestants to pretend, that they have attained the
true meaning of Scripture by their private reason is certain discourses which
look like Probabilities, and likely hoods of truth, which may stand as well on
the one side as the other, and which may be sufficient to make their favorers
stiff in their defense, but not to put the matter out of doubt. I make no
question, but men of very excellent natural parts adhere sometimes so firmly to
these Probabilities, that they have no actual doubt of the truth which is
recommended by them, to which no more is required, but that they judge such
Argumens as they bring in their defense to be incomparably stronger than any
that are brought against them: yet the nature of these Probabilities having
uncertaintie annexed unto it as it is unseparable property, cannot afford their
followers so great a Presumption of Truth and certainty as may exclude a
possibility of a reasonable doubt. For the controverted Texts will very often
bear contrary explications, without any necessity that either side should
pass with the other for fools or mad men for defending that explication which
they judge to be true. So that neither of them is able to say of their Opinion,
I am certain that this is the meaning of the H. Ghost. The utmost they can say
upon the matter is, I am verily persuaded, that this is the meaning of the H.
Ghost, which does not implie a certainty that it is so (as I could show at
large, were it a proper place) but only such a conviction of mind as arises
upon the sight of Arguments, which a man cannot solue himself to his
satisfaction, and which nevertheless he can not hold for necessary and
concluding, if persons as learned and as intelligent as himself are satisfied
with such solutions as they give them, and remain as fully persuaded of the
truth of their contrary judgments. As certain as these persons pretend to be
of their exposition of Scripture, yet there is no wealthy and prudent man
among them who would hazard all that he has in the world upon a wager without a
greater certainty that he should come off a winner. For what man in his wits
would venture a great estate, and all the conveniences of this life upon the
truth of a matter, which his Opponent is as well able to judge of as himself,
particularly if his Opponent be well acquainted with the reasons which induce
him to lay, and is willing to take him up after a diligent ponderation of them?
So blind are men in the affairs of their souls, if they have not God for their
enlightner?

24. This uncertaintie of interpreting Scripture by private reason shows the
weakness of the grounds whereon Protestants rely for the truth of their Faith,
and obliges them to seek out others that are more strong whereon to build their
salvation. God be thanked they act in the belief of the B. Trinity, and
several other great Articles wherein they aggree with the Catholic Church much
better than their Principles can direct them to, which next to the Divine
Providence, which mercifully guides their understandings, we may ascribe to
education and custom, which having at first received these Doctrins for good,
are ever after importunate advocates for their continuance. What they have long
believed, they have loved a great while; and what they have loved a great
while, they are unwilling to part withal. Any Probability seems of great
moment to a mind that is thus resolved and preengaged, the imagination giving
evidence, when Argumen^t afford none, and any thing passing for certainty when
certainty is much desired.

25. Thus we see that Dr. Sherlock is far from being certain, which Bodies of
Christians puta right interpretation upon Scripture, and by consequence which
Bodies are Obedient to Christ's Commands, and by consequence which Bodies are
Christ's Church; and by consequence he must say, that Christ's Church is as
Invisible in order to our distinguishing of it from Heretics and
Schismatiques, as if it were not in being, or that it were not perceptible to
our senses, notwithstanding that we see their persons, and know their Doctrins
as well as every man does his own. Wherefore if he acknowledge Scripture for the
word of God, he must necessarily take other measures than he has hitherto done,
to show how the Church on on Earth is Visible. And seeing i'ts Visibilitie
cannot be shown from it is sensible and Visible Obedience to Christ, nor from
any certainty that it is interpretations of Christ's Commands are conformable
to his meaning, he will do well to entertain a more fa ourable opinion or our
Motives of Credibilitie, which efficaciously persuade us which is Christ's
Church, and that she teaches nothing but what is Christ's Doctrine and
conformable to Scripture, and that as long as we cleave to her, we cannot fail
of being Obedient to Christ, if not alter a sensible manner as Obedience is the
Object of our senses, yet after a most certain and Rational manner, inasmuch as
it is evidently Credible, that the Obedience which we pay the Church in all she
teaches is the Command of Christ. If he take this course, he will have as great
a certainty, that the Obedience which he pays the Church in all she teaches is
an Obedience to Christ, as he pretends to have, that Scripture (for whose
Authority Protestants allege Motives of Credibilitie) is the word of God.
Whereas if he go his old road, he may prove the Visibilitie of the Church as
long as he pleases, before we think our selves obliged to give any heed to what
he sais, seeing it is Invisibilitie is in his Principles as plain to our Reason,
as any text of Scripture is to our sight.

. 3. Ib. It immediately follows, So that whatever makes a Church a true Church,
makes it a Member of the One Catholic Church.

26. Reply. This deceitful Proposition must be understood so as to signify,
that Faith and Obedience which make a true Visible Church as such, are not the
formal Reason which makes it a member of the One Mystical Body of Christ, but
only the Conditions without which this Fellowship cannot be obtained, as has
been shown already, and shall further appear hereafter.

. 4. Ib. And here comes in what the Apostle makes essential to this One Body,
One Lord, One Faith One Baptism ad Ephesians. 4. which signifies what I said before
being united to Christ in the same Covenant.

27. Reply. This passage comes in here indeed, that is, it belongs to the
Visible Church as such; for Faith is not Essential to the One Body of Christ,
as that includes the Church in Heaven, and the Church on Earth. So that this
Text does not signify formally, that the Church on Earth is Christ's One
Mystical Body, but only that it is One Visible Body by the performance of
what she promised him in the Gospel Covenant, from whence we infer only by
consequence, that she is Christ's Spous and Mystical Body, which was the
favor which our Lord promised her in the same Covenant.

. 5. Ib. For Christ is the One Lord to whom (...) united, the One Faith is the
Condition of this Covenant, and the One Baptism is the Faederal (...) of it,
or the Sacrament of our union to Christ.

28. Reply. From hence appears the reasonableness of the last Reply; for he
grants expressly, that Faith is the Condition of the Gospel Covenant, and we
may presume his meaning to be, that it is no more than a Condition, because he
makes a distinction between it and our Union to Christ. It may be observed
likewise, that if Baptism be the Sacrament of our union to Christ as we are
his Spous and Body, our Union to him must be an Invisible Grace, which cannot
be the formal Reason that makes us Members of the Visible Church as such.

. 6. Ib. Where this is not there is no Church, and where this is, there is but
One Church, how many particular Churches, or distinct Communions soever this
Church is divided into.

29. Reply. There is but One Church where there is One Eaptisme, One Faith,
and One and the same Authority derived from the One Lord. But if particular
Churches differ in Faith, and claim each of them, or many of them together an
Authority to censure, and deprive their neighbors of Christ's Sacraments on
the account of their disagreement in matters of Faith, there is not one Faith,
nor One and the same Authority derived from the One Lord. For if the Faith
were One amongst them all, there would be no disagreement about it; and if
there were One and the same Authority derived from the One Lord, it could not
excommunicate the opposers of any more than of One Faith. Wherefore these
particular Churches cannot make One Church; but are so many absolutely
distinct Churches and Communions.

. 7. Ib. From hence it is evident, that there never can be more than One Church
in the world: for those Nominal Churches which have not the same Baptism are
no Churches, and all that have are but One.

30. Reply. All this is very true, and confirms what I said last.

. 8. P. 31. Which makes it a ridiculous Triumpl^ in the Church of Rome, as if
we Protestants did not believe One Catholic Church, or could not tell where to
find it, when we profess to believe One Church, and that all true Churches are
Members of this One Church.

31. Reply. It is a much more ridiculous Triumph in you, Sr. to conclude from
any thing which you have hithertho said, that you know where to find the
Catholic Church. For although I should grant you, that the only Essential
Unity of the Church on Earth consist's in it is Mystical Union to Christ
whereby it is likewise united to the Church in Heaven, yet this concession
cannot enable you to find it out, or to tell me which is it, unless you can
satisfy me, which those Christians and Churches are, who have One Lord, One
Faith, One Baptism. For seeing the Mystical Union of the Church to Christ is an
Invisible Grace, and consequent to the performance of the Conditions of the
Gospel Covenant which are signified by One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, you
ought to have shown us, which those Christians are who have performed these
Conditions before you can prove them to be Christ's Mystical Body, which is a
matter that cannot be known otherwise, than by knowing that they have performed
the said Conditions. This is a thing which (...) ought to have done in the
first place, and this was required of you by the nature of the thing, and till
this be done, Christ's Mystical Body hangs in the air, and is too far removed
out of our sight to say This is it; and as soon as this is done, there is
nothing more easy, than to point out the Nations and Churches whereof it is
composed. The only Essence of a true Church is to be united to Christ as to
it is Spous. Suppose this. But how shall we know when a Church is Mystically
united to Christ? By the performance of the Conditions of the Gospel Covenant.
And how shall we know when a Church has performed the Conditions of the
Gospel Covenant? Not one word of this.

32, But seeing it is such an easy thing to find out the Catholic Church in
your way, let us come to a trial of it, and make use of names by descending to
a particular consideration of some Bodies of Christians. You say that
Roman-Catholiques and Protestants are both of them in Covenant with Christ, and
by consequence that they are both of them Members of Christ's Mystical Body;
for which reason you conclude, that they are both Members of the Catholic
Church upon Earth. I confess that this is a very expedit way to find out the
Catholic Church. But how will you prove, that both these Bodies are in
Covenant with Christ, and Members of his Mystical Body? You can effect this no
otherwise, than by showing that they perform alike the Conditions of the
Gospel Covenant, which you will find by experience to be a hard task. For we
Catholics believe, that the Lord to whom we are Mystically united, neither
has given, nor can give to the Protestant Churches that Power and Authority
which they challenge to excommunicate us on the account of any Doctrins which
we profess. In like manner you Protestants hold, that the Lord to whom you
believe you are Mystically united, neither has given, nor can give to our
Church that Power and Authority which she challenges to exclude you from the
use of the Sacraments on the account of any Doctrine which you profess. From
which contradictorie judgments of Catholics and Protestants we may gather 1.
either that there are two Lords; or 2. that the One Lord contradicts himself
by two inincompatible Authorities, which Catholics and Protestants pretend to
have over each other in the aforesaid cases, Or 3. that at least one of these
Churches is a 1. ad Cor. cap. 15. v 15.
false witness of the one Lord by fathering an Authority on him which it
never received. Say which of these you pleas, it follows, that both these
Churches cannot be Mystically One with Christ; and if they are not Mystically
One with Christ, they cannot be the Catholic Church, nor parts of it

33. If you say the first, it is plain, that they cannot be both Mystically One
with Christ, because Christ is one Lord. If you say the 2. it is evident, that
they are Mystically One and not Mystically One, because Christ the one Lord to
whom they believe they are Mystically united is himself One and not One, in as
much as he is imperfect by contradicting himself. If you say the 3. it is
evident likewise, that they cannot be both Mystically One, because at least that
Church which fathers a lie on the one Lord cannot be Mystically united to him
as it is Spous and Head, because the one Lord is the Lord of Truth.

34. As these two Churches are not One by being both united to One and the same
Lord, so neither are they One by One and the same Faith, because you condemn
many Doctrins for false, which we believe to have been revealed by Christ. And
as they are not One by professing One and the same Faith, so neither are they
One by One and the same Sacraments, since we acknowledge five more than you
receive. Indeed they have both one Baptism which you style the Faederal Rite
of the Gospel Covenant, but then the Church of Rome holds, that the others
Sacraments which you disown, are Faederal Rites of the Gospel-covenaot as well
as Baptism, as often as they are received by the Faithful. We do not deny,
but that Baptism is by Institution the first, and most principal, and most
universally necessary among these Faederal Rites considered as such, and that
the other Sacraments are not so significant to express our Mystical Union to
Christ as our Spous as Baptism is both in it self: and in all it is
circumstantial Ceremonies, yet they all of them by Institution Represent the
Passion of our Lord, which is the Meritorious Cause of that Relation which we
have to him as to our Spous, and are all of them so many solemn renewings and
repetitions of the Gospel-covenaut which passed between God and man in
Baptism, as being so many Protestations of Faith and Obedience to our
Ecclesiastical Superiors without which no man can have a right to receive them.

35. Who now has reason to Triumph, Sr. You who pretend without any ground,
that you can tell where to find the Catholic Church, or we who prove that you
know nothing of the matter? You say that those are the Catholic Church who
are Mystically united to Christ as their Spous. I say so too, but I show
withal, that you cannot tell who those are who are thus Mystically One with
Christ, of which I have given you an instance in Catholics and Protestants,
whom you hold to be both Mystically One with Christ; and yet I have proved,
that they are not Mystically One with One another by means of the
Gospel Covenant, by which you say they are both Mystically One with Christ. For
both these Churches cannot be united to the one Lord. One and the same Faith
which you hold for a necessary Condition of the Gospel Covenant, is not common
to them both, neither have they One and the same Faederal Rites of the
Covenant, from whence it follows, that they are not One by the same Covenant.
You see that I have used your own terms of Gospel Covenant, Mystical union,
Condition, Faederal Rite etc., and after all you are as far from sinding out
the Catholic Church as ever.

36. If you tell me, that notwithstanding what I have here said, you can show,
that these Churches are both Mystically united to Christ as their Spous, and
with one another, as having one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; I answer, that
when you set your self upon this undertaking, you will find that you want
strength to master all the impossibilities which you will meet withal. But
supposing you were able to perform it with some likelihood of truth, yet seeing
this cannot be done by any such Principles as you have laid in this Discourse,
you must give your Brethren the other Protestant Writers leave to say of you as
you have said of them, that although you have said many good things about the
Notion of the Catholic Church, yet they are verily persuaded, that there will
never be an end of these Wranglings till it be settled, which you have not
thoroughly done yet, because after all you have said, it does not appear from
your Principles which is the Catholic Church, and to the end you may make a
further discovery of it, you are forced to betake your self to such Methods
as you judge to have proved unsuccesseful in your Fellow-writers.

. 9. Ib. For it is plain from this account (that is, if we will admit his
obscure and impertinent Principles to pass for evident and to the purpose)
that although all the Churches in the world were united into one Ecclesiastical
Body, yet this external visible union is not the thing which makes them the
one Body of Christ.

37 Reply. This external visible Union is not the formal Reason which makes
them the one Body of Christ, but only a necessary Condition without which
they cannot be it.

, 10. Ib. They are one Body by being all united to one Mystical Head the Lord
Jesus Christ, not by an external and visible union to each other.

38. Reply. They are one Mystical Body by being united to their Mystical
Head, and one Visible Body by being united to their visible Superiors.

. 11. Ib. This external union is a duty which all Christians and Christian
Churches are bound to observe as far as possibly they can.

39. Reply. Since he owns it for a duty of all Christians to observe this
external Union, he acknowledges it to be Christ's Command that they should do
so, for which there may be alleged places enough out of Scripture. But where
can he show one Text to prove, that they are no longer obliged to this
observance, than they think they can do it with a good conscience; which he
fignifies by saying as long as possibly they can? Or whence will he prove, that
every man's conscience ought to be regulated by his own private reason, without
any regard to the Authority of the Church, which our Savior commands us to
hear under pain of being Heathens? Such places as these (were there any such to
be found) would suit better with the Cause of the Reformation, than the great
secret he has produced that the Church in Heaven and Earth are one Church.

. 12. Ib. But all true Christians and Christian Churches are the one Body of
Christ, whether they be thus visibly united, or not.

40. Reply. Which way shall we know which are true Christians and Christian
Churches? This is a matter above the Drs. reach, who cannot tell us, which is
the Catholic Church. It is most certain that all true Christian Churches are
the one Body of Christ, and it is as certain that no Christians or Christian
Churches can belong to the one Body of Christ, unless they be visibly united
to the rest of the Church, as shall appear from the consideration of what he
sais on the true Notion of the Catholic Church on Earth whose turn comes
next, whither he refers us for the proof of his contrary Assertion. If we
cannot discover where the Catholic Church is in the discussiof this point, we
may for ever despair of coming to the knowledge of it. As for the two orher
Points wherein he promises to make his Assertion good, viz What the Nature and
unity of a particular Church is, and how every particular Church is a part of
that universal Church which is the Body of Christ, and what that unity and
Communion is, which all distinct Churches ought to maintain with each other,
they are reserved for a second Part, which I suppose he will think better on
before he publish, since the principles whereon he must depend for the forming
of it, have already found so great on opposition in this Part which has
already seen light.

. 13. P. 32. Now, sais he, it is evident from what I have already discoursed,
that the true Notion of a Church is Coetus Fidelium, or the Company of the
Faithful, of those who profess the true Faith of Christ, and are united to him
by Baptism.

41. Reply. I wonder from what part of what he has already discoursed we are
to gather this Notion of a Church. I have diligently read over all that he has
writ from the beginning of his Book till this passage which I am now examining,
and cannot find any evident grounds for it. He has told us indeed not long
since chap. 2.. 3. that whatever makes a Church, makes it a Member of the one
Catholic Church, or of the one Body of Christ, after which he sais
immediately, and here comes in what the Apostle makes essential to this one
Body, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, which signisies being united to
Christ in the same Covenant. Which Assertions are far from affording any
evidence of the truth of this Notion in his principles, as appears out of the
Replies which I have made to them. Nay throughout his Discourse I find evident
grounds to infer the contrary. For seeing he will have the Essential Unity of
the Church on Earth to be the Mystical Union whereby the Church in Heaven and
Earth are united in One Body to Christ as to their Spous, this Notion of a
Church must be said to be essentially distinct from it is Essential Unity,
which is a mere Chimera. For the Essential Unity of the Church in Heaven and
Earth does not consist in Faith, as I have said over and over, and shall
declare further herafter. So that Faith in the Drs. way does not so much as
belong to the Notion of a Church, because it is Essential Unity does not consist
therein. The Dr. seems to have forgotten, that the Notion of a thing is a really
indistinct from it is Essential Unity, which is universally true of all beings
as they fall under a Metaphyfical consideration, and without doubt it takes
place in Moral Bodies (such as the Church is), which are nothing else but
united multitudes. For that which unites them together makes them a Body, and
that which makes them a Body is their Notion, therefore that which unites them
together is their Notion.

42. The occasion of this monstrous absurdity is the Drs. not allowing the
Church on Earth to be as Essentially a Visible Body as it is Christ's Mystical
Body, which being once admitted, there is no fear, that the Notion of a Church
will run counter to it is Essential Unity, or that Faith does not belong to the
Notion of it. For as has two Unities Essentially distinct, so it has two
Notions Essentially distinct. As it is Mystically One, it is Essential Unity
consists in the Special Relation, which all those have to Cbrist as their last
end, who have not retracted their acceptance of the Graces and favors which he
promised them, through their renouncing the necessary Conditions which he
required of them, and which they promised to perform at what time the
Gospel Covenant passed between them, wherein consists also the Mystical Union of
the Church in Heaven to her beloved, and the Notition of them both as they are
Christ's Mystical Body, as I have said above Chapter 1. N. 102. and seq. And as it
is Visibly One, it is Unity consists in the actual performance of the
Conditions which God required from her, when he promised her his Son for Spous
in Baptism, wherein it is Notion also consists as it is a Visible Body. So
that although the Church in Heaven and the Church on Earth are both Mystically One
with Christ, as being both Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, under
which consideration they have both the same common Notion: yet seeing the actual
performance of the Conditions of the Gospel-covanant is absolutely necessary,
to the end the Church on Earth may be Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and Bone of bis
Bone, from which Conditions the Church in Heaven is exempted, hence it is, that
the Mystical Body of Christ as it abstracts from both these states resembles a
Genus, and the actual performance of the aforesaid Conditions is in the nature
of a Difference, whereby that part of Christ's Body which is Militant on Earth
is distinguished from the other part which is Triumphant in Heaven. This is
clear; for if I tell Dr. Sherlock, that Titius is a Member of Christ's Mystical
Body, he cannot conclude from these terms, whether Titius be in Heaven, or on
Earth. But if I tell him, that Titius is Orthodox in his Faith, and Obedient to
his Ecclesiastical Superiors, it is evident that I mean him to be a Member of
Christ's Mystical Body upon Earth. If therefore that part of Christ's Mystical
Body which is upon Earth have a special Difference, whereby it is
distinguished from the other part which is in Heaven, it must by consequence
have a special and distinct Notion from it too.

43. If the Dr. will admit of these two sorts of U^tie, I shall easily grant
him, that Faith belongs to the Notion of a Church on Earth, but if he will
persist in his pretense that this follows from what he has already discoursed
in this Chapter, or from what he has said in the first Chapter concerning the
Essential Unity of the Church in Heaven and Earth, to the end his Doctrine may
seem all of a piece, and to hang by the same thread, I must beg his pardon if I
dissent from him herin for the reason given, notwithstanding that he quote S.
Paul for one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. The Church on Earth is more
beholding to those Protestants, whom he accuses of being ignorant that the
Church in Heaven and Earth are One Body, than it is to him who values himself
upon the discovery of it. For these Gentlemen seem to grant, that the Church
on Earth is Essentially One at it is a Visible Body, and persuant to this
Principle, they affirm that it is Essential Unity consists in the profession
of the same Fundamental Faith; from whence it follows, that Faith belongs to
the Notion of it. But this Author is so fond of his New Truth, that he has no
regard for the Old one, and whilst he establishes the Essential Unity of the
whole Church in Heaven and Earth, he leaves the Church on Earth without a
Notion. What my thoughts are concerning this Notion of a Church shall appear
below.

44. Perhaps some Readers (amongst whom the Dr. may chance to be one) will
cavil at my saying, that the Mystical Body of Christ resembles a Genus, as tho
Christ had more Spouses and Bodies than one.

45. To which I answer, that no such absurdity as this follows from my
Doctrine; for I mean only that the states and conditions of the Church
Triumphant and the Church Militant, whereof Christ's Mystical Body is composed,
are specially and Essentially distinct, which I believe this Author will
hardly deny. Neither can there be any greater inconvenience in this manner of
speech, than there is in saying, that Man is a Genus in respect of innocent and
sinful, rich and poor, happy and miserable persons; from whence it cannot be
inferred, that an innocent man is Essentially distinct from a sinner, or a rich
man from a poor man, but only that innocence and sinfulness, riches, and
poverty, which are extrinsecal to the nature of Man, are Essentially distinct.
Thus it happens at present; for neither Invisibilitie nor Visibilitie, nor the
Vision of God nor Faith belong to the Notion of Christ's Mystical Body as
such, as is plain; because that part of it which is in Heaven is Invisible and
without Faith, and the other part which is on Earth is Visible and without the
Vision of God. The one part is innocent, rich, and happy, and the other part
is sinful, poor, and afflicted, but for all this difference in their
circumstances, they make no more than One Mystical Spous and Body of Christ.
Neither can it follow, because they have distinct Notions as they are thus
considered under their different circumstances, that therefore they are not the
One Spous of Christ, as it does not follow, that the Nature and Notion of Man
is not One, because as Man is considered in relation to his riches and poverty,
happiness and misery, he is capable of distinct Notions. This is all that I
mean by saying, that Christ's Mystical Body resemble a Genus in respect of the
Invisible Church in Heaven, and the Visible Church on Earth whereof it is
composed. If I had held the Church on Earth to be Christ's Mystical Body
inasmuch as it is Visible, no doubt, but Christ would have had more Spouses and
Bodies than One; but I hold, that Faith and Obedience which make it Visible,
are not the formal Reason why it is Christ's Mystical Body, but only the
necessary Conditions without which she cannot be it. And therefore let Dr.
Sherlock, who will have Faith to be the formal Reason which makes the Church on
Earth to be Christ's Mystical Body, make out how Christ has not two Spouses
and two Bodies in his way, seeing the same formal Reason which makes the Church
on Earth Christ's Mystical Body, cannot produce the like effect in the Church
in Heaven which wants Faith.

. 14. Ib. There can be no other Notion of the universal Church in Heaven and
Earth, but the whole Company of the Faithful, who are united to Christ by
Covenant, and are his Mystical Body in the sense above explained.

46. Reply. This Proposition is delivered with such a Magisterial
peremptorinesse, that (considering the small grounds he has for it) it seems to
have been the result of many a tedious and perplexing thought, which he might
have well spared, if he had reflected on the aforesaid Special Relation which
the Church in Heaven and Earth have to Christ as their last end, which as it
(...) them both in One Mystical Body, so it is their Notion. This Notion of
the Universal Church in Heaven and Earth is so apparently false, that I cannot
but wonder, how he came to venture his credit so far as to submit it to the
censure of the public. For Faith, as I lately said, does not belong to the
Notion of Christ's Mystical Body as such, because de facto the most Illustrious
part of it which is in Heaven has no Faith at all, as neither will any of it is
Members have after end, and conflragration of this world. And certainly nothing
can belong to the Notion of a thing without which a thing is and may be.
Besides, he has told us more than once, that the Unity of the whole Church in
Heaven and Earth ought not to be placed in any thing that can concern only a
part of it, and after all he makes Faith which concerns only the Church on
Earth to belong to the Notion of the Universal Church in Heaven and Earth. I am
much mistaken if this be the way to put an end to wranglings.

. 15. Ib. And if the universal Church in Heaven and Earth be the whole Company
of the Faithful, the Catholic Church on Earth must be the whole number of
the Faithful on Earth.

47. Reply. The only Difference we find here between the Church in Heaven and
the Church on Earth is, that the one is in Heaven and the other on Earth, as
tho Faith which is said to make them One Church were professed in Heaven, as
well as on Earth.

. 16. P. 33. The learned Launoy has produced various Texts of Scripture for
this Definition of a Church, that it is the Company of the Faithful; and has
proved by the Testimony of the Fathers in all Ages, even down to the Council
of Trent it self, that this was the received Notion of the Church, tillit was
altered by Canisius and Bellarmin. Canisius puts Christ's Vicar intothe
Definition; that the Church is the visible Collection of all baptized Believers
under one Head Christ in Heaven and his Vicar on Earth, which makes the Church
a Monarchy. Bellarmin desines the Church to be a Company of men united
together by the same Christian Faith, and the Communion of the same Sacraments
under the government of lawful Pastors, but chiefly of the Bishop of Rome as
the one Vicar of Christ on Earth, which makes the Church a kind of mixed, and
tempered Monarchy; the goment of Bishops, and the Pope as supreme Pastor.

48. Reply. It would have been much more to the purpose, if he had produced
some Testimonies to prove, that the Church in Heaven and Earth are the whole
Company of the Faithful, than to cite Authors to show, that this Notion
aggrees to the Church on Earth. But because he was not able to prove what he was
sure would be disputed, he wisely proves what is willingly granted him. Whoever
denied this Notion? We have no exception against it is falsenesse. We know very
well that it is every where to be seen in the Fathers of the Church, and we read
it in the Catechism of the Council of Trent set out by Pius V. But he must
know, that every true Notion of a thing is not a good one, because every true
Notion is not a complete one. We often express our Notion of things by
something that is Essential to them, and omit other properties that are no
less necessary to their being than those we mention. In which case the
consequence will not hold either that our Notion is false, or that those
properties we omit do not necessarily appertain to the things defined. Thus S.
Paul ad Ephesians. 4. takes the Notion of the Church from it is Pastors. He gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the Body of Christ; and ad Philip. 1. from the Pastors and People, To all the
Saints which are at Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons; and 1. ad Cor. 1.
From it is Sanctity and universalitie, unto the Church which is at Corinth, to
them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours;
and ad Ephesians. 1. from it is Sanctity and Faith, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ
by the will of God to the Saints that are at Ephesus, and the Faithful in
Christ Jesus; and ad Ephesians. 5. from it is Mystical Union to Christ, We are Members
of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; and 1, ad Tim. 3. from it is
Infallibility, ^he Church is the ground and Pillar of Truth. Thus likewise the
same Apostle takes the Notion of Faith from it is inevidence and obscurity,
Faith is the evidence of things that do not appear, ad Heb. cap. 11. And the
like examples may be produced from several other places of Scripture. All which
Notions are true, but not complete, that is, they are not good Notions in a
Logical sense, because they do not explain the Nature of the thing according to
such considerations as make it aggree with some things, and disagree with all
others, or as Logicians say, they do not explain it by Genus proximum and
differentiam ultimam.

49. And this is the defect which we find in the present Notion of the
Catholic Church. For Schismatiques and Excommunicated persons may be
baptized, and have as good Faith as Catholics, and yet there is nothing more
certain, than that they are not comprehended under the Notion of the Catholic
Church. The reason of which inconvenience is, because Obedience to our
Ecclesiastical Superiors in not placed therein which would have distinguished
the Church from all those who are cut off from it is Communion. There is no
Definition will pass muster in the Schools which has such a well grounded
exception as this brought against it: And certainly there ought to be greater
heed taken about a Notion that immediately regards our H. Religion, where the
error will prove of a much more dangerous consequence, than a natural mistake
in an unnecessarie matter. If you say, that that the Catholic Church as such
has no Authority, and that therefore it is not necessary to make Obedience
any part of it is Definition; I answer, that the contrary shall appear below.
28.

50. Neither are Schismatiks only and Excommunicated persons comprehended
under this Notion, but Heretics also. For although this Author P. 32. would have
us to understand by Faithful no others than such as profess the true Faith in
Christ, and are united to him by Baptism, yet what Heretic is there who
allows of Baptism and a Catholic Church, that will not admit of this Notion
of it? Arians, Sabellians, Nestorians, and the most enormous sects in the world
who pretend to believe in Christ judge their own Faith to be true, for which
reason they are in Dr. Sherlock's way comprised in the Definition of the
Catholic Church. For in his judgment particular Churches, nay individual
Christians are the proper and lawful judges for themselves, what Doctrins they
ought to receive, and what to reject. See what he sais below. 22. n. 138. So
that supposing there be no common and irrefragable Rule of Faith which all
Christians ought to conform to in such debates as arise about the meaning of
Scripture, that must be held for true Faith which particular Churches and
individual Christians hold for such, how opposite and contradictorie soever
their sentiments are about it. For how dares Dr. Sherlock to censure any one's
Faith for false, which is declared to be true by the proper and lawful Judge
thereof? whence if follows, that the true Faith which is placed in the Notion of
the Catholic Church signifies a contradictorie Faith, and by consequence when
he pretends to define the Catholic Church by the whole number of the Faithful
who profess the true Faith of Christ, and are united to him by Baptism, the
meaning of it is; that it is the whole number of those who profess the
contradictorie Faith of Christ, and are united to him by Baptism.

51. I say this absurdity evidently follows, supposing the Notion he has given
be designed to serve for the Catholic Church, as that is said to be One Body
resulting from many different Communions, who are at variance about matters of
Doctrine, and the Interpretation of the H. Scriptures. For the Faith of the
Catholic Church in this way is not One but manifold and contradictorie, and
by consequence the true Faith which is placed in the Notion of the Catholic
Church is contradictorie too. For although the Faith of particular Bodies of
Christians, and of individual persons who may be said to compose the Catholic
Church is not contradictorie, yet the Faith of the Catholic Church as such,
and as it is One Body (under which consideration this Notion is given to it)
must needs be contradictorie, because the Faith of all the parts together is
contradictorie by reason of their contradictorie interpretations of the H.
Scriptures.

52. But in case this Notion relates only to One Body of Christians who
profess one and the same Faith, and are of one denomination, the aforesaid
absurdity does not follow, buth then there follows another which is not less
than that, viz that Protestants alone for example are the Catholic Church, as
being the whole number of those who profess the true Faith in Christ, and are
united to him in Baptism, unless he be so just as to assign us this
Prerogative to whom of right it is due, or so good natured as to exclude
Protestants by allowing it to some other Body who has no more right to it than
they. We may with very good reason ask them, where their Church was before
Luther, if there were none before that false Apostle who professed the true
Faith of Christ. And if there were any such Professors, it will be a hard task
to prove that Protestants are the Catholic Church, or that they are so much
as parts of it, unless they associate themselves to such Christians as
professed the true Faith before the first Reformers appearance in the world, by
which means the true Faith of the Catholic Church will be, as I have said,
contradictorie.

53. If the Dr. to salve these Absurdities have recourse to the usual Refuge of
Fundamental and Non-fundamental Faith, and say that by true Faith which he has
put into the Notion of the Catholic Church, he understands Fundamental Faith
wherein every part of the Church necessarily aggrees; I Answer, that this will
not serve his turn, unless he make us know, what those Points are which he
calls Fundamental Faith; for how can we know what the Church is, without
knowing the Fundamental Faith which makes the Church? Neither is it enough for
him to tell us, what the Fundamental Faith is, unless every part and Body of
the Catholic Church concur with him therein. For the true and Fundamental
Faith of the Catholic Church can be on other than that which the Catholic
Church will have it to be. And if he abstract and separate from among the
Doctrins of the Catholic Church a certain number of them which he reputes for
Fundamental Faith, they will be his own Fundamental Faith, and not the
Fundamental Faith of the Catholic Church, which holds the other Doctrins
which he rejects, to be as much Fundamental Faith as those which he has culled
out. Which proves, that the Notion of the Catholic Church must be likewise
that which the Catholic Church will have to be it. It is a just prejudice
against any Notion of the Catholic Church, if the Catholic Church it self
will not receive it (she ought to know best what she is), as it is certain it
does not receive this Notion of Dr. Sherlocks, if by the true Faith which he
has placed in it; he understands only such Doctrins as the Church of England
esteems for Fundamental. Who sees not, that if it be tolerable for Protestants
to insert no other Faith into the Notion of the Catholic Church but that
which they hold for Fundamental, that it is as lawful for any of the other
Bodies, whom they account for parts of the Catholic Church, to do the like,
by which means there will he as many destinct Notions as there are Fundamental
Faiths, and as many distinct Churches and Communions, as there are Notions of
the Catholic Church.

54. Again. Since there is as great a variance among the several Bodies of
Christians, what Points are Fundamental and what Non-fundamental, as there is
what Faith is true and what is false, this Author is still pressed with the
weight of the aforesaid Absurdities, and in the very same form too, as you
shall see. For as every particular Body of Christians looks on their own Faith
to be true, so they hold it for Fundamental and necessary to be believed. (I
say all other Christians do so besides Protestants). And as every particular
Body of Christians, nay individual persons are the lawful and proper Judges,
what Doctrins they ought to receive, and what to reject, what Faith is true and
what is false; so they are likewise in Dr. Sherlock's way no less proper
Judges, what Faith is Fundamental and what Non-fundamental. So that supposing
there be no common and irrefragable Rule of Fundamental Faith which all
Christians ought to follow in such debates as arise concerning the sense of
Scripture, that ought to be held for Fundamental Faith, which particular
Churches and individual Christians hold for such. For how dares Dr. Sherlock
censure any one's Faith for Non-fundamental, which is declared to be
Fundamental by the proper and lawful Judge thereof? From whence it follows, that
the Fundamental. Faith which is placed in the Notion of the Catholic Church
signifies a contradictorie Faith, and by consequence when he pretends to define
the Catholic Church by the whole Company of those who profess the
Fundamental Faith of Christ, and are united to him by Baptism, the meaning is,
that the Catholic Church is the whole number of those who profess the
contradictorie Faith of Christ Jesus, and are united to him by Baptism, which
is not much different from the Notion which the Heathens had of it in the
primitive times.

55. I say that this absurdity follows as much here as in the other case, and
that for the same reason too, because the Fundamental Faith of the Catholic
Church in this way is not one but manifold and contradictorie, and by
consequence the Fundamental Faith which is placed in the Notion of the
Catholic Church is contradictorie too. For although the Fundamental Faith of
particular Bodies and individual persons that may be said to compose the
Catholic Church be not contradictorie, yet the Fundamental Faith of the
Catholic Church as such, and as it is One Body (under which consideration
this Notion is given to it) is contradictorie, because the Fundamental Faith of
all it is parts together is contradictorie by reason of their contradictorie
interpretations of the H. Scriptures. And in case this Notion relates only to
one Body of Christians who profess the same Fundamental Faith, the same
absurdity follows here likewise as above, viz that the Catholic Church
consists in a Body of one denomination, as suppose, in Pro^estants, or in
whatever other Body the Dr. is pleased to place it in, which is an inference
that does not well suit with his Principles.

56. Thus we see that we are never the nearer knowing what the Catholic
Church is by this Notion, as it is handled by Dr. Sherlock. For seeing he
defines it by true and Fundamental Faith, and seeing this true and Fundamental
Faith is the belief of Contradictions, what understanding is able to
comprehend, what the Catholic Church is? If he had told us expressly, that
the Notion of it is the whole number of People who believe Contradictions, we
could presently conclude the nature of it, because the belief of Contradictions
would be the thing that made the Church. But to tell us, that the belief of
these Contradictions is true and Fundamental Faith is the greatest
Contradiction that any one can possibly believe. For how can the understanding
judge manifest lies, errors, deceits, and Contradictions to be true and
necessary to be believed? We expected from him the Notion of a thing that
really exists, and he has given us such a Notion of it as makes it a Chimera.

57. Before this Author can persuade us to admit of this Notion for a complete
one, he must show out of the Fathers from whence it is taken, that they held
nothing more requisite toward ou^ being Members of the Catholic Church
besides Baptism and true Faith; for their words can do him no service, so long
as we may justly (...) him for having perverted their meaning. They little
dreamed, that this Notion of the Catholic Church would be turned to the
overthrow of that Faith which they held to be true. For whoever has made any
progress in their writings cannot be ignorant, with what vehemonce they
inculcate to us Obedience to our Ecclesiastical Superiors, and the external
and visible Unity of the Church as things absolutely necessary toward our
being Members of the Mystical Spous of (...). To be a Schismatique in their
judgment was as bad as to be a Heathen, and an obstinate continuance in a state
of Excommunication was esteemed by them as a renouncing of Christianity. If
they had understood the whole Company of the Faithful in the Drs. way, they
would never have drawn such Arguments as they do from the Authority of the
Church, and the obligation there is of living in a visible Union with it, when
they disputed against Heretics and Schismatiques, because those miserable
People might have had the same plea against them, as the Dr. has against us,
viz that they were baptized, and held the same Fundamental Faith with them, and
therefore were as much Members of the Catholic Church as they, seeing the
Catholic Church is the whole Company of the Faithful, and as such has no
Authority, neither does Obedience belong to the Notion of it.

58. The word Ecclesia or Church signifies in Greek an Assembly or meeting of
men, and is indifferently applied to unbelievers as well as to believers, as
appears out of the 25. Psalm. I have hated the Church of the wicked, as
likewise Acts 19. where we read, that after the Heathen Officer had quieted the
People, he said to them, If ye have any inquiry into other matters, it shall
be determined in a lawful Church, that is, in a Church of Ephesians who
worshipped Diana. In which places Protestans express the word Church by
Congregation and Assembly, although the Greek word be the same as in Latin, but
since the propagation of the Gospel the word Church has for it is common and
principal signification those who believe in Christ.

59. The Fathers called the Catholic Church the whole Company of the
Faithful in Christ Jesus, 1. with relation to Christ who is their Mystical
Head whilst they are Obedient to their Pastors. 2. Because Faith is the Primarie
Mark of distinction of the Church on Earth from the Church in Heaven, which
sees and enjoys those glorious things which we believe, and hope for. 3. Of the
Church of Christ from the Church of the Jews, who believed in God by Moses and
not by Christ. 4. Of the Church of Christ from Pagans, whose Religion was not
revealed by God, but established by the professed enemy of God and his Church.
Faith is the beginning of our Spiritual life on which all it is succeeding
Motions depend; it immediately and directly regards God as it is proper Object,
which Obedience to Eccle siastical Superiors does not, and therefore it is no
wonder, if the Fathers call the Church the whole Company of the Faithful in
Christ Jesus without mentioning Obedience. They designed this Notion rather to
diversifie the Church of Christ from all such multitudes as did not believe him
to have been sent by God, than from those who were not Members his Mystical
Body, although they pretended to believe in him. As for this sort of People, they
had another Notion of the Church for them, as is manifest out of S. Cyprian,
who sais Ep. 69. ad Florent. Pup. that the Church is the People united tot he
Priest, and the Flock cleaving to theit Pastors; from which Principle this
Holy Martyr concludes in several places, that those who are disunited from
their Pastors are no Members of Christ's Body. There was no such need of
mentioning Ecclesiastical Obedience in the Notion of the Church in respect of
those who believed not in Christ: but those who believe, or pretend to believe
in him, and yet are not of his Body, ought to be put in mind by such a Notion
as particularly regards their condition, of the subjection which they ow to
their Pastors whom they have forsaken, and that those whom they follow, are not
Pastors but wolves, because they are not sent by Christ, whom they believe to
have been sent by God.

60. Besides, the Fathers proved the Faith of the whole Company of the
Faithful by the same Motives of Credibilitie as we do now, viz by Succession
of Pastors, Antiquity, Universalitie, Miracles etc. Which Marks as they made
the Faith evidently Credible, so they left no room to doubt, whether Christians
were bound to obey their Pastors under the penalty of forfeiting their
Mystical Union to Christ, because this Point being believed by the Church became
as Credible as any other. So that the Christians of their times had no more
reason to question, whether Obedience to their Ecclesiastical Superiors were
necessary to Catholic Communion, because the Catholic Church is the whole
Company of the Faithful, than Dr. Sherlock has to hold that nothing (...) is
necessary to salvation besides Faith and Baptism, because he reads in
Scripture, that he (...) believes, and is baptized shall be saved. For as the
Motives of Credibilitie which prove Scripture (...) be the word of God, prove
an obligation of performing every Command of God which is contained therein, so
those Motives of Credibilitie which proved the Faith of the whole Company of
the Faithful, proved an obligation of being Obedient to Ecclesiastical
Superiors, because the was a Doctrine which was believed by the whole Company
of the Faithful. So that this Notion of the Catholic Church cannot be said
to exclude, but virtually to include Obedience to Ecclesistical Superiors,
because it includes every Point of Faith, which was belived by the whole
Company of the Faithful, whereof Obedience to Ecclesistical Superiors was one.

61. Supposing any one should take the same advantage against the Dr. from S.
Cyprian's Definition, as he takes against us from the whole Company of the
Faitfull, and prove that Faith is not necessary to wards being a Member of
Christ's Church, because it is not mentioned in S. Cyprian's Definition of a
Church, no more than Obedience is expressed in the Definition that lies before
us: what answer would he return to this Objection, which has so great a
resemblance with that which he has made against us? If he say that Faith is
included in Obedience to Ecclesiastical Superiors; I answer, that Obedience is
as much included in Faith, and therefore either no advantage can be taken
against us from the Church's being defined the whole Company of the Faithful,
or else the same advantage may be taken against him from S. Cyprian's
Definition.

62. If he say 2. that S. Cyprian's Definition belongs only to a particular
Church, which he seems desirous that we should believe, because P. 34. he has
fairly remitted the consideration of it to his second Part wherein he has
promised to give us the Notion of a particular Church; I answer, that the true
meaning of S. Cyprian's Definition will be best known from the occasion which
induced him to deliver it, which was this. One Florentius Pupianus had
withdrawn himself from the Communion of the Church, and, as it seems, had
betaken himself to the Novatians. He writes to S. Cyprian a great many bitter
complaints and accusations against him, and among other things charges him with
dispersing the Flock of Christ ( scripsisti quoque quod (...) nunc propter me
portionem sui in disperso habeat). Whereupon the Saint replies, that when the
Church lost him and his gang, she lost her chafe only and not her wheat, that
none went out from her who ought to remain in her, and that she continued the
same Church still notwithstanding their departure, and proceeds thus: Dominus
quoque in Evangelio quum eum loquentem Discipuli (...) linquerent, conversus ad
duodecim dixerit, numquid and vos vultis ire? Respondet ei Petrus, Domine ad
quem ibimus? Verba vitae aeternae habes, et nos credimus, and cognoscimus,
quoniam tu es Filius Dei vivi. Loquitur illic Petrus super quem
aedificatafuerat Ecclesia, Ecclesiae nomine docens and ostendens, quia etsi
contumax ac superba obaudire nolentium multitudo discedat, Ecclesia tamen a
Christo non recedit; Et illi sunt Ecclesiaplebs Sacerdoti adunata and Pastori
suo grex adhaerens. unde scire debes Episcopum in Ecclosia esse, and Ecclesiam
in Episcope; and si quis cum Episcopo non sit in Ecclosia non esse, that is in
English, Our Lord also in the Ghospel, when his Disciples forsook him as he was
speaking, turning himself to the twelve said, will ye also go? Peter replied
to him, Lord, to whom sall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life, and we
believe and know, that thou art the Son of the living God. There Peter speaks
on whom the Church was built, teaching in the name of the Church, and showing,
that although a proud and stubborn multitude of People who will not hear do
depart, yet the Church does not depart from Christ; and they are the Church,
the People united to their Priest, and the Flock cleaving to their Pastor.
Whence you are to know, that the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the
Bishop, and that whoever is not with the Bishop is not in the Church.

63. Now there can be no dispute, but that the Father designs this Definition
of a Church to serve as well for a particular Church as for the Church Catholic,
because the words in themselves are very general, and besides his known Doctrine
is throughout his works that particular Bishops are essential to particular
Churches. But then his defining on the one hand the Universal Flock of Christ
by the Power which Bishops have over the People, and the Union which the People
ought to have with their Bishops, and on the other side affirming that the
Universal Church, that is, the whole multitude of Bishops with their respective
People were built upon Peter, and that this Apostle spoke in the name of the
universal Church, that is, of the other Apostles and the Faithful when he
said, Lord, thou have the words of Eternal life etc, is a clear Argument, that
he meant that the universal Flock of Christ should be united to S. Peter's
Successors, as well as particultr Bodies of Christians ought to be united to
their respective Bishops who are the Successors of the other Apostles. For as
according to him it was necessary in the Apostles time, that particular
Christians before they could be a Church, should be either immediately united
to the Apostles, or to such Bishops as the Apostles had set over them, and that
the Apostles and Bishops with their respective Flocks should be all united to
S. Peter on whom the whole Church was built, so it is no less necessary now
in S. Cyprian's judgment, that all the Bishops in the World with their Flocks
should be united to S. Peter's Successors, who inherit from this first Apostle
the Prerogative and Right of having the whole Church of their times built on
them, as the Successors of the other Apostles inherit the Right of making their
respective Flocks to be particular Churches, or having their Churches built on
them. Which is the only reason why particular Bishops belong to the Definition
of particu-Churches. And therefore seeing all particular Churches with their
Flocks are in S. Cyprian's judgment built on S. Peter and his Successors, the
Successors of S. Peter ought in like manner to belong to the Definition of the
Catholic Church and Universal Flock of Christ. It is most evident, that the
Church for which S. Cyprian designed this Definition in this passage, is the
Church which was built on S. Peter consisting of Pastors and their Flocks, and
which does not depart from Christ notwithstanding that never so many proud and
stubborn multitudes depart from her, which no man of sense will deny to be the
Catholic Church. And although he immediately add after the Definition, that the
Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop, in which Claus he may
mean by the word Church a particular Church considering the Schismatique
against whom he wrote, yet this is only an application of his general Doctrine
about the Church to a particular case, and can be no ways prejudicial to what I
have said, seeing particular Churches are called the Catholic Church as being
parts of it, and, as S. Cyprian sais, because they are all built on Peter.
Besides, it may be as truly said and as properly in S. Cyprian's way of S.
Peter's Successors as of any particular Bishop, that they are in the Church,
and that the Church is in them, seeing the whole Church is built upon them,
which is that which he means below, when he sais, who forsakes the Chair of
Peter, upon whom the Church is built, does he hope that he is in the Church?

64. This appears to be the true meaning of S. Cyprian's Definition in several
places of his works, where he makes an Union of all the parts of the Church to
S. Peter's Chair to be necessary to the Unity of the whole Church, as in his
40. Ep. to his People where he sais, Deus unus est, and Christus unus, and una
Ecclesia, and Cathedra una super Petrum Domini voce fundata, There is One God,
One Church, and One Chair established on Peter by our Lord's voice. Which words
denote a necessity of believing all they import no less than that saying of
S. Paul One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, nay they seem only the same thing
expressed in other terms. And in his 45. Ep. to Cornelius he calls the Roman
Church Ecclesiae Catholicae radicem and matricem, The Root and Matrix of the
Catholic Church. And in his 55. Ep. to Cornelius he calls S. Peter's Chair
the Principal Church from whence the Priestly and Ecclesiastical unity has
it is beginning. Navigare (...) ad Petri Cathedram and Ecclesiam Principalem
unde unitas (...) exorta est. And Ep. 73. ad Jubaian. He sais of Peter super
quem Dominus aedificaverat Ecclesiam, and unde unitatis Originem instituit, On
whom our Lord built his Church, and from whom he has appointed the Origin and
beginning of unity.

65 But above all other passages to this purpose, that (...) we find in his
Book de unit. Eccles. is the most full and Illustrious. The occasion of the
writing of which Treatise was the great Schism which was raised at Rome by
Novatian who pretended to have been chosen Bishop of that See to the prejudice
of S. Cornelius, which this Father thoroughly considering in all it is
mischievous consequences, provided this Antidote for his People to secure them
from the like innovations in Faith, and disobedience to the Church. He begins
by warning them of the sleights which the devil makes use of to draw men into
(...) and Heresies, and then proposes to them as a grand expedient against
these evils their close Union to S. Peter's Chair in these words.

66. Hoc eo fit, Fratres dilectissimi, dum ad veritatis Originem non re litur,
nec Caput quaeritur, nec Magistri coelestis Doctrina servatur. Quae siquis
consideret and examinet, tractatu longo atque argumentis opus non est. Probatio
est ad Fidem facilis compendio Veritatis. Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, Egodico
tibi, inquit, quia tu es Petrus and super istam petram (...) Ecclesiam meam,
and portae inferi non (...) eam. Ettibi dabo claves regni coelorum, and quae
ligaveris super terram, erunt ligata and in coelis, and quae solveris super
terram, erunt soluta and in coelis. Et iterum cidem post Resurrectionem suam
dicit Pasce oves meas. Super illum unum aedificat Ecclesiam suam, and illi
pascendas mandat oves suas. Et quamvis Apostolis omnibus post Resurrectionem
suam parem potestatem tribuat and dicat, sicut misit me Pater, and ego mitto
vos, accipite Spiritum Sanctum; si cui remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis, si
cui tenueritis, tenebuntur: tamen ut unitatem manifestaret, unam Cathedram
instituit, and unitatis ejusdem Originem ab uno incipientem sua authoritate
disposuit. Hoc utique erant caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio
praediti and honoris and potestatis, sed exordium ab unitate (...). Primatus
Petro (...), ut Ecclesia una and Cathedra una monstretur. Et Pastores (...)
omnes, sed grex unus ostenditur qui ab Apostolis omnibus unanimi consensione
pascatur. Quam unam Ecclesiam etiam in Cantico Canticorum Spiritus Sanctus ex
persona Domini designat and dicit, una est columba mea, perfecta mea, una est
(...) suae, electa genetrici suae. Hanc Ecclesiae unitatem qui non tenet,
tenere se Fidem credit? Qui Ecclesiae renititur and resistit, qui Cathedram
Petri super quam fundata est Ecclesia, deserit, in Ecclesia se esse considit?
In English thus, The cause whereof, sais he, most beloved Brethren, is because men
will not return to the Origin of Truth, nor seek after the Head, nor observe
the Doctrine of our Heavenly Master, which whoever will but consider and examine,
he will not stand in need of long reasonings and Arguments. The proof of Faith
is easy through the compendiousnesse of truth. Our Lord sais to Peter, I say
to thee that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not overcome it. And will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, and what thou bindest upon Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and what
thou loosest on Earth. shall be loosed in Heaven. And again he sais to him
after his Resurrection, feed my sheep. He builds his Church upon him alone, and
gives him his sheep to feed; and although he gave equal Power to all the Apostles
after his Resurrection, and said, As my Father sent me, so I send you, Receive
the H. Ghost, whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins ye
retain, they are retained: Nevertheless to the end he might declare unity, he
constituted One Chair, and appointed by his Authority that the Origin of the
same unity should be from one. What Peter was the other Apostles were also,
they being all endowed with an equal participation of Honor and Power; But the
beginning proceeds from unity. The Primacie is given to Peter, that there
might be shown to be One Church of Christ and One Chair. And they were all
Pastors, and but one Flock appears, which was to be fed by the unanimous
consent of all the Apostles. Which One Church is deciphered in the Canticle of
Canticles by the H. Ghost in the person of our Lord, when he sais, My Dove is
One, my perfect one, the only one of her Mother, and the choice one of her
that brought her forth. Whoever does not hold this unity of the Church, does
he believe that he holds the Faith? Who resists and rebels against the Church,
who forsakes the Chair of Peter upon which the Church is built, does he hope
that he is in the Church?

67, These passages afford as good a light as any impartial enquirer can desire
for understanding the true meaning of S. Cyprian' Definition of a Church. For
here we have, that Christ built his Church upon Peter alone (super illum unum),
and that he gave him his sheep to feed, that he constituted One Chair and
established it on Peter, that this One Chair is the beginning of the Priestly
unity, that is, of the Ecclesiastical and visible Unity of the Church, and
that the Primacie was given to Peter, to the end Christ's Church might be shown
to be One. All which places show a Jurisdiction, and Superiority which this
Apostle had over his Brethren, and by consequence a Jurisdiction which his
Successors have had over their Brethren the other Bishops in every Age of the
Church since him.

68. For what signifies the building of the Church upon Peter alone, but that
he as the Principle and Origin of the Church's Unity was to make it One
Visible Body by the Union of subordination; which all his Brethren and their
Flocks had to him? The Church was built upon him alone, inasmuch as he was made
the beginning of the Priestly unity, for seeing the Priestly unity is
essential to the Visible Church as such, the Church was built upon him alone,
because it was necessarily to be One with him, and could not subsist without
this Union. And seeing the Church cannot be One with Peter, nor be united to his
Successors as the beginnings of the Visible and Priestly unity, but by means
of Obedience and Communion with them, it follows, that all the Members of the
Catholic Church ought to be Obedient to them and in Communion whith them.
What signifies our Lord's saying to Peter alone, Feed my sheep, but that he
gave him a special Jurisdiction which was not common to his Brethren? For
feeding in the H. Scripture is a word which imports Government, and a Power of
correcting, teaching etc. And here by the way methinks Protestants should be
more sparing of their witty jests against us for alleging this Text to prove
the Primacie of S. Peter, seeing we have so good an Authority as that of S.
Cyprian for what we do. What signifies the One Chair of S. Peter, but a Chair
of Jurisdiction paramount to all other Churches, being called One by way of
excellence and Power, as having a superiority over all other Sees without
having any See Superior over it? For which reason it is called the root,
Matrix, and Origin of the Ecclesiastical and Priestly unity. No doubt, but
that there are more Chairs and Sees in the Catholic Church than One, and this
S. Cyprian knew well enough (as we shall see presently), but there is only one,
and that S. Peter's Chair, which has an Universal superintendence over all the
rest, as being the beginning of the Priestly unity. What signifies the
Primacie which was given to S. Peter, and this absolutely without any
modification, or qualifying words? Let the Dr. be ingenuous and confess with
me, that the reason which S. Cyprian gives why a Primacie was granted to him,
shows that it was a Primacie of Jurisdiction, which as it is the only Primacie
which can make the Catholic Church One, so it is the only Primacie which can
afford a convincing Argument, or show that it is One, which is the express
reason why S. Cyprian sais, that the Primacie was given to Peter ( ut una
Chris^^ Ecclesia and Cathedra una mon ^retur). A Primacie of mere Precedence
(by which we can understand no more than a Privilege of ta^ing the first place
when the Apostles met at dinner, or on any other occasion) is ridiculous. For
although an adjudication of such a P^ecedence to S. Peter might be a means of
preventing any pretentions to the same in the Successors of the other Apostles,
yet it could not afford any remedy against other Schisms, nor be in any
tolerable sense the Beginning of the Priestly unity. Neither could this be so
great a favor as might deserve to be called the building of the Church upon
Peter, no more more than the Peers of England (under which Notion they are all
equal) may be said to be built upon any one in particular among them, who has a
Primacie of Precedence over the rest. S. Cyprian's Doctrine is reconcilable to
no other Primacie than that of Jurisdiction and Power. Lastly, what reason can
there be, why any man may not reasonably hope that he is in the Church, and
that he holds the Faith, although he forsake the Chair of Peter, if an Union to
this Chair be not necessary to Catholic Communion? And if it be necessary
to Catholic Communion, it is evident that S. Peter's Successors are the root,
Origin, and Principle of Unity to the whole Catholic Church, and by
consequence that they belong to the Definition of it.

69. Here comes the cauilling Objection of Protestants against S. Peter's
Primacie of Jurisdiction, because S. Cyprian affirms a Paritie amongst the
Apostles, when he sais, that our Lord gave equal Power to all the Apostles
after his Resurrection, and that what Peter was the other Apostles were also,
they being all endowed with an equal participation of Honor and Power.

70. For the clearing of this Point the Dr. may pleas to take notice, that in
the Ordination of the Apostles (and the same happens in the Ordination of
Bishops and Priests) we may consider two Powers, the one of Order, and the
other of Iurisidiction. By the Power of Order I mean a spiritual quality,
gift, ability, or capacity whereby the person Ordained is enabled to
perform all those Functions, which our Lord has annexed to men of this
condition. And by the Power of Jurisdiction I mean a lawful Power of putting
this gift, quality, ability, or capacity in execution. The first Power
imports that the Apostle, or Bishop, or Priest by virtue of his ordination is
qualified by our Lord for his special service, but does not of it is own nature
import a call to the actual exercise which he is designed for. The second Power
imports not only the aforesaid qualification, but likewise a call to the
actual performance of our Lord's work.

71. The Power of Order is One and the same throughout all the Bishops of the
Catholic Church, as the Faith of the Church is the same through all it is
parts. And as the Faith is not multiplied by the multiplicitie of persons who
profess it, so the Power of the Episcopal Order is not multiplied by the
multiplicitie of persons who enjoy it. It is One, because it proceeds from
Christ the One Lord. It is One, because it is the Power of preaching the same
Faith, and administering the same Sacraments. It is One, because it is directed
to the same end viz the edifying of the Body of Christ, and the governing,
feeding, and illuminating the souls of the Faithful, who are committed to
their care. Lastly, and in one word, it is One, because there is not any one
action which S. Peter's Successors can do, which any Bishop in God's Church may
not in like manner do vi Ordinis; neither is there any thing which hinders the
meanest among them from being P pes, but only the want of the Popes
Jurisdiction. The same Unity of the Power of Order is likewise to be seen in
the Old Law, wherein all the male descendants from Aaron were Priests alike,
their birth making them capable of attending on God's Altar, as Order enables
Bishops and Priests to perform their respective Functions in the Church of
Christ. The Power of Jurisdiction on the other hand is different and unequal,
more or Iesse, according to the different degrees and steps in the Hierarchy,
as in Popes, Patriarchs, Primats, and Bishops, who partake all of them in their
respective stations so much of the Jurisdiction of Christ's Priesthood, as is
requisite for the due government of the portion of his Flock which is committed
to their charge. And thus it was likewise in the Jewish Church, where the
Jurisdiction of the High Priest was much greater than that of his inferior
Brethren, although they were descended from Aaron no less than himself. Whence
we find Number. 20. that God upon the death of Aaron commanded Elcazar his Son to
put on his Father's garments, by which is signified, that as Aaron's Successor
he was to take upon him the fullness of his Jurisdiction. These two Powers of
Order and Jurisdiction are apparently distinct; for Dr. Sherlock knows well
enough, that a Bishop who is Canonically suspended, or excommunicated is as
much a Bishop aster he is censured as he was before, if we speak of the Power
of Order which he received at his Consecration. On which account he is not to
be Ordained again upon his reconciliation to the Church, and readmission to his
Bishoprique, but only entitled anew to his former Jurisdiction, and the
lawful exercise of his Functions, which he had lost by incurring the Censures
of the Church. Which is a demonstrative Argument to prove the distinction, and
separabilitie of these two Powers.

72. Now this distinction of Powers in the Apostles and Bishops at their
Consecration gives an easy solution to the Objection. For when S. Cyprian
sais, that our Lord gave equal Power to all the Apostles after his
Resurrection, and that what Peter was the other Apostles were also, they being
all endowed with an equal participation of honor and Power, he means, that our
Lord gave them all the same Honor and power of Order, and that Peter was no
more an Apostle than his Brethren, nor any beginning of their unity inasmuch
as he was an Apostle, which are truths which we acknowledge as well as S.
Cyprian. But when he sais, that Christ built his Church upon Peter alone, and
gave him his sheep to feed, and made him Primat; here we must necessarily say,
that although he had given him and his Brethren before the same honor and power
of Order, and together with the Power of Order the same Power of Jurisdiction,
when he said, As my Father sent me, so I send you etc (which was at the first
time that he appeared to his Apostles after his Resurrection, (see S. John's
Gospel Chapter 20.): yet that he gave to Peter alone a special power of
Jurisdiction as the first Apostle, when he said Feed my sheep (which was at the
third time that he showed himself to his Apostles after his Resurrection (see
S. John's Gospel Chapter 21.) and by consequence, that he made him the beginnig of
the Apostles unity, and by consequence that he gave him a special Honor, if
it be an Honor to be a Primat, as it most certainly is. And therefore in S.
Cyprian's judgment he gave to all the Apostles the same power, and not the same
power; the same power of Order, and not the same power of Jurisdiction; the
same Honor, and not the same Honor; the same Honor of Order, and not the
same Honor of Jurisdiction. For whenever God bestows an Honor upon his
servants he always grounds it upon some gift which he confers on them at the
same time. For which reason we must say, that when S. Cyprian affirms the
Primaci^ to have been given to Peter, that he held this Honor to have been
accompanied with a special gift which was not common to his Brethren, and
which can be nothing else but the power of Jurisdiction. So that Protestants
are obliged to solve this difficulty as well as Catholics, supposing there be
any obscurity in S. Cyprian's words. And from this solution which I have given
to them, I shall propose one difficulty more to their consideration, which is
this. Either our Lord gave Peter a special Honor when he gave him the
Primacie, or he gave him none. If he gave him none, let them show, how God
conld give a Spiritual gift and of so great moment as the Primacie was without
giving a special Honor. And if he gave him a special Honor when he gave him
the Primacie, let them show, how our Lord endowed all the Apostles with an
equal participation of Honor, when he gave the Primacie only to Peter,

73. It is this Superior Jurisdiction of S. Peter's Successors which makes the
Catholic Church One Bishoprique, as S. Cyprian asserts it to be after the long
passage, which I have quoted out of him in these words, Episcopatus unus est,
cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Which place our Author in his Vindic.
of some Protest. princip p. 34. translates thus. There is One Episcopacie, part
of which every Bishop holds with full Authority and Power. And he sais, that
by One Episcopacie S. Cyprian understands One Bishoprik that is, the universal
Church, which as it is but One Church, so it is but One Bishoprique also, it
being all under the Episcopal government, that is, under a multitude of Bishops
who govern their respective parts of it with the whole Episcopal Authority.
This is set down by him as a choice Principle against the B. of Rome's
Universal Pastorship, although he say that all learned men are a little puzzled at
the meaning of it.

74. Here are two things to be considered; the one, in what sense it is that S.
Cyprian affirms the, Catholic Church to be One Bishoprique; the other, in
what sense it is that every Bishop holds part of this One Bishoprique with full
Authority and power.

75. The Catholic Church is One Bishoprique, which he shows thus in his Book
last cited p. 77, S. Cyprian, sais he, tells us that there is but One
Bishoprique, and therefore all the Bishops who are (...) over all the world,
and have the supreme government of their particular Churches, must be reckoned
but One Bishop; for tho their natural persons are distinct, they are but One
Ecclesiastical person, their office, power, and Dignity being one and the
same, not divided into parts, but exercised by all of them in their several
Churches with the same (...) and plenitude of power. And thus we have found out
but One Bishop for the One Catholic Church, all the Bishops in the world
being but one; for tho they are many distinct persons, they are but one Power,
and exercise the same Office without division, and multiplication.

76. I cannot but think, that this Author has proceeded mala fide, and against
the light of his conscience in fathering upon S. Cyprian the new models of
Ecclesiastical Polity which he has laid in some of his writings. And I can
never desire a better Argument to justify this censure, than the instance of
this passage which lies under examination, viz that the Catholic Church is
One Bishoprique. For he cannot be ignorant, that all the aforesaid quotations
out of S. Cyprian, viz that the Church is built upon Peter alone, that the
Primacie was given to him, that our Lord established his one Chair, and made it
the beginning of the Priestly unity etc, are truly to be found in his works,
and he is a man of too good natural parts not to see what a fair appearance
they carry of proving the Universal Pastorship of the Successors of S. Peter
over the Catholic Church, which makes the Catholic Church one Bishoprique.
Which required at least, that he should have endeavored to put another meaning
on them, than that which they suggest to our thoughts as soon as we read them,
or hear them spoken, before he had provided the Catholic Church with any
other Bishop than S. Peter's Successor: and yet he passes them all over in a
deep silence, and only culls out this passage, and two or more which he thinks
he can deal well enough withal when he has them alone, and by the help of an
odd speculation for which he can produce no grounds out of S. Cyprian, he
makes them bear a sense quite contrary to S. Cyprian's, as you shall see.

77. For that which makes a Church One Bishoprique is One Chair, or One
Hereditarie Episcopal Jurisdiction. And therefore that which makes the
Catholic Church One Bishoprique is One Chair, or One Hereditarie Episcopal
Jurisdiction. Which One Chair, or One Hereditarie Episcopal Jurisdiction, S.
Cyprian sais, was establishedon Peter by our Lord's own voice. And therefore in
S. Cyprian's judgment the Catholic Church is one Bishoprique by means of S.
Peter's one Chair.

78. Again. That which makes a Church one Bishoprique is because it is built on
One Bishop. And therefore that which makes the Catholic Church one
Bishoprique must be, because it is built on One Bishop; which S Cyprian sais our
Savior has done upon S. Peter, when he sais, that he has built his Church, or
the Catholic Church upon him alone. And (...) that which makes the Catholic
Church one Bishoprique in S. Cyprians judgment is because it is built upon Peter.

79. Again. That made the Catholic Church (...) Bishoprique in S. Cyprian's
Judgment which was the Center, beginning, and root of the Ecclesiastical, and
Priestly unity. But the one Chair of S. Peter was in his judgment the Center,
beginning, and root of the Ecclesiastical, and Priestly unity. Therefore the
one Chair of S. Peter made the Catholic Church one Bishoprique in S.
Cyprian's judgment. If there be any thing amiss in this Syllogism, it shall
be cleared in the following paragraph.

80. These Arguments and several others that may be formed out of S. Cyprian
strongly persuade any sincere searcher after truth, that he held the Successors
of S. Peter to be the Universal Bishops over the Catholic Church. And the
only way the Dr. can have to show the contrary, is to prove that the Priestly
unity whereof S. Cyprian sais that the Chair of S. Peter is the beginning, is
not such an Unity from whence we can lawfully infer, that S. Peter's
Successors make the Catholic Church one Bishoprique. And to this end he must
let us know distinctly, wherein this Unity consists which takes it is rise from
S. Peter's Chair, as also what that special privilege was which our Savior
gave to S. Peter above his Brethren, for which S. Cyprian sais that the Church
was built upon him alone, seeing it is evident ad Ephesians. 2. that the Church was
also built upon the other Apostles by means of some Graces and Privileges
which were common to them with S. Peter. For my part I have diligently read S.
Cyprian, and cannot find any one passage in him after all things are well
weighed and considered, which seems of any force to persuade me, that he did
not intend in these places, and others of the like nature to acknowledge, that
S. Peter and his Successors have a Power of (...) as Primats over all the
Bishops throughout the world, which unites and cements them all together into
one Body and Bishoprique by means of the reciprocal ties of Commands and
Obedience, which are the nerves and sinews without which One Church and one
Bishoprique can neither subsist, nor be conceived. The Union of many moral
parts together (as it is in an Army) supposes a dependence on their beginning
of unity to conserve them in a state of Union, and this dependence of the
parts supposes a Superiority of influence which their Principle of Unity has
over them. And unless these grounds be admitted in the explication of S.
Cyprian's word's, it will be impossible to make out, how the Church was built
upon Peter alone, and how his Chair is the beginning of the Priestly unity,
which is most evidently his Doctrine. This Superior Power of Jurisdiction in S.
Peter's Successors is not only the beginning of the Priestly unity, but of
the Unity of their Flocks too. For seeing in S. Cyprian's judgment a Church is
the Flock cleaving to their Pastor, the People must be necessarily One by the
same Kind of Unity which ioyns their Bishops together, which being their Union
to One Apostle, or to the One Chair of S. Peter, it follows that the whole
Church both Clergy and Laity must be One by the same means. S. Cyprian Loc.
cit. de unit. Eccles. describes this Universal dependence and Union which all
the Members of the Church have with S. Peter's Chair by several fit
similitudes, as by comparing them to many rays of light, which make but One
light by means of the sun from whence they all proceed; to many boughs of a
tree, which are all united in their root, and to many rivers, which flow from
the same head, which are all united in their source. If you go to separate,
sais he, a ray from the Sun, the unity of light is incapable of division; if
you break a bough from the tree, it will not grow after it is broken off; and
if you divide a river from the source, it will dry up after the division is
made. Thus the Church of God shining also with light stretches forth her rays
throughout the world, and yet the light which is spread every where is but one,
neither is there any division made in the unity of the whole; she extends her
boughs into all Countries through her abounding fruitfulness, she widely opens
her vast rivers, and yet there is but One Head, and One beginning, which is
that which makes the Catholic Church to be One Church, and One Bishoprique.
And thus we have S. Cyprian's Doctrine pure and unmixed, as being lawfully
inferred from his own words and writings, without the help of the Drs. wild
speculation, which can only serve to put him in mind, that seeing One Bishop is
necessary to make One Bishoprique, he ought not to seek after any other Bishop
over it than the Successor of S. Peter, whom S. Cyprian calls the beginning of
the Priestly unity. And seeing he has so great a deference for this Father, as
to believe the Catholic Church to be One Bishoprique on his Authority, he
ought in like manner to admit of S. Peter's Successors for the Bishops over it
on the same Authority too.

81. It ought to be no prejudice at all to S. Peter's Primacie that we do not
find in Scripture any evident and indisputable record, that he ever exercised
any Superior Jurisdiction over the Apostles, because all the Apostles actions
are not recounted in Scripture, and it is a very ill consequence to say, that
Peter or John never did this or that, because Scripture is silent therein. It is
sufficient, that the Scripture affords us good grounds from whence we may
lawfully infer this Superior Jurisdiction, which by the way was not to be
exercised toward the other Apostles in matters of Faith, by reason of the
perpetual assistance of the H. Ghost, which was promised them all alike in the
discharge of their Functions; nor in matters of Discipline neither, for what
relates to their particular persons, because as their eminent Sanctity secured
them from falling into any scandalous crimes, so it freed them from any danger
of falling under the coercive Power of S. Peter's Censures. The only solemn
way then that seems to remain wherein he could exercize his Primacie besides
what we find in Scripture, was by ratifying and confirming the regulations that
were taken for the public Discipline, and government of the Church, in case
that Uniformitie of Discipline which appeared throughout the world after the
Apostles deceas, were an effect of any common resolutions to this purpose
before their separation among the Gentiles, and did not proceed from the same
Spirit of Truth, and Prudence, and Government, which guided and directed each
single Apostle to take such measures in the Polity of his Province as were to
be observed in all places after the same manner. So that considering the
uncertain knowledge we have from Scripture of the particular cases wherein he
did, or might exercise his Primacie, we must betake our selves to Tradition,
which is the Supplement, and best interpreter of Scripture, to know in what
cases our Lord designed that the Primacie he had given him was to be exercised.
And we learn from Tradition, that S. Peter's Successors have in his Right put
this Authority in practice on several occasions, which is an Argument, that it
was inherent in the Person of Peter, although per accidens it could be seldom put
in execution by him. But after his deceas, and the deceas of the other
Apostles, (...) the Church grew up and together with years contracted vices,
his Successors found amongst their Colleagues more matter whereon to exercise
their Jurisdiction, which being allowed by the Church ought to be considered by
us as a sufficient evidence of what he might have done, if he had found as
ample a matter for his Jurisdiction, as he had an unquestionable Right to put
it in execution whenever it should be offered.

82. There are two places which are usually alleged out of S. Cyprian to
prove, that he did not hold any Superior Jurisdiction in S. Peter's Successors
over the other Bishops. The first is taken out of his Preface to his Council of
Carthage wherein he sais, Quum habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentia libertatis
and potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquam judicari ab alio non possit,
cum nec ipse possit alterum judicare; sed expectemus universi judicium Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, qui unus and solus habet potestatem and praeponendi nos in
Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, and de actu nostro judicandi. In which words he
seems to make our Lord Jesus Christ the only Judge, and Primat over Bishops,
and that they are accountable to no other Superior for any measures they take
in the Government of his Flock. I shall remit the full examination of this
passage to Number. 199. and seq. whither I refer the Reader for an en^re
satisfaction, and shall only take notice here, that if this Doctrine be taken
as it lies, and without a fovourable explication, it wholly destroys any Power
in the Church to Censure Heretical and Schismatical Bishops, which this Author
as great a friend as he is to the Episcopal Power is unwilling to deny, as we
shall see presently. Neither could 8. Cyprian with any consequence to such a
Principle advise S. Stephen B. of Rome (as he does Ep. 67.) to excommunicate,
and depose Marcianus B. of Arles for Heresy and Schism, when he writ thus to
him, Facere t^ oportet plenissimas literas ad Coepiscopos nostros in Galliis
constitutos ne ultra Marcianum..... Collegio nostro insultare patiantur, that
he should write most full and effectual letres to their Fellow-Bishops in
France not to suffer Marcian to insult any longer over their College. And
afterward, Dirigantur in Provinciam and ad plebem Arelate consistentem a te
literae, in quibus abstento Marciano, alius in locum ejus substituatur; that he
should dispatch his letres into the Province (that is, to the Bishops of the
Province over which Marcian was Primat) and to the people of Arles, wherein
after he had excommunicated Marcianus, another Bishop should be placed in his
room. If Dr. Sherlock be willing to grant, that Innocent XII. has the same
Power over Archbishops who are in a state of (...) and Schism as Marcian was,
we shall have very good grounds to believe, that he holds the Primacie of S.
Peter's Successors. For here we have a Power of deposing and casting an
Heretical and Schismatical Archbishop out of the Church, and of commanding his
Diocesans and Provincial Bishops (who had in those time's the Right of
Election) to choose another, which is the proper, and one of the most principal
exercises of that universal care and Superiority, which the B. B. of Rome have
over their Brethren, and which S. Cyprian meant by calling them the beginning
of the Priestly unity.

83. The other passage it out of his 55. Epist. to Cornelius B. of Rome wherein
he acquaints him, that the Affrican Churches had resolved in a Provincial
Council, ut uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur ubi crimen est admissum, that
every one's Cause should be heard in the place where he committed his crime.
From whence it seems to follow, that the Churches of Affrique did not believe
the Chair of S. Peter to have had any Superior Jurisdiction over any
Churchmen what soever, who were not of the proper Province and District of
Rome.

84. I answer, that this Canon relates only to the Crimes of Immoralitie, and
breach of Discipline etc. and not of Infidelity such as Herefie is, as appears
from the occasion which S. Cyprian had to cite it, as likewise from what he
sais afterward, that the criminals ought to plead their Cause in the place
where their accusers are, and those who can bear witness against them, Oportet
illic agere causam suam, ubi and accusatores habere, and testes criminis sui
possint. For in matters of Doctrine a man carries his accusers and witnesses
about him, let him go whither he will to have his Cause tried; and whoever
renounces, and denies the error he is charged withal is ipso facto to be
accounted innocent, seeing no man can be a heretic without an obstinate
resolution to continue in his error, which is to be known by his own
confession, and not by interrogating witnesses. And if he declare, that he will
persist in his error, he is never the nearer being acquitted, although he produce
never so many witnesses who abet his Doctrine, unless he can allege the
concurrent testimonies of at least the greatest part of the Bishops of the
Catholic Church in his favor, which if he be sure of before hand, there is
no reason to fear, either that the Catholic Bishops of the Country where he
lives, or S. Peter's Successors will either cite him, or question him as an
Heretic for any tenet which he holds on so good an Authority. This was the
reason why S. Cyprian advised S. Stephen to do summarie justice upon Marcianus,
because the Doctrine of Novatian which he publicly professed, was condemned by
the Bishops all the world over. Indeed it may happen, that an obstinate
Heretic may conceal his sentiments, in which case his Heterodox belief is to
be detected by overt-acts, and this requires that witnesses be produced to
prove them; but this was a thing not likely to happen often in S. Cyprian's
days, seeing the reason why men generally conceal their private belief is the
discouragement which they find from the secular Magistrate, who seconds the
sentence of the Spiritual Judge with temporal punishments; which could not be
apprehended in those times from the Roman Princes, who made no distinction
between Catholics and Heretics, seeing they passed all alike under the name
of Christians. This shows, that the Canon ought to be understood so as to
prohibit the hearing of any Crimes, which were against good manners, or the
like in any foreign Court. For as for the Superiority which the Chair of S.
Peter has over Bishops in cases of (...) and Schism, I think it plain enough
out of Marcian's case, which could not happen above four or five years after
this Canon was signified to Cornelius, unless we say, that S. Cyprian and the
Churches of Affrique had all changed their sentiments in so short a time, which
is a thing incredible without a good attestation from History.

85. I do not intend to affirm here, that this Canon forbids indifferently the
Causes of Bishops as well as of Priests to be tried in any foreign Court,
unless it be in cases of Heresy. For no such thing appears in S. Cyprian,
whose Authority alone I rely upon at present for the establishment of the
Superior Jurisdiction of S. Peter's Successors, what ever grounds there may be
alleged for this Opinion in the Age that followed S. Cyprian. Bishops have
always had a special consideration allowed them both in their Causes, and in
all their other concerns by the Church of God above Priests, and therefore
considering S. Cyprian's silence in the matter, I think that no one ought to
draw any such (...) out of the general words of this Canon, and this the
rather, because if we carefully weigh the occasion which the Father had to cite
it to S. Cornelius, we shall find that it relates merely to the Causes of
Priests, and not of Bishops. And that I may show this the more effectually, I
will set down the occasion how it came to be cited, which was thus. There were
five Priests, of very scandalous lives and conversations, the overthrowers of
the public Discipline of the Church, the introducers of liberty, the
Companions of Heretics, and Schismatiques, and such kinds of Outlaws, and who
had been excommunicated by S. Cyprian in a Provincial Council, by name
Fortunatus, Repostus, Felix, Maximus, and Jovinus. This wicked crew procure
Fortunatus to be made a Bishop, who being invested with the name of a Dignity,
which they thought might gain them some credit abroad in the Church, sends one
Felicissimus who was their Ringleader with some others of their gang with
letres to S. Cornelius B. of Rome, who having before hand had a Character of
him out of Affrique, refused to receive his letres, or to communicate with him,
and writ an account to S. Cyprian of what he had done. But this confident blade
having hereupon given S. Cornelius very ill language, and threatened to read his
letres in public before all the Brethren, he writ a second letre into
Affrique, wherein S. Cyprian discovered some wavering and irresolution in him
how he should proceed with this importune and vexatious person. Whereupon he
writes this Epistle to S. Cornelius, and in the first place he puts him in mind
of the intrepiditie and courage which Bishops ought to embrace as virtues
proper, and in a singular manner requisite for the discharge of their duties;
and not being well assured, what the contents of the letres were which his
Rebels had sent, whether they were accusations against himself, or that they
disired to have their Cause tried at Rome, he arms himself against both these
Heads; against the first, by laying open the enormous crimes for which they had
been excommunicated by him, and many others of as heinous a nature which the
Brethren had informed him of, and which as yet had not come to a trial: and
against the second, he alleges the aforesaid Canon, saying moreover, jam eorum
causa cognita est, jam de eis dict a sententia est, nec censurae congruit
Sacerdotum mobilis atque inconstantis animi levitate reprehendi.

86. We see here, that S. Cyprian considers this Cause as no other than that of
simple Priests; for although Fortunatus were a Bishop, yet this Dignity was far
from entitling him to the Privilege of Bishops, because it was conferred upon
him against the Spirit, Canons, and practice of God's Church by Heretics, and
Schismatiques who had no lawful Power to do it, and whilst he was under an
actual Excommunication by a Provincial Council. S. Cyprian was too zealous a
Pastor, and Christian to admit of a man's crime as a competent plea to obtain a
favor, and too well versed in the Maxims of natural equity to allow an unjust
Intruder the benefit of all the Claims, which belong to a just Possessor. And
accordingly we find, that he treats him in this Epistle as a simple Priest,
when he sais of him, Est unus de quinque Presbyteris jam pridem de Ecclesia
profugis; and afterward jumbles him with his camerades as perfons who lay all
alike under his lash, when he sais, Opertet eos quibus praesumus non
circumcursare. Which manner of proceeding is very good Canon Law at this day in
the Court of Rome, which allows no Priledge of Bishops to such as have assumed
this Dignity under a state of Excommunication, and rebellion against the
Church.

87. And although it be no good Canon Law (...) in this Court at present to
maintain as S. Cyprian did with his Council, that Provincial Synods are such
Sovereign Tribunals to determine the Causes of simple Priests, that there is no
Appeal to be made from them to S. Peter's Chair, yet this Doctrine can afford no
argument to prove, that the Churches of Affrique denied the Superiority of
this Chair, no more than the opposition which the Churches of France make
against several branches of the Prerogatives which are challenged by that See,
evinces that they denio the superiority of it over all the Churches in the
world. Although Catholics acknowledge the Primacie of S. Peter's Successors to
be Iure Divino, yet they do not hold every Prerogative which is claimed by them
as a consequent of their Primacie to be Iure Divino. For the Primacie it self
we have Scripture and Tradition, but we are to seek for the same degree of
evidence for many of it is branches. Which is the reason, why in the Histories
of most other Christian Countries besides France, we read of contentions that
have happened between National Churches and the Chair of S. Peter, and the
State engaged in the defense of their Churches, and Bishops, by making Laws
against encroachments upon them by the Chair of S. Peter, which only shows,
that they disallow of the exercise of the Primacie in certain cases for which
they judge there neither stands reason, nor Tradition. And this they may do
without renouncing the Primacie of that Chair, which in all such branches as
are not evident by Tradition is under the regulation of the Church, either by
means of express Canons made in General Councils, or by the Universal
acceptance and admittance of them by the Church Diffusive. And whenever both
these Conditions are wanting, Kingdoms and National Churches may dispute with
S. Peter's Chair, and stand out against any unjustifiable pretenses of the same
without any danger of separating themselves from this beginning of the Priestly
unity.

88. And this seems to have been the case of S. Cyprian and his Council when
they enacted the aforesaid Canon. For we see evidently on the one hand, that he
held the Church to have been built upon Peter alone, which contains the
substance of the Primacie of the B.B. of Rome; and on the other hand we
discover as clearly in the Case of Marcian, that he ascribes to S. Peter's
Chair a Superior Power of excommunicating, and deposing Heretical, and
Schismatical Bishops, which is the proper exercise of this Primacie. What then
can we say else of his refusing Priests, to have their Causes tried in any
foreign Courts, but that he did not think that the Cognizance of these Causes
appertained to S. Peter's Chair as a Right of it is Primacie? And he might
possibly have had this ground for this judgment, because there was no Precedent
to be found in the Affrican Churches of any Priest's Cause that was ever tried
at Rome. And perhaps in those early times of Christianity, when Charity, and
humility, and penance were so much in vogue amongst Christians, this practice
was so far from being allowed by the Universal acceptance of the Church
Diffusive; that there were very few examples of the like nature to be heard of
in any other parts of the Church. Which might induce him to believe, that the
Primacie of S. Peter's Chair did not extend to the hearing and determining such
Causes, and upon this presumption he might procure a Canon to be made to this
purpose, that his Clergy might be the more submissive and Obedient under his
Government. In which case the Primacie of S. Peter's Chair remains untouched,
and there is only a bar put to a doubtful consequent of it, which S. Cyprian
would have allowed as well as he did the other Point of excommunicating, and
deposing Heretical and Schismatical Bishops, if he had had the like evidence
for the one, as he had for the other. I think this Canon to be so far from
prejudicing the Primacie of Power in S. Peter's Successors, that it is a strong
Argument, that S. Cyprian and his Council believed this Primacie at the same
time that thy made this Canon. For we cannot in reason judge, that so grave and
wise an Assembly as a Provincial Council of that Church was would make
Constitutions and Canons to prevent inconveniences that were no more than
purely possible, as that was of Priest's removing their Causes to be tried at
Rome, in case there was not a probable ground to apprehend lest this
inconvenience should happen, which could be nothing else but the common belief
of those Churches, that the B. B. of Rome had a Primacie over the whole world.

89. 11. Every Bishop holds part of the One Bishoprique of the Catholic
Church with full Authority and Power. These words (supposing they are rightly
translated) may signify first, either an equality of Iurisdidiction in
Bishops, which makes them independent of any one or more of their Colleagues in
matters of Government, under which Notion are comprised all things relating to
Faith, Morality, and Discipline; so that by the Law of Christ, and their
Original Institution they are not bound to accept of any Political regulations
in any matter contained under any of the aforesaid three Heads, unless they
voluntarily, and of their own proper Motion and consent are pleased to ratify,
and accept of the same: Or 2. that they all equally and immediately receive
from Christ the Authority and Jurisdiction whereby they act in the Government
of their Flocks, although their Acts of Jurisdiction be under the regulation of
and dependant on One or more of their Colleagues, to whom they are bound to
submit their consciences, and private reason, as being the Rule which they
ought to follow in the lawful exercise of their Jurisdiction. So that by full
Authority and Power be meant an equal relation which they have all to Christ
whose Vicars they are, and from whom they immediately receive their
Jurisdiction, and not an equality of extent in the matter, and use of their
Jurisdiction.

90. The first of these senses is Dr. Sherlock's in his aforesaid Vindication,
but is none of S. Cyprian's. For S. Cyprian holds, that all the Bishops in the
Church are One among themselves by being all united to S. Peter's Chair, which
is the beginning of their unity; And this Union argues a dependence and
subordination in matters of Government, there being no other imaginable reason
why they should be tied to an Union with this Chair, but because of the
Superiority and Jurisdiction which it has over them, S. Cyprian holds, that
the Decrees of S. Peter's Successors, when they are accompanied with the consent
of the other Bishops, are to be a standing Rule which Bishops ought to follow
in matters of Faith, as appears in his 67. Epist. to Stephen B. of Rome in the
case of Marcian of whom he sais, sententiam non dicat, sed accipiat etc. Let
him not pronounce sentence against us, but receive it from us; nor carry
himself so as tho he had judged the College of Priests, when he is judged by
them all. For we must maintain the glorious Honor of our Predecessors the
Blessed Martyrs Cornelius and Lucius; whose memory as we honor, so ought
thou, most dear Brother, who art in their place, and become their Successor, to
honor and support in a more peculiar manner with they gravitie and Authority.
For they being full of God's Spirit... judged that the Peace ought to be given
to those who had fallen.... which thing we all of us in all parts judged in
like manner. S. Cyprian holds, that the Decrees of S. Peter's Successors when
they are made with the aforesaid approbation and consent of the College of
Bishops, are to be accounted for a Law throughout the Church in matters of
Discipline, as is seen in his 68. Epist. to the Clergy and People of Asturica
and Emerita in Spain, whom he commends for having chosen other Bishops in the
room of Basilides and Martialis, who had sacrificed to Idols in the time of
persecution. And after that he with his Provincial Bishops had proved to them
by several places of Scripture the lawfulness of what they had done, he put's
the matter beyond dispute, when he tel's them, Maxim cum jam pridem nobiscum
and cum omnibus omnino Episcopis in toto mundo constitutis, etiam Cornelius
Collega noster..... decreverit etc. More especially considering how together
with us, and with all the Bishops in the world, Cornelius also our Colleague has
some time since Decreed, that such kinds of persons (as Basilides and
Martialis) might be admitted to do Penance, but that they should be removed
from Ordaining the Clergy, and the Priestly Honor.

91. These few instances which Providence has left us, show that when S.
Cyprian sais, that every Bishop holds part of the Catholic Church with full
Authority and Power, he does not mean, that there is no superior Authority
in the Church over them, and that they are independent as to subjection, as
this Author affirms in his Vindicat. p. 38. For if this were so, they might he
Heretics, and Schismatiques, and Idolaters, and what they pleased besides
without any fear of justice, or being controlled in their course of
sinfulness. Which makes me wonder, how he who maintains the aforesaid
Propositions, can assert in the next page, as he does likewise in several other
places of the said Book, that Bishops are not exempt from Censures in case of
Heresy, Schism, Idolatry, and such evil practices. Certainly a lawful Power
to punish an Offender argues an Authority in the punisher, and a subjection in
the person that is punished. O but the Power of censuring Heretical and
Schismatical Bishops does not infer a superior Authority of one Bishop over
another, but only an Authority in the Church to censure such crimes whoever
be guilty of them. Vid. loc. cit. This is a very remarkable Reply. Pray, Sr.
is it not the common sense of mankind, that an Authority to censure crimes
whoever be guilty of them, is an Authority to censure all those who are
guilty of them? Yes, say you. How then comes it to pass, that an Authority
in the Church to censure the crimes of Heresy, Idolatry, Schism etc. does
not infer an Authority over all those who are guilty of them? So it does, say
you. How then comes it to pass, that the Authority which is in the Church
(which can be no other than that of Bishops) to censure the aforesaid crimes,
does not infer an Authority of one Bishop over another, whenever Bishops are
found guilty of them? Here lies the difficulty, if there be any. According to
my poor talent it is very clear, that every one who is lawful Judge over a
Criminal has Authority over him, and the Criminal is in subjection to him,
seeing it is nothing else but Authority which makes one man a lawful Judge over
another; and wherever there is Authority, there must of necessity be
subjection, because of the relation there is between these two qualifications.
And therefore if we suppose Bishops to be lawful Judges over Bishops, we must
consequently say, that Bishops have Authority over Bishops, and that this
Authority in the one infers a subjection in the other.

92. He tells me in his aforesaid Vindication p. 35. that this is no act of
Authority over Bishops considered as Bishops, but over Heretics and
Schismatiques.

93. I answer, that it is sufficient that a Judge be said to have Authority
over Criminals considered according to the character, station, and Dignity
which they bear in the Church or Commonwealth monwealth, if he have Authority
to punish those crimes in them which are proper to men of their station; for
example, when a Judge punishes a Viceroy for his ill Government, or a Treasurer
for turning the Kings cash to his own uses, or a Privy Counselor for
betraying the secrets of State, it is evident, that he punishes the Viceroy
considered as a Viceroy, and the Treasurer considered as a Treasurer, and the
Privy Counselor considered as a privy Counselor. And thus it happens in
the trial of Heretical and Schismatical Bishops, who are punished by other
Bishops for such crimes as are the most proper violations of their Dignity;
and their punishment directtly shows, that their Judges considers them as
Bishops when they condemn them, seeing they deprive them of all Spiritual
Jurisdiction, and make their Sees vacant for new Incumbents. Besides the Power
of censuring Bishops for Heresy and Schism is of it is own nature a Power to
control them in the management of their Churches, and of compelling them to
govern them by such Laws as they in their consciences do not approve. As for
example, a Bishop preaches Arianisme in his Diocese, and is commanded to
forbear by the other Bishops, and to preach the contrary Doctrine of the
Consubstantialitie of the Son of God with the Eternal Father, which he accounts
for a most dangerous error. Another Bishop refuses to give the Peace to any
who have fallen into any damnable sin after Baptism, and is presently ordered
by the other Bishops to give the Peace to all whom he shall find truly
penitent, which he accounts a great impiety. What can any one think of this
procedure among Bishops, but that it infers an Authority over Bishops
considered as Bishops? And this Author would be of the same mind too, were it
not for the cause of the Reformation which requires, that he say something to
free the English Bishops from Heresy, and Schism. Which engages him to exalt
the Authority of Bishops to so great a height, as to make them independent of
one another as to subjection, and matters of Government. Which Principle has
the same property as all false Principles have, which is to prove more than
the advancer of it is willing it should prove. For it so well secures the
English Bishops from being Heretics, and the Novelties of the Reformation
from being Heresies, that it makes it impossible, that there should be any such
thing as Heresies and Heretical Bishops, by constituting Bishops for the
sanctifiers and unaccountable Judges of what Doctrins they are to preach, as it
happened at the Reformation, which was such a notorious violation of all
Ecclesiastical Laws, that it can never be defended but by making Bishops
considered as Bishops superior to all Laws. From whence it follows that their
Acts of Government viz the Faith which they preach, and the Discipline which
they establish, are above the censure of other Bishops, and by consequence that
they can never be Heretics and Schismatiques, which we find him to deny in
the present Objection. On the contrary our Doctrine touching the Authority of
Bishops is reconcilable to reason, and all Christian Principles. For we hold,
that so long as Bishops will order their lives, and conform their Faith, and
Discipline according to the prescript of those whom Christ has appointed for
their Judges, there is no Power on Earth that can control them in the exercise
of their Episcopal Functions. And I think this Author ought to close with me,
that they are under this obligation, because the consequence is necessary, that
if Christ has left them Judges of their Faith and Discipline as often as they
offend in either (as he grants he has), the Faith and Discipline of these Judges
ought to be the Rule which they are obliged to follow in their conduct and the
government of their Churches, as I will show more at large when I treat of the
Authority of General Councils.

94. A great cause of these puzzling mazes is a strong persuasion that Bishops
by their Original Institution were all of equal Jurisdiction, which I have
shown to be false out of S. Cyprian, who sais, that S. Peter was Primat over
his Brethren. And although we should suppose it to be true in the Apostles yet I
do not see any necessity of granting, that their Successors must have in like
manner the same equality of Jurisdiction. For if it be lawful to discourse
after this manner, we may as well infer, that the whole world is the subject
matter of each Bishop's Jurisdiction, seeing it is certain that the Apostles
Jurisdiction was not restrained to any particular Province, but they were
empoured by by our Lord to preach his Faith, and administer his Sacraments in
what place soever they should come, although it were in some Province, or City
where one of their Brethren were before, as we find in S. Peter and S. Paul who
were both in Rome at the same time. And yet it is notorious, that since the
Apostles time the Bishops their Successors (I except always S. Peter's
Successor's) never had any Jurisdiction over the whole world, but have held
only a part of it, as S. Cyprian sais, for the matter of their Jurisdiction.
What reason then can there be to affirm, that Bishops inherit from the
Apostles an equality of Jurisdiction (supposing the Apostles had it), and yet
that they do not inherit from them the whole extent of the subject matter of
their Jurisdiction? If their Original Institution be of force to prove the one,
why should it not in like manner prove the other?

95. If you say, that Bishops do not succeed the Apostles in the whole subject
matter of their Jurisdiction, because the Apostles had a command from our Lord
to assign to each Bishop whom they should ordain, a certain part of the world
for the subject matter of their Jurisdiction, and that they left an injunction
on the Church of succeeding times to follow the same Rule in the Consecration
of other Bishops: why may not any one say in like manner, that the Apostles had
a Command from our Lord to give to the Bishops whom they should ordain, so much
of their Jurisdiction as was sufficient for the discharge of their duty in
their respective stations, to some more, to others less, to Primats and
Metropolitans more, and to inferior Bishops less? If the Original Institution
of Bishops in the Apostles could not tie our Lord's hands, but that he might
give them a less matter of Jurisdiction than he gave to the Apostles, it could
as little tie them from giving them an unequal distribution of Jurisdiction
among them, which Dr. Sherlock's Principles will strongly dispose any man to
believe that he has done. For in his aforesaid Vindicdtion p. 41. he sais of
Arehiepiscopal and Metropolitical Churches, that they were so very early in the
Church, that it is most probable, that they had their beginning in the Apostles
days, which being once admitted for a truth (as it most certainly is), the
lawful consequence is, that these Churches were established by the Apostles
Authority. For it is incredible, that there could be any such solemn
Combinations and Associations of National and Provincial Churches settled
without the allowance of the Apostles, who were the Sovereign Governors of
God's Church, it being a necessary Prerogative of all Sovereign Power's to
give life and being to Politic Bodies, without whose Charter and express
Erection they are no more than a Company of unconnected individual persons.
How can any one think, that such prudent establishments as these could be
carried on throughout the world without the orders of the Apostles, who were
the sources of Christian Prudence? Or that God provided such visible, such
illustrious, and such effectual means for the continuance of his Church by his
inspirations to other men, than to the Apostles on whom he had built his
Church? And supposing that these Associated Churches were established by the
Apostles, it follows, that Archbishops and Metropolitans received from the
Apostles all that Authority which we learn from antiquity to have been
exercised by men of their eminent rank and station, as to call National and
Provincial Synods, to preside in them, to see the execution of their Decrees,
and to censure the Bishops of their several Provinces for any enermous crimes
etc. All which Prerogatives do not signify a Primacie of mere Order, but of
Jurisdiction without which there can be neither Faith, nor order, nor
Discipline, nor any thing else that is good observed amongst men. Neither is it
tolerable to hold, that the Councils which consisted of the Bishops of these
Archiepiscopal and Metropolitan Churches (and which our Author loc. cit. sais
were from the very beginning) were instituted only for mutual advice, it being
ridiculous to think, that the Apostles empowred them to consult together about
the common concerns of their Churches, and to aggree upon Canons and
regulations for their better government, without giving them a coercive Power
to punish any one who should be a contravener of their orders, or laying an
obligation under Obedience on succeeding Bishops, nay nor so much as on
themselves by whom the Canons were signed and enacted, to procure the due and
faithful observance of them. A great piece of Apostolical Prudence indeed, to
command, and to empower Bishops to assemble in Councils, and to make Canons for
the better government of their Churches, and yet not to give them when they are
thus assembled, Authority sufficient to bind themselves to the execution of
their common resolutions unless they pleas themselves! Those who prudently
design an end, make choice of such means as are effectual for the compassing
of the same. And therefore it must be granted, that when the Apostles empowred
these Councils to frame Canons for the good of the Church, they gave them a
direct and superior Auhoritie over Bishops for the more exact execution of
them in their several districts, this being the only way to compass the end
of these Councils, which is the good of the Church. And thus we have a
superior Authority of one Bishop over another, although we suppose them by their
Original Institution in the Apostles to have been all of equal Jurisdiction.

96. This discourse shows, that we ought to understand S. Cyprian's words in
the second sense which I have given above, viz that when he sais, that every
Bishop holds part of the One Bishoprique of the Catholic Church with full
Authority and Power, he meaus that they receive their Jurisdiction alike from
Christ, although not all of them in the same equality, of proportion.

97. It will be objected against this explication of S. Cyprian, that these two
Doctrins which I have ascribed to him, viz that the Primacie of S. Peter's One
Chair is de Iure Divino, and the Jurisdiction of each single Bishop is de Iure
Divino seem irreconciliable, and in Consistent with one another. For first, if
Bishops receive their Authority and Power immediately from Christ, how can
they have any other Superior but Christ in the performance of their Functions?
2. How comes it to pass, that in their Consecration they take an Oath of
Obedience to S. Peter's Successors, and 3 that they are chosen or consirmed by
them, and that without their Bulls they have no Jurisdiction to act as Bishops?
4. How can S. Peter's Successors limit, and restrain their Power so much as we
see in matters of Appeals, Dispensations, and Reservations of Cases in the
Court of Penance, since an immediate Delegation of a Power from Christ act
signifies a lawful Power to act immediately without any subjection to any
intermediate Director and Controller? 5. All those Directions, Commands, and
Decrees which proceed from S. Peter's Successors, and which are many times
accompanied with threats of Excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical Censures
debar Bishops of their liberty to act, or to ceas from acting. Which
abridgment of their liberty seems inconsistent with the Doctrine which makes
their Authority to be Iure Divino. All which great dependances which
particular Bishops have on S. Peter's Chair, seem to show, that the Authority
and Power whereby they act is not derived immediately from Christ, but from the
Successors of S. Peter.

98. These Objections admit of very easy solutions. As to the first, I answer,
that Bishops have no other Superior but Christ, for what relates to the
Donation of their Jurisdiction, but they have S. Peter's Successors, and their
Colleagues in a General Council for their immediate Superiors for what relates
to the regulation of the same, so that they may be the better able to edify
the Body of Christ thereby, and proceed all with the greater Uniformitie in
the government of their Flocks, as becomes the Heads, and Princes of the several
portions of the One Bishoprique of the Catholic Church.

99. As to the 2. I answer, that the Obedience to S. Peter's. Successors which
Bishops oblige themselves to by Oath at their Consecration, can no ways
prejudice their Claim of receiving their Jurisdiction immediately from Christ.
For this Obedience may be reduced to two Heads; the one is, when they are
commanded to desist from injuring the Flock of Christ either by their ill
example, careless government, or false Doctrine; and the other, when they are
commanded to see the execution of such orders as are for the good of the
Faithful. In the first of these Cases they lose nothing of their Authority by
Obedience, because Christ never gave them any Power to destroy his Church 2. ad
Cor. 13. Neither is their Authority weakened in the other case, because the
orders of S. Peter's Successors are performed by the Authority which they have
immediately received from Christ to edify his Body. For seeing the execution
of these orders belongs to them as they are Bishops, and as they are Bishops
they derive their Authority immediately from Christ according that of S. Paul
Quos Spiritus Sanctus constituit regere Ecclesiam Dei, it follows, that when
they execute these orders, they execute the Authority which they have
immediately received from Christ. The Authority which they immediately receive
from Christ is that of governing, feeding, and illuminating souls as S. Paul
sais 2. ad Tim. 4. Praedica verbum, insta opportune, importune, argue, obsecra,
increpa in omnipatientia and doctrina. And seeing those orders which they
receive from S. Peter's Successors are supposed to further them in the exercise
of this Power, the consequence is, that the performance of them is by the Power
which they have immediately received from Christ.

100. It belongs to the Superior Jurisdiction which S. Peter's Successors have
over their venerable Brethren the other Bishops, that they have a Latitude of
judgment whereby they are enabled to judge what is expedient for the general
good of the Church, and of particular persons too in certain cases and on
certain emergencies, which the other Bishops have not out of a General Council;
as also a Coercive Power to see the execution of such regulations as they shall
make on the like occasions. To give an instance in the first Case, let us
suppose, that the Pope takes into consideration, that it will conduce very much
toward the better observance of the Lord's day, if the Faithful are under the
same obligation of hearing sermons, or assisting at Vespers as they are of
hearing Mass on this day. Herupon he orders a Decree to this effect, which as
soon as it is duly formed, duly received, and duly published in all parts of
the Church, it ought to be put in execution by the other Bishops in their
several Districts. The instance in the second case may be this. Titius is very
desirous to marry Caja, but there is an impedimentum derimens between them
which jure communi cannot be dispensed withal by the Ordinary. Whereupon he
sues for a Dispensation in the Court of Rome, lays open the reasonable Motives
he has for a relaxation of the Canons, and having procured it he shows it to
his Bishop, who presently gives his consent that he may marry Caja. Now the
Bishops acting in either of these cases affords nothing like an Argument, that
they act by the Authority which they receive from S. Peter's Successors, but
only that their Authority in these cases has a necessary relation to the
direction of S. Peter's Successors, which as soon as they have received, they
do not receive a new Authority together with it, but only an obligation to
exercise the Authority which they have immediately received from Christ. The
Authority whereby they act in these cases is from Christ, but the obligation
of acting hic and nunc is from the direction of S. Peter's Successors. And here
we may discover a great difference between the Polity of the Church, and that
of the Civil State; for when a subject receives from his Prince a Command to
govern a Province, or a City, the Prince's Command is the Power whereby he is
to govern: whereas when S. Peter's Successors send their Commands to Bishops,
they do not properly speaking give them Power, but lay an obligation on them to
exercise the Power which they have immediately received from Christ on such and
such occasions; just as when I command Peter to beat John, although he beat him at
my Command, yet he does it by his own strength.

101. As to the 3. I answer, that the election or confirmation of Bishops by
the Pope no more proves that they receive their Jurisdiction from him after
their admission into their Bishopriques, than it is an Argument that Popes
receive their Jurisdiction from the College of Cardinals, because they are
chosen by them. In both cases the Jurisdiction is received immediately from
Christ, although the election of the persons be according to the customs which the
Church at present has admitted. For some Centuries after Christ the People had
a great part in the election of Bishops, and yet I suppose no body will
pretend, that those Bishops received their Episcopal Jurisdiction from the
People. It is God who gives the Jurisdiction, and those who have the Power of
choosing do no more than present to his Divine Majesty such persons on whom he
may confer it, as we we read Number. 11. 16. that Moses by God's order chose from
among the Tribes 70. men who were to be assistants to him in the government of
the People. Which Institution of those Magistrates was properly Divine, and
their Jurisdiction was received immediately from God, although their persons were
nominated by Moses. And thus it is in the Church of Christ, wherein God has
commanded the election of Bishops, but reserved to himself the Prerogative of
investing them in their Jurisdiction after they are chosen. The custom which
there is at present for Bishops to receive their Bulls from Rome before they
are admitted into their Bishopriques was introduced into the Church not many
Censuries ago. And therefore it cannot afford so good an Argument that Bishops
derive their Authority from that See, as the contrary custom which was before
can yield, that they derive it immediately from Christ. We are at full liberty
to look upon this Custom as a Form, which ought to be considered according to
that construction of it which the Fathers of the Church and Tradition lead us
to, which is that Bishops Faculties are immediately received from Christ, and
that their Bulls signify no more than that the New-Bishops may govern with the
Pope's consent and approbation.

102. As to the 4. I answer, that the delegation of a Power to act many times
ties those who receive it to the observance of certain Conditions, without
which the exercise of it cannot be lawful. As for example, a Judge who
receives from the Prince a Power to hear Criminal, or Civil Causes cannot
pronounce a lawful sentence before he has referred the matter to the
consideration of a Jurie, and observed the other Forms of Law; nor a Viceroy
come to a full resolution in any matter of great moment, without hearing first
the judgment and opinion of his privy Counsel, or others who may be presumed
to be able to give him a true and exact information of the case. And thus it is
at present, for although particular Bishops have received from Christ their power
to govern their Churches, yet Christ himself has subjected the lawful and
valid exercise of this Power to the superior Wisdom, and Conduct, and
Moderation of General Councils and S. Peter's Successors, who may limit it in
certain cases, as they find it expedient for the good of the Church, as they
have done in those cases mentioned in the Objection; without whose concurrence
Bishops may be said to have no Power nor Jurisdiction, in as much as what they
do is neither lawful nor valid; and with their concurrence they may be said to
have Power, in as much as what they do is both lawful and valid. But from hence
it does not follow, that the Power whereby they act after this concurrence is
not received from Christ, but only that the Power which they have received
from Christ becomes lawful and valid by the observance of those Rules which
Christ will have to be observed in the exercise of it? Every thing that is
sufficient to make the exercise of a Power lawful and valid is not necessarily
the Cause of the Power whose exercise it makes lawful and valid, as is manifest
in Judges and Viceroys, who receive their Power from the King, and yet the
lawfulness, nay the validity of their Acts in many Cases depends upon the
concurrence of their Juries, and Privy Counsels.

103. As to the 5. I answer, that the abridgment of the liberty of Bishops by
means of the Decrees and Commands of S. Peter's Successors does not in the
least impair their claim of receiving their Authority from Christ, because
although God has given them freedom of will to act, or not to act according as he
would have them, yet he has given them Authority to act only so as that they
may edify the Body of Christ. And seeing such Decrees as are issued forth by
S. Peter's successors according to the Canons and Tradition of the Catholic
Church, are supposed to edify the Body of Christ, whenever Bishops complie
with them, they properly exercise their Authority by exercising the freedom of
their wills in such compliances. And seeing a noncompliance with such Decrees
as edify the Body of Christ is an interpretative destruction and
disedisication of the same, we cannot conclude, that Bishops lose any thing of
their Authority, because S. Peter's Successors have a Power to force them to
Obedience by the threats of Excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical Censures,
because this Power is only the Power of punishing those who (...) and destroy
the Body of Christ, which certainly must be granted to have been lodged by our
Savior either in one or more Bishops, or else that he was a very imprudent
Lawgiver to design the perpetuity of his Church, and yet to provide no fitting
means for it is preservation. If I who am not S. Peter's Successor, can convince
a Bishop of any thing which he ought to do toward the edification of our
Lord's Body, he is bound in conscience to follow my counsel, and yet he loses
nothing of his Authority by having his will determined to act through my
advise. Why then should it be so dangerous an encroachment on his Authority as
to be an argument that it is derived from S. Peter's Chair, because his will is
determined to act by such orders and Commands as he receives from thence, seeing
these orders when they are according to the Practice and Canons of the Church,
are supposed to bring a conviction along with them, that their performance will
tend to the ^dification of our Lord's Body, and the threats of Excommunication
wherewith they are accompanied, do no more than (...) the thoughts of those
punishments which private persons may denounce to him, if he omit to act as
they advise him, when their advice is evidently good, and he is obliged in
conscience to follow it?

104. It is a vain thing to think, that God has given to every Bishop an
absolute and Despotical Power to act in all Cases, so as he shall judge to
co^duce most toward the edification of our Lord's Body without any obligation
to follow the received Customs, Maxims, Principles, and Canons of the
Catholic Church; or having any kind of dependence on a Superior Authority
in any matters relating to Faith; Morality; or Discipline. For if this were so,
there might be as many distinct Communions as there are Bishopriques, because
every Bishop has full Authority and Power in this Hypothesis to appoint what
terms and Conditions of Communion he thinks fitting. And if there may be as
many distinct Communions as there are Bishopriques, it is possible for the
Catholic Church to fail, because it is impossible for One Body and Communion
to result out of many distinct and independent Communions. Wherefore when we
say, that every Bishop has full Authority and Power, we must understand it in
such a sense, as will not hinder the Catholic Church from being One Body and
Communion, which is a truth as evidently Revealed, and of at least as great
importance, as that every Bishop holds part of the Catholic Church with full
Authority and Power.

105. Thus we see that S. Cyprian's Definition of a Church aggrees to the
Catholic Church as well as to any particular Church within it is Communion, if
it be sufficient for this purpose to make S. Peter's Successors essential to it
by being Primats over the other Bishops, by being the beginning of their
unity, and by being Bishops over the Universal Church. And from hence I infer,
that if Dr. Sherlock can lawfully conclude, that Obedience does not belong to
the Notion of the Catholic Church, because it is the whole Company of the
Faithful, there can be no reason why Faith may not be said not to belong to
the Notion of it because it is the People united to the Priest, and the Flock
cleaving to their Pastor, which is S. Cyprian's Definition of it.

106. I do not at all wonder, that Bellarmin has joined both these Notions into
One complete Definition, which he might very well do without the introduction of
a dangerous Noveltie. For seeing Faith and Obedience are equally necessary
Conditions of Communion with the Catholic Church, where lies the fault in
inserting them both into the Definition of it? He was certainly no flatterer of
the Pope by acknowledging a Privilege which the Son of God had given to him,
neither had the Pope any reason so much as to thank him for it, unless it were
because he had done his duty. When he acknowledged the Pope's Primacie, he
confessed Christ before men by confessing his Universal Vicar before
Schismatiques, as the Learned Launoy would have done himself, had he been to
manage the Cause of the Church against this sort of People. For seeing he held
the Pope's Primacie to be an Article of Faith, he held the belief of it to be
essential to the Church. And if the belief of it be essential to the Church,
why may not this Article be particularized in the Notion of it as often as
occasions prudently require it, as well as covertly expressed under the general
name of Faith, when the Church is said to be the whole Company of the
Faithful? In like manner seeing the Authority of General Councils is no less
an Article of Faith than the Pope's Primacie, whoever pleases may insert that
too into the Notion of it, as often as occasions prudently require it, without
any danger of error. One thing the Dr. may assure himself, that if Mons.
Launoy had lived to see the advantage, which is pretended to be taken from what
he writ to Gatinaeus concerning the Notion of the Church, he would not have
failed to let him know, that he held Obedience to the One Chair of S. Peter to
be as necessary to Catholic Communion as Bellarmin, or any other who has
placed it in the Notion of the Church, and that what he had written on this
occasion was far from giving any encouragement to Schismatiques, because it was
no ways repugnant to the Unity of the Catholic Church. Let this Author show
me, if he can, where Monsr. Launoy sais, that obedience does not belong to the
Notion of the Catholic Church as such, which being once granted to have been
his Opinion, there is no difficulty in showing, that he held the Catholic
Church to be the Company of the Faithful in the Protestant sense.

107. From what has been said we may learn the true meaning of two other
Principles drawn out of S. Cyprian, which this Author in his aforesaid
Vindication p. 35. makes use of to show, that this Father held no Superiority
of one Bishop over another. The first is this, unus Episcopatus Episcoporum
multorum concordi numerositate diffusus, which he renders thus into English,
One Bishoprique is spread over the world by the consenting multitude of many
Bishops. Ep. 52. Pam. The other is Ep. 69. Quando Ecclesia quae una est scissa
non sit, neque divisa, sed ubique connexa and cohaerentium sihi invicim
Sacerdotum glutino copulata, which he translates thus, The Catholic Church is
not rent, nor divided, but united and coupled by the Cement of many Bishops
who stick close together. From which places he infers I know not what
Chimerical unity of the Episcopacie which is distinct from the Essential
Unity of the Church, and without any dependence of subordination to the Chair
of S. Peter, when it is as clear as noon day, that in S. Cyprians judgment the
Concord, unity, and Cement of a multitude of many Bishops do no otherwise
make the Catholic Church One Bishoprique, or One Ecclesiastical Body, but
inasmuch as they unite them to the One Chair of S. Peter. For how can they be
united in an Ecclesiastical sense to one another, who are not united to the
Center and beginning of the Ecclesiastical and Priestly unity? Heretics and
Schismatiques may be very numerous, and their Bishops may have their Unity,
Concord, and Cement too, and yet they make not One Church, because they are not
united among themselves by means of one common Union to the beginning of the
Priestly unity. So that in S. Cyprian's judgment the Ecclesiastical Unity of
a multitude of many Bishops, and by consequence of the Unity of their several
Flocks consists in their Union to S. Peter's One Chair, without which they
cannot make One Church, One Bishoprique, or one Ecclesiastical Body, although
there be never so good an intelligence and correspondence held amongst them.

. 7. P. 32. I know of late the Clergy have in a great measure monopolized the
name of the Church, whereas in propriety of speesh, they do not belong to the
Definition of a Church.

108. Reply. What is it he means here by the word Church? a Church as it is
taken for Christ's Mystical Body, or as it is a Visible Society? If he take
it in the first sense, I know of no body that denies the latter part of his
Proposition; for Christians are singly and individually united to Christ as to
their Head and Spous, and the Clergy of the Catholic Church are so far from
monopolizing the name of the Church in this sense, that they do not pretend to
belong to the Definition of it, but leave this Prerogative to Christ alone.

109. But if he take the word Church so as to signify a Visible Society, we
have already seen that the whole Company of the Faithful is not a complete
Definition of it, and therefore for ought yet appears to the contrary, the
Clergy may belong to it as much as the People. Nay we have seen, that S.
Cyprian places the Clergy as well as the People in the Definition of it, which
makes his postponing of S. Cyprian's Definition to be very suspicious, and a
vehement presumption, that he was unwilling to submit his Cause to the judgment
of this Father. Nay what is more remarkeble yet, he tells us p. 38. in behalf of
particular Churches, that the government of Bishops is that which makes them,
and is essential to their Definition. If he will stand to this, we need no
further proof against him than his own confession. For what is essential to a
thing belongs to it in propriety of speech. Wherefore if the government of
Bishops (who are the Heads of the Clergy) be essential to the Definition of a
particular Church, it follows, that the Clergy belong to the Definition of a
Church in propriety of speech.

110. And from hence it follows, that the Clergy belongs likewise to the
Definition of the whole Catholic Church on Earth as it is a Visible Society.
For what is essential to the parts must needs be essential to the whole, and by
consequence seeing the whole Church is nothing else in his way but the
Collection of all particular Churches and Christians who are under the
government of Bishops, it cannot have a distinct nature and Definition from
particular Churches and Christians, unless he say that men may be Members of
the Visible Church without being Members of any Church in particular. So that
according to this Doctrine the true and proper Definition of the Catholic
Church is the whole Company of persons who are united together by the
profession of the same Christian Faith (if he will have Faith to be essential
to it,) and Communion of the same Sacraments under the government of lawful
Bishops. Which Definition differs from that of Bellarmin, not because it
excludes the Clergy, but because it excludes the B. of Rome, whom Bellarmin
acknowledges for the root and beginning of the Ecclesiastical and Priestly
unity. We make with S. Cyprian and all Antiquity the Pope together with his
Venerable Brethren the Bishops to belong to the Definition of the Catholic
Church, and this Author (if he persist in affirming Bishops to be essential to
particular Churches) excludes the Pope, and admits only lawful Bishops. In
both these ways the Clergy belongs to the Definition of the Catholic Church
in propriety of speech, although in the Drs. way the Catholic Church be not One
Body and Society for want of a root and beginning of unity to knit it is
parts together, but rather an Aggregation of several incoherent and unconnected
Churches and Christians, as a heap of wheat is in respect of the grains whereof
it is composed; which does not hinder, but that the Collection or Aggregation
of Churches ought to be defined according to that which is essential to every
Church in particular, as a heap of wheat necessarily requires, that it is
Definition be made according to such considerations as are essential to the
grains that make it. And in case the government of Bishops be essential to the
Definition of the Catholic Church, it follows, that Obedience must be so too.
For seeing this obligation of inferiors is annexed to all lawful Governments,
the Government of Bishops can neither be conceived, not subsist without it.
From whence it is plain, that Obedience is as necessary toward our being
Members of the Catholic Church as Faith, and by consequence the whole
Company of the Faithful cannot be a Complete Notion of the Catholic Church
for want of Obedience, as I said lately.

111. This discourse gives me an occasion of taking notice of a great
inconsequence of this Author in his Vindic. of some Prot. Princ. etc. p. 34.
where he sais, that in case of necessities, when Bishops caunot be had, a
Church may be a truly Catholic Church, and such as we may and ought to
communicate with, without Bishops, which, he sais, he asserts in vindication of
some foreign Reformed Churches who have none; and that therefore he does not
make Episcopacie so absolutely necessary to Catholic Communion as to
unchurch all Churches which have it not. He must have a very subtle
understanding who can reconcile what is here said with what I quoted last out
of him, viz that the government of Bishops makes aparticular Church, and is
essential to the Definition of it. For if this Doctrine be true, how can there
be a truly Catholic Church without Bishops? Or how comes it to pass, that
Episcopacie is not so absolutely necessary to Catholic Communion, but that
there may be true Churches which have it not? There is no playing with Essences
and Definitions. If the government of Bishops makes a particular Church, and be
essential to the Definition of it, there is no imaginable (...) which can make
a Church subsist without it. For how can any thing subsist without it is
Essence, that is, without being what it is? He had done his foreign Churches
much better service, if he had left them to shift for themselves. (...) to take
such measures in the (...), as (...) the world, that their Cause cannot be made
good without Contradictions.

112. I well see, that this Author will resent the advantages which I have taken
from his granting the government of Bishops to be essential to a particular
Church, which he has expressed in as full and plain terms as possibly can be
desired. And yet he will not fail of making use of his talent of evading here
as I have observed he has done on other occasions, although I have set my self on
purpose to guess at some tolerable Reply which he may make to it, and after
all my searches I do not find any thing that can carry so much as the color
of reason. Perhaps he will serve me as he does his Adversary in the aforesaid
Treatise p. 23. who having charged him with a Contradiction, he tells him, that
the matter was a little out of his reach.... and that if he had not understood
it, it had been more modest and ingenuous to have made a Querie upon it, and
desired him to have reconciled that seeming contradiction, rather than to
charge him with such Principles as he often and expressly rejects. But
ingenuitie and modesty are not to be expected from such Adversaries etc. This
good Gentleman blames his Adversary for want of Ingenuitie and Modesty in
letting the world know, that he had contradicted himself in a very material
Point, as tho these virtues could suffer any thing by the publication of a
pertinent truth. But J shall have no scruple at all to charge the same defects
upon him, in case he do not acquit himself very well of the present
inconsequence, seeing it is no less a sign of Ingenuitie and Modesty to
confess and acknowledge ones own weakness, than it is to acquaint those
privately of it whom we find guilty. But why should he expect a Penny-post
letre to advertise him of that which he would have thought to be a blunder? Is
there any such practice among Controvertists? Why should he think himself
hardly used, when he is treated no otherwise than as good, and as able men as
himself have been treated before him? Why may not he contradict himself as
well as his neighbors, and if he contradict himself in public, why may not
he be censured for it in public? Those who write Controversies out of
ambitious ends, or to show their wit, may with a false gallantrie give their
Adversary their hand after they have thrown him, but a severe lover of Truth
will keep him down whilst he has him down, because he judges that he holds
error down together with him. I am very sensible, that men of the best parts,
and the managers of the best Causes may sometimes slip, and commit mistakes,
and I think it a piece of rudeness to take a man up, as they say, before he is
down; but when we may justly presume, as we may at present, that the
inconsistencie of two Doctrins is not a mere slip, but the result of a
deliberate and fixed judgment, I think it neither wisdom nor prudence for any
man who thinks that he defends a good Causnot to press it upon his Adversary,
and to make use of all the advantages which will serve to strengthen the Cause
which he has undertaken.

113. To proceed, no one better understands what he belongs to the Essence of a
Church than he that made it, and we may securely depend upon the truth of that
Definition which our Lord gave to his Apostles. He tells them Luc. 10. He that
hears you, hears me. From whence it is plain, that if to hear Christ be to be a
Christian, and to hear those whom Christ has sent to teach us be to hear
Christ, that Christianity consists in hearing those whom Christ has sent to
teach us. And if to hear Christ be to believe what he has revealed, and to obey
what he has commanded, it follows also, that by hearing those whom Christ has
sent to teach us, is meant that we ought to believe what they preach, and to
obey what they command, because we hear Christ by hearing them. So that the
Definition of a Church according to the Founder of it is a Company of People
which hear those whom Christ has sent to teach them, where we see the Clergy
or those whom Christ has sent to teach, and govern his Church to be a part of
it is Definition. And from hence we may safely conclude, that the Church is not
only (...) whole Company of the Faithful, and united to Christ as to to their
Mystical Head and Spous, but that it is essentially also a Visible Body and
Society by being a Company of People who hear those whom Christ has sent to
teach them, or as S. Cyprian delivers it in other words, by being united to
their Priests and cleaving to their Pastors, that is, by believing what they
teach, and obeying what they command.

114. Our Lord tells his Apostles in like manner Luc. 5. You are the Light of
the world, you are the salt of the Earth. Which words clearly show the
Apostles, or the Clergy to belong to the Definition of a Church. For the
Church was the world which was to be illuminated by them, and the Earth which
was to be salted by them. Wherefore if Light belong to the Definition of an
illuminated world, and salt to the Definition of a salted Earth, it follows,
that the Clergy belong to the Definition of a Church, because they are the
Light wherewith it is illuminated, and the salt wherewith it is salted.

115. The Clergy are the Light of the world, not only because of the Faith
which they preach, but likewise by means of the Sacraments which they
administer, which are the channels and conveyances whereby the Sun of Justice
dispenses his rays to the souls of men. Will this Author say, that the
Sacraments do not belong to the Definition of a Church? And yet this
necessarily follows, supposing the Clergy do not belong to the Definition of
it. For the administration of the Sacraments necessarily requires, that there
be a Clergy who are duly authorized to do the same, unless it be said, that
there is no other qualification requisite for this performance, besides such
natural gifts as may incline the People to Ordain Ministers by their own
choice. As for Baptism, although it may be validly conferred by Lay people, men
or women, yet this practice is only indulged in cases of great necessity,
which cannot vacate the Institution of the Lawgiver, nor the direct Relation
which this Sacrament has to those who ex Officio are to represent the person of
Christ in the administration of it. It is not absolutely necessary that every
individual person be baptized by a Priest, because in danger of death the
Lawgiver gives way, that they be baptized without one; but it is absolutely
necessary to the whole Church that there be Priests, because where there is no
danger of death, the Institution of the Lawgiver ought to take place. We shall
deal very ungratefully with our Savior, if we interpret his gracious
Indulgence in one certain case as an abrogation of his Law in all others. But
supposing the Clergy be not so necessary to the Church for the administration
of Baptism, but that it may be conceived to subsist without them, yet what
will this Author say of the Sacrament of our Lord's Body and Blood? May Lay
people administer that too? Where does he find any warrant for this either in
Scripture, or from the practice and Tradition of former Ages? All Christian
Principles oppose him herin, and he has no other defense but his own prejudiced
reason, which it is to be feared may at length work him into a total dislike of
Christ and Christianity, since it has already disposed him to believe, that
Bakers and Midwives may succeed the Apostles in being the Light of the world,
as well as those whom he acknowledges to derive their Authority of preaching
and giving the Sacraments by an uninterrupted succession of Ordainers from the
Apostles down to these times.

116. The Clergy are the salt of the Earth, inasmuch as they are empowred by
our Lord to preserve his Church from putrefaction either in their Faith, or
Morality. They are the Physicians which are to cure all our maladies, which
flow from the Original defect which we brought into the world along with us.
They are our Governors to restrain our Excesses by a saving discipline, and to
direct our steps to our Heavenly Country. They bear the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, where none enter but when they open. They are to remove all infected
Members from the Communion of the Faithful, and to prevent the contagion from
spreading further, Our Author cannot deny, but that they are invested with all
these Privileges, and that they have received from Christ our Lord a suitable
Grace to perform the same, which makes me wonder, how he can hold, that they
are not essential to a Church, nor belong to the Definition of it. The Church
is a Visible School; and certainly where there are visible Scholars, there
must be Visible Masters. The Church is a Visible Body and Society, which
certainly requires Visible Governors. The Church is designed by God for the
Kingdom of Heaven, which certainly supposes the assistance and cooperation of
those with whom he has entrusted the Keys of it. The Church is a Company of
Patients under a cure, which certainly argues that there ought to be Physicians
to perform it. This is a plain case according to the present Principles of the
Church of England, and I believe that there are few men of sense among them,
who had not rather continue in a state of wrangling with us on the old foot it
has been hiterto managed, than make use of this new project of putting and end
to it, by renouncing so important a piece of Christianity, as the perpetual
and indispensible necessity of the Evangelical Priesthood till Christ's second
coming.

117. The reasons why he will not have the Clergy to belong to the Definition
of a Church are very remarkeble, not for any strength they have, but for their
apparent weakness (...) first p. 32. that they are Members of the Church, as
they are of the number of the Faithful, and they are the Governors of the
Church, as they have received Authority from Christ the Supreme Lord and
Bishop of the Church, but they are no more the Church than the King is his
Kingdom, or the shepherd his Flock.

118. I answer, if the Clergy are considered barely as they are of the number
of the Faithful, they do not belong to the Definition of the Church, because the
Church under this consideration is not a Visible Body and Society. But if
they are taken as they are the Governors of the Church, they are taken as they
are Governors of a Visible Body and Society, and thus they are part of it is
Definition, as the King belongs to the Definition of a Kingdom as such, and a
Shepherd to the Definition of a Flock that is under care. Can any one define a
Kingdom without conceiving, or mentioning a King to whom the multitude pays
Obedience; or a Flock that is under care without saying any thing of the
Shepherd who has the care of it? I know of no one who is so sottish as to
contend, that the Clergy are the multitude whom the govern, any more than the
King is his Kingdom, or the Shepherd his Flock. I shall declare N. 122. in
what sense it is we say, that the Clergy are the Church.

119. He sais 2. p. 34. that the Church is the Mystical Body of Christ, which
is in subjection to Christ the Head; but the Bishops and Pastors of the Church
considered as such, represent the Head, and not the Body..... And therefore as
Christ the Head is distinguished from his Body, so are those who act under the
Head, and represent and exercise his Authority in the Church; as private
believers, they are Members of the Church, as Church Governors, they are the
Vicars of Christ.

120. I Answer, that we willingly grant the Clergy to be distinguished from
the Church they govern, as much as Christ is distinguished from his Body, and
he needed not to have quoted Scripture as he does ubi supra for the proof of a
matter which is as visible as the light of the sun; but we deny, that it
follows from hence, that the Clergy do not belong to the Definition of a
Church, as it does not follow, because Christ is distinguished from his Mystical
Body, that therefore he does not belong to the Definition of it. This is the
thing he should have proved, but for this be pretends to no Authority out of
Scripture. And it would be a very strange thing to prove from thence a thing
which is so evidently repugnant to natural Reason. For do we not see in Natural
Bodies, that the matter and Form are two distinct things? And yet the Union of
them both together makes only one Essence and Definition. The same likewise
happens in Moral Bodies such as the Church is, where the multitude is the
Matter, and the Governing Power is the Form, or that which makes them a Body.
So that the distinction of the Clergy from the Church, or People whom they
govern, is so far from proving that that they do not belong to the Definition
of a Church, that there cannot be a Church or Ecclesiastical Body, if they are
not distinguished. Can any one conceive how there can be a governed People
without subjection to a Governing Power? If this be impossible, let him
confess that Governors belong to the Definition of a governed People. And if
he grant this, let him confess that Church Governors belong to the Definition
of the Church which they govern. Neither is it at all material what he sais,
that as Church Governors they are the Vicars of Christ, because Christ who is
Invisible cannot make his Church a Visible Body and Society, as I have
proved, but gives it this qualification by means of his Vicars to whom he has
given the Visible Government of it.

121. Having thus settled, as he thinks, his Assertion upon good grounds, that
the Clergy do not belong to the Definition of a Church, he triumphantly
proceeds to sum up the fruits of his labor. Now from hence, sais he P. 35. I
shall observe some few things, the use of which we shall afterward better
understand.

. 18. p. 35. As 1. That Bishops and Pastors are not the Church, but the
Governors of the Church: and therefore the Promises made to the Church do not
belong to the Bishops of the Church, as that the Gates hell shall not prevail
against it: which certainly proves, that the Church shall never totally fail,
but does not prove, that the Bishops or any Bishop of the Church shall be
Infallible. For the Bishops are not the Church: there are distinct Promises to
the Church, and to the Pastors and Ministers of it, and they ought to be kept
distinct, which will put an end to a great many controversies between us and
the Church of Rome.

122. Reply, No such inference as this can be drawn from any thing he has
hitherto said; for the Church on Earth is not merely the Company of the
Faithful, but is moreover a visible Society consisting of Bishops and Pastors
who are the Governors and Teachers, and of the Laity who are the subjects and
Scholars. We do not say, that Bishops and Pastors are the Church inasmuch as
they are of the number of the Faithful, any otherwise than the Laity are the
Church; for under this consideration there is no difference between the Clergy
and the Laity. Neither do we say, that they are the Church inasmuch as this
word imports a visible Society of Governors and subjects, of Teachers and
Scholars; for this were to make them the same with those whom they teach and
govern. But we say, that the denomination of the Church belongs to them because
they are an essential part of the Church, just as when we read in Scripture,
that such, or such a King was buried with his Fathers, and that Lazarus was
carried into Abraham's bosom, the Body and soul which are the essential parts
of a man, are called by the name of man, although they are taken separately from
one another. When we say, that Bishops and Pastors are the Church, we mean that
they are the governing and teaching Church, for which manner of speech we have
no less than the Authority of Christ himself besides the unanimous
concurrence of all Antiquity. For who sees not, that when our Savior Math.
18. remits us to the Church in cases of Controversy, when he sais tell the
Church, that he means the Bishops and Pastors of it? And when he sais in the
same place, that whoever will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a
Heathen etc. that he will have us to be obedient to our Bishops and Pastors?
Whom are we to believe now, our Savior, who says that Bishops are the Church,
or Dr. Sherlock who sais that they are not the Church?

123. I see no way for him to escape, unless it be by saying, that our Savior
speaks improperly: or else that he understands the Laity as well as the Clergy
in those Texts, which instead of putting an end to Controversies with the
Church of Rome, increases their number, and affords occasions of new ones. For
hitherto the Church of England has never in express terms placed the Laity on
the Ecclesiastical Bench, nor given them a joint Commission to act with the
Clergy in the Government of souls, which certainly follows, if in such
disputes as arise among the Faithful, men are to Tell the Church, that is, to
Tell the Laity as well as the Clergy under pain of being Heathens and
Publicans. I suppose the Dr. will not charge any one with telling an untruth,
who shall say that the Common prayer and the Protestant Canons were compiled by
the Church, although it be evident that they were made by no others but their
Clergy; nor censure any one for speaking improperly, who shall say that a
person who is excommunicated by a Bishop of his Communion, is excommunicated by
the Church. In which manner of speeches the word Church signifies the Governing
and Teaching Church (who are the Church inadaequate) as much as it does when
our Savior sais Tell the Church.

124. It is in this sense that we are to understand what our Lord said to his
Apostles Matt. 18. Teaching them to observe all things what soever I have
commanded: and behold I am with you always to the end of the world..... And
Joan. 14. I will ask my Father, and he will give you another comforter, that he
may remain with you for ever...... the Spirit of Truth.... for he dwells in you,
and shall abide in you... But the Comforter the H Spirit whom my Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring to your memory
whatever I shall say unto you. Which promises and several others are made to
the Church, although they are only addressed to the Clergy.

125. Nay those Promises and passages in Scripture which may relate to the
Church as it is a Society of Teachers and Scholars, as when it is said, that
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, have a special regard to the
Teaching Church, from whom the Indefectibilitie of the Scholars Faith
proceeds, seeing they are to hear the Teaching Church as they hear Christ
himself. So that when when our Savior promises, that the gates of hell shall
not prevail against his Church, he promises, that they shall not prevail
against the Teaching Church, because the instructed Church is to receive the
benefit of Christ's Promise by hearing them. Christ has no where promised the
Laity that their Faith shall never fail, but with a dependence on the Churches
instruction, whom if they will will not hear, their Faith has already failed,
because we are to look on them as Heathens. This is the only necessary means
which our Lord has appointed them for the Indefectibilitie of their Faith, and
by consequence when our Savior promises his Church, that the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, he stands engaged in a particular manner to preserve
the Clergy from error, because he has grounded the Indefectibilitie of the
whole Church upon them, by reason of the gracious Promises which he has made
them of his perpetual assistance in the discharge of their Offices.

126. Thus likewise when S. Paul 1. ad Tim. 3. calls the Church the ground and
Pillar of Truth, although the Infallibility of the Church (supposing that be
proved by this Text) belongs to the whole Company of the Faithful, yet it
belongs to Bishops and Pastors after a different manner than it does to the
Laity. For it is rooted in the Clergy as in it is proper subject, because our
Lord according to his promise remains with them, and the Comforter the H. Ghost
teaches them all Truth; whereas the Laity derive it from them, and they are no
otherwise infallible, but because of the Objective Infallibility of their
Faith, and the Infallibility of their Pastors from whom they receive it. The
Bishops and Pastors of the Church, when they are assembled, and proceed
according to the custom, practice, and Canons of the Church in holding of and
consulting in General Councils, cannot possibly err; but Lay men may err, let
them hold never so many solemn Assemblies and Consultations about matters of
Faith, because there is no Promise, that the Spirit of Truth shall abide in
them, and influence them in such undertakings. The Infallibility of the Church
is rooted there where the Spirit of Truth more especially abides, and where the
Spirit of Truth more especially abides, there is the ground and Pillar of Truth
in a more special end eminent manner. The whole Church as it includes both
Clergy and Laity is the ground and Pillar of Truth, because it is as
impossible for it is Faith to be false as for God not to be be true; but it is
the Privilege of the Bishops and Pastors alone to define, and declare what the
true Faith is, and to make us secure that it is the true Faith.

127. 1 infer from what has been said, that since Bishops and Pastors are the
Teaching Church, that is, since they are the Church in the same sense wherein
our Savior said Tell the Church, their Faith and Decrees when they are
assembled in General Councils, ought to pass, and to be esteemed among
Christians for the Faith and Decrees of the Catholic Church, and under this
venerable Name ( p. 36.) they ought to have an indisputable Authority. From
whence I conclude, that the Faith of General Councils cannot be false, unless
the Faith of the Catholic Church may be so too.

. 19. He observes 2. that as Bishops are not the Catholic Church, so neither
are they the Representatives of the Catholic Church.

128. Reply. We have seen that Bishops are the Church, because they are the
Governors and Teachers of the Church. And as they are the Governors and
Teachers of the Catholic Church, so they are the Catholic Church. And as
they are the Catholic Church, so they may be the Representatives of the
Catholic Church in that sense which I am about to declare, for any thing of
moment that he offers to the contrary, as shall appear.

. 20. Ib. The Office of a Bishop is not to Represent, but to govern the Church,
and therefore Bishops are not the Churches Representatives by Institution, no
more than the King is the Representative of his Kingdom.

129. Reply. I find this Author in his Vindicat. of some Prot. Prin. p. 50.
not unacquainted with our Doctrine about the Church Representative. Had the
Representatives of the Catholic Church, sais he, a Divine Authority,
superior to all particular Churches and Bishops, to oblige them to stand to
their Decrees, as the Church of Rome asserts a General Council has, then indeed
some few Bishops chose by their National and Provincial Bishops, to go to the
Council, and to act as Representatives of such Churches might have a Plenarie
Authority to debate and determine all matters in dispute relating to Faith, or
Worship, or Discipline. And yet at present he delivers his judgment against us
in such a manner, as would persuade any one to believe, that he knew nothing of
this Authority which we adjuge to the Church Representative. Wherefore it will
be convenient to set our entire Doctrine down, to the end the Reader may be the
better able to judge of the weakness of the exceptions which he makes against
it.

130. We hold that Bishops are by institution the Governors and Teachers of
the Catholic Church, and that it belongs to them ex Officio to regulate any
thing that is amiss either in the Faith, or Morality of Christians. But by
reason it many times happens, that there is not a perfect evidence of the
unsoundnesse of the contested Doctrine, either because the Universal Tradition of
the Church is not easily to be discovered, or because sentence is to be
pronounced according to the necessity of consequences which are to be drawn
from Principles of Faith, hence we say, that they are obliged ex Officio, and
as they are Bishops to repair to a General Assembly or Council of the
Catholic Church whenever it is Canonically called, and there to determine
authoritatively by common consent the Controversies that are depending amongst
Christians. They are each one singly empowred by our Lord to edify his Body
according to their knowledge, and the utmost extent of their capacities in
their several precincts, but when the good of the whole Church is concerned in
the decision of a matter which regards the whole Church, as Faith and Morality
do, they are to act jointly with their Colleagues the other Bishops in a General
Council (wherein we believe the H. Ghost to preside and govern), that they may
be able to edify the Body of Christ the more effectually by such measures as
are taken therein, which they could not put in practice by their single
Authority either for want of evidence, or otherwise, without endangering and
destroying the Flock whereof they are Pastors. They have likewise the Supreme
Power of making general orders and regulations in Ceremonies, and the exterior
Acts of God's Worship, of hearing the complaints that are brought against
Bishops, and examining their Causes, of ending differences between Bishop and
Bishop either concerning the Precedence, or Prerogatives of their Churches, or
any other matter, and generally to take Cognizance of of all debates, causes,
matters, and things that want a redress and remedy among Christians, inasmuch
as they are Christians and belong to the Church, but not as they are Members of
the civil Commonwealth.

131. When we say, that Bishops Represent the Catholic Church in General
Councils, we do not mean, that they Represent the inferior Clergy of each
one's Diocese, nor much less, that they Represent the Laity who have no
Ecclesiastical Authority, but are bound to hear the Clergy in all things
appertaining to their salvation. For if this were so, the Authority of General
Councils would not be immediately from Christ, but derived from the whole
Company of the Faithful, who must be said to have the Original Right of
determining all differences about Faith, and morality, and Discipline, and
Bishops will act only as their Substitutes, as the Members of Parliament act in
the name of the People, who have chosen them for their Representatives therein.
This is no Doctrine of ours; for we believe the Original Right of determining
differences about Faith, Moralite, and Discipline, to be placed in those to whom
our Savior has made a Promise of teaching them all Truth, who having been no
others than the Apostles, we hold that it belongs to Bishops who are the
Apostles Successors, with a total exclusion of the Laity as to the Power of
voting, and that all those of an inferior rank among the Clergy who are
called by them, and admitted to sit in Council, enjoy this Privilege by the
favor only, and permission of Bishops.

132. As Bishops are singly considered, they Represent only the Prelates of
their own Countries, but as they are taken all together, they Represent the
whole Body of Bishops in the Catholic Church. For seeing there is a moral
impossibility for all the Bishops in the Church to be present in a General
Council, because several of them will be hindered by Age, sickness, and other
unavoidable occasions; nay seeing it is necessary toward the edifying of the
Body of Christ, that some of each country remain at home to discharge the
Functions of the Episcopal Dignity, we say, that those who give their
attendance ought to be held for the Catholic Teaching Church, and to have as
full Authority as tho every individual Bishop of the Church were assembled in
the Council. They are all summoned to appear and they are bound in conscience
to obey their summons, unless they have a just and reasonable cause to the
contrary, and therefore they ought to be esteemed as the Teaching Church,
because they are all that can come considering the lawful excuses of those who
are absent. Nay supposing there are some Bishops who will not obey their
summons, not for any just and reasonable excuses they have, but because of
sluggishnesse, discontent, or other unjustifiable Motives, yet this hinders
not, but that the Council which is called, assembled, and held according to the
Canons and Practice of the Catholic Church, ought to be esteemed as the whole
Teaching Church, notwithstanding the sinful absence of such sluggards and
malcontents. So that in every General Council we may conclude, that all the
Bishops are there who ought tobe there unless it be such as sin by refusing to
come. For which reason we say, that they Represent the whole Body of Bishops
in the Catholic Church, and that our Savior performs his Promise of teaching
the Church all Truth in all such Decisions as they make in Relation to Faith,
and Morality, in as ample and effectual a manner, as tho every Bishop were
actually present, which is that which we mean by the Church-Representative.

133. What has been here said is scarce any thing more than a bare deliverie of
our Doctrine, which is all that the consideration of the Passage which I have in
hand requires of me, there being no need of Proofs and Arguments to ascertain
the Authority of the Church-representative (which shall be done below), when
the exceptions which he brings against it suppose him to be ignorant of what it
is. For according to this account it is plain, that Bishops when they assemble
in a General Council, are so far from acting out of their Sphere, and not as
Governors, that to Represent the Catholic Church, and to govern it are one
and the same thing. Nay their voting and defining in a General Council is one
of the most noble and excellent exercises of their Episcopal Jurisdiction, as
binding the whole Church to an observance of their Decrees, and securing their
respective Flocks from any danger of miscarrying by the wholesome provision which
they make against error. Wherefore if they are Governors by Institution, they
may be the Church's Representatives by Institution too.

134. Neither does it follow, because a King is not the Representative of his
Kingdom, that therefore Bishops cannot be the Representatives of the Church.
For although a King and a Bishop are both Governors, yet there is a vast
disparitie in the nature of each one's Power. For a King is a Governor so as
not to acknowledge any Superior but God alone in any case whatsoever that
falls under the Verge of Temporal Power. Let his actions be never so unjust and
unreasonable, and misbecoming his Greatness and Dignity, yet he is
accountable for the same to no other King, or to his own subjects, but only to
God from whom he has received his Authority, whose steward he is, and whose
person alone he Represents: In what Council, or Assembly should he Represent
his Kingdom, who has within his own breast the Supreme Reason wherewith he ought
to govern his Kingdom? I say the supreme Reason in this sense, that no one has
a Right to control him, or to resist him therein by force. But Bishops, although
they receive their Power immediately from Christ no less than Hereditarie
Kings, yet the exercise of this Power, as often as it does not edify the Body
of Christ, is subjected by God himself to the Superior Power of the first
Bishop, or to an Assembly of them all in a general Council. They Represent
Christ so long as they follow the Practice and Tradition of the Catholic
Church, and Right Reason in the discharge of their Offices; but when the same
Tradition is gainsaid by opposers, or the nonevidence of it occasions disputes;
there is amongst them all only one Power of asserting and declaring the
lawfulness of it, so as to oblige all Christians, which is exercised in a
General Council by a competent number of them, who Represent their whole Body:
The Church is but One although there are many Bishops in it, because they are
closely united and connected among themselves by means of their Union with S.
Peter's One Chair, which is the root and beginning of the Ecclesiastical and
Priestly unity. But Temporal Kingdoms are not One but many, because their
Kings have distinct Powers, and an absolute Independence on one another.
Wherefore it may well stand, that Bishops may Represent the Church, by which no
more is signified, but that some of them may Represent their whole Body;
whereas Kings cannot be said to Represent either the whole order of Kings, or
their own Kingdoms, or the generality of Kingdoms in the world, because they
derive their Authority from God alone, without any intermediate dependence on
their own Kingdom, or of any other Kingdom on Earth for the exercise of it.

. 21. Ib. How then do they come to he the Church's Representatives? Did all
the Christians in the world, who are the Catholic Church, ever entrust them
with this Power? Did they ever resign up their Faith into the hands of the
Bishops? This never was done, and yet no man has a Representative but by his
own consent.

135. Reply. We have seen that Bishops Represent the Catholic Church by
God's appointment, and that the consent of the Clergy, or (...) is not
necessary for this purpose, And supposing it were necessary, yet it would not
follow, that all those whom this Author accounts for true Christians and parts
of the Catholic Church, ought to have a Power of giving their Votes for the
election of Burgesses to serve in this great Parliament of the Church. For there
is only one sort of Christians among those who profess contradictorie Faiths,
who belong to the Catholic Church, and by consequence there is only one sort
of them who can have a Right (if there were any such thing) to elect Deputies
for their Representatives. The Dr. will do well to examine which are those
Christians, and as soon as he has found them out, he will perceive, that
neither their inferior Clergy, nor Laity think themselves injured, because
their Bishops assemble in General Councils without receiving their Power of
acting from them. And if they are well satisfied, this Author can have no reason
to complain, that General Councils meet and act without the (...) of those who
are divided from the Church. Can Outlaws and Rebels have reason, when they
complain that the Commonwealth assembles, and makes Laws without their leave
and concurrence?

136. It is a must intolerable Assertion in a Divine to say, that No man has a
Representative but by his own consent. For what does he think of Adam? Did not
he Represent us before we were in being to give any consent thereto? Were not
our wills included in his, and have not we dearly paid for his transgression
ever since from the first moment that our souls were united to our Bodies? He
had best argue the case with God, and ask him, how it was possible for him to
sin in Adam, seeing No man has a Representative but by his own consent? What
does he think of the second Adam? Did not he Represent all the sinful race of
the first Man, according to that of S. Paul 2. ad Cor. 5. Si unus pro omnibus
mortuus est, ergo omnes mortui sunt? And were not all our crimes laid on his
blessed shoulders? He may if he pleas renounce this favor, by denying that any
man can have a Representative but by his own consent. But all good Christians
will acknowledge the greatness of the mercy that is done them, although it
transcend the Principles of common discourse. What does he think of the
Apostles, when they received the Power of governing, and feeding the Flock of
Christ? Did not they Represent the Pastors and Teachers of the Church in all
succeeding Ages, who have claimed their Authority to govern, because it was
given them by our Savior in the persons of the Apostles? What does he think of
Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism? Do not they Represent the Infant, who is
incapable of giving, or declaring his assent to the Faith in Christ? From all
which instances it is evident, that those who are not in being, or unable to
give any consent may have Representatives, and if this be possible, nay if it
be an infallible truth that this defacto is, there can be no inconvenience nor
any Mystery in saying, that the whole Teaching Church may be Represented by a
certain number of Bishops in General Councils, which is a Doctrine much more
easy to be conceived than some of those which I have mentioned; for what more
easy than to conceive, that Christ who promised to teach his Church all truth,
may perform this Promise in a General Council, wherein those Fathers who are
present may Represent their whole Body, that is, that Christ may hold and
esteem them for their whole Body, for what relates to his Promise of teaching
his Church all Truth?

137. It can only be granted, that no man can have a Representative but by his
own consent in such matters wherein he has a Right to give his consent, as
suppose the People have a part in the Legislative Power of a Kingdom, they can
be Represented by no others, but such as they choose themselves to sit in the
General Diet; or supposing I am justly possessed of an estate, no man can
Represent me so as to receive my rents without my leave, because in these cases
an involuntarie Representation will be an encroachme^t upon the Right of the
just Possessor. But it is otherwise when the representation is commanded by a
Sovereign Power, and to be Represented is a matter of pure grace and favor, as
it was when Adam Represented us, to whom God made many precious Promises on
condition that he had persevered in Obedience to him; as also when we were
Represented by our Savior in Order to our Reconciliation to God for the
disobedience of Adam, and our other sins that flowed from thence. In which
cases our consent was not necessary for the validity of these
Representations, because there was no injury designed us by them, but a great
deal of good. And besides we had no Right to give our consents, and on the
other side God had a Right to be obeyed by us, and to be adored for directing us
to our last end by such a conduct of his Providence as pleased him best. He is
our Absolute, Supreme, and Sovereign Lord and Master; and and what should
hinder him from treating us after that way that suited best with the Maxims of
his hidden Wisdom, and Power? And as our consent was not requisite for those
Representations, so neither can the consent of every absent Bishop be requisite
for their Representations in a General Council. For certainly Christ as the
Sovereign Lord and Lawgiver of his Church might appoint the Representations of
absent Bishops without any necessity to ask their consents, seeing they can
have have no Right to give their consents unless they receive it from him.
When Bishops Represent the Catholic Church, they have Christ for their Master
and Instructor, which is a matter of the greatest Grace. And what absurdity
can there be in saying, that Christ may dispense his favors on such terms as
he likes best?

. 22. P. 37. As Bishops are the supreme Pastors and Teachers of the Church,
they may declare what the Faith is, and aggree what Doctrins shall be taught in
their Churches, and consent to censure and excommunicate those will not
profess to believe as they do.

138. Reply All that is here said is the proper and chief employment of
General Councils, who are the Supreme Pastors and Teachers of the Church; and
if it be ascribed to them, we can find no fault at all with such innocent
expressions. But that which follows spoils all, viz that if they make any
Decrees contrary to the common Faith of Christians (what General Council ever
did so?), no Christian is bound to believe them, nor is ever the worse for
their Anathemas and Excommunications; as likewise what he sais p. 43. that it
is the office of Christian Bishops and Pastors to preach the Gospel, to
convince, and persuade gainsaiers by reason and Scripture, which obliges all
Christians diligently and impartially to attend to their instructions, but yet
leaves every man at liberty to judge, whether they preach the Gospel of
Christ, or their own inventions. In which expressions we find the People made
judges of the Lawfulness of the sentence which is pronounced by their Pastors,
who are commissioned by God to govern them, and by consequence that they are
bound to obey them no further than they pleas themselves.

139. For when the Pastors teach, and command such things as the People
approves, the People in this Authors way ought to say, that they teach and
command just things; and when they teach, and command such things as the People
disapproves, they are bound to say, that they teach and command unjust things.
So that if the judgment of the People be the measure of the justice, or
injustice of the commands of the Bishops and Pastors, it is a plain case, that
their judgment must be the measure of the Right and Power which the Pastors
have to excommunicate them for their disagreeing Faith. It is not a pin-matter
whether the Faith of the Bishops be true, and their Commands and
Excommunications just, if the People are not satisfied in these particulars,
whose obligation of following the Faith of the Bishops is said not to arise
from the Authority which the Bishops have over their belief, but from the
conviction of their private reasons. Thus if the Faith of a Council of Bishops
and Pastors pleases me, I will make profession of it, but if I judge it to be
false after I have diligently and impartially considered of it, I will renounce
it', and defy all their Anathemas and Excommunications. Where lies their Power
over me in this case? Or what Right have they to command me, so long as I can
but persuade my self, that their judgments are in the wrong? If they have any
Power over me, it is evident that the exercise thereof must depend for it is
validity on my pleasure, which is wholly unintelligible. When I profess to
believe as they do, I pleas my self, and not obey them; and when they command
me to believe as they do, their commands signify no more, but that I believe
as they do, if I have a mind to it. So that my conformity to their belief is
not an Act of Obedience, because it does not proceed in virtue of an exterior
Command, but is the result of my own voluntary choice. I should believe as
they do now, although their judgment were contrary to what it is, and that they
commanded me, that mine should be so too. And if a Juncto of Weavers can
persuade me that what I believe is false, I Will follow them, and leave the
Supreme Pastors and Teachers of the Church.

140. This pestilent Reasoning shows, that the People are under no obligation
of obeying the Bishops of the Church, and if they are under no such obligation,
it is manifest, that the Bishops have no Power to command them. For who is able
to conceive, how a just and All-wise God can give a Right and Power to an
Assembly of Bishops to declare what the Faith is, to command what Doctrins
shall be taught, and to excommunicate those who will not profess to believe as
they do, and yet at the same time give the People a Right and Power to judge,
whether their Declarations of Faith be true, and their Excommunications just?
It he has given this Power to Bishops and Pastors, it is questionless because
he would have the People to obey them, and to believe as they believe. And if
he has given the People a Right to judge of the Faith of the Bishops and
Pastors, it is questionless because he leaves it in their Power and choice,
whether they will obey them, and believe as they believe or no. Can God command
the People to believe as the Bishops believe, and yet leave it to them, whether
they will believe so or no? What is this else, but to command and not to
command them to do the same thing?

141. Again. If the People do ill in disliking the Faith of the Pastors, when
after an impartial consideration of it, they cannot reconcile it to their
consciences, why has he given them this liberty, and commanded them to do so?
And in case they do well, why has he given the Pastors of the Church a Power of
casting them out of their Communion, if they will not profess to believe as
they believe? A just God cannot punish without a crime, nor for any thing of
which he himself is the Author. He has commanded us to continue in the visible
and external unity of the Church, and has promised many blessings to the
observers of it: why then has he invested the Pastors with a Power of depriving
us of the same without any demerit of ours, as often as we are conconvinced
that they preach a wrong Faith? And why has he made it a necessary and
obligatorie Act in us to withdraw our selves from a state wherein he showers his
blessings on us? If the Pastors may excommunicate us for not professing to
believe as they do, it is supposed that they are sufficiently qualified by God
to understand the greatness of our offense in not believing as they believe.
And if we may without sin, nay if we may laudably not believe as they do, it is
likewise supposed, that we are sufficiently qualified by God to discover the
innocence of our consciences herin. How now can these two things be compatible,
the judge instructed by God's special grace to discover the heinousness of an
action, and the Person accused instructed by God's special grace to discover
the innocence of the same? Can the same thing be absolutely good; and
absolutely bad? And yet this may happen, if God can represent the same Faith as
absolutely bad to the Judge, and as absolutely good to the Criminal. I^ the
Bishops and Pastors may excommunicate us for our unsound Faith, they are
appointed by God for the Judges of the unfoundnesse of our Faith. How then is
it possible, that we should be never the worse for their Anathemas and
Excommunications which they lay on us because of our unsound Faith? How can it
enter into the heart of a reasonable creature, that we deserve no punishment
from those who are set over us by God as Judges, when they make use of those
means which he affords them for the Cognizance of our crimes, and censure and
condemn us as often as they find us guilty according to the obligation of
their Office and Station?

142. When we are cast in the Courts of human Judicature, it will not pass for
a Legal exemption of us from punishment, if we tell the Judge, that we are
persuaded in our consciences, that he pronounces an unrighteous sentence
against us. For if this were so, to be sure the Judges would Iways be in the
fault, and the King by whom they are empowred to give sentence, would not be
the Fountain of Equity, but of injustice. Why then should it be a Legal
exemption of Christians from the punishment of Excommunication, if we tell our
Ecclesiastical Judges, that we are persuaded, that our Faith for which we are
condemned, is sound and holy? It is no less than blasphemy to assert, that
God is less prudent and efficacious in doing justice, and maintaining peace in
the Christian Commonwealth, than earthly Kings are in their Civil States. And
yet who sees not, that the provision of Kings in their Courts of Judicature is
much more prudent, and efficacious in order to the preserving of peace and
doing justice, than that of God in the Government of his Church (which he will
have to be One and Holy) is in the Drs. way, because the Plaintiff and
Defendant must both submit to the Civil Judges decision and conscience: whereas
there is such a great Solaecisme in the Polity of the Church, that Christians
are Superior to all Law and above punishment, if they are persuaded that their
Judges are men of bad Faith and profligate consciences, although they cannot
pretend to a greater certainty that they are in the right, than their judges
have to the contrary by whom they are condemned. All Heretics and
Schismatiques are secure under the shelter of this Principle, and he must be a
man of a weak understanding and strong scruples, who being desirous to make new
stirs in the Church, and to raise a separate Altar, can be deterred from so
doing by such a Power of excommunicating as this Author places in Christian
Bishops and Pastors.

143. There is no other way to defend the Right and Power which the Bishops of
the Church are acknowledged to have to excommunicate those, who will not
profess to believe as they believe, than by making the validity and
lawfulness of the exercise of this Power independent of the People's judgment,
so that the Faith of the Bishops be the Rule which the People ought to follow,
and their deviation from this Rule be esteemed as a crime sufficient to warrant
the justice and legalitie of their punishment by Excommunication. Such a Power
as this is clear and intelligible, and free from all those horrible absurdities
which attend the other way of giving the Bishops a Power to excommunicate those
who reject their true Declarations of Faith, and then submitting the truth of
their Declarations to the judgment of every particular person. For according to
this account, seeing our private reason is not the Rule and measure whereby we
ought to direct our consciences in matters of Faith, our Faith is an effect of
our Obedience to our Pastors when we believe as they believe, and our dissent
from them is a most criminal Disobedience. We are forbidden to break the
visible Unity of the Church, without the liberty of doing the same. We are
commanded to consider our Ecclesiastical Judges as sufficiently qualified to
judge of our errors in Faith, without the Privilege of censuring their
judgments as false. We are to esteem their Excommunications as just
punishments, because we are to esteem them under the Notion of Judges as men of
a Supernatural knowledge, probitie, and Authority. Here are no inconsistencies
in the Rules of Government, no interfering and clashing of Rights, nothing that
misbecomes an All-wise Lawgiver, but all things are ordered after such a manner
as is aggreable to Nature, and the reason of mankind.

144. The Dr. may say, that he cannot admit of such a Right and Power of
excommunicating for errors in Faith, without granting the Pastors and Teachers
of the Church to be Infallible, whereof there appears no Institution. And he is
resolved in his Vindicat. of some Prot. Princip. etc. p. 62. to allow of no
consequences to prove an Institution.

145. I answer first, that this Author (if there be any heed to be taken to his
words) ascribes at present as great an Infallibility to the Supreme Pastors
and Teachers of the Church, as we Catholics do to General Councils. For if he
had said, that the Bishops may excommunicate those who publikly contradict they
Faith which they declare to be true, we could not infer any thing more from
thence, than that in his judgment God has given them a Right of being obeyed in
the Non-contradiction of their Faith, whereby there would be liberty left for
every one in private to believe what he judged best. But he sais, that they may
excommunicate those who will not profess to believe as they believe; from
whence I infer, that then God has given them a Right of being obeyed by their
Flocks in the interior assent of their minds to the Faith which they declare
to be true; unless he say, that God requires of the People, that they profess
to believe as the Bishops believe, and yet leaves it in their choice, whether
they will interiourly believe so or no; which is an Assertion evidently false,
because of the Essential opposition which the Nature of God has to
deceitfulness, and dissimulation. And if he does not only require of the
People, that they profess to believe as the Bishops believe, but likewise that
they give an interior assent to their Faith, he allows of as great an
obligation in the People to believe the Pastors of the Church as we Catholics
do, and by consequence as great an Infallibility in them as we assign to
General Councils.

146. I Answer 2. that if we pretended to prove the Infallibility of the
Supreme Pastors and Teachers of the Church from pure natural reason only, I
could not blame any one, who would not (...) an answer to any of our Discourses
and consequences about it, because such consequences can have no connection with
the Supernatural Providence of God, nor infer the existence of a thing which
depends wholly upon the Divine will and pleasure. But our proceedings are quite
contrary; for although we make use of Arguments drawn from natural reason in the
explication of Divine Truths, yet we do not say, that God has done all that
seems conformable to natural reason; (for how can natural reason say, that this
or that is fitting for him to do without a perfect comprehension of his ends?).
Neither do we allow of this consequence, It is suitable to the Greatness,
Wisdom, or Power of God to do so, or so: Therefore God has done so or so.
However we hold, that God cannot do any thing that is repugnant to natural
reason, because he cannot act against the Light of his own Countenance which he
has imprinted on us, Psalm. 4. On which account we hold this for a very good
consequence, It is contrary to the Greatness, Wisdom, Goodness, or Power of
God to do so or so. Therefore God has not done so, or so. This is the way which
I have taken at present; for I prove, that God could not give to the Bishops of
the Church a Power of Excommunicating Dissenters in Faith, and yet subject the
lawfulness and validity of the exercise of this Power to the judgment of the
Dissenters themselves, because such a Power as this misbecomes the Wisdom of
God, and is repugnant to natural reason. And from hence I conclude, that if God
has left such a Power in the Bishops (as no body denies), the lawfulness and
validity of the exercise thereof must be taken from the judgment of the Bishops
as it is proper Rule and measure which necessarily argues their Infallibility
(I mean always when they define in a General Council, or when they teach the
known Faith of the Church Diffusive, or the Definitions of former General
Councils). In which inferences it is to be observed, that the reason whereby I
prove the judgment of Bishops to be the Rule and measure of the Lawfulness and
validity of their Excommunications for errors in Faith, is not natural,
because it is deduced from a Principle of Faith, viz that Christ has left in his
Church a Power to excommunicate those who err in Faith. And the like
obfervation we may make in some of our modern Authors, when they prove the
necessity of an Universal Head of the Church, whom Protestants traduce, as tho
they endeavor to make it out by pure natural Reason, and not from the
connection it has with Scripture, or Christian Principles.

147. If then we prove the Infallibility of the Supreme Pastors and Teachers
of the Church from a Principle of Faith, we prove this Truth from a Divine
Revelation, and if we prove it from a Divine Revelation, I hope he will not
deny, but that we lawfully prove an Institution. But do we not prove the
connection of this Institution with the aforesaid Principle of Faith by
consequences? I Answer, yes; And what harm is there in so doing? Does not the
Church of England prove the Institution of Infant Baptism, and the
Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters by consequences drawn from Scripture:
and will they think it reasonable; if the Dissenters tell them, that they will
allow of no consequences to prove the^e Institutions? What other way can we
have to prove a matter that is controverted among Christians than by lawful
consequences drawn from Principles of Faith, when all parties are unwilling to
stand to the determination of the Church? If it were acknowledged on all sides;
that the principles stood clearly either for the Affirmative, or Negative of
the matter in dispute; there would be no dispute at all about it. And if they
(...) clear to one side, and not clear to the other, either both sides must
(...) with their respective Doctrins, and give over disputing against one
another; or if they will endeavor to gain Proselyts, they must promote the
credit of their Cause by consequences, seeing there is no other way imaginable
for them to compass their design. If our consequences are not lawful, he has
some color to ni^our Institution, but if they are lawful, it is a madness to
deny the Institution merely because it is proved by consequences.

148. This is the course we take against Protestants in all the Con roversies
that are between us and them. And thus, as we have seen, we prove the Church to
be Infallible by Institution, as we do likewise first, from the Motives of
Credibilitie wherewith she is accompanied, and which are so many Marks of God's
special Grace and favor toward her. From whence we argue, that it is
impossible for her to to err in what she teaches, because it is impossible for
an Essential Veracitie to countenance error, or a possibility of error so
far as to make it evidently Credible. For if God makes those who deceive us, or
who may deceive us to be evidently Credible, he acts against his own
Attributes, and we may justly lay our destruction to his charge, because he has
given us such natures, as cannot choose but believe what he has made evidently
Credible. 2. We prove it from several places of H. Scripture, as first from our
Savior's Promises to remain with his Church to the end of the world, and to
send the Comforting Spirit, the Spirit of Truth to assist her, and to teach her
all Truth. From whence we infer, that if the Church teaches us what the Spirit
of Truth teaches her, it is as impossible for us to err so long as we follow
the Church, as for the Spirit of Truth to be the Spirit of falsehood. And we may
safely conclude, that the Church shall always teach us as she is taught by the
Spirit of Truth, because she is taught by him, to the end she may teach us. 3.
From the obligation we have to hear those whom Christ sends to preach to us as
the we heard Christ himself, and to hear the Church under pain of being
Heathens and Publicans From whence we argue, that those whom we are to hear as
tho we heard Christ, must necessarily be preserved from error by him;
otherwise we are under the same obligation of hearing liars and such as may
deceive us, as we are to hear Truth it self. We say likewise, that if we are
bound to hear the Church under pain of being Heathens, the Church cannot
deceive us in what she proposes to our belief, unless God can command us to
hear those who may lead us into error under pain of being damned. And the like
inferences we may draw from several other places of Scripture to evince the
same Truth, which shall be proved more fully when we discourse of the
Authority of the Church in a General Council.

. 23. P. 37. He observes 3. that the whole Catholic Church on Earth is not
One Organized Body; for it is only the whole Company of the Faithful, and
no Ecclesiastical Ministers or Pastors belong to the Definition of it; and yet
unless some Ecumenical Pastor be essential to the Notion and Definition of
the Catholic Church, it cannot be One Organized Body.

149. Reply. We need not be much concerned at this Observation, because we have
seen, that the whole Company of the Faithful is not a complete Definition of
the Catholic Church, and that in S. Cyprian's judgment the one Chair of S.
Peter belongs to the Notion of it, because it is the beginning of the Priestly
unity. He would have done his Cause better service, if he had shown us, how the
Catholic Church can be one Visible Society and Body without an Ecumenical
Pastor, than to prove from such sorry Principles that it is no Organized
Body, from whence it clearly follows, that it is not One Visible Body and
Society.

. 24. P. 38. He draws two Conclusions from this wise Observation. 1. That no
Organized Church can be the Catholic Church, nor the Bishop of it an
Ecumenical Pastor, because the Catholic Church is not Organized, but every
Organized Church is a particular Church, 2. That there neither is, nor can be
any Visible Tribunal of the Catholic Church, which shall be the Center of
Catholic Communion, and have Authority over all particular Churches in
matters of Faith, and Worship, and Government. For the. Catholic Church being
no Organized Body, it has no Authority, and can have no Tribunal.

150. Reply. The weakness of these Conclusions appears from what I have said
in my last Reply, and shall further appear from what I shall say. 28.
concerning the Visible Tribunal of the Catholic Church.

. 25. Ibid. He proves that the Catholic Church has no Authority, because the
whole Company of the Faithful, which is the true Notion of it, are the Body
of Christ..... that it is made up of particular and individual Christians, who
are all immediately united to Christ their Head...... that Bishops as they are
Members of the Catholic Church (as it is Christ Mystical Body) are not
considered as Bishops, but as private Christians; for it is not their
Authority in the Church, but their union to Christ which makes them Members of
his Body.... that if the Catholic Church be only a company of private and
particular Christians united immediately to Christ, and made one in him, it has
is no more Authority than particular Christians, which is none at all.

151. Reply. We willingly grant, that the Catholic Church as it is Christ's
Mystical Body has no Authority. But what then? This does not prove, that is
has no Authority as it is a Visible Body and Society. Here lies the
difficulty between me and the Dr. which cannot be cleared without the Notion
of the Catholic Church as it is a Visible Body and Society, which we are to
expect in his Second part, for at present we can gather no such thing.

. 26. The Catholic Church is united to Christ by a belief of his Gospel,
obedience to his Laws, and a participation of his Spirit, which is a state of
perfect and absolute subjection to him, and therefore can have no Authority to
alter the Faith, to make a new Creed, or a new Gospel, which would be to have
Power over Christ, and not to be subject to him.

152. Reply. To what end is all this talk of altering the Faith, and making a
new Creed, or a new Gospel? as tho we ascribed any such Authority as this to
the Catholic Church. If he had first made this out, he would have had reason
to provide Arguments against so scandalous an assertion, but knowing in his
conscience that we disown this Doctrine no less than himself, as he confesses
in effect p. 43. when he sais, that no body pretends to an Authority of
making new Articles of Faith, we cannot put any other construction on his
frequent Arguments of this nature throughout his Discourse, than that they are
so many evidences of his insinceritie, or perhaps an effect of his
unwillingnesse to omit any occasion tho never so frivolous, and unhandsom of
showing his talent in spinning of consequences.

. 27. p. 40. Christ indeed has placed an Authority in his Church for the
instruction and government of it; but an Authority in the Church and an
Authority of the Church are two different things. The first signifies the
Authority of Christ who is the Head; the second is the Authority of the
Body, which is the Church; the Head has Authority over his Church, and may
appoint what Ministers he pleases to exercise this Authority, but the Church
has no Authority at all, no more than the Body which is subject to the Head

153. Reply. He sais that this may be thought a very nice distinction between
the Authority in the Church and the Authority of the Church, but I think it
rather obscure than nice, how useful soever it may be to a Cause that cannot be
maintained without tricking. For what means he by the word Church, when he sais
that Christ has placed an Authority in his Church? If he take it as it
signifies Christ's Mystical Body, it is evident, that he has placed no
Authority therein which is distinct from his own, because he immediately
sanctifies, governs, and directs it by his invisible Motions and Graces in
order to it is last end. But if he take it as it imports a Visible Society, it
is plain, that an Authority in the Church, and an Authority of the Church are
one and the same thing. For the Authority of Ecclesiastical Ministers is all
the Authority which is in the Church as it is thus considered, and there is no
other Authority of the Church. For our Lord has delegated his power of
governing to Bishops and Pastors who are the teaching Church, and not to the
People whose duty it is to hear their Pastors and to obey them as tho they
heard Christ himself. So that by the Authority of the Church we are to
understand the Authority of those whom S. Paul ad Hebr. cap. 13. bid us to
obey, for that they watch over us, and are to give an account of our souls.

154. It is not denied, but that the Authority which Christ has placed in the
Church is the Authority of Christ, but from hence it does not follow, that it
cannot be the Authority of the Church, that is, of the Bishops and Pastors; or
that the Authority which Christ has committed to them is so far Christ's, that
it cannot be truly said to be theirs too. For this is to contradict the common
sense of mankind, which allows to every one a Right to that which is given him.
For which reason we say, that the Authority of Kings and Princes is the
Authority of God, and yet we cannot deny, but that is theirs too by gift and
participation; and we might as well deny them to have any Authority, as deny
that Bishops and Pastors have any, because the Authority of Kings and Pastors
is equally derived from Christ. As to what he sais, that the Authority of the
Church signifies the Authority of the Body, it is very false, as we have
seen, if by Body we are to understand the whole Company of the Faithful; for
we hold no less than he that the whole Company of the Faithful as such has
no Authority at all, but is under an immediate subjection to Christ their
Mystical and invisible Head.

155. The usefulness of this pretended Distinction appears in the discourse
which he makes upon it. Those, sais he, who would impose upon the Faith of of
Christions talk of nothing less than the Authority of the Catholic Church,
which sounds very big, and frights People into a submission. Whilst Bishops
pretend only the Authority of Christ's Ministers, private Christians make
bold to examine their commission, and how far their Authority reaches, and
whether they do not prevaricate in the exercise of it, as it is possible
Ministers may do; but the name of the Catholic Church strikes all dead, for
who dares oppose the Decrees of the Catholic Church? Which is to condemn the
whole Church of error and Heresy; who dares separate from the Catholic
Church? Which must be an unpardonable Schism, and a state of damnation, since
it is universally aggreed, that there is no salvation to be had out of the
Catholic Church..... but now all these amusements vanish, when we remember,
that the Catholic Church has no Authority.

156. How pleasing is this libertin lesson to flesh and blood! How he triumphs
with the conceit that he has destroyed the Authority of the Church, which we
are bound to hear under pain of being Heathens! One would think by his
confidence, that he had done this great feat by Scripture, Fathers, and
Tradition: and yet he has not formed so much as one Argument from any of these
Heads, but instead thereof tells us, that the Catholic Church is nothing else
but the whole Company of the Faithful, and that Bishops and Pastors do not
belong to the Definition of it, from which pidling and false Principles he
concludes, that it has no Authority. The next Reply will give a further
account what little reason he has to rejoice on this occasion.

. 28. P. 43. He 2. proves, that the Catholic Church has no Authority, because
it has no no Visible Tribunal wherein to exercise this Authority; and he
proves, that it has no Visible Tribunal, because it is nothing else but the
whole Companic of the Faithful.

157. Reply. I have shown over and over, that Bishops and Pastors belong to
the Notion and Definition of the Catholic Church, from whence it follows,
that if they have Authority, the Catholic Church must have it too. And if
the Catholic Church have Authority, it may have a Visible Tribunal wherein to
exercise this Authority. For what should hinder, but that the Teaching Church,
that is, the Bishops and Pastors may assemble in General Councils (which is
that, I suppose, which he means by a Visible Tribunal) as often as occasions
require, to determine Controversies relating to Faith, Morality, or Discipline?
Our Author does not deny, but that they have received Authority, and Power
for the government of their respective Churches, the question is, whether when
they are assembled in General Councils in the manner above mentioned chap. 2.
20. they have Power to oblige the whole Company of the Faithful to an
observance of their common Decrees.

158. Those who have been Members of the Visible Church in all Ages have
acknowledged such a Power in them, and have held all such for Heretics and
Schismatiques, who have not bended their judgments to their Declarations of
Faith, and paid Obedience to all other regulations that have been made by them,
of which no one can make any question, who is never so little acquainted with
Ecclesiastical History, where we learn that General Councils have been always
considered as the supreme Tribunals whither Christians repaired for the
redress of their Spiritual grievances. And I challenge this Author to show,
that any one sort of Christians who have dissented in any Age from the
Definitions of any Council of Bishops which the Visible Church of their times
held for General, were esteemed hy the Visible Church as their Fellow Members
of Christ's Mystical Body. Which unanimous concurrence of the Members of
Christ's Church in the same judgment touching the Authority of General
Councils, is a matter of infinitely greater moment to move us to an
acknowledgment of a Visible Tribunal in the Catholic Church, than any thing
which this Author has produced can persuade us to the contrary. For if we may
safely follow a Doctrine which has been practiced, and believed in the purest
times of the Catholic Church, because there is a just and vehement Presumption
that it descended by Tradition from Christ and his Apostles, there can be no
reason, why we should disown the Authority of General Conncils, which we find
to have been exercised on the first great occasion that was presented in the
case of Arius at the Council of Nice under Constantin the first Christian
Emperor, in whose time Christians made a public profession of their Faith,
and declared by their practice what their belief had been under the persecution
of unbelieving Princes.

159. Neither is the use of General Councils reco^mended to us only by
Tradition, but it is moreover countenanced and proved to be lawful by the
practice of the Apostles themselves, who held one at Jerusalem, as we read in
their Acts chap. 15. And by reason the assembling of this Council was very
remarkeble in all it is Circumstances, I shall handle it the more at large for
the clearer discussion of the Point which lies before me. There was a great
Dispute raised at Antioch between the converted Gentiles and certain Faithful
Jews, by whom the Gentiles were taught, that unless they were circumcised after
the Law of Moses, they could not be saved v. 1. This Doctrine was vehemently
opposed by Paul and Barnabas, but all they could say was not sufficient to gain
credit: wherefore it was resolved, that Paul and Barnabas with some others from
among them should go up to Jerusalem, to consult with the Apostles and Elders
about this question ( v. 2.) who accordingly set forwards, and when they were
come thither, they found there likewise certain believing Pharisees, who judged
it necessary, that the Gentiles should observe the Law of Moses ( v. 5.)
whereupon the Apostles and Elders assembled to consider of the matter ( v. 6.)
and it was examined by them with a great deal of care and diligence, as we may
learn from those words Cum autem magna conquisitio fieret. v. 7.

160. There is no dispute, but that S. Paul and S. Barnabas and every single
Apostle had sufficient Authority to end all Controversies that arose among
their Converts, because of their perpetual assistance by the H. Ghost in the
exercise of their Functions, and that this Authority being made evidently
Credible by the many Miracles which they wrought among them, there lay an
obligation on their hearers to give an entire assent to all they preached
without any more ado. For which reason we must say, that these believing Jews
and Antiochian Christians sinned in not resting satisfied with what S. Paul and
S. Barnabas had said against the Doctrine which caused so great a disturbance,
as may be gathered from v. 24. where the Council sais, that these Jews had
subverted the souls of the Antiochians, not only by the unquietness of mind
which they raised in them by such things as they had not been commanded to
teach, but likewise by the unsetlednesse and depravation of their Faith, as we
may learn from v. 32. where Jude and Silas are said to have used many
discourses to strengthen and confirm them in it. And besides the assistance of
the H. Ghost which was common to all the Apostles in the discharge of their
duties, these unsettled Christians found a special Motive in S. Paul, why they
ought to have laid aside all their scruples, because the Non-necessitie of
Circumcision had been revealed by our Lord to him in express terms, which had
not been done to the other Apostles, as may be seen above chap. 1. N. 80. and
seq. whither I refer the reader for a more full information of the matter in
hand. And questionless S. Paul did not forbear to acquaint them, as he did the
Galatians afterward ( cap. 1. v. 12) on the same occasion, that he had not
received his Gospel from man, nor learned it but by Revelation from Jesus
Christ. But notwithstanding that the Authority of each single Apostle was thus
secured, and in particular that of S. Paul, yet seeing it met with an opposition
about a Doctrine whereof their whole College could not pretend an immediate
deliverie from our Savior in express terms, it was judged by them more
fitting to be exercised in a General Assembly of them together with the
Elders, since it was desired, that the Unity of the Faith might suffer no
prejudice by the difference there was in the ways whereby the Apostles came to
the knowledge of it. Nay it was judged more fitting to be thus exercised by the
H. Ghost himself, because S. Paul ad Gal. 2. sais, that he went up to Herusalem
with Barnabas in persuance of a Revelation which he had to this purpose. Which
passage is held by many Fathers to relate to the journey which he made to
Jerusalem about the question of Circumcision.

161. The Jews were very fond of their Law which had God for it is Author, and
which had been recommended to them by many great and Supernatural wonders.
They had had of old times many repeated assurances of God's care over them, as
long as they were observant of it. They had a tender veneration for Abraham
their Illustrious Progenitor, from whom they had received the Command of
Circumcision, as likewise for Moses the great Favorit of God, who delivered
them their Law. They saw that Circumcision was called by God Genesis 16. an
everlasting Covenant, and knew that all the Holy Prophets and Saints from the
times of Abraham and Moses lived in the profession of this Practice, and that
our Lord himself was circumcised and observed to the last the Law of Moses;
nay they knew our Lord's Declaration in the Ghospel Mat. 5. that he come not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

162. All which Arguments were of strange force with these Converts, who were
not as yet weaned from their devotion to the Letre, and might seem to conclude
as strongly the necessity of Circumcision after the Messia, as any
consequences could prove the contrary which were drawn by the Apostles from
the Doctrine of the Messia. It was therefore requisite, that there should be some
condescension to their weakness, as well as to the desires of the Gentiles, and
that they should be heard, and their Plea thoroughly considered. And this course
seems to have been the rather taken, because the satisfaction of the Jews in
this Point, and after such a manner (which was the most solemn and greatest
they could possibly desire as Christians) would render the conversion of the
Gentiles more easy, and their Faith more secure, seeing a misunderstanding of
the Jewish Converts with the Apostles, or Apostolic Missioners, would either
cause scandal among the Gentiles, and so hinder their embracing the Faith of
Christ; or else corrupt their Faith, in case they did believe, as it happened
to the Syrians, Cicilians etc. v. 23. For so many plausible Arguments as the
Jews might frame in favor of Circumcision out of the Old Testament whereof they
had been the keepers and preservers; together with the example and the
aforesaid Declaration of our Savior, were likely to work strongly on new
beginners, who having attained to the knowledge of the true God, would be apt
to believe all he said in a literal sense, for fear they should disbelieve him
in any thing, or omit any thing that was necessarily required for the enjoyment
of him, unless the nullitie and unconclusivenesse of those Arguments were
shown in such a manner as was able to master a Jewish obstinacy. Wherefore
seeing the Gentiles desired that those Arguments might be examined in a General
Council, a General Council was accordingly granted them; whereby both Jews and
Gentiles might rest satisfied.

163. When we read of the great inquiry that was made, we ought not to judge,
that there were any of the Apostles who favored the Jews, and opposed their
Brethren in their behalf, but that the dissatisfied Jews and Pharisees them
selves were allowed to dispute, and to manage their Arguments in their own
persons. For of the five Apostles who are known to have been present in the
Council, the judgment of those four who are mentioned by S. Luke in the Acts
are clearly against the necessity of Circumcision; and we may safely conclude;
that S. John who is mentioned by S. Paul loc. cit. and the other Apostles, if
any more of them were present, were of the same mind too. For after the Vision
which S. Peter had at Joppe wherein he first learned it to be lawful to preach
to the Gentiles, and the descent of the H. Ghost upon Cornelius the Gentil and
his family, the other Apostles had convincing grounds to believe that
Circumcision was not necessary to salvation (as we shall see below); and we
may presume that their Spirit, after they had heard an account of this Vision,
bore witness to the Spirit which spoke by S. Peter, this having been an
occasion wherein S. Peter confirmed his Brethren. S. Peter learned likewise in
that Vision, that the believing Jews might freely converse with the Gentiles,
and that they were not tied to that choice of meats which was prescribed by the
Law of Moses, from whence the Apostles had no less evident grounds to gather
the abrogation of Circumcision, supposing we will allow them to have been
acquainted with that truth which S. Paul delivers to the Galatians cap. (...)
viz that he that circumcises himself is obliged to the observance of the whole
Law, which is that which S. Peter means; when he calls Circumcision a yoke
which neither the Jews nor their Forefathers were able to bear. For it is a
plain case, that if Circumcision was an obligation to observe the whole Law,
that the nature of it was changed, and it is necessity taken away, when God had
forbidden the observance of the whole Law.

164. And we have all the reason in the world to conclude, that not only the
Apostles, but the Elders also were possessed with the same Truth after the
aforesaid Vision, as well because of the conformity which they ought to have to
the Apostles Faith, as also because when they were assembled together with them
in council, they all unanimously declared to the Antiochians that they had not
commanded the Jews to teach the necessity of Circumcision. Which were's ought
to be carefully weighed. For they must be understood so, as to signify that
none of the Council, whether they were Apostles, or Elders had at any time
taught by themselves, or commanded any others to teach the necessity of this
Doctrine. For the Antiochians knew well enough, that the Council as such could
not command any one to preach this Doctrine to them, before it was assembled. It
was 18. years after our Savior's Ascension into Heaven, and 7: years after the
separation of the Apostles for the Conversion of Nations before the convening
of this Council, in which time there had been many great conversions wrought
among the Gentiles, whom if we should suppose to have been circumcised by the
Apostles, or Elders as a necessary duty of their Religion, or to have been
taught the necessity of this Sacrament, the Council could neither truly nor
sincerely have written to the Antiochians, that they had never commanded the
preaching of this Doctrine to them; because those who are in Authority do in a
moral sense command the performance of those things, which they practice as a
necessary part of their duty and obligation, when their subjects are bound in
conscience to follow their example, as the Faithful were to follow the
Apostles and Elders in all things that were practiced by them as a necessary
means of salvation. And if neither the Apostles, nor Elders had before this
Council practiced this Doctrine as a part of Christianity, or commanded it to
be taught, what other construction can we put upon this manner of procedure,
but that they did not believe Circumcision to be necessary to salvation?

165. I hold it for certain, that the Clergy in general after S. Peter's
Vision at Joppe believed the abrogation of this Sacrament, and that they never
administered it to any Gentiles whom they had converted as a necessary part of
their Religion; nay that they possessed them with the contrary truth, as often
as there was an occasion for it as they did also such Jews whom they found to
be well disposed for the receiving of it, as appears from the Scripture's
saying, that certain of the believing Pharisees judged it necessary, that the
Gentiles should be circumcised, which is an argument that all of them were not
of the same judgment. But yet I do not think that they ever preached this
Doctrine as freely and universally among the Jews, as they did the other parts
of the Christian Faith till after the calling of this Council, because of their
weakness and obduracie. Neither did they do it then neither till after some
years, that they were grown stronger in spirit, as appears from S. Paul's
circumcising of Timothy Chap. 16.
because of the Jews in those parts who all knew that his Father was a Gentil;
as likewise from the advice which S. James gave to S. Paul with the concurrence
of all the the Elders at Jerusalem who were assembled on this occasion viz
that he should Chap. 21.
purisie himself in the Temple according to the prescript of the Law, for that
there were many thousands of believing Jews who continued zealous for the Law,
and were offended that he had ordered the Jews who dwelt among the Gentiles not
to circumcise their children, and that by this means they would all know, that
what they had heard of him was all false, and that he himself kept the Law.
Which shows, that there was a connivence toward the Jews, or rather that there
was an indulgent condescension to their weakness, and a Dispensation (for such
we ought to esteem the advice of S. James) to continue in the practice of the
Law, which of it self was not evil but of God's own Institution, but not that
there was any Dispensation not to believe the inutilitie of Circumcision and
other Legal performances, which having been at first revealed to S. Peter, and
afterward defined, and declared in a General Council of Apostles and Elders,
reached every Member of the Church whether Jew or Gentil, as soon as it was
duly proposed to their belief by their Ecclesiastical Superiors, which was not
as yet done generally sowards the Jews but only toward the Gentiles. Neither
did the Council declare the Jews, or all the Faithful to be free from the
observance of the Law, but only the Gentiles about whose Cause they were
assembled, although it was very easy for every one who was well instructed in the
Faith, to gather a General exemption of all Christians from the observance of
the Law from those discourses which the Council held against Circumcision, and
the Declaration which they made in favor of the Gentiles.

166. S. Paul's purifyng himself in the Temple was an evident proof for the
Jews, that they might without sin practice the Law of Moses, but it was no
warrant for them to believe, that the practice of the Law was necessary to
salvation, this being a Doctrine which they were to learn by word of mouth and
preaching, and not by actions. For how could they be certain, that an action
which might be done for different motives, supposed any one motive in
particular, unless the doer of it discovered to them which it was? They might
lawfully conclude thus: Paul purifies himself: Therefore he holds it lawful to
follow the Law of Moses; but their discourse failed, if they argued thus: Paul
purifies himself: therefore he acknowledges an obligation in conscience to
follow the Law of Moses, which was a Doctrine only tolerated among the Jews,
and permitted by the Apostles, since it could not be remedied without the
danger of their total defection from Christ. And this was the reason, why S.
James found out an occasion whereby they might deceive themselves about S.
Paul's judgment, till such time as they were better disposed to embrace it when
it should be made known to them, as judging it much better for them to
concontinue in their ignorance of a truth, which in all likelihood they would
not have accepted at that time, although it had been as formally proposed to their
belief as it had been to the Gentiles.

167. Seeing the Apostles called this Council by an inspiration of the H. Ghost,
the number of the Fathers who assembled therein, was likewise approved by the H.
Ghost for a sufficient Court and Tribunal. The Church was yet in it is infancy,
and the number of Pastors but few in respect of what they are now, and the
presence of many of those few was necessary among their Flocks, and therefore
we ought not to expect any great confluence of them to the Council. However
considering this infancy of the Church we may confidently affirm of this
Council, that it was as General as any that has been held from that time to
this, because of the presence of sive Apostles therein who were the principal
Teachers of the Church, and the glorious Patriarchs from whom descend the
multitude of Governors who are in the Church at present. We have no pressing
grounds from Antiquity to believe, that there were any more than five of them
present, viz Peter, Paul, James, Barnabie, and John, as we find ad Gal. Cap. 2.
v. 9. and there can be given a good account how they came to be there. As for
James, he was in the City where he was Bishop; Peter came thither because of
his banishment out of Rome by Claudius together with all others of his
Country; Paul and Barnabas were preaching the Faith to the Antiochians, and
were brought thither by the dispute which arose in that City about
Circumcision; and Ephesus where John was Bishop, lay not so far off but that he
might be sent for from thence upon a much shorter warning than the other
Apostles who are not mentioned, and of whom it is certain, that they were
departed for their respective Provinces some years before the assembling of
this Council. We may add to these five Apostles a good appearance of Elders,
of whom we have evident grounds to believe, that they exceeded by far the
number of the Apostles. For S. Paul, as we find ad Gal. 2. brought Titus along
with him from Antioch together with some others as it is said in this Chap. v.
2. and we read v. 22. that Judas and Silas carried the Acts of the Council to
Antioch. Here we have at least five already, and it is a hard case if among
our Lord's 70. Disciples, and others who after his Ascension had been ordained,
and qualified by the Apostles call to fit in Council there remained not at
Hieru salem (which was the seat of an Apostle, and the chief City among the
Jews) enough to make their number more than five thrice told, especially
considering that when S. James advised S. Paul to purify himself, it is said
that all the Elders assembled on this occasion, which denotes a considerable
number of them, and this at a time when there was no Council held. Judas and
Silas are likewise called Principal men among the Brethren v. 22. that is,
among the Elders, which shows, that there were a great many Elders at
Jerusalem whom they excelled in Gifts. Besides, the Apostles were always
attended by some one or more of the Elders to be witnesses of their actions,
and Associates in their labors. So that if we allow but one Elder for each
Apostle their number will be equal; and since it is incredible, that there were
not at Jerusalem before the coming of Peter, Paul, John, and Barnabie many
more Elders than the Associates of S. James, their number must have been much
greater than that of the Apostles. Neither is it at all likely, that the Jews
and Antiochians would have appealed from the Apostles to a lesser number of
Elders than there were Apostles.

168. S. Peter as the first Apostle declared his judgment first in the matter
after there had been a great inquiry made, and disputed against the necessity
of Circumcision from two Heads. The first was v. 8. and 9. because God had given
the H. Ghost to the Gentiles even as he had done to the Jews, and made no
distinction between them, purifying their hearts by Faith. The giving of the H.
Ghost is the greatest perfection of a Christian during this pilgrimage on
Earth. He is the Comforter who supports the Church under all he pressures she
lies under, and the principal spirit which is to secure and confirm to her all
other Blessings which she has received from our Lord. He is the seal of her
Redemption, and the Pledge of her salvation. He discovered his presence in the
Faithful in the first beginnings of Christanitie by many visible effects
which were above nature, as by Prophecy, the Gift of Tongues, and working of
Miracles, as also by a notorious and evident change of life and manners, as by
humility, patience, fervor of Spirit, contempt of all sensible delights, and
a vehement desire of promoting the glory of their beloved Jesus,
notwithstanding all the impediments they met withal through the opposition of
the world, and the devil. From all which Marks and Signs which S. Peter
observed in the converted Gentiles, he concluded, that they were as perfect
Christians as those of the Circumcision who professed the Faith, and if they
were perfect Christians, that they stood in no need of Circumcision. If he had
preached Moses to them, and the H. Ghost had descended on them upon their
belief of his Law, they would have stood in need of Circumcision: but seeing he
preached Christ unto them, and the H. Ghost had descended on them upon their
belief of his Gospel, and purified their hearts by means thereof, he inferred,
that they stood in no need of Circumcision, but of Baptism which was part of
the Gospel which they believed.

169. His 2. Head was from the Liberty of Spirit which Christ had given to his
followers. Why tempt ye God, sais he (...). 10. to put a yoke upon the necks of
the Disciples, which neither we nor our Forefatherswere able to bear? It is a
state of freedom to serve Christ, seeing his Worship is nothing else but the
profession of Love. His Sacraments cause Love, because they cause Grace; and if
they cause Love, they cause Liberty. The Love of God is the contempt of all
earthly things; and no man is a slave to the things of this world, who knows
how to contemn them. The Love of God is an adhaesion to an infinite Goodness;
and no man can be a slave under such a state, because it is a state of the
greatest Happiness. The Law of Moses on the contrary was a state of ^laverie,
because it subjected the minds of men to the observance of Creatures as of days,
and months, and Ceremonies whose whole Essence consisted in the signification
of Blessings which they could not give. The Sacraments which it enjoined with
the greatest rigor did not cause Love, because they did not cause Grace; and as
they did not cause Love, so they did not cause Happiness by weaning the
affections of men from the painful and hurtful persuit of the goods of this
life. And what is a state of unhappiness, but a state of Bondage? The
observance of such things as do not cause, nor suppose the Love of him by whom
they are commanded, lays on us an obligation to obey without any reward to our
Obedience, which is mere slaverie. And this was the case of the Jews as to the
Precept of Circumcision, which neither (...) in them Justice and the Love of
God, nor by consequence supposed any such Love in God toward them, as inclined
him to reward the observance of it with the joys of Heaven, but at most to make
them a recompense here in this world by Temporal Blessings. For seeing the
Justice which was wrought in Circumcision was not effected by this Sacrament,
but by the Faith of the receivers or givers of it, it was in it self a (...)
Element without any immediate influence on their salvation; whereas the
contrary happens in Baptism, which causes that Justice which it signifies,
and as it causes Justice, so it causes Liberty, happiness, and glory. Prom
these Considerations S. Peter concluded, that seeing the profession of Christ's
Law was a state of Liberty, as no one doubted but it was; and seeing the
observance of Circumcision and the Law of Moses was incompatible with this
Liberty, it followed that Circumcision could not be necessary to salvation.

170. Next after Peter followed the judgment of Paul and Barnabas, who formed
their discourse from the many Miracles and wonders which God had wrought among
the Gentiles by them. When God works Miracles in defense of a Doctrine, he
solemnly engages his Veracitie for the truth of the same. Miracles have their
signification as well as words; (...) seeing no Power but that of God can do
things above nature, it is only God who speaks that language which is conveyed
into our hearts by their means. These Blessed men instructed the Gentiles, and
reconciled them to Christ without Circumcision, nay they taught them that
Circumcision was not necessary to salvation, and yet God assisted them all
along, and gained the^ credit by the Miracles which he wrought by them: from
whence they concluded, that Circumcision was not necessary to salvation;
otherwise God would never have declared the Non-necessitie of it by so many
Miracles, when they preached this Doctrine together with the other parts of the
Christian Faith.

171. In the last place which is upon record there comes the Judgment of James,
who proves the Non-necessitie of Circumcision first from Simeon, who has
declared, that God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a
People for his name. 2. from Amos chap. 9 where it is said, that God would
build again the Tabernacle of David... that the residue of men might seek after
the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom his name is called Since the debate of
the Council was not whether the Faith should be preached to the Gentiles, but
whether they ought to be circumcised, the Apostle must be said to understand by
the word Gentiles in these passages all those who professed not the Jewish
Religion. For in case it signified all those who were not of the seed of
Abraham, these passages were as capable of proving the necessity of
Circumcision as the Non-necessitie of it, and it would have been as easy to
prove, that God would build again the Tabernacle of David out of those who were
not of the seed of Abraham, but who professed his Faith and followed his Law,
as it was to prove, that he would build it out of those who did not follow his
Law. S. James concludes from these passages, that if God would take out of the
Gentiles a People for his name, and that his name should be called upon them,
and they should seek after him, that Circumcision could not be necessary to
their salvation. For if it were, it would be necessary for them to profess
the Jewish Religion, and it would not be true, that God would take out of them
a People for his name, and that his name should be called upon them, and that
they should seek after him, because they would not be Gentiles, but Jews as
professing to follow the Law of Moses.

172. Thus the Fathers of the Council gave in their reasons why they judged
Circumcision unnecessarie to the salvation of the Gentiles, which as soon as
they had all done, they proceeded to one common resolution in the matter, which
was conceived in these terms v. 28. It seems good to the H. Ghost, and to us to
lay upon the Gentiles no greater burden than these necessary things, that they
abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled,
and from fornication, from which if they keep themselves, they shall do well. In
which sentence we may observe the divine Prudence of these Fathers, who seeing
they could not gratisie the Jews in obliging the Gentiles to observe
Circumcision, yet they complied so far with them, as to command the Gentiles
under mortal sin to abstain from eating such things as gave them the greatest
scandal, til they were advanced in Spirit, although this were a matter innocent in
it self, and agreeable to the Liberty of Christians. Which example shows the
great Authority which General Councils have in matters of Discipline, since God
himself declared to S. Peter at Ioppe, that the avoiding of these Mosaical
uncleanness was not by his Institution a necessary obligation in the Law of
Grace, when he said to him, Do not thou call that common (or unclean) which God
has made clean.

173. It deserves to be taken notice of, that these discourses of the Apostles
were such as might have suited with any of the Elders for any special
Authority which they seem to carry in outward appearance. The reason whereof
is, because they waved for that time to influence and engage the Elders
judgments by putting them in mind of our Lord's Promises of teaching them all
Truth by means of the Comforting Spirit, and that they had already received
from him a decision of the matter that lay before them, to the end the common
resolution which should be taken therein, might come forth with the greater
evidence of freedom, seeing the Elders were not solicited to side with them out
of respect to the Apostolic Dignity, but from the merits of the Cause, which
should appear in the conviction that arose in them from such Arguments whose
strength consisted not in an extrinsecal Authority. A particular Revelation of
the H. Ghost to the Apostles was without dispute the very thing whereof the
Antiochians doubted, and that which made them desire a common decision of the
Apostles and Elders: for which reason the Apostles forbore to press their
special visitations by the H. Ghost, as not judging it expedient to move the
Council with such Arguments, as could not prevail with the Antiochians to rest
satisfied without a Council. Indeed S. Peter sais, why tempt ye God to put a
yoke upon the neck of the Disciples etc. Which words import a reprehension, but
this reprehension was not directed to the Elders in Council, who could not sin
by obeying the Apostles orders in being present and consulting therein, but to
the unbelieving Jews, and Pharisees, and Antiochians, who whould not lay aside
their scruples without the Council's Definition. (And here by the way we may
gather, that S. Peter makes this Council as such to be the Organ of the H.
Ghost, seeing he sais, that the Jews and Antiochians tempted God by desiring the
assembling of it and their wranglings in it, that is, they provoked him by
their obstinacy and obduracie to continue the painful yoke of circumcision
upon the necks of the Disciples by a countermand in Council, which he had been
pleased to free them from by the commands which he had been graciously pleased
to signify to the Apostles.) He likewise hints at the Vision which he had at
Ioppe, when he told the Fathers that they knew, that is, that he had formerly
acquainted them, how God a good while ago had pitched upon him, that the
Gentiles by his mouth should hear the word of the Gospel. Which words (since
there was no dispute in the Council about the lawfulness of preaching to the
Gentiles) are mentioned only to introduce the Argument, which he framed from
the descent of the H. Ghost upon Cornelius the Gentil, and his Family. The
Vision was particular to him, and therefore he did no more than mention it, but
the operations of the H. Ghost upon the Gentiles were notoriously known to many
others besides himself; for which reason he might judge it as a proper
evidence to be produced against the Jews, and Antiochians. S. Paul's proceeding
was just after the same manner too. For he might have told the Fathers, that he
had not learned that Gospel from men, but by Revelation from Jesus Christ which
he had preached to the Antiochians, as he writ to the Galatians on the same
occasion Cap. 1. v. 12. And if he had done so, he would have found as many
believers as there were persons in the Council. He might have declared his
sentiments in such vehement terms as we find in the aforesaid Epistle; and if
he had done so, no one could have blamed him for the same. But the satisfaction
of the Jews and Antiochians engaged him and his Brethren in the milder way, and
made them deliver their judgments in such a plain manner, that no one can
perceive by their speech, that they had any Superiority and Jurisdiction over
the Elders.

174. Having thus shown upon what occasion the Gentiles required the assembling
of this Council, as likewise the Motives which prevailed with the Apostles to
grant it, together with the manner of their discoursing and reasoning therein, I
shall now prove this Council to have been the Church Representative, or the
Visible Tribunal of the Catholic Church of that time in the same sense, as we
affirm it of the General Councils which have been held in the following Ages
of the Church.

175. J know of nothing of moment that may be pretended against this Assertion,
unless it be that the Infallibility of this Council ought to be ascribed to
the presence of the Apostles therein, who were preserved from error by a
special assistance of the H. Ghost, and that seeing the same assistance of the
H. Ghost does not attend the Bishops who succeed them in the government of the
Church, no Council of Bishops can be the Visible Tribunal of the Church so as
to oblige all the Faithful to an observance of their Decrees. The vanity of
which pretense shall appear in the following Considerations.

176. 1. Since the Antiochians appealed for the resolution of their doubt from
the Apostles alone to a Council of Apostles and Elders together, it is a plain
case that they appealed from one Authority with which they would not acquiesce
to another Authority from which they were willing to receive satisfaction. And
seeing S. Paul with the other Apostles consented to the calling of this Council,
it is plain likewise, that they acknowledged that this Council had Authority
to give them the satisfaction which they desired. The question is, whether we
are to place this Authority in the Apostles only whose judgments in Council
the Elders were obliged to follow; or else in the Elders also, who must be said
to have been as lawful Judges in the Controversy as the Apostles themselves?
If the first be said, the Infallible Authority of this Council seems to afford
no efficacious Argument to prove the Infallibility of General Councils since
the Apostles times, because the Infallibility of this Council being no other
than that of the Apostles it seemsto follow, that the Infallibility of all
General Councils died together with the Apostles. But if the second be said,
then the Infallibility of this Council is not taken merely from the
Infallibility of the Apostles, but from the assistance of the H. Ghost which
was given to the Elders as well as to the Apostles. From whence this Council will
be a good Precedent for the Infallibility of all General Councils which have
succeeded in the Church since, who are held for the Visible Tribunal of all
debates arising among Christians concerning Faith, Morality, or Discipline,
because of the assistance which they receive from the H. Ghost to frame their
Conclusions. And in case the H. Ghost had not instituted, nor the Apostles
owned such an Authority as this in the Council, I see not how it could serve
the use for which is was designed, or how it could be called without rashness,
and presumption in the Apostles.

177. It could not serve the use for which it was designed. For the Antiochians
who appealed from the Apostles to a Council of Apostles and Elders together,
could not receive any other grounds to believe the Non-necessitie of
Circumcision than what they had before, if the Authority of the Council was
the Authority of the Apostles assembled in Council, and not the Authority of
the Elders who were assembled together with them. For a common Declaration of
the Apostles in Council signified no more in order to their satisfaction in
this matter, than their judgments out of Council, which S. Paul would not fail
to acquaint them with among the many Arguments which he used to convince them.
And in case they would have been contented therewith, they needed only to have
demanded it without the concurrence of the Elders. But this was not the thing
which they desired, but a common Consult of the Apostles and Elders together,
whereby they understood, that the Elders should be joint Judges as well as joint
Consultors; for if the Apostles were only to be Judges, they knew before hand
what would be the end of the Consultation. They did not only desire, that the
Apostles should hear what the Elders could say in case, but likewise that the
Elders should hear what the Apostles could say about it. For when many consult
about a matter, the natural meaning of it is, that they hear one another's
reasons for or against it. Neither can we put any other construction on what is
said v. 6. that the Apostles and Elders assembled to consider of this matter.
And in case they desired no more, than that the Apostles should hear what the
Elders could say for or against the Necessity of Circumcision, that they might
be the better able to give their judgments about it, yet it suited not with the
Apostolical Character to grant this request, as we shall see.

178. The Council could not be called without rashness and presumption,
unless the Elders were to be Judges therein, and assisted by the H. Ghost as
well as the Apostles. For these latter having been constituted by our Savior
for the Sovereign and Universal Governors, Pastors, and Teachers of his
Church, and being secured by the H. Ghost from any possibility of erring in
the discharge of their Functions, the Elders at Jerusalem and every where else
were as much obliged to give credit to what they preached as the Antiochians or
any others. How then could they suffer any thing to be questioned which they
had learned of the H. Ghost? Or how could they submit the H. Ghost, who spoke
by their mouths, to the judgment and discourses of their fallible Brethren?
They could receive no such Power and Authority as this from that Spirit of
Truth. They had an unquestionable and Divine Assurance, that Circumcision was
not necessary to salvation, and this Assurance ought to have been the Motive
of the Church's Faith about this Doctrine, and not the approbation and
recommendation of it by a company of fallible Elders. S. Paul sais, that he
learned it not from men, but by Revelation from Jesus Christ; S. Peter gathered
it (as we have seen) from his Vision at Ioppe; S. Barnabie preached it, and we
may confidently say, that the other Apostles did the same; and God attested the
truth of it by many great and stupendous Miracles. Wherefore if this Doctrine
was not sufficiently proposed to the belief of the Antiochians, what better
grounds could they have to believe any other parts of Christianity? And if the
Apostles had not not an infallible Assurance of the Truth, when as Teachers
they actually performed the Functions of the Apostolic Dignity, when is the
time that we shall say, that they were infallibly assisted by the H. Ghost? How
then could they, or durst they at the request of the Antiochians consent to
have this matter sifted by the Elders in Council, if the whole Body of them
were fallible therein? Could a Doctrine want the approbation of their fallible
judgments which men sinned by disbelieving before their judgments were made
known in Council,

179. For these reasons we may boldly say, that when S. Paul, and the other
Apostles admitted of the Antiochians Appeal from them to a General Council of
them together with the Elders, they admitted of their Appeal from the H. Ghost
who spoke by them to the same H. Ghost, who would likewise speak by the Elders,
as well as by them in a General Council. And this they questionless did by
God's special Providence, who would have the Apostles themselves to Authorize
by this memorable example the Power of General Councils, which was to be
received by the Church after their deceas as an effectual remedy against
Innovations in Faith. We have here no base compliance, nor faithless
condescension, no rash subjection of the H. Ghost to the approbation of
fallible men, no confirmation of the Truth by any other than Divine means, nor
any thing that misbecame the Apostolic Dignity, since it was God's pleasure
that their 1. ad Cor. Cap. 14.
Spirits should be subject to the Spirits of their Brethren the Elders, who
were Prophets as well as themselves in a General Council, and that the
Infallibility of the Faith should be made manifest by the same way that it
became Infallible. This was not to call the Faith into question, nor to show
the least doubt of it is truth, but to implore H. Ghost, that he would pleas to
remove the incredulity of the Syrians by making known the second time that
Doctrine, which they had firmly believed upon his first Revelation.

180. 2. the Letre which the Council directed to the Antiochians, and wherein
they sent them the Decision of their doubt, bore the name of the Elders as well
as of the Apostles, which we ought not to understand as tho the Elders name was
inserted therein only by way of salutation, or as witnesses and approvers of
the Apostles Act, as we find S. Timothie's and S. Sylvanus's names placed
together with S. Paul's in some of his Epistles, and as the names of the Lay
Jews and Antiochians are inserted in this Letre of the Council, in case they
are inserted herin (I say in case they are inserted herin, because in the Vulgat
edition it is said Apostoli and seniores Fratres without the Copulative and
between seniores and Fratres, where Fratres is to be put by Apposition to
Seniores, by which means the said Brethren are excluded); but that it was their
proper Act, and by consequence that they had as Judges a Decisive and
definitive Vote in making the Decree that was sent therein, as is evident out of
the Letre it self. We the Apostles and Elders, sais the Letre, being assembled
with one accord send you Paul and Barnabas Apostles, and Judas and Silas Elders
(two of each rank of the Judges who have made up the Council, which you have
desired) to inform you how we have taken Cognizance of your affair, and how It
seems good to the H. Ghost and to us etc. It seems good to us, that is, we
judge through the diligent enquiries which we have made into this matter, and
through the weight of the Arguments and discourses which have been held
thereupon, after having heard with patience all that the Opponents have been
able to produce in defense of their Opinions. It does not seem good only to us
Apostles, but to us Apostles and Elders who are assembled together with one
accord. It seems good to the H. Ghost, that is, the H. Ghost (whom our Savior
has promised to teach us all Truth) approves and ratifies the truth of our
judgments by the cooperation of his Grace with our endeavors. It does not seem
good to the H. Ghost to approve only, and to ratify the truth of our
judgments who are Apostles, but likewise to ratify the truth of the Elders
judgments through the cooperation of his grace with our common endeavors. The
Apostles and Elders when they were assembled with one accord made only one
Body, and seeing that seemed good to the H. Ghost which seemed good to this
Body, that seemed good to the H. Ghost which was decreed by this Body, as it
was composed of Elders, no less than as it was composed of Apostles. And if
these words of the Councils Letre it seems good to the H. Ghost and to us etc.
signify an Authoritative Decree, as no body doubts but they do, we ought to
derive the Authority of it from the Elders as well as from the Apostles, and to
ascribe the Infallibility of it as well to the one as to the other.

181. 3. When S. Paul is recorded Chapter 16. v 4 to have gone through the Cities
and Churches, commanding them to observe the Doctrins which were decreed by the
Apostles and Elders who were assembled at Jerusalem, shall we say, that he
commanded them to observe the Decrees of those who had no Power to command
them? Or that he made use of the Elders name to reenforce the Authority of the
Apostles? This would have been a great error in such a wise Governor as S.
Paul was. For what understanding Magistrate will ever pretend to put an end to
a rebellion, by commanding the rebels in the name, and by the Authority of
their fellow subjects to lay down the arms which they have taken up against
him? And besides a failure in prudence it would have been moreover a means of
endangering the Faith, if those Decrees were only the Apostles Act, by giving
the Faithful an occasion to believe, that the Legislative Power was lodged in
the Elders in Council, as well as in the Apostles. There can be no reasonable
grounds to put any other construction on this proceeding of S. Paul, but that
he gave the Cities, and Churches through which he passed a new Motive of
continuing in the right Faith, which they had never had before, inasmuch as
these Decrees were not issued forth by the Apostles, who were the standing
Governors of the Church, but by the joint and united Power of them together
with the Elders. Which Power was extraordinary, and peculiar to them as they
were Members of the Council; for the Apostles out of Council had a Power
independent of the Elders, and the Elders by themselves had no Power to oblige
the whole Church to an observance of their Decrees. I make no doubt, but that
such Doctrins as we find delivered in Scripture relating to the Authority of
the Church, as Tell the Church, Whoever will not hear the Church, let him be to
thee as an Heathen etc. The gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church,
and S. Paul's Doctrine that the Church is the ground and Pillar of truth gave to
the Antiochians an unwarrantable occasion of appealing from the Apostles. For
how great soever the Authority of any single Apostle, or of their whole
College might seem to them, yet the united Authority of the Apostles and
Elders in a Council was held by them as greater and more venerable, as being
the Representatives of the whole Church, to whom the Promises of our Savior's
perpetual assistance to the end of the world were made, and from whom there was
no Appeal. Which consideration prevailed with these new beginners to demand a
Council, which they ought not to have done, because it was a great indignity
offered to his Divine Majesty, to require him to declare a second time, what
he had sufficiently proposed to their belief before by the Apostles.

182. Thus the Apostles themselves have left us a precedent for General
Councils, and to the end the Dr. may have full satisfaction herin, I shall
strengthen all that I have hitherto said on this subject with a very forcible
consideration, which is this, that seeing we find the Promises which our Savior
made to the whole Catholic Church to have been performed in this Council, we
ought to say, that this Council was the whole Catholic Teaching Church, or
the whole Body of Church Governors, which cannot be said because every
individual Governor of the Church was there present, but only because this
Council Represented all those who were absent. And truly in case this be not
admitted we must say, that our Savior promised particular Churches, (such as
Provincial Councils are) to teach them all truth to the end of the world,
because we find that he has made this Promise good to a particular Body of
Church Governors. For if this Council was not the whole Church Representative,
it was only a part of the Catholic Teaching Church and by consequence if our
Savior performed his promise of teaching the Governors and Teachers of his
Church all truth by the assistance which he gave to this Council, he made not
this Promise to the whole Catholic Teaching Church, but to a part of it.
Wherefore I shall leave it to the Drs, choice to take which of these two
extremes he pleases, either to grant that our Savior taught the whole
Catholic Teaching Church when he taught this Council, whereby he must
confess a Church Representative; or else that he taught only a part of the
Teaching Church, whereby his Promises must be held to have been made to a part
of the Catholic Church, and not to the whole Body.

183. He may say to this, that the assistance which our Savior gave to this
Council was the performance of the Promises which he specially made to the
Apostles, who were the Church virtual, as being appointed by him for the Rule
of Faith which all Christians ought to follow.

184. I Answer, that our Savior performed the personal Promises which he made
to the Apostles of teaching them all truth, before the assembling of this
Council, as is manifest in S. Peter, and S. Paul, and S. Barnabie, who had an
Infallible assurance of the Non-necessitie of Circumcision before this Council
was held. And besides this the very Acts of the Council (as we have seen)
clearly confute this pretense, because the Definitive Decree that was made
therein, was an effect of the assistance which our Savior gave to the Elders as
well as to the Apostles, seeing it was said by them all alike It seems good to
the H. Ghost and to us etc. The Apostles out of Council were the Church Virtual
in consequence of a Promise which was particularly made to them, and all
persons were obliged to acquiesce with their judgments without seeking after
any other security of their belief of any Doctrine which they preached, than
their Authority. But when they were assembled together with the Elders in
Council, there was a suspension of the exercise of this Prerogative so far,
that although the Elders were not permitted to mistrust the Apostles Faith, yet
they might sift and examine it with as much niceness as tho they did mistrust
it, before they gave it a public approbation by a common Decree in in it is
favor. Which custom has continued in the Church ever since the Apostles times,
when upon the appearance of Heresies in opposition to the known Faith of the
Church, as it happened in the case of Arianisme, the Fathers who have assembled
in General Councils to take Cognizance of the Doctrine in Controversy, have
examined, and enquired into it with the utmost rigor, although at the same time
that they made these enquiries, the evidence of Tradition and the Universal
practice of the Catholic Church have recommended it so firmly to their
belief, that they judged it to be a sin of infidelity to doubt of the truth of
it. The Apostles acted not in the Council as Superior Governors who were
Infallible in virtue of their Apostleship, but jointly as Brethren and
Colleagues with the Elders, who were to receive a confirmation of the
controverted Doctrine from the H. Ghost through their own endeavors, and not
from the Apostles alone. Nay the Apostles heard the discourses which the Elders
made to the Point, no less than the Elders hearkened to them; neither was the
Faith of the Apostles ratified without more ado because it was theirs, but was
subjected to the trial of Arguments drawn from Scripture, Christian Principles,
and reason, and to the evidence of a new declaration, and this new declaration
was proposed by the concurring votes of the Apostles and Elders together.

185. Although the Apostles might have insisted on their Authority, yet they
could not lay any commands on the Elders to confirm their Faith without making
an inquiry into the grounds of it, because this would have been inconsistent
with that liberty of discourse which is necessarily required among those who
are assembled to consult together, and to consider of any matter that is laid
before them. And in case the Elders had declared against the necessity of
Circumcision on no other account than because of the Authority of the Apostles,
and this too at their command, their Declaration would have amounted to no more
than a bare profession of their Faith, and not to an Authoritative Decree which
would have contented the Jews and Antiochians; neither could they have said, It
seems good to the H. Ghost and to us etc. but only It seems good to us it
seems good to the H. Ghost, and to the Apostles, which any Layman might have
said as well as the Elders in Council. Such a judgment as is formed by men's own
industry and endeavors through the assistance of the H. Ghost (as when the
connection which the controverted Doctrine has with Scripture, or Christian
Principles, is gathered and concluded on) is necessary to qualify the freedom
and Authority of a Council. For which reason the Authority of the Apostles
writings is a sufficient ground for any General Council to proceed upon since
the Apostles times in the condemnation of an error, because the meaning of the
Scripture is proved by the sifting of Tradition, by comparing one place with
another, and by the connection it has with other revealed Truths. All which is
performed by endeavors and industry, as by consequences, conferences, study,
meditation, reading and the like. So that when they are come to a final
aggreement in the matter, they may truly say, It seems good to the H Ghost and
to us etc. which the Elders in this Council could not have said, if at the
command of the Apostles, or out of pure respect to them, they had approved and
confirmed their Faith, and not acted as Judges of it by such a conviction as
arose in them from Arguments, which did not depend merely on the Apostles
Authority and Character.

186. The Church Virtual and the Church Representative differ in this, that
individual persons may be the Church Virtual as the Apostles were, but the
Church Representative is necessarily a Council. The Privilege which the
Apostles had of being the Church Virtual was personal, and not to descend on
any of their Successors at least in the whole Latitude wherein they enjoyed it.
And therefore the Promises which were made them under this Character were to
last no longer than their lives: whereas the Privilege of being the Princes,
Governors, and Representers of the Church was to be continued on to their
Successors. And therefore the Promises that were made them under these
considerations might be communicated by them during their life time, as they
were to the Elders, and to be in force as long as the world endures. Our Lord
might, if he had pleased, have made the Apostles the only Representatives of
the Catholic Church for term of life, but then their regulations and orders
ought to have proceeded always from the common consent of them all being
assembled together, which we do not find to have been their practice. And it
was morally impossible for them to take this course after their departure from
Jerusalem toward the Conversion of Countries far distant from one another,
without a great hindrance to their undertakings. And yet we may reasonably
conclude, that there wanted not manic occasions of consulting together, as they
did in this Council about Circumcision. Which is a convincing Argument, that
each single Apostle was the Church Virtual, or a General Council in
equivalence, as being sufficiently assisted by our Lord in the performance of
their duty for the resolution of all doubts, that might arise among their
Converts concerning any Doctrine that had not been expressly delivered to them,
but to be deduced from Principles which they had expressly received. And as
that Argument proves them to have been the Church Virtual, so their holding of
this Council together with the Elders shows, that they alone were not
necessarily the Church Representative.

187. These Observations upon the Council at Jerusalem undermine a great part
of the Drs. Discourse, and afford us a ready answer to all the Objections
which he makes against General Councils. If he say, that the whole Church is
nothing else but the whole multitude of individual Christians, the H. Ghost
assures us v. 22. that this Council of Pastors was the whole Church, from
whence I infer, that Bishops and Pastors belong to the Notion and Definition of
the Church. If he say, that General Councils are not the Representatives of the
Church, the contrary appears from this Council wherein five Apostles and a
competent nnmber of Elders Represented the whole Catholic Church in the
Apostles time. If he tell us, that the Power which particular Bishops have over
their respective Flocks ought not to be controlled by any Superior Authority
such as we ascribe to General Councils, we find at present, that every
particular Bishop in the Apostle's time was obliged to follow the Decrees of
this Council, not only in virtue of the obedience which they owed to the
Apostles, but likewise in virtue of the Obedience which they owed to the
Elders, and not only in matters of Faith, but in matters of Discipline too. If
he tell us, that the Governors and Teachers of the Church whether they are
taken singly, or all together, are fallible in the proposal of matters of
Faith; we see here, that a Council wherein the major part of the Members had no
Promise of Infallibility made them any more than any Pastors of the Church of
these days, became Infallible by a particular assistance of the H. Ghost. If he
say, that our Savior's Promises to the Church do not principally, and in a
special manner belong to the Governors and Pastors of the same, but to the
whole Company of the Faithful; the contrary is evident out of this Council
wherein the Promises of our Lord's assistance were immediately performed to the
Pastors of the Church, by whom the fruit and benefit of them was to be imparted
to all the Faithful throughout the world. Lastly, if he say, that the
Catholic Church has no Authority, nor Visible Tribunal; the H. Ghost gives
him the lie, from whom we learn that the Council at Jerusalem had Authority,
and was a Visible Tribunal of the Catholic Church of those times. And if the
Catholic Church at that time had a Visible Tribunal, what grounds can there
be to imagine, that the Catholic Church of succeeding times has had none? We
are not bound to believe this upon any Protestant Writer's bare word and
surmise; for what proof can there be against a truth so well defended by
Scripture, and Tradition? God is as Faithful to his Church now as he was in the
Apostle's time, because he is the same God now as he was then. And if the
Promises which he made to his Church, that the Gates of hell should not prevail
against it, and that he would teach it all Truth were performed then in a
General Council why are they not to be performed so now? And if the performance
of these Promises made the Council at Jerusalem Infallible in their Decrees,
why should not the performance of the same Promises make other General Councils
Infallible in like manner? And if the Faithful of those days were bound under
damnation to lay aside all scruples, and to submit to the Decrees of the Church
which was Represented by that Council, why should it be lawful for the
Christians of these days or of any times since the Apostles to set at naught
the Definitions of the Church, which has been Represented by other General
Councils since?

188. If Dr. Sherlock grant, that the Promises of our Savior to his Church are
as much in force now as they were in the Apostles days, we ought in all reason
to expect, that our Lord should afford her the same Infallible assistance now
as he did then, and not only that he should give her the same Infallible
assistance, but that he should give it to her after the same way too, that is,
in General Councils and Assemblies of the Church, as often as occasions
require. And if he will not allow of this inference, let him demonstrate, that
our Savior's Promises to his Church ought to be understood in a different
sense now from what they were taken in in the Apostles days; and then let him
demonstrate, what this different sense is which they ought to be taken in. I
say, that till he can produce these demonstrations, the performance of our
Savior's Promises (of which we have an unquestionable evidence) sufficiently
declare their meaning to us, and this consequence ought to pass for an
undeniable Truth, Our Savior has performed the Promises which he made his
Church of preserving her from error, by the Infallible ass^stance which he
gave to the Pastors of it being assembled in a General Council. Therefore be
will perform the same Promises after the same manner till the end of the world.

189. It is a vain thing to think, that our Savior performs his Promise of
teaching his Church all truth by means of each one's private reason; for if
this were so, seeing the Catholic Church in the Protestant way is composed of
several sorts of Christians who differ in Faith and Doctrine, they must
consequently hold, that when our Savior teaches her all Truth, he teaches her
dowright contradictions by means of each one's private reason whereby they
persuade themselves, that their respective Faiths and Doctrins are true, and
the very same that he taught his Apostles. See the grounds of this Discourse
more fully handled above, N. 49. and seq. Chap. 2.

190. It may be objected 1. against this Discourse upon the Council at
Jerusalem, that the Elders were no more than Priests, which shows this Council
not to have been a Visible Tribunal of the Catholic Church in our sense,
because we maintain Bishops alone to have the Right of giving a Definitive and
Decisive Vote in matters of Faith. From whence it follows, that the Infallible
Authority of this Council must be derived from the Apostles exclusively to the
Elders, which can afford no efficacious Argument to prove the Infallibility of
any General Council since the Apostles deceas.

191. I answer, that although it be our Doctrine, that Bishops alone have the Right
of giving a Definitive vote in matters of Faith according to the evident and
perpetual Tradition of the Catholic Church, which has always adjudged it to
them as the Successors of the Apostles exclusively to Priests: yet it is no
Doctrine of ours, that this Right and power cannot be communicated by them to
other Churchmen who are not Bishops, as they find a reasonable occasion for it,
as is manifest out of the Florentine, Lateran, and Tridentin Councils, wherein
Cardinals, Abbots, and the Generals of Religious Orders had Definitive Votes,
although they were not Bishops. Which practice receives a very good defense from
this Precedent of the Elders, and whatever further Arguments can be brought to
make it good, will equally prove the lawfulness, and validity of it as well in
the one case as the other. To judge Definitively in matters of Faith is an Act
of the Episcopal Jurisdiction, which may be committed in sundry cases to the
management of those who are not of the Episcopal Order, and whenever we find it
thus conferred by an unquestionable Authority, we ought to say that the
persons to whom it is given, are Bishops as far as the extent of it will go as
much as if they enjoyed the Episcopal Order. For which reason we must hold,
that the Cardinals, Abbots, and General Superiors of Religious Orders after
their admittance by the Bishops to vote Decisively in the aforesaid General
Councils, were as much Bishops for what relates to the lawfulness, and
validity of this Power of voting as those from whom they received it. Now we
may discourse after the same manner in the case of the Elders, who without
dispute were for the greatest part of them no more than Priests, if we speak of
their Orders; and nevertheless seeing the necessity of the Church, and the
fewness of Bishops in those early times had obliged the Apostles to give them
a Power to act and vote in the Council as as tho they were Bishops, we ought to
consider them as raised to a higher degree than that of mere Priests, because of
this branch of the Episcopal Jurisdiction, which is the thing that does all in
General Councils, and not the Power of the Episcopal Order. By which means the
Promises which our Savior made to the Bishops of preserving them from error
in their common deliberations about matters of Faith, appertained to the Elders
as well as to the Apostles. And by consequence the Council of Jerusalem was a
Visible Tribunal of the Catholic Church in the same sense that we affirm it
of the General Councils which have been held since the Apostles time, seeing the
Infallibility of it is not derived purely from the Infallibility of the
Apostles, but likewise from the special assistance which the H. Ghost gave to
the Elders as well as to them, as I have shown at large.

192. It may be objected 2. against General Councils out of S. Cyprian (as he
is quoted, and translated by this Author in his Vindic. of some Prot. Princ. p.
19.) in his Preface to his Council of Carthage, where we find him speaking thus
to the Fathers, that they were met freely to declare their Opinions about the
matter (the rebaptizing of those who had been baptized by Heretics), judging
no man, nor denying Communion to any man, if he dissent; for neither does any
of us constitute himself Bishop of Bishops, or by tyrannical terror ^ompel
his Colleagues to a necessity of obeying, since every Bishop being free, and in
his own power, has his ownfree choice, and can neither be judged by another,
nor judge another; but let us all expect the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who alone has power both to advance us to the Government of the Church, and to
judge of our government.

193. I answer, that if these words are to be taken as they lie, they afford
very good grounds to reject the Authority of General Councils. But there is no
necessity for us to take them in this rigor; for if S. Cyprian had held it
absolutely true, that no Bishop can be judged by another, how could he advise
S. Stephen B. of Rome to excommunicate, and depose Marcianus Archbishop of
Arles for being a Novatian? Was not he a Bishop, and was not he sentenced, and
judged at his instance? Can any one think, that S. Cyprian took himself for a
Tyrant, when he procured this wolf to be drove from among the Flock of Christ?
Or that he thought himself to do an injust thing in being an instrument of
compelling him to a necessity of obeying? Or that he thought it an
encroachment upon the prerogative of Christ for S. Stephen to judge of his
Government? How easily might Marcianus have told him, that he was free, and in
his own power, and had his free choice, and that he would expect the judgment
of Jesus Christ, who alone had power to advance him to the government of the
Church, and to judge of his government? And in case he had made this Plea, I do
not see how S. Cyprian could have refused to accept it for good, seeing it was
nothing else but his own Doctrine, if he held it to be absolutely true, that no
Bishop can judge another, and that Christ alone has power to judge of their
government.

194. This proceeding of S. Cyprian toward Marcianus evidently shows, that the
aforesaid Passage ought not to be understood in all the rigor as the words
sound. And therefore nothing can be inferred from thence which makes against
General Councils, because the power of excommunicating Heretics and
Schismatiques infers all the Authority which we ascribe to General Councils,
inasmuch as the power of excommunicating and judging Schismatiques supposes,
that there is in the Bishops and Pastors of the Church an irresistible power of
commanding in all things appertaining to the edification of our Lord's Body;
and the power of excommunicating and judging Heretics supposes an Infallible
power of declaring what the true Faith is. For the better understanding of
which truth the Reader may turn over to. 22. N. 138. and seq. chap. 2. where I
have shown at large, that Bishops and Pastors can receive no power from Christ
to excommunicate any person for matters of Faith, if they are not infallibly
certain that their own Faith is true, by which I do not mean, that every Bishop
is personally infallible in all he teaches, but only that they are infallible
as long as they follow the Definitions of General Councils in such matters as
are defined, or the indubitable and known Faith of the Church Diffusive in such
things as are not defined, by which latter means it was that S. Cyprian was
infalliblie certain, that the Doctrine for which he procured Marcianus to be
deposed, was contrary to the Christian Faith. If the Dr. think fit to
maintain, that Bishops have power to excommunicate and judge their Colleagues in
cases of Heresy and Schism, he is obliged as much as we to explicate this
passage of S. Cyprian, which as soon as he has done, he will not think it worth
his while to allege it against General Councils. For the power of
excommunicating and judging Heretical and Schismatical Bishops is obnoxious to
the main exceptions which are brought against General Councils, because it
imports a power of imposing Laws and Rules on Bishops without their consent,
which he sais ubi supra p. 25. is an usurpation upon the Episcopal Authority,
and moreover excludes them from any power of judging and voting in their own
Cause, which is urged as an unanswerable exception against the Council of Trent,
because Protestants were not permitted to sit as judges therein of the Heresies
whereof they were accused.

195. If the Dr. tell me 1. that Marcianus was a notorious Heretic and
Schismatique, and that he grants in his aforesaid Vindicat. p. 26. that such
Bishops may be cast out of the Church and deposed; I answer, that although Bishops
are never so notorious Heretics and Schismatiques, yet seeing they are to be
censured by Bishops for their Heresy and Schism, they must necessarily have
Bishops for their judges. And then let him show, how this Negative Proposition
of S. Cyprian can be absolutely true, that no Bishop can be judged by another,
nor judge another. But by the way what is it he means here by a notorious
Heretic? For as much as J have been able to learn out of him, he means one who
contradicts some plain and acknowledged Article of the Christian Faith (see his
Vindicat p. 30.) which is such a Notion of a notorious Heretic, as no one can
desire a better to prove Protestants to be all notorious Heretics, seeing they
profess to follow those Doctrins which the first Reformers broached against
the known Faith of the Visible Church of the time wherein they lived. Why should
the Doctrine of Marcianus be a notorious Heresy, because it contradicted the
acknowledged Faith of the Church of his time, and the singularities of
Protestants and the first Reformers be no notorious Heresies, although they
contradicted the acknowledged Faith of the Church of their time? Either let
both of them be said to be notorious Heretics or neither, seeing they are both
of them cast and sentenced as such by the Church of their respective times. If
he will never grant any to be notorious Heretics whilst there is a dispute
whether they be Heretics or no, nor any thing to be a notorious Heresy
whilst there is any Controversy whether it be an Heresy or no, he will make
it impossible that there ever should be any notorious Heretics, or notorious
Heresies; for to be sure all Heretics and their followers will dispute hard
to prove the Doctrine which they deny to be no plain Article of the Christian
Faith, and their Novelties to be no Heresies (and so questionless Marcianus
did with his Novatians), whose Controversies and brawls ought to be reckoned of
no moment to invalidate the unanimous judgment of the Visible Church by whom
they are condemned, whose Authority alone makes them notorious Heretics, and
their singularities notorious Heresies. Indeed if the Visible Church dispute,
and be not resolved whether a Doctrine be Heresy or no, I know of no body who
sais that any such controverted Point is a notorious Heresy, or a notorious
truth. But if the dispute be between the Visible Church and those who have
departed from her (as it happened in the case of Marcian and the first
Reformers,) it is evident that such controverted Points as are held in
opposition to the known Faith of the Church, are to be accounted notorious
Heresies, unless we destroy the present supposition, which is that the denial
of some plain and acknowledged Article of the Christian Faith is a notorious
Heresy. Let this Author give a good reason if he can, why the denial of any
Doctrine which was held by the Church in Marcian's time should be the denial of
a plain and acknowledged Article of the Christian Faith, and yet that the
denial of so many Doctrins as the first Reformers rejected of the Church of
their times, should be no denial of so many plain and acknowledged Articles of
the Christian Faith.

196. If he tell me 2. out of his Vindicat. p. 26 that the Power which Bishops
have of deposing Heretical Bishops does not proceed from a Superior
Jurisdiction which they have over each other, but from the obligation which all
Bishops have as far as they can, to see that no part of the Christian Church be
corrupted with Heresies; I answer, that our Savior cannot lay an obligation on
one man to punish another man's crimes without giving him a Superior
Jurisdiction over him, because this obligation essentially supposes a Command,
and a Command from our Savior to punish another's crimes is most formally the
giving of a Superior Jurisdiction to this purpose. Which general Doctrine as it
proves that Bishops have a Superior Jurisdiction over all Heretics whom they
are obliged by our Savior's Command to censure, so it shows that they have a
special Superior Jurisdiction over Bishops considered as Bishops, because of
the special punishment of Deposition which they are obliged to inflict upon
them, which being the deprivation of an Office and Jurisdiction which they have
immediately received from Christ, necessarily supposes a special Command from
him to take it from them, (for who else can give them this Power?) And this
Command is most formally a special Superior Jurisdiction which they have over
them considered as Bishops in cases of Heresy. And thus the obligation which
all Bishops have to see that the Church be not corrupted with Heresy is so far
from impairing the Superior Jurisdiction of one Bishop over another, that it
evidently infers it, which is no ill step toward the Authority of General
Councils. But after all let the Power of Bishops to depose Bishops proceed from
what cause this Author pleases, yet seeing he grants that Bishops have Power to
depose one another in certain cases, it follows that they have Power to judge
one another in certain cases, and then, as I said above, let him show how this
Negative Doctrine of S. Cyprian can be absolutely true, that no Bishop can be
judged by another, nor judge another.

197. The True occasion and meaning of S. Cyprian's words is as follows. He was
unhappily engaged with his Affrican Bishops in the defense of the Doctrine of
rebaptizing those who had been baptized by Heretics, which seemed to him very
clear for such reasons as are to be found in his Epistles to Januarius,
Quintus, Pompeius, and Jubaianus; and he entertained the better opinion of it,
because Aggrippinus one of his Predecessors in the Sea of Carthage had embraced
it, and confirmed it in a Council. And besides this, Firmilian Bishop of
Caesarea together with a great many others of Cappadocia, Cilicia, Galatia,
and other Eastern Countries were as zealous for it as himself. However by
reason he found a great opposition from his Colleagues in other parts, and
particularly from the Church of Rome under Stephen, and generally from the
whole Church of Italy, he was unwilling on the one side to confide so much in
his own judgment as to think that he could not possibly be mistaken, and on the
other side he was too great a lover of truth not to take all necessary
Precautions for the security of a Doctrine which he held for such. He therefore
as Metropolitan called a Council of the Bishops of his Province to consult
freely upon the Matter, that in case he were abetted by the concurrence of
their Votes, the Doctrine which he esteemed true might receive the public
recommendation of their whole Province. But he took special care herin, that
their Declaration in it is favor should not be accompanied with any
Ecclesiastical Censures on the Contraveners of it, or that any one should be
denied Communion if he dissented, or the worse looked upon, or esteemed to do
an ill thing by the rest of his Colleagues for any such dissent, or that the
contrary Doctrine should be pronounced Heretical or erroneous in Faith (all
which is signified when he sais judging no man), as holding it unreasonable
that a Provincial Council, which is no more than a part of the Catholic
Teaching Church, should prescribe Laws to be observed by their whole Body. He
took himself with his Affrican Bishops to have Authority enough to pass what
judgment they thought best in a matter that was not undoubtedly known to be
either true or false, as he held this Doctrine of Rebaptization was not; and
seeing he could not deny, but that the other Bishops of the Church had the same
power to give in their judgments concerning it, he thought it no less than
Tyranny to go about to compel them to a necessity of obeying, and therefore
he left both the truth of his and his Council's judgment together with the
judgment of those who stood in opposition to them, to the Sovereign Cognizance
of Christ Jesus who alone had the power to judge which party was in the right;
till such time as the difference should be determined in a General Assembly of
the Fathers of the whole Church, as it afterward was in the Council of Nice.
It was this consideration which made him say to the Fathers for neither does
any of us constitute himself Bishop of Bishops, by which he meant, that none
of them pretended to take from their Colleagues throughout the world that Right
which he owned they had of choosing which side they pleased about the Doctrine in
debate, and that they confessed themselves to have no power over them in this
case, but that it was vested in a General Council of the Bishops of the whole
Church, who were by Christ's Institution in all matters relating to the Faith
Bishops of Bishops and Teachers of Teachers.

198. This explication of S. Cyprian's words is nothing else in effect, but
what S. Augustine delivers in his Book de Baptis. contr. Donatist. He there tells
us first, lib. 2. cap. 8. how much S. Cyprian depended on the strength of his
own Arguments, and how he came not to be moved with the contrary Custom that
was alleged against him, viz because it was not mado out to him ( nondum
asserta), by which we are not to understand, that he held it lawful to prefer
our own private reasons before the undoubted Tradition of the Church, but only
that he was not satisfied of the Universalitie of this Custom, by reason
Firmilian had informed him (with what truth I know not), that they had a
contrary Custom in their parts of the East. And besides the point in dispute
being a matter of a mixed nature partly Doctrinal, and partly of Discipline and
that Negative too, he might have been induced to believe that the Custom was a
culpable Omission, because the belief of it is lawfulness seemed to want an
Universal approbation, inasmuch as the great opposition which so many famous
Bishops who were zealous for the Catholic Unity, made against it, might
persuade him, that it was no Apostolical Tradition. Quiae tunc non extiterant,
sais S. Augustine, nisi qui ei consuetudinem opponerent, defensiones autem
ipsius consuetudinis non tales afferrent quibus illa talis anima moveretur,
noluit vir gravissimus rations suas etsi non veras, quod eum latebat, sed
tamen non victas veraciquidem, sed tamen nondum assertae consuetudini cedere.
2. He tells us lib. 3. cap. 3. the extent of that liberty and freedom of
judgment which S. Cyprian gives to Bishops, viz that they may judge as they see
cause, and come to what resolution they shall see fitting in all such Questions
as have not been thoroughly sifted and cleared, as this Point of Rebaptization
which had caused so many disputes in the Church, never had been, to the end
the truth may the more easily appear by this means. In Quaestionibus, sais he,
quae nondum eliquatissima perspectione discussae sunt. Nover at enim quantam
Sacramenti profunditatem tunc omnis Ecclesia varia disputatione versab at,
liberumque faciebat quaerendi arbitrium, ut examinata veritas panderetur. And
Lib. 6. cap. 7. he sais that this liberty was referred by S. Cyprian himself
to the time wherein there was a search made into the truth of obscure Doctrins,
in quo quae ab illis tractata sunt nondum declarata sine ambagim hauriebantur,
sed adhuc clausa magno molimine quaerebantur. 3. He tells us Lib. 2. cap 4. that
(...) perfect sifting and clearing of a Point is effected in a General Council,
whose Declaration had prevailed with him to dissent from S. Cyprian about
Rebaptizing those who had been baptized by Heretics, and he makes no doubt,
but that it would have prevailed with S. Cyprian too to have altered his
judgment in this matter, if it had happened in his time. Nos ipsi, sais he, non
auderemus hoc contra Cyprianum asserere, nisi universae Ecclesiae concordissima
authoritate firmati, cui and ipse sine dubio cederet, si jam illo tempore
quaestionis hujus veritas eliquata and declarata per Concilium Plenarium
solidaretur. 4. He tells us Lib. 7. Cap. 53. that the sifting and clearing of
controverted Doctrins is begun in Provincial Councils (such as this Council of
Carthage was), and that it is perfected in General Councils (such as the
Council of Nice was), In Regionali Concilio inchoatur rerum eliquatio,
terminatur autem in Plenario; and he speaks to the same effect Lib. 2 cap. 9.
He (...). tells us lib. 1. cap. 7. of the great obscurity of the Question about
Rebaptization, and how it came at length to have a final determination in a
General Council, Quoniam, sais he, quaestionis bujus obscuritas prioribus
Ecclesiae temporibus ante Schismae Donati magnos Viros and magna charitate
praeditos, Patres Episcopos inter se compulit salva pace disceptare atque
fluctuare; ut diu Conciliorum in suis quibusque regionibus adversa statuta
nutaverint, donec Plenario totius Orbis Concilio quod saluberrime fentiebatur
etiam remotis dubitationibus firmaretur-And ib. cap. 18. In qua tamen (Ecclesia
Catholica) si aliud alii and aliud alii adhuc de ista quaestione salua pace
sentirent, donec universali Concilio unum aliquid eliquatum sincerumque
placuisset. And a little lower, Nam illis temporibus antequam Concilii plenarii
sententia quid in hac re sequendum esset, totius Ecclesiae consensio
confirmasset, visum est ei cum ferme octoginta Episcopis Affricanarum
Ecclesiarum, omnem hominem qui extra Ecclesiae Catholicae unitatem baptizatus
fuisset oportere ad Ecclesiae unitatem venientem denuo baptizari. And lib. 6.
cap. 39. when he recounts the Opinions of the Fathers of S. Cyprian's Council,
he sets down this of Eugenius ab Ammedera, Ego autem hoc idem dico, censeo
haereticos baptizandos esse, to which he returns this answer, sed non hoc
censet Ecclesia cui Deus jam plenario etiam Concilio revelavit, quod tunc
aliter sapiebatis, sed quia in vobis charitas salva erat in unitate
permanebatis. And ib. cap. 13. whereas Januarius a Lambese said, secundum
sanctarum Scripturarum Authoritatem decerno omnes Haereticos baptizandos, and
sic in Sanctam Ecclesiam admittendos, he answers, secundum Scripturarum
Sanctarum authoritatem decrevit Concilium Catholicum orbis terrarum etiam in
Haereticis inventum Christi baptismum non esse improbandum.

199. Whoever diligently weighs these quotations will find the explication
which I have given of S. Cyprian's words to be exactly according to S.
Augustin's mind, and therefore there is no fear that they can make any thing
against the Authority of General Councils; seeing besides their consent with
the Church in S. Augustin's time, they may be as easily reconciled to the
language of the Catholic Church of these times wherein we live. For we hold
with S. Cyprian, that Bishops have a Right to choose that Opinion which they
shall think most probable about any Doctrine that is controverted, and disputed
between Catholic and Catholic, and that they have no power to judge one
another in such cases, or to deny one another the Communion if he dissent, or
to compel one another to a necessity of obeying, but that each one's
conscience after a due examination of the matter is his own supreme Guide under
Christ, who alone has the power of judging their proceedings herin. And if any
of them out of a General Council go about to make their private consciences in
such cases (...) necessary Rule which their other Colleagues ought to follow,
and interiourly assent to under forfeiture of their mystical union with Christ
and his Church, they properly make themselves tyrannical Bishops of Bishops in
such matters wherein no man has a Right to play the Bishop. We hold likewise,
that they may assemble in Provincial Councils, and take such disputes into
consideration according as they find just and reasonable motives to do so, and
that they may establish therein such a Declaration concerning the debated points
as in their judgments may seem to draw nearest to the truth; but we hold
likewise, that when the agreeing Authority of the universal Church has
declared in a Plenarie and Catholic Council of the whole world what the
Faithful ought to believe in such points, Bishops then lose their liberty of
judgment, and must submit their consciences and judgments to such Declarations,
as S. Augustine sais that S. Cyprian himself would have done, had he seen his
Opinion about Rebaptization disapproved by a Plenarie and General Council.

200. If any one will contend here, that the meaning of S. Cyprian's words was
not the same (...) S. Augustine represents it to be; I answer, that if it was
not the same, it ought to have been the same, and that it will be a strange
attempt in any one who pretends to be of S. Augustin's Faith to quote S.
Cyprian in such a sense as he has suppressed as unsafe, or erroneous. For my
part I am fully satisfied, that S. Augustine spoke as he thought in his
interpretation of S. Cyprian; for the words will naturally bear his meaning,
and on the other side without such limitations as he has given them, Bishops
necessarily lose their power of judging their Colleagues when they fall into
Heresy and Schism, as we have seen. I could have produced out of S. Cyprian
himself the grounds of this interpretation, were it not that I feared the
swelling of the matter in hand, which is already grown to a greater bulk than
I designed at first. And if S. Augustine spoke as he thought, we cannot desire a
better Authority than his, who was a man most unquestionably holy and
learned, and thoroughly versed in the affairs of the Affrican Churches, and
particularly in S. Cyprian's case. What I have here said shall suffice for the
examination of this passage, which I have the rather undertaken, because I find
it to be the groundwork of Dr. Sherlock's whole Treatise of his Vindication of
some Prot. Princ. etc.

201. It may be objected 3. against General Councils out of his aforesaid
Vindication p. 51^ that their bare authority never put an end to any Dispute
any further than they were backed by the Imperial Power; which is an Argument
that they did not believe in those days such Councils to be Infallible, or to
be the supreme Tribunals of the Catholic Church.

202. I answer, that if this discourse be good in Dr. Sherlock against the
Authority of General Councils, it cannot be unsuccesseful in us when we turn
it against the H. Scripture's being the only Judge of Controversies, for the
bare Authority of these sacred Books never put an end to any Dispute, any
further than they were backed by the temporal Power, which is an Argument, that
they did not believe in those days the H. Scriptures to be the only Judge of
Controversies. Thus his erroneous zele against General Councils has transported
him so far as to destroy the Authority of the H. Scriptures, which he has
substituted in their place to determine disputes in Religion.

203. I say therefore, that the Anathemas which the Catholic Fathers annexed
to their Decrees are a better Argument to prove, that they believed General
Councils to be Infallible, than the perverse disobedience of Heretics is to
show that there was no such belief in the Church. For with what conscience
could they 1. ad Cor. cap. 5.
deliver up to Satan all those who would not believe as they did, unless they
had an Infallible assurance that their own belief was true? This is a Power
which they could not receive from Christ, as I have shown above. Besides, true
Christians ought to learn what they are to believe about General Councils from
Catholics who submitted to them, and not from Heretics who made no account
of them. And therefore he ought to have proved, that in former Ages men were
members of the Visible Church although they refused to acquiesce with the Decrees
of General Councils, before he can weaken their Authority. And when he has
made this out, I will confess that he has said something to the purpose
against General Councils, and not til then. Where lies the force of this
con^equence, The Arians, for example, did not give over their contention after
they were condemned by the Council of Nice. Therefore Catholics did not
believe the Council of Nice to be infallible? I say where lies the force of
this consequence? And yet this is the only thing that can stand the Doctor in
any stead. For we have nothing to do with the Arians belief of the Authority
of the Council of Nice; neither can any one esteem them for fit examples to
follow, who holds them for Heretics, and aliens from God. It is an easy
thing to imagine, that those who departed against all reason from the known and
peaceble profession of the Faith of the Church, might he carried by the like
passion to deny the Authority of the same. For one sin seldom comes alone,
and one Abyss calls on another. Psalm. 41.

204. Besides, if the discourse be of the Arians, it was possible for them to
admit of the Authority of General Councils at the same time that they rejected
the Council of Nice, because they might think this Council not to be a truly
General one for want of some conditions which they judged necessary, as
perhaps because they held matters not to have been carried therein freely, and
that their cause had been discussed with too much precipitation, as the Greek
Church at this day which acknowledges the Infallibility of General Councils no
less than Catholics, does however refuse to acquiesce with the Council of
Florence, although they were present at it and confirmed it is Decrees, because of
some frivolous exceptions which their pride and faction have suggested to them
against it since that time. A small color will serve the turn when men are
obstinately bent to act unreasonably. It is apparent from the restless
endeavors which the Arians used to procure a Council that might speak their
sense, that they attributed a greater power to Councils than Protestants will
allow them to have, or at least that they thought by this means to work the
whole Church to an admission of their belief, which is an Argument that the
Church of those times held the Authority of Councils for sacred. Neither is it
material that their Heresy never ceased till it was suppressed by the Imperial
Power, from whence we can only conclude, that they were brought to a
confession of the truth more through fear of punishment than the love of God,
as most men are to an amendment of their lives. Our Lord instituted General
Councils as a means of putting an end to Disputes, but so as to leave to
Heretics the free use of their wills. The Definitions that are made therein
are a sufficient ground for Peace, if they will accept it; but if they will
rather choose to continue in their singularities, the fault is not in the
Authority of the Council, but in their own depraved minds. After their cause is
heard and judged there is no room left for a reasonable Dispute, and if they
will dispute against reason, it is because they have the power of doing good or
evil, and not because God would not have them do only what is good by obeying
the Council If this Objection prove any thing against the Infallibility of
General Councils, it will prove in like manner that the Council of Apostles and
Elders which assembled at Jerusalem was not Infallible, because their
Authority did not put a total end to the Dispute about the necessity of
Circumcision, as it ought to have done, and there remained many obstinate
persons who persisted in their error, as tho there never had been any
Declaration against it by the Apostles and Elders. Those who were pr^destin ed
to glory hearkened to this Council, which end has been likewise obtained by God
in all the General Councils that have been held since, and if Reprobates grow
never the better by their Declarations, we ought not to impute their ruin to
the want of Authority in the Councils, but to their not cooperating with that
Grace which God affords them by Councils.

. 29. P. 44. But cannot the Catholic Church meet and act by it is
Representatives, as Kingdoms and Commonwealths do?

205. Reply. If the Catholic Church signify the Catholic Teaching Church,
it may meet and act by it is Representatives as Kingdoms and Commonwealths do so
far, as that their Acts are to pass for the Acts of their whole Body. But if
it signify the whole multitude of the Faithful, he might have spared his
discourse on this occasion, for he knows that this is none of our Doctrine.

. 30. P. 45. The Dispute between the Church of Rome and some Protestant
Divines, which is managed with so much warmth and zele about the perpetual
Visibilitie of the Church, proceeds in this Controversy about a visible
Tribunal of the Catholic Church; for nothing else will do the Protestant
(...) any hurt, or the Popish Cause any good.

206. Reply. It is not worth while to guess who were the managers of this
Dispute, which he here points at. Only I observe, that no Dispute can pass
without his Censure. When we say that the Church has been allways visible, our
meaning is, that there has been a succession of Pastors and People visibly
continued in all Age^ since Christ, whose Faith has been accompanied with many
Marks and vehement Presumptions of truth, which are no where else to he found
amongst Christians, and whereby it has been always distinguished from Heretical
and Schismatical Congregations. We affirm likewise, that whatever Church is
thus qualified is the very Church which our Savior and his Apostles
established in the beginning. Now supposing we make out this perpetual
visibilitie in behalf of the Roman Church, as we pretend to do, the Protestant
Cause must necessarily suffer very much, although our Lord had instituted no
Visible Tribunal for the manifestation of Heresies. For seeing Protestants do
not pretend, that their Religion as such, and as it is Reformed was professed
for several hundred years before the Reformation, we may reasonably infer, that
it never was preached by our Savior and his Apostles, because the Church of
Rome which is supposed to have been visible in all Ages, holds a contrary
belief to many of their tenets. The very opposition of that Church in this
Hypothesis ought to pass for a just prejudice against any Doctrine, and the
belief of it for a sufficient Proposal of any matter of Faith, as the
Non-necessitie of Circumcision which S. Paul confirmed with many Miracles, was
sufficiently proposed to the Antiochians before the Visible Tribunal of the
Church assembled at Jerusalem.

. 31. P. 46. While there are any men who visibly profess Christianity, there
will be a visible Church.

207. Reply. The perpetual visibilitie of the Church of Rome is too great an
advantage to be absolutely granted, and too evident to be absolutely denied.
The way therefore must be to mince the visibilitie of the Church into a visible
profession of Christianity, by which means this incommunicable property of
the true Church becomes common to Heretics, who all profess to worship
Christ, which if they do so as to be difcovered and known they must pass for
Members of the Visible Church.

, 32. Ib. Having said that while there are any men who visibly profess
Christianity, there will be a visible Church, he immediately subjoins, and
what then? What then? Why then you must hear the Church; then you must submit
to the Authority of the Church, then you must believe as the Church believes,
and receive your Faith from the Decrees and Definitions of the Church. But pray
why so? Has every visible Church this Authority? No; but the Catholic Church
has. Suppose that; but how shall I speak with the Catholic Church which is
dispersed over all the world, and is nothing else but the whole number of
Christians all the world over? Now it seems impossible for me to speak with all
the Christians in the world, and to know what their belief is in all matters of
Controversy; and tho the Catholic Church is visible, and part of it be in
England, and part in Holland, and part in France etc. yet no man can see it all
together, nor speak with all the Christians in the world together; and
therefore tho the Catholic Church be visible, it cannot determine any one
Controversy, unless there be some visible. Tribunal from which we must
receive the Faith of the whole Church.

208. Reply. This is the only place throughout his Discourse wherein he takes
notice of that dreadful saying of our Savior He that will not ^ean the
Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican, although he has not
wanted many occasions that have called upon him to take it into consideration.
And one would think by his way of reasoning, that he would have passed it over
in silence here too, had he not thought himself cock-sure of catching our
Savior tripping in his Veracitie. Our Savior commands us to hear the Visible
Church by which the Dr. gives us leave to suppose the Catholic Church, and
having supposed thus much he very manfully undertakes to prove the
impossibility of hearing it. For in the first place he tells us, that the
Catholic Church is nothing else but the whole number of Christians all the
worldover, from whence he concludes, that no man can hear it by it self,
because no one can see it all together, nor speak with all the Christians in the
world together. And in the second place, he sais, as we have seen, and
continues to affirm at present p 47. that the Catholic Church neither has
nor can have any visible Tribunal by whom it may be Represented, and which may
declare it is judgment about any controverted Doctrine. So that seeing the
Catholic Church according to his Notion of it cannot be heard immediately by
it self, nor by means of a Tribunal that may Represent it, and seeing he knows
of no other way whereby it is to be heard, it necessarily follows, that we
cannot heart it at all; And then let him make out, how an Infinite Veracitie and
Justice can command us under pain of damnation to hear that which it is
impossible for us to hear.

209. He would show himself a much better Christian than he does at present,
if he would discourse upon the Text in the following manner. Christ commands us
in very plain terms to hear the Church, by which I am willing to suppose that
he means the Visible and Catholic Church; from whence I gather, that the
Church may be heard, otherwise our Lord commands us under damnation to do that
which is impossible. Now I cannot possibly conceive, how we can perform this
Command, unless the Church may he heard either by it self, or by a Visible
Tribunal that may Represent it, both which ways seem to me impracticable. For I
am of the opinion, that the Catholic Church is nothing else but the whole
number of Christians all the world over, which evidently shows an
impossibility for it to be heard by it self, because we cannot see it all
together, nor speak with all the Christians in the world together. I am
likewise of the opinion, that the Catholic Church can have no visible
Tribunal, because it is the whole multitude of Christians considered as a
multitude; and a multitude as a multitude can never be Represented by any thing
but it self, there can be formal, nor virtual multitude, but the whole entire
number; from whence it follows with no less evidence, that the Catholic
Church cannot be heard by a Representative. What course am I to take now in
this straight? Christ commands me to hear the Catholic Church, and my
Principles make it impossible to be heard. If I stick to my Principles, great
advantages will accrue to me and to the Protestant Cause by this means. For I
shall get great credit by my Notion of the Catholic Church, which will
particularise by name amongst the numerou^ swarms of discoursers and pretenders
to learning, as it has fared with Dr. Stilling fleet by his Argument against
the Roman Worship of Images, and with Dr. Tillotson by his new weapon against
Transubstantiation; and the Protestant Cause will be freed from many vexatious
Objections which puzle our best Writers. As for example, when the Papists
charge us with Schism for renouncing the Authority of their Hierarchy, we
can easily answer, that Schism is a departure from the Church, which
Protestants have not done by departing from the Obedience of Church Governors,
who are not the Church, nor belong to it is Definition. If they charge us with
Heresy for disbelieving many Doctrins which have been declared by the Visible
Tribunal of the Church, we as easily answer, that the Church has no Visible
Tribunal by whom it may be Represented. And after this manner we have a ready
answer always at hand to most of their accusations against us relating to the
Church. All which are mighty advantages, if they could be made good without
the forfeiture of Christianity, which I do not see how it can be done. For
seeing Christ commands us in express terms to hear the Church under pain of
being Heathens, what does he else in effect but tell us that the Church may be
heard? And if it may be heard, what advantage can it be to the Protestant Cause
to clear them of Heresy and Schism, which the Papists brand them withal, by
such a Notion of the Catholic Church as makes it impossible to be heard? Is
not this a falsification of our Savior's words? And what can a falsification
of his words be but a renouncing of Christianity? These things considered it
will be much safer for my soul, and less prejudicial to the Cause I defend, to
give over the pretense of this Notion of the Church, which is apparently
singular as it is handled by me, and for which I cannot produce any one Text of
Scripture to recommend it to the belief of a reflecting man with any tolerable
degree of certainty, nor much less any Text that favors it half so plainly
as this Command of our Savior favors the possibility of hearing the Church.
Wherefore let Wranglings continue as they have hitherto done, and let
Protestants defend themselves as well as they can against the Pretenses of the
Church of Rome. It will be much better for them to be thus employed, and to
bear with patience the exulting Ecchos of the Romanists, than to sing 10 Pean
by denying one tittle of God's Word. If the Dr. I say, will proceed after this
manner, he will show himself to be a man of some conscience, but the way which
he takes, makes Scripture and Christianity become contemptible; neither can a
Heathen desire a greater advantage against Christ, than that he most rigorously
commands impossibilities, which must be an Argument either of his ignorance, or
injustice, which are qualities repugnant to the nature and goodness of God.

210. But how are we to hear the Church during the intervals of General
Councils, when any disputes arise about Religion?

211. I answer, that in this case the Faithful are to have recourse to their
Spiritual Guides, and Pastors, and especially to the Bishops of the Diocese
where they live, from whom they are to learn what they are to believe, as well
those things that have been declared, as those things that have never been
declared in General Councils. And whoever hears them hears the Church, because
they are essential to the Church, and are the Catholic Church inadaequate as
being parts of the Catholic Teaching Church by whose direction and spirit
they proceed in the government of souls. If the Disputes that arise be about a
Point which is favored by the Universal Tradition and belief of the Church,
and their Pastors tell them so much, they are obliged to abquiesce and to lay
aside their scruples, and if notwithstanding this admonition they will break
off Communion, and herd together in separate Conventicles, they become formal
Schismatiques, and rebels after their Bishops have thundered out an
Excommunication against them, and are to be accounted no better than Heathens
as long as they continue in that state. And if the Disputes be about such
Doctrins as are neither clear in Scripture, nor Tradition, nor the Definitions
of any General Council, if they stand in contempt of their Bishops Authority
and Censures after they have taken Cognizance of the case, and commanded them
to keep the Peace and Unity of the Church, they ought to be held for Heathens
here too, not because they are bound to follow the judgment of their Bishops in
obscure matters supposing they have made it known, seeing they have no power to
obtrude it to their belief; but because they Schismatically rend, and tear the
Body of Christ in defense of their singularities, and will not hear their
Pastors who command and exhort them to the contrary. Such doubting consciences
as these would stand in no need of General councils for their satisfaction, if
they had more humility; for then they would consider this persistance in their
doubts as the proper effect of spiritual pride, and that it is the office of
the Pastors to take care that nothing be imposed uponthem but what is sound
Doctrine, inasmuch as they are to give an account of their souls. Neither is any
man in danger of damnation, because his Faith is not extended to as many
Objects as he can raise doubts from Scripture, or Christian truths, but from the
opposition which his Faith has with any one Point that is sufficiently proposed
to his belief, as all matters are not which are neither clear in Scripture, nor
Tradition, nor declared and defined in General Councils.

. 33. P. 47. The Church of Rome is a Visible Church, and so is the Church of
England; and if mere visibilitie give this Authority to a Church, the Church
of England has as good Authority as the Church of Rome, because it is as
Visible a Church.

212. Reply. The Reader may turn over to N. 25. and 16. chap. 2. where he will
see that I have assigned to the true Church a double Visibilitie which can
aggree only to Roman-Catholiques.

. 24. Ib. He observes 4. that the essential unity of the Catholic Church is
not an external and visible union of an Organized Body, because the Catholic
Church it self is not an organized Body.

213. Reply. This Observation has been proved false from what has been said
above in answer to. 16. chapter 2.

. 35. P. 48. In the next place he pretends to prove, that there can be no
Ecumenical Pastor and Head of unity to the Catholic Church from several
Considerations, the first whereof is, because the Catholic Church is the whole
Company of Christians: and to whom can the whole Company of Christians be
united, but only to Christ.?

214. Reply. The whole Company of Christians is united to Christ as to their
Mystical Head, and to the B. of Rome as to their Visible Head. See the
examination of this Notion of the Church ubi supra.

. 36. P. 49. The second Consideration is, because it is our union to Christ
alone which makes the Church.

215. Reply. Our Union to Christ makes us his Mystical Body, and our Union to
the B. of Rome makes us a visible Society.

. 37. Ib. And therefore tho our Savior had appointed an universal Pastor, as
the Bishop of Rome pretends to be, yet he could not have been the Head of
unity to the Catholic Church.

216. Reply. In this case he would have made the Catholic Church, and
belonged to it is Definition, as he affirms P. 38. that particular Bishops make
particular hurches, and belong to their Definition, and would have been the
Head of visible Unity to the Church, which is all that is meant by saying,
that the B. of Rome is Head of the Church.

. 38. P. 50. There is a vast difference between the essential unity of the
Church, and the external exercise of it in a visible Communion.

217. Reply. The external union of all true Christians in a visible Communion
is as necessary to the Church on Earth as such, as her Mystical Union is to
Christ as her Spouse, as I have often said; and therefore seeing he grants at
present, that if Christ had appointed an universal Pastor; communion with, and
subjection to this universal Pastor would have been necessary to the external
unity of Church Communion, he grants that in this supposition the Church on
Earth would have been essentially one by the same kind of Unity whereby de
facto we hold it to be essentially one, vi^ by the Communion with, and
subjection of all true Christians to S. Peter's Successors.

. 39. Ib. The not distinguishing of which has occasioned great mistakes in this
matter.

218. Reply. Here is another lash for Protestant Controvertists. But I
affirm, that his not discerning the necessity of a visible Union of
Church Members among themselves, as well as of the Mystical Union of them all to
Christ, has occasioned most of his great mistakes in this Discourse.

. 40. Ib. The 3. Consideration is, because there is a wide difference between
being a Supreme Pastor, and a Vicarious Head of the Church, a title which is
given to the B. of Rome, not without great injury to Christ our Head.

219. Reply. There is no difference at all which we ought to know best, who
are best acquainted with our own Faith. We acknowledge the B. of Rome to be
Christ's Vicarious Head of the Church on no other account than because we
acknowledge him for the Supreme Pastor of it. He is the Vicarious Head of the
Church inasmuch as he is the universal Governor of it under Christ, and he is
the Supreme Pastor of it for no other reason. The Dr. tells us p. 50. that
Christ is not merely a Head of Government, but of union. Suppose we admit of
this distinction; Then, I hope, as he is a Head of Government, he may have a
Vicar; for we do not pretend that he has any as he is Head of Mystical union.
We do not own the Pope for Christ's Vicarious Mystical Head, or say, that he is
our spiritual Husband and Spous as we affirm it of Christ, which Privilege is
essentitially annexed to Christ's person, and is incommunicable to any other,
as may be gathered from what I have said above concerning the Notion of our
Mystical Union to him, whereof our Obedience to the B. of Rome is only a
Condition. Neither can our Doctrine afford him any grounds to fasten this
scandal on us, unless the Doctrine which he delivers p. 35. about particular
Bishops and Pastors being Christ's Vicars, or Vicarious Heads over particular
Churches may give us the like advantage against him. For if this title may be
given to particular Bishops without any injury to Christ, which way can it be
a great injury to Christ to affirm the same of the B. of Rome over the whole
Church? Every particular Church is Christ's Mystical Body as much as the whole
Church, and if the nature of Christ Mystical Body be not repugnant to a Vicar
over a particular Church, it may as amicably subsist with a Vicar over the
whole Church. If the Dr. could infe^ from the Pope's Vicarship, that we made
the Church to be Flesh of the Pope's Flesh and Bone of his Bone for the same
Mystical Reasons whereby we affirm this of Christ our Head, this would be an
injury to Christ with a witness; but this absurdity follows no more from the
Vicarship of the Pope, than from the Vicarship of particular Bishops.

220. I have here an occasion offered of considering a Text out of Scripture
which the Doctor alleges p. 11. against the Pope's Vicarious Headship over the
Church. The place is out of S. Paul 1. ad Cor. 1. Now I say this that every one
of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and (...) of Cephas, and I of
Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in
the name of Paul? Out of which words he discourses thus. If Christ had made
Peter the Vicarious Head of unity, as the Romanists pretend, S. paul^ Argument
against these sidings and factions, that one said he was of Paul, another of
Apollos, a third of Cephas or Peter, had not been good; for at least those who
were united to Peter were in the right: but S. Paul knew of no other Head of
unity but only Christ, because the Gospel Covenant unites us to no other Head;
and therefore those who said they were of Peter, which is the case of the
Church of Rome at this day, were as great Schismatiques as those who said they
were of Paul.

221. I answer, that whatever was the true reason of this Schism, nothing can
be concluded from hence to our prejudice. For if we be so foolish as to
suppose, that their Dispute was about the Head of the Church, we must say that
this happened, either because some of them would have had Christ to be the
Mystical Head of the Church, and others would have Paul, Apollos, or Cephas to
be it; or else because they could not aggree who was Head of the Church as it
was a Visible Body. If the Dispute were about the Mystical Head of the Church,
those only were in the right who said that they were of Christ, and we blame
the others who said that Paul, Apollos, or Cephas were it as much as S. Paul
himself does. But if the Dispute were about the Head of the Church as it is a
Visible Body, none of them all were in the right, no not those who said that
Christ, or Peter were it. For, as we have seen, Christ who is invisible cannot
make his Church visibly One; and although Peter were visible, yet he could not
make the Church visibly One neither in such a way as Christ ordained it should
be One, if the Faithful were to be united to him without any obligation of
being united to any other Pastors. For seeing our immediate Pastors govern us by
the Authority which they have received from Christ, we cannot cast off our
Obedience and Union with them under pretense of being united to S. Peter's
Successors, because this is to divide Christ by separating our selves from the
Authority which he has set over us: neither can we refuse Communion with any
Pastors of God's Church, because he has established no more than One Communion.
It is in this sense that we ought to understand S. Paul when he sais on the
present occasion 1. ad Cor. 3. I have planted, Apollos watered; now he that
planteth and he that waters are one. Whoever departs from his immediate
Pastors, or refuses to communicate with such as are not his immediate Pastors,
but who are however Members of Christ's Body, divides Christ by breaking
asunder those ligaments and bonds of Unity which Christ has appointed, although
he pretend to be never so much in Union with S. Peter's Successors. And this
was the case of the Corinthians, (in the present Hypothesis) who did well in
saying they were of Peter, but ill in saying they were not of Paul, nor of
Apollos; and they were as much in the wrong who said they were of Peter, and
not of Paul nor Apollos, as those who said they were of Paul and Apollos, and
not of Peter; because if Christ be divided, and a separation made in his Body,
it is not material whether this separation be made by breaking with Peter, and
cleaving to Paul, or by breaking with Paul and cleaving to Peter, seeing the
mischief lies in dividing Christ by dividing his Body, which way soever this
happens, or whence soever it has it is beginning.

. 41. p. 52. No Christian can separate from the Catholic Church (in this
sense of it, as it signifies the whole Company or Family of Christians (which
is the true Notion of the Catholic Church) while he continues a Christian;
for it is a contradiction to be a Christian, and not to belong to the whole
number of Christians.

222. Reply. Were a Latitudinarian to dispute with this Author, he could never
desire a better advantage than he has from this concession.

. 42. Ib. Nothing can separate us from the Catholic Church, but what forfeits
our Christianity, either a final Apostacy, or such Heresies as are equivalent
to Apostacy.

223. Reply. A Latitudinarian need not be concerned at this Restriction; for
seeing in Dr. Sherlock's way every individual Christian must be said to be the
lawful judge for himself, what Doctrins are Heresies, and what not, it
follows, that every individual Christian must be the lawful judge for
himself, what Heresies are equivalent to Apostacy, and what not. From whence
it follows, that no man can separate from the Catholic Church, let, him
profess what Herefies he will, provided he judge that they are not equivalent
to Apostacy, as to be sure all Heretics judge of their errous, which is all
that a Latitudinarian can desire.

. 43. Ib. Which shows how vainly the Church of Rome charges us with Schism,
and separation from the Catholic Church, because we disown the Authority of
the Pope.

224. Reply, The Church of Rome does indeed vainly charge Protestants with
Schism, and separation from the Catholic Church on the aforesaid account, if
every man has a right to judge for himself of the lawfulness and sufficiency
of the causes of separating and departing from a received Authority. But who
sees not that this Maxim undermines the Authority of all Ecclesiastical
Governors, and makes it precarious? The Dr. might as well have said that
Schism is no sin, as lay such Principles to wipe it off from Protestants, as
sanctify the most outrageous rebellions that have been in the Church in any
Age.

. 44. Ib. Schism and separation is a breach of the external and visible
Communion of the Church, not of the essential unity of it; the Church is one
Church still, whatever breaches and Schisms there are in it is external
Communion.

225. Reply. We have seen above that Obedience (wherein consists the visible
Unity of the Church no less than in the profession of the same Faith) is a
necessary Condition of our Mystical Union to Christ, wherein this Author places
the essential Unity of the Catholic Church.

. 45. p. 53. The Indefectibilitie of the Church does not depend upon the
Indefectibilitie of any Organized Churches.

226. Reply. The Catholic Church it self is an Organized Church as being
subject to the One Chair of S. Peter, and to it is Representatives in a General
Council.

. 46. Ib. It immediately follows, for the Catholic Church does not consist of
Organized Churches as Organized, bnt it is made up of particular Christians.

227. Reply The Catholic Church as it is a visible Society consists of
Christians who are in subjection to their Bishops, and as they are in
subjection to their Bishops. For seeing this Author will have Bishops to make
particular Churches, and to be essential to their Definition, it follows, that
subjection to Bishops makes particular Christians, and is essential to their
Definition. Wherefore if the Catholic Church be the whole multitude of true
Christians, it is the whole multitude of Christians who are in subjection to
their Bishops. And therefore if the Catholic Church be made up of true
Christians, and as they are true Christians, it must consist of Christians who
are in subjection to their Bishops, and as they are in subjection to their
Bishops. And if it consists of Christians who are in subjection to (...)
Bishops, and as they are in subjection to their Bishops, it necessarily
consists of Organized Churches as Organized, if by Organized Churches nothing
more be meant than a multitude of Christians who are under the Episcopal
Authority, which is the Notion I have gathered of these terms out of his
writings.

. 47. Ib. It immediately follow, And therefore while the whole race of
Christians does not fail in the world, the Catholic Church cannot fail.

228. Reply. If subjection to Bishops be essential to true Christians, there
must be always Bishops in the world, and whenever these fail the Catholic
Church must fail too.

. 48. Ib. There is no promise that I know of to any particular Church that it
shall not fail, and all Organized Churches are particular.

229. Reply. It Is strange that he who holds such Principles from whence it is
lawfully inferred, that subjection to Bishops in essential to the Definition of
true Christians, should know of no promise at least in general, that all
particular Churches shall not fail. For when our Savior promises, that there
shall be true Christians to the end of the world, what does he else but
promise, that there shall be Bishops too to govern them? True Christians
according to the Drs Notion of them, have an essential respect to Bishops, and
can no more subsist without them than actual sons can subsist without actual
Fathers.

. 49. P. 54. I am abundantly satisfied, that there always has been since the
first planting of Christianity in the world, and I believe always will be to
the end of the world, a true visible Church.

230. Reply. God grant him perseverance in the confession of this great truth.
He has no reason to take it in ill part, if I suppose, that the ground which
induces him to believe that the Church will be visible to the end of the world,
is not because he judges, that it has sufficient strength from pure nature to
preserve it self in the state of it is Original Visibilitie. For this is
downright Pelagranisme, seeing the Catholic Church has always held with S.
Paul, that the beginning of all good actions, and the final perseverance in
them proceeds from the Grace of God, and by consequence the continuance of the
Church in it is Original Visibilitie must do so too. For this state imports
many great and supernatural virtues as Faith, Hope, the fear of future
punishments, Obedience to Ecclesiastical Superiors together with a contempt of
death, and a generous preference of our Lord before all the advantages af^eas,
wealth, and honor under times of adversity and perfecution. All which are
God's free Gifts, wherein we have no other share, but our voluntary acceptance
of them when they are offered; neither is it possible for us to have them,
unless he look upon us with eyes of mercy. Our natures are the same with those
of Infidels, and the only difference between us is, because God has given to us
a value for his Son, which he has not given to them. So long as we are
strengthened by God, we judge Christianity to be Wisdom, but when through our
offenses he withdraws his assistance from us, we as easily believe it to be
Folly as they. It is not in the natural power of Christians to resist all such
remptations as may solicit them to forsake their Faith, nor to bear up against
the most violent persecutions that may discourage them from the visible
profession of it. If the Church after it is first establishment had not been
preserved by God in a state of Visibilitie, it would most certainly have fallen
from it long before now, considering the many furious assaults it has
sustained from the world, the flesh, and the devil; and seeing these enemies, at
least the two last of them (and Scripture assures us, that the world will be so
too before the end of time) are as restless now as they have been in former
Ages, we ought to conclude, that the continuance of the Church till the end of
the world in that state must be by the same means that have supported it to
this day. And seeing the bestowing of these means supposes a Decree in God to
this purpose, we ought to conclude, that the preservation of the Church in a
erpetual state of Visibilitie is an effect of this Decree, as it is
Indefectibilitie is an effect of God's ^upernatural Providence over it. For all
such means of salvation as are intrinsecally good, as the Visibilitie of the
Church is, cannot be said to happen by chance, or merely by God's permissive
will, but in virtue of his Positive, Absolute, and Praedestinative Decree.
Wherefore it the Dr. be abundantly satisfied, that there has been always since
the first planting of Christianity in the world, and believes that there will
always be to the end of the world a true Visible Church, he must acknowledge
that this belief supposes a Divine Decree, without which he cannot reasonably
believe that the Church will be always Visible, any more than he can that it
will be always in being. If the Drs. Faith in this particular be built on these
grounds, it is very Orthodox, but the next passage shows what we are to trust
to.

. 50. P. 54. But yet I do not think, that the Indefectibilitie of the Church
necessarily requires a perpetual Visibilitie; that the Church must needs be
owned to fail, if there should be no Visible Organized Church with whom we
could hold Communion.

231. Reply. If God has annexed a perpetual (...) to the Indefectibilitie of
the Church, we must consequently say, that the Indefectibilitie of the Church
necessarily requires, that there be always a Visible Organized Church with whom
we may hold Communion, because the sensible Visibilitie of the Church consist's
in it is Visible Organization. Now that God has annexed a (...) Visibilitie to
the Church's Indefectibilitie, is manifest from what I have lately said,
because the Church cannot be always Visible to the end of the world, unless it
receive this Gift from God, neither can it receive this Gift from God without
a Decree to this purpose. And if the perpetual Visibilitie of the Church be
decreed by God, to what end does the Dr. say, that the Indefectibilitie of the
Church does not necessarily require a perpetual Visibilitie? Certainly the
Indefectibilitie of the Church necessarily requires whatever God has decreed,
and annexed to it as an inseparable adjunct. There is no other reason, why the
Nature of the Church requires to be Indefectible but because God has decreed
that it should be so, and seeing he has decreed that it shall be always ways
Visible as well as Indefectible, the Nature of its Indefectibilitie must be
owned to require a perpetual Visibilitie, as much as the Nature of the Church
requires Indefectibilitie. And it is as great a contradiction to say, that the
Church shall be always Visible in virtue of God's Decree, and to allow it a
possibility of becoming Invisible, as it is to say, that God's Decrees have an
infallible connection with their Objects, and yet that it is possible for them
to be frustrated. The Dr. says, that he is abundantly satisfied, and believes
that there always has been, and always will be a true Visible Church to the end
of the world. Then say I, he is abundantly satisfied and believes, that God has
decreed the perpetual Visibilitie of the Church. And if he be abundantly
satisfied and believes, that God has decreed this perpetual Visibilitie, it is
a contradiction to affirm, that the Indefectibilitie of the Church does not
necessarily require a (...) Visibilitie; because it is a contradiction to
believe, that the Church ever can be without being Visible, when the perpetual
Visibilitie thereof is believed to be decreed by God.

232. The main proof whereon he depends for his Assertion is, because it is
certain that the Catholic Church subsists in single and individual
Christians, which Notion I have often proved to be false, if it be applied to
the Catholic Church as it is a visible Society. It is very strange, that he
who confesses so clear a conviction, that there always has been, and always
will be a true Visible Church to the end of the world, should admit of a
possibility of it is becoming Invisible on such slender grounds as this. This
is the mischief of bad Principles, which as long as men cleave to, they are
enforced to make good all absurdities that flow from thence, let them be never
so (...). He has forgot what he answered (...). to an Objection against the
essential Unity of the Church which he had established, viz that according to
this Notion of it, there can be no Visible Church on Earth, which he admits for
a great inconvenience; when he sais that it is a mighty prejudice against any
Notion, if it destroy the Visibilitie of the Church which is so plainly taught
in Scripture, and does, for ought he knows, unchurch the greatest Member of
Visible Church Members; and disputes against the opinion of those who consine
the Church to the number of the Elect because it makes the Church Invisible,
saying, that he has often wondered that some learned Protestant; and that of
late too (since Protestants are generally so much improved in knowledge) or
rather since they are generally convinced of the strength of our Arguments
whereby we prove the Church's Visibilitie) have so much insisted on this
Notion which gives manifest advantages to their adversaries.

233. One would think by this that the Dr. were very steadie in his judgment
concerning the Churches Visibilitie. And yet when his beloved Notion of the
Catholic Church lies at stake, from whence is inferred a possibility of the
Church's becoming Invisible, he never considers that the Visibilitie of the
Church is plainly taught in Scripture, but boldly affirms, that he does not
think that the Indefectibilitie of it necessarily requires a perpetual
Visibilitie. If his principles cannot be maintained without contradicting
Scripture, the word of God must rather lie under a suspicion of being false,
than they suffer any thing by an opposition from thence. I see not why it
should not be as mighty a prejudice against any Notion of the Catholic
Church, if it destroys the Visibilitie of the Church, which is so plainly
taught in Scripture, as well as it is a mighty prejudice against any Notion of
it is essential (...), if it destroys the Visibilitie of the Church, because it
is plainly taught in Scripture; or why those who confine the Church to the
number of the Elect should give their adversaries a manifest advantage, because
their opinion makes the Church Invisible; and yet that this Author should not
give us the like advantage, seeing his Notion of the Catholic Church is also
pernicious to it is Visibilitie by grounding a possibility that it may become
Invisible. The faultiness of their Doctrine is derived from the opposition
which it has to Scripture, and seeing this Author's Notion is (as we shall see)
contrary to Scripture as well as the other, why should we not esteem them both
for alike faulty and false?

234. I say that the Drs. Notion of the Catholic Church is contrary to
Scripture, because it grounds a possibility that it may become Invisible. For
all those Texts of Scripture which I have quoted, and those Arguments which I
have proposed above N. 108. and seq. to prove that Bishops and Pastors belong
to the Definition of the Church, as likewise those which I have alleged N.
122. and seq. to evince that the Clegie are the Church, prove in like manner
the Visibilitie of the same, which consists no less in the Obedience which
which Christianspay their Pastors, than it does in their profession of Faith.
And therefore all those Texts alsowhich prove the Indefectibilitie of the
Church prove in like manner it is perpetual Visibilitie; because if the Church is
to continue to the end of the world, there must be Bishops who are to their to
govern, and People who shall be subject to them to the end of the world, which
is the same thing as to say that the Church shall be Visible to the end of the
world. I think the grounds of this Discourse sufficiently well laid in those
places which I have cited, and shall therefore add only the following Dilemma
to it. Either the Visibilitie of the Church which, he sais, is plainly taught
in Scripture is according to Scripture to continue to the end of the world; or
else it is to ceas in some Age, or Ages before the end of the world. If he say
the first, with what conscience can he hold, that the Indefectibilitie of the
Church does not necessarily require a perpetual Visibilitie? And if he say the
second, he must not only allow a possibility of the Church's becoming
Invisible, but must positively affirm, that it will be so before the end of
the world, because he cannot otherwise free the Scripture from falsehood. And
then let him show, how his believing that there always has been, and always
will be a true Visible Church to the end of the world is not point blanc
against Scripture. Which makes me wonder at his ^iting 1. Kings. Chapter 19.
whereby he attemps to show, that the Church, of God was Invisible in the time
of Elias, when this Prophet thought himself alone, but was informed by the
Lord: that (...) had (...) thousand left in Israel who had (...) s^rved Baal.

235. To which Authority we have a readio Answer; inasmuch as the Church of
Israel, whereof the Propher spoke, was only a part of the Jewish Church, whose
Invisibilitie cannot afford an Argument for the Invisibility of the Catholic
Church, but at most for the Invisibitie of some particular Churches, or
Christians, which we do not deny. God's Church was Visible in the Kingdom of
Juda (which was the principal seat, and center of Religion) at the same time
that it was i^visible in the Kingdom of Israel, from whence we may rather infer
the perpetual Visibilitie of the Catholic Church notwithstanding the (...)
and defection of some numbers of particular Christians, than prove that it may
become Invisible from the Invisibilitie of a particular Church among the Jews.
Besides, the Christian Church is built upon better promises than the Church of
the Jews; and it is an Argument of a weak Faith, and of a dull apprehension of
the (...) of a Christian, to measure the blessings of the New Law, according to
the proportion of those which were conferred on the Observers of the Law of
Moses.

. 51. P. 55. The the Visible state of the Church be Antichristian, there may be
an Invisible number of Christians among them, who may preserve themselves from
the Corruptions, Superstitions, Heresies, and Idolatries of the Visible Church,
and in these men the Catholic Church is preserved from a total failure.

236. Reply. Must these Christians be said to to be Invisible, because they
exteriourly conform to their Corruptions of the Visible Church, or because
their Non-conformitie is not discovered by the Visible Church? If you say the
first, the consequence is, that the H. Catholic Church, the Spous and Body
of Christ, his undefiled one; and beloved consists in a pack of diabolical
dissemblers, who act contrary to their judgments in the great concerns of
their souls, by renouncing Christ before men for the sake of worldly
conveniences, or for fear of punishment, which is a crime of so black a
nature, that the Catholic Church in all Ages has looked upon it as a
forfeiture of Catholic Communion. If you say the second, pray inform me,
whether these Nonconforming Christians are the Church mentioned in the Gospel
which Christians are bound to hear under pain of being Heathens and Publicans.
If you say that they are this Church, it is certain that they are not
Invisible, because they may be heard. And if you say, that they are not this
Church, it is as certain that there is no such Church in the world whom
Christians will be bound to hear under pain of being Heathens and Publicans,
that is, under pain of damnation for not Hearing of her.

. 52. P. 56. While there is a Visible Society professing the Christian Faith,
and administering the Christian Sacraments, the Catholic Church may subsist in
an Invisible and unorganized number of Christians, who profess the true Faith
without such corrupt and Antichristian mixtures.

237. Reply, I must desire this Author to reconcile with this Doctin the
following words of our Savior to his Apostles Mat. 28 viz Teaching them to
observe all things that I have commanded you; and behold I am with you always
even to the end of the world. From whence it is evident, that those whom our
Lord will assist to the end of the world, shall be such Bodies and Societies of
Christians as are under the government and direction of Bishops and Pastors. How
then dares he say in defiance of these sacred words, and of this gracious
Promise of our Savior, that the Catholic Church may subsist in an
unorganized number of Christians? If the Catholic Church will Infalliblie be
to the end of the world in that state, and after that manner, as our Savior
has promised it shall be, there can be no dispute, but that it will consist in
Organized Churches, that i^, in numbers of Christians who are under the
Government of Bishops. And if it be possible for it to be otherwise than as our
Savior has promised it shall be, we may boldly say, that it is possible for it
to be, and not to be at the same time.

. 53. Ib. Now, sais he, this shows the weakness and ^allaice of several
Arguments used by the Church of Rome. As 1. that the perpetual Visibilitie of
the Roman Church proves it to be the Indefectible Church, of which our Savior
Promised, that the Gates of hell should not prevail against it....... for if the
Indefectible church may be sometimes Invisible, then the Visible Church may not
always be Indefectible.

238. Reply. Supposing he will stand to what he has said, that there always
has been, and always will be a true Visible Church to end of the world, it
follows, that the Indefectible Church will be always Visible; and seeing
Visibilitie is one Markof of the Indefectible Church, we may justly pretend,
that the Roman Church carries an evident presumption of it is being the
Indefectible Church which the Reformed Churches have not, because it has been
always Visible, whereas we can point out the time when the others made their
first appearance in the world, which was accompanied with too many odious
circumstances to be easily forgotten. And if we take the Visibilitie of the
Roman Church, so as to include all it is Motives of Credibilitie whereby it is
distinguished from Heretics and Schismatiques, and all others who are not of
it is Communion, and yet pass under the denomination of Christians, it does not
only afford an evident presumption of it is being the Indefectible Church above
the Reformed Churches, but likewise above all other Christians in the world,
amongst whom perhaps there may be some Sees which can make out a succession of
Pastors from the Apostles time as well as the Roman Church. But if he will
contend, that the Indefectible Church may be sometimes invisible,
notwithstanding the incoherence of this Doctrine with the aforesaid concession,
he must seek after some better Principle whereon to build this Assertion, than
because the Catholic Church subsists only in single and individual Christians.

. 54. p. 57. 2. He undertakes to show the weakness of that Argument, which
proves the Church to be Infallible, because it is Indefectible. And the reason
why he disallows of this Argument is, because the Indefectibilitie of the
Church, as we have already heard, does not necessarily prove, that there shall
be any one Visible Organized Church which shall not fail; for the Church does
not fail while there are any true Christians in the world..... and therefore if
Indefectibilitie proves Infallibility, it proves only that there shall be
some private Infallible Christians, not that there is any Visible Infallible
Church; From whence the consequence is clear, that since we deny, that the
Infallibility of the Church subsists in private Christians, we ought to deny
that the Church is Infallible.

239. Reply. Whether the Church be said to subsist in private Christians, or
in a Visible Organized Body, or Bodies of Christians, we ought to say, that it
is Infallible by the same means whereby it is Indefectible. And feing it is
Indefectible, because of God's Decree that it shall never ceas to be a Church,
we ought to say, that it is Infallible in virtue of the same Decree too. For if
it shall never ceas to be a Church, it shall never err so grievously as to
ceas to be a Church, and if you grant that it shall never err so grievously as
to ceas to be a Church, you grant the substance of all the In fallibilitie
which we teach.

240. No, say you, Catholics signify by the Infallibility of the Church an
impossibility for it to err so grievously as to ceas to be a Church, which is
a different thing from saying, that it never shall err so grievously as to
ceas to be a Church.

241. I answer, that when we say that the Church can never err so grievously
as to ceas to be a Church, we mean that God has essicaciously decreed, that it
shall never err after this manner. And I suppose that the Doctor will think
better on it before he blame us for saying, that there is an impossibility for
God's Decrees to be frustrated. What does he mean else, when he sais that the
Church shall never fail nor ceas, but that God has decreed, that it shall never
fail nor ceas? And if God has decreed, that it shall never fail nor ceas, sure
he will never dare to say, that there is a possibility for it to fail, which
evidently follows, if there be a possibility for it to err so grievously as
to ceas to be a Church.

242. Now as to the Reason why he disallows of this Argument, I answer, that
hitherto we have heard nothing that can make it good besides his false Notion
of the Catholic Church which I have often rejected. For seeing the abundant
satisfaction he has that there always has been, and always will be a true
Visible Church to the end of the world necessarily supposes a Divine Decree to
this purpose, it follows, that the Church in virtue of this Decree is to be
Visible as long as it continues, and if it is to be Visible as long as it
continues, it is to be Organized as long as it continues. And since, as we have
seen, the Indefectibilitie of the Church proves it is Infallibility, if the
Indefectible Church shall be always Visible and Organized, it follows, that
there shall be always a Visible, Organized, and Infallible Church to the end of
the world.

. 55. P. 58. When our Savior sais that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against his Church, we may consider it either as a Promise, or a Prophecy, or
both, that there shall be always some sound and Orthodox believers in the
world.... Now I hope Christ can make good such a Promise (it we consider it as
a Promise) without bestowing Infallibility upon any Christians, for men may be
Orthodox without being Infallible. And if we consider it as a Prophecy, I hope
Christ can foretell things which have no necessary Causes, and then he can
foretell, that there shall never want true believers, tho it is possible there
might be none; that all Christians shall not err tho they are all fallible and
therefore may err.

243. Reply. There is no special difficulty at present which is not common to
all those, who hold the compatibilitie of the Divine Prescience and Grace with
Free Will, as is manifest in the Apostles, who were in the judgment of all
Christians as Infallible as we believe the Church to be, and therefore the Dr.
must provide a solution for his own Argument, which will make him not to
require one from us,

244. However, to the end he may not think himself flighted, I say that the
aforesaid words of our Savior are both a Promise, and a Prophecy. They are a
Promise, because they are a declaration of the efficacious assistance, which he
will give to his Church toward it is continuance to the end of the world; and
they are a Prophecy, because they signify, that the Church shall and will make
use of the assistance which he promised to give it. Now Christ cannot make this
Promise good to his Church without making it Infallible, because it is
impossible for the Church to e^re so long as it is efficaciously assisted by
him. Neither can we have any other Notion of the Infallibi^tie of the Apostles,
than an impossibility for them to err, because they were to be always
efficaciously assisted by our Lord. This Promise which was made in time
supposed his Eternal Decree to the same purpose, and seeing it is absolutely
impossible for God to fail of any thing which he has decreed, it must needs be
impossible for the Church to err in Faith, because the continuance of it in the
right Faith was the thing which God decreed, and which he declared by this
Promise. And from hence it is plain, that if the aforesaid words are considered
as a Prophecy, they foretell the same Infallibility of the Church which was
caused by them as they they were a Promise, because they foretell the
efficaciousnesse of the assistance which was decreed to be given to it in all
Ages for it is preservation from any damnable error. They suppose the Decree of
preserving the Church from auy damnable error, and therefore as the
Infallibility of the Church is lawfully inferred from that Decree, so likewise
is it inferred from these words as they are a Prophecy.

245. You Will say, that the Faith of the Church is a voluntary Act, and
therefore it is possible for the Church to fall from it notwithstanding this
Promise, and Prophecy of our Savior.

246. I answer, that the Faith of the Apostles was a voluntary Act. But what
then? Will the Dr. say, that it was possible for them to fall from the true
Faith, notwithstanding that we suppose the Promises, and Prophecies of our
Savior to the contrary? This would be a very ready way to introduce
infidelity into the world: for what should hinder a possibility of a
reasonable doubt concerning the truth of Christianity, if it be owned for a
certain Principle, that those by whom it was first preached might possibly be
deceived in the truth of it, even supposing the Promise and Prophecy of our
Savior that they should not be deceived? We must say therefore, that although the
Faith of the Church has no necessary Causes, yet when we suppose that the
perpetual truth of it is foretold by our Savior, it is necessary that it
should be, as Christ has foreseen and foretold that it shall be; from whence we
cannot infer, that the Church has no freedom of will, but only that it is
necessary, that the free exercise of it is Will in cooperating with the Divine
Grace and assistance, should be performed in time in the same manner as it was
foreseen from all Eternity. Which necessity signifies the necessity of
certainty in the Divine Prescience, and not an ^antecedent necessity of
acting on the Church's part. So that supposing Christ foresees, and has
decreed, that there never shall want true believers, it is impossible that
there should be none; and supposing he foresees, and has decreed, that all
Christians shall not err, it is impossible that all Christians can err. And
if there shall be some Christians who cannot err, it follows, that there shall
be some Christians who shall be Infallible. And if there shall be some
Christians who shall be Infallible through the assistances which they shall
receive from our Lord to preserve them from error, this Author can have no
reason to quarrel with our Doctrine about the Infallibility of the Catholic
Church, the true notion whereof is An impossibility of erring in matters of
Faith by means of such assistances as our Lord has decreed his Church, and
which he foresees, and has decreed that she will and shall make good use of.

247. But do we say, that all those are Infallible, whom God foresees, and has
decreed that they will and shall believe aright?

248. I answer, that every individual Christian is Infallible, so long as he
cooperates with that Grace which God has decreed him toward his believing
aright, and by consequence that men cannot be Orthodox without being Infallible.

249. You Will say, that if this be so, it follows that every individual Christian
is as Infallible as the Apostles.

250. I answer, that if the comparison fall upon the certainty of Faith, it is
very true that every individual Christian is as Infallible in his Faith as the
Apostles were; but if it fall upon the Proposal of Faith, and it is
Indefectibilitie, there is a great deal of difference between the
Infallibility of the one and the other. For the Infallibility of the Apostles
was derived to them from the H. Ghost who was the immediate Proposer of their
Faith, and whose perpetual assistance was promised to them during life, not
only for refreshing their memories as to those truths which they had heard of
our Savior in express terms, but also for enlightening their understandings,
that they might not err about other Doctrins which they had not expressly
received, when they were to be deduced from Principles that were of Faith.
Whereas the Infallibility of individual Christians is only on supposition than
they hear the Church, which derives it is Infallibility in declaring matters of
Faith immediately from the H. Ghost as the Apostles did, and has the like
promises of his perpetual assistance as they had. Tradition is her Memory
whereby she calls to mind what our Savior said in the beginning, and General
Councils are the School wherein our Lord teaches her all such truths as had
never been expressly delivered to her before. We find no such Promise as this
made to individual Christians, that they shall be Infallible in their judgments
when a Doctrine is drawn from Principles of Faith, or that they shall not
totally fall from the Faith, as many large Provinces have done: but the
Apostles had such a Promise made them, and so has the Church too. The
Authori^ie of the Church is the necessary external Grace which God has decreed
to individual Ch^istians toward their believing aright; and therefore if they
are Infallible only so long as they cooperate with those graces, they are
Infallible only so long as they hear the Church. We may say in like manner,
that every particular Convert of the Apostles was Infallible so long as they
heard the Apostles, because this was a necessary Grace which was decreed them
toward their believing aright.

. 56. Ib. This is all that Protestants can mean, when they say that the
Catholic Church cannot err in Fundamentals, not that there is any Visible
Society of Christians which is infallible in it is Definitions of Fundamental
Doctrins, but that the Catholic Church, or the whole number of Christians
shall never err fundamentally, that is, that there shall be always some true
and Orthodox believers in the Church.

251. Reply. The Dr. is sensible of the inconvenience which accrues to his
Cause by so ample an acknowledgment as the Church's being Infallible in
Fundamental Doctrins, and therefore he thinks it expedient to dwindle it into
this expression, that there shall be always some true and Orthodox believers in
the Church. But this will not do his business. For seeing he cannot deny, but
that Christ has promised his Apostles to be with them to the end of the world,
I hope he will grant, that he will efficaciously assist their Successors in the
discharge of their duties to the end of the world. And if he grant this, he
must needs grant that the Church is to consist of a Governing and a Governed
part. And if he grant this, he must needs grant that there will be always an
Organized Church in the world, which signifies something more than that there
shall be always some true and Orthodox Believers, who are concealed, as he sais
p. 57. and unknown to one another. And if he grant this, he must needs grant
that this Indefectible Organized Church will be Visible, since the Visibilitie
of the Church (which consists in it is Organization) is plainly taught in
Scripture, by which, as I said lately we are to understand it is perpetual
Visibilitie. And if he grant that this Visible Organized Church shall never
err Fundamentally, he must needs grant that this will happen through the
efficacy of the grace which God has decreed her to this purpose. And if he
grant this, he must needs grant, that this Visible Organized Church shall be
Infallible, because it is impossible for it to err in Faith, if God has decreed
it an efficacious Grace to preserve it from error. So that his some true and
Orthodox believers amount to an Infallible, Visible, Organized Church, which if
he grant to be accompanied with Motives of Credibilitie, it will look so
extremely like the Catholic Church whereof S. Peter's Successor is the Visible
Head, that we may safely conclude it will be the same.

. 57. Ib. 3. He undertakes to show the nullitie of our Argument whereby we
prove any Church (for example, the Reformed Church) to be a new upstart church
which after some time of concealment is said to reassume it is Visibilitie, and
to appear openly in the world. And the reason hereof is, because during the
degeneracie of that Church (the Roman) the Church might subsist in those
private Christians, who preserved themselves (...) a great measure from the
Corruptions of that Church.

252. Reply. We want here to know by what name these private Christians were
called, where they lived, what Doctrins they held, whether they were concealed
and unknown to one another; and if they were unknown to one another, how they
came to be known to the Dr.? We must have a satisfactorie answer given to these
and a great many other Queries of this nature, before we can withdraw our
charge of a new and upstart Church wherewith we brand Protestants. For a mere
possibility of such private Christians (although it could be made out) is not
sufficient to remove the Absurdity, which does not proceed because it is
impossible there should be any such Christians, but because it is highly
unreasonable to judge that there were any such. But enough has been said about
the vi^ibilitie of the Church to refute this threadbare pretense of Puritans
without giving it a further consideration.

. 58. p. 59. There are Evidences enough that there never wanted some in all
Ages, who have condemned their Innovations.

253. Reply. If he can show that our Faith has been opposed in all Ages by
such persons as were held for sound and Orthodox Christians by the Visible
Church of their times, he will effectuaily prove it to have been cintrarie to
the Fait (...) of the Visible Church in all Ages, which he dares not say; but
in case the opposition of those who have condemned our Faith has been censured
by the Visible Church of their times (as it most certainly has been) it is an
Argument, that we ought to esteem their opposition for an Innovation, and not
such Doctrins as they rejected. I see not why Luther's Reformation should
receive any advantage by his not being the first Heretic who has condemned
some Doctrins of the Church of Rome, and yet that the Reformation of Socinus
and other Heretics (whom this Author seems to condemn at present with the
Catholic Church) should not receive the like benefit from the opposition
which the Arians and other such like revolters made against the Divinity of
the Son of God, and other unquestionable Articles of the Christian Faith. For
it was no more lawful for those ancient Separatists who favored Luther, to
renounce the known Faith of the Church of their times than it was for Arius;
and if Arius was wicked for so doing, so were those Separatists who favored
Luther. And what he sais in behalf of the Protestant Reformation, that there
were some private Christians who preserved themselves in a great measure from
the corruptions of the Roman Church, and were the seeds of the Reformation, may
as well he applied by the Socinians in behalf of their Reformation, who may
likewise reply, in case we call them a new and upstart Church as we do
Protestants, that there was no failure of the Church tho it were obscured and
concealed before the time of Socinus, and that we may as well say, that it is a
new Sun that rises every morning, not that which sets at night, as make a new
Church of old and Primitive Christianity (Arianisme etc.) the profession of
which was never lost, although the Professors of it were not so visible.
Similitudes may pass for good Arguments among those who are destitute of good
reasons, but methinks he might have given us other similitudes, than such as
make the Protestant Cause as odious as that of Arians and Socinians.

254. Having thus taken a particular view of all the most remarkable passages
in the Drs. Discourse which may give offense to Christian ears, I shall
conclude my considerations thereon, by submitting them to the Censure of the
same Catholic and Roman Church which I have defended, and of every Bishop and
Pastor within it is Communion, and in particular to the judgment of my more
immediate Superiors with whose consent I have at last sent them abroad into
the world.

The End.
I Must desire the Reader to correct the following Errata, which are the most
considerable amongst those that have escaped the press.

In the last page of the Index lin. 14. for. 50. Read p. 54. in the same page
for n. 145. r. n. 243 p. 11. l. 17. for tn. r. in. p. 18. l. 24. for his to own
Faith himself r. his own Faith to himself p. 44. l. 19. for which. r. with.
After p. 48. for p. 46. r. p, 49. p. 67 for n. 61. r. 68. p. 105. l. 12. for
she. r. the. p. 106. l. 1. for it one r. makes it one. p. 139. l. 28. for:
after it self set, and l. 29. after Ceremonies for, set: p. 143. l. 24. for
discussi. r. discussion. p. 145. l. 14. for is a really. r. is really. p. 148.
l. 27. for specially. r. specifically. p. 152. l. 17. for go-. r. gover-. p.
154. l. 21. for in. r. is. p. 158. l. 12. for on other. r no other. p. 164. l.
26. for Members his Mystical Body. r. Members of his Mystical Body. p. 169 l.
19. for particultr. r. particular p. 199. l. 25. for Priledge. r. Privilege.
p. 219. l. 6. for derimens r. dirimens. After p. 219. for p. 202. r. p. 220. p.
236. l. 6. for what he belongs. r. what belongs. p. 240. l. 20. for and end. r.
an end. p. 241 l. 23. for the govern. r. they govern. p. 272. l. 7. for
inferences. r. inference. p. 311. l. 27. for implore H. Ghost. r. implore the
H. Ghost. p. 353. l. 29. for there can be formal. r. there can be no formal. p.
354. l. 10. for by name. r. my name. p. 368. l. 21. for in. r. is. p. 371. l.
7. for it. r. if. p. 376. l. 6. blot out to their. p. 378. l. 9. for to their.
r. to the.


