THE PRECIOUSNESSE OF CHRIST Unto BELIEVERS.

OR, A Treatise wherein the absolute necessity, the transcendent excellency,
the supereminent Graces, the beauty, rarity and usefulness of Christ is opened
and applied.

By JOHN ROBOTHAM, Preacher of the Gospel.

(...)

Cant. 3. 13. (...)

PHIL. 1. 2. Malim praesente Christo esse in Inferno, quam absence Christo in
Caelo.

Luther in Genes. LONDON, Printed by M. Symmons, and are to be sold by Hannah
Allen, at the sign of the Crown in Popes head Alley. 1647.

TO THE HONORABLE Colonel Stapely, and William Cawley, Esquires, both Members
of the Honorable House of Commons, Justices of the Peace, and Deputy
Lieutenants of the County of SUSSEX.
Honorable Sirs,
IT is a rare and comely sight to see greatness and goodness together: both
are concentring and met in you, unwearied you have been in your pains,
faithful in your trust, a refuge for the oppressed, not only in these times,
when many are assertors of Religion because it should protect the^ and because
it is in fashion: b^ even then, when it was the gre^test crime to be godly, it
hat^ been the counsel of others to b^ still on the strongest side: b^ their
aim being false, they sho^ wide of the mark. God hat^ given you a more
spiritual judgment, which has mad^ you to stand like a Rock unm^veable,
venturing all, when others out of timorousness have unworthily betrayed their
trus^ and left a perpetual blot upon their names.

Your wisdom and fidelity i^ an honor and a joy to then that chose you, and
to the whol^ Kingdom; which has great cause to bless God for you: i^ any do
otherwise, yet kno^ for your comfort, that you^ wages in your work, as the
har^est is in the seed. Whatsoever ^ou expend for God, in God ^ou shall find it
again: the ^ore public your spirits are, ^he nearer you come to that cen^er
of all perfection. Self ^n a man is a base and poor end: ^ea, it is proudly
to sit down ^n the place of God, to whom ^lone it is proper to work for
^imselfe: even the best of Crea^ures must acknowledge their ^ubordination unto
him, the ^ore we do so, the greater re^ection of honor and blessing ^ begets:
subordination in some ^espects may be between two ^nely: but sometimes there
is ^ series, or concatenation of things subjected one to another, ^ which the
Logicians call sub^ternation: and here there is a ^oking upward and downe^ard:
and so do you, to God, and to inferiors: I should b^ in grateful either to
deny, o^ forget it.

You have engaged me, wit^ often, manifold, choice, undeserved, unrequitable
favors. ^ have consulted what to returne^ pauperis est numerare pecus. The
ensuing discourse you have already had by word of mouth ^ the acceptance that
it foun^ with you, when it was first del^vered, has emboldened me t^ present
it unto you again wit^ some enlargements. Solin^ writes, that the African
Elephants are dwarfes to the Ind^ans; and therefore are loath t^ be seen of
them; Iul. Solin: polyhistor. cap. 38.
quasi parv^tatis suae conscij: it is mine ow^ case in relation unto your
Honors. I much revere you Judgments: that which make me ventrous, is your
unsuspected candor and ingenuity you shall have (as the Orator speaks)
levidense crasso filo: but the preciousnesse of the subject matter will make
amends for that: Christ the Lord of life, and the most precious one of the
Father. I doubt not but he is such to you also: and perhaps this Treatise, such
as it is, will draw out your hearts and affections farther. You know not what
tentations and trialls God may yet bring you through. Christ the Angel of his
presence will be with you: your safety will be in him: infinite is that
distance between the favor of God and us, without him. Rest then upon this
rock of ages: go to this fountain of strength: he will fortify you against
fears without, and terrors within: and when opposition is at the highest, he
will raise your spirits to a suitable height: he will carry you as on Eagles
wings: you shall be above the creature; above your selves: you shall as it were
walk in heaven; while you live on earth.

Honorable Sirs, give me leave to leave with you this monument and witness
of my thankfulness for your many unmerited favors toward me. I have
abundant reason to think, that your hearts are right for God, and for the
Kingdom of Christ: some cannot lay down themselves enough: if it were not so;
whereas they do some good, they would do much more. Self-denial makes a fat
and fruitful soul. Blessed be God for your obedience in this behalf: then we
love our selves best, when we love God more then our selves; the matter of
this discourse will much promove it. I know no better Loadstone to attract and
draw out affections to God ward, then Christ laid open in all the sinews and
joints, in all the veins and arteries of his Fathers love to mankind. I have
done it very jejunely and brokenly: I leave the many defects of it to be made
up by your meditation: how soever I have handled it, I am confident, the
subject is such, that you will receive it, as I present it, with the right hand.

I have adventured to cast this poor mite into the public treasury, although
I am conscious to my self of mine own inability for such a work. What though
a man cannot contend with Lynceus in quick-sightednesse; must he therefore be
reckoned stark blind? What though he cannot run with the swiftest; must he
therefore have his heels tript up? What if he cannot climb to the highest
fastidge and top, must they therefore disturb him, and throw him down from his
station? Zech. 4. 10.
We should not despise the day of small things: inest sua gratia parvis: there
is a foot in the body, as well as an eye: and the Apostle speaks of (...),
diversities of gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 4. And diverse they be as well in measure, as
in kind. I much rejoice, I know nothing by my self: by the grace of God I am
that I am: it is he that has stirred me up to the best studies: and I shall be
willing to do good, according to the dispensations of his grace.

Now the Lord make you so to eye and apprehend the preciousnesse of Christ in
his person, in his graces, in his offices, in his members, in his ordinances,
in all the operations of his Spirit, that you may be willing to spend and be
spent for him, to adventure all your worldly interest, and to throw down all
your honor at his feet; as the four (...), four living creatures, and not
four living beasts as our translation has it.
living creatures, and four and twenty Elders did their crowns: this is the
way to take up all again with unspeakable advantage: this is the best
traffic and trading in the world: this is the safest adventure, that you can
make. Christ will be a rich gain unto you here, and when you come into that
endless world, he will set the never-withering crown upon your heads. So
prays

Your much obliged servant, JOHN ROBOTHAM.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THou art not I conceive such a stranger to these times but thou know, that
there is a spirit of bitterness and contention among us; whereby abundance of
Gospellove is lost, and our affections become unprofitable unto us: if we
could live more in the love of Christ; we should live more in the love one of
another: this following Treatise being first preached (through the earnest
importunity of many friends) is now printed for to elevate thy affections, and
cause them to mount up with wings as Eagles unto Christ, who is the delight of
all delights, and abstract of all praises.

The Subject of this discourse is the pearlesse, and unmatchable excellency of
Christ, wherein is discovered his rarity, price, usefulness, with the high
esteem that the Father puts upon him, in which respect he is precions to
Believers. Love is the attractive Lord-stone of Love: and never was there such
a love-deserving object as Christ; upon whom should Saints place all their
sweet affections that are to be exercised upon good, as love, joy, and delight;
but upon him who is the brightness of Gods face, and the express Image of his
glory?

It will be worth thy time to study the absolute necessity, and transcendent
excellency of Christ, he is precious and excellent in all relations, whether as
man, as Mediator, as God: he is attractive in his love, ravishing in his
beauty, winning and delightful in all his graces: he is absolute gain,
without loss, he is absolute for all supply: in a word, all the riches of Gods
love, the brightness of his glory, and the shining of his face are treasured
up in Christ, and by our union with him we come to enjoy them.

Now this excellency of Christ must not lie as a contemned thing: but it calls
for the strength of our souls, and the height of our affections to be fixed
upon it. There is no object in the world, but there is a will relating to it,
and inclinable to close with it. Now what better object can the will of man
have then Christ? if we be not here what do we differ from beasts? and a
beast in the shape of a man is worst of all. It Is good for us, that God has
placed such sweet affections of love, of joy, of delight, and the like in our
souls; but it is much better, that God has provided such an object for them,
as Christ, who is the summum bonum, and the top of all felicity and happiness.
It is pity we should lose so much of our affections as we do upon the world:
when we cast our affections upon Christ, they be not lost: he only makes them
heavenly and gracious, and gives them to us again: if we lay down our lives
for him, they be not lost, but gained unto eternal life.

Thus I have showed thee whereon this discourse is grounded; namely in setting
forth Christ in his beauty, in his love, in his graces, in his offices, in his
riches, and in all the operations of his Spirit, in all those rich and costly
gifts, which he does bestow upon Believers, redeeming of them with his precious
blood, sanctifying of them with his precious graces, enriching of them with his
precious premises, reviving of them with his precious love, comforting of them
with his precious Spirit, and ennobling of them with precious privileges: and
all this is, as an attractive Lodestone to attract and draw our hearts unto
him.

Now if thou will but take a view of all the high perfections and supereminent
excellencies of Christ; if thou will anotomize him in every particular, and
particularize him in every excellency, thou will find him to be lovely in all
the parts of his Mediatorship, in his person, in his natures, all Offices, and
Graces, yea, he is the chief, or Standard Bearer of ten thousand: he is
altogether lovely, be is wholly delectable. Now it is my earnest desire, that
as God has honored his Son, and Angels they venerate him, and Saints highly
esteem of him, that, he might be precious unto thee, which is the chief
thing I can desire for my self, or for thee, who am

June 4. 1647. Thine in the service of the Gospel JOHN ROBOTHAM.

A Table of the maine things contained in this following TREATISE.
THe coherence of the Text. p. 1. 2. What is meant by precious. p. 2. 4. What
the faith is, that esteems Christ precious. p. 5, 6, 7. The division of the
Text, with the Doctrines contained in it. p. 8, 9. The maine Doctrine
propounded, viz. that though Christ be slighted and undervalued by unbeleevers;
yet he is exceeding precious to those that do believe. p. 10. The Doctrine is
proved by three eminent ex-examples. p. 11. In the prosecution of the Doctrine,
three things are insisted on. 1. some demonstrations, 2. Some illustrations. 3.
Grounds and Reasons of the point. p 12. 1. Demonstrations, and they are four.
1. Believers are impatient of Christ's absence. ibid. 2. Believers make diligent
search after Christ when absent. p. 13. 1. They seek Christ diligently in the
use of all means. p. 14. 2. They seek Christ constantly without intermission.
ibid. 3. Believers have a prudentiall care in keeping Christ when they have
found him. p. 15. 4. Believers do bewail Christ's absence, seek him with
diligence, and keep him with prudence out of a principle of love. p. 19. Love,
what it is. ibid. The will cannot be forced. ibid. The will must have a suitable
object to draw it out. p. 21. Christ is a suitable good to the soul of a
Believer. ibid. 22. A second thing in the prosecution of the Doctrine is the
illustrations, viz. 1. Rarity, 2. Esteem, 3. Price. 4. usefulness. p. 23. 1.
The rarity and scarceness of a thing makes it to be precious. ibid. Christ is
rare in the world. ibid. 2. The high esteem, that is cast upon a thing makes
it precious. p. 24. Christ is highly prized by the Father. p. 25. By Angels. p.
26. By Saints. p. 27. 3. The great and excessive price, that is given for a
thing makes it precious. p. 29. Much has been given for Christ. p. 30. 4. The
usefulness and profitablenesse of a thing makes it precious. p. 31. Christ is
precious for all things, but especicially for Justification. p. 32
Sanctification. p. 34. The parts of Sanctification are two, viz. Mortification.
Vivification. p. 35. Believers are sanctified by an influence of grace flowing
from Christ their Head. page 36. 37. The third thing in the prosecution of the
Doctrine is the grounds and reasons, why Believers do so highly esteem of
Christ. p. 38. 1. Reason, Believers are in some measure convinced 1. Of their
misery without Christ. ibid. 2. Of their inability to help themselves. ib. 2.
Reason, Believers apprehend an infinite treasure and happiness, that God has
treasured up in Christ; and that to be joined to him, is the only way to
obtain these blessings. viz. the Fathers love. Pardon of sin. Manifestation
of Gods face. page 42. 1. The love of God is infinite like himself, and cannot
be conferred upon any creature for its own sake. ibid. Christ alone is a
suitable object for the love of God. ibid. The treasures of Gods love and riches
are first in Christ, and by him conveyed to us. page 43. 2. There is an
absolute necessity of Christ for the pardon of sin. p. 45. Christ
redintigrates mercy and justice, when they seemed to be at variance. ib.
Christ's blood only purges away sin. p. 48. When sin is pardoned there is a
confluence of all blessings comes along with it. page 49, 50, 51. 3. It is
Christ alone, that does as it were unmaske and unvaile the face of God; and
helps us to a manifestation of it. page 52. Christ is the brightness of Gods
glory. p. 54. 3. Reason, Christ is precious and excellent in all relations:
either as he is man, or as he is Mediator, or as he is God. p. 55. 1. As man,
Christ was holy and harmless ibid. 2. Christ was lovely in his abasements. p.
57. Christ was in the Essential form of God. page 58. Christ did evacuate and
empty himself of all his glory p. 59, 60. 3. Christ was obedient unto the
will of his Father. p. 61. Repentance was hid from his eyes, when he was under
the pressures of Divine wrath. page 62. He prays the cup might pass from him
with submission to his Fathers will. page 63. 4. Christ as man, was perfect in
graces. page 64, 65, Christ was more perfect then Adam. p. 66. Christ's
Excellency shines forth in diverse respects, as man. p. 67, 68. 2. Christ is
excellent as God-man, as he is Mediator. p. 69. In the Mediatorship of Christ
we are to consider three things: viz. his Prophecy. Priesthood. Kingdom. p.
70. Christ was the head of all Prophets in diverse respects. ibid. 1. All other
Prophets were but types and shadows of Christ. ibid. Moses was a type of
Christ in diverse respects. ibid. 71. Noah, David, Elisha, Jonah, John the
Baptist were all types of Christ. p. 72, 73. 2. Other Prophets could speak
only to the ears of men: but Christ speaks to the heart. ibid. Other
Prophets could preach wisdom unto men: but Christ can preach men wise. page
74. 3. Other Prophets were isntrumental to search out the mind of God; and
they did it by way of act only: but the mind of God was in Christ habitually
and radically. p. 75. How all fullness is said to dwell in Christ. page 76. 4.
Other Prophets could reveal but some part of the will of God, and at some
times only: but Christ does it fully, and altogether. ibid. 77. 5. Other
Prophets might not preach themselves: but Christ might. p. 78, 79. 6. All
Prophets had their Commission from Christ. p. 80. Christ is the fountain of
all Prophecy. page 81, 82. 83. 2. Christ it a Priest wherein is the heart and
strength of his mediation. p. 84, 85. 86. The dignity and exceeding
preciousnesse of the Priesthood of Christ is set forth by a collation and
comparison between him and the Leviticall Priests, those of Aron's order. page
87. 1. In the Leviticall Priesthood there were a plurality of Priests: but
Christ was Priest alone. ibi. 2. In the Leviticall Priesthood there was a
change, and a succession of Priests: but Christ's Priesthood was impassable.
page 88. Christ was not a Priest after Aron's order: but after Melchisedec's.
ib. In what respect Melchisedec is said to be without Father and mother. ib.
89. 3. The Leviticall Priests offered oftentimes: but Christ offered but once.
p. 99. 91. 4. Other Priests and their Sacrifices were but types and shadows:
Christ is the essence and substance of those things. p. 92 5. Other Priests
entered only into that place, which was typically holy: but Christ into heaven
it self. p. 93. If men will Judaize and stick to Mosaicall rudiments; they
have no right to eat of the Christians Altar. p. 94. 6. Other Priests offered
first for themselves, and afterward for the people: but Christ was without
sin, and needed no sacrifice for himself. p. 95. 7. Christ was a merciful
Priest. p. 96, 97. 8. Christ was the Priest, the Temple, or Tabernacle, the
Altar and the Sacrifice all in one person. page 98. 1. He was Priest in respect
in respect of both natures. p. 99. 2. he was the Tabernacle or Temple most
properly according to his Godhead. page 100. 3. He was an Altar most properly
according to his Divinity. p. 101, 102. 4. He is a sacrifice most properly
according to his manhood. p. 103, 104. Christ as Mediator is a King: and in
his Kingly Office he shines forth most excellently above all other Kings, and
that in diverse respects. p. 105. 1. Christ's Kingdom is spirirituall. ibid.
Christ only rules over the Conscience. ib. The souls of men are one of
Babylons chief merchandise. 106. Domination and Lordship over the soul and
Conscience is that part of Christ's glory, which he will not give to another.
ib. We are not to mancipate and inflame our Consciences to any humane devise
in matters merely spiritual. p. 107. Christ rules in the Kingdoms of men,
and meddles in their secular affairs in reference to his own spiritual
Kingdom. ib. page 108. 2. Christ Kingdom is universal. p. 109. 1. In respect
of all Nations. ibid. 2. In respect of all sorts and conditions of men. p. 110,
111. 3. In respect of all ages and times of the world. p. 112. 4. In respect of
all creatures. p. 113. 3. Christ rules as King alone without either colleague
in the largeness of his dominion, or Regent in his minority, or Viceroy in
his absence. p. 114, 115. 4. Christ is an eternal and everlasting King. page
116. In what respect Christ's Kingdom is ever lasting. page 117. In what
respect Christ shall give up that Kingdom to the Father at the last Day ibid.
118. Christ's Kingdom is not subject to succession, or to be devolved and rould
down to after comers. page 119, 120. 5. Christ is matchless and eminent above
all other Kings in all royal virtues, endowments, and accomplishments. p. 121.
1. He is a most sapient and wise King. ib. 2. He is a most puissant and warlik
King. ib. 3. He is as eminent in peace, as be is in war. page 122. 4. He is a
most just and righteous King. page 123. 5. He is a most mild and merciful
King. page 124. Christ as King is eminent above all others. p. 125. The third
thing spoken of Christ as Mediator is his God head. ibid. There are
fathomlesse depths, and stupendous Mysteries, and confounding excellencies to
be found in God. p. 126. In general, Christ is excellent, in that he is the
altitude and summity of all glory, and one eternal God, the same in essence
and substance with the Father. p. 127. In special thus. 1. Christ shines as
the Sun, in all perfection and sufficiency of wisdom, power, goodness,
love, Majesty, and glory. p. 128. all these perfections are originally in
Christ. ibid. 3. All perfections of virtue are in Christ in the abstract, they
are his essence. page 129, 130. some conclusions are drawn from the Godhead
of Christ, by Scripture aphorisms, to set forth the preciousnesse of Christ.
p. 131, 132, 133, 134, 135. A fourth Reason why Christ is precious to
Believers: v^z. he is absolute for all manner of supply: and the supply which
he makes to Believers is full, suitable, and constant. page 136. 1. Christ makes
a full supply to the soul, as is manifested by many types and shadows which
of old had relation to him. page 137, 138. 2. The supply that we have by Christ
is suitable. ibid. p. 139. 3. Christ makes a constant supply of grace. p. 140,
141, 142. A fifth Reason, Christ is the most gainful object in the world for
the soul. p. 143. 1. He is absolute gain. ib. 2. He is universal gain. p.
144. 1. In respect of all persons. ibid. 2. In respect of all times. 145. 3. In
respect of all things. ibid. 3. Christ is gain in, and for himsef. p. 146. A
sixth Reas: Christ is precious to Believers, because of the attractivenesse, and
alluring virtue Of his love. Of his beauty. p. 147. Of his grace. 1. Christ's
love is very winning and conciliating, drawing the affections of the soul to
Christ. p. 148, 149. 2. Christ is winning and attractive in his beauty. ibid.
He is of a fair and comely complexion. p. 150 He is proportionable in all
parts. p. 151. 3. Christ is attractive in his graces considered 152. 1. As
inherent in himself. p. 153. 2. As bestowed upon the Saints. p. 154, 155.
Believers are the glory of Christ. p. 156. Reason 7. Christ is precious to
Believers from that evidence of Interest, right, and propriety, that they have
in him. p. 157. 1. In all his works and performances. p. 158. 2. In all his
dignities and honors. p. 159. 3. In all his Offices and administrations. p.
160. 4. In all his blessed influences and graces. ib. The application of the
point. 1. Use. It shows us the reason why the most in the world do despise
Christ, and care not for him, namely, because they have no faith. p. 161. Where
Christ seems a despicable and worthless thing, there is no faith, as appears
1. By their ignorance. ib. p. 162. 2. By their stumbling at Christ. p. 163, 164
3. Their not improving of Christ. p. 165. 4. By their carelessness of the
things of Christ. p. 166, 167, 168, 169. 5. By their refusing to receive
Christ. p. 170, 171. 6. By their being satisfied without Christ. p. 172, 173.
2. Use. The discovery of a fit object for our affections. p. 174. The
affections of the Saints are some more, and some less intensive upon Christ.
p. 175, 176. 3. Use. The discovery of the singular effects, the excellency of
Christ, have upon Believers, drawing out their affections unto him. p. 177. We
may judge of all our affections, by the affection of love. ibid. Love is the
height of our esteem, and there are in it three acts or effects, viz. 1.
Complacency or well pleasednes. p. 178. 1. What the love of complacency is,
being referred to Christ. ib. Cheist is an exceeding pleasing object to a
believing soul. p. 179. Christ is welcome to a Believer, however he represents
himself. p. 180. The Saints are wel-pleased with Christ in spiritual
desertions. p. 181, 182. Christ's sweetness does swallow up all his
bitterness. p. 183. The force of that pleasantness, which is in Christ, is
such, that nothing can make his Saints weary of their profession. p. 184, 185.
2. From complacency flows a desire of union. ib. The love of union desires to
enjoy Christ. p. 186. Christ is enjoyed. 1. In his Ordinances. ibid. 2. In his
secret and sweet appearances. to the soul. p. 187, 188. 3. In his personal
presence. p. 198. 190. 3. From complacency and desire of union flows
benevolence or good will. p. 191. Benevolence being referred to Christ, is an
affection whereby we desire his name may be glorified. ib. A Believers love to
Christ is a constraining love. p. 192. 4. Use. We are to consider the
unmatchable excellency and preciousnes of Christ. p. 193. We are to consider by
way of motive, those rich and costly gifts, which Christ has bestowed upon in:
and they are such as these, Precious blood. Precious Graces. viz. Precious
Promises. Precious Love. p. 194. Precious Spirit. Precious Privileges. 1.
Motive. The blood of Christ is precious in these respects. 1. From the purity
of his humane nature. ib. 2. It was noble blood. p. 195. 3. It was his
Life-bloud. p. 196. 4. From his personal union of his Manhood with his
Godhead. p. 197, 198 5. In the blessed effects thereof. p. 199. 1. It saves
from wrath. ibid. 2. It is the price of redemption. p. 200. 201. 3. It is the
blood of entrance into heaven by which Christ entered. p. 102. By which
Believers enter. p. 103, 104. 2. Mot. Christ has bestowed upon Believers
precious graces. p. 205. Faith is called a precious grace, and that for these
reasons. 1. It is the root grace. p. 206. 2. In respect of its Author. p. 207.
3. In respect of its object. p. 208. 4. From the effects and workings of it. p.
209, 210. 3. Mot. The Promises of Christ are great and precious, if we consider
1. The nature of the Promise. p. 211, 212, 213. 2. Of the Antiquity of the
Promise. p. 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219. 3. The precious things contained in
the Promises which do appertain 1. To temporal life. p. 220, 221. 2. To
spiritual grace. p. 222, 123. 3. To eternal glory. p. 224. 225. 4. Mot.
Christ has bestowed precious, love, and precious it is because, 1. Infinite.
p. 226. 2. Gracious. p. 227. 3. Liberal. p. 228, 229. 4. Eternal. p. 230,
231. 5. Mot. Christ bestows upon Believers his precious Spirit which does
these things. 1. It illuminates our minds, p. 232, 233. 2. It sanctifies our
natures, and therefore compared to wind. p. 234, 235, 236. To fire. p. 237,
238. To water. ibid. 3. The Spirit seals our adoption. p. 239, 240. 6. Mot.
Christ bestows upon Beleeevers Privileges, namely, 1. Access to the throne
of Grace. p. 241, 242. 2. Good Success of their suites. p. 2^^* 244, 245, 246,
247, (...)*


THE PRECIOUSNESSE OF CHRIST Unto BELIEVERS.
1 PETER. 2. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious.


THE particle [wherefore] in the beginning of this Chapter intimates a
connection, and consequently the Apostles going on with his exhortation begun in
the precedent.

The first thing he exhorts to, is to love the word of God, ver. 2. As
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word. To this he does both
prepare, and also give suitable and agreeable reasons. His preparation is in
the first verse; laying aside all malice and all guile, etc. his reasons follow
the Text: and the first is edification in these words, That you may grow
thereby. The second is taken from the Subject, or maine Argument of the word;
and that is Christ, propounded unto us by taste: if so be ye have tasted that
the Lord is gracious, ver. 3.

Now that Christ is the primary Subject and chief Argument of the word is
declared from the fourth verse unto the eleventh.

First in believers adhering to Christ by Faith, set forth to us under the
term of coming; to whom coming, says the Apostle. Then we have the reasons
of this duty. First, because Christ is the foundation of the spiritual edifice
or building, called therefore a livingst one, verse 4.

Secondly, because Believers are thereby also made lively stones, verse 5.
Christ is the foundation; and Believers are the superstructure.

Both these reasons are illustrated: First, Christ was chosen and precious.
Secondly, Beleivers were a holy Priesthood. Now that Christ is a lively and
precious stone, the Apostle confirms by testimony of Scripture, verse 6.
Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, (...), elect and precious.

This Testimony is explicated by the contrary affections of men; viz. to
Beleivers he is precious: to unbeleivers a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offense.

Unto you which believe he is precious: here for expositions sake we must
observe in the words two things: first, what is meant by the word precious?
Secondly, what manner of faith it is, that is here spoken of.

He is precious, the word is (...), Honor; as if the Apostle had said, he is
to you that believe an honor, or honorable. Praise, glory, and honor are
promiscuously and indifferently taken for one and the same thing: but if we
respect their propriety, they differ thus.

First, (...), praise, is when we make honorable mention of others: this is
external, and expressed by the tongue, or pen.

Secondly (...), Glory is a reverend, and venerable opinion that we have of
others: this is internal, lying in the mind.

Thirdly, (...), Honor comprehends both those, being a testification of the
opinion, that we have of other men's excellency and worth, declared by outward
signs, as respectfull salutations, uncovering the head, bowing the knee, and
the like. We have a double expression, 2 Pet. 1. 17. Christ re-received from
his Father (...), honor and glory, as much as to say transcendent glory: glory
in the highest degree.

The Hebrew word importing honor and glory is properly of weightinesse; as
Paul mentions the weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...) Kabad signifies to
aggravate, add, or increase: so must Th^^^a ^stud sign^ficat^ g^^v^s^ere,
fec^t in H^p^. Bux^. in L^xi^:
we add excellency, price, estimation, and weight of honor unto Christ: not
that we can really and substantially add the least cubit unto the stature of
his glory, of his beauties and perfections: for he is rich, and full, and
absolute without us: but we must add condign and worthy praises to him; and
so acknowledge him to be that which he is: we add not any worth unto Christ;
but only an agnition or acknowledgement of his worth.

I come to the second question, namely what manner of Faith it is, that the
Apostle speaks of? The Divine speaks of three kinds of Faith; natural,
legal, and Evangelicall. The natural Faith is to believe that God is, or that
there is a God, Hebr. 11. 6. generally all reasonable Creatures, both Angels
and men have such a Faith as this: the Devils believe, that there is a God, and
tremble, says the Apostle.

Legal faith is to believe that God speaks Truth in the Scriptures, or that
the word of God is true; Histories, Prophesies, Promises, threatenings, every
line of that sacred Text, as it was indighted by the Spirit of God, they all
breath out Truth, without the least jot or tittle of falsehood in them. Now the
Faith that assents to this is called Legal; because the Law, and particularly
the first Commandment injoynes me to honor God: and I do honor him, when I
believe, that which he says is true.

Evangelicall Faith is to believe God in Christ. God is objectum ultimum fidei,
the ultimate, or the highest object of Faith: and Christ is objectum mediatum,
the mediate object thereof. Christ is the Medium by which we go unto God: by
him we believe in God, 1 Peter. 1. 21. and (says Paul) we trust through Christ
to Godward, 2 Cor. 3, 4.

True Evangelicall Faith is that whereby the soul does roll or cast it self
upon Christ, as upon a sufficient and faithful Savior.

And that this is the nature of Faith is declared by these phrases of
Scripture. To lean upon the Lord: the Hebrew word (...) to lean produces and
brings forth the word that signifies a a staff; because we lean upon it: now
Faith in Scripture is set forth by both these terms: in respect of Faith the
Lord is said to be the staff of his people, 2 Samuel 22. 19. and they are said
to lean or to stay themselves upon him, Esa. 10. 20. Again, the word (...)
signifies both confidence, hope and security, all which are effects of Faith:
the radical word is used to express the act of Faith, Psalm. 40. 3. And very
significant and choice to declare the work of Faith is that phrase (...) and
applied unto David, and to Christ, Psalm. 22. 8. as much as to say, to roll ones
self on the Lord. Arius, Montanus renders it, volve ad Dominum, roll to the
Lord: the Hebrew word besides the primative sigsignification of rouling,
imports also a confident committing of ones self unto another. Again, (...),
Faith, signifies a steady or firm resting upon the Promises of God. It is
said, Exodus A^nsw. in Loc.
17. 12. that Moses his hands were steady until the going down of the Sun;
where the same word is used for steady, as for Faith. Now then seeing that to
believe in God is to lean upon him, as on a staff, or a supporter; to roll
our selves to him, or on him, as Creatures that cannot subsist happily
separated from him; and also to rest steadily in him, as in God all-sufficient,
and the very life and Salvation of our souls: certainly this cannot be done by
an act of the understanding, but by an act of the will. Confidence indeed is a
fruit of Faith: but yet you must take it thus: as it relates to God in
dependence on him for some future good, so it is hope.

But as it respects him offering himself to us in Christ at present; so it
is faith: and hence are those phrases of the Apostle (...), being fully
persuaded, Romans 4. 21. (...), the substance or ground of things hoped for; and
(...), the Argument, or demonstration of things not seen, Hebr. 11. 1.

Having showed what is meant by Precious, and what is the faith that esteems
Christ so: I come to the division of the Text. In the words observe.

First the person esteemed, or honored, Christ.

Secondly, the persons so esteeming or honoring, Believers.

Thirdly, the ground or reason of all, employed in the word Therefore. It is a
relative particle, importing some antecedent, or foregoing reasons of the
preciousnesse of Christ to Believers, as --

1. That he is found to be a precious stone, verse 4.

2. That Beleivers also are made by him lively stones, as we read in the fifth
verse.

3. There is likewise testimony of Scripture alleged to confirm the
excellency of Christ: therefore he must needs be precious.

The words afforde us these Doctrines or Observations.

First, Christ is very honorable and precious. Christ is honored in Heaven
and Earth, by God the Father, by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, by his
Angels and by Believers: all these put such worth upon him, that hehe is the
chiefest of ten thousand, Cantic. the fifth chap. verse the tenth.

Secondly, however Christ be undervalued by such as have no faith, and do not
believe: yet he is exceeding precious to those that do believe.

Thirdly, Christ is precious to Believers, because of his proper and inherent
excellency, called therefore a precious stone; because of his usefulness,
being a Foundation to build upon: because of his blessed efficiency or
operation, making them that build upon him to become living, or lively stones;
and finally, because all these beauties and lovelinesses of Christ are not
shucks and shadows, but Truths and realities, being confirmed by a sure and
infallible word of Prophecy.

I shall make bold to wave the first Doctrine, because the substance and matter
thereof shall be laid open in the second, which was this.

That though Christ be slighted and undervalued Doctrine.
by unbeleevers; yet he is exceeding precious to Believers. Where there is
faith to believe, there Christ is highly esteemed of, and precious above all
the things in the world.

Hence it is that the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 13. 44.
is likened to treasure hid in a field, and to a goodly Margarite or pearl,
which the Merchant having found he sells all to buy it. Mark I pray.

First, it is a Merchant man, and Merchants commonly are well stored with money,
and of the richest sort of men: it was much then for such an one to part with
all that he had: surely that thing must n^eds be superlatively excellent, that
could move him to do thus.

Secondly, it is a Merchant, the Hebrew (...) which signifies a Merchant, does
also signify a Seeker or searcher, because Merchants do search up and down
in diverse Countries for their precious things: this notes the great pains
that is taken about the Pearl.

Thirdly, when he has made up his resolution thus to forsake all, observe his
policy: he hides the Pearl and the treasure, craftily he conceales it and
keeps it close, that so he may make it sure to himself, and that no man may
deprive him of it.

Fourthly, he sells all, to show that he values it above all things in the
world; and would rather part with all, then miss of such a bargain.

Fifthly, he sells all with joy: that which he does, he does with a very good
will, so far from any sticking at it, so far from any repenting or
wavering, so far from any changing of mind; that he persists in his
resolution with a cheerful and joyful heart. Now what is the ground and
reason of all this? verily it is Christ a treasure, a Pearl of inestimable and
unvaluable price; this is the thing that the soul like a politic Merchant-man
eyes all this while, and is glad to leave all to enjoy it.

See this in the Apostle: he counted all things but loss for the excellency of
Christ: yea he counted them but dung, (...), dogs-meate, (...), that I may
win or gain Christ, says he: that is, that I may get more near communion
with him; and that I may be satisfied with a larger portion of his fullness.

Moses also counted the worst of Christ better then the best of sin: nothing
can be imagined worse of Christ then reproach and affliction: yet Moses sets
these against the pleasures of sin and the treasures of Egypt: he chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season; esteeming the reproacb of Christ better riches, then the
treasures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 26.

Now beside these examples, I will endeavor further to prove and illustrate
the Doctrine in this method. First, I will show the (...), that it is so.
Secondly, the (...), how it is so. And thirdly, the (...), why it is so.


In the (...) it shall appear by these demonstrations.

First Believers are very impatient of Christ's absence. Christ may veil I
D^monstration.
himself for a while, and withdraw his Light and comfort from the soul:
though he take not away his love, yet he may suspend the acts of it: he may
seem to frown; he may so abscond, so hide and eclipse himself, that the
soul for a while loses sense, and feels not its own happiness. Now when it
is thus with a Beleiver, Christ is gone: the comfort and assurance of his Love
is gone, joy and Light is gone, o how dejected, how disconsolate is the soul
then! so far as a man is spiritual, the flame of love to Christ is kindled in
him: Malim praesente Christo esse in inferno, quam absente Christo in Coelo.
Luther in Genes.
and then he cannot sit down without him. He is the fountain of all supply: he
is the staff of strength, the support of joy, and the very life of the soul:
o that I might see him (says the Beleiver) oh that I might live in his
presence! nothing in the world will content him, neither honor, nor riches,
nor pleasures, nor friends, nor any thing else will content him, till he find
him whom his soul loves, till he find the Lord Jesus Christ, whom formerly
with unspeakable pleasure he enjoyed.

Secondly, consider that earnest inquisition and diligent search, which the
Beleiver makes after Christ when absent.

He seeks him diligently and constantly.

First, his diligence appears in that he searches for Christ in the use of
all holy Ordinances: who so esteems Christ, the same person can slight no
Ordinance of Christ, hearing, prayer, meditation, conference with the godly,
and the like: he has found such sweetness in all these, that he cannot give
over his search and inquiry, until he has found Christ. Those Ordinances are
(as I may say) a walk wherein Christ is wont to meet with his people: a
Beleiver therefore does with great eagerness, delight and study put himself
upon that way. If he find not Christ present, his spirit fails; the soul is
in a syncope or fit of swooning, there is a swift and a sudden failing of
strength. But Christ being once found, this is as life from the dead. The
Ordinances therefore in which Christ presents and offers himself are very
precious to a Beleiver. The soul that has once felt the quickening power of
those Ordinances, will hardly, or never be kept from them.

Secondly, the true Beleiver seeks Christ constantly, he seeks him without
intermission or ceasing. See a pattern of this, Cantic. 3. 1, 2, 3. By night on
my bed I sought him, says the Church: and what was the success? for the
present she found him not: how then? did she give over? no: but she sought him
in the streets: and yet she found him not, ver. 2. Well, she is not contented;
but she seek^ him again: she asks the watchmen for him; such as were in place
of superintendency and Ministry; such as pretended at least to have the
greatest care of her: she inquires of them for him: saw ye him whom my soul
loves, says she? but even they satisfy her not: therefore she goes further,
waiting patiently for the Revelation of Christ: and so at length she has
blessed success: she found her beloved: it is not lost labor to seek and
wait for Christ constantly and perseveringly: such labor in the Lord shall
never be in vain: and verily they do highly esteem of Christ, who seek him
so.

Thirdly, a true Beleiver does not only I held him (says the Church) and would
not let him go, Cant. 3. 4. she came by him hardly: and therefore she will not
part with him lightly, it cost her hot water (as I may say) to get him; she gat
him with much hazard and danger, much loss and suffering: and therefore she
will not leave him for the greatest advantage in the world. She knows, that
nothing under Heaven can countervaile or repair the loss of him: she knows,
that nothing in this great and wide Universe, though never so lovely and
desirable can be equivalent to such a Jewel: She knows, that with him is the
wellspring of life and of all blessing: therefore she cannot be induced or
persuaded upon any terms to part with him. Many of Christ's followers forsook
him, and went no more with him: but will ye also forsake me, says he to his
Apostles? Peter answers for himself and the rest: Lord, whither shall we go?
thou have the words of eternal life, Joh. 6. 68. as if he should have said:
Lord, if we leave thee, we leave our life and our comfort; we forsake our
own mercy: it was motive enough to stay by him, and to keep closse to him to
consider that eternal Life, and consequently the very quintessence of all
happiness was with him. The Merchant that found a treasure of great price,
went and hid it, and joyfully sold all that he had to purchase it: and
therefore he will not part with it for any good. This Merchant-man is an
Emblem or figure of a sound beleiver, who when he has found Christ, will not
forgo him by any means: no, but he will say of him, whom have I in Heaven but
thee: and on Earth there is none that I desire in comparison of thee: Christ is
the strength of his heart, and his portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. It Is the
voice of the Church: the Lord is my portion says my soul: not only her
tongue without; but even her soul and her spirit within speaks it with
unconceiveable joy and delight: she was in deep affliction when she spoke it,
Lament. 3. 24. Yet the apprehension of such a portion, as the Lord, was solace
and refreshing enough to her. And David is in the same mood too: the Lord is
my portion and mine inheritance (says he) the lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. He alludes to
the manner of dividing the Land of Canaan to the children of Israel, which was
done by line. O terque quaterque beati; unspeakably happy are they that have
such an heritage: can we think now that they will be such fools, as to part
with it? no verily, they will not so dote on any thing in the world, as to
leave Heaven for earth, infinite and eternal joys for a short blaze, or a
little flash of mirth, like the crackling of thorns under a pot: they will not
be so overseen and besotted, as to part with such an heritage, as Christ is,
rich, fat, always fruitful, and never decaying, (...), as the Apostle says:
it is an inheritance where there is no dirt, no winter, or withering, no decay
or dying of fruits; but ever green, ever flourishing, ever bearing, infinitely
profitable and delightful to the possessors of it: who can be so foolish as to
part with such an inheritance as this? If Naboth would not part with the
heritage of his Fathers; how can we imagine that the Saints will part with
theirs? Naboths was his but for his life time only: but the heritage of the
Saints is everlasting: Naboths was subject to many hazards and casualties,
fire, inun^^ation, robbery, blasting, worms, and utter loss, as the event
declared: but the heritage of the Saints, the portion that they have in Christ
is quite above and beyond all such detriment: they will not then be such
fools, as to part with it.

Fourthly, consider the principle from I sought him whom my soul loves, says
the Church, Cantic. 3, 4. Now love is the inclining or closing of the will,
with something that is at least apprehended to be excellent and agreeable to it
self: I say apprehended to be excellent; because sometimes the object is not
excellent indeed, but only fansied and conceited to be such: but here the case
is otherwise, as I trust it shall appear. In the mean time observe the nature
of the will; it is elicita, not coacta, inclined and drawn forth; not
compelled and constrained, not ravished (as I may say) or forced: will should
be no will, if it were so: the will is absolute and free; it sits as Empress
in the soul, commanding there in chief, as we say: no violence can be offered
to it: or if there be any, yet it is very pleasing full of ti^^^^ation, full of
tickling and delight. I confess the old saying is, ducimus volentem, and
trahimus ^olentem: we lead him, that is willing, and we draw him, that is
unwilling: but when the Father is said to draw us, Joh, 6. 44. and Christ also
is said to draw us, Cantic. 1. 4. we must know that here is no compulsion, or
coaction: but it is done by the sweetness and efficacy of grace: it is done by
the secret operation and working of the Spirit, inclining the heart, and
swaying the will: I conclude then, that if the will be so impassible, and
cannot be forced; Christ must needs be a Lodestone (as I may say) very
attractive, and an object very tempting and alluring: else certainly he could
never have such power over men's wills to incline them, to draw them, to bend
them and bow them, as he does: he could never make the Wolf to dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard to lie down wi^h the Kid, as it is in the Prophet: he
could never tame the fierce natures, and the ravenous dispositions of
persecutors; he could never change men's minds, and alter the constitution of
their souls, so as he does; if there were not excellency in him super-humane,
and above all that which any creature can boast of? doubtless it must argue
the excelling dignity and preciousnesse of Christ, when our wills, which are
subject to no enforcement, are so kindly and so sweetly swayed and commanded by
him.

Again we must know, that the object of the will according to the mind of the
Philosopher is something that is good: bonum est objecium voluntatis, says the
Moralist: whether it be bonumreale, a real and substantial good; or bonum
apparens, a shadowish and seeming good* it is so; both are the object of the
will: but Christ is altogether substance and no shadow, no lie, no falsehood, no
fuke, no varnished appearance of good; but the most solid, and absolute
blessing, that is in the world; so revealed by the Spirit, and so apprehended
by the Saints: and therefore it is, that he is so choice and precious to them.
That excellent glory, that transcendent good, that spiritual beauty, that
supereminent worthiness, that overflowing fountain of Grace, and the shining
of Gods face in Christ; these make him to be the best object; these set a high
rate and price upon him: these incline the will, attract the heart, and draw
the love of our souls to him.

Again, observe that the object of the will must be a thing suitable; bonum
sibi conveni^ns, a good agreeable to it self. Now such an object is Christ: he
is most suitable and agreeing too us in all his Offices, in all his
communications; suitable in his blood for pardon, in his grace to adorn us, yea
in his very debasements to lift us up; suitable in his love for lost sinners, in
his fullness for for empty and beggarly souls; yea the summum bonum, the
chiefest good, that we can desire, or be possessed of: this makes a child of God
to love nothing so well as him: there is none on earth, that I desire besides
thee, says the Psalmist. If Christ were not very precious to believers,
d^ubtlesse they would not overlooke all the world to claspe, and close with
him, as they do.

A second thing illustrating the Doctrine is the (...), how it is so? there are
four things spoken of in the Scripture, which make a thing to be preci^us;
viz. the Rarity.

The Esteem. The Price.
And the usefulness thereof.

First, the rarity and scarceness of a viz. the word of Prophecy called
precious, 1 Samuel 3. 1. It is said there, that the word of God was precious,
that is, it was rare in those days: so is Christ rare in the world: few and
rare they be that find him: one of a City, and two of a Tribe, as it is in the
Prophet, Christ is a Pearl, yea a Pearl of highest price, as in Matthew. 13.
Pearls are rare in the world: the Merchant only, that seeks far, obtaines
them: there are more ways to miss, then to hit the mark: the stoney ground,
and the young man in the Gospel came near the Kingdom of God, but yet missed
it: it is rare to see a soul embellished and adorned with such a Jewel, as
Christ is: this then must needs make him to be precious. If things excellent
were common, the plentinesse of them would take off the price of them: it is
said 1 Kings 10. 21. that all Solomon's drinking vessels, and all the vessels of
the Forest house in Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of Silver, it was
nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon: the King made it as common as
stones in Jerusalem, as we read in verse 27. The excessive and superabounding
quantity of that metal made it so cheap and so worthless, as it was: had it
been rarer, it would have been more precious: this then confirms the exceeding
preciousnesse of Christ, because they be thin sown, and come up as thinly,
that have him for their portion: the paucity and fewnes of such, as are
enriched with him, argues his dignity and worth not a little.

Secondly, the high esteem, that is cast upon a thing makes it also to be
precious; Gadarens esteem more of their swine, then of Christ; we will not lay
him in such a balance: look upon God the Father, and see what reckoning he
makes of him: he calls him choice and precious, as we read 1 Peter 2. 6.
Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and precious. God has
honored Christ, and committed all Judgment even the full administration of
all things to him, that all men might honor him. Christ was in the bosom of
the Father; he was from all eternity privy to all his counsels and decrees, as
we find Prove. 8. 22, 23, 24. etc. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of
his way before his works of old: the word (...) is there used, put for
eternity, a part ante, as we say: as if Christ should have said; even from all
eternity, before his works made in the Creation of the world I was my fathers
Darling: when he made the Heavens, girded the Sea; and gave the unresistable
decree, that it should keep in its bounds, I was as one brought up with him; I
was as a child with the Father; I was daily his delight: the original word is
(...) delights in the plural number, intimating that the eternal Son was
the greatest delight of his Father: he was variety of delights unto him: while
God was making of the world, he took infinite pleasure in him; in so much that
he made all things by him: every creature has a beam of the Fathers wisdom
in it; and the wisdom of God is the Sun. This is a great mystery: but God
speaks of it in terms very quaint and familiar. Christ speaking of the days
of eternity and everlastingnesse, says that he was always rejoicing before
God; the word is (...) as much as to say, sporting greatly; a metaphor, or
simile taken from little ones, which sport and play before their Parents.
Christ must needs be precious, being thus highly esteemed of the Father. And to
this head of Argumentation we may add the great and high account that the
most excellent of all Gods Creation, the holy Angels have of him, they all
worship him, and adore him, Hebr. 1. 6. yea they do exceeding earnestly desire
to stoop down and pry into the great mystery of our Redemption by Christ, as
the words (...) and (...), 1 Peter 1. 12. do import: where the Apostle alludes
to the manner of the Cherubims looking down into the Mercy-seate: this is the
study, yea, this is the delight and recreation of the elect Angels to look
into the several scopes of our salvation by Jesus Christ, to behold the whole
frame and fabric of it, to observe all the parts of it from the beginning to
the end, and the glorious attributes of God, his wisdom, his power, his
Justice, his Mercy, all shining and glittering in it like bright Stars in the
firmament: this, I say, is their work: yea this is their festivity and
past-time. Then let the profane ones of the world think what they will of
Christ; let them slight him, and scorn him, and cast him at their heels, as
they do; let them trample upon his blood and passion, as their wicked manner
is, making it a common and worthless thing; let them despise those high and
celestial Mysteries of his Mediatorship; we need not care for their thoughts;
it is enough for us, that God the Father has honored and exalted him, that
the holy Angels do venerate and worship him; yea and all the Saints do
magnify him, and count him very precious: the opinion, that one of the least
of these has of Christ, is more to be regarded, then the Judgment of the
wisest and most judicious worldlings, that are. The Preacher says, that a wise
man's heart is at his right hand; but a fools at his left, Eccles. 10. 2. what
is the meaning of this? We know, that naturally every man's heart is placed on
the left side: therefore surely that sentence aims at something higher then
Nature: doubtless then Heavenly things are figured by the right hand, and
Earthly by the left. The first is the choice of the Saints: they are therefore
those wise ones, whose heart is at their right hand: the other is the delight
of Heathenish and carnal people: they then are the fools, whose heart is on
their left hand: and here is the true reason, why the men of this world do
despise Christ, their heart is a left handed heart (as I may say) they favor
and relish nothing but earthly things: and therefore Christ and the glorious
things of the Gospel are lightly set by: such wisdom is too high for fools,
as Solomon says, they cannot attain unto it. Even the Heathen Philosophers as
wise as they were, could not reach it: they were so far from embracing it,
that they counted it very foolishness: and be it so (says the Apostle, for he
does after a sort gratify them) yet the foolishness of God is wiser then men;
and the weakness of God is stronger then men. It skils not then what the men
of the world do think of Christ: but what esteem God, and his holy Angels,
and the Saints illuminated and enlightened by the Spirit of God have of him: if
they count him precious; this is an Argument irrefragable, and a proof beyond
all exception, that he is so indeed.

Thirdly, the great and excessive price, Mary anointed Christ, was called
precious in this respect: this ointment might have been fold for much, and
given to the poor. Thus also the life of a man is said to be precious,
Proverb. 6. 26. because he will part with one thing after another, till all
begone to save it: as we see in the Egyptians, who parted first with their
money, after that with their cattle; and last of all with their Lands; and all
to buy bread to save their precious lives. Now this also does set forth the
preciousnesse of Christ: but who shall value him? Who shall set the price upon
him? not men of corrupt minds, not people of depraved affections: for they will
set too low a rate upon him. Judas sold him, and the Highpriests bought him
for 30. pieces of silver; a goodly price (says Christ) that I was prised at of
them Zach. 11. 13. Magnificum pretium, as Junius renders it: a very worthy
price, I promise you: ironically spoken, meaning nothing less; and yet he was
no less then the eternal Jehovah, that was so prised: Jehovah said unto me;
cast it unto the potter; a goodly price, that I was prised at of them. But they
did thus to fulfill the good Counsel and purpose of God for others, that would
esteem more highly of him. There be them in the world, that do enhaunse the
price of Christ, and value him at the highest rate: though some will not part
with a beastly lust for him; though like hogs they count the base wash and
fig to be far sweeter: yet there be others, that know well the worth of
him: there be others that are willing to forsake all for him: we have forsaken
all (says Peter) and have followed thee, Matthew. 19. 27. The Merchant, of whom
you heard before, sold all to buy the preclous pearl: he valued it above all
things in the world, and was willing to leave all for it. The holy Martyrs
thought not their very lives, and their heart-bloud too dear for Christ: so it
is said, that they loved not their lives unto the death, Revel. 12. 11. that
is, they despised their lives in comparison of Christ: they exposed their
bodies to horrible and painful deaths, their temporal estates to the spoil,
and their persons to all manner of shame and contempt for the cause of Christ:
they thought nothing too hot for him. A soul, that by Faith has sense of the
worth of Christ, will willingly give all for him, will go away rejoicing, and
will think his pennie-worth to be very good.

Fourthly, the usefulness and profitablenesse Deuteronomy. 33. 14. there the precious
fruits put forth by those heavenly luminaries, the Sun and Moon, are a part
of Joseph's blessing: and precious they were, because very useful and
serviceable to the life of man: and the influence of those heavenly bodies by a
course, which God had constituted and set in Nature, made them the more
useful, and therefore the more precious. So also are the afflicted and
persecuted Saints said to bear precious seed, Psalm. 126. 6. because their
sufferings shall profit them much in the end: such seed shall bring forth
weighty sheaves of joy at the last. Now then, to come to the point, that we
drive at, in this manner does the Scripture hold forth Christ as precious: he
is very precious; because he is very useful: he is useful for many things,
yea for all things; but especially for these two,

viz. Justification. Sanctification.


First, Christ is useful for Justification: he is the only mine pit of this
treasure: the golden and precious veins of it run along in him only. That
he might be just, which believes in Jesus, says the Apostle, Romans 3. 26
(...), which is of the Faith of Jesus; that is, which seek not Justification
by their own righteousness, viz. by the works of the Law; but by Christ
alone: and hence we are said to be made the righteousness of God in him, 2
Cor. 5. 21. mark, I pray. The Apostle does disertly and emphatically add the
clause (...), in him, that he may take away all conceit of inherence in us, and
establish the Doctrine of imputation: as Christ is made sin in us by
imputation: so we are made righteousness in him by the same way. St.
Augustines place, which Beza cites, is a most full commentary: God the Father
(says he) made him to be sin, who knew no sin; that we might be the
righteousness of God, not our own, and in him, that is, in Christ, not in our
selves. And being thus justified, we are so righteous, as if we were
righteousness it self. It is Christ alone, that can administer life and
righteousness: it is he alone, that binds up the brokenhearted, opens the
prison doors, proclaims Liberty to Captives, and the acceptacle year of the
Lord, or the Lords year of good will: the Quire of the heavenly host sang good
will toward men, when this accepted and welcome year was come, Luke 2. 14.
This was Christ's work: the Law was too weak for it: that could kill, but not
make aalive. Christ alone bare the whole weight of his Fathers wrath, made
reconciliation for iniquity, and brought in everlasting righteousness: none
but he was of use for this; and therefore he must needs be precious.

Secondly, he is likewise useful for Sanctification, that Spirit alone, which
Christ sends forth, is of power and ability to instill and breath grace into
us, and so make us meet vessels for the heavenly masters use. It is Christ,
that stamps afresh the impression of Gods Image defaced and decayed in our
souls: it is he that restores the life of God in man, lost by sin, by the
blessed influxe and droppings of his grace we come to put on the new man, which
is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him, as the Apostle
speaks, Coloss. 3. 10. he uses a Metaphor of putting on taken from garments,
to show that those new qualities of the soul are a^i^^ed as Venu^t and
beautiful ornaments to our nature: the substance of the soul is not changed,
as some have foolishly dreamed; but only it puts on new properties and
affections, new powers and abilities: and this benefit we derive from Christ.

The parts of Sanctification are mortification, a dying unto sin, and
vivification, a living unto righteousness: now both these come by virtue of
our implantation, inserting, or ingraffing into Christ: the first when we are
implanted into his death, and the second is a fruit of his resurrection: Christ
reviving, his members could not lie dead: a living head and dead members were a
Monster never seen in nature. Nevertheless observe this; that though we are
sanctified by the death and resurrection of Christ: yet his death is the Primum
mobile, as I may say, that strikes the first stroke, that is the meritorious
and exemptory cause of our sanctification, and hence is that saying of the
Apostle, Romans 6. 5. If we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death; we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: this is an
elegant metaphor, representing unto us, that as plants engraffed do receive
moisture, juice, and nourishment from the stock, whereby they sprout out,
budde, and bear fruit; so we being as it were inserted into Christ, do
receive vigor and life from him, whereby we walk in the Spirit, and become
spiritual, holy, gracious, and active in all good works. Christ is the Olive
tree, that stands before the Ruler of the whole Earth, and emptieth it self
by the pipes and conduits of his word into the golden Candlesticks of his
Church Zach. 4. ^ight and grace in the Ministration of holy Ordinances flow
from him: he is the head and seat of spiritual influence, from which the
whole mystical body receives breath, life, and motion: this is the Apostles
simile, Coloss. 2. 19. He makes there Christ to be the Head, and the Church the
body knit together by certain joints, and ligaments, as we see it is in
nature: and by this means it has convenient nourishment ministered to all
parts, whereby it increases with the increase of God, that is, with mighty and
most blessed increasings. Christ has goodness enough for himself, and for
all his Members: he is a Fountain never dry; and the Philosophers property of
good agrees to him most of all: Bonum est sui communicativum: that which is
good spares no^, but communicates it self: this is most true of Christ: his
grace is diffusive like water, of which the Naturalist says, that it is
difficultly contained within its own bounds; but easily within the bounds of
some other thing. Christ is that sun of righteousness, that compasses the
whole world enlightening, warming, and cherishing every one of his elect with
his beams, of his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace, says the
Apostle, John 1. 16. (...), that is, abundant grace, or graces suitable to his
own. The first day of union a Believer enjoyes this participation of grace.
Union is the ground of Communion. We must remember also that Christ did
sanctify himself to the end, that we might be sanctified: for their sakes I
sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through the Truth, says
Christ, Joh. 17. 19. Christ is the principal cause of our Sanctification: we
are sanctified vertually by his sanctifying of himself: he being set apart,
and separated from sinners, such as are by his Spirit and by faith knit to him,
must needs be also separated from the world to walk with God in holiness of
life and conversation. Thus much of the (...), demonstrating and declaring how
Christ is precious.

I come now to the third thing, which is the (...), showing why it is so?

There be many reasons and causes why Believers do esteem so highly of
Christ, as they do.

First, beleivers are in some measure

First, when the soul finds it self in darkness without any Light; lying
under shame and dishonor: under the guilt of sin, and not able to deliver it
self: this cannot but make it look out for it self, and seek with great
importunity for a Savior. The Dove could find no rest for the soale of her
foot, till she returned into the Arc. It is a perfect hyeroghyphick or
resemblance of a wounded Spirit, as Solomon calls it; when it is as the blessed
Redeemer was (...), surrounded with sorrow, and it is full of restless
vexations, fluctuating and tumbled up and down in a whole Ocean of
perplexities and fears, and can see no shore, no Land, no creek, or haven of
comfort: then it must into the Arc; then it uses the soliloquie of the
Psalmist; return unto thy res^ o my soul: then it cries out with the blessed
Martyr, o! none but Christ, none but Christ: there is my Arc, there is my rest,
there is my refuge; there I shall find relief and refreshment, or else no
where. Christ will be a calm to me after a storm: he will dispell and drive
away all these clouds: he will hold my head above water, and keep me from
sinking; he will be light and joy, and unspeakable solace after all these
distempers: thus the poor affl^cted soul, as a prisoner of hope (as the
Prophet speaks Zach. 9. 12.) returns unto Christ, as to its strong hold. The
mis^rable soul seeks for cure; the whole need not the Physician (says Christ)
but the sick: sin-sick sinners will enquire and seek after the Physician of
souls. The sense of misery is the primum mobile, the first mover, that sets us
on seeking for Christ. The more we know our own misery: the more we know how
to prise Christ, and set a true value upon him.

Again, Believers are likewise convinced of the impotency and weakness of the
creature, in respect of any help or succor that it can afford. None can by any
means redeem his brother, nor giv^ to God a ransom for him, Psalm. 49. 7. i^
not redemption from temporal death, much less from eternal. Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams (says the Prophet) or with ten thousand
rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my transgression: the fruit of
my body for the sin of my soul? The truth is, should all the Angels in
Heaven, and righteous men upon Earth join their goodness together, and offer
it up to God as a sacrifice: it would not be sufficient to expiate so much as
one sin. Now when the soul is sensible of this, it cries out (as Peter in
another case) help Lord, or else I perish.

Solomon says, that as good news from a far Country, so is cold water to a
thirsty soul, Prove. 25. 25. So it is with a poor distressed soul, when it
sees it self as it were in a far Country, far from God, far from ^oy,
and far from any deliverance in it self, or in any other; then if one bring
him news of a Savior, of a Redeemer, this is welcome news indeed; this is as
cold water to a thirsty soul.

An instance of this is seen in the Prodigal: who, when he came to himself,
that is, when he saw what a wretched and helpless creature he was, he cast his
thoughts upon his Fathers house, he loathed any longer to feed upon the husks
and hogs meat of the world, then he desires the bread of his Fathers hired
servants: Nothing but home will content him: farewell feasting and revelling,
and all filthy pleasures that I have lived in: I have gotten nothing by them,
but wounds, and sorrows, and vexation of Spirit: I will home to my Fathers
house: there is bread and durable clothing: there is whatsoever I can wish or
desire: here I starve and die: there I shall live and sweetly enjoy my self:
here I want all things; but there I shall lack nothing. This is a lively
pourtraiture of a thirsty and wearied soul flying unto Christ for ease and
comfort. This then is one reason why Christ is precious to Believers; namely,
because they are in some measure convinced of their misery with him: and of
their own impotency and utter inability to help themselves, therefore Christ
is precious unto them.

Secondly, Believers are not only

Viz. the Fathers Love. Pardon of sin. Manifestation of Gods face.


The love of God being infinite like himself, cannot be conferred upon any
creature for its own sake: the causa procuratrix, or the procuring cause of
this love must of necessity be infinitely meritorious: now this is not found
among the sons of men, but only in Christ the eternal Son of God; only
in Christ, who was (...), God-man, as I may say; Immanuel, God with us, or God
in our flesh: God, that he might be a fit object for the infinite love of his
Father; and man, that he might derive and bring that love to us. God first
loves his Son, and then Beleivers through him. It is impossible that the
infinite love of the infinite God should be drawn out, but by an infinite
motive: and where is this motive, but in the second person coe-eternall,
co-essentiall, and co-equall with the Father? were it not for his Son, God
should have no object for his love in the world. Love is as fire, which must
have fuel to maintain it. Now let all the Creatures, men and Angels be set
before God; yet they all with all their excellencies and lovely parts cannot
deserve the least minute or tittle of his Love. God loves himself in his
Son, and his creatures for his beloved Sons sake. God will supply (says
the Apostle) all your need according to his riches in Glory by Jesus Christ,
Philip. 4. 9. The treasures of Gods love and riches are first in Christ; and by
our union with him we come to enjoy them. So Ephesians. 1. 6. To the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved (...), in
which he has ingratiated us through that Beloved. Gods love and his favor is
undeserved on our parts: we find grace in his sight through Christ. Notable
to this purpose is the order of the three persons, which the Apostle sets, Cor.
the last and the last. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the Communion of the Ho-Ghost be with you all, Amen. You must know now,
that this is not a right natural order: for by order of nature the Father
(whom the Apostle cal's God in a personal sense, as John 1. the word was with
God, that is, with the Father) I say by order of nature the Father is first of
himself, not begotten: the Son is from the Father begotten; yet eternal: and
the Holy Ghost is proceeding from them both; yet eternally too: for though they
be one before another in order of nature; yet not in order of time. But now
here is the Question: seeing the Father is first, the Son second, and the
Holy Spirit last in that natural order; why does the Apostle in the
forementioned place set the Son first? verily because he is next and
immediate unto us, being our Mediator; being the canalis or conduit pipe (as I
may say) by which the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost is
brought and conveyed to us; as the means is ever before the end. Now the
Saints being convinced and persuaded of this Truth, this is the thing, that
makes Christ so dear and precious unto them, as he is: if Isaac loved Esau for
his venison, for a carnal respect: much more have we cause to love the Lord
Jesus, and highly to esteem of him, having procured for us the love of the
Father; a love like Jonathan's love to David, passing the love of women: yea a
love of infinite dimensions and measures, if I may so speak: the breadth of it
is infinite; because it is without respect of persons: the length also
infinite; because it is from everlasting to everlasting: the depth infinite;
because it redeemes and delivers from Hell: and the height likewise infinite;
because it lifts us up to Heaven. Certainly Christ having purchased such a
wonderful love, as this; he must needs be precious, he must needs be amiable
and lovely to a believing soul.

Secondly, for the pardon of sin there is likewise an absolute necessity of
Christ. The blood of Christ only, and not of Bulls and Goats, is availeable to
take away sins. The soul being convicted of its sinfulness, speaks as the
Prophet does: Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who among us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? God is devouring fire and everlasting bumings
in relation to sinners: his wrath is the fuel of Hell, as I may say: the
breath of his indignation is like a river of brimstone kindling and perpetually
maintaining the flames of Tophet: what shall the poor sinful soul do now?
here is nothing but menaces and threatenings, terrors and amazements, death and
destruction: and where is the remedy? verily no where but in Christ alone.
Israel passing through the wilderness had a cloud to cover him, and defend him
from the scortching Sunne-beames: now what was this cloud but a type and shadow
of Christ, as the Apostle makes it, 1 Cor. 10. 1.? he makes there the cloud,
and the Sea, and the Manna, and the water of the Rock to be all figures and
Images of Christ. Christ is a sea to wash, Manna to feed, water to refresh, and
a cloud to hide the soul from the hot and burning wrath of God: the fiery
beams of that wrath would surely suffocate it and stifle it, were not the
blood of Christ interposed and set between to veil it: the blood of Christ
obnubilates and covers the soul from the fierce anger of God; it is Christ
only that reconcileth us to God: it is he alone that is our Advocate to plead
our cause with his Father: when man had sinned, Justice and Mercy strove one
with another, and seemed to be at variance: Christ redintigrates them, and
makes them friends again: he is our blessed Umpire to set there two together
again; giving satisfaction to Justice, and place to mercy; so honoring and
dignifying both; making both to rejoice, both to kiss and embrace each other.
God smells a sweet sav^ur of rest in Christ only: all the hilasticall and
propitiatory sacrifices of the Law did ^^oke to him, as to their end and
substance: of themselves they could not pu^ge away the guilt of the least
sin: the repetition of them (as the Apostle teaches) shows plainly how
invalid they were to expiate the crimes and offenses of the soul: the
strictest observance of them could not make the worshipper perfect, as touching
cleerenesse of Conscience, Heb. 9. 9. When David cries, purge me with bysope,
and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow; he alludes
indeed to the Leviticall Ceremony: but he aims at the blood of Christ only:
this alone was able to purge away his foul spot: his heinous sin of murder
would not out by any other washing then this. In one of the old sacrifices
there were two Goats appointed; one to be slain, and the other to be kept
alive, which was called the scape-Goate: now both these have an eye to Christ:
the slain or sacrificed Goat was a type of his dying for sin: and the
surviving or scape-goate figures his rising again and ever living to
mainetaine the worth of that oblation: the Apostle says, that he ever lives
to make intercession for us: and how does he make intercession, but by
continual holding forth in the presence of his Father the merit of his
sufferings? so that still Christ both dying and living is the fountain of our
peace, and atonement with God: still Christ is he, and the only he, that
obtains remission of sins for us. Now if we consider the many and great
benefits that redound to us by the pardon of sin, we must needs conclude that
Christ is very precious, by whom we enjoy such a mercy.

When sin is pardoned, there is an end of Gods heavy wrath and displeasure:
Satan's Kingdom goes down; the power of our corruptions daily decaying: we
have peace and joy within; whereas before we had nothing but raging storms
and tempests, and a very hell in our Consciences: our prayers find acceptance
at the throne of Grace: all the creatures are in league with us, and are become
our faithful servants: that which comes from them, is sweet and benign,
healthful and good: our blessings are blessed: yea our very curses (if they
may be so called) are likewise blessed unto us: Judgments are removed: every
bitterness is taken away: even the sting of death is pulled our: Christ, as a
tree of most excellent virtue, is cut down, and thrown into our Marah. Some
things may work adve^sly and crosly to us: but the Apostle speaks of a
cooperating, or working together; which makes amends for all: all things, work
together (says he) for good unto them that love God, Romans 8. 28. and they be
such, that have their sins pardoned.

Though some things work untowardly, and against the hair, as I may say; yet
take them altogether, and there is a blessed harmony and compliance, a sweet
relishablenesse and savourinesse in them: one thing does recompense and make up
another: the mixture of sweet and sour through the wisdom and mighty working
of God is very demulcent and wholesome, full of benediction and blessedness;
that even the sins of the Godly are an advantage to them, and turn to their
melioration and betternment: God makes use even of them to do his children
good: he brings meat out of the very eater; and converts the causes of
damnation into furtherances of salvation. Add hereunto, that adoption,
communion with God, and with his Saints, and assurance of eternal ^lory are
all of them the blessed concomi^ants of sin pardoned. We recover the Image of
God, and in some measure the freedom of our wills unto good, when our
Consciences are washed, and our sins pardoned. We have a continual feast in
our souls, and songs in the very night of affliction, when our sins are
pardoned. We are freed from the spirit of bondage, our hearts are strong, we
are as bold as Lions, and desire nothing more then the presence and coming of
the Judge, when our sins are pardoned. Oh what a confluence of all
blessedness and happiness is there in Jesus Christ! if we have him, we are
rich, we are full, we have all: if we be without him, all that we have, how
excellent soever it be, is as nothing: we are miserable, wretched, lost, and
the very worst of creatures: all the maledictions and curses of God lie upon
us, and death, when it comes, will gnaw upon us everlastingly. Certainly,
Christ must needs be exceeding precious, with whom we enjoy such a world of
blessings; and without whom we are so extremely unhappy. The Lord give us to
know the things, that belong unto our peace. Christ procures for us the pardon
of sins; and the pardon of sins is not a solitary blessing; it comes not
alone; but with a long train of good things at the heels of it: Christ
therefore, that obtaines it, must needs be precious and excellent in the
highest degree.

Thirdly, it is Christ alone, that does as it were unmask and unvaile the face
of God; and helps us to such a manifestation and sight of it, as our nature is
capable of: his glory in the absoluteness and perfection of it no creature can
behold. When Job had set forth the greatness of Gods wisdom and power
expressed in his mavelous works; he concludes thus: Lo, these are part of
his ways: but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his
power who can understand? Job 26. last verse: now that thunder of Gods power is
the highest degree of it: the Apostle expounds it, when he says, that God is
able to do above all that we can either ask, or think: we can ask much;
and we can think more: yet we can neither ask, nor think so much as God can
do: here is the thunder of his power, Zophar also says, that we cannot find
out the Almighty unto perfection: he compares it in height to Heaven, in depth
to Hell, in length to the Earth, and in breadth to the Sea: yea he makes it
higher, deeper, longer and broader, then all these. And God himself tells
Moses, that no man can see his face, and live. We may see Jehovah's back-parts:
but his face, that is, his absoluteness, and perfection cannot be seen: and
therefore he is called the invisible God. Yet howsoever this does not a little
set forth the excellency and worthiness of Christ: that Revelation, which we
have of God, we have it by him: and hereof we may see a notable figure in
Moses. The Lord proclaimed his mercy, his patience, his goodness, his Truth,
and his justice before him: these are his backparts; and more then these he
could not see: and therefore it is said, that the Lord covered Moses with his
hand, while he passed by. But to come now to the point: where was Moses, when
he had this vision and appearance of the Deity? he was in a clift of the Rock:
now verily that Rock was a shadow of Christ: we see the glory of God through
him per speculum, as it were in a glass. Christ is the lively Image of God, 2
Cor. 4. 4. He is the brightness of his glory, and the express character of
his person, Heb. 1. 3. There is no excellency in the Father, which is not
complete in the Son: and by the Son we come to know it: so says the
Apostle. God, who has commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts to give the Light of the Knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. both this expression, and that in the
Hebrews beforementioned, where Christ is called the brightness of Gods
glory, are a metaphor taken from the beams of the Sun. As the Sun is
manifested by his own brightness, viz. by his beams; for we cannot see the
Sun in Rota, in his Charret, or circumvolution, but by his beams: so the
inaccessible Light of his Fathers glory is revealed tanquam per radios ac
splendorem, as it were by beams and brightness shining most clearly in
Christ: and the root and Fountain of that brightness is in Christ's
Godhead, but darted upon us through the manhood: according to that testimony,
Joh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, which
is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. The bosom is the place
and seat of secrets: now it is Christ only that opens the bosom, declares
the secrets, and reveals the glory and brightness of Gods face unto
Believers: therefore he must needs be exceeding precious.

Thirdly, if we consider Christ in

First of all as Man; he was holy, and harmel^sse, and separate from sinners;
Heb. 7. 26. a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Peter 1 19. The
Apostle relates to the Paschall Lamb, which was to be so conditioned: it was
behoofefull, that Christ should not only be man; but also a man perfectly holy
and righteous; else he could not have been a competent and sitt^ng Savior:
yea, he had been so far from satisfying for the sins of others, that he
must have dyed for his own. And besides it was requisite that there should be
that beautiful analogy and proportion between him that lost all, and him that
recovered all; that as Adam, who played the Bank-rupt, was perfect; so should
the Redeemer be. Christ indeed in a certain place does turn off from himself
the appellation of good in a sense of perfection. One called him good Master:
but he replied, why call thou me good? there is none good but God, Matthew.
19. 16, 17. But why does Christ do so? was not he perfectly good? yes: but the
other was not ware of his Godhead, when he called him so: he looked upon Christ
(says Chrysostom) (...), as upon a mere naked, extenuated, debased man: and
yet he attributes unto him a more then humane goodness and perfection;
according to the error of the Pharisees, whose Disciple, no doubt he was. The
Pharisees held, that even men by a strict observance of the Law might attain
to perfection of Righteousness and sanctimony in this life: and such a
thought, no question, had this Scholar of theirs concerning Christ: so that if
we look well upon it, we shall see, that our Savior does not deny himself
to be perfectly good: but only he checks the pharisaicall opinion of
perfection in those, that are no more then men. Christ was more then a mere
man: if the young man had known so much: he should not have been reproved for
calling him good in a sense of absoluteness and perfection: such an Epithet
was rightly applyable unto Christ, had the young Pharisee been ware of his
Deity: or had he known the strange manner of his conception, viz. by the Holy
Ghost; he might have said of him, as the Psalmist does; thou art fairer then
the children of men: and so the title of good Master would never have been
excepted against.

Secondly, Christ as man also was abased: and yet in his abasement he was very
excellent: it is a very comely sight to see a great Personage of a meek, humble
and lowly carriage, willing to stoop, and to come down from his height; so it
be not in a sordid and unfitting way. Now so it was with Christ: he washed the
very feet of his Disciples: he became poor to make us rich: he fasted, that
we might feast: he went on foot, that we might ride, as I may say: he died,
that we might live. The Apostle says, that though he was in the form of God,
and thought it no robbery or Sacrilege to be equal with God: yet he made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, Philip,
2. 6, 7, 8. Now mark, I pray, the antithesis or opposition, which these words
hold forth.

Christ was from all eternity (...), in the * essential form of God; (...),
properly signifies the outward shape, face, or figure of a thing, which
because God has not, therefore here it is put for the Divine Essence.
or in the glorious nature and condition of God: yet he took upon (...), the
state, being and condition of a servant. He was equal with God, called
therefore the mighty God, and the everlasting Father, Esa. 9. 6. and (...), the
very, or the true God, 1 John 5, 20. yet he was content to be found (...), in
the similitude and shape of men, that is in the very rank, nature and quality
of men, subject to man's passions, and every way a right man, sin only
excepted, whereof you heard before. Again, be thought it no rapine or robbery
to be equal with God: yet he suffered himself to be denuded and robbed of his
glory by sinful men. God cal's him the man, that is his fellow, Zach. 13. 7.
and yet he was made a fellow to thieves and malefactors: yea he was made
inferior and underling to base men, a very murderer being preferred before
him. Though he was full of glory and excellency: yet he did empty himself of
all: for so are the words of the Apostle, (...), he evacuated or emptied
himself, that is, he reduced himself, as it were to nothing; or (as a Father
has it) he exhausted himself; he drew himself dry. Lastly, though he was the
Prince and Lord of life: yet he humbled himself unto Death: and the basest
death of all, the death of the Cross: it was a Roman kind of execution, and
asserted even by a Roman Orator to be of all other most ignominious and
shameful. Civem Romanum scelus est verberare prope paricidium n^care: quid
dicam in crucem tollere? said that Orator. It is a heinous wickedness to
beat a Roman: it is almost paracide to kill him: what is it then to crucify
him? how beyond measure heinous is that? yet thus low was the Son of God
brought. And it adds likewise to the measure of his humility and lowliness,
that he was voluntary in all this debasement: he was not forced or compelled to
it: no man takes my life from me (says he) but I lay it down of my self,
Joh. 10. 18. and what he says of his life, is true also of all his Divine
glory: it was not violently snatched from him whither he would, or no: but he
did willingly, cheerfully, spontaneously and of his own accord divest and
strip himself of it. Now certainly thus to descend from Heaven to Earth, from
Divinity to humanity, from a Kingdom to slavery, from life to death, and all
this of his own free and willing disposition without any compulsion or
enforcement; this adds no little grace and luster to him. it is a very seemly
sight to see a venerable person condescending, stooping low, and denying
himself; to see a King casting aside his Robes of Majesty, and descending to a
lower pitch for the doing of some good, which otherwise cannot be atcheived: we
had been eternally lost, if the Sun of God had not done thus: unless he had
humbled himself, we could never have been exalted.

Thirdly, Christ as man was obedient unto the will of his Father: he was
universally and constantly obedient: he was obedient without any the least
reluctation, grudging, or unwillingnesse. To this purpose makes that of the
most excellent song, where it is said of Christ, that he comes leaping upon
the Mountains, and skipping upon the hills, Cantic. 2. 8. there were great
Mountains of difficulties and hardship in the way of our Redemption; yet he
past lightly and cheerfully over them all to do the will of him that sent
him. Yea, he was so far from grumbling and murmuring, that it was even meat
and drink to him to do that will; and he was straightened and pained in his mind
till the bloody baptism of his suffering was accomplished, Luke 12, 50. It is
written of him in the roll of Gods book; Lo, I come to do thy will, o God:
those words, Lo, I come; show his alacrity and cheerfulness, his readiness
and forwardness to do his Fathers will: his loins were always girded, and
his feet shodde unto it. The Spirit of Christ dwelling in the Saints makes them
to be prompt and ready unto all duties, and works commanded of God: how much
more then was Christ himself so, in whom the Spirit of God was, as water in
the Fountain? when he conquered death, and the grave, and all the powers of
darkness for us, Repentance was hid from his eyes: he shrunk not, nor drew
away the shoulder from it. Three times he was under such an infinite pressure
of Divine wrath, as had been enough to have crushed ten thousand worlds, yet he
flinched not; but drank the bitter cup off to the very bottom: he patiently
endured the Cross, and despised the shame. Indeed it cannot be denied, that
when he was in his agony, he prayed to his Father to save him from that hour;
and thrice he prayed, that the bitter cup might pass from him: yet he did not
this through disobedience or unwillingnesse to undergo the task, that his
Father had set him to: but first of all we must know that his mind was so
stricken with the infinite wrath of God, with which he was then confl^cting; so
astonished and overwhelmed with that insupportable pressure; that all the
powers and faculties of his soul were for a while interrupted, suspended,
confounded: so that he knew not well what to say, nor whether to turn
himself: this appears by his words, Job. 12. 27. Now is my soul troubled,
and what shall I say?

Secondly, when he prayed so, we must conceive, that as a man subject to
frailties like us (yet without sin) he thought he had been utterly lost and
undone, if his Father should not deliver him from that hour, and excuse him
from drinking of the cup. His sense of dolor was so vehement, and he so amazed
with it; that it wru^g from him a signification of Natures fears and
reluctance: yet all the while his holy, his pure, and unblemished mind was
thoroughly bent, and resolved to go through stitch with the work, whatsoever
came of it.

Thirdly, we see, that when he prayed, Father save me from this hour, he
presently and immediately subjoynes: but for this cause came I unto this hour:
Father glorify thy name: likewise when he prayed, that the Cup might pass
from him: he desires it no otherwise, then with condition of his Fathers will.
Also in that ruefull vociferation and crying out, why have thou forsaken me?
we see that he did not let go his hold; but remembered to say, my God, my God:
so that here was no diffidence, no sin, no disobedience all this while.

Lastly, all this was so carried, and punctually related by the Evangelists to
show us these things, viz.

1. The exceeding atrocity and heinousness of sin.

2. A mirror of Gods infinite mercy in Christ.

3. Our Nature really and truly suffering in him.

4. The fullness of his expiation and satisfaction.

5. The certainty of his Fathers goodwill toward us; whereof we are the less
to doubt, by how much the more we see that the eternal Son was humbled and
made an abject for our sakes.

Fourthly, Christ as a man likewise was perfect in all graces. The Prophet
tells that there should come a Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch out
of his roots; and the Spirit of the Lord was to rest upon him; the spirit of
wisdom, and understanding; the spirit of Counsel, and of might; the spirit of
Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, Esa. 11. 12. yea, so eminent was the
Lord Jesus this way; that even at twelve years old, be sat in the Sanadrim,
disputing with the Doctors, and asking them questions. It is said that God gave
not the Spirit by measure unto him, Joh. 3. 34. that is, he did not bestow it
upon him imperfectly and in part only: but fully and entirely: for measure is
not opposed to infinite, as the Eutychians would have it to confirm their
opinion of Ubiquity: for they thought, that if the Spirit were given unto the
Manhood of Christ unmeasurably, then even the Manhood would be capable of
Divine properties; and consequently, the flesh of Christ would be no where
circumscribed, but every where present: but I say, that measure in the place
before mentioned is not opposed to that which is infinite and unmeasurable; but
to that which is not whole, entire, and perfect: Christ in the gifts of the
Spirit was not lame and imperfect; but omnibus suis numeris absolu^us, full and
complete, as Adam was before he fell: and yet far excelling Adam: for Adam
was set in a mutable condition: but Christ is steadfast, and abiding for ever;
confirmed in grace like the Holy Angels of God: Yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever. In respect of virtue and the Faith of Believers even his
manhood, before it was in being, was clothed with perfection of grace, and so
continues for ever. Again, Adam was a mere man and alone by himself: but in
Christ the humane nature was hypostatically un^ted unto the Divine: and hence
it comes topasse, that Christ, even as man, had a greater measure of knowledge
and Revelations of grace and heavenly gifts, then ever Adam had. The Apostle
says, that in Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead (...), bodily Col.
2. 9. that is, not by a naked and bare communicating of virtue, as God is said
to dwell in his Saints; but by a substantial union of the two Natures, Divine
and humane, the eternal Word and the Man, consisting of a soul and body,
whereby they become one (...), one Person, or subsistence. Now from this
admirable and wonderful union of the two Natures in Christ, there flows unto
the Manhood a plenitude and fullness of all Spiritual wisdom and grace, such
as was never found in any mere man; no not in Adam, while he stood in his
integrity and uprightness.

Now then to draw to a conclusion of this head. If Christ even according to his
humanity were perfectly innocent and holy: if he were in his Divine celfitude
and highness voluntarily debased: if he were exactly obedient in all things to
his Fathers commands: and if he were complete in all heavenly wisdom and
graces: then certainly even as he was man, he was of all other most precious,
most lovely and desirable.

Add hereunto, that his flesh never saw corruption; that it rose again from
the grave, it being impossible for the bands of death to detain it. Also as
man he came of the race of Kings. As man he shall judge the world, Acts 17. 31.
As man he was wonderfully borne of a Virgin; called therefore by a peculiar
name, Shiloh, which signifies a Secundine, or afterbirth, Genes. 49. 10. the
word comes (...) which signifies tranquillum esse; intimating that Christ is
he, who has brought us peace and tranquillity: and that he might be our
Peacemaker, it was necessary that he should be Shiloh, borne of the sanctified
seed of a woman, without the seed of a man. The Apostle expounds the name,
Galat. 4. 4. where he says of Christ, that he was made of a woman: not of a
man and a woman both; but of a woman alone without a man.

Again, Christ as man was foretold by the Prophets, and by sundry types;
attended upon at his birth by holy Angels: a peculiar Star created for him.
Christ as man was in one hypostasis, or person with God, called therefore
Ithiel, Proverb. 30. 1. a word (as Junius writes) compounded of three parts; as
if one should say; the strong God with me: the name comes all to one with
Immanuel; and the Apostle expounds both, 1 Timothy 3. 16. where he says of
Christ, that he was God manifest in the flesh: and this he affirms also to be
without controversy a great Mystery, and a Mystery of godliness: In every Art
and profession there is a Mystery: but this holds forth a Mystery of
Godliness: for he that was Ithiel, God present in the flesh to every faithful
and believing soul, was likewise Vcal, Almighty, able for all things: so that
by these two names the faithful are assured of their Justification,
Sanctification, and eternal Salvation through the presence and power of God:
and this doubtless is (...), a great Mystery.

Furthermore Christ as man was our Sacrifice and expiation: he was our (...),
the price of our Redemption, 1 Timothy 2. 6. though I confess that this price had
its worth from the union of the two natures. Again, Christ as man was
conceived of the Holy Ghost: Christ as man is ascended into Heaven: Christ as
man sits at the right hand of God. Now all these things, and much more that
might be brought, do speak Christ a very precious and excellent person, and
that even according to his manhood.

Secondly, consider Christ as Mediator, and there also he shines forth most
gloriously, and appears to be the most peerless and precious thing in the
world.

In the Mediatorship of Christ we are to consider his (...), or his threefold
Holy Office of Prophecy. Priesthood. Kingdom.


Christ is a Prophet (...), in way of eminency and excellency above all other
Prophets: he was the Head of them all; and that in these respects.

First, of all, other Prophets were but Types and shadows of this great
Prophet: even Moses himself was but a figure of him: a Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto me says Moses, Acts 7.
37. those words, like unto me, do plainly show, that Moses was at the best but
an Image and a shadow of Christ.

Moses fasted forty days before the giving of the Law on Mount Sin^i; so did
Christ before he began to preach the Gospel

God did more clearly and perspicuously manifest himself unto Moses then unto
other men: it is said, that he spoke unto him face to face, as a man speaks
to his friend, Exodus 33. 11. so did the Eternal Father more openly reveal
himself unto Christ, then unto any creature: no man knows the Father save
the son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Matthew. 11. 27.

Moses became a Shepherd in the Land of Midian: so is Christ the Shepherd and
overseer of our souls, 1 Peter 2. 25.

Moses was faithful in all Gods house, and so was Christ, but yet in a far
more excellent manner then Moses, as the Apostle declares, Heb. 3. Moses was
faithful as a servant, Christ as a son over his own house.

Moses was himself a part of that house: but Christ was the builder of it.

Moses under God did institute Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. It is said, that
the Fathers p^ssed under the cloud, and through the Sea; and were all baptized
unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea: mark that phrase, unto Moses: they
were baptized unto him, as unto the type, or deputy of Christ: for Baptism is
a Sacrament of the New Testament, and properly of Christ's Institution.

Moses also instituted the Passover: so did Christ the Lords Supper.

As the Law was exhibited by Moses: so was the Gospel, which brings grace and
truth, free Redemption, and the accomplishment of all types unto Believers,
exhibited by Christ, Job. 1. 17. Thus you see, that Moses, that egregious and
eximious Prophet was no more then a shadow of Christ. And the like may be said
of all the rest of the Prophets: it were no hard matter to show how they did
all of them in one thing, or other resemble Christ, just as the lively picture
of a man does his person: as Enoch and Elijah in their Translations resembled
the ascension of Christ.

Noah by his righteousness saving all the rest that went into the Arc with
him, shadowed Christ, who by his perfect obedience saves all true Believers.
Concerning the Prophet David it is said, that even those which sat at his
Table rose up against him, Psalm. 41. 9. so did Judas against Christ, who dipped
with him in the platter. David also was a man after Gods own heart: so was
Christ without the least flawe or failing; and what an evident type of Christ
was the Prophet Elisha, when a dead body rose again being cast into his grave,
and touching bis bones? a Kings 13. 21. This was not done by any Native or
inherent virtue of the Prophet: but by that accident to foreinstruct the
faithful concerning the virtue of Christ's flesh, which rising from the dead,
should likewise raise up our perished bodies, according to that, Esa. 26. 19.
thy dead men shall live: together with my dead body shall they arise: awake and
sing ye that dwell in the dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the
Earth shall cast out the dead. Again, Jonah lying three days and three nights
in the belly of a fish, was a sign of Christ lying so long in the grave. The
Prophets were all of them types and resemblances of Christ: even John the
Baptist, then whom there arose not a greater Prophet of all those that are
borne of women, even he, I say, was but Christ's harbinger or forerunner. Now
then as substances do far excel shadows, and Kings their Ante-ambulos or
harbingers: so does Christ far excel all Prophets: they all of them were but
shadows and forerunners to him

Secondly, other Prophets could speak only to the ears of men: but Christ
spoke, and still speaks to the heart: he has the Key of David; he opens, and
no man shuts; he shuts and no manopeneth, Rev. 3. 7. it is a similitude
taken from them, that keep the Keys of a City, or Castle, without which they
can neither be opened, nor shut: no more can any open the heart or break in
upon the Spirit, beside Christ: he alone is able to open the eyes of the mind,
and to convince the Conscience, by the secret, kindly and powerful working of
his own Spirit.

Other Prophets can preach wisdom unto men: but Christ can preach them wise:
other Prophets can warn men by telling them of their sins, and denouncing
the Judgments of God: but Christ can reclaim them, and turn them from their
sins: the dead hear the voice of the Son of God, and live, Joh. 5. 25. and
hence it is said, that he taught, as one having Authority, and not as the
Scribes: it came coldly and driely from them: but full of paresie and
boldness, full of conviction, and raeproofe, full of the evident demonstration
of the Spirit, and of power, as the Apostle speaks: in this manner came the
word from Christ.

Thirdly, other Prophets were isntrumental to search out the mind of God: and
they did it by way of act only, the Divine will being revealed and discovered
unto them, but the mind of God was in Christ habitually and radically: the
fountain and root, the source and principal cause of Christ's Prophecy was
in himself. Before all time Christ had the honor to sit in the seat of most
excellent secrets; the bosom of the Father: and therefore he is able, as from
himself to reveal all the Oracles and secrets of God needful to be known:
he is able to reveal them when, and how, and to whom he pleases.

Now that these things are habitually in Christ, as heat in fire, or water in
a living and ever-flowing spring, appears by this.

1. That Christ is essentially wisdom and understanding: Counsel is mine, and
sound wisdom (says he) I am understanding, Prove. 8. 14.

2. It appears also by this, because he counsels us to buy eye salve of him,
that we may see; and because he has power to send the Spirit; ye have an
unction from the holy One, and ye know all things says the Apostle, 1 John 2.
20. Christ is the holy one from whom we receive the anointing of the Spirit,
opening our eyes and discovering unto us all saving truths. In him are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Colossians 2. 3. They are hid in him,
as Gold, and Silver are in suo loco, as the Philosopher speaks, hid in the
veins of the Earth: that is another Argument of the habitualnesse of Prophecy
in Christ.

Thirdly, and another is this, that all fullness is said to dwell in him,
Coloss. 1. 19. where by the term of plenitude or fullness Mr. Beza understands
(...) ^^cumulation, or heaping up of all (...) gifts in a most copious and
plentiful manner, which he says, that the Schoolmen do call habitual
grace, distinct from the grace of union; the union (he means) of the two
natures. Now one part of this habitual grace and fullness in Christ, is the
gift of Prophecy: and mark, I pray; it is said (...), to inhabit or dwell in
Christ: this implies the habitualnesse of it.

Fourthly, other Prophets could reveal but some part of the will of God, and
at sometimes only, Heb. 1. 1. that God spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets
at sundry times, and in diverse manners; that is, he did let out his Light
minutatim, by little, and little, till the Day Star and Sun of
Righteousness a-rose: but (says the Apostle) in these last days he has
spoken by his Son, ver. 2. that is, he has spoken more fully and plainly. The
antithesis or opposition which the Apostle sets between Gods speaking by the
Prophets of old, and by his Son in this latter age of the world, shows
plainly the dimnesse and darkness of those former ages in comparison (...)
those, which have been since the coming of Christ: in this respect (...)
Apostle says, that the heirs of life and salvation were but children before
Christ's incarnation, Galat. 4. 1, 2 etc. for the generality of them they knew
but as Children, for that we have done since, besides other points of minority
and nonage touching Legality and Ceremonies, which the Apostle in that place
terms elements or rudiments of the world; and the State of the Saints under
them a state of bondage; as we see now but (...), through a glass darkely,
for what we shall do in the life to come: all is w^apt up in a riddle now, for
what it will be then: so did they of old in comparison of us: their Light was
but an obscure and glimmering light to ours. Christ has flowed in upon his
people in greater abundance of Revelation since his coming, then before: His
discovery of himself then was but a standing behind the wall, a looking forth
of the window, a showing himself through the Lattice, Cant. 2. 9.

Fifthly, other Prophets might not preach themselves: the Apostle inveighs
against selfe-commenders, 2 Cor. 10. 12. we dare not (says he) make our selves
of the number, or compare our selves with some, that commend themselves: and in
another place he speaks out plainly: no man (says he) lives to himself,
Romans 14. 7. that is, none ought to live unto himself. Yea, even Christ
himself relating to himself as a mere man, says, that his witness is not
true, if he bear witness of himself; Joh. 5. 31. but in another place
relating to himself as Mediator, as God and man in one person, and one with
the Father, he speaks clean contrary to this: though I do bear record of my
self (says he) yet my record is true, Joh. 8. 14. Here then is a wide
difference between other Prophets in re^pect of their Office, and Christ: they
might not preach themselves: they did indeed report something of their own
virtues, but it was for holy example and instructions sake; and it was still
with reference unto the maine object of the word which was Christ. But now
Christ being our Mediator, our great Prophet, the Apostle of our Profession,
and the Angel or Messenger of the Covenant between God and us, he may and does
preach himself: to him give all the Prophets witness, Acts 10. 43. and he
bears witness of himself, because he has not a greater in the point of our
Justification, Sanctification, and eternal Salvation to bear witness of,
than himself: and hence are those selfe-predications of his, which we find
in the Scriptures. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the Earth.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden. When he read that
place of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 61. 1. etc. he told the people, this day is
this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. When the excommunicated man asked him
who the Son of God was? he answered him, thou have both seen him, and it is
he that talks with thee: and he told the Samaritanesse plainly, that he was
the Messiah. And it is said of the two Disciples, that beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself. Now surely it commends unto us the Prophecy of Christ,
that he might preach and commend himself without any blot of arrogancy, or
taking too much upon him: this argues him to be a high and honorable Prophet
above all other.

Sixthly, all the Prophets had their Commission and Authority from him: the
words of the wise are as Goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of
Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd, says Solomon, Eccles. 12. 11.
the words of the wise are Divine and heavenly instructions: the Masters of
Assemblies are Gospel Ministers and Teachers: and Christ is that one Shepherd
from whom those words are given, and from whom those Masters have their
Authority. Hence it is said, that he went by the Spirit, that is, by his Divine
virtue and power, and preached unto those Spirits, that are now in prison (in
Hell we must conceive) having been disobedient unto the word of God, and
despised his long-suffering in the days of Noah, while the Arc was preparing,
1 Pet. 3. 19. 20. here we see, that that, which Noah a Preacher of
righteousness did, is attributed unto Christ: because Noah was but
isntrumental, and had his Commission from him; just as it is said, that
whatsoever the Prisoners did in the prison, Joseph was the doer of it, Genes.
39. 22. because they did it by warrant and leave from him; or by his dictation
and Commandment.

Again, observe that phrase, Ezekiel. 20. 46. drop thy word toward the South: and
the like speech is that of Moses; my Doctrine shall drop, as the rain; my
words shall distill as the dew; as the small rain upon the tender herb, and
as the showers upon the grass. Now from this phrase of dropping, we may draw
an Argument, that Christ is the head of all true Prophets and Teachers. For
look^ as the clouds, from whence the rain descends, have not their water
originally and natively in themselves; but from the Sea and moistened places of
the Earth exhaled and drawn up by the heat of the Sun: so have not the
Prophets a Spirit of Prophecy; nor any Divine Teachers a faculty of teaching
Heavenly and saving Truths of themselves: but it is drawn up out of Christ, as
out of a full Sea of all excellent wisdom and knowledge, and convayed into
them by the heat and vigor, not of their own Spirit, but a far higher spirit
then theirs, viz. the Spirit of Christ.

Neither may other Prophets go of their own heads, but by Commission and
delegation from him. And therefore they have the name of Ambassadors given
them, 2. Cor. 5. 20. Ambassadors for Christ. Christ it is, that said, go and
teach all nations. Christ it is, that instituted the Ministry of the word.
Christ it is that gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists and some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. and hence are those
speeches so frequent in the Old Testament: hear the word of the Lord, the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it: the word of the Lord came unto me, and the
like: in which places the original for Lord is Jehovah, and by Jehovah is
meant the second person, to wit, the Lord Jesus, the whole administration of
things for the good of the Church being committed unto him: and hither tends
that remarkable passage, 1 Samuel 3. 21. The Lord revealed himself unto Samuel
in Shiloh by the Junius in Loc.
word of the Lord; that is, by Jesus Christ; who in the preceding books of the
Scripture (as Junius notes) was wont to be called the Angel of the Lord: and
afterward, as he revealed himself more clearly, he was called the word of the
Lord. But besides the opinion of Junius, another place of Scripture does
confirm this interpretation: the place is Genes. 19. 24. The Lord rained upon
Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Heaven. From this
Scripture I gather thus much: that as the second person is brought forth acting
by way of mediation from the first, in point of Rule and Kingdom here: so in
that place of Samuel he is brought forth acting from him mediately in point of
Prophecy: although I confess that considered according to his Godhead, he
did both execute Judgments upon the Sodomites, and reveal him-self unto Samuel
immediately from himself, without any such dependence or subordination.

Thus you see, that Christ is the head and principal of all Prophets being in
sundry respects the most excellent this way of all other.

Secondly, consider Christ as a Priest, and here also we shall find him to be
most precious and excellent: here is the very heart and strength of all his
mediation between God and us; indeed in respect of our necessity, who must
first know our own misery and the remedy, before we can apply the sacrifice of
Christ, and so be reduced to holy obedience and subjection to the Kingdom of
God; Prophecy has the first place in the mediation of Christ; after which
follows Priesthood, and last of all royalty or government.

But forasmuch as the priestly Office consists mainly in suffering of death;
whereunto we were obnoxious and liable for sin, and could not be delivered
without it: it plainly appears, that this Office has the pre-eminence and
upper hand, and that it does promerit (as I may say) and buy out the other two.
The Prophecy of Christ could never have opened our eyes; neither could his
Kingdom have ruled and swayed our hearts, unless by his Priesthood he had
dyed for us. I have manifested thy name unto the men (says our Savior) which
thou gave me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me; and
they have kept thy word, Joh. 17. 6. Here we see are some that have the name
of God, that is, the Salvation of God manifested unto them: so that Christ
becomes a Prophet to them to enlighten their eyes: they be such also, as are
subject and obedient to the Kingdom of Christ; and therefore they are said to
keep Gods word: but now who be these that are partakers of such graces and
choice blessings, illumination and Sanctification? verily they be such as God
gave unto his Son out of the world, as that Scripture speaks. Now I must tell
you that this gift of God is free and properly so called, if we respect the
love of God, and our selves that partake of it. But if we respect Christ the
Mediator, so it is improperly called a gift: for God gave his Elect unto
Christ conditionally for a price, the price of his Life-bloud. and hence the
Mystery of our Redemption is called a Covenant. It is indeed a Covenant of
Grace in respect of God, who was pleased of his own accord to find out such a
remedy for miserable man, and to yield to it: and also in respect of true
believers, who enjoy the benefit of: but yet in respect of Christ the
Mediator, it is a Covenant made upon terms and conditions, to wit, his
passion, his Righteousness.

The Priesthood then of Christ is the most noble part of all his Mediation:
without this his Prophecy and Kingdom could never take hold of us, never do
us any good: they whom God gives unto his Son out of the world upon Covenant,
upon terms of his suffering and dying; they only have the name of his
salvation manifested unto them, and they only keep his word: all others how
near soever they may seeeme to be unto the Kingdom of God, and to the mark
of salvation; yet they fall short of it. In the Priesthood then of Christ, and
in that especially lies the latitude and longitude, the profundity and
sublimity of Gods love toward us: and in respect of this especially is the
whole Mystery of our redemption by Christ called (...).
magnalia Dei, the magnificent works of God, Acts 2. 11.

But now further to set forth the eminency and dignity of Christ's Priesthood,
and his exceeding preciousnesse thereby, let us make a collation and comparison
between him and the Leviticall Priests, those of Aaron's order.

First of all in the Leviticall Priesthood there was a plurality of Priests; as
in Matthew. 12. 4. it is said, that it was lawful for the Priests only to eat
of the shewbread; and in the fifth verse, that the Priests in the Temple do
profane the Sabbath, and are blameless: though there were but one
High Priest: yet there were many inferior sacrificing Priests at once, Heb. 9.
6. But now Christ was a Priest alone: he by himself alone has appeared to
take away sin: he has by himself purged our sins, Heb. 1. 3. his own
self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and hence it
is, that he cries out in the Prophet; I, even I am the Lord; and beside me
there is no Savior.

Secondly, in the Leviticall Priesthood there was a change, a succession and a
moveablenesse, and hence it came to pass, that there were many Priests;
be(...) (...) the Apostle) they were not suffered (...) by reason of death,
Heb. ^. 23. But (...) is for ever after (...) of Melchise^^^ (...) ^^ich
Melchisedec was (...) Father, (...) Mother, (...) beginning of life, or end of
days, Heb. 7. 3. ^^at is, his Priesthood came not by Father, or Mother, or
kindred, as that of the Tribe of Levi did: the Leviticall Priests had their
Priesthood by generation, by succession from Father to son; it was hereditary
to them; neither might they be put beside it, except it were for some natural
blemish, as blindness, lamenesse, crookedness, and the like, Levit. 21. 17,
18, etc. But Melchisedec's Priesthood was not after this manner: his was not by
natural descent: but it was instituted and given him of God at a time nev^^
mentioned in the Scripture: neit^^^ (...) the expiration or ending there (...)
^^oken of; that so he might be an ap^ ^^semblance and figure of the everlasting
Priesthood of Christ; who has (as the Apostle teaches) (...), an impasseable
Priesthood; a Priesthood, that cannot pass, or be translated from him to
another, Heb. 7. 24. in the priesthood of Aaron's order every Priest bare
office but for his own time: and they were subject to be put out for
misdemeanor, as we see in Abiathar, 1 King. 2. 26. yea, and the whole order
was dissolved at the death of Christ. But Christ himself is a Priest for ever:
he ever lives to make intercession for us: his priesthood continues unto the
end of the world; yea and the virtue of it infinitely beyond all time:
therefore he will have no successor, or Vicar. Christ's Priesthood like
Melchisedec's came neither by Father or mother, as you heard: for he was of the
Tribe of Judah, of which (the Apostle says) there is no mention made as
touching priesthood, save only that a King of Judah did once to his cost
usurp that Office; and again, as we read not of the moments of Melchisedec's
either inauguration or ceasing; so was Christ ever from the beginning of the
world a Priest, and ever shall be to the end, yesterday and to day, and the
same for ever.

Thirdly, the Leviticall priests offered daily offerings oftentimes: the Priests
went always into the first Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God, Heb.
9. 6. and the High Priest entered into the holy place, viz. the inmost
Tabernacle every year with blood, ver. 25.

But Christ offered but one sacrifice once for ever: once in the end of the
world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, says
the Apostle, ver. 26. and he does illustrate this Truth by a simile, and
confirm it by an Argument. His simile is in those words: as it is appointed
unto men once to die; but after this the Judgment: so Christ was once offered
to bear the sins of many: and unto them that look for him shall be appear
the second time without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 27, 28. the explication
or unfolding of this similitude take thus: as there is nothing interposed
between the death of a man, and his eternal doom, or Judgment: nothing can
either mar, or mend his estate: but as the tree falls, so it shall lie,
whether toward the North, or toward the South, toward Heaven, or toward Hell:
so between the death of Christ and his second coming, there is no hilasticall
or expiatory sacrifice interjected, either to add perfection to the first; or
to ransom those that had contemned it: and to this looks that Scripture,
where it it is said, if we sin wilfully after that we have received the
Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, Hebrews
10. 26. there is not a second propitiatory sacrifice to be expected: Christ
shall appear the second time without sin, that is, without sacrifices for
sin. Men must lay hold of that one once offered, and not despise it not seem
to embrace it, and afterward cast it away: for if they do, there will never
come a second to expiate such an offense.

The Argument, which the Apostle uses to prove that Christ's sacrifice is but
one, and once offered, is taken from the perfection thereof; wherein it differs
much from the sacrifices of the Law: for they could not make the comers unto
them perfect, Heb. 10. 1. but there was in them an anniversary or yearly
remembrance of sins: yea there was a daily repetition of some of those
sacrifices, as the Apostle minds, Heb. 10. 11. so that here was no
perfection: the Conscience of the worshippers might remain for ever unclean,
for any thing that these sacrifices could do to purge them. But the single and
one sacrifice of Christ, whereby he offered up himself a Lamb without spot
unto God, is of sufficiency and perfectly able to do away the sins of all
the elect in all ages and times of the world, both before and after conversion.

Fourthly, other priests and their sacrifices were but types and shadows of
good things to come, Heb. 10. 1. and so likewise was the Tabernacle, and all
the utensiles thereof, in and by which they officiated, chap. 9. 9. But now
Christ is the very Ita interpretandum est vocabulum, (...) Heb. 10. 1.
essential form, or the lively and substantial representation of those
things, which were shadowed in the Law; and the Tabernacle, in which he offered,
not made with hands, as the other was, Heb. 9. 11. for that other was a figure
for the time present, as the Apostle says: but the person of Christ, God and
man, is the very substance and thing it self, figured by that resemblance. The
Ceremonial Law was given by Moses: but grace and Truth, the full
accomplishment of all those Mystical and shadowish services, came by Jesus
Christ, Joh. 1. 17. the dispensation of life and righteousness, Christ alone
has the honor of that. Leviticall Priests, and bulls, and goats, and Altars,
and Ceremonies might be Types (...), Patterns, Heb. 9. 23.
: but he was the Antitype and signification of them all.

Fifthly, other Priests entered only into that place which was typically holy:
the Tabernacle was a figure for the time then present, Heb. 9. 8, 9. it was
made with hands; and therefore it is called To (...), Heb. 9. 1.
a worldly Sanctuary: but Christ is entered into that place, which is properly
holy: he is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us: Heb. 9. 24. and hence he is said to be a Minister of the Sanctuary, and
of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man. Now from the
typicalnesse of that Tabernacle of Moses, and the verity and substantialnesse
of the Tabernacle, wherein Christ our High Priest offered, we are taught, that
if men in these times of Reformation, as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 9. 10. if
in these times of more clear Evangelick Revelation since the coming and
suffering of Christ; if in these times, wherein the Church of God has put off
her minority and childhood, and is come to be adult, as we say; is come to
maturity and rifenesse of age: if, I say, men in these times having the Gospel
clearly and lightsomely preached unto them, will nevertheless cleave in any
measure to Judaicall rites and Ceremonies: if they will embrace shadows, now
the substance is long since come; then truly they are ipso facto (as we speak)
barred off from all benefit by Christ: so says the Apostle: We have an Altar
(says he) whereof they have no Right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle, Heb.
13. 10. If men will judaize and stick now to Mosaicall rudiments, they have no
right to eat of the Christians Altar, that is, they have no part nor portion
in Christ. Such another sentence we have, Galat. 5. 2, 3, 4. Behold, I Paul say
unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: for I
testify again to every man, that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do
the whole Law: Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you is
justified by the Law: ye are fallen from grace. That which is here said of
circumcision, is true of all other Leviticall rites: if we will retain any of
them, Christ will not profit us: we are bound to keep the whole law: if we
observe a piece, we must observe all: and if we be justified by such legal
observances; Christ avails us nothing: we hold not the head, when we cleave
to such ordinances.

Sixthly, other priests were to offer first for themselves, and afterward for
the people: Heb. 7. 27. This was the injunction of the Law: if the priest that
is anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring
for his sin, that he has sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the
Lord for a sinne-offering, Levit. 4. 3. and in the 8. chapter of that book we
read, how that Aaron and his sons were to offer a sinne-offering at their
consecration; we must understand for themselves. But it was not so with our
High Priest, the Lord Jesus: he offered for his people only: as for himself,
he needed no sacrifice: after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut
off; but not for himself, Dan. 9. 26. not for his own transgression: the
Prince of this world came and tempted him: but could find no corruption in him,
no yiedling to his tentations in the least measure: he knew no sin, neither
was there any guile found in his mouth: and it became us, that is, it was
necessary and behoofefull for us, to have such an High Priest, as was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. holy toward God,
harmless toward men, undefiled in himself, and totally separate from
sinners, not contaminated or spotted with sin in the least measure.

Seventhly, consider this, that Christ is the most merciful, the most
pitiful, and the most compassionate High Priest, that ever was: and therefore
it was, that he was made like unto us, bone of our bone, and flesh of our
flesh, subject to hunger, thirst, cold, weariness, tentation, and the like, as
we are. The Apostle Heb. 2. 17. says, that this was behoofefull: he says
there, that he (...).
ought in all things to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a
merciful, and a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the people. Eli was the High Priest in his time: but he
failed much in the point of tenderness and consideration, when he judged the
godly and gracious woman to be drunk: how long will thou be drunken (said he)
put away thy wine from thee, 1 Samuel 1. 14. whereas alas, she was far from
it: she was a woman of a sorrowful spirit (as she answers) and was in earnest
prayer at that time. Christ our High Priest was more sensible and feeling of
our affliction then so. We have not an High Priest (says the Apostle) which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points
tempted like as we are; yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15. as it is said, that
never any man spoke, as he spoke: so I may say, that never was there any
Priest, so mild, so gentle, so gracious, so loving, so tenderly affectionate,
and so regardfull of our condition, as Christ was: full to this purpose is that
place in Isaiah 63. 9. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel
of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them: and
he bare them and carried them all the days of old. And again: he shall feed
his flock like a Sh^pheard: he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry
them in his bosom; and shall gently lead those that are with young, Isaiah 40.
11. And the bruised reed shall he not break, nor quench the smoking flax;
that is, he shall compassionately bear with our slownesse, our dullness, our
small and weak beginnings, our little measure of grace, until he bring forth
Judgment unto victory, that is, till he overcome our corruptions, and give
sentence of victory over sin and Satan. In the Law we read, that the
High Priest was to bear the names of the children of Israel in his pectorall
or breast plate upon his heart; now this did figure and shadow unto us the
tender love and pity that Christ the Mediator bears to his people: guiding
the blind, feeding the hungry, comforting the comfortless, restoring such as
are out of joint: all is mercy, and love, and sweetness, and more then
motherly affection that comes from him. All these things are spoken of Christ,
as Mediator: and hence it is that he has the title (...), one of many
commiserations, Jam. 5. 11.

In the eight and last place I shall tell you of a wonder. Christ unlike to all
other Sacrificers was both the Priest, the Temple or Tabernacle, the Altar, and
the Sacrifice all in one person.

First, he was a Priest in respect of both natures; which will easily be
granted, if we consider the nature of a Mediator, or Umpire, who ought to be
one indifferent, and equally inclining to either party, like a pair of scales
that hang even; neither side lift up, or depressed more than the other. A
mediator is not of one, says the Apostle, Galat. 3. 20. so did Christ
indifferently partake of both natures, Godhead, and Manhood; that so he might
be fit to stand in the gap between his Father and us. We must believe
therefore, that whole Christ offered up himself unto God; even the Manhood, as
well as the Godhead, did offer it self: Christ is a Priest according to both
natures. And whereas it is said, that he offered himself through the eternal
Spirit without spot unto God, Heb. 9. 14. that does not put the manhood from
its share in priesthood: but only it shows how the Sacrifice came to be
without spot or blemish, namely by the hypostaticall union of the two natures,
the eternal Spirit, that is, the Godhead of Christ assuming the flesh into one
person with it self.

Secondly, Christ was the Tabernacle or Temple most properly according to his
Godhead: for he says himself in the Gospel, that the Gold of the Temple is
sanctified by the Temple it self: so is the manhood sanctified and made noble
by the Godhead. Nevertheless in some respects his humane body was the Temple
also: Destroy this Temple (says he) and I will build it again in three days,
he speaks it of his body, which is called a Temple not only because the holy
Spirit dwelt in it after a singular and peculiar way, conceiving it at the
first, and sanctifying it perfectly; but also because in the offering of it up,
God found in it an acceptable sacrifice, and smelt in it a sweet favor as in a
Temple. But yet further to this purpose: the flesh of Christ is called a veil,
Heb. 10. 20. in which the Apostle alludes to the opertory or veil in the
Tabernacle of old, and in the Temple, by which alone there was entrance into
the holiest place of all; so by the veil of his flesh, rent and torn upon the
Cross, has Christ opened a new and a living way for us to pass to God, and
to Heaven. Thus is he the Tabernacle or Temple according to both natures too.

Thirdly, Christ is the Altar most properly according to his Divinity: for he
says himself, that the Altar does sanctify the Gift, Matthew. 23. 19. And thus
does the Godhead like an Altar sanctify the Manhood, as a gift or sacrifice,
making it of infinite merit, and and worth with God the Father: the Altar ought
to be of greater dignity then the oblation. But now although the Godhead of
Christ alone be the sanctifying, and dignifying thing in respect of the
offering of himself, that is, of his flesh unto God: yet in respect of his
presenting us blameless and a sacrifice, as it were, without spot and blemish
unto his father, so whole Christ, God and man in one person is the sanctifying
Altar, that makes us accepted with God. The Scripture it self speaks thus,
Isaiah 56. 6, 7. God promises, that he will bring even the sons of the
stranger (that is, the Gentiles) to his holy Mountain, and make them joyful
in his house of Prayer, and their burnt offerings, and their sacrifices shall be
accepted upon his Altar: for (says he) mine house shall be called an house of
Prayer for all people: in which place by the Altar we are to understand whole
Christ, God and man, the blessed Mediator, upon whom, as upon an Altar, all
Nations promiscuously, both Jews and Gentiles, were an offering acceptable to
God. And a like place there is in Isaiah 60. 7. All the flocks of Kedar shall
be gathered together unto thee; the Rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto
thee; they shall come up with acceptance on mine Altar, and I will glorify the
house of my glory. Here also whole Christ is the Altar, that makes the Gentiles
to be (as I may say) a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God. To this
also tends that in Isaiah 6. 7. where a coal from the Altar touching the
Prophets lips, his iniquity is taken away, and his sin purged: now what is it
that takes away iniquity, but the Lamb? what is it that purges sin, but the
blood of Christ? although I grant (as before) that if we respect the offering
of himself, the body and blood of Christ was most properly the sacrifice. I
will add a few words more touching this matter out of Mr. Brightman, upon
Revel. 6. 9. he says, that the souls under the Altar are most eminently the
Martyrs, whose salvation is placed only in the death of Christ; under which
those holy Champions lying hid, as under a Buckler, they might safely and
without terror appear before God: now it is true, that this death of Christ
in respect of himself was the sacrifice: but to the Martyrs, and to all the
Saints, it is together with his Godhead as an Altar, under which (and not
under their own perpessions and sufferings as any whit meritorious) they lie
safe and secure.

Lastly, Christ according to his manhood is most properly the sacrifice, Heb.
10. 10. yet for as much as whole Christ presents himself now in the sight of
God for us: we are to judge that whole Christ, God and man was after a sort
the oblation or offering; and hence the blood thereof is said to be the blood of
God, Acts 20 28. Nevertheless though in respect of us, who are reconciled,
justified, sanctified and eternally saved thereby, whole Christ is offered up:
yet let us be wise unto sobriety: Let us (as I may say) give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods, that is, let us
give unto each nature of Christ its own properties and offices: both his Deity
and his humanity did distinctly act their parts: his humanity by suffering the
punishment due to us, and by fulfilling all righteousness: and his Deity by
conferring upon those suffering infinite and saving virtue. The humane soul
and flesh of Christ was the holocausto, or whole burnt-offring roasted it the
fire of his Fathers wrath, his God head was the Temple in which, and the Altar
upon which this sacrifice was offered; and lastly, Christ both God and man, was
the Priest most willingly and cheerfully officiating in this service.

Thus I have showed you, that Chrisunlike unto all other Priests was himself
both the Priest, and the Sacrifice, and the Temple, and the Altar all in one
person; and in some respects also all according to both natures: so that well*
may he be called wonderful, as we read of him, Isaiah 9. 6. and well also may
the Apostle say, that the Mystery of Godliness is without controversy a great
Mystery.

Now then to conclude this discourse of Christ's Priesthood: if he were a Priest
alone; an everlasting Priest, a Priest offering but once, and yet sufficiently
for ever; the substance and verity of all those Priests, which went before him;
gone into heaven, which never any did as Priests, but he only; not needing to
offer for himself, but only for us; a most merciful and pitiful high
Priest: and lastly, sacrifice, Temple, Altar, and Priest, all in one: if
Christ, I say, be such an high Priest, then certainly we must needs grant him
even by this argument to be very precious and excellent.

Thirdly, Consider Christ as a King: and in this also his glory, his dignity,
and his excellency shines forth most eminently. Christ is a King above all
other Kings, and that in these respects.

First of all, his Kingdom is a spiritual Kingdom: he rules over the souls
and consciences of men: other Kings may subject the bodies and the estates of
such as are under them; but not their consciences. Indeed there has been
usurpation in this kind; but never tolerated and allowed by Christ. One and
the chiefest of all Babylons merchandise are the souls of men, Revel. 18. 13.
by her curses, excommunications, pardons, purgatory, and the like inventions,
she has made merchandise of the souls, and domineered over the consciences
of men. Episcopacy in all places more or less has trodden in the same path;
let the Reformists of these times have a care, that nothing be obtruded and
thrust upon tender consciences, which they cannot bear: the heart, the soul,
and the conscience, is properly the subject of Christ's Kingdom: neither will
he endure the subjection thereof to any other then himself: domination and
lordship over the soul, is a part of his glory, which he will not give to
another. The Church speaks it with indignation, that her own mothers sons,
such as seemed to be of her numbers and corporation, being inflamed with rage
against her, made her the keeper of other vines, and to neglect her own; that
is, they forced her to serve in part their phansies and pleasures Mr. Dudley
Fenner in his exposition upon the place, printed at Middelburgh, 1587.
, while she abated of her diligence in doing those duties, which God required
of her, Cant. 1. 6. God challenges the persons of the Israelites as his own
servants, neither must they be sold as bondmen: because he brought them forth
out of the land of Egypt, Levit. 25. 42. Now the like reason does the Apostle
give why we should not subject our hearts and consciences to the ordinances of
men in matters of religion: ye are bought with a price, (says he) be not ye
the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7 23. that is, do not mancipate and enslave your
consciences to any humane devise in matters merely spiritual. Christ alone is
the King and Lord of our spirits: his Kingdom is spiritual; his Laws are
spiritual; his people are spiritual; he rules in the Kingdoms of men, and
meddles in their secular affairs all in order to his own spiritual Kingdom;
Heathenish people have been tamed and civilized, that way might be made for
their embracing of the Gospel. All the wars of the Nations, all their
policies, and governments, all their risings and decayings, all the great works
that ever were done in the world, have tended by degrees at least to the
advancement of Christ's spiritual Kingdom: Christ has still made them his
prudentialls to bring about his own ends. The Assyrian first subdued the
Nations; after him the Babylonian; then the Persian, and the Grecian followed
him; but the Roman went farther then them all: and when God had thus shaken the
earth, and the Kingdoms of the world, then it was high time for Christ the
desire of all Nations to come, and the Gospel to be more clearly preached, then
before. I speak this to show, how that Christ mingles himself even in worldly
agitations and affairs, that thereby he may further and set forward his own
spiritual Kingdom, and it should teach us to rule and steer our course in
such things not carnally and grossly, as the Heathen do, but spiritually, as
Christ does; his Kingdom i^ a spiritual Kingdom; so he tells Pilate: My
kingdom; (says he) is not of this world, Joh. 18. 36. that is (says Mr.
Luther) he reigns not according to the flesh, and the world; but he rules
and sanctifies in spiritual and heavenly things, as righteousness, truth,
wisdom, peace, salvation: not as though all things of this world, and even of
Hell it self were not also in subjection unto him (otherwise how could he
p^eserve us and defend us from them all?) but because his Kingdom does not
consist either in them, or of them. Christ's Kingdom is in heavenly and
spiritual things, as in binding and loosing of the conscience, captivating the
affections, and subduing the heart, in obedience to himself, and so bringing
us by degrees unto glory. There be them, that tell us of a Monarchical
Kingdom of Christ, whereby he shall in proper person reign a thousand years
upon the earth, before the end and consummation of the world; which if it be a
truth, yet I leave the opinion thereof to be scanned and disputed of by the
judicious. Truth and falsehood are brought to light by travail, industry, and
disputation: Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, Dan.
12. 4.

Secondly, the Kingdom of Christ according to his Mediatorship is a universal
Kingdom.

First, Universal it is in respect of all Nations; There was given him
dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, and Nations, and
languages, should serve him, Dan. 7. 14. The heathen are bis inheritance, and
the ends of the earth his possession. The Monarchs of the world have Psa. 2. 8.
stretched their Empiers far: Nebuchadnezzars Kingdom in Strabo reached as
far as Spain, as Mr. Broughton delivers out of that Author; The Persians
pierced farther; Alexander farther then they; and the Romans farther then them
all: but none of all these subdued the whole habitable, as Christ has done,
his subjects have been, and are to be gathered from the four winds all over
the universe. The Apostle speaking of the preachers of the Gospel, says, That
their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world, Romans 10. 18.

Secondly, Christ's Kingdom is universal in respect of all sorts, ranckes, and
conditions of men Noah's Arc was a shadow of the Church: Now as into that Arc
came creatures of every kinds so into the Church, which is the Kingdom of
Christ, are received people of all ages, sexes, professions and conditions
whatsoever: if their conditions be such as thwart the laws and ordinances of
that Kingdom, they are laid down, they are changed in the very act of their
reception. This Kingdom does not refuse any, that will submit to it: but all
sorts of people may come and be accepted. This is elegantly set forth by the
Prophet, Esa. 41. 19. where God promises to plant in the Wilderness the
Cedar, the Sitath tree, the Myrtle, the Oyle-tree, the Firre-tree, the Pine,
and the Box-tree together. This also is signified by the Net cast into the Sea,
which gathers fish of Mat. 13. 47, 48.
every kind, and so also of every kind are reserved as good: this net is an
emblem of the Gospel preached, and called the kingdom of heaven, because it
does form, promove and advance that Kingdom. The fish of every sort, which
the net catches, do declare that people of all qualities are admittable into
the Kingdom of Christ. This likewise was sweetly represented unto Peter by a
sheet knit at the four corners, wherein were all manner of foure-footed
beasts, Acts 10. 12.
of the Earth, and wild Beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air;
and the Apostle was bid to arise, and to slay and eat. Now by this he was
taught, that not only the Gentiles, as well as the Jews were to be received
into the Kingdom of Christ: but also that in every Nation (as himself
afterward expounds it) He that fears God, and works Righteousness is
accepted with him, Acts 10, 35. Let him be of what trade and occuptation, of
what rank and quality, of what state and condition soever he will be, Christ
will not refuse him coming unto him and submitting unto the Scepter of his
Kingdom.

Thirdly, the Kingdom of Christ is universal in respect of the ages and times
of the world: it runs through all ages, and it lasts from generation to
generation. And hence it is, that Christ is called a King immortal, 1 Timothy 1.
17. having spoken of the long suffering of Jesus Christ, toward him in the
precedent verse, he adds immediately; now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God be honor and glory for ever and ever, amen:
Jesus Christ then is that God and King: and he is called immortal to
distinguish him from all other Kings. The Kings of the world are mortal, they
die, and leave their Kingdoms to others: but Christ is an immortal King, he
never dies: his Kingdom knows no period: it passes through all Epoches and
tracts of time. Precious is Christ, that has such a Kingdom; and happy are
his Saints, that have such a King. When friends die; when Estates are gone;
when the Sword rages; when sickness and death comes; when any trouble or
affliction is upon them; yet to their unspeakable comfort they know, that their
mighty King lives and reigns; and so long as he is up, they cannot be so
down, but they shall rise again. Christ is a King in all ages of the world
from the beginning: God is my King of old (says the Church) Psalm. 74. 12. and
Christ is God there spoken of, as appears by the words that follow: God is my
King of old, working salvation in the midst of the Earth; it is Christ the
Mediator, that works salvation in the midst of the Earth: for the Father has
committed all Judgment unto him; he then is King of old, from the very first
founding of the world; and so shall continue to be while the Sun and Moon
endure, as it is prophesied of him.

Fourthly, Christ's Kingdom is universal in respect of all Creatures: all
power is given into him both in heaven and in earth. In respect of his
providence the creatures are subject to him as God: but as they serve to
further the salvation of his elect, and to beautify his Kingdom: so they are
subject unto him as Mediator. In Ephesians. 1. 22. It is said of Christ, that the
Father has put all things under his feet, and has given him to be the head
over all things to the Church: that is, so far forth as they conduce to the
good of the Church, so they are under the Kingdom of Christ as Mediator.

Thirdly, Christ rules as King alone: he alone is caput Ecclesiae, the head of
the Church. When the Roman Empire was grown vast and unweldy, there were
colleagues in government, two men of equal Authority, one to rule the East,
and another to sway the West. And in some places during the minority of the
King they chose a Regent, who has Kingly Authority, and is pro tempore as a
King. But it is not so in the Kingdom of Christ: he rules alone without a
partner. Vnum non capit Regnum duos is a most true saying here, this one
Kingdom will not bear two Kings at once. Ridiculous is the Popes challenge to
be the Ministerial head of the Church: Christ rules alone without any such
Image of his government: he rules alone as head without either colleague in the
largeness of his dominion, or Regent in his minority, sole, or Viceroy in his
absence: he has indeed Officers, that rule under him: but the headship and
royalty he reserves as peculiar to himself; he carries the government upon his
own shoulders, as we read, Isaiah 9. 6. he alone has sovereign power and
Authority in governing of his Church: he alone has supremacy of Regiment: he
alone is Claviger, the Key-carrier to his Church, Isa. 22. 22. It is written
thus of Eliakim: the Key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder: so
he shall open and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open: Now
herein was this Saint a lively figure and type of Christ: the words of the
Prophecy are applied to Christ, in his advertisement to Philadelphia, Revel.
3. and the sense is this: that look as Eliakim was made Steward, or Treasurer
under Hezekiah, that is, the next unto the King in government all over the
Land, to command, to forbid, to permit, to reward, to punish, to do Justice,
and to repress all disorder, of which Authority the bearing of a Key on the
shoulder was a badge: so Christ as Mediator under his Father has regal power
and Authority over his Church; where he commands in chief, as I may say; and
no man may lift up his hand, or foot without him: he has the Key of the house
of David upon his shoulder, to prescribe, to inhibit, to call, to harden, to
save, and to destroy at his pleasure; such a Monarch and King is Christ over
his Church; neither has any, such rule and sovereignty beside him.

Fourthly, Christ is an eternal and everlasting King: he receives a Kingdom,
that cannot be shaken; there shall be no end of it: his Throne endures for
ever. God rent away the Kingdom from Soul and others; and Mean, Mean, was upon
Belshazzars Kingdom, a full ^umbring and finishing the days of it: but
Christ's Kingdom is everlasting, and shall never expire; let the enemies
thereof use what art and craft they will; they shall never destroy it, or pluck
it up. The God of Heaven (says the Prophet) shall set up a Kingdom; which
shall never be destroyed; neither shall it be left to other people: but it
shall stand for ever, Dan. 2. 44. If that of the Apostle be objected, where ^e
says, that Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, 1
Cor. 15. 24. I answer, that this does nothing at all impeach the
everlastingnesse of Christ's Kingdom: for the meaning of it is this: that at
the general Resurrection, and the end of the world, Christ shall lay down his
Mediatorship, and shall deliver up all his Elect and faithful Members, of whom
now his Kingdom consists, unto his Father, to be eternally crowned and
glorified: and this shall be then, when he shall have reconciled some of his
Enemies, spoiled desperate ones of their abused rule, power and authority, and
quite abolished death, the last Enemy: so that then Christ shall cease to
reign any longer as Mediator: he shall then cease to reign according to the
present dispensation, and administering of his Office: but not as one God
co-essentiall with the Father: for his Kingdom according to his Godhead shall
then be complete, consummate and perfect: yea and his humanity also shall
reign then not as by, or of it self, but as joined in one person with his
Godhead, and as the common head of all those, whom he has redeemed, and
sanctified and brought toglory through taking their nature upon him, and
suffering in it. So that the forementioned place in the Corinthians does not
speak of the abolishing of Christ's Kingdom; but of the perfection of it
rather, when God, whose glory is now much obscured and darkened by Enemies,
shall be all in all among his Saints; and the eternal Father shall triumph
eternally in his Son as a final Conqueror.

The like answer also must be given to the objection, which may be made from
the words of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15. 28. where he says, that the Son also
himself shall be subject unto him, that did put all things under him. These
words are not so to be understood, as if the Father were not for the present
well pleased with the Son, or as if the Son were not already subject to the
Father, as Mediator: but the meaning of them is this: that when all things,
which do now during the present form of his administration make opposition
and resistance against Christ, shall be subdued unto him, and brought under
his feet; then Christ himself also, as touching his Mediatorship, shall be
subject unto the Father, and God shall be all in all; neither does this
subjection imply a depressing, or pulling down lower: but rather Christ and
his Saints shall be at the height and top of their glory, when they shall be so
subject; as on the other side whosoever shall not then be so subject, they
shall be at the bottom of all remediless misery and wretchedness.

Before I pass away to another head, I must needs touch again upon a place of
Scripture before cited, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, etc. Here be two words that do express the perpetuity and
everlasting duration of Christ's Kingdom, eternal, and immortal, and neither
of them is idle or superfluous: the Holy Ghost does not use tautalogie or vain
repetition in them. I have showed you already what is meant by immortal,
namely that the Kingdom of Christ is not subject to succession; it is not
liable to be devolved and rould down to after comers; which Daniel expresses
thus; his Kingdom shall not be left unto other people, as the Monarchies of
the Babylonians, Medes, Alexander, and the Kingdoms of the Seleucidae, which
the Prophet had spoken of were; they were translated from Nation to Nation, and
from man to man, and at last quite dissolved. But Christ's Kingdom shall not be
plucked up for others beside himself; but it shall hold on constantly through
all ages and centuries of the world unto the end: and when the end comes, it
shall not expire and give up the Ghost; but it shall attain to its full beauty
and perfection; it shall come to its meridian, or vertical point, as I may
say, and shall never decline, never decay: it shall last beyond the world, and
beyond all time for ever: therefore the Apostle calls Christ not only an
immortal King, but also an eternal King. Thus you see, that the Spirit of God
does to good purpose use two words, somewhat of kin i^ signification one to
the other; that thereby he might set forth the excellency of Christ's Kingdom
above all other Kingdoms: by the one word is showed the course of his
Kingdom, through this world, during the time of his Mediatourship^ and by the
other word is declared the lasting of it unto all eternity, after his
Mediatorship is laid down.

Lastly, Christ is matchless and eminent above all other Kings in all Royal
virtues, endowments, and accomplishments.

First, he is a most sapient and wise King, called therefore Counselor by the
Prophet, and only wise, by the Apostle, the wonderful Numberer; he that
seals up the sum, full of wisdom: none essentially wise, but he: none but
are depending and beholding for their wisdom, but he, his foolishness is
wiser then men: they be all doters to him. Earthly Kings have their
Counselors; but he needs none: Solomon was the wisest among them: but a
greater then Solomon is here.

Secondly, he is Rex armipotens, and bellicosus, a most puissant and warlike
King; called therefore a man of War, the Lord of Hosts, the Captain of our
Salvation: the armies in Heaven, Angels and righteous men follow him; he is the
stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, sent from heaven, and acting by
no humane, but merely Divine Authority, which smote the Image and brake in
pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the Silver and the Gold; the great
Monarchies and Kingdoms of the world, to make way for his own Kingdom: he is
terrible to all the Kings of the Earth that withstand him, he is so mighty and
so politic, that he gets ground of his enemies by giving ground to them. The
world, Hell, Death, sin, the Accuser of the brethren, the enmity of the
carnal mind, all these are in the Trophes of his victories. All his foes are
and shall be made his footstool: he will make even the proudest of them to
stoop and to hold his stirrup: yea he will make them his very stirrup to get
on horseback by, as once S^por the Persian served Valerian the Roman Emperor.

Thirdly, Christ is as eminent in peace also, as he is in war; called
therefore the Prince of Peace. When he was borne, wars were hushed every
where, and all the world was at peace. Jacob beheld him as a ladder reaching
from Earth to Heaven, and what was this, but the Image of a Peacemaker between
God and man? the Angels of God ascended and descended by that ladder,
signifying, that by Christ we have the benefit of the Ministry of Angels: they
ascend to receive new commission from God concerning the Saints, and again
descend to execute it; by Christ also our prayers as Intelligencers and
signifiers of our wants do ascend into the presence of God: and again his
blessings, as Angels and Messengers of his good will toward us, do descend
and light upon us. Thus is Christ a ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven,
partaking of both, God and man in one person; our blessed Reconciler, and
Peacemaker: he died to purchase peace for us: when he went away he left his
peace with us: and he reigns for ever to maintain our peace. Melchisedec was
King of Salem, that is, King of Peace, nominally and in a figure only: but
Christ is the very body and substance of that shadow.

Fourthly, Christ is a most just and righteous King: he reigns in
righteousness, he speaks in righteousness, he makes war in righteousness,
he betroths his Church to him in righteousness, he delivers her from her
Enemies in righteousness, he answers her prayers in righteousness, he does
all in righteousness. Neither is he personally righteous alone; but
efficiently also: not only righteous himself; but he makes others so too;
just, and a Justifier, as the Apostles phrase is: called therefore (...), the
Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. He is our true Melchisedec, King of
Righteousness: that King in Abraham's days bore the name, that he might be a
Type of our King.

Lastly, Christ is a most mild and merciful King, meek, gentle,
long-suffering: he is the true propitiatory, or Mercy-seate: that in the
Tabernacle of old did but prefigure him: he keeps mercy for thousands; his
mercy is everlasting: his mercy indureth for ever is the versus amoebaeus, or
the bearing of the song, as we say, in the 136. Psalm; He delights in mercy:
yea, it is so pleasing to him, that even in wrath he remembers it; he bears
long with his Enemies, he forgives them, he dies for them, he saves them
eternally, and crowns them with glory for ever.

Thus I have showed you, that Christ is a King, a Spiritual King, a
univerversall King over all Nations, ranks of men, ages of the world, and over
all Creatures: a King ruling alone without a mate or associate; an everlasting
King, and eminent above all other Kings in all royal virtues and
qualifications, as wisdom, fortitude, peaceablenesse, Righteousness, Mercy,
and the like. Where shall we find such a King, as this? It is said of Solomon,
that there was no King like him, and so of Josiah: but it may more truly and
properly be said so of the Lord Jesus Christ, the heavenly King. On Earth there
be Kings, that have rule and domination over other Kings: but Christ has them
at his steps and under his girdle, as we say: and they for the most part have
such command by usurpation and incroachment: but Christ is so constituted of
his Father; I will make him my firstborn, higher then the Kings of the Earth,
Psalm. 89. 27. and all this is for the good of the Saints: certainly then Christ
must needs be very precious unto Believers.

Having spoken of Christ as Mediator, I come now to commend him to you as God:
and here we be come to the supreme and highest pitch of all glory. Here are
fathomlesse depths, and bottomless bottomes, if I may so speak: here are
stupendous and amazing Mysteries; astonishing, and confounding excellencies,
such as the holy Angels themselves cannot pierce into: God is (...), dwelling
in inaccessible light, 1 Timothy 6. 16. here are such beauties and perfections,
that had I (as the Poet speaks) a hundred tongues, a hundred mouths, and a
voice of steel: yet I could not sufficiently describe them: but must be driven
with the Philosopher to ask more days to think of it; and at length resolve,
as he did, that the matter is so intricate and perplexed, so inscrutable, and
unsearchable, that I cannot resolve. Nevertheless let me say something, though
I do it but slenderly and weakly, as children do of men's matters.

Christ then is in the altitude and summity of all glory, one eternal God with
the Father, and with the Holy Ghost: proved to be so by a cloud of witnesses:
we have the Authority of the sacred Scriptures both in the Old and New
Testament for it most frequently: where he is called God, and Jehovah, the
only begotten Son of God, the Image of the Father, his substantial Image,
and not as the form of a face in a glass: ^lso to him are attributed such
things, ^^ can agree to none but God: he is said to be equal with the Father,
eternal, the author of election, a searcher of hearts; one that must be
believed in, s^orne by, worshipped with Divine worship; one that gives eternal
rewards; one that has power to pardon sin; one that does illuminate by the
Spirit; one that shall judge both quick and dead; one that is omnipotent; one
that has power to work Miracles, to create, to send the Holy Ghost; one that
has power to raise himself and others; one in whose name we must be baptized,
and the like. Paraeus that Godly and learned Divine of Heidelburgh in his
Commentary upon the Revelation, pick's out of the text of that book no less
then forty two Arguments of the Divinity of Christ. By all which we may see
the blasphemy of those, who have affirmed him to be no more then a particular
God, and (...) patri; but not (...), like unto the Father; but not of the same
Essence and substance with him. But we shall farther see the madness of these
men, if we consider these particulars.

First of all, Christ shines as a Sun in the firmament of the world, in all
perfection and sufficiency of wisdom, power, goodness, love, Majesty and
glory.

Secondly, whatsoever measure the most excellent of the creatures have of these
things they are beholding unto him for it: he is the never failing spring and
fountain of all blessing and goodness. Now the Logical Rule is, quod efficit
tale, illud magis est tale, that which makes a thing to be so as it is, is much
more so it self: if the creatures be full of beauty and excellency, and yet
all in a derivative way: how unspeakeably excellent then and beautiful is he,
that is the Beginning of the creatures of God, and made them all so as they
are? whatsoever energes or powers they have, they are but relative and
borrowed, as the Light of the Moon from the Sun, and also subject to
subordination: but in Christ according to his Godhead all is absolute, and
complete; and all without him is by him and for him: of him, and through him,
and to him are all things, says the Apostle, To. 11, 36. Great dispute has
been among the Philosophers about the Summum bonum, the chief and sovereign
good: now lo here it is. Finis et bonum conver^untur, says the Logician, the
end, and good are coincident and come both to one. Christ then being God, and
God the ultimate and farthest end of all things; it follows necessarily, that
Christ is the Summum bonum, and the top of all felicity and happiness.

Thirdly, whatsoever virtue or goodness is in the creature, it is not of the
essence and substance of the creature, but only an accident, or an inherent
quality: as a man may be said to be wise, mighty, just, merciful; but not
wisdom, strength, Justice, and mercy, as God may; who is all this, and much
more in the very abstract, as we speak: whatsoever then is properly attributed
unto Christ, as God, we cannot divide it from his very essence. It is proper to
substances and material things, to have accidents adhering and cleaving unto
them: but God is immateriall, and (...), without matter, and above all
substance; and therefore above all predicament, as time, place, quantity,
quality, and the like: Whatsoever i^ in God, it is essential to him; a man may
be a man still, though he be neither knowing, nor valiant, nor just, nor
gracious; but take away these from God, and you destroy his very essence and
being. Now then if Christ be God, we may see by this, that he does infinitely
surmount in praises all the most lovely and most desirable creatures in the
world. Mark how the Prophet depresses them all in relation to God, Isaiah 40.
15. 17. He says, that al Nations are unto God as a drop of water unto a
bucket-full, or as the small dust that cleaves to the balance, is to the great
and heavy weights, that are put therein: and yet this is not enough to show
the disparity; therefore the Prophet adds, that they are to God as nothing:
neither does this suffice to empty the creature enough; but he goes a degree
farther, and says, that they are in comparison of God less then nothing and
vanity. Now believe it, all this is no more then is true of Christ: he is
according to his Godhead arrayed with all this glory: all the creatures are to
him, but as dropps to bucket-fulls, or as motes to ponderous weights: yea, they
are as nothing, and less then nothing and vanity. Christ has a name above
every name; all creatures in Heaven and in Earth, and under the Earth must
stoop to him: I may truly say, that they be all to him, but as the shadow of a
shadow, like the reflection of a Rainbow, when it seems to be doubled in
the cloud. The Rainbow it self is but a shadow; what is then the shadow of
this shadow? nay, what is the third generation of a shadow? as sometimes, when
the reflection is very strong, three are seen at once. Truly all creatures,
even the most excellent of them must stand in the very lowest degree of these,
if compared unto Christ; how precious then, how worthy beyond all thought and
computation is he?

Let us draw some conclusions from the Godhead of Christ farther to set forth
his preciousnesse, and then we will conclude this most weighty and
considerable reason. We will do it by Scripture aphorisms, and the first
shall be this.

Fair weather comes out of the North, with God is terrible Majesty, Job 37.
22. the meaning of it is this, that though the creature may be pleasing and
flexible enough, and there may be fair quarter between man and man: yet not so
with God: if he be once provoked, with him there is terrible and dreadful
Majesty. Now this is true of Christ. Behold, I send mine Angel before thee
(says God) to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place, which I
have prepared: beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not: for he will
not pardon your transgressions; for my name is in him, Exodus 23. 20. 21. The
Angel here spoken of is Christ, as appears by this, that he has power to
pardon sin, and Gods name is in him, that is, he is essentially God: for Gods
name and attributes are his very essence. But what is this to the preciousnesse
of Christ, you will say? here is terror and dread-striking Majesty: but what
makes this to the purpose in hand? I answer, very much: for first of all Gods
terriblenesse does not impeach the happy condition of the Saints, because they
be in Christ: the terrors of the Law cannot reach them: their hearts are so
fortified and established with Faith, that they are able to meditate of death,
and Hell, and damnation, and the most terrible things that are, without
trembling, without any slavish fear or dread Isa. 33. 18.
. Secondly, it makes very much for the good of the Church of God, that some by
the threatening terror of Judgments are reduced to obedience and good order;
and others, that are refractory and incorrigible, are cut off by the stroke of
them: this I say, makes much for the good of the Church: when noxious humors
are purged out of the body, all the parts are at ease, and in a healthful
State: so when wicked men are either awed and repressed, or quite extinct and
cut off, the corporation of the Saints must needs enjoy much peace and
quietness thereby. The terror then that is in Christ does not a whit take off
from his preciousnesse. What Saint is there, that does not with much comfort
and hearts contentment read that place of Scripture, Revel. 6. 15, 16. The
Kings of the Earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman hid
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the Mountains: and said to the
Mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? The men that are here in
such a fear, are the enemies of the Church; and what faithful soul does not
rejoice at the ruin of such? Secondly, God cannot lie is another Scripture
Aphorism, Tit. 1. 2. then if Christ be God, we may build upon this, that all
his promises, and particularly those concerning eternal Life and salvation,
shall surely be made good: so says the Apostle in the place to Titus before
mentioned: in hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promise^ before
the world began. Christ is not only verax, speaking truly; but ipsa veritas,
truth it self. He is the Amen; the faithful and true witness: Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, before one jot or tittle of his word shall fall to the
ground. Now this likewise sets forth the preciousnesse of Christ not a little.
Among men he is counted a very choice and precious person, that is a man of his
word: how much more then is Christ precious, whose eternal essence and being
is Truth, who cannot lie as men can, and with whom there is not the least
variableness, or shadow of turning?

Lastly, whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, etc. is another Scripture
aphorism, Eccles. 3. 14. Then let the Devil himself and all enemies do
their worst: they shall never be able with all their might and policy, Engines
and Stratagenis to overthrow and frustrate the salvation of Gods elect: but it
shall abide forever more permanent then the ancient Mountains and everlasting
hills of the world: and this must needs be so; because their Redeemer is God,
God by nature, and furnished with Divine power, such as all creatures, even the
most able of them, must yield unto. Now what is there, that can make Christ
more precious to a believing soul, than this? God it is, that works all our
works in us, and for us; the whole structure of our salvation is of his
founding and raising; and whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, nothing
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: now we have abundantly proved,
that Christ is God: our salvation then does not stand upon our own mutable and
variable will; nor upon the weak legs of our own power, which is as
nothing; but upon the unchangeable counsel and mighty power of God; in which
our Lord Jesus has as great a share, as either the Father, or the Holy Ghost.

Thus I have given you some taste of Scripture aphorisms, as I call them
leaving the rest to private observation and collection. And this know
assuredly, that whatsoever i^ said of God in the Scriptures, a Spiritual man
and a Believer may see in it the preciousnesse of Christ, and one way or other
suck sweetness out of it.

I proceed to a fourth Reason. Christ

1. Full. 2. Suitable. 3. Constant.
First, it is a full supply, if there be Light in the Sun, the air cannot be
dark: if there be sap in the stock, the branches cannot be dry: if there be
fullness in the fountain the streams cannot be empty.

This full supply through Christ is manifested by all those types and shadows,
which of old had relation to him. The striking of the blood of the Pascall Lamb
on the posts of the doors, where the Israelites dwelt was a token and
assurance to them, that the destroying Angel should pass over them, and smite
only, the first borne of the Egyptians: now what else did that blood prefigure
but the blood of Christ? wherewith the Elect being sprinkled, the Destroyer
cannot hurt them. This blood certainly is the ink of the Angels inke-home,
spoken of in Ezekiel. 9. 3. wherewith the Godly are marked for deliverance, while
others perish and are cut off. The pillar of the cloud by day, and of fire by
night was a type of Christ, leading and guiding his people continually. The
water of the Rock and the Manna in the wilderness were signs, that Christ
should spiritually feed and refresh his people. The Serpent of brass lifted up
by Moses, signified, that he should be their Physician and healer. All the
sacrifices of the Law did typifie, that Christ should make atonement for
Believers. The Arc or Holy Chest in the Tabernacle did likewise represent
Christ unto us; in whom God has treasured up all perfection of wisdom, grace,
power, goodness and mercy: for it pleased the Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell, Coloss. 1. 19. Now from the redundancy and overflowing fullness
of all blessing that is in Christ, Believers do receive their sufficiency and
fullness: of his fullness (says the Apostle) we all receive, and grace for
grace, Joh. 1. 16. that is, graces answerable to every communicable grace of
Christ: that as face answers to face in water, so we may in all things be
like unto our head.

Secondly, the supply that we have by Christ is suitable also. The faithful
soul looks upon him, and says, lo, here is most precious and pure blood to
wash away my guilt; here is strength to support me in my weakness; here is a
garment of righteousness to cover the shame of my nakedness; here is a spirit
of Truth to lead me and guide me in all my ways; here are sweet mercies and
consolations to comfort me in my droopings; here are gold and Pearls, and
precious stones to enrich me with; here is perfect purity and holiness to
sanctify and cleanse my corrupt nature; in a word here is the plenitude and
fullness of all grace to fill my empty and destitute soul.

The Spirit of the Lord anointed Christ, and did solemnly design him to be
home unto every Saints condition, and to be made (as the Apostle says of
himself) all things to all men: he was anointed to preach good tidings unto
the meek, to bind up broken hearts, to proclaim Isa. 61. 1. 2, 3.
Liberty to captives, to appoint beauty for ashes, joy for mourning, and
garments of festivity, and praise for sad and heavy spirits. Christ is (as I
may say) for every turn: he has in him sufficiency relative and suitable to
all conditions: there is no disease, but this Phisician can cure, no case, but
this Counselor can resolveus, and direct us in, no Enemy, but this Champion
can conquer, no difficulty, but this mighty Savior can overcome: he is made
unto us of God all that we stand in need of, wisdom to cure our folly,
righteousness to justify our persons, Sanctification to purify our nature,
and Redemption from those many sorrows and miseries, which we here are subject
to. As Job says, that he was eyes to the blind, and feet to the Lame, and a
Father to the poor: so is Christ made every thing unto Believers in proportion
to their wants. As Elisha, when he raised a child to life, put his mouth upon
the child's mouth, his eyes upon the child's eyes, his hands upon the child's
hands, still similar parts were applied to similar: so does Christ apply
himself to us in a relation suting and answering to every necessity.

Thirdly, the supply that we have from him is likewise constant: it is not like
a winter-bourne, that fails, and dries up in the Summer: but it is as the
streams of living waters, and of an ever-springing Fountain. Christ does not
only give grace: but maintains it. It was a just complaint which long ago
was made against the Heathen Gods;

O faciles dare summa Deos eademque tueri Difficiles!

They could give their Favorites great gifts; but they could not maintain
them in the possession of them. The Lord Jesus Christ our blessed benefactour
is not so: he gives to his Saints not only the first grace; but the grace of
perseverance also. As David said in another case, thou maintainest my lot: so
does Christ maintain that lot of grace, which he bestows upon his faithful
Members: he is the Author, and finisher of our faith: his gifts and calling are
(...), without Repentance: he is not like the foolish man, that began to build
and was not able to finish: but having begun a good work in his Saints, he
will finish it, and make it persevere unto his own day: and then when grace is
full he will crown it with eternal glory. Now by that which has been said,
we may see that the condition of Believers, and of such as are ingraffed into
Christ, is far better, then was that of Adam in his innocence: he had
excellent gifts of knowledge and grace conferred upon him: but he was never
confirmed in them: and therefore being left to the mutability of his own will,
he chose the evil, and lost the good: but it is not so with the Saints now,
under the Covenant of grace by Christ; whatsoever heavenly endowments they
have, they are confirmed and established in them; so that they can never be
lost. Marie's good part, which she had chosen, could never be taken from her.
The Saints and their graces are in the hand of God; and who can snatch them out
of that mighty and powerful hand? Mount Zion stands fast for ever: and the
Lord is about his people, ^s the Mountains are about Jerusalem; they are
therefore in a most safe and persevering condition. In Solomon's Temple there
were two pillars, the one was called Jachin, and the other Boaz, 1. Kings 1
Kings 7. 21.
21. as much as to say stability and strength: now what does this figure unto
us? but the more then brazen steadfastness and strength of the Church of God,
of all the members of it, and of all their saving graces; which can never
perish, never decay; but shall dure beyond the world unto all eternity, never
to be broken, as the two staffes Beauty and Bands were, which the Prophet Zach.
11. 10. 14.
speaks of: but still to be supplied by the Spirit of Christ with fresh
strength and abilities; and so to last for ever and ever.

Fifthly, look upon Christ as upon Universal gain. And gain for himself.


First, he is absolute gain: absolute, because whatsoever we give unto him, we
lose it not, there is no alienation of it: but it is ours still, and ours in a
far safer custody and keeping, then in our own: if we cast our affections
upon Christ, they be not lost: he only makes them better: if we give them to
the world, they differ little or nothing from the affections of beasts: but if
Christ have them, he makes heavenly and gracious, and such as will fit us for
the presence of God: if we lay down our lives for him, they be not lost
neither, but gained unto life eternal, Matthew. 10. 39.

Again, the necessity of getting Christ makes him to be absolute gain to
such, as have him: the necessity of a thing puts worth upon it: it is not
absolutely necessary to be rich, or honorable, or great in the world: but
Christ being the life of our souls, and one without whom we cannot subsist
happily; he must needs be of absolute necessity: and therefore absolute gain
unto us. Without me (says Christ) you can do nothing, Joh, 15. 5. As the
branch cannot bear fruit, except it abide in the vine; and if it bear no
fruit, men cast it into the fire and burn it: so if we be not in Christ, and
abide in him; we can bear no good fruit: and for such, as bear no good
fruit, the fire of Gehenna is prepared: how absolutely necessary the^ is
Christ? and how absolutely gainful to us, if once we have him?

Secondly, Christ is universally gain?

First, universal for all persons, rich, and poor; young, and old; noble, and
ignoble; Learned, and unlearned; bond, and free: there is no man rich without
Christ: neither is there any poor, that have him: none noble without him; none
ignoble with him: none learned, or free without him; none bond, or unlearned
with him. There be distinctions in the world among men, honoring some, and
debasing others; exalting some, and depressing others: but in the body of
Christ they are not to be found. There is neither Jew, nor Greek; there is
neither bond, nor free; there is neither male, nor female: for ye are all one
in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, Galat. 3. 28.

Secondly, Christ is universal gain in respect of all times. All things are
beautiful in their season, says Solomon: Music is good: but it is so only
in a time fit for mirth: food is good: but it is so only when men are hungry:
clothing is good: but it is then for them that are naked: and Physic also is
good; but it is when men are sick and distempered: but Christ is seasonable at
all times; he is that tree of life, that bears twelve sorts of fruit; and
before the old store is done, new comes: for it yields fruit every month,
Revel. 22. 2. Christ is never out of season; and therefore universally gainful.

Thirdly, Christ is gain also to all things. In Christ are made unto us
promises of all sorts, both of this life, and of that, which is to come: for
which cause the Apostle says, that Godliness is profitable for all things.
When the Prophet says, that the just shall live by Hab. 2. 4.
his Faith; we must conceive, that it is true as well of food, and raiment, and
temporal deliverance, as of Justification, Sanctification, and eternal
salvation: this is not so well observed by Christians, as it ought to be: for
many can trust Christ with their souls; but not with their bodies, not with
their Estates. Peter rested upon him for salvation; thou have the words of
eternal life, says he: but he could not trust him with the safety of his
flesh: for going to him on the water, he doubted, and began to sink. But
believe it, whatsoever our weaknesses are; whatsoever our ignorance, ou^
doubting, our forgetfulness; Christ is profitable for all things; both for
soul and body, for this life, and for the life to come for ever.

Thirdly, Christ is gain for himself, other things are gainefull in aspect and
relation to their ends; as wealth is good to supply want, food to maintain
life, clothes to keep off the cold air, a staff to support feeble legs, a
bed to rest weary limbs on, and the like: but Christ is a rich and
inestimable treasure to the soul, without reference to a further end then
himself: he is to be desired even for himself. Wisdom is better then Rubies;
and all the things, that may be desired, are not to be compared to it, Proverb.
8. 11. And doubtless Christ is the wisdom there spoken of. Now then if Christ
be the most gainefull thing in the world, absolute gain, universal gain, and
gain for himself, without aim at some better thing: if Christ be thus
gainefull, I say, who can deny him to be most precious and excellent? I pass
to a sixth Reason.

Sixthly, then Christ is precious to Believers,

Of his Love. Of his Beauty. Of his Grace.
First of his love, Magnes amoris est amor: Love is the attractive Lodestone
of Love: and never was there such a love, as Christ's love to his Elect; free
and undeserved; from everlasting to everlasting; cast upon them even when they
were enemies, and in their stomachous grassations and rebellions; overcoming
all difficulties and oppositions, all peevish frowardness and prevarications
after reconcilement; never wearled or tired out with any provocations; a love
lifting up Adam, Earthly man as high as Heaven, and translating Enoch,
miserable and enthralled man into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; a
love infinite, and past comprehending: so that well might the Apostle set a
Behold to it: Behold (says he) what manner of love the Father has bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God, Joh. 3. 1. and the Father
was not alone in this Love; but the Son and the Holy Ghost too: if the love
of the Saints to Christ be so hot, that many waters of affliction cannot quench
it, nor the floods of persecution drown it; if it will not be scourced or
exchanged for any wealth: if it be strong as death and cruel as the grave,
urging and constraining them to lay down life and all for him; if the coals
thereof be coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame, as we read, Cant.
8. 6, 7. What is then the love of Christ to his people, who is not only loving
but love it self in the very abstract? certainly such a love as this cannot
but be very attractive and drawing, very conciliating and winning: it must
needs like the first wheel move and turn about all our affections; our desire
to enjoy Christ, our joy in the fruition of him, our love toward him, our fear
to displease him, our anger, when he is offended, our jealousy of losing him.
Our nature is such, that we will love, where we are first loved; as the heat
of the Sunne-beames reflects from a wall: so Christ's love to us cannot but
cause a reflection of ours upon him: ours is but a spark of his: we love him
(says the Apostle) because he loved us first: 1 Ioh. 4. 19.
when he reveals his love to us, such a fire must needs kindle and melt our
affections, be they never so key-cold and frozen.

Secondly, the beauty of Christ is likewise very attractive. I do not mean it
of the aspect and face, of the outward lineaments and proportion of his body,
although his comeliness in that behalf need not to be doubted of, being formed
in the sanctified womb of a Virgin by the Holy Ghost: but of his spiritual
beauty and gracefulness. Now we know, that true beauty consists

In fairness of complexion.

And in a just symmetry or proportion of parts.

Neither of these was wanting in Christ.

First, he was of a fair and comely complexion, as the Church describes him,
Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, says she, the mixture of these two
colors makes a beautiful and good complexion: White and red as they show the
best temperature in man; so here it may signify in Christ his Godhead and
manhood. God appeared in a vision all white as snow, and pure as fine wool,
Dan. 7. 9. And man had his name Adam from the red mould or Earth, that his body
was made of: and Christ vouchsafed to be like unto us in this. Again, the red
color may signify the bloody sufferings of Christ: and the white his
righteousness thereby; inherent in himself; but conveyed to all his members
by Gods free imputation: righteousness is so described by white linen, Revel.
19. 8. Now this temperament, and mingling of white and red after such a
mystical way in Christ, denotes the surpassing beauty of Christ, makes him
precious to the Saints, and inflames their affections to embrace him, and
follow him.

Secondly, in Christ there is also a comely proportion of parts: from the
correspondency and agreement of parts arises a feature completely beautiful
and lovely. This every faithful soul finds in Christ. The Church enumerates
and reckons up all his parts, Cant. 5. 10. etc. his head as most fine gold; his
locks bushie, and black as a Raven, excellently well agreeing with a fair
face; his eyes as the eyes of Doves by the rivers of water, washed with milk,
and fitly set; his cheeks as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers; his lips like
Lillies, dropping sweet smelling mirrhe; his hands as gold Rings, set with the
Berill; his belly as bright Ivorie overlaid with Saphires; his legs as
pillars of Marble set upon sockets of fine Gold; his counteance as Lebanon,
excellent as the Cedars; and his mouth or voice most sweet: What a pleasant
harmony and specious consent of parts is here? figuring unto us the supreme
and absolute Government of Christ, his unsearchable Counsels, his pure nature
hating all impurity and uncleanness, his amiable and delightful smilings upon
his Saints, his gracious promises and soule-saving instructions, all his
actions and administrations just and holy, his mercies and inward affections
very precious like the Sapphire, that glittereth with golden points, the
workings of his spirit in his Saints, most firm and steadfast like marble
pillars, the whole show and cast of his person most glorious, most excellent,
most Majesticall, and yet most delightful, like the forest of Lebanon, and
the stately Cedars, that grew in it: so that he is altogether lovely; all over
from top to toe (as we say) desirable, and the chiefest among ten thousand, as
much as to say, matchless and incomparable: on earth and in all the world
there is not his like, who is made without spot or blemish; yea, who is made
and not made; a creature, and yet the mighty Creator of all things, God and
man in one person, wholly excellent and beautiful, every part suitable, a most
ravishing and wooing object.

Thirdly, Christ is attractive in his graces considered, either as inherent in
himself,

Or infused into Believers.

First, as they be inherent in himself, they transcend in excellency all the
thought and conceit both of men and Angels: they have (if I may so speak) a
most fragrant smell and allicient quality in them, compared therefore to sweet
spices and ointments, as myrrh, aloes, frankincense, spikenard, and the like.
As these are delightful to our senses: so are the graces of Christ to a
believing soul, attracting the affections, winning the love of the heart,
making all other things vile and base in comparison of him; that the soul
loathes them, and spues at them, as I may say, when they offer to stand in
competition with him. It was the grace of Christ, that made him so glorious as
we read of, Joh. 1. 14. We beheld his glory (says the Apostle) as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth; that is, we beheld him
glorious in all perfection of grace, wisdom, goodness, and Mercy. It is the
gemme or Diamond in a ring, that makes it very precious and beautiful; so it
is the grace, that God has treasured up in Christ, which makes him so
glorious, so attractive, and so alluring as he is.

Secondly, Christ is attractive in his graces bestowed upon the Saints. As a
Father is dignified by having a worthy son, and a Schoolmaster by the
learning and proficiency of his Scholars: so is Christ by the Graces of his
people. A Master is honored by his livery, which his servants wear: now the
graces of love, and humility, and meekness, and patience, and the like, are,
as I may say, Christ's livery, by which we are distinguished, and known to be
his servants: and he is much honored by those badges: By this shall all men
know (says Christ) that you are my Disciples, if you love one another. Joh.
13. 35. The holy lives and blessed examples of the Saints are very fruitful;
they advance the Kingdom of Christ, and are very attractive things to tole and
draw on others to a liking of his ways. Ye wives (says the Apostle) be in
subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they also may
without the Word be won by the conversation of the wives, while they behold
your chaste, or modest conversation, coupled with fear, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. Not
that the examples even of the best can convert a sinner; for that is done only
by the preaching of the Gospel; but they may do this; they may show a sinner
the vileness and the danger of his own way; because they be light; they may
also allure him and draw him on to approve of the holy ways of Christ, and so
prepare him to hear that word, which is of power to beget faith, and to save
the soul. And hither tends that of the Prophet Hosea, 14. 7. They that dwell
under his shadow shall return, they shall revive, as the corn, and grow as
the vine: the sent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon: The meaning of it
is this, that Ephraim being converted, others that dwell under his shadow,
beholding his ways, and approving them, shall return: he shall cast forth
such a sweet savor of holy conversation, that others not yet wrought upon,
shall revive as the corn after the dead winter, flourish like the vine, and
give a sent as fragrant and delightful as the wine of Lebanon. The graces then
of the Saints do very much decorate and adorn Christ himself. As a fair and
beautiful woman, virtuous, and holy, is a credit to her husband; ^o are the
godly to Christ: they are his Spouse, they are his Members, they are his
Children, they are his Servants, they are his Scholars; and therefore
whatsoever is excellent and commendable in them, it redounds to his praise.
They be branches of his planting, and the work of his hands, and he is
glorified in them, as the Prophet speaks: If the visible heavens do declare the
glory of God, as the Psalmist says; how much more then do the new heavens, I
mean the new creature, the persons of men new molded and formed in holiness
and righteousness to the similitude and likeness of God; how much more, I
say, do these declare the glory of Christ, whose handy-worke they are? Hence
is that saying of the Apostle; If our Brethren be enquired of; they are the
messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 23. And in
another place he says, that Christ presents his Ephesians. 5. 27.
Church to himself a glorious Church: The glory of the Church reflects upon
Christ, who first founded and formed it. Every child of God at his conversion
puts on Christ; whence it follows, that whatsoever beauty and comeliness the
Saints have, it is Christ's beauty and comeliness; and he has the praise of
it. Thus you see, that Christ is very attractive in his love, in his beauty,
and in his graces, both his own and his Saints, therefore he must needs be very
precious.

There is one Reason more, which Indies to me, if I my self languish in
poverty? What are the feasts and full feeding of others to me, if I my self
starve for hunger? or what is all the help in the world to me, if I cannot
have it at my need? Here then is the ultima lima, (as I may say) and the
complement of all, that Christ is every way excellent, and the Saints enjoy him
as their own; they have a comfortable interest In all his works and
performances. In all his dignities and honors. In all his offices and
administrations. In all his blessed influences and graces.


First, all Christ's works and performances, are in a peculiar respect for
every Believer; his making of the world, settling of policies and governments,
rooting up of Kingdoms, executing of judgments in the earth, rewarding some,
and punishing others, raising up wise, learned, valiant, active, just and
merciful men in their times: in all these, and in all other general and
providentiall works of Christ, the believing soul has a kind of interest and
propriety: next unto his own glory, Christ aimed at the good of his Church in
all these things, and has still either immediately, or in the upshot and close
of all made them isntrumental for her welfare: in which sense are those words
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. All things are yours, (says he) whether
Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present,
or things to come; all are yours.

Secondly, Believers have a kind of claim also in the dignities and honors
of Christ. There is a reciprocation (as I may say) between him and his Saints:
they are mutually and interchangeably glorified in one another: as Christ is
glorified in them, Joh. 17. 10. so they are unspeakeably dignified and graced
by him. The glory of children (says Solomon) are their Fathers, Prove. 17. 6.
If the Father be heroical, or learned, or any way excellent, this is the
sons glory, unless he degenerate: now the Saints are called the seed and
the children of Christ: whatsoever therefore he excells in, it is their
dignity, and their glory. Besides, Christ does impart of his honors to them,
making them like himself. Is Christ a son, and heir of all? so are they
sons, and heirs, and co-heires with Christ: shall he judge the world? so
shall they in some sort: does he break in pieces the Nations with a rod of
iron? so do they: is he ascended into glory? so shall they ascend: There is
not any whit of his glory, unless it be that which is utterly incommunicable,
but they have a touch of it, if I may so speak: yea and that which is so
incommunicable, redounds to their glory, as you heard before.

Thirdly, Believers have interest in the offices of Christ. Every Saint may say
of Christ, he is my Prophet and Teacher, he is my Priest and reconciler, he is
my King and governor: yea the godly have such an interest in these offices of
Christ, that virtue comes out of him to make even them Prophets, and Priests,
and Kings also: Prophets in some measure, to teach themselves and others,
Priests to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Christ; and Kings
to rule over their own lusts and corruptions.

Lastly, Believers have also interest in the graces of Christ: he, that has
the field, has also the treasure, that is hid in it. It was the greatest
consolation and joy of the Spouse, that she could say, My Beloved is mine. All
that is in Christ, a Believer may appropriate to himself: he may say with
unspeakable delight, his riches, his love, his goodness, his greatness, his
power, and all that is his, is mine. I have interest in all those transcendent
graces of his; his mercy, his truth, his promises, they are all mine. Now this
must needs render Christ very precious, when he is not only in himself,
whatsoever is excellent and desirable: but also the Saints may justly challenge
and claim him for their own.

I come now to the application of the

First, by their ignorance. Most have not so much as the theory, or doctrinall
knowledge of Christ: they are like Festus, who told Agrippa, that Paul's
adversaries had questions against him concerning one Jesus, Act. 25. 19. So let
these be asked, and they can answer nothing truly, nothing rationally, nothing
punctually of Christ. Christ is to them (as Logicians speak) an Individuum
vagum, quidam homo, a certain man, one Jesus; but they for their part know
little of him; only they have a wild hope, that if he be good for any thing,
they shall have a share in it, as well as others: and therefore, Jesus Christ
have mercy on us, is a frequent and high point of their devotion: they have it
by tradition to receive Christ: but what he is, and how made ours they know not.

Others there be, that have pretty store of knowledge; they can reason and
discourse of Christ distinctly and satisfactorily; but they have no
experimental knowledge of him; they have not fel^ the work of his Spirit upon
their hearts they have not tasted how gracious the Lord is: they may perhaps
have a flashi^^ relish and light taste of him; such as their is, of whom the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 6* 4, 5. Temporary gusts and apprehension^ of Christ's
sweetness, causing joy for ^^ while; but they do not sit down with Christ at
his Table to eat even to saturation (as I may say) and to make a full meal of
his spiritual dainties, the heavenly Manna, the marrow of fatness: neither
have they drunk abundantly (as the charge is, Cantic. 5. 1.) of wine on the
lees, well refined out of Christ's wine-cellar. In a word, they have not a
thorough and saving experience of Christ: though their brains have some print
of him, yet their hearts are strangers to him: and therefore they have no
faith: They that know Christ's name, will put their trust in him, Psalm. 9. 10.
But these know it not: they know not the power, they know not the virtue, they
know not the worth of Christ; neither do they know their own misery without
him. And what faith can there be, where there is no knowledge? Knowledge is so
necessary to breed and beget faith, that sometimes it includes faith, and faith
bears the name of it, as Esa. 53. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many: and again, Not having mine own righteousness (says
the Apostle) which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith; that I may know him, and
the power of his resurrection, Phil. 3. 9, 10. That is one token then that men
have no faith because they have no knowledge.

Secondly, It appears by their stumbling at Christ, Christ is a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense to the disobedi^nt, as the Apostle says: and
disobedient ones are opposed to believers: unbelief is the greatest
disobedience in the world; it is to make God a liar, and it is the mother and
damme of all other disobedience: because men believe not; therefore they are so
vicious, so profane, so ungodly, and so disobedient as they are: and therefore
it is that Christ seems so vile and so base to them as he does: therefore it
is, that they are offended with him, and stumble at him: overmuch have makes a
man to stumble: now the Prophet says, that he which believes shall not make
have, Esa. 28. 16. Had the Jews believed, they had never stumbled at Christ;
his poverty and depressed condition had never been any scandal to them; but
they not believing, looked for a Savior and a Messiah, that should come in the
riches, in the glory, in the pomp and magnificence of an earthly Monarch;
which when it failed, they were ^ffended, and said, We will not have this man
to reign over us. The Prophet E^^y brings forth carnal people speaking thus
of Christ; He has no form, nor comeliness, and when we^ shall see him, there
is no beauty, that ^^ should desire him, Chap. 53. 2. This is no^ meant of the
bodily visage and countenance of Christ; but of the strict laws of his
Kingdom, and of the hard terms upon which he offers himself: he tells men,
that if they will be his followers, and will have him for a Savior, then they
must deny themselves, renounce their own wills, take up his Cross, suffer
mocks and reproaches, bonds and imprisonment, be hated and persecuted in the
world, and resist even to blood, and loss of life, if need be. These are the
terms and conditions upon which Christ offers himself: and these are very
unsavory, most cannot relish them, they will not down: Christ is very
offensive being so tendered; without form, without comeliness, without beauty,
a most nauseous and loathsome object. Now where it is thus, it is evident, that
men have no faith: a man will not rest or rely upon that, which he has no
good conceit of.

Thirdly, It appears to be so also, when men do not improve Christ. True
faith is a growing thing, and makes all other graces to grow, it is not idle
and lazy, but active, and advancing, and still pressing forward. What is
ground, if not goodded and manured? What is a Ship, if not rigged, and sent to
Sea? What is a trade, if not driven, and made use of? So what is Christ, if not
working, not acting, not improved in us? What is his incarnation, death,
resurrection, intercession, if we receive no virtue, or vigorous impresse, no
accession or augmentation from them? the business of Christ in a soul is not
a matter of words and names, as Gallio thought: but it is a work of the highest
and greatest concernment that can be; the aims of it are above all created
excellencies: and therefore where it is true and not fained, it is ever in
agitation, ever girding forward to the mark, ever building, ever running, ever
growing: if not so, it is manifest that men haw no faith: and if they have no
faith, it is no wonder, that they should despise Christ.

Fourthly, When a man is careless and regardlesse of the things of Christ,
this is also an argument of a faithless and unbeleeving soul, Phil. 2. 20,
21. the Apostle opposes Timothy (whom elsewhere he commends for his unfeigned
faith) unto such careless ones; I have no man like minded (says he) who will
naturally care for your state; for all seek their own, and not the things
which are Jesus Christ's. But how does he mean it? did Timothy care for the
Philippians as a natural man? No; but as one that was by faith implanted into
Jesus Christ, and so had a new nature: and by the motions and inclinations of
that new nature, he did as indearedly and affectionately tender the good state
of the Philippians, as parents do naturally care for their children. By this
Antithesis then, or opposition, it appears, that those who sought their own
privacies, and not the things of Jesus Christ, had no faith. They might
perhaps, and did in all likelihood make profession of the faith: but not
regarding the community and public good of the Saints, it is evident, that all
their Religion was but a vain and empty flourish, a mere shukke or shadow,
without heart, without life, without truth and substance of grace: had they
been truly of the body of Christ, they would have had more public spirits,
and considered others, as well as themselves: So writes the Apostle; The
members have the same care one for another, 1 Cor. 12. 25. And this was his own
practice, I please all men in all things (says he) not seeking mine own
profit; but the profit of many, that they may be saved, 1 Cor. 10. last. And in
the very same Chapter he gives in precept, that no man should seek his own;
but every man another wealth. I confess, that both these sayings of his do
offer some hold for cavil and exception: as where he says, that he pleased
all men in all things; it may seem that he was then a flatterer, and a
time-server; but yet we must not so understand it; for he intends it no
question, of his care not to give offense to any, as appears by the context.
And again whereas he says, Let no man seek his own, but every man another
wealth; we must not conceive, that he does enjoyne selfe-neglect; but only he
gives a charge against self-love, to wit, that no man should so seek his own,
as wholly to neglect the benefit of others, and especially their spiritual
benefit: yet thus it is with many in the world, who notwithstanding make a
glorious show of better things: let the cause of Christ, let his Church and
people sink or swim, it is all one to them; like Gallio they care for no such
matters. Eli's heart trembled when he heard, that the Ark of God was taken:
but let news of the ill success of the Saints come to these, and it never
troubles them: they will make some show of sorrow with their tongues; but there
is not a whit in their hearts. Now certainly, here can be no faith. It Is the
right guise of Infidells, to call the Church an outcast, and to say, This is
Zion, whom no man seeks after, Jer. 30. 17.

Josephus Antiqu: lib. 8. c. 2.
writes, that Solomon was not so intent and earnest in building of his own
palace, as he was in the structure of the Temple; because the one was for God;
but the other for Kings. Clean contrary to which was the practice of those,
that dwelt in their seeled houses, and let the house of God lie wast, Hag. 1.
4. Doubtless, where there is such slighting of God, and of his people, and
such intensive care of private concernments, there can be no faith. As a man
believes, so he cares for the things of Christ.

Fifthly, When men procrastinate and delay their seeking of Christ, putting off
this great and necessary work from day to day, giving the prime, the morning,
and the virginity of their affections (as I may say) to the world, prostituting
their precious souls to such base, vile, and worthless thing: this is also a
sign of a faithless heart, and consequently, that Christ is little set by.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, says our Savior, Mat. 6. 24. Mammon is a
rabinicall word, signifying plenty of riches and worldly wealth: some say it
comes from (...), a multitude: now as Believers dilating upon the copious
theme of the love of Christ, do as it were lose their hearts and affections
in the bottomless depth of his unsearchable riches and grace: so worldlings
do in like manner ingurgitate and drown their spirits in the endless and
unsatiable desire of worldly riches and pleasures: and when they thus serve
Mammon, how can they do the work of God, to believe on him, whom he has
seat? The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, that
is, the inordinate desire of earthly pleasures, and riches, and honors; these
are of the world, as the Apostle says; and we all know, that the world and the
Elect are e regione (as we say) diametrically opposite and contrary one to the
other: and if so, then certainly where there are those lusts and inordinate
desires, there can be no faith; for faith is proper to the Elect; and therefore
it is called the faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1. 1. Neither will it serve the
turn for men to say within themselves, as many do, that there will be time
enough to seek Christ hereafter: for the present it will be best to follow
after pleasures, and to pursue the world; when gray hairs, and old age comes,
then 'twill be rathe enough to look after God, after Christ, after grace;
certainly, this is a most desperate resolution; for know assuredly, that though
many seem to seek Christ in the twilight (as I may say) and evening of their
lives; yet in the upshot and close of all he is not found: though men seem to
leave their sins, when they be old; yet for the most part, it is not so; but
rather sin leaves them; for were they young and lusty, as they have been,
they would be as forward to act it, as ever. Now where there is no seeking, nor
receiving of Christ, there cannot be any faith at all.

Sixthly, When men can sit down contented and satisfied without Christ, never
miss him, never feel the want of him; this does also argue a state of
unbelief. Every true Believer makes Christ the center and rest of his soul.
All things tend naturally to their proper place, as light things upward, and
heavy things downward: so the nature of faith is to fly up unto Christ, who
is (as I may say) the bosom of perfect rest and repose. Those that have been
most eminent for faith, could never endure the absence of Christ: they have
still borne it very impatiently, very eagerly and discontentedly. The Church
professes her self to be sick of love for him, Cantic. 2. 5. David's soul
panted after him, as the hunted or chased Heart does after the water-brookes.
And the people of God say, The desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the
remembrance of thee. With my s^ule have I desired thee in the night, yea with
my spirit within me will I seek thee early, Esa. 26. 8, 9. Now, I must tell
you, that it was faith, which caused such love-sicknesse in the Spouse, such
panting and thirsting in David, and such soule-desires, such incessant seeking
of Christ in those godly ones, that we read of: Give me children, or else I
dye, said Rachell: so certainly nothing can quiet and content the mind of a
Believer, but union and communion with Christ. It argues then a dead, dark, a
hopeless, a faithless condition, when the soul can go whole months and
years, pleasing it self with rattles and toys, as I may say; and never labor
for sweet intercourse or commerce with Christ: at the very best here can be no
better then a divided esteem of Christ, which is nothing worth. When the heart
is divided between Christ and the world, there is always a disproportion: the
world has most, and Christ least: yea even then, when Christ seems to have
most; yet it is but occasional: dangers, fears, the ficke bed, a spirit of
bondage, stings of conscience, and the like, may perhaps make Christ most
relishable for a spirt; but when the fit or storm is over, and God gives
respit; then the heart is hardened like Pharaohs, and there is a returning with
the dog 2 Pet. 2. 22.
to his vemit, and with the washed Sow to wallowing again in the mire. It is
possible for a man to esteem of Christ merely for ease; he would be freed
from anguish, but not from sin; he would be eased of the burden of sin, I
mean those horrors, and terrors, and wounds, and affrightments, which it
works: he would be delivered from pain, and the hell of sin, but he cares
not to be purged from the impurity and filthiness of it. Now where Christ is
welcome and accepted only for such an end as this, truly he counts himself
to be but little set by: such an esteem of Christ is but an occasional
esteem of him, a divided esteem, and a disproportionable esteem, which he
does nothing esteem of: and it declares a soul quite destitute of faith: and
Christ cannot be precious where there is no faith.

Secondly, Here is discovered to us a lose our affections, and they become
unprofitable unto us.

I confess, that the love of Christ is not alike in all the Saints, some are
more, and some less intensive in their love to Christ. We all know that in
the natural body, there is not so much strength in a finger, as there is in
the arm: so in the mystical body of Christ, the members have not all of them
the like measures, and abilities of grace. And it is possible also to sleep
spiritually, while the heart, that is to say, the life and inmost affection of
the soul, is waking. I sleep (says the Spouse) but my heart waketh, Cant. 5.
2. The meaning is, that she was somewhat secure, and kept not that watch
against the pleasures of this life, and the baits of this world, as she should
do: and yet her heart was upright still. So the wise Virgins slumbred and
slept as well as the foolish, Mat. 25. 5. And yet they had oil in their Lamps,
and were ready to go in with the bridegroom. The spirit may be willing, when
the flesh is weak, as our Savior says. Nevertheless, it were to be wished,
that every child of God had heavenly affections in him at the height, and like
an arrow drawn up to the head: And we must take heed, that our pusility and
dwarfishnesse in them do not flow from a vicious and adulterate love: love of
the world, love of ease, love of any thing more then Christ. Many of Gods dear
ones are not without some tincture of this; they have, as it were, fits of it
sometimes, as we may see by those excuses, which the Spouse makes, when Christ
did knock at the door of her heart for entrance; I have put off my coat (says
she) how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
Cant. 5. 3. It Is a Metaphor taken from those that are gone to bed, and are
loath to rise for any man's pleasure: and the meaning may be this; that she had
now shaken off many fears and troubles; she was free from persecution, and
delivered from many afflictions and miseries formerly endured; she had now
thrown off these things, as one going to bed does his garments; she had washed
them off; as in the Eastern Countries travailers were wont to wash off the
soil of their feet, when they went to their rest; and she was now in the bed
of fleshly ease and worldly contentment, loath to disrest her self, loath to
rise, and to be pincht with cold again, loath to set her feet into the dirt of
former sufferings: though in her heart she preferred Christ above all; yet so
sweet were those earthly accommodations, that she would rather forbear
intercourse with him for a while, then lose her share in them. Thus it was with
her: but this was a naughty temper, and cost her dear to be purged of it. The
true and healthful temper of the soul is, when Christ is a joy to us, even in
the absence and want of all other things; when we can say with the Prophet;
Although the fig tree shall not blossom; neither shall fruit be in the vines;
the labor of the olive shall fail; and the fields shall yield no meat; the
flock shall be cut off from the fold; and there shall be no herd in the
stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord; I will joy in the God of my salvation,
Habac. 3. 17, 18.

Thirdly, This may discover unto us, what singular effects the excellency of
Christ have upon the hearts of Believers; and how eminently their affections
are drawn out toward him. We may judge of our esteem by our affections, and
chiefly by the affection of love. Love is the height of our esteem, and there
are in it these three acts, or effects, viz.

1. Complacency, or well-pleasednesse. 2. Desire of union, or enjoyment. 3.
Benevolence, or good will.
First, Complacency, or well-pleasednesse, being referred to Christ, is an
affection whereby we do approve and like of all that is in him, resting in
his goodness, as in the most lovely and desirable object in the world. Thy
love is better then wine (says the Church) because of the savor of thy good
ointments, thy Name is as ointment powered forth; therefore do the Virgins love
thee, Cant. 1, 2, 3. This Scripture shows what a pleasing and delightful
object Christ is to a believing soul. What more acceptable to taste, then
fragrant wine? Christ is far more to a Believer. What more pleasing to the
smell, then sweet ointments of an exquisite composition? Christ is the same,
and far sweeter to the heart of a believer. The judgment the Church has of
the love of Christ is, that it far excells all the pleasures and delights of
the world, synecdochically signified by wine, one pleasant species or kind for
all the rest: and his Name, that is, the knowledge of him, by preaching of the
Gospel, is powered out like odoriferous ointment, to the unspeakable delight of
the Saints, drawing and ravishing the minds of them that hear it, as virgins
are drawn with the offer of some lovely match. Now where Christ is such a
pleasing and delightful object: where the senses of the soul are so
exceedingly taken with his sweetness: where there is such a total
acquiessence in Christ, and such a full, absolute, and universal resting in
him; it is most evident and undeniable, that there cannot but be a high and
worthy esteem of him. The best of Gods Saints and servants have liked of
Christ, coming with a frown, as well as with a smile, with a rod, as well as
with tender and sweet embracings: though there has been some reluctance in the
flesh, and averseness in nature: yet to the new man within, to the sanctified
and regenerate part, Christ has been ever welcome, however represented, and in
what shape soever he has offered himself. Indeed Christ hiding, and absenting
himself, ecclipsing his light, and withdrawing his comfort from the soul;
this has ever been bitter and unsavory to the Saints, and never could they
bear it with any patience; because they thought Christ to be utterly lost and
gone: they thought Christ to be no Christ: but in other things, though never so
tart and unpleasant, Christ has been acceptable enough: Lord, if it be thou
(says Peter) bid me come unto thee on the water: so it is with the Saints,
they refuse not to venture even upon the boisterous water to go unto Christ:
Christ is welcome to them upon any terms: scourging and whipping Christ, as
well as stroaking and embracing Christ. When Samuel told Eli of judgments to
come upon his family; It is the Lord (says he) let him do what seems him
good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. If it be the Lord that does it, it is no matter, I will
bear it. So David; I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because ^h^u did it.
And Job; Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
evil? As who should say, God shall be welcome to me any how, bringing good, or
bringing evil. Yea, even in spiritual desertions, when Christ hides (...),
and vaileth himself from the soul, the Saints are enough wel-pleased in him:
though the tentation be full of amarulency and bitterness: yet in Christ
himself there is abundant sweetness and satisfaction: hence was that
resolution of Job; though he kill me, yet I will trust in him. Hence also it
is, that the children of God, though they walk in darkness, and have no Light
at all, yet they will trust in the name of the Lord, and stay themselves upon
their God, Isaiah 50. 10.

Though some weak ones doubt of this and call it into question; and the efore
are sometimes in fits of despair: yet the more exercitate of the Saints; those
among them, that are as beaten and tried soldiers, they cannot be beaten off
from the comfortable apprehension of it: and therefore in the depth of
darkness and tentation, when Christ hides and turns away his loving
countenance, they resolve to wait for better times: I will wait upon the Lord,
that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him, Isaiah
8. 17. and notable to this purpose is that of Job: Behold I go forward, but he
is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand where
he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the right hand,
that I cannot see him. Job does not speak thus in respect of the invisible
essence of God; but in respect of comfortable revelations: God hid his
cheerful and loving face from him, that which way soever he turned himself
he could not behold it. Well, but what does Job in this case? does he despond?
does he let go his hold, and give over his hope? no, but he holds fast still,
he likes Christ well enough still: he knows (says he) the way that I take;
and when he has tried me, I shall come forth like gold, Job 23. 8, 9, 10. Job
had (as the Apostle speaks) (...), by reason of a habit, or perfection, he had
his senses well exercised, H^b. 5. 14.
or scool'd, as the word signifies, he was a man of experience, and experience
works hope, as the Apostle says: and therefore in the depth and bottom of
all his misery Christ was a Light, a stay, and a comfort to him. Now whence is
it, that the Faith and graces of the Saints are so impregnable? whence is it
that their hope is so indefatigable and never out of breath? whence is it, that
no storms or tempest of tentation can break their spirits, and make them give
out, but from that complacency and well pleasednesse, from that exceeding
swavity and sweetness, that they find in Christ? so that let him present
himself how he will, they are never offended, as to fly off from him, and to
give him the slip for ever. A bundle of Mirrhe (says the Church) is my
welbeloved unto me: he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts, Cant. 1. 13.
Myrrh is very sweet of smell, and leniter amara, meanly, or somewhat bitter
in taste, as the naturalist writes: so is Christ in this world a kind of a
bitter-sweet unto his Saints: but yet his sweetness does (as I may say)
swallow up all his bitterness: his bitterness is in the lowest degree; but his
sweetness in the superlative: so that let his dispensations be what they will,
his Saints are never weary of him: yea they take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for his sake: and
when they be weak in themselves, then they are strong in him, and more then
Conquerours, as the Apostle says.

To conclude, such is the force of that pleasantness and loveliness, that is
in Christ, that neither the shame of his own poverty and cross, nor his
coming to set fire in the earth, holding forth such a Doctrine, as makes
wicked men rage like Devils, and makes his own people to be in the midst of
fears and troubles, and Christ himself hiding his face and love from them:
such I say, is the force of his pleasantness and amiablenesse, that none of
these bitter things could ever make the Disciples of Christ weary of their
profession, or cut off the race and succession of them.

There is a remarkable passage to this purpose In Josephus Antiq. lib. 18. cap.
4.
; At that time, says he (meaning when Pilate was Governor) was Jesus, a wise
man; if it be lawful to call him a man: for he was the performer of diverse
admirable works, and the instructure of those, who willingly entertain the
truth. And he drew unto him diverse Jews, and Greeks to be his followers: this
was Christ; who being accused by the Princes of our Nation before Pilate, and
afterward condemned to the cross by him; yet did not those, who followed him
from the beginning, forbear to love him for the ignominy of his death: for he
appeared unto them alive the third day after, according as the Divine Prophet
had before testified the same, and diverse other wonderful things of him. And
from that time forward the race of Christians, who have derived their name from
him, has never ceased.

Here you see what an honorable testimony this Jew, that was no Christian,
gives of Christ and his Disciples: so precious and desirable was he
notwithstanding his suffering, notwithstanding all the shame and trouble that
came upon his followers for him, that they never would forsake him, neither
could the generations of them be rooted out of the Earth unto this day. This is
my beloved, and this is my friend o daughters of Jerusalem.

Secondly, from complacency, or wel-pleasednes flows another thing in love,
viz. a desire of union, or enjoyme^t. When the soul eyes a tempting or
tickling object, as I may say, it presently covets the possession and fruition
of it: there is by and by a kind of clasping or closing with it, or a strong
appetion of peculiarity, or private Intrest. Whence it is that the French
Divine writes Molinus.
thus of love. Love (says he) is that point of our spirits, whereby it joyneth
it self unto objects. That which is weight in heavy things, love is the very
same in our souls: for as weight moves earthly bodies toward the place of
their rest: so love moves our souls toward that object, which promises rest
and contentment. Now Believers highly esteeming Christ, desire nothing more
then the possession and enjoyment of Christ. Now Christ is enjoyed

In his Ordinances.

In his secret and sweet appearances to the soul, and in his personal
presence.

First, Christ is enjoyed in his Ordinances. The Ordinance is (as I said
before) a walk wherein Christ is wont to meet with his people: a Believer
therefore does with great delight and study put himself upon that way, that he
may enjoy Christ in it. But

Secondly, Christ is enjoyed in his secret and sweet appearances to the soul.
What are all holy Ordinances, but dead and heartlesse things without such
revelations?

Job tells us of Ordinances of Heaven; and Jeremiah in like manner of the
Ordinances of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars: these are natural
Ordinances: but to what purpose were they; if this inferior world did not
partake of their light and heat, and sweet influence? We read also of politic
and Judicial Ordinances, which God constituted and set in the commonwealth of
Israel: but to what purpose were these likewise, or what benefit could an
Israelite reap by them, if he lived in such corrupt and lawless times, that
he could not have them administered? so what are all heavenly and sacred
Ordinances to a Believer; if he find not the virtue, the life, and the power
of them, enjoying Christ in the Ordinance, and finding an influence of his
spirit and grace flowing in upon his soul? As there is a desire in a Believer
to communicate his heart unto Christ; so Christ communicates his grace unto a
Believers heart. Christ as a Fountain, sends forth his streams of comfort and
joy: and as a Sun, sends forth his glorious beams of grace and love into a
Believers soul. Now a Believer does account prayer, preaching, Sacraments, and
all other means of his souls welfare to be nothing; unless the Spirit of
Christ comply with them, flowing in upon the soul with such heart-ravishing
discoveries of his grace, as no tongue can possible express. Hence it is, that
a Believer sets open the windows of his soul, desiring that Christ may shine
into it, with the bright and glorious beams of his grace and favor; but if
Christ eclipse and hid himself from the soul, there is nothing but darkness
and complaining, sorrow and mourning, and no rest at all; until the mist be
dispelled, and the cloud blown over, and the day star arise in the heart
again; until Christ come and refresh the soul with new supplies of
revelations. The Church never left off seeking Christ; until she had found
him; till the King had brought her into his bedchamber, and into the
banqueting house, and imparted some of his love unto her. Oh how precious is
that sweet and secret communion, which a Believer enjoyes with Christ! o! what
a delight is it to sit under Christ's shadow, and to enjoy him in such a way, at
this is?

Thirdly, Christ is enjoyed in his personal presence at his second coming. The
Saints are described to be such, as long and look for Christ's appearing, 1
Cor. 1. 7. you come behind in no gift (says the Apostle) waiting for the
coming (...), revelation of Jesus Christ. It is called the revelation of
Christ, because the glory and Majes^y of Christ it now hid; but then his
brightness shall appear and be manifested; for he shall come in the clouds
and great glory. And the Apostle says in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. that Christ shall be
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe. that is, the
Saints seeing themselves to shine as the Stars for evermore, and to be made
conformable to the glorious body of Christ, they shall infinitely admire his
grace and Mercy unto them. Hence it is Believers wait for the consolation of
the second coming of Christ, as they did for the consolation of his first
coming; because here they receive good in promise, but then they shall receive
it in the fruit of the promise: here they receive the first fruits of his
Spirit, then a full harvest of joy and blessedness: here they see Christ's
glory at a distance, and through the lattesse, but then in the luster and
brightness of it; Christ is the object of a Believers affections, and nothing
but fruition will give him satisfaction: his heart is never at rest, until it
come to his proper place of rest and repose; agreeable to that of the Father,
fecisti nos Domine ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescit in te,
thou have made us o Lord for thy self, and our heart is never at rest, till it
rest in thee. Now whence is it, that a Believer desires to enjoy Christ in his
Ordinance, in that sweet and secret communion, in his personal presence, but
from this love of union: when he sees such a glorious object, as Christ is, he
desires to claspe and close with it.

Thirdly, from complacency, or wel-pleasednesse, and from union and enjoyment
flows a third thing in love, viz. benevolence or good will. Benevolence being
referred to Christ, is an affection whereby we do yield our selves wholly
unto him, desiring his name may be glorified by us. The Saints cannot properly
confer any essential goodness, or glory upon Christ; but only make an
agnition and acknowledgement thereof. Can a man (says Job) be profitable unto
God, is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? Job 22. 2.
that is, if a man were just and holy, yet he could not profit God, or add any
joy and delight unto him. Again in Psalm 16. 3. Thou art my Lord (says
David) my goodness extends not to thee: that is, I cannot enlarge and enrich
God; but (says he) to the Saints on Earth, in whom is my delight; that is, as
for those that bear thy stamp and superscription upon them, I will entertain
with my goods: thus we may wish well to Christ in his members.

Again, this love of benevolence does carry and contain in it a willingness
to yield all obedience unto Christ. He that loves Christ freely, cannot but
study to please him in all things, and be like unto him, 1 John 4. 17. And he
that keeps his word, in him is the love of God perfect, 1 John 2. 5.

Love is the condescending to the lowest service, it is impulsive and
constraining, it has a sweet kind of violence to draw the heart of a Believer
unto the obedience of Christ: so says the Apostle, the love of Christ
constraines us, 2 Cor. 5. 15. And so in Cant. 8. 6. Love is strong as death,
and Jealousy is cruel as the grave. That is, love is that strong affection
which cannot be subdued by trouble or tentation; it is as strong as death: the
heart (as some say) is primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, the first living,
and last dying, and therefore all the vitalls of the body draws to the heart,
and unites there; whence it is a man gives such strong plunges at his death,
because his strength is united: so love does unite all the affections of a
Believer drawing them forth to act for Christ: and for zeal or jealousy, that
is, love enflamed and fervent, and it is fierce and inexorable as Hell and the
grave: that as Death and Hell devoureth, and swallows up all; so love to Christ
overcomes all opposition and suffering, and makes Believers rejoice to fill up
(that is declaratively) the suffering and affliction Col. 1. 24.
of Christ.

Fourthly, the unmatcheable excellency, upon those rich and costly gifts, which
Christ has bestowed upon Believers, and they are such as these, viz.

Precious Blood. Precious Graces. Precious Promises. Precious Love. Precious
Spirit. Precious Privileges.
The blood of Christ is precious in

First, from the purity of his humane nature, which was holy, harmless,
undefiled and separate from sinners: to God, to man, and to it self it was
wholly without spot and blemish, and had not the least touch of sinfulness in
it. In nature the best constitutions have the best blood: never was there a
better tempered, a more purely constituted nature, farther from the
corruptions, freer from the pollutions and gross humors of sin, then
Christ's was. It behoved him as man to fulfill all righteousness, and thoroughly
to come up to the pattern of Legal types; which did all shadow him absolutely
holy, and speak him perfectly pure without the least tainture of spiritual
defilement. Now if the blood of the Saints, who are but in part sanctified,
dregs of sin remaining in the best, be precious in Gods account, as we read,
Psalm. 116. 15. how much more then is the blood of the Son of God precious;
who never went awry, never failed in the least jot, or title of due obedience
to the Law of God? The Apostle says, for a good man peradventure some would
even dare to dye, Romans 5. 7. and why so? but because it is great pity such
precious blood should be lost: now if their blood be so precious, that are but
imperfectly good, what then was his, who was good without any mixture of evil?

Secondly, Christ's blood was noble blood, and therefore precious. He came of
the race of Kings, as touching his manhood: but being with all the Son of
God, this renders his nobility matchless and peerless. 'Twas Pharaoh's
brag, that he was the Son of ancient Kings, Isaiah 19. 11. Who can lay
claim to this more then Christ? who can challenge this honor before him? he is
the Son of the ancientest King in the world: he was begot a King from all
eternity; and the blood of Kings is precious: thou art worth ten thousand of
us, said David's Subjects to him; and therefore they would not suffer him to
hazard himself in the battle, 2 Samuel 18. 3. his Life-bloud was of more value,
then if half of his people had perished, because he was King and had the
Sovereignty: the nobleness of his person did set a high rate upon his blood;
and whom does this Argument more commend unto us, then Christ?

Thirdly, the blood which Christ shed for his people, was his life-bloud. Life
is the most precious thing that a man has. As the life of God is the sum of
all his attributes: so the life of man does eminently contain in it all other
blessings: all that he has serves to maintain it: it is the end and drift of
all his enjoyments. What could Christ do more then to spend his heart-bloud,
and to lay down his life for us? Sanguis est vehiculum vitae, says the
Physician: the blood is the Chariot of life: yet Experience teaches that there
may be great effusion of blood, and yet no death following. Had Christ almost
emptied all his veins, and not dyed, this would not have reached to our
misery: it had not been sufficient to save us from death: even those (...),
drops of blood; which he did sweat in his agony, had nothing availed without
death. Death is the sum of the curse due to us: in the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall die the death: Christ then dying for us, here was the
accomplishment of all his sufferings, and the height of his love toward us:
Surely that blood must needs be very precious, which could not be let out, but
the vital spirits must follow after it. Those that profess skill in words,
do derive (...), blood from (...), which signifies to burn, or to kindle:
whether this be a true etymology, or not, I will not dispute: the heat that
is in the blood of a living creature (if at leastwise in good temper) speaks
for it: sure I am, that the blood of Jesus Christ shed for our sins both
testifies his ardent and burning love toward us, and requires a like affection
in us, the kindling and fiering of our love toward him.

Fourthly, the preciousnesse of Christ's blood appears likewise from the
personal union of his manhood with his Godhead. The Divine and humane natures
of Christ subsisting together in one, and the same person, is called an
hypostaticall union: properly the word (...) signifies a placing, or standing
under: when the Godhead stands under the manhood, and the manhood is taken into
the same person with the Godhead, this is hypostaticall. Now from this
mavelous and wonderful union flows, though not a real communication of
properties, yet a promiscuous predication of them, as if they were all alike
common and natural to both natures. Hence the manhood is said to be in heaven
even while it was circumscribed and compassed with a place on earth, John 3.
13. and on the other side, the blood of the humane nature is called the blood
of God, Acts 20. 28. and else where by reason of this union God himself is
said to be crucified. Oh how precious was the blood of Christ then! doubtless
it had more worth in it then all the creatures in Heaven and earth, Angels and
men, and all the world beside. The uniting and consequently the cooperation and
compliance of the impassible Deity in the same person with that soul and body,
which suffered, must needs put infinite dignity, and preciousnesse beyond all
account upon the blood of Christ: yet this was not thought too dear for his
Saints.

Fifthly, and lastly, the blessed effects of Christ's blood is another strong
Argument of the inestimable value and price of it. It justifies our persons in
the sight of God. It frees us from the guilt, from the punishment and from the
power of all sin. It saves us (...), from that wrath that is to come, 1
Thessalonians 1. 10. Wicked people are Light and merry-hearted, and never
dream of an after recoming: but there is a thunder shower of Gods wrath to
come, which will light heavily upon the heads of unbeleeving ones. We are all
of us by nature obnoxious to, and involved in this danger, therefore the
Apostle uses the words (...), snatching or pulling us out from the wrath to
come: even we of the children of God, we of the Corporation and society of
the Saints, we Believers, as well as others were liable to this wrath: but
Christ has d^livered us: this is his tender loving kindness and good will to
his Elect.

Again, the blood of Christ obtaines eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.
whence it is that the Apostle opposes it to Gold and Silver: though these be
among the most precious things that the Earth affords; yet being corruptible
and transitory, they cannot purchase incorruption and eternity for us. The
blood of Christ is the price of our Redemption: ye are bought with a price,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 23. and a like phrase he uses in the end of the
precedent chapter: yet there is neither a pleonasme in the words, that is to
say, a fullness of speech, though that sometimes be rhetorical enough: nor
impropriety, or unfitness of Language, as if a thing could be bought without a
price: though, I confess, the Scripture in some respects does sometimes speak
so: neither is there an hebraisme, whereby words of the same signification are
itterated and repeated ob vehementiam, to set the matter on with the greater
vehemence and force: but the word price is used (...) to show the superlative
excellency and dignity of the price wherewith the Saints are bought: so that,
ye are bought with a price is as much as to say, ye are dearly bought, 'twas
a price with a witness, that was given for you, a price of inestimable value,
a price past the number of a man: it cannot be calculated or summed up, it is
so infinite, such a rich and exceeding price is the blood of Jesus Christ,
costly and chargeable were our souls, that required such a ransom. This is
the price wherewith we are bought from the earth, bought out of Hell, and
bought into Heaven and everlasting glory. This is the price that redeemeth us
from condemnation; and this is it that cleanses us from the filth and stain
of sin. This is it that purges our Consciences from dead works to serve the
living God, Heb 9. 14. The Apostle in that place draws an Argument ^ minori
ad majus, as the Logician speaks. If typical rites and sacrifices, as the
blood of Bulls and goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkled upon the
unclean, availed for external Sanctification, namely for the purifying of the
flesh legally and ceremonially; how much more shall the blood of Christ
sprinkled upon our Consciences, purge away the guilt of sin, and avayle to
the internal, spiritual, and everlasting sanctifying of our persons.

Again, by this blood it was that Christ, as the high Priest of our
profession, that is of Christians, entered into Heaven: so says the Apostle,
Heb. 9. 12. Christ entered ^y his own blood into the holy place: he did not
enter into the presence of God as the high priest of old did with the blood of
Goats, and Calves: what should those slender things do in the Tabernacle made
without hands? there are no such mean and poor offerings there. Neither did
Christ enter to offer for himself, as well as for his Family, as Aaron did,
Levit. 16. 6. he had no need of expiation himself: but he went into the
holiest to offer for his people only: whom he has for ever washed, justified
and sanctified not with blood of others (as the Apostle speaks) but with his
own blood.

Lastly, from the precious blood of Christ, we also that are so cleansed and
purged have boldness to enter into the holiest, Heb. 10. 19. 20. The blood of
Christ breeds us and begets us this confidence. The Apostle in that place does
covertly oppose the liberty of Christians unto the restraint of them that lived
under the Law. The Jews of old might not press into the Holy of Holies: it
was lawful only for the High Priest to enter into it, and that but once a
year. Great in this regard is our preeminence now above Gods ancient people:
they might not pass so much as into an earthly Sanctuary enclosed with
material walls, and coped with a roof: but we have license and leave to
enter into a far more holy and undefiled place. Christ has consecrated or
initiated a way for us: he has trod the path first as our forerunner; and
he has done it by his blood, or as (the Apostle speaks) through the veil,
that is to say, his flesh: he alludes to the veil of blew and purple scarlet
and fine twined linen, which was to divide the holiest of all from the rest of
the Tabernacle. That veil was a type of Christ's flesh. Now as the High Priest
of old entered into the holiest by removing of the veil: so Christ by the death
of his body did as it were turn aside the veil, and so has entered into
heaven, the holy of holies, there to make intercession for us. Yea by the
renting and tearing of that veil of his flesh upon the cross, he has for
ever opened a way for all Believers: a new and a living way: that of old is
obsolete and vanished, this is such as the vigor thereof shall never decay:
that of old being by the blood of beasts, could not give life to the comers,
this being by the blood of Christ, revives and raises up them that are dead in
trespasses and sins, and does also confer eternal life upon them. O how
precious, beyond all thought and conceit is the blood of Jesus Christ? the
blood of a most righteous person, most noble blood, the very life and
heart-bloud, the blood of God, justifying, sanctifying, redeeming blood; blood
purchasing eternal redemption for us, blood that quickens us, and conferres
both spiritual and everlasting life upon us. Lastly, Blood that opens to us a
never decaying way into Heaven. How precious, I say, is this blood of Christ?
and how does it call upon us to stir up our affections to embrace Christ, to
lay hold of him, and to love him with a most ardent and unfeigned love, who has
bestowed such a precious gift upon us?

Secondly, Christ has bestowed upon Believers precious Graces. Grace is called
by the Apostle, the renewing of the Holy Ghost, and the forming of Christ in
us. It consists in the rectitude and conformity of our will unto the will of
God, and to Christ the absolute pattern of all grace and holiness, the image
of the invisible God, the express character of his Fathers brightness: the
Sun of righteousness, the morning star, most eminently and gloriously above
all others; chiefest of ten thousand for sweet and gracious deportment. How
precious are those qualities of the soul, which come near such a pattern as
this? which imitate, resemble, and take after such unmatchable beauty? Now all
grace is precious; but the Scripture gives that Epithet especially to faith, 2
Pet. 1. 1. and that for these Reasons.

First, Because it is the root and womb (as I may say) of all grace; it is
the inward fountain and principle, from whence all grace flows; it is the
mother grace; it purges the conscience, and purifieth the heart, and so
breeds every needful grace in us. You may see this genealogy or pedigree of
grace, notably delineated by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 5. There we find that
charity, or love, which is the fulfilling of the commandment of God, and a
chief grace or Christian virtue, flows from a pure heart; and a pure heart
springs from a good conscience; and a good conscience is the offspring of
faith. Faith is the Genetrix and breeder of Grace, as Eve was the mother of all
mankind. I speak so in respect of an internal principle; for if we regard
external causes; the race and genealogy may be stretched farther; as thus,
faith comes by hearing of the word of God; the word of God is declared by the
mouth of a Preacher; and every true Preacher is (...), sent from heaven. But I
must speak ad rhombum; though there be sundry external efficients and workers
of grace, yet faith is the internal root and principle of it: and that is one
reason why it is called precious.

Secondly, it is precious in respect of its Author, which is the Father, Son,
and Spirit. The Father draws us unto Christ, Joh. 6. 44. And hence we are said
to be (...), to be taught of God, and to hear and learn of him. The Son
likewise draws us: draw me; we will run after thee, says the Spouse. Christ is
both the Author and the finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. He casts in the
first seed of it; and also makes it to persevere: he lays the foundation of
it, and brings it up to the roof, as I may say: he makes us first to apprehend
him, and then leads us to the end of our faith, which is the salvation of our
souls. Whence it is that he is called the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession: that is, he is the teacher of our faith, and the Captain thereof.
Lastly, the Holy Ghost is likewise the Author of our faith. No man can say,
that Jesus is the Lord (says the Apostle) but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3.
And in the ninth verse of that Chapter, faith is reckoned among the gifts of
the Spirit. Faith then must needs be very precious, having God the Father, God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost for the Author of it.

Thirdly, Faith is precious in respect of the object thereof, that is to say,
the thing upon which it leanes, or rests, which is God himself, or God in
Christ. God is said to be in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, and
not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Now this is the highest
and most excellent object of faith. Christ also as Mediator is the object
thereof. David prays, Lead me unto the rock that is higher then I, Psalm. 61.
2. And the rock that he speaks of is Christ: he is the strong rock on which
his Church is built firmly and unmoovably. Needs then must faith be precious,
while it leanes on such a solid and steadfast foundation. Again, the promises
are metonymically an object of faith: because they are made unto us in Christ:
they are in him as adjuncts in their subject: we rest upon the power and truth
of Christ, for the obtaining of that good which is in the promises. All the
promises of God are in him yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. He is mediate,
or in the middle between the promises and us: God makes the promises, and
Christ is his pledge and assurance for the accomplishment of them: so that
faith rests on the promises of God, mediante Christo, through the mediation of
Christ: and anon you shall see what precious things those promises are: in the
mean while, we may conclude even from them likewise, that faith must needs be
precious, which has such precious props and pillars to uphold it, God and
Christ, and a sure word of promise, all the wisdom and power of the Father,
and the Son, and the Spirit, all that they can do to establish and confirm
their own word, and that is more then enough.

Lastly, The preciousnesse of faith appears from the nature, from the effects
and workings of it. The nature of it is piously to know, and to affect the
things of God: to cleave unto God in Christ, to rest upon him for the obtaining
of the promises. Faith joins us to God, who is our life, in whom the lives of
our souls are bound up, as Jacobs life was bound up in his darling Benjamins.
Faith fills the soul with solace unspeakable, with peace passing all
understanding, and with joy everlasting. As blood is in the veins, dispersing
it self into all parts of the body, so giving life and heat and continual
nourishment thereunto: such is faith in the soul; it works upon all the
affections; it diffuseth and sheddeth abroad in our hearts the love of God in
Christ; it attracts and draws our spirits to delight in nothing more then in
Christ; it entertaineth the soul with feasts of fatted things, and of wines
refined; it leads it into the wine-cellar; it invites us unto those apples
and fl^ggons of pleasure, which Christ has prepared; it sweetens the cross;
it makes us to rejoice in tribulation, and that with joy unspeakable and
glorious; it works in us a childe-like confidence toward God, whereby we
approach boldly to him, crying, Abba, Father; it carries the soul up to
heaven, and gives ravishing sights of God and Christ, and the joys of
eternity; it brings us into communion with God, whereby we have most intimate
and familiar conference with him; it brings us into his bedchamber, into his
galleries of love. In a word, it enlightens, justifies, sanctifies, and saves
us for ever; because it lays hold on Jesus Christ, who is made 1 Cor. 1. 30.
unto us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption, as the Apostle says. O how precious is faith, that has such
wonderful virtues and operations, as these? how precious also are those
graces, that flow from it, as love, and the fear of God, and humility, and
patience, and the like? But above all the rest, how precious is Jesus Christ,
and how highly to be esteemed of, who has bestowed upon us such precious, such
royal, and such rich gifts as these?

Thirdly, Consider likewise the promises Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises, says the Apostle. I confess that by
promises he means the effect of the promises, or the things themselves that
are promised, which are of no small value and worth; and therefore the promises
themselves are of no little weight and moment. This will easily appear, if we
consider The nature of the promiser. The antiquity of the promises. And the
precious things, which they contain.


First, God, who has promised, is by nature wise and powerful, true and
unchangeable. God is infinitely wise, he has a profound reach; his counsels
are very deep: even his foolishness is wiser then men, as the Apostle says:
and he knows ways beyond our imagination and capacity, how to bring about his
own ends, and to accomplish his promises. He is also almighty to effect and
bring to pass his designs: he can do above all that we can either ask or
think. And again, he is true and cannot lie, and therefore he is called the
God of Amen by the Prophet, Esa. 65. 16. And lastly, he is unchangeable; he
cannot repent: there is no variableness or shadow of turning with him: all
these are the fulera, the props and supporters of the promises, on which they
stand firm and sure, and cannot fall to the ground. The saying is Pollicitis
dives quilibet esse potest. Every man can be rich in his promises: even a
beggar may be as rich as a King in promises: but all the question and doubt is
about the performance of them. Among men it is frequently thus: they are facile
and forward in making of promises: but they are ignorant of the means how to
fulfill them; or if they know the way; yet they want power and ability; or if
they be both knowing and able; yet they want a will; they have a heart and a
heart, as the Scripture speaks: they pretend, what they never intend; The
children of men are deceitful upon the balances: or lastly, though they know
how to be as good as their word, though they can do it; yea though for the
present they do really intend what they promise, yet Multa cadunt inter
ealicem supremaque labra. many things fall out between the pot and the lip, as
the proverb is; they are fickle and inconstant, well instructed how to play
fast and loose, unstable as water, like Reuben: and so their promises prove to
be nothing worth: perhaps the fault may be in their intellect and
understanding: though they be wise to day, yet after a while they may grow sots
and fools, and so know not how to steer their course, and to wheel about
their purposes; or perchance the default is in their hands: though they be in
possibility of performing their promises to day, yet to morrow their arms may
be cut off, and they are left shiftlesse; or if not so; yet it may be worse;
the fault may lie in their affections; they may be honest now, and after a
while dishonest; and so say, and unsay; promise, and change their minds. Thus
it is with men oftentimes; but with God it is not so; he knows how to perform
his promises; he is able to make them good; and he is most true and faithful
in all his pro^essions: yea he is ever wise, ever powerful, ever true, ever
the same, never altered or changed in the lest measure: how precious then and
sweet are his promises? and how lovely also ought Christ to be, by whom we
enjoy them? Thus much of the nature of the Promiser.

Secondly, Consider the antiquity of the promises. The maine and chief promise
of God is that which concerns eternal life, and this was made at the
beginning of the world unto Adam, when God said, that the seed of the woman
should break the Serpents head: yea it was made before the world began, Tit.
1. 2. In hope of eternal life (says the Apostle) which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began. Here by the way we learn, that the promise
being before all time, it must needs be absolute and without all condition. But
let that pass. The question is to whom that so ancient a promise was made?
when there was yet no world, nor any men created to receive it, to whom did God
make it? I answer, that it was made to him that even then was ordained to be
our head and M^diatour, even the Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God.
The Elect are called the s^ede of Christ, Esa. 53. 10 and his children, Heb. 2.
13. Now as we were in Adams loins when he transgressed: so as touching the
decree and counsel of God, we were (as I may say) in the loins of Christ
from all eternity, and before the world began: and so the promise was made to
him for us, or to us in him before all moments or measures of time. But you
will ask me perhaps where we find such a promise? I answer, that we have
such a promise, Psalm. 2. 7, 8. I will declare the decree: the Lord has said
unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I
shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth
for thy possession. In this Scripture mark two things.

First, That God the Father says of his Son, this day have I begotten thee.
And [this day] signifies both time and eternity. Time as touching the
resurrection of Christ from the dead: that was done in time, as you know; and
the Apostle applies the words of the Psalmist unto that very matter of Christ's
resurrection, Acts 13. 33. And to the same purpose he is called elsewhere the
first begotten of the dead. Again [this day] signifies eternity. It is most
certainly to be believed, that God did beget his Son before all time, even
from everlasting. There is a place to this purpose, Heb. 1. 4, 5. where the
Apostle says, that Christ has a more excellent Name then the Angels; because
God the Father said of him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
which he never did say unto any of the Angels. And mark I pray, the Apostle
says, that Christ obtained this more excellent name by inheritance, as being
Gods natural Son: and therefore he had it from everlasting.

Secondly, In this day of eternity (if I may so call it) God makes unto his
Son a promise of a Church to be gathered among the Heathen. This promise was
stipulated in the nature and manner of a decree: and all Gods decrees are
eternal, and co-etaneous with himself: most true is the theoreme of the
Philosopher; a voluntate antiqua non procedit actio nova: from the ancient will
(he means from Gods will) there does not proceed any new act. God does not
begin to will any thing; he does not will any thing afresh; because whatsoever
he wills, from all eternity he willed it: his will from everlasting to
everlasting is one most pure and simple act: it is sometimes called a decree:
but yet in respect of himself it is no such thing: for a decree supposes some
intervall of time to be between the purpose and the execution: and so there is,
I confess, in respect of us: but to God it is not so; for he is without all
predicament of time: one day is as a 1000 years, and a thousand years as one
day with him: those things that are past and to come with us, are eternally
present with him. But to come to the point. Though the counsels of God be not
properly decr^es in respect of himself, f^r the reason before alleged: yet
they are from eternity, and that is the thing that we drive at. The
forementioned decree of gathering a Church from among the Heathen, was made
when the Son of God was begotten: and he was begotten of old from
everlasting, as we have prooved. And it was not only a decree, but a promise
also; it runs plainly in the form and tenor of a promise: Ask of me, and I
will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for
thy possession.

Now then consider; how precious is that promise that was made in a familiar
parlie and conference between the Father and the Son from all eternity?
Christ was foreseen and ordained even of old to be our (...), or Mediator:
upon this ground God makes even then a gracious promise to him for us; a
promise of giving us to him, and consequently of giving us eternal life
through him. So that here we have plainly the reason why the Apostle says,
that God promised eternal life before the world began? Namely, because Christ
was even then in the counsel and purpose of God our Media^our. And hence in
another place, he says, that the grace of God, whereby we are called with an
holy calling, and consequently everlastingly saved, was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Christ Jesus was even then looked
upon as our Redeemer: God stipulates and promises to him; and he again
restipulates to undertake for us. Certainly then the promise of eternal life
must needs be exceeding precious, being the substance of that Dialogue (as I
may say) and communication, which passed between the Father and the Son
before the world was created. And if that great promise be so ancient, then
questionless so are all promises: because eternal life does eminently
contain in it all other blessings, just as the heaven of heavens does all
inferior parts of the world. Now how should the consideration of this stir
up our hearts to love Jesus Christ, who received promises for us, not only
before we our selves were, but even before there was any time, or creature
made.

Thirdly, Consider the precious things that are couched in the promises, and
they appertain either to temporal life, or to spiritual grace, or to
eternal glory.

First, Great and precious are the promises, which do appertain unto this
life. Godliness (says the Apostle) has the promise of this life, as well as
of that which is to come. And even in this respect, God has promised never to
leave us, nor forsake us, Heb. 13. 5. There are in this place no less then
five negatives to strengthen and confirm our faith in the truth of the
promise; (...); as if he should have said, I will in no wise whatsoever come of
it at any time forsake thee; mine eye shall be still upon thee, and I will
watch over thee for good continually. And mark, I pray, what the Prophet
says, Esa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of
his presence saved them, in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and
carried them all the days of old. The place may be read interrogatively thus,
Was he not afflicted? etc. That is, did he not take to heart the wrongs done to
his people in Egypt? Was not Christ the Angel of Gods presence their Conductor
and Savior? Did he not bear them, as a tender Mother or Nurse does her young
child? Did he not carry them as the Eagle does her brood, with such care,
that she her self may not hurt them, and at such a height, as others may not
reach them? In such manner does Christ for ever protect his people. In Zech. 2.
5. he promises to be a wall of fire round about them: where the Holy Ghost
alludeth to the practice of Travailers in the Wilderness, who by surrounding
themselves with a fire, did thereby fray away the wild beasts, and kept them
off from annoying them: now such a defense will Christ be unto his Saints; he
will be with them in most deadly dangers, When they pass through the water,
and when they walk through the fire, Esa. 43. 2. Fire and water are two most
devouring elements, good servants, but bad masters, as we say; and therefore
here they are put for all other perilous and dangerous kinds: Christ will save
and deliver his people from them all. We read, Dan. 3. 25. that the three
Children were cast into the fiery furnace: But what said the Tyrant? I see
four (says he) and the fourth is like the Son of God: and in all
probability it was so; it being usual under the old Testament for Christ,
upon some weighty occasions to appear in humane shape. Thus Christ will be
with his people in the furnace of affliction; and either he will provide that
it shall not be overheate, or else he will work a miracle to restrain the
power of the flames: he will both preserve them in, and deliver them out of
trouble: he will so sanctify affliction, that it shall prove a very blessing
and mercy to them.

Secondly, Great also and precious are the promises, which appertain unto
spiritual grace: The Apostle says, That by them we partake of the divine or
godly nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. He does not mean it of the essence or substance of
God, as some of the Heathen conceited, affirming man to be aurae divinae
particula, a little piece of the divine Spirit: Thus did the Platonicks dream,
and also the Manichees and Priscillianists: not so, I say; for the essence of
God is incommunicable: but we are to understand it of the graces of the
Spirit, whereby the image of God is stamped again and restored in man:
therefore the Apostle does not call it (...), that is, the essential nature of
God: but (...), the godly nature; as if he had expressed it in one word, (...),
Sainthood, or a nature approaching to Gods, resembling and like unto Gods. So
that Believers through Christ have in their souls a lively image and
representation of the perfections, of the virtues, and of the life of God:
according to that of the Apostle, Colos. 3. 10. And have put on the new man,
which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him: he puts
knowledge, which is the incipient part of regeneration, for the whole,
including under that both holiness and righteousness. And answering to this
is that precious promise, Esa. 65. 17. where the Lord says, That he will make
new heavens, and a new earth: This is meant of the spiritual excellency of the
Church, in regard both of doctrine, of discipline, and of life: and therefore
it holds forth a promise concerning the renewing of the soul by the Spirit of
the Lord: where doctrine is sound, discipline wholesome, and life holy, there
are new Heavens and a new earth, as I may say, and there the soul is become a
new creature by the sanctifying Spirit of God.

Lastly, great and precious also are the promises appertaining to eternal
glory: they contain in them that heavenly inheritance of the Saints in Light,
where they shall have blessed communion with God, with Christ, with the Holy
Spirit, with elect Angels, and with one another for ever: where they shall have
the quintessence of all good things, the sweetness of all Mercy and
consolation: where they shall have the splendor and bright rays of
everlasting honor; where after this life (and this life is but a bubble, a
smoke, a wind, a shadow) they shall have that unutterable and immortal Crown
of glory set upon their heads, which Christ has promised: in a word, where
they shall have totum quod volunt, and nihil quod nolunt, all that they would
have, and nothing that they would not have. Hence it is, that the Gospel, which
holds forth the promise of these things, is termed glorious, and the
ministration thereof likewise glorious. And therefore as the Apostle makes the
comparison between the Law and the Gospel: if the ministration of death and
condemnation be glorious (says he) how shall not the ministration of the
Spirit and of righteousness be rather glorious? so may I say: if the glory of
Christ be so splendent and shining, so attractive and alluring even in the
promise and expectation of it: what then will it be in the full fruition and
enjoyment thereof? if so excellent and surpassing at a distance, and through
the lattice, as I may say: what will it be in the nearest touch and vision
thereof, when we shall come our selves to participate of that glory? Now we
see but in a glass darkely, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 12. that is, here
we see God but as we see our own Image in a glass, and not the very face it
self; here we see him by a kind of reflection, and at second hand, as I may
say, in the Ordinances, in the creatures, and such like dim representations,
which at the farthest are in some sense aenigmaticall, full of intricacy and
obscurity. But then we shall see God face to face; and then we shall know him,
as we our selves are known by him, that is to say, perfectly; I mean with
such a perfection as a glorified creature is capable of. Thus have I showed
unto you what excellent and precious things are contained in the Promises for
our souls, and for our bodies, for this life and for the life to come for
ever: o then how much more precious and excellent, how much more to be desired
and longed for is Jesus Christ, by whom so manifold and unspeakeable blessings
are conveyed unto us*

Fourthly, Christ has bestowed up-Beleevers

Gracious. Liberal. Everlasting.
First, the love of Christ unto his Saints is infinite and unmeasurable: it is
beyond all imagination or conception. As the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you, says Christ, Joh. 15. 9. Now who can understand with what love the
Father has embraced his Son? who can dive into the bottomless depth of
that tender affection, which the infinite God bears unto Christ? no more can
we define and fully set forth what the love of Christ unto his Saints is? The
Apostle indeed would have the Ephesians able to comprehend with all Saints, the
breadth, and length, the depth and height of the love of God in Christ: but yet
for all that he concludes, that it passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18. 19.

Secondly, Christ's love is a gracious love. That which the Lord speaks by his
Prophet concerning Jerusalem, may fitly be applied to all his people, When I
passed by thee and saw thee polluted or trodden under foot, as the word
signifies) in thine own blood, I said unto thee live. That is, (as we use to
apply it spiritually) when we were in our natural filthiness and
uncleanenesse, which we drew from our first Parents, God loved us freely, and
not for our worth or merit; not for our beauty or comeliness: we had no
worth in us, nor no beauty upon us: yet he loved us, and said unto us live,
that is, he made us to live spiritually; he did put the life of grace into us:
he did breath into the nostrills of our souls (as I may say) the breath of
heavenly life: his saying in this new Creation was as his saying was in the
first Creation of all things: he did but speak the word, and it was done.
Again, he adds in the forementioned Prophecy, verse the eight, I spread my
skirt over thee. He alludeth to a custom or Ceremony of the Jews, whereby at
Marriages, the Husband in token of his Interest and propriety, and also as a
pledge of his most tender love and endeared affection to his wife, did cover
her with a lap or skirt of his garment: now this matrimonial rite was a
figure of the merit of Christ, who has by his righteousness covered all our
sins and transgressions, veiled all our filthiness and polutions, and hid
all our spiritual nakedness, and deformities, and that most freely, most
graciously, most undeservedly, according to that Hosea 14. 4. I will heal
their backsliding; I will love them freely.

Thirdly, Christ's love to his Saints is a liberal love, a munificent, a
magnificent and bountiful love: this appears plainly by those hard and
bitter things, that he underwent for us, Philip, 2. 7. the Apostle says, that
he made himself of no reputation: he took upon him the form of a servant,
and was made in the likeness, or habit of men. The original word in the place
signifies, that he emptied himself, or redegit se ad nihilum, he brought
himself, as it were to nothing: he divested and stripped himself of the robes
of Divine Majesty, laying them, his Throne, his Crown, and his Scepter of
Glory aside for a while. Through the extremity of his agony his body did sweat
drops of blood: he did exhaust such an infinitely rich and precious treasure,
as all Heaven and earth could not recompense and make up again. It is reported
of the Pelioan, that she opens her breast with her bill, and feeds her
young ones with the blood distilling from her: and therefore (says mine
Author) the Egyptians did make that kind an hieroglyphick of Piety and pity,
and upon that consideration they spared them at their Tables. Now this creature
is a lively picture and Emblem of Christ: he parted with that, which was most
dear unto him; the soul in his body, the blood in his veins, and (which was
more then all the rest) the sweet and ravishing apprehensions of his Fathers
love eclipsed, and darkened in his agonies, and so totally eclipsed, that he
cried out with a loud voice, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And all
this he did in his infinite pity and love to us: the Apostle says, that he
loved his Church and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25.

Lastly, Christ's love is eternal and everlasting: a love that never decays or
waxes cold; like the stone Asbestos, of which I read in Solinus, that being
once hot, it can Iul. Solin: polyhistor. cap. 12.
never be cooled again. The love of Christ is like a Fountain ever flowing,
and never dried up: or like the sacred fire, which never went out. I have loved
thee with an everlasting love, says he, Jer. 31. 3. and in another place, with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee. Though the Saints offend
Christ often, yet he loves them still: he only purges them and heales them of
their spiritual maladies, which cannot be done without some smart: but he does
not a whit lesson, or detract his love from them. Though his people come upon
him every day for new favors and new supplies; yet his goodwill is never
wearied or tired out: yea though thousands, millions of his Saints press upon
him at once; yet he has for them all, and the Fountain of his love is never
emptied. I like the matter of the Poet very well; although, I confess his
verse be something jiggish and toying.

Sumit unus, sumunt mill:
Quantum isti, tantum i^e:
Neque sumpius absumitur.
One Believer draws water of life, and supply of all needful blessings out of
this well of salvation; and a thousand like gracious souls do the like; and
the one draws as much as the thousand: and yet the well is never drawn dry.
Now then a little to recapitulate. If the love of Christ unto his Saints be
infinite, boundless and unmeasur^ble, if it be gracious, free, and undes^rved,
^r it be liberal, rich, and bountiful. Lastly, if it be eternal,
everlasting, and never decaying, o what a whetstone should this be to our
affections, what a spur to our Spirits, and what a bellows to blow up, and
kindle the fire of our love to Christ? nothing does more conciliate and attract
love, then love it self: it were horrible ingratefulnesse not to spend, and be
spent (as the Apostle speaks) for one that has loved us so much as Christ
has done: certainly if love do not draw us unto him, nothing will. The acts
of Christ's love are the cords wherewith he draws souls unto himself. I drew
them with the cords of a man, with bands of love, says he, Hosea, 11. 4. and
in another place, with Jer. 31. 3.
loving kindness have I drawn thee*. It Is an Argument then, that we are not
drawn at all, if love do not effect it.

Fifthly, Christ bestows upon Believers Joh. 14. 26. The comforter, which is
the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name (says Christ) he shall
teach you all things, etc. Now let us consider how excellent the Spirit is, in
all the workings of it upon our hearts, and then we shall see what a precious
and lovely gift this is.

The Spirit of Christ does these things. It illuminates our minds. It
sanctifies our natures. It seals our adoption.


First of all, the Spirit of Christ does illuminate the mind and understanding:
it opens the windows of the soul, as I may say, and sets up a new Light in
it: it brings in light upon light. Even by nature men have some Light, such as
it is: by Art and industry they acquire more: but the saving Light of the
Spirit of Christ far excels all that of the natural man, as the Light of
the Sun does the light the Moon, or as the Light of seven days does the
light of one: hence is that Spirit by an excellency called the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding: and it is said to lead us and to guide us into all
truth, Joh. 14. 16. I have many things (says Christ) to say unto you: but you
cannot bear them now: but when the spirit comes; he shall lead you into all
truth, that is, he shall open your understandings, he shall enlarge your
capacities, and shall make you able to comprehend those Divine and heavenly
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, which shall be dispensed unto you. Ye have
an unction from the Holy one (says the Apostle) and ye know all things, 1 John 2. 20. The Holy one here spoken of is the whole Trinity, God the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost: the unction is not the Spirit it self: but a
thing different from the essence and substance thereof: viz. the grace of
illumination and saving Knowledge, wherewith the eyes of our minds being
anointed as with an unction, we come to know all things, not absolutely, and
omnisciently, as God does: but to know all things that are needful to be
known unto salvation. And hence in the 27. verse, the same anointing is said
to teach us, and that we need no other teaching, but that: it is called
eye salve, Revel. 3. 18.

Secondly, the Spirit of Christ sanctifies the hearts and natures of
Believers, whereby they are really changed from the filthiness of sin unto
the purity of Gods Image; that as Christ himself is holy, so are they in some
measure by an inherent holiness: their love and their hatred, their joy and
their sorrow, all their passions and affections, are not such as they were
before, but they are quite altered and changed, new-moulded and fashioned, made
after Gods own heart, and conformed to his holy will. This is the blessed
work of the Spirit: We are sanctified through the Spirit and belief of the
truth, says the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. The Spirit is principal in stamping
the Image of God upon the soul: the Spirit it is that does convey the
efficacy of Christ's death and blood unto us. Hence it is called in Scripture
wind, fire, water, and the like.

First, it is a wind. Awake o North, and come thou South, Cant. 4. 16. and
that for these reasons. As wind allayeth heat: so the sanctifying Spirit of
God asswageth hot and burning distempers in the soul; it suppresses inordinate
and lustful desires, moderating all our affections, and keeping them in a good
temper. Again, as wind purges the air, and dries up superfluous moisture in
the earth: so the Spirit purges our corrupt natures, and dries up the
excrementious humors of sin, which are Enemies to spiritual health. Also
Fav^nius the Westwind, dic^^ur a savendo, from cherishing of fruits and other
things.
as the wind is a great fructifier, causing the fruits of the earth to spring
out: so the Spirit of God makes that soul, which naturally is as a barren and
dry wilderness, no plants of grace growing in it; but the weeds of sin
rankling every where, to be a fruitful and flourishing garden, where Christ
delights to walk and to take his repast, beholding how his trees of
Righteousness do spread, and blossom, and bear most pleasant fruit. When
the wind of the Spirit does blow upon the garden of the soul, then the spices
of grace flow out: then Christ may come into his garden and eat his delicious
fruits of union and Sanctification. The soul is not now an empty vine,
neither does it bear wild grapes; it does not bear grapes of gall and bitter
clusters, but fruits of Righteousness and holiness, most sweet and well
relishing, most pleasing and acceptable to Christ.

Again, the wind is a quickening and enlivening thing: the breath of every
living creature is a wind: Come from the four winds o breath, and breath upon
these slain, that they may live, says the Prophet, Ezekiel. 37. 9. Now such is
the Spirit of God also: it raises up the soul from the death of sin, and
puts the life of grace into it: it sets us upon our feet and makes us to walk
before God in the Light, and in the land of the living.

Lastly, As the wind is not in the power of any man, it blows where it
lists, as our Savior says; and it is impossible to hide it, Prove. 27. 16.
So the Spirit of regeneration is not at the arbitrament, will, and disposing of
any creature: but it is sui juris, at its own choice and disposing, at its own
pleasure, when, where, and how it will breath and dispense grace: Of his own
will begat he us with the word of truth, says the Apostle, Jam. 1. 18.

Secondly, the Spirit of sanctification is also called fire in the Scriptures;
He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, Mat. 3. 11. It
resembles fire in the purging property thereof; as fire is a great purger,
attracting and drawing corrupt aires to it self, segregating and severing pure
substances from dross, as we see in the trying of gold and silver: so does
the fire of the Spirit draw away from our souls all pestilent and infectious
sents of sin, and by little and little purges away all the dross of our
corruptions.

Again, The Spirit resembles fire in the consuming property thereof: fire
purges only, when it meets with a substance that can endure it: but when it
lights upon combustible matter, then it wastes and consumes: so the fire of the
Spirit does no more then purge the hearts of the Elect: yet it wastes and
consumes their lusts, because they be things to be wasted and abolished.

Lastly, The Spirit of grace resembles fire in the assimilating property
thereof: fire turns other things that are approximate into its own nature: it
makes things hot, as it self is hot: it propagates and spreads it self,
increasing its own flames by licking up and catching in other things to it
self: so the sanctifying Spirit of God does fire our hearts and affections,
heating them with his own heat, kindling them with his own sacred sparks,
assimilating and making us like unto himself: holy as he is holy, pure as he
is pure, and perfect, as he is perfect. The soul being acted and wrought upon
by the Spirit, is changed into the same glory, and becomes spiritual like it
self. We know that a paper will smell of the musk or civet that is put in
it: so a soul endued with the Spirit of grace, cannot but become gracious: it
must have the same savor, the same odoriserous and pleasing sent that the
Spirit it self has.

Thirdly, The precious Spirit, which Christ bestows upon his Saints, is called
water also; because as water washes away the filthiness of the flesh; so does
that Spirit the uncleanness of the soul. And again, as water has a
softning and suppling virtue with it: so the gracious Spirit of Christ does
mollify and soften hard hearts; making them of impenetrable and insensible to
become broken and contrite, of stubborn and froward, to be flexible and
pliable unto Gods holy will: so that though they were before like Leviathans
heart, as hard as a piece of the neither millstone; yet now they can tremble at
judgments, submit to commands, and be glad to close with the promises of
Christ. Thus you see that the Spirit which Christ bestows upon his Saints, is a
sanctifying, a purging a regenerating, and a renewing Spirit.

Lastly, This Spirit seals our adoption, our filiation or sonship unto us.
By adoption we are received into the number of the sons of God; and by the
Spirit of Christ we come to be assured of this prerogative. The Spirit of God
seals up our salvation and blessed state unto us: The Apostle says, That God
has sealed us and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.
22. He has given us the earnest of his Spirit for the assurance of our
heavenly inheritance. The Apostles manner of speaking is taken from the custom
of men, who to assure and confirm others in the truth of their promises and
covenants, are wont to set their seal to bills and bonds, and such like
instruments: so God sets his seal to all his promises, and to the covenant of
grace, which he has plighted with us, by giving us his holy Spirit to renew
us, to imprint his image upon our souls, and to bear witness within us, that
we are his children, and consequently heirs of life and glory everlasting. Now
this Spirit is expressly called the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4. 6. Because the
Holy Ghost seals up our adoption in Christ: so that through Christ it is made
sure unto us. Let us now sum up all which has been said of this gift: if
Christ has not withheld his gracious Spirit from us, but has given even that
unto us, to enlighten us, to sanctify us, and to assure us of our adoption and
salvation: where can we find greater favor then this? and where should our
minds be lifted up into the opinion of any thing more then of Christ?
Doubtless, the giver of such a precious gift, ought himself to be much more
precious unto us. If we make great account of the gift, much more ought we
most highly to esteem of the bestower of it.

Lastly, Christ bestows upon Believers Access to the throne of grace. Good
success of our prayers.


First, Believers have blessed access; Let us come boldly unto the throne of
grace (says the Apostle) that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. The Apostles phrase is (...), a word which
signifies liberty of speech, and boldness of face, when a man intrepidly and
undauntedly utters his mind before great ones, without blushing, without
weakness of heart, without shaking of his voice, without haluccination,
imperfection and faltring in speech; when neither majesty nor authority can
take off his courage, so as to stop his mouth, and make him afraid to speak.
With such spirits would the Apostle have us to come unto God by prayer: we
must come with paresie, with confidence of heart, and freedom of speech. This
is a fruit of our access to the throne of grace, to which doubtless the
Apostle would never have exhorted us, if we were not blessed with such a
privilege.

Again, A like exhortation we have Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true
heart, (...), in full assurance of faith, that is, in steadfastness of faith,
without wavering, without doubting. The Apostle means it of our full assurance
of Gods favor, and acceptance of our persons in Christ. In the Law the high
Priest going into the Sanctuary, did bear upon his shoulders, and in his
pectorall or brestplate, the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Now this
figures unto us the great love that Christ bears unto his people: he has them
always at his heart; he loves them most tenderly and dearly: he bears them
also upon the shoulders of his mighty protection, carrying them a loft out of
the reach of all adversary power. And he is gone into the heavenly Sanctuary
with Vrim and Thummim, with the names of his people upon his breast, for a
memorial before the Lord continually: so that now through his mediation we may
draw near unto God in plerophorie, and full assurance of faith: nothing
doubting but that God will for his sake accept both of our persons and of our
prayers.

Secondly, Believers have not only access to God, but also good success of
all their suites and petitions, which they put up unto him. Christ by his
office of mediation and intercession, is an advocate for his people, and does
in his own person appear before God for them: he takes upon himself their
suite and their cause, as an Advocate in Law does his Clients. Hence is that
exceeding sweet and consolatory promise of the Apostle, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any
man sin (says he) we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Here is never a word, but
has sweetness in it. Mark, I pray; first he says, If any man sin; not as
though there were some that did not sin: for that this very Apostle beats
against expressly in the end of the first Chapter: but when he says, If any
man, he speaks cordial things, he speaks to the heart and comfort of sinners,
showing that with God there is no accepting of persons; but all without
exception of any for exterior adjuncts and qualities, do find grace in his
fight through Christ: this is plainly the inference of the indefinite particle,
Any.

Secondly, He says, That we have an Advocate: an Advocate is a forensicall
word, and it signifies properly one that is called to, or assumed as an
Assistant, as a friend, as an helper, as an Intercessor: such Advocates did
guilty ones among the Greeks and Romans assume to themselves. Now such an
Advocate is Christ unto us: he is our Patron, he is our spokes-man, he it is
that pleads our cause for us; he it is that by the merit of his expiation
does entreat for us. The Devil is called our (...), our Adversary, another
Law-terme, 1 Pet. 5. 8. he lays in hard against us; and therefore he is
elsewhere called the Accuser of the Brethren: and guilty we are too: but
Christ is our (...), our Advocate, and he entreats the Judge for us: he
implores mercy and clemency for us.

Thirdly, The Apostle says, that we have an Advocate with the Father; with
him still at his right hand: so with him, that he is his own natural Son: so
with him, that he needs but only show himself for us, and without speaking
any word we are accepted. At that day (namely at that day when I shall be
ascended into heaven) ye shall ask in my Name (says Christ) and I say not
unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: for the Father himself loves
you; because ye have loved me, and have believed, that I came out from God,
Joh. 16. 26, 27. In these words Christ bids us not so to depend and hang upon
him, as to have no confidence in God the Father, as if he were angry with us,
and did not love us. Christ is so an Advocate with the Father, as that the
Father is made ours fully and perfectly: and so the eager and malicious
adversary can do nothing against us.

Fourthly, Our Advocate is Jesus, a most sweet and heart refreshing name; it
signifies a Savior; one that does not only entreat for us, but perfectly
save us: other Advocates may entreat, and not prevail; but Christ intreates
and prevails; and so saves his people from their sins.

Fifthly, He is called Christ; there is an addition and increase of comfort in
this name; it signifies anointed. Christ was anointed to be our Prophet, to
show us the ways of life and salvation: he was anointed to be our Priest, to
offer a reconciling sacrifice for us. And he was also anointed to be our King,
to protect us, and to destroy all our enemies.

Sixthly, Our Advocate is called the Righteous, by an eminency, none so
righteous as he: he is perfectly righteous: so that he needs not, as other
Advocates, to plead for himself: he pleads only for us: and he must needs
have good success in his pleading; because he is righteous himself: he is the
Righteous; just, and a justifier; absolutely and completely righteous by his
own inherent purity; and conveying righteousness to us by imputation.

Lastly, our Advocate is such an one as stands in our room, and takes the
whole penalty and punishment due to us for our offense upon himself: therefore
the Apostle adds, that he is the propitiation for our sins, that is, he is
the sacrifice that implores and begs pardoning Mercy for us. Hence the blood of
sprinkling, that is, the blood of Jesus Christ, is said to speak better things
then that of Abel, Heb. 12. 24. for of Abels God speaks thus: the voice of thy
brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. Abels blood cried unto God for
vengeance to be executed upon Caine that murdered him: but the blood of Christ
cries unto God for mercy to be showed unto poor miserable sinners. Now then
if Christ be our Advocate, if he be an Advocate with the Father, always in his
presence, always near and dear unto him; if he be an Advocae mighty to save;
if he be an Advocate separated and sanctified of God himself, and anointed to
bear Office for us; if he be an Advocate perfectly righteous and blameless in
his own person; if he be such an Advocate, as is willing to stand in our
stead, and to bear the burden of our deserts, like him that cried out when he
saw his friend ready to be sl^ine,

Me me! Adsum qui f^ci; in me convertite ^er^u^. Me me! I am he that did the
fact, turn your sword upon me; Lastly, if he be such an Advocate as refuses
none, but receives all without exception, that come unto him: if Christ, I say,
be such an Advocate, such a days-man, so every way qualified and furnished to
do us good; then surely it cannot be, but that the prayers, which we present
unto God in his name, must find acceptance, and obtain a glorious return.
Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name; he will give it you, says Christ,
Joh. 16. 23. Christ puts incense upon our prayers and mingles them with the
sweet odours of his own merits: he is the only Altar of Christians,
sanctifying all their gifts and sacrifices. Thus you have a taste of the
excellent privileges of Believers: through Jesus Christ they have access to
the Throne of Grace; and all their petitions find acceptance with God,
returning (as the Spies did out of Canaan) with great and weighty clusters of
blessings, or (as Jacobs sons did from their brother Joseph) full and laden
with good things. Oh then how precious, how lovely. how longed for ought Jesus
Christ to be, who accumulates, and heaps such royal favors upon us? who
stores us with such rich and inestimable gifts, who gives us free ingresse into
the presence of God, and regresse from him with joyful hearts; who makes way
for our prayers, that they may come as things of worth unto his Father, and
sends them back again with good news, and glad tidings of blessed success:
how precious, I say, and how highly to be esteemed, and regarded is such a
Benefactour as this? how ought we to draw out all our love, and the very
strength of our affections to cast them upon such a lovely object as this, and
to embrace Jesus Christ, who has done for us above all that we can either
name, or think? I pass now to some means by which we may awaken, and stir
up our affections unto Christ. And herein I shall give no other directions,
then the Church does to the daughters of Jerusalem in Cant. 5. 10. etc. And the
occasion was this. The Church was seeking Christ earnestly, and diligently, and
in her seeking, enquires of the daughters of Jerusalem for her beloved: upon
which the daughters utter these words. What is thy beloved more then another
beloved, o thou fairest among women? The Church for answer, and as a means to
draw forth the affections of the daughters; sets forth exactly the high
perfections and excellencies of Christ: and she does anatomize him in every
part, and particularize him in every excellency, setting him forth thus:

First, the Church describes Christ in general, and that two ways.

1. Positively. 2. Comparatively.
First, positively; my beloved is white and ruddy, verse 10. that is, he is of
the most complete, perfect, healthy constitution. The strongest complexion and
constitution is noted by these two colors; white and ruddy: and it denotes
unto us the power and omnipotency of Christ, whereby he is able to do the
greatest things in the world. Also his whiteness denotes his purity and
Righteousness: and ruddy; his own blood and sufferings; and likewise his
vengeance on his enemies, for he has his garments dipped in blood, Isaiah 63. 2.

Secondly, comparatively, he is the chief of ten thousand: or having (...) the
banner above ten thousand. Christ is the Standard bearer of ten thousand, that
does excel all men and Angels, and all other creatures in the world. Now in
Armies the goodliest men use to carry the Ensign or banner,: so Christ is
incomparable beyond all other, and has the perfections of Angels, of men, and
of all creatures beside. Again, the Ensign is a warlike Instrument, and the
bearer thereof, one of the chief: so Christ is for the Ensign of his people,
Isa. 11. 10. And all the Armies in Heaven and earth do follow him, Rev. 19.
11. the Saints they worship him, the Angels they adore him; for he is the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah: and he is the firstborn of God, set above all the
Kings of the Earth.

Secondly, the Church descends from her general commendations of Christ, to
that which is more particular, setting him forth by all the members and
lineaments of his body.

First, the Church begins with Christ's head, which is the most eminent part of
all the body. His head is as the most fine gold, verse 11. that is, Christ has
a head most glorious and excellent, most splendent and shining, as pure as
gold. This denotes unto us the beauty, dignity, eminency, and government of
Christ. As gold is of a splendent and durable nature; so is the government and
dignity of Christ everlasting and durable, it is Divine and heavenly, and of a
glorious extent.

2. His locks are curled, and black as a Raven, verse 11. Black and curled
locks are a sign of a hot brain, and they do argue quickness, and dexterity
of wit and strength: this denotes to us the vigor and strength of Christ, and
the depth of all his counsels.

3. His eyes are as Doves eyes by the streams of waters, washed with milk,
and fitly set, verse 12. that is, his eyes are pure as Doves: so that he cannot
behold any evil with the least approbation: and they are quick to search all
things: and they are white as milk, in that he does behold his people in grace
and mercy: Lastly, his eyes are fitly set; that is, as a Diamond in a ring, or,
as the fi^ling stones, which were set in the hollow places of the golden Ephod,
Exodus 25. 7. and those stones were called stones of fullness, because they did
fit the hollow places in that golden Ephod. In like manner Christ has steady
eyes, he is not goggle eyed, (as we say) but his eyes are steady and firm,
they are as a stone set in a gold ring, which cannot be turned out of its
place: so are Christ's eyes evermore guiding his fight to look perfectly into
all things, both into the depth of Gods Counsels, and into the depth of man's
heart and understanding.

4. Christ's cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, verse 13. that
is, he is like a bed of sweet spices, or grown plants, that serve for persume.
This denotes and shows unto us Christ's beauty and grace, his comeliness and
gravity to all that do behold him. All Christ's graces are sweet, and his fight
and countenance has a transforming virtue in it, it makes those that behold
Christ to be like unto him, while others behold his glory, they are transformed
into the same Image of his glory, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

5. His lips are like dropping sweet smelling myrrh, verse 13. The Lillies are
fair and sweet of themselves; yet he adds, they dropp pure myrrh. This is
to be referred unto the holy, heavenly, sweet and gracious Doctrine of Christ.
Honey and myrrh, that is, love and mercy, grace and goodness did flow out of
Christ's lips: so its said in Psalm. 45. 1. grace was in his lips. Christ's heart
was a treasure full of all Divine grace and goodness, then needs must his lips
be sweet; yea, and far surpass in sweetness honey and myrrh.

6. His hands are as gold Rings, set with a berill, or Chrysolite, verse 14.
The hebrew word (...) put for Chrysolite, signifies a precious stone. The
hands of Christ are set forth with all ornaments and precious stones, and
shining rings of Gold. This denotes unto us not only the person of Christ; but
also his actions and workings. The operations of Christ are admirable and full
of Majesty, if we consider them in the course of the creatures, in the Sun,
Moon, Stars, in the growth of herbs and plants; so in all the Creation of
the world, in gubernation, in ordering of the event of all things, and the
like. The works of God are incomprehensible, as in Job, 9. 12. who shall say
unto him what do thou? that is, the things which he does are too high for
man's understanding. Now as all the government of Egypt went through the hands
of Joseph; so all the works of God go through the hands of Christ. The Father
has committed all his Judgments and works into the hands of his Son,
glorious therefore are the works, which Christ does perform both in Heaven
and in earth.

7. His breast, or belly is overlaid with Saphires, as bright Ivory, ver. 14.
Ivorie and Saphires are precious and beautiful: and with these Christ has his
belly overlaid. This denotes unto us the bowels and inward affections, the
tender mercy and pitiful commiserations of Christ toward his Saints and
Children.

8. His legs are as pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine gold, ver.
15. That is, Christ's ways are full of Majesty and power, and as Marble pillars
they are firm and constant, having sockets of Gold to sustain them, and to
bear up his feet, whereby his way is perfect, by which he walks safely,
treading down his enemies under his feet, and brings glad tidings of peace
unto his people.

9. His looks, or countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, ver. 15.
that is, Christ was of a goodly and tall stature, like unto the Cedars of
Lebanon, a goodly Mountain on the north side of the Land of Canaan. This
shows the Majesty and countenance of Christ, when he shall plead for his
Church and people against their Enemies.

10. His mouth, or palate is sweet, ver. 16. this is the same with his lips,
and shows how sweet and comfortable, how gracious and amiable the Doctrine of
the Gospel is, this expression is here again repeated to show, that Christ is
better known in Sion, then in any other place. All the works of Christ are
glorious, but his Gospel exceeds them all in glory. The Gospel is the glass,
wherein we see the glory of Christ more clearly, then in any other way;
therefore the words of Christ are much more sweet to a Believers taste, then
honey or the most sweetest of spices are unto the mouth.

Lastly, Christ is precious and amiable in his whole self: yea, he is
altogether lovely, ver. 16. that is, Christ is lovely in general, and he is
lovely in particular: he is lovely in all parts, and altogether: yea, he is
altogether lovely. As if the Church should have said, what shall I say more of
my beloved? he is all over, and altogether lovely. Christ was lovely to God, to
Angels, to Saints: he was lovely in his nature and person, in his Offices and
graces, yea, he is all over lovely, he is wholly delectable.

The Church having thus described her beloved, she concludes with an
exclamation; this is my beloved, and this is my friend, oh daughters of
Jerusalem: this is he, that I sought with so much diligence, and for whom I was
sick of love: this is he, that shall have my best affections, in whom I desire
to glory in: this is my friend, oh ye daughters of Jerusalem.

In the next words, we may take notice of the effect, that this commendation
of Christ has upon the daughters of Jerusalem. Whether is thy Beloved gone, oh
thou fairest among women? whether is thy Beloved turned aside, that we may
seek him with thee? The daughters hearing such a high commendation from the
Church of her Beloved, hearing of his riches and glory, and of his beauty and
excellency, she is enflamed with a desire to seek Christ also.

Now from this singular effect, which this commendations of Christ wrought in
the daughters of Jerusalem: Ministers of the Gospel may learn and see what
their chief duty is; namely, to display those rich treasures of grace, and
that splendent shining glory, which is in Christ, to publish and spread before
men those manifold excellencies, which be in him, to draw and allure them unto
Christ. The Ministers of the Gospel should employ their whole force and
strength this way, that poor souls may be drawn to esteem highly of Christ.
Who will seek after that, which he knows not off? and who will not seek
after a precious jewel? O then tell people where this jewel, this pearl, this
treasure is, that they may seek and search, and become Merchants for to
adventure all for Jesus Christ.

To conclude, study then all his excellencies, riches, beauty, loveliness,
offices, and the nature of Christ: meditate upon whole Christ, and upon all the
parts of him; and never give over until thou have sweetened thy soul,
enkindl'd thy love, and fixed all thy affections upon him. Meditate what Christ
has done for thee, what moved him unto it; and likewise how unworthy thou
art, and how thankful thou art, and let these meditations draw forth thy
affections unto him.

Again, Feed upon Christ's love; that which we feed upon, turns into our own
nature: love is fuel for it self; love feeds upon love, and the person
beloved: so let us upon Christ's love: the more we live upon Christ's love, the
more our love will be enflamed toward him. Kiss sweetly the glorified body of
our crucified Savior, with the lips of infinitely indeared and unexpressible
affectionate love: though the distance be great between Christ and the soul;
yet faith will bring them easily together.

Lastly, Go to the everlasting fountain of Christ's blood; let the cock run;
rence thy soul (as it were) in the blood of the Lamb; apply it for
justification and sanctification; so shall thou be free from the guilt and
pollution of sin; thou do ask but the acquittance, the debt being paid in
Christ.

FINIS.
A Table of those Scriptures, which are occasionally cleared and briefly
illustrated in the foregoing Treatise.
The first number directs to the Chapter, the second to the Verse, the third to
the Page.

Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page. 49. 10. 67. 49. 22. 81. 49. 24. 83. Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 17. 12. 7. 23. 20, 21. 132. 33. 19. 53. 33. 11. 70.
Leviticus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 21. 17, 18. 88. 25. 42. 106. Deuteronomie.
Chap. Verse. Page. 33. 14. 31. 1 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 14. 97. 3. 1. 23. 3 21. 83. 3. 18. 180. 2 Samuel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 18. 3. 196. 22. 19. 6. 1 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page. 10. 21. 27. 24. 2. 26. 89. 7. 21. 142. 2 Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page. 13. 21. 72. Job.
Chap. Verse. Page. 22. 2. 191. 23. 8, 9, 10. 182. 26. 14. 56. Psalms.
Psalm. Verse. Page. 2. 8. 109. 2. 7. 8. 215. 9. 10. 163. 16. 3. 191. 16. 5, 6.
17. 22. 8. 7. 40. 3. 6. 49. 27. 125. 45. 2. 57. 41. 9. 72. 61. 2. 208. 73. 25,
26. 17. 22. 74. 12. 113. 116. 15. 195. 126. 6. 32. Proverbs.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6. 26. 29. 8. 11. 147. 8. 14. 73. 8. 22, 23, 24. 25. 17. 6.
159. 25. 25. 40. 27. 16. 236. 30. 1. 68. Ecclesiastes.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3. 14. 135. 10. 2. 28. 12. 11. 80. Canticles.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 2, 3. 178. 1. 6. 106. 1. 13. 183. 2. 8. 61. 2. 9. 78. 3.
1, 2, 3. 14. 19. 3. 4. 15. 4. 16. 235. 5. 1. 162. 5. 2, 3. 175. 5. 3. 176. 5
10. 9. 151. 249 8. 6. 192. 8. 6, 7. 148. Isaiah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6. 7. 58. 102. 8. 17. 181. 9. 6. 115. 11. 6. 20. 11. 12. 65.
19. 11. 195. 22. 22. 115. 26. 19. 73. 26. 8, 9. 172. 28. 16. 164. 33. 14. 46.
40. 15. 17. 130. 40. 11. 97. 41. 19. 100. 43. 2. 221. 50. 10. 181. 53. 2. 164.
53. 10. 215. 53. 11. 163. 56. 6, 7. 101. 60. 7. 102. 61. 1. 79. 61. 1, 2, 3.
139. 63. 9. 97. 65. 16. 212. 63. 9. 220. 65. 17. 223. 63. 2. 250. Jeremiah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 23. 6. 124. 30. 17. 169. 31. 3. 230. Lamentations.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3. 24. 17. Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 9. 3. 137. 16. 6. 8. 227. 20. 46. 81. 37. 9. 236. Daniel.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 44. 116. 3. 25. 221. 7. 9. 150. 7. 14. 228. 9. 26. 95.
12. 4. 109. Hosea.
Chap. Verse. Page. 11. 4. 232. 14. 4. 228. 14. 7. 155. Michah.
Chap. V^^s. Page. 6. 7. 40. Hab^kkuk.
Chap. Ve^s. Page. 3. 17. 18. 177. Zechariah.
Chap. V^rs. Page. 2. 5. 221. 4. 12. 36. 9. 12. 39. 11. 13. 30. 13. 17 59.
H^gg^i.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 4. 167. Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3. 11. 237. 6. 24. 170. 10. 39. 144. 11. 27. 71. 12. 4. 87.
19. 16, 17. 56. 19. 24. 30. 13. 44. 10. 23. 23. 19. 101. 26. 9. 29. 25. 5. 173.
Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 14. 33. 12. 50. 61. 15. 17. 41. John.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 1. 44. 1. 8. 54. 1. 14. 152. 1. 16. 37. 1^8 1. 17. 71.
93. 2. 20. 233. 3. 13. 198. 3. 34. 63. 5. 25. 74. 5. 31. 78. 6. 36. 16. 6. 44.
20. 207 8. 14. 78. 10. 8. 60. 12. 27. 63. 13. 35. 154. 14. 16. 233. 14. 26.
232. 15. 5. 144. 15. 9. 226. 16. 23. 248. 16. 26, 27. 245. 17. 6. 85 17. 10.
159. 17. 19. 37. 18. 36. 109. Acts.
Chap. Verse. Page. 7. 37. 70. 10. 12. 36. 111. 10. 43. 79. 13. 33. 216. 20. 28.
198. 25. 19. 161. Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3. 26. 32. 4. 21. 8. 5. 17. 195. 8. 28. 50. 10. 18. 110. 11.
36. 129. 14. 7. 78. 1 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 7. 189. 1. 25. 29. 1. 30. 210. 3. 21, 22. 158. 7. 13.
107. 200. 10. 1, 2. 71. 10. 1. 46. 10. 33. 168. 12. 3. 207. 13. 12. 225. 12.
25. 6. 67. 15. 24. 117. 15. 28. 118. 2. Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 20. 208. 1. 22. 239. 3. 4. 6. 4. 17. 4. 4. 4. 53. 4. 6.
54. 5. 19. 208. 5. 21. 33. 5. 15. 192. 8. 23. 156. 10. 12. 78. 13. 14. 44.
Galatians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 2. 77. 3. 20. 99. 3. 28. 145. 4. 4. 68. 5. 23, 24. 94.
Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 6. 3. 1. 22. 113. 3. 18, 19. 227. 4. 11. 82. 5. 27. 156.
5. 25. 230. Philippians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 7. 228. 2. 20, 21. 166. 2. 6, 7, 8. 58. 3. 8. 11. 3. 9,
10. 163. 4. 9. 43. Colossians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 19. 76. 1. 19. 138. 1. 24. 193. 2. 3. 76. 2. 9. 66. 2.
19. 36. 3. 10. 34. 223. 1 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 10. 199. 2. 10. 189. 2 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 13. 234. 1 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 5. 206. 1. 17. 112. 119. 2. 6. 69. 6. 16. 126. 2 Timothy.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 9. 219. Titus.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 1. 171. 1. 2. 134. 1. 2. 215. Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 3 54. 87. 1. 4, 5. 216. 2. 13. 215. 2. 17. 96. 3. 5. 71.
4. 15. 97. 4. 16. 241. 5. 14. 182. 7. 3. 87 7. 23. 88. 7. 24. 9. 7. 26. 55. 96.
7. 27. 95. 9. 6. 87. 9. 6. 26. 90. 9. 8, 9. 93. 9. 9. 48, 92. 9. 10. 93. 9. 12.
200. 202. 9. 14. 99. 201. 9. 27. 90. 10. 1. 91. 10. 10. 102. 10. 11. 91. 10.
19, 20. 203. 10. 20. 100. 10. 22. 242. 10. 26. 91. 11. 1. 8. 11. 2. 76. 11. 6.
5. 11. 26. 12. 12. 2. 207. 12. 24. 247. 13. 5. 220. 13. 10. 94. James.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 18. 237. 5. 11. 98. 1 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 4. 222. 1. 12. 26. 1. 20. 6. 2. 6. 26. 2. 24. 87. 2. 25.
71. 3. 1, 2. 155. 3. 19, 20. 81. 5. 8. 244. 2 Peter.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 1. 205. 1. 4. 173. 1. 7. 4. 2. 22. 173. 1 John.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2. 1, 2. 243. 2. 5. 192. 2. 20. 75. 3. 1. 148. 4. 19. 149.
4. 17. 192. Revelation.
Chap. Verse. Page. 3. 3. 115. 3. 7. 73. 6. 9. 102. 6. 15, 16. 133. 12. 11. 31.
18. 13. 105. 19. 8. 150. 19. 11. 251. 22. 2. 145.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
NOtwithstanding all our care, there are some faults escaped in the Print; yet
I hope none will be found so great as to disturb the sense, if thou will but
make a favorable construction of what thou shall read.


