THE SCHOLARS Winter Garment: OR, The Garment of Righteousness: Wherein is
declared the duty of every Christian both to God and Man; being very necessary
both for young and old to learn. With many good Exhortations to every Man,
Woman, and Child to obey Gods holy Will and Commandment.

Written by THO. ROBINS. B of D. A Well-wisher to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Prove. 6. 21, 22, 23. My Son, keep thy Fathers commandment, and forsake not
the law of thy Mother: bind them continually upon thy heart, and tie them about
thy neck, when thou go, it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep
thee, when thou awakest it shall talk with thee.

London, Printed for Tho. Passenger at the three Bibles on London Bridge. 1667.

THE Scholars CAVIAT.
YOu Scholars all that does this Caviat view,
When you have read, You Will find nothing but's true;
First God obey, and then thy Parents honor,
All that do so, fight under Christ our Bannar:
From needy men turn not thy face away,
Comfort the comfortless, faint not when thou do pray;
Be reverent always in company,
Hate idleness, much good does come thereby,
Shun hateful pride, which is the root of evil,
And covetousness which comes from the Devil:
Learn this in time, time is a precious thing,
For rich, for poor, and all, for Beggar, and for King,
Then learn in time, it will thee profit gain,
And heavenly joys, Christ will send thee for thy pain.
So I rest, Yours in Love and duty, T. R. The Author.
May 1660.
Ephesians. 6. 1, and 2. Verses. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this
is right: Honor thy Father and Mother, which is the first commandment with
promise.
MY Beloved Brethren, I would desire you all, both young and old, rich and
poor, or of what degree soever you be, I say, I would have you to take notice
what is here set down, which I hope is for the good of your salvation.

And first of all I would desire every Child of God to make good use of what is
declared unto you: and my first exhortation is to obedience; and with the same
words as the Apostle Paul spoke to the Ephesians: Children obey your Parents in
the Lord, for this is right, Ephesians* 6. 1. Here you see the obedience of
Christian* ^ne to another, is part of the first Commande^ent with promise, as
in ye first verse of this Chapter: But indeed this is contrary to many ^ens
minds now adays, for there is many that will not endure to hear talk of obeying
^ne another, no not so much as to suffer their ^hildren to show any duty to
them: which we ^ay perceive that they strive to bring them ^p quite contrary to
the Commandments of God, and yet they do profess themselves to be ^ervants of
God: but how can we say with a ^afe conscience that we be ye servants of God,
^hen we deny his Commandments: nay, our ^isobedience is not all, but our daily
seeking ^o entice and seduce others: for as we are taught ^y our parents, so we
shall be apt to do: For ^rain up a child in the way he should go, and ^hen he
is old he will not depart from it. And ^ndeed we may see it so with us here
now, for ^here is so many ancient people that is so ^lindly led, as I may say,
that they will suffer ^o child they have to show them, nor to any other: and
this is contrary to that Comman^ement of God, for as I told you before, look
unto Ephesians. 6. 2. and there is your assurance ^or it, in the words, for the
words says there, honor thy Father and Mother, which is the first ^ommandement
with prom^se? Nay, if you do but read the third verse of this Chapter, you may
plainly understand the promise which is made unto all such as do strive to keep
this Commandment of Obedience, for there the Apostle tells us, why we should be
obedient; That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth;
and no doubt but that it will go well with every poor soul that does strive to
keep the Commandments.

For as it is in Proverbs the second, the first and second verses, My Son
forget not my law, but let thy heart keep my Commandments: For length of days,
and long life, and peace shall they add unto thee. Hear ye Children the
instructions of a Father, and attend to know understanding; for I give you good
Doctrine: Forsake you not my law, for I was my Fathers Son, tender and only
beloved in the sight of my Mother: He taught me also, and said unt^ me, Let
thine heart retain my words, keep my Commandments and live, Prove. 4. to the 4*
verse.

O that every one of us would but strive t^ keep the Commandments of God, and
t^ hearken to the good instructions of our goodl^ minded Teachers, and not to
give our mind^ to bearken to the inticements of every vai^ fellow which would
seek night and day to delude you to difobedience toward God and man, as I may
say: For he that strives to counsel any man, woman, or child to disobedience
toward their Parents, they strive to draw you away from Gods Commandments.

But I desire you all that be here present to have a care of such people; and
as the Apostle Paul exhorts the Ephesians, so I desire to exhort you all, Let
no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these thing comes the wrath
of God upon the Ch^ldren of disobedience, be not ye therefore pertakers with
them, Ephesians. 1. ^6, 7. Know therefore in this thy day, and consider in thine
heart that the Lord he is God ^n Heaven above, thou shall keep therefore h^s
Statutes, and his Commandments, which I ^ommand thee this day, Deuteronomy. 4. 39, 40.

How can that man say he keeps Gods com^andem^nts, when he daily and hourly
seeks ^o break them by being disobedient both to God and man: for he that does
not obey his ^arents. does not over Gods Word: there^^re I desire every
Christian to consider with himself, whither it be be^ter to obey the true lord
of God, or be led away with the fancy of men: meaning such as will give no
obedience unto their Parents: For this I will assure you, that the disobedience
you carry toward your Parents, is a forerunner, and a great sign of your
disobeying God. For can a man obey God, and deny the two Doctrines of his word?
no certainly no man c^n do it:

Indeed I must needs tell you, that the disobedience of a Christian is more
abomination to the Lord then many do take it to be, or else people would have a
great deal of more care to obey his will, and to keep his Commandments. I pray
you look into the 27. of Deuteronomy. and there you shall see the curse that is
allotted for those that are disobedient to Father or Mother. For the Word says
there, Cursed be he that sets light by his Father and Mother, Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
I pray God that there be not too many now a days that deserves this curse: For
certainly there is too many such abroad that has but little care of their
Parents: Nay, I must needs tell the Parents that has such children, that it is
long of them, and not of their Children. For how should a Child learn
obedience, when they are brought up where it is not taught? how should a
scholl^r*learn all languages, that never hears no word but English; teach them
that which is good, and they will learn it: for as the Text says, train up a
child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.

Oh happy is that man or woman, that has so much grace in their hearts, as to
bring up their children in the fear of God, and to learn them to know their
duty toward God and man: For how should they know their duty toward God, which
they nev^r saw, when they will not show no duty to their own Parents which they
are daily withal: Therefore give ear a while unto me, and I will let you
understand a little more concerning the joy and comfort that belongs to the
obedient child.

And then lastly I shall by Gods assistance declare to you the torments which
belongs to them which are disobedient: for look but into the 28. Chap. of
Deuteronomy, and begin at the first verse and so on, I pray give your attention
to it, and when you have heard it, the Lord of his mercy give you all grace to
make good use of it.

And it shall come to pass, If thou shall hearken d^ligently unto the voice of
the Lo^d thy God, to observe and do all his Commandments which I command thee
this day? then the Lord thy God will set thee above all Nations of the Earth,
and all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee: If thou hearken
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, then blessed shall thou be in the City, and
blessed shall thou be in the field, blessed shall be the fruits of thy body,
and fruits of thy ground, Deuteronomy. 28. 1, to 5.

Nay, this is but small to the blessings which is promised to them that strive
to be obedient and keep his Commandments: For if thou will be pleased but to
read this Chapter at thy leisure, you will find a great many comfortable
blessings for those that truly honor obedience, and do their endeavors to
keep Gods Commandments, which I pray God give us all grace so to do, truly I
desire at the hands of our gracious God, that he would put it into the hearts
of every one of us to consider how the Lord threatened the people for their
sins, as you may find in Isaiah the third.

I pray you consider with your selves, whither you be not in the very same
condition at this present day: For behold the Lord, the Lord of Hosts does take
away from Jerusalem and from Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole stay of
bread, and the whole stay of water. The mighty man, and the man of war, the
Judge and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, the Captain of fifty
and the honorable man, and the Counselor, and the cunning Artificer, and the
eloquent Orator. And I will give children to be their princes, and Babes to
rule over them. And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and
every one by his Neighbor: the child shall behave himself proudly against the
ancient, and the base against the honorable, Isa. 3. 1, to 6. And as before, I
say still: I pray God that we be not almost under the same punishment as those
people was, for what sin can we read of in Scripture, but that we are subject
unto; Then how should we think to go free from the punishments which are
ordained for those sins?

For when was there more crying out against false decrees and unrighteous
dealings then there is now adays? or when could you hear of more wrong done to
the Widow and the Fatherless as there is now, and has been this many a da^:
But I desire every one that has any hand in such matters, to look into Isa.
10. 1, and 2. verses: there you may see the woe that is pronounced against
these that oppress the Widow and the Fatherless: for there he says, Woe unto
them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they
have prescribed: To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right from the poor of my people, that Widows may be their prey, and that they
may rob the Fatherless. Isaiah the 10. Chapter, the first and second verses.

But now a days we make no conscience at all to wrong the Widow and the
Fatherless, and to oppress the poor and needy.

No, no, I am afraid that there be too many that make a common practice to
wrong the widow and fatherless: But the Lord of his mercy give every one more
grace. For he that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, and he that
gives to the rich, shall surely come to naught, Prove. 22. 16.

He that gives to the poor shall never lack: but he that hides his eyes shall
have many a curse, Proverbs 8. 22. And too many there be that will turn away
their faces from the poor, but you may see many that is ready to give to the
rich,

But, alas my Brethen, you may see by this place of Scripture, that it is
contrary to Gods Comandements, which is a vile and terrible thing, for if we
would but secretly examine our hearts and consciences, and consider with our
selves, and we shall find that this preceeds from a disobedient heart, and
therefore we should pray God to give us obedient hearts. Which I pray God give
every one grace to consider in time, and pray to the Lord night and day, that
he spoke not to us as he spoke to the people in Isa. 43. 22. and these be the
words, But thou have not called upon me O Jacob, but thou have been weary of
me, O Israel.

Truly it is to be feared, the Lord has a just cause to speak the same words
to us: For how can we say but that we are weary of him, when we will not strive
to keep his Commandments? O let ^s turn unto the Lord, and he will look upon
us with the eye of mercy* as in Isa. 45. 22. Look upon me, and be ye saved all
the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else.

Oh what a blessed and comfortable speech was here spoken to poor sinners, this
was from the mouth of God, and not from man. O what a miserable condition is
this, that we should be so stony-hearted one toward another, when we see the
Lord so loving to us.

Can a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should have compassion on the
Son of her womb? yea they may forget: yet I will not forget thee, Isa. 49. 15.
O what a comfortable speech is this, if we would but consider on them: for
though it is possible for a woman to forget her Child which she gives suck, yet
the Lord says he will not forget a sinner: Indeed if our hearts be not made of
flint, these loving mercies of the Lord showed to us, would mollify and soften
the flintiest heart in the world. Oh my beloved, awake out of the deadly sleep
of sin, and let us cry unto the Lord and say, Who is among us, that fears the
Lord God of Hosts? Oh let us shake off those old Rags of sin, and strive to
cloth our selves with this winter Garment of righteousness.

Oh it is warm clothing! Oh it is clothing that will keep warm both body and
soul! Oh let us cry out. The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be
confounded.

Happy is that Christian that has so much confidence in the Lord: For the Lord
desires not the death of a sinner, but rathe^ he would turn from his
wicked^ess and live.

I desire every one of you which be her^ present to look into the eleventh
Chapter o^ Jeremiah, beginning at the second verse, an^ there you may hear how
the Prophet proclaimed Gods Covenant to the Jews, and how he re^^ked them for
their disodedience: I pray you take notice of it, cursed is the man that
obeys not the word of this covenant; And I pray God this Nation wherein we
live do not deserve the same curse: For I believe no Nation under the Sun has
rebelled more against Gods commandments then we: and there is no way to escape
his punishment but by prayer, and repentance, and turn unto the Lord, and call
unto him for mercy: and as Job says, in Job 26. 5. Behold he is mighty in
strength, he preserves not the life of the wicked, but gives right to the
poo^. O here is comfort for poor sinners, for the Text says, the Lord despises
no sinner: but alas we are too prone to fall into sin, as hatred, and ^nvying,
and the like: but look into Job 34. and you will find that it is not fit to give
angry words one toward another: for is it fit to say to the King, thou art
wicked, much less to him that accepts not the person of Princes, no nor the
rich more then the poor, for they are all the works of his hands? Here we may
perceive that we ought not to revile one another, either poor or rich, King or
Magistrate, for as Dav^d says in the 36. Psalm, about the 2, 3. He flatters
himself in his own eyes until his wickedness be found hateful: the words of his
mouth are in^quity and deceit, etc. And ^ndeed there is too many that devises
mischief night and day, but the Lord give us all more grace, and to call upon
him for mercy. And as David says in Psalm 3. Let us all cry, bless the Lord, oh
my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities,
etc. and in Psa. 10. he tells us, like as a Father pittieth his child, so the
Lord pittieth all them that fear him. Here you may see the Lord does promise
very much to poor sinners, if so they would but strive to keep his
Commandments, which the Lord of his mercy give us all grace so to do. And so
much concerning the obedience of a Christian: and as I have showed you the joys
and benefits of those that obey God and their Parents: so I have declared the
torments of the disobedient: So I pray God give us all grace to be obedient to
him, to our Parents, Prince, and Governors: and so I conclude with this short
Exhortation, out of Prove. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Read at your leisure, So the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, bless, guide, and keep you all, this
day, and for ever more, Amen.

The Second part.
THe second Part of this Book, does teach young Scholars their duty to all
sorts of people.

First, those Scholars that desire to serve God, must every morning prepare
their hearts to put on this Winter Garment of faith, and strive to shake off
the old rags of sin, which must be done by faithful prayer.

First, down on thy knees every morning, and pray to the Lord to give a
blessing to thy up-rising, and to thy down-lying, to thy going out, and to thy
coming in; and when thou have done so, down on thy knees to thy parents, and
desire them to pray to God to give you a blessing: and no question but the Lord
will bless such children which be obedient to him, and their Parents; For as
Solomon says, in Prove. 4. 4. Hear ye children the instructions of a Father,
and attend to know understanding: and in chap. 6. there he says, My Son, keep
thou thy Fathers commandment, and forget not the law of thy Mother.

So I desire all you that be Scholars, that either reads it, or hears it read,
let it be a good instruction for you all, in the first place to learn to serve
God: secondly, to give honor and obedience to thy Parents: thirdly, let not
thy heart over-slip thee with ^nvy and hatred toward thy Neighbor; but be
always ready with diligence to do any thing for them which lies in thy power
to do; not wronging thy Parents nor thy self. The duty of a Scholar is, if thou
meet any man or woman in the street, thou art to carry thy self very civilly,
to put off thy hat, and to give them the time of the day, for in so doing thou
show thy breeding: more-over there will be some sign of grace in thy old
age, for as ye Scripture says, Train up a child in the way he should go and
when he is old he will not depart from it. And I pray God give every child
grace to lead his life in his youth, that he may have joy and comfort both in
this world, and in the world to come without end, Amen.

A short Prayer for every Scholar to learn every morning before he goes to
School, o^ begins any labor, then after this ye Lord Prayer.

A Prayer for the morning.
O Most gracious Lord God; thou that sitte^ upon thy throne, and see into all
the co^ners of the World; thou made the heaven and the earth, and all things
belonging thereto: thou art a God of mercy, thou art a God of favor and love;
and even so thou art a God of just^ce and wrath, yet slow to anger, or else
what would become of poor sinners; O Lord, I do give thee humble and hearty
thanks for this good blessing which thou have bestowed upon me this night past,
in giving me such quiet rest and sleep; O Lord I confess thou might have
made my bed of ease a bed of death: But O Lord, seeing it has pleased thee to
preserve my life a little longer: so O Lord I do desire thee out of thy tender
mercy to give me this day, a heart of true Repent^nce, that I may truly repent
me of my sins, and lament for all my transgressions. O God thou know the
flesh of man is weak and frail, yet we know thou art able to put strength into
the weakest soul: therefore I beseech thee out of thy tender mercy for to
strengthen my faith; put grace and wisdom into my heart, that I may do nothing
but what is pleasing to thy sight. And gr^nt O most merciful Father, that
whatsoever. I shall think, or speak, or take in hand, it may tend to thy glory
the good of my friends and neighbors* and for the joy and comfort of my poor
soul, and that for thy Son, our Lord and Saviors sake, I will farther call
upon thee, in that most holy and perfect prayer which thou taught thy
Disciples, in that holy place of Scripture, Mat. 6. 9. where he said to his
Disciple, ^^ you pray, pray thus, saying, Our Father, etc.

Lastly, when thou have spent the day, call into thy mind how thou have spent
it; and if thou have done any thing which thy conscience tells thee is not
right, then fall on thy knees, and desire the Lord to forgive thee, and that
with a true heart, and then no doubt but the Lord will hear thy prayers.

A short Prayer for the Evening.
O Lord God, Heavenly Father, I beseech thee hear my prayer, and let my cry
come unto thee, consider my prayer, O Lord my God, lighten thou mine eyes, lest
I sleep the sleep of death, and so be utterly lost: I cannot but confess I have
sinned against thee: but O Lord I know thou art merciful, and will show mercy
to all such as will consess their faults, and truly repent them of their sins,
and strive to forsake their wicked ways, and turn to the Lord and live:
therefore turn me O Lord, and I shall be turned: make me to know the way to
righteousness, and give me thy spiritual grace, that I may fly from the way of
the wicked, and turn unto thee for salvation: O Lord my God, and my redeemer;
and as it has pleased thee to give me this day liberty to follow my calling
which thou have called me unto, so O Lord I beseech thee to give me thy favor
and countenance this night, set thou a guard of Angels about me, that no evil
spirit have power to entice my poor weak and sinful soul, that by thy power and
protection I may take quiet sleep, and rest under the shadow of thy wings, that
when I sleep, I may not sleep unto death, but sleep unto life everlasting, and
all for thy Son our Lord and Savior, in his words I pray farther, saying:

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven, give us this day, our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Amen.

So I remain your faithful Servant in Christ Jesus, Tho. Robins.

FINIS.
These books following being of a small Price, are printed for Tho. Passenger,
at the three Bibles on the middle of London Bridge.
THe christians Combat, or his true spiritual Warfare, by C. Love, late
Preacher of the Word in the City of London.

The wise Merchant or the pearl of price, by T. Calvert, Minister in York.

The Book of Graces, with prayers for Morning and Evening: These are all but
three pence a piece.

The sinners warning piece, or Heavens Messengers, by T. Robins, B. of D.

Man's chief guide to Salvation, by T. Robins, B. of D.

A Wonder of Wonders, or Gods people, the Worlds wonder, by R. Hough, a lover
of the truth.

Englands golden Legacy, or a brief descripti^^ of the manifold mercies the
Lord has bestowed upon his sinful Nation.

Gods message from Heaven, to sinners on Earth, by T. P. B. of L.

Christ upon the cross, suffering for poor Sinners.

Gods call to unconverted sinners, to ^urn from their sins and repent, a very
useful and comfortab^e book.

Now or Never.

School of Learning.

Door of Salvation.

Englands sorrow, for Londons misery.

These Eleven last are but two pence a piece.

FINIS.

