A WHIP For the Marshalls Court, and their OFFICERS. The Petition of ROBERT
ROBINS Gent. to the House of Commons, Against the Abuses practiced in the
MARSHALS COURT. AND A Discovery of the Jurisdiction and privilege of that
COURT, with some of the particular greevances, the Subjects suffer under the
pretended Authority thereof, maintained by ill Members of the Commonwealth.
Written for the Releife and redress of all that have, or hereafter shall be
Arrested, or wronged there, with directions where to repair for advice and
Assistance therein, And how, and where to get restitution for the same. By TO.
ROBINS.

London printed for the Author. And are to be sold at the Sign of the three
Pigeons in Kings Street, Westminster.

TO THE READER,
SIR.
HAving by the malice of the false and cruel Marshalls men's periuries, an
opportunity to ^ivulge what I long since intended, their false swearing the
last Term, procuring me a Prison, leisure to manifest the Jurisdiction of that
Court, and to discover some of their abuses, and vile extortions by the
assistance of the Printers Press to your view, hereby entreating you to
perruse this little book, and then to repair to me, either in the Fleet, or
at the three Pigeons in King Street Westminster, where I shall not fail to
be, and satisfy you the true course that the Law of England has in this
Case, provided whereby you may recover not only what expense or charge, or
sums of money it has cost you, or you have paid by any arest or suit there,
but also damage for your false imprisonment thereby sustained, by due and just
Course in Law (every Arrest by a Marshalls man made being clearly (as I shall
show you) false Imprisonment, And I shall show you Judgments, for president in
the Case, and shall let you farther to know where to levy any Judgment upon
Persons whose Estates are responceable until which time I am

Your most humble Servant to Command: TO. ROBINS.
From my Iron Cage in the Fleet, 29th. of August 1647.
A WHIPE For the Marshalls Court, and their OFFICERS.
ABout a year since at the Sessions of the Peace for Westminster holden in
Westminster Hall before the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace sitting there
in open Court by good advise of Council, I Indicted two of the Marshalls men,
amongst other of their Confederates, for an assault and battery made by them
upon me, (this is one of their Arrests) and by force deteyned me in their
Custody, until I did deliver them five shillings and six pence, lawful money
of England, of my own proper monyes numbered, which Bill was upon positive and
full Evidence to the Grand Jury given, found, and by them in their Virdict,
delivered in Billa vera, and the Justices, the grand Jury, the Constables and
inhabitants within that liberty feeling and well knowing what a mis^rable
oppression they and the Dwellers there suffered by Arrests, Suits, and Actions
commenced in that Court against them, upon idle and frivolous pretenses did
joyfully seem to join with me in the endeavoring a Rectification thereof,
and then promised me that if I would draw a Petition to that purpose to the
Houses of Parliament they would procure it to be read, thereby humbly desiring
the Houses to settle that Court in its just Jurisdiction and Privilege, And
take away the abuse of it, to which I condiscended (though contrary to my
opinion) knowing and acquainting them that I could very well do it at Common
Law, if I could once come to a Trial at the Common Pleas Bar, with them
concerning their Jurisdiction to hold plea in actions between party, and
party, not being of the Kings house, and their extorted fees, which Petition I
herein, verbatim set forth, being drawn in my own name, on the behalf of all
the Inhabitants in general, within 12. miles round, about the sitting of the
same court, within which is their pretended Veirge, and for the avoiding of
Tumults and Crowdes of People to wait on the houses with it, therefore I did
it not, doubting but most of the Members of both Houses know very well the
oppression the greived Communalty live under by that Court.

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, Assembled in
Parliament.
The humble Petition of Robert Robins, Gent. SHOWS.
THat your Petitioners by the desire of his Majesty's Justices of the peace for
the City, and Liberty of Westminster, at a General Sessions of the peace
houlden in Westminster Hall, about a year since, as also by the request of
many of the Inhabitans within the said City and Liberty, and diverse
Housekeepers as well Commanders, Gentlemen, and others, and especially poor
Tradesmen within twelve miles about London, does present unto your Honors
consideration the intolerable misery and oppression they live under in a
perpetual daily fear of arrests, by a pretended Jurisdiction of a Court,
called the Marshalls Court, alias, the Court of the Kings palace of Westminster
weekly on Fridayes houlden in Southwarke, contrary to the Laws, and Statutes
of the Kingdom, kept by Color of a Pattent granted by the Kings Majesty to
Sir Edward Sidenham Knight, Marshall of England, under the old Great Seal of
England, since the twenty second of May, 1642. Which pattent is by virtue of an
Ordinance of both houses of Parliament concerning the Great Seal of England
void; The great and heavy pressures thereby* laid on the Shoulders of the
Freeborn Subjects of this Kingdom as well Inhabitants as Lodgers, and Country
gentlemen here in Town, about their affairs, and within twelve miles about
London (which is within the Veirge of that Court, as the Marshalls men,
Steward, Attorneys and others their Officers, very untruly affirm, justify and
maintain) are so violently, injuriously, and extortiously, and contrary to the
known Laws, and Statutes of this Kingdom, and the liberty of the Subject put
in execution, by the Officers of the said court, that many hundreds are thereby
ruined, and others in a most sad, desperate, and lamentable condition in that
crewell Jayle, starved and dye And the Parliaments Commanders attending here
for their arreares, for their good service done, notwithstanding their extreme
wants are by the Marshals men daily arrested and forced in that prison, to take
up their quarters for life, for the prevention where of, and for the relief of
all Freeborne Subjects that desire to live under, and be governed by the
ancient and good Laws of England.

Your Petitioner humbly prays, That your honors will be pleased to order that
the said Court may be, and continue in its just Jurisdiction, and privlledge
for fees, and all other rights perquisits and pleadings, and to the same intent
and purpose as it it was first ordained for, provided and granted by the
several Acts of Parliament, and that the late pattent granted to the said Sir
Edward Sidenham and all other Pattents, and authority they sit by, contrary to
the first institution of the several Acts of Parliament, and the said court
thereby confirmed may be to all intents and purposes void, and utterly
annihilated and that all by that court; or Officers thereof, wronged, or by any
arrest, or proceeding therein, sufferers, may have the benefit, and assistance
of the common Law of England, to sue for relief, and in the interim the Court
silenced from their proceedings there, until its ancient Jurisdiction be fully
settled, and the corrupt proceedings taken away.

And he shall daily pray, etc. TO: ROBINS.

This I do manifest and declare to all that will lend a judicion and gentle
aspect, and audience to what I have here with a candidheart, at my great cost
and charge, and disgraceful reproaches, and hard imprisonments delivered, not
doubting, but to see the distressed communalty to reap plenty of the fruit of
my sad labors as the neighboring inhabitants by my pen and person, do from
the hands of serene Justice, beg, and implore cordially assuring my self, and
them that a gale of VVesterly wind is at hand to blow off those Caterpillars,
from being so near our seats of Justice which will be a means to preserve
much of the wholesome fruit of the Law from their rapins devowrings, spoils
and perjuries to feed the poor wronged and greeved Subject with, and it will
undoubtedly afford more good wholesome and joyful norishment to both souls,
bodies and estates of the oppressed and wronged people then the Marshalls
prison begging basket.

The first institution of this Court, called the Marshalls Court, or the Court
for his Majesty's House, was by a grave and learned counsel in many
Parliaments settled and ordained, and if considerately looked on, and
understood for the Subjects benefit, and advantage, and not to destroy them as
it is now used.

That I am very confident that most honest Subjects are not ignor^nt that all
his Majesty's meniall Servants now are, and in all former ages have been, and
according to the ancient customs of England, (a laudable custom) ought to be
protected by the Royal protection as necessary Servants to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, who swayes both the Septer, Sword, and Mace of this and his
other two Kingdoms, and by them and the Laws, rules and governes his Subjects
under him, and thereby preserves, and maintains the causes of the Pious,
Honest, Just, pooer, abused, wronged, oppressed, and distressed Subject: And
with the same cutts off, strickes to the ground, and lays stat to the earth,
the wicked, proud, unjust, malevolent, and ungodly oppressors, and
extortioners, and such wicked persons; And no servant who enjoyes, or ought to
enjoy this privilege of protection, is or ought to be Arrested, Sued, or
impleaded, molested or hindered, from his employment in his Majesty's service,
for or by reason of any Suit, Action, or molestation, or pretense whatsoever,
in any Court (except in cases criminal) thereby violence, taking such a
servant from his Majesty's service, and by that means (if tolerated) his
Majesty's Cook may be taken out of his Kitchen, when he is provding, and
dressing his Majesty's Dinner, and so consequently, all his other Servants may
in the like manner be taken from him, and by such means when his Majesty
expects his Dinner, and that attendance which belongs to, and befits so great
a Monarch will be wanting, which were no small abuse to his Majesty; therefore
protection is for such Servants, provided, ordained, and allowed of; This ^
Contra says the Subjects, were a sad condition for us, and much suffering, and
loss must of necessity follow to our disadvantage, if this protection should
be allowed of, and defended, for then his Majesty's Servants will be lawless,
and may by cunning and sinister ways, and false and deceitful means get into
any of our debts, and procure our Estates by dealings, trusts, and otherwise
into their hands and possession, and if we cannot sue for it, if they refuse to
restore it to us, but shall be barred by this protection, we were merely
cheated, which no doubt that wise Council and parliament has already very
satisfactorily answered and resolved, that is, they have ordained, and
constituted this Court called the Marshalls Court, or the Court for his
Majesty's House, and meniall Servants, and none to sue, or be sued in that
Court, but either the Plaintiff or Defendant must be one of his Majesty's
meaniall Servants, and the Knight Marshall and Steward are the Judges of that
Court, as appears by the contents of the several Statutes hereafter following
in his verbis, viz.

That the Steward and Marshall shall not hold plea of any Covenant, or any
contract made between the Kings people, nor of debt, but only of Trespass
done within the Kings House, or Veirge* but of such contracts and Covenants
that one of the Kings House makes with another of the same House within the
House, and not else where, and they shall plead no Plea of Trespass, except
the party were attached, by them, before the King departed from the Veirge
where the Trespass was committed, and shall plead them speedily from day to
day, before the King depart out of the lymits of the Veirge, where the
Trespass was done, and if so chance that they cannot be determined within the
lymits of the same Veirge, where the trespass was done, then shall the same plea
cease before the Steward, the matters determinable at the common Law, and from
thence forth the Steward shall not take cognizance of any debts nor of other
things, but of such things only as be of the Kings house, nor shall hold no
other plea, by obligation made by a distress taken by the Steward or Marshall,
and if they attempt any thing to the contrary to this Statute, it is void. 2.
E. 1.3.

If any plea of Debt, detinew, or other plea personal, be commenced betwixt
any persons not being of the Kings house, though the Record do make mention
that the Plaintiff and Defendant in the same plea be of the Kings house, yet
the defendant shall not be estopped by such Record but may have his Averment
that he himself, or the Plaintiff were not of the Kings house, at the time of
the Plea, or suite commenced. 15. H. 6.1,

In all places where the King in his own person, shall come to rest, abide or
make repose within the veirge limited to his graces Court, which shall not
pass the space of twelve miles, to be accounted from his Majesty's lodging
(13. R. 2.3.) his Steward Marshall, and all other Officers may keep their Court
of Justice, and execute, their Offices which shall appertain to them,
according to the Laws, Customs, and Statutes of this Realm, as well within
liberties as without during the time of the Kings abode any privilege or
grant notwithstanding ^1. H. 8.24.

In every case where enquests be, to be taken, before the Steward and Marshall
of the Kings house, such enquests shall be taken by men in the County
thereabouts, and not by any of the Kings house, except it be of contracts,
Covenants, or Trespass made by such whereof the one part, and the other be of
the Kings house, and that in the same house. 5: E. 3.2.10. E. 3.2.

If any man will complain of Error made before the Steward. and Marshall of
the Kings house, he shall have a writ to remove the Record, and the process into
the Kings Bench, and there the Error shall be redressed 5 E. 3.2.10: E. 3.3.

The Marshall of the Marshalsey of the Kings house may take the Fees hereafter
following in open Court, that is of every person which comes by capias to the
said court, four pence, and if he be let to maine prize until his day, two
pence, and of every person being Defendant, which is impleaded of Trespass, and
gives manucaptors, to keep his day to the end of his plea, two pence, and of
every one committed to prison by the Judgment of the Steward in whatsoever
manner the same be fourepence, and of every person delivered of felony, four
pence, and of every Fellon, let to maineprise by the Court fower-pence, But if
the Marshall or any of his O^ficers under him do take any other Fee, then
before are declared, the said Marshall and every of his Officers shall loose
their Offices, and also shall pay to the party greived treble damages for the
same for which the said party shall have his suite before the Steward of the
said court, for the time being a Serviture of bills (now called the Marshals
men) which bears a Staff of the said Court: shall take for every mile from
the said court unto the same place where he shall do his service a penny, and
for twelve miles twelve pence, and so to serve a venire facias, or a distringas
out of the same court the double, and if a Serviture of Bills do the contrary
he shall be imprisoned and make Fine to the King after the discretion of
Steward of the same Court, Al which articles the Steward at his coming into
the Country, has authority to proclaim and put in execution. 2. H. 4.23. And
Priests and other Ecclesiastical persons taken in the Marshalsey of the Kings
house shall pay such Fees as Lay People shall reasonably pay, and no more.

The Steward of the Marshalsey shall for ever from time to time be assigned by
writing under the Seal of the Lord Steward of the Kings house for the time
being 33. H, 8.12.

Very much more I could set down concerning the Jurisdiction of this Court, in
cases of Batteryes, blood sheds, and other misdemeanors which I conceive not
fit to be here incerted, in respect my intent is only to treat of, and
manifest the matter of arrests pleadings and power of holding Plea, in that
Court of Actions between party and party, as now they do.

There is a Statute made in the 23. H. 6.10. which gives every man from whom
any money is extorted, by an Officer, other then the Statutes do allow, power
to sue the Extortioner in action of Debt for forty pounds which he shall
recover by trial at Law, and twenty pounds thereof his Majesty is to have,
and the other twenty pounds the party wronged, and that sueth for the same is
to receive, this I shall show all men that are wronged and desire relief, and
restitution of their injury, if they will be pleased to repair to me, to be
satisfied in it, with several other benefits the Law has provided for, our
good and quiet living, and enjoyment of our own* Estates and Liberties, and
there is provided in them, punishment for those vile and unsufferable
creatures, called extorting Bayliffes, Marshalls men, and Jaylers.

Now having here showed the Jurisdiction of the Marshalls Court and their just
Fees and privileges, and wherefore ordained, I am very confident that you are
and may be satisfied, that that Court which usually sitts every Friday in
Southwark is of no validety, nor has any power or Jurisdiction to execute that
Authority which they wrongfully and unjustly do, upon the ignorant people
every day, and that no process issuing out of that Court, ought to have
obedience yielded to it, but is only a color for their rapines and cheating
the people, for what money soever is by pretense of Law forced from the Subject
contrary to Law, is a mere cheat, and no better then plain English Theevery.

Now concerning the Fees usually taken by the Court and their Officers, as many
as I know I will herein set down the particulars, viz. Their Writ two
shillings and six pence, whereof there is Eighteen pence paid, and the
Marshalls man coseneth the other twelve pence, which he calls the advantage
of the Writ and then this Writ must be executed, the Marshalls man for doing
it, must have ten or twenty shillings, otherwise he will not do it, nay he
shall swear a hundred Oaths in an hour, that the Defendant which is to be
Arrested is a man very seldom to be seen, and a dangerous man and this he
shall swear over and over again, that if it were not for the Plaintiff whom
he takes to be his special friend, he would not execute it for that money, no
if it were for his own Father, and that he shall spend more in waiting for
him, then he does ask for serving the Writ, all which is false, for no sooner
is the Plaintiff gone, but he goes and fetches the Defendant, and so they two
go to an Alehouse, and drink lustily, and so the Marshalls man gets money of
him, and sometime takes Bail, but if it be one of his acquaintance, then he
takes a bribe and lets him go, or if a Beggar then to the Goal, he is
presently carried, and you see the first extorted Twelve pence is as much as is
due, if he did Arrest one the full twelve miles, from the sitting place of the
Court; And when they Arrest one, and deteyne him for want of Bail, he must
presently give two sufficient Housekeepers, bound with him in a Bond of forty
pounds, or more, according as the Marshalls man pleases, for his personal
appearance the next Court, and this Bond is taken in the Jaylors name, and not
in the Knight Marshalls name which ought to be done, and must presently pay
five shillings and six pence, for the Knight Marshalls Fee, and bail bound
when there is but six pence due, that is two pence for admitting him to
Manucaptors, and four pence for the bail Bond, there is you see five
shillings extorted; And if for want of Bail the Arrested be committed, his
Prison his Fees are eighteen shillings four pence for the turn Key, ( alias
Dictus turned extorting knave) and there is but four pence due and (the
eighteen shillings is extorted) to be paid upon the Prisoners discharge out of
Prison, two shillings for walking in the Garden, to take the Air, which makes
the Jailer Heir, of an estate gathered by compulsive extortion out of both
Heirs, young Brothers, and beggars Estates; Two shillings and six pence the
Garnish, which is to be spent in Beer, in the Seller of the Prison, this makes
the Tapster rich, giving so much per Barrel to the Jailer for drawing the
Beer, five shillings a week for a Chamber, when the King commands Lodgings,
Bedding, Candlestick, Chamber Pot, Basin, and four pence a day in all his
Prisons, to be given to the Prisoner, otherwise the Prisoner for Debt (which is
an honest man's case, or a Prisoner upon a commitment by a court of Justice, and
commonly not deserved) is in a worse and sadder condition, and case then a
Thief or Fellon, who is allowed so much, and shall a poor Debtor or an
imagined misdemeanor have no thing, then the fellon is far before a Debtor or
misdemeanor in respect he is at every Sessions following, his commitment,
(except in some special cases) either condemned to die for his fact, if proved
or set at iiberty, and the others must ly and starve by degrees, a lingering
death, and one of the cruelest for hunger compels passion in a man, and to
attempt almost any thing, even to kill himself, to cry out against King and
Kingdom, for want of relief and Justice, yea, swear, curse and blaspheeme
their God, the mother in such case to eat her own Children, as in Jerusalem,
to eat their own Dunge, their shoes their own flesh, and what not, this is a
pitiful punishment for nothing that a poor prisoner is forced to, so
horrible, is a starving life, till the grave cures, yet Magna Charta does not
compel any to ly and die in prison, for debt or misdemeanor, but otherwise
provides relief and succor, if it were put in execution And I never heard of
any man hanged for debt, and in my opinion it were better hang debtors then
starve them, A multitude of other just demands, the poor prisoner is forced to
pay, or else to lie and starve, as it is a usual thing with Jaylors, for
prison sees, be the parties never so poor, and not one penny so demanded due,
to deteyne them in this kind, and when he comes to Court to give bail, he must
pay five shilings ten pence, when there is but two pence due, This is the
nature of their proceedings in that Court, by which means they pillage and rob
the poor Country of at least two hundred thousand pound per annum, amongst
them all.

And to further dispute the Cause with them, they pretend that the Court they
now keep is not the Marshalls Court, but the Court of the Kings Palace of
Westminster, granted to them by Pattent bearing date at Canterbury, the twelfe
day of July, in the sixth year of King Charles his reign, which his Majesty
granted for the good of the Subjects (of which I am very confident his Majesty
conceived so, but the contrivers got it past for the goods of the Subject) as
by them is practiced and reported) to be gotten by the advice of the then
Judges of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, the Barrons of the Exchequer, and Mr.
Noy his Majestifs then Atorney.

To which specious pretense of theirs I answer that the Kings bench where the
King sits himself Chief Justice, held in Westminster Hall; where other
Judges of that Court, sit as assistants to his Majesty for the matter of Law,
is the Court of the Kings palace of Westminster, held, in the palace of
Westminster, in the great Hall there (formerly the Court for his Majesty's
house) and that the Kings Bench ^s the Court of the Kings Palace of
Westminster, is evident by all the Statutes concerning that court in the
Statutes at large, to be seen and read. And the then Judges, Barrons and Mr Mr.
Noy were no Parliament and therefore could not repeal the several acts of
Parliament that settled the Marshalls Court of the Kings paliace of Westminster,
thereby to take away the power and Jurisdiction of them two courts to make a
clear power in the King to dispose of them by this new Pattent, and all the
World knows that King and Parliament must repeal Acts of Parliament otherwise
they are still in force and where aany thing is by his, Majesty granted; and
confirmed by Act of parliament, the Jurisdiction of that gift be it just or
unjust is good until repealed by Act of Parliament. Provided it be not against
any of the Chapters of Magna Charta.

It is not to be ommitted in this Case what Nagna charta says, that is the
City of London and all other cities, Towns, and Ports shall enjoy all their
free charters, and customs, without encroachment of any power whatsoever, and
this was long before the Pattent of Sexto Car. and therefore by the way of
goods advice let me entreat you good Mr. Win, and your servitures by virtue of
that pattent not to infringe Liberties and corporations, any more for if ie be
any longer continued, some body must account for it.

Now to come to the manner of their proceedings, which are as hereafter
according to my knowledge I will declare.

First their original Process, is an odd Writ called a Non omittas, which put
spirit into the heart of the Marshalls man (as in this case is requisite to put
a good face upon a bad matter) that he has more power then the Sheriff of
each County upon an original Process by which he can enter into and arrest in
five Counties, viz. Essex, Kent, Middlesex, Surry, and Hartfordshire which
makes him desperate with his Sword by his side, and swear and drink, and
dominere, that he is a brave fellow, and he has a non omittas, and swears 40.
or 50 Oaths one after another, that he will enter any liberty within them,
five Coun^ies within twelve mile round, their Court in Southwark, and does so,
and Arrests within them all and the writ is his warrant, and the Court will
bear him out in it, and the Sheriff durst not do so, and why will not every
one sue within their Court and veirge (when indeed there is neither veirge nor
power, and not at Common Law, for there they shall be sure to recover, this is
the Marshalls man's carriage with his Writ.

This Writ of such force, power and strength; I will verbatim here write down,
viz.

CAROLVS Dei gratia Anglie, Scotie, Francie, et Hibernie, Rex fidei defensor,
etc. Portatoribus virgarum officiarum et Ministrum Curie Palatij nostri
Westminsterij, et eorum cuilibet salutem pricpimus vobis et cuilibet vestrum,
quod non omittatis propter aliquam libertatem infra Iurisdictionem Cur. pride.
quin capiatis, sen aliquis vestrum capiat per Corpora sua Iohanem Do, et
Ricardum Roe si invent. fuerunt infra Iurisdictionem Curie pred. infra tres
Septimas tunc prox. sequen^ et eo salvo Custodiatis, Ita quod habetis, seu
aliquis vestrum habeat, Corpora eorum eoram Indicibus Curie predict. ad Prox.
curiam nostram Palatij nostri Westminsterij, pred. post captionem illam infra
tempus Pred. apud Southwark in Comitatu Surrey, reneud. ad Respondendum Iohani
Styles in Plito. transgr. et heats. ibm. tunc hac bre. Test Edvardo Sid^nham
mil^* apud Southwark, undecimo die Decembris, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo
secundo.

Shetterden.

This writes being blanks signed in their Office at Clemens Inn by Master
Shetterden their Prothonatory (a wise court to have a Prothonatory only to
sign writts, not able to draw a a plea, but to give 2500 li. for a place and
pick it up again by these writts, where the Marshalls men on this side the
Thames usally fetch them, or send for them, sending to the Office the names of
the plantiffe, and dtfendant, to be filled and entered but at general times and
almost commonly the marshalls men have these writts blanke in their pockets and
a seal of Office being a Parcullis and wax, and so they fill them seal them
and execute them, by which Proceedings and actions every Marshal man keeps an
office in his pocket, and when he thinks fit makes rereturne of them or of so
many as he conceives convenient, and in case of necessity, as they call it,
they having no blanks about them, they take old writts, of which their pockets
are commonly full, and raise fill and execute them (this is but forgery and
false imprisonment) and detain the prisoner arrested, by that forged and
raised writ until they can end the business which they will endeavor, and
by that means the arrested is drawn into a fools paradise, thinking them to
be as honest men as may be, which invites him, if a stranger, to put trust in
him, and the Marshalls man perceiving the arrested to put some confidence in
him, swears himself to be as honest a man as any in England though he be a
Marshalls man, and the arrested believes so, and thanketh God that he is
happened into an honest man's hands, seeing it was his fortune to be arrested,
and he is very confident that the Marshalls man will end his business, which
the Marshalles man binds with a multitude of oaths, and that he does not
desire to gain one farthing by it but for quietness sake to make neighbors
friends, he will be contented to loose his fees, and then the Marshalls man's
man comes in swearing as God shall Judge him there is not an honester man in
England, then his Master, and he hopes his Master and he shall make an end of
the business, for what fools are men to go to Law, so long as neighbors
(who I thingke are fools indeed) may end it, and if they go to Law, the Lawers
will get all the money, and for his part he will have nothing for his pains,
and fees, so there may be a good end, which he heartily wishes, and so he will
drink to the arrested, and caleth for another flagon, or a half douz^n of
beer, (which the arrested must pay for) and professes that his master and
himself are two of the honestest men in England, and noe harm in them, (no,
no more then in a Devil of two years old) but wishes all peace and
quietness, and if they cannot effect it this way, then they send to the Office
for a new writ, which is filled and entered before the arrest by the registers
man Thomas Greenfill by which they force the arrested to give bail, or they
will turn all their freindship into rigor, and carry him* if not monyed, to
prison, saying they forfeit their bonds, if they keep a prisoner above six
hours, but if he has money and will pay them well, and that he will hold his
peace and not reveal it, then they will do him the best courtesy they can,
and he shall lie in their house til he can take a course to end his business
or give bail, provided that he pay twelvepence every night for his lodging,
besides ten shillings a day for attendance, and sometimes twenty, and when all
his money is gone then his cloak or some other good thing, and at last he
cannot keep him any longer, but must go to prison unless he will have the
Marshalls man undone for him, and he has done as much as he can, and he is
sorry for it, but cannot help it, and any thing that lies in his power he will
do, and swears lustily to it, and will be one of his bail so he can get
another, so the poor prisoner is merely cheated, this is their custom, but
if they compass the business, as commonly in such arests they do then they take
the fee for the writ, that is to shillings and six pence, the Knight Marshalls
fee, and bail bond five shillings and six pence, and for the arrest and
waiting what they can get, sometimes twenty and commonly thirty shillings or
more, swearing that they get not any benifit by it, for they must pay the
prison fees out of it to the Keeper, and all the former fees, or else they
shall forfeit their bonds, when they keep all this money notwithstanding their
swearing, and if the defendant be carried to prison, then if he can procure the
favor, he must appear the next Court, and put in bail which will cost five
shillings and tenpence, when there is but two pence due, and must also give two
sufficient housekeepers bail within the said liberty, though the action be not
worth two pence, and then must answer to a new kind of declaration called an
Incippitur, which is in this manner. Johannes Doc quer versus Richard Roe,
implito. transg. or transg. super casus or the like ad dam* 20. l. or the like,
and this is all the Declaration commonly they have before the trial, then the
next court the defendant must answer, and so they proceed on, in this Arbitary
horse trot way, wherein is neither sense nor Law. And when any motions be in
Court made, the Steward Mr, Win, desires still that all things may be done
with consent, which is very cunningly thought on by him, when they can do
nothing by Law, and after Verdict in any case by their apprentized Jury given,
which is commonly for the Plaintfffe, according to the custom of that Court
then they enter judgment in this form, viz.

CVria Domini Regis Palatii Regis Westminster: tenta apud Southwarke, in Com Surrey,
die veneris sciliscet, none die Octobris, Anno regni Domini Caroli, Dei gratia
Anglie, Scotie, Francie et Hybernie, Regis fidei defensoris etc. vicessimo
secundo coram Edwardo Sidenham, milite Mariscalo hospitii Domini Rogis, et
Henrico Win, ar. Senlo, cur. pred. Indicibus curie illius virtuto litterarum
patent gerand. dat apud Canbry. duo decimo die July, Anno regni sui sexto,
Memorand. quod alias silicet, ad curiam domini Regis Palatii Regis Westminster: tenta
apud Southwarke in dicto Com. Surrey infra Iurisdictionem huius curie die
veneris septimo die Augusti ultimo preter. ito venit hic Danielis Shetterden
ar. de hospitio Domini Regis nunc. non existans per Richm. Somer. Attorn suam
et, protulit hic in cur quandam billam suam versus Iohannem Avery, unu.
portator. veigarn. officiar. et Minister. hujus curie genesis presen. hic in Curia
in propria persona sua de cod. hospitio non existen. in plto. deb. et sunt
pleg. de proso Io. Do: et Rio. To.

And so they go on in the form of the Common Law, in entering their Judgment,
and for the executing of it, issue forth a fieri facias, or a Capias ad
satisfac. returnable within a year and a day after the Test.

To give you an Account of some of the Erroneous proceedings of that Court in
the writ and Exordium of the Judgment formerly by me set down, and how all
their Arrests are false imprisonment trespass and batteries, and the and fees
money so taken extorted and forced from the Arrested, I intended to satisfy you
in some thing, but not in all part lie in respect, I cannot here in my Iron
Cage procure the year books, Dyer, Cook, and such as you should have Cited,
and partly I hold it sufficient to tell my enemy, I will fight with him, and
that I challenge him as I do now again the Marshalls Court, or that Court Mr.
Henry Wyn is Steward of, if they durst come to a fair Trial with me at the
Common Pleas Bar, concerning the Jurisdiction of that Court, to hold plea in
actions betwixt party and party not being of the Kings house, and how by them
as yet I have suffered out of purse above 2300. l. besides my credit no man
knows whether or no by all the ways or means I can use, though it be by many
costly and troublesome Law, Suits or otherwise receave one penny thereof, for if
I should set forth all that I know, and can make appear of that Court, it were
to arm my enemies being Rich and numerous, and leave my self in a kind of
naked condition, my estate being most in other men's hands, and a stranger in
Sodom, and friendlesse Gomorah, yet I fear them not, for my heart is good,
and just, my Actions honest, and my ways straight, and one that have not done
any wrong, but can bouldly dare that man who ever he be, or ever so rich to
meet him in any place, and with the spirit of truth tell him thou lie, if so
be shall devulge any thing that may carry the least species of dishonesty, or
scandal against me, I serve and fear my God, and love all honest people, and
know not to day whether I shall see to morrow, and love Heaven better then
money, not fearing death, counting him an insinuating knavish Scicophant that
knows any dishonest act by me done and is silent, not procuring just
punishment to be insflcted on me for it, which is all the comfort I have, in my
fortified Castle guarded more then regarded, and watched both night and day,
where my self with many more causelessly gaze away our time, thinking what Law
has produced such a heavy burden in the bowels of one house, and when to be
delivered, into the new part of the old City, there to be rebaptized, by the
name of Goal Birds, amongst our scandalous enemies, to the honor of our
Nation, that Gentlemen shall have new Titles, in this time of Reformation.

But to return to my old work, of the Marshalls Court, I will satisfy you
every one, if you will repair to me, in whatsoever point you conceave dubions
concerning the jurisdiction of that Court, and in what manner you shall ground
your Actions for Recovery which shall be so fixed as upon a Rock, and also make
it appear so clear as the Sun at noone day, that every one that has been
sued in that Court shall recover damage for his false imprisonment.

First what Fees are allowed in the Statutes, you have read them, and what they
have received, to whom, when, and where paid is best known to your self, and
how long you have been imprisoned, or in custody, by whom and when, where to
find their Estates, I am very well satisfied and can let you know it, and for
their extortions in what nature to be punished, and what restitution you may
recover, I will give you an account of it.

Secondly, note the nature of the Writ of such power and force, being directed
to the Carryers of the Rodds of the Office of the Ministers of the Court of the
Kings Palace of Westminster, where ipse facto there is no such Officie (but
they that make this Writ tolerate, sign, seal, and execute, it had need of A
Thousand Rod Carryers, and beadells to whip them out of this piece, which may
be would put some better law into their heads, or beat them into more wisdom
and honesty) and to let you understand a little more, the court of the Kings
palace of Westminster is the court of the Kings Bench, and they have noe such
offices as rodd carriers, but tippstaves, and the carriers of the Rodds, are
the Knight Marshalls men (as I have formerly proved by the statutes) deputed by
him to serve the process of that court, by virtue of their capias with their
rods in their hands, livery coats upon their backs, and cognizances upon
their sleeves, this should be their garb, and by this they are known to be
officers, and every one who is by him arrested, ought to yield obedience, and
to defend themselves in due course of law, but contrary to this rule, or any
good rule, they issue forth their writs, with a precipiums quod non omittatis
propter aliquam libertutem infra jur. curie predict (when neither themselves,
or any one else knows the jurisdiction of that court, caled the court of the
Kings palace of Westminster which they hold in Southwarke) quin capiatis etc.

By virtue of this writ being a dangerous on, and clean contrary to law they
euter, and break into the foresaid several Counties and the ancient charters
and liberties thereof, they impudence,* and insolent violence infringe, break
and enter, taking to themselves by this illegal Writ of Non ommittas, full
power and authority to justify any arrest within twelve miles about their
Court in any Corporation or Liberty in these sive Counties, as in London, where
one Edward Gunsmith did arrest Mrs. Margaret Landgridge, and carried her to the
Marshalsey, from Shoe-Lane, and in Westminster, where be at least forty Arrests
every week in the liberties of the Tower, White Chapel, St. Katherines, the
Dutchie-Finsbury, the Borough of Southwark, the Clinke, St. Giles, and many
others; I am confident you are not ignorant how that no inferior Court can
grant process out of one County into another, as this Court does (except the
Marshalls Coutt for the Kings house, which Court is always to attend his
person wheresoever he goes, and this is by special Act of Parliament and not
by Pattent or Common Law) And none of the Kings superior courts at
Westminster. can do it but with special direction to the Sheriff of of each
County, who is to make return of all such writs, and here they arrest in
general, in the five several counties by one writ, and the Sheriff never
has any knowledge of it, or of any such Writ (a horrid boldness) and carry
away the arrested whether they please, out of one County into another, let all
men consider what an infringement of liberties this is, and with so much
impudence Justified, and not one officer who live in such infringed l^berties
endeavor the prevention hereof, though their Oaths binds them to it and know
and see it oftener then my self and yet are silent, I doubt Genlemen your
silence herein is perjury, and let me entreat you to repent of your ignorant
perjuries. and do so no more, and be no longer dumb, but endeavor the cure of
this Malady or I will call you by good statute law provided for
Newtralist-resiants, and Officers) to account for it, and be no looser by the
bargain, and if you love your souls [being warned] hereafter to discharge
your Offices with a regard to your oaths and bring these Marshalls men to
condign punishment for such offenses, and transgressions, and note that if
Custom or Tolleration of this evil once become a Law by perscription any man
that can prevail, may get a Pattent from his Maj. to have the same power over
all the Kingdom, as this Marshals Court has within the five Counties, for if
his Majesty have power to grant such a Pattent for twelve miles, there is in
his Majesty the like power de die in diem, to grant Pattents of the same nature
for twelve hundred miles if the Kingdom were so large, and so consequently
all the Courts, Jurisdictions, Charters, Laws privileges and rights of the
Subject, so long enjoyed, and by Magna Charta by so many Kings confirmed upon
us utterly overthrown* and wholly in his Majesty.

Thirdly the test their writs from the last session of their court before they
take it forth and make it returnable, in fra tres septimanas tunc prox. sequen.
what a false and erroneous writ is this, the Law cannot any way warrant such a
return, but there a turn must be the next court after the test, and they keep
their court every Friday, and so the return cannot be, but from Friday to
Friday.

If this return of theirs were law why cannot the Kings bench or common pleas
issue forth writs beareing test in Trinity Term to be retornable in Easter
term following, it is all one and the same law, and if an inferior court can
do this, why not a superior Court, if any Attorney. Be it of the Kings bench
or common pleas should make such a writ, he would be thrown over Bar, and
imprisoned for it, as he should well deserve, and so consequently if this were
law, an Attorney might make a writ tested last term, and returnable seven
years since, and arrest any one by virtue of it presently after the writ
issued for upon a pretended account of ten thousand pound, and for want of
bail the arrested must lie in prison, until the return of the writ,

Fourthly they command the body of the arrested to be brought before the Judges
of the Court, of the Kings palace of Westminster which is a strange power in
my opinion, that the Knight Marshall by virtue of his writ out of that court
held in Southwarke should command any man to be arrested and carried to prison,
and his appearance to be before justice Bacon or justice Roll at the Term,
which is the court time of the court of the Kings Palace of Westminster, when
their tests are not to the writs, they being the Judges of the Court, of the
Kings palace of Westminster, but the test of this writ is by Sir Edward
Sidenham, he having nothing to do there, or in any other Court, neither has
he taken the oath of a Judge in any Court, and if he had taken such an oath,
yet he is a Delinquent, and the Office of Knight Marshall, as much as
concerns him in that Court, and the benefit thereof long since sequestered,
and taken from him by the Committee of Sequestrations in the County of Surrey,
and let to another for about thirty pounds per Annum, And Sir Edward Siddenham
has not yet made his Composition, yet the Test of the Writ is still in his
name, which Vacuats the writ in it self, for by the Votes of the 20. of MAY,
1642. and by the Statutes of the 11. R. 2.1. H. 4. the same is confirmed, all
Delinquents are declared Traitors, and he being a Delinquent, I conceive him to
be within compass of the Votes, which if he be, let all Lawyers and wise men
give their opinion upon, whether or no the Test of the Writ be in a Traitors
name, and if tested by a Traitor, then the Writ is clearly void and of none
effect, and what man will be so base and unworthie a fellow, to yield obedience
to Traitors test or command, thereby confederating with him, It will be
objected that the Chancery, Kings Bench, and Common Pleas writes bear the Test
of the Keeper, and Chief Justice after they be came Delinquents, which is
true, but not after their Offices were sequestered and taken from them, for then
the Committee for obstructions, Justice Bacon, and Justice Reeve bore the Tests
of the Writts, Moreover Sir Edward Sidenhams Pattent is void into several
ways, by which he is made Knight Marshall, first his Pattent is not enrolled
in the Rowles here in due time, and secondly it is past under the old Great
Seal at OXFORD, which by virtue of the Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament
is void, that Ordinance declaring all Graunts, Pattents, etc. past under the
old Great Seal since the twentieth second of May 1642. void, which was the
time Littleton the Keeper Run away to York with the seal, and at that time, and
sinre Sir Edmond Varney was Knight Marshall, who was at Edgehill, the twenty
third of October following killed, after whose death Sir Edward Sidenham had
his Pattent to be Knight Marshall sealed with the old Great Seal. So the
whole foundation of the Court is destroyed, the Knight Marshall not being
Knight Marshall whose Test is to the Writts, and also the Marshalls men have no
Deputaion from the Knight Marshall, which must of necessity be otherwise, they
are no Marshalls men, and so all their Arrests every way false imprisonment,
and let all men judge if that Court has not ruined it self.

Fifthly, their writts run to Arrest John Do, and Richard Roe in an action of
Trespass, and they declare some times in debt, sometimes in Trover in Action sur
le Case, and the like which is repugnant to Law, for wherefore shall I Answer
to any other action according to the Common Pleas proceedings which is Law,
then that I was Arrested for and put in Bail to, and wherefore shall not I
have Costs upon that Action by nonsuit if not declared against, according to
the first Process, and Arrest.

Sixthly, by what Law or rule, I must be bound to answer to an Incippitur, such
a one as I have formerly mentioned, I know not, but sure I am that such an
Incippitur is a piece of non sense and not coming near the name of a
Declaration, the Steward if he were a just Steward ought to grant a non pros.
upon it for want of a Declaration, but for the Courts benefit, that lawful
proceeding is slighted, and instead thereof puts the poor Defendant by
lawless and irregular rules and other by blows, to a very long attendance,
and much cost, and lately one Gilbert Barrel one of the Attorneys of that
Court has found out a quirk which he pretends to be Law, to preserve the
Plaintiff from paying the Defendant Costs, when there is no cause of Action,
that is to declare in a good Declaration, and when the Defendant answers, to
demurre to the Answer, and so the Judgment shall pass against the Plaintiff,
and that Court gives no cost upon a demurrer, this was his client Bowers his
case against Mrs. Carter, and thus in an odd erroneous way, and kind of
proceedings they go on, and when they are to enter Judgment in any Case, this
is their Exordium which I have litteratly set down formerly, out of which have
observed one pretty passage, and the like is in their Writ, which I will only
mention, and so endeavor a Conclusion.

Note they make their writ retournable before the Judges of the Court of the
Kings Palace at Westminster, of which Court Mr. Win pretends to be Steward, and
Tests it with Sir Edward Sydenhams Test, Knight Marshall, and so Ioyn both the
Court and Steward, and Knight Marshall together.

And for their Judgment they begin with Curia Domini Regis Palatii Regis
Westminster: etc. Which Court is not the Court of the Kings Palace at Westminster,
but the Kings Bench is the Court of the KINGS Palace of WESTMINSTER, as I
have formerly Declared and cannot be held in Surrey as aforesaid, unles by
special adjournment is tenta coram Edw. Sidenham milite Marescallo Hospitii
Domini Regis et Henerico Win. Ar. Senlo. curie pred. and so in all their
proceedings join their two courts in own to make as they say a vis unita
fortior, and need they have to if that would help, but the worst is, neither
of their courts has jurisdiction before the King come, and then but one, and
that is the Marshalsey for his Majesty's house, and is not this able to trouble
Mr. Win, that the power of two Courts cannot make one, yet nevertheless he
marries them both together by which means money enough will begotten if the
Spawnes of that Court, the Marshalls men, be careful to sow Sedition enough,
between the Scoulds, Bawdes, and Whores, within their Veirge, from whom most of
their living and benefit comes.

The last of my exceptions that I intend at this time in this Book to set
forth; is to entreat you to take notice of their executions retornable within a
year and a day, within which time there is 52 Courts, one every week held,
wherefore shall not the Common Law make forth an execution returnable 52 Terms
after the Test of the Writ, and so that Writ will not be out of Date, or the
return past in 52. Terms, which is about Thirteen years, I do not think but
it is false imprisonment in any one to execute such a writ when the Law will
not allow them to make it returnable, but from court to Court, as the Common
Law does from Term to Term.

If a man could but have the full view of their proceedings, I am very
confident he should discover more errors in one day then he could with his
pen devulge in a Year.

Civitas Burgus et Vil. Westminster. in Com. Midd.
. Apud generalem Session. pacis Domini Regis tent. ibm. Die Lunae existen.
undecimo die Januarii, Anno Regni Dn. mi. Caroli nunc Regis Angliae. etc xx ii.
coram Gregorio Fenner Mil. Humph. Edwards Enbulo Thelwall et Johe. Hooker Ar.
et al. sociis suis Justiciar. etc.

IT is Ordered by this Court that Cornellius Avery who is alleged to be a
Marshals Man, or Servant to a Marshalls man, be suppressed from keeping a
victualing House any longer, and that from henceforth he shall not sell or
utter any beer or Ale whatsoever by color of any License or Warrant made him
by this Court, or any of his Majesty's Justices of the peace within this City
and Liberty, and that from henceforth no person who is, or shall be a Marshalls
Man be Lycensed to keep a Victualling house to sell beer or Ale, within this
Liberty but that all lycenses granted or to be be granted to any Marshalls Man,
shall be ufterly void to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

per Iohannem Iackson.

There is also an Order granted at the Sessions at Hicks-Hall, that no
Marshalls man or Bayliffe shall keep a Victualing house in the County of
Middlesex. But that all such lycenses granted or to be granted to any such shall
be to all intents and purposes void.

I wish all the Sessionses in the Kingdom would do the like in all their
Counties and liberties, and see the same put in execution by their Constables
and Officers.

If Heaven be pleased, when men do cease from sin.
If Earth be pleased, when Thieves do enter in.
If Hell be pleased, when she receaves a Knave.
Then all be pleased, this Courts going to its grave*
FINIS.

