TO THE RISEN SEED, A SALUTATION, AND To the BREATHING BABE Of ETERNAL BIRTH:
AS ALSO, TO Britains Bereans, The Noble Islanders, who have waited for His
Law, (called Quakers) in ENGLAND.

Together with A MOVING in the Spirit for the SEED to feel.

By A. ROBESON.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1662.

To the Risen SEED, a Salutation.
O Seed of the Covenant, thy Glory has surrounded me, and as passing in the
vein of thy Mansions, my Soul is ravished, Oh my Soul is ravished! and with the
Glory of thy Tabernacle I am overwhelmed: To the Beauty of thy dwelling Place
there is no comparison.

O ye Vessels of the Lord, Purity retain, for Holiness becomes his House for
ever; You, you Seed of Jacob has he called, and known above all the Families
of the Earth, to place his Name in you, and set you as a Garden in a pleasant
Soil; he eats of your Fruit, and delights in what ye bring forth; O Answer,
Answer his Goodness for ever; He has settled your Shakings, and set you on a
Rock; He has ended your Wanderings, and given you Dwellings at Home; when there
was none to pity, he gathered you up; He saved you in Trouble, when vain was
the help of Man: Out of Egypt has he called his Son: He is dividing the Waves,
and the Seed's passing through, when Darkness is covering the Earth, and gross
darkness the People; behold it is clear about you, and your Light in your
Lanthorn does shine: His Thunderclaps is amazing the Earth, yea, Terror and
Madness is making men reel; The Cups of pure Wrath is the Wicked swallowing up,
while great is your Peace, dear Children.

O Babes, your Union, your Order, your Peace and Joy, shows ye are all taught
of the Lord; And lo, He is come as from a far Country, traveling in his great
Strength, through a long and sable black Night of Apostasy, with the Dayspring
from on high to visit you; And have you not felt Him arise with healing under
his Wings? Speak, Speak to his Glory, and let the Heathen hear of his Fame, you
blessed Ministers of Truth, to whom the utterance is given; Sound, Sound
gloriously, that the dead may arise to Judgment; Let the Wicked hear of his
Dread, and his Love that has cut down many, when he arose his Seed to redeem,
and to bring back Zion with Judgment out of Shadows, you to lead forth into
the Living Substance, making you loath the Pots in Fgypt, and love the new Wine
in the Kingdom: What ye have heard, declare; What ye have seen, utter, and hide
not your blessed Talent, that Dread may beset the Nations, and Fear the Enemies
of his People; let your Flourishing lives declare that your Spring is from a
Fountain, that the parched Land may gape, and the Thirsty may yearn for Water;
that the Coy may be wooed to Love, being jealous to see your Beauty, and the
Peace through War, that ye enjoy, O Zions Camp in England.

A Work ye are raised up to do, mine eye sees it; the Seed of Faith alone can
perceive it; With joy the Firstborn is come into the World, ye are all
Witnesses: And shall He not stand the last upon the Earth? the Day of the
Restitution of all things shall prove it: Feel me here, the Babe can embrace
me, the Wise and Prudent is shut out. Many has had a Day, but one shall have
the last: The Dragon, the Beast, the false Prophet, Antichrist, that denies Him
to be come in the Flesh, has all had a Day, the suffering Witness has felt
it; And shall not the Prince of the Kings of the Earth have his Day also? yea,
he shall have the last, even the Day of Judgment on all Flesh, on all that has
gone before him, the Thieves and Robbers; that shall be his Day, the Joy of the
Upright shall arise in it; and that that Day is already sprung, you enlightened
Ones are Witnesses; and that it shall come to a noon-tyde, and never decline
again, many shall be Witnesses, yea, a numberless Number shall see it, and all
counterfeit Lights, and false Fires shall vanish in it.

Be joyful in Glory, and rejoice in Hope, all you that wait for the Appearance
of Zions King, for his Rising shall be refreshful as the Springs of the
Morning; the earnest Expectation of the Creature has waited for his Day,
wherein shall shine forth the Manifestation of you, the Sons of God; then shall
the groaning Creation be let into the Liberty, for the Son shall make it free,
(and you know, that is free indeed) the Son who fulfils the Fathers Will, which
was, and is, that of all that the Father has given him, He should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last Day: And has he not given
Him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost ends of the Earth for his
Possession? you, who have seen and felt Him a Light unto the Gentiles, can
witness it: And although there has come before him Thieves and Robbers, who
have thronged into the high Places of the Earth (yea into the holy Place where
they ought not) for a season, yet his Day of Judgment shall be upon them, and
they shall be cast out; Behold his day is come, and the Recovery is arising.

All dear Friends, keep your eye to the Cloud by day, and to the Pillar of Fire
by night, and in the Patience abide for the time of glorious Wonders; eye Him,
eye Him, who rules the raging of the Sea, when the Waves thereof arise, he
stills them; verily the Day approaches, wherein the things that are shall pass
away, and that shall arise, that will refresh the Earth; for Peace shall be
sown to the Righteous, and Joy to the upright in Heart.

These things I testify in the Openings of the Spirit of Light, who am your
dear Friend and Brother in the Patience and Tribulation of Jesus; with you is
my Name new, and to the World known by,

A. Robeson.

There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the Heaven in thy
help, and in his Excellency, on the Sky.

The Eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath thee are his Everlasting Arms;
and He shall thrust out the Enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them.

Israel then shall dwell in safety alone; The Fountain of Jacob shall be upon a
Land of Corn and Wine; also, His Heavens shall drop down Dew.

Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee O People, saved by the Lord,
the Shield of thy Help? and who is the Sword of thy Excellency? and thine
Enemies shall be found Liars before thee, and thou shall tread down their High
Places.


To the Breathing Babe of Eternal Birth, Says my Life in the Love of God.
AS thou fallest into the bosom of thy Father, thou will feel thy Rest, the
Spring and Fountain of Life which arises not in that part within thee, is
according to this world: But O, how it flows from above, from the Father of
Light, unto that which is born anew, and prepared for the Kingdom; Oh the
Kingdom that is to come! The Lord God of my mercy and life preserve thee from
every evil Word and Work, and fit thee yet more for that Heavenly Kingdom, for
it comes; for it comes in ten thousand of his Saints. O my Lamb, feel more
and more, the Innocence overshadow thee, and the Vesture that is beautiful, and
the Armor of Light: O, the Day is come, walk while thou have the Day, for, The
night comes wherein no man can work: The Springs of the morning has been thy
Visitation; yea, the day Spring from on high has visited thee; and the
righteous Son with the healing wing has fluttered over thee, as a Hen for the
Bird. Be gathered, O, be gathered in this Day of great Mercy, lest the Day of
Lamentation come, and it thus be taken up, How often would I have gathered thee?
etc. Fulfill my joy in thy joining to the Lord, and hear thou the Angel of the
Covenant (who is come to gather) crying to the Seed, Arise and shine, for thy
Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is arisen upon thee, even upon the
Seed through whom the Nations are, and are to be blessed: O, the beautiful
despised Seed, let this outcast dwell with thee, and thou shall entertain an
Angel: O my Breathings for that Babe in thy Bosom, I know him to be of a noble
descent, begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth; he leads in the
hidden way of Peace from the World, yea, the wayfaring-man that follows him
(though a Fool) he shall not err; His is the Voice of the Turtle, and Oh! it is
heard in thy Land: Then rejoice since the time of the Singing of Birds is come;
and into the now recovered Eternal Paradise enter thou again, taking a seat
among the Branches, to chaunt among the Birds on the pleasant Myrtle Trees; for
so, to many the Winter is over and gone, and the Flowers of the Eternal Spring
appears. O, the Songs of Zion are full of Harmony, in whose Remembrance my Life
is as the Fume of burning Incense, ascending from the Altar of Holiness to God,
and to the Lamb for ever: O, come to feel the Song from the Fountain of Joy, of
Life, Light and Love, for evermore, Amen.

Nor can I hear hold, God's Love overflowing my Life, as a River swells over
her Banks, whereby the pure Streams of Everlasting Love runs through me, toward
the rising Seed of Immortal Life, in thy long oppressed, darkened, traveling
Soul; Cherish it, Cherish it, O my lovely Babe, that in thee it may grow to the
Everlasting Joy and Peace of thy Soul, and safety of thy Immortal Part for
ever; This is a matter of weight, enter into the Feeling of it. O, that I may
see the Day wherein the glorious Power of the Living God may come up, and be
over and a-top of all the Powers of Darkness in thee; that would be the Day of
the Answer of the Desires of my Life, and the Petitions of my purest Breath,
which has ascended from me even of old, in the Days of my great Darkness,
when I had no witness of the withdrawing of veil, nor entrance into the holy
Place, but as one having been far off, and brought nearer by the Blood of
Jesus; I feel the Issues of Life begetting in me the Sounding of Bowels to the
breathing Seed, that into the Unity it may come into the Fold to Feed, where
the Flock rests at noon, and has a Shadow from the heat.

And this is the Message of my Life in the Love and Power of God unto thee, O
Traveller toward Zion, if thy Face be thitherwards, and that be raised in thee,
which cannot live but in God's Life, nor cannot rejoice, but in the Light of
his Countenance, nor feed, but on the Bread from Heaven; I say, from Him who
lives for ever, Holy, Faithful and True, the days of thy Refreshing shall
come, for I feel the Yearning of his Bowels, to enter into an Everlasting
Covenant with thee, that shall never be forgotten: Wherefore let the Faint grow
Strong, and the Weary walk Uprightly, for a time shall come that Tears shall be
wiped from their Eyes.

A. R.

To Britains Bereans, the noble Islanders, who have waited for His Law,
(called Quakers) in England.
SOns of Righteousness, you arise so often before me, that my pure Remembrance
does continually stir: Whereto shall I compare you? Or by what similitude can I
desine your Beauty? How short's the Earthly to find you out, since in the
Heavenly was your Plantation? and in, and from the Holy Land of Light and Life,
I send you forth a most endeared Salutation; It Is alone your Innocence that
gives you Splendour, and your unspotted Life that makes you shine; The pure Law
of Righteousness you have received, else your Stedfastness had been in vain. To
what you have been faithful, is from the Lord, else your Faith had never been
accounted; for if not for the single Truth, for what should serve your loss of
All? And when to you the Testimony rifes clear in the Lord, give freely up, and
your Reward shall be Abundance.

Dear Lambs, our God great and terrible, the Intents of his Heart, is bringing
to pass, to establish his mighty Work of Wonders; he is swift in his Goings,
his Arm is stretched out, Scattering that which is to be Scattered, and
gathering the Remnant of his Seed from the winds of the Earth.

You know that of all Trees in the world, he has chosen one only Vine; of all
Flowers one Lilly; above all Fowls has he loved one Dove; amongst all Cattle,
chosen one Sheep; above all builded Cities, has he hallowed Zion for himself;
amongst all the Multitudes of People, has he gotten One; unto this People whom
he loves, has he given a Law, approved in them, whereby a way of returning to
that, which was erred from in the wandering Minds of fallen Mankind, is opened
up; and this Law must be published to the ends of the Earth, for a tie to
bridle the Nations.

Wherefore O Friends, a weight lies upon you, you are the Objects of the eyes
of many; yea, a jealousy concerning you, is spreading over the Earth, and
secret questions arising in the hearts of many, saying, What does this
Appearance mean? Friends, you know, it is the earnest of good things to come;
and I Will tell you in that which cannot fail, the Generations to come shall bless
the day and spring, in, and by which you have been, and are visited.

Therefore staidness, staidness O Flock of Israel, in the pure Opening measure
of Life, in your holy cleansed Vessels, is that which shall cloth you with
Authority, and give you dominion, and make you to feel, and support you under
the weight of the work ye are called unto.

O holy Children, in the pure Silence, in the weighty Wisdom, in the blessed
Openings of the unchangeable Light, and endless Life, stay your Minds; keep,
keep under that, that you may be a weighty People in the approaching Day,
wherein your Enemies will seek to raze, your Foundation.

Which (O Babes of blessing) I feel to be the Rock of Ages, and the Foundation
of many Generations, who on it stood firm, against all the thundering decrees
for Isreal's utter Destruction of Haman, Ahasuerus, Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, and
all other combined Kings against the Lord, and his Anointed, in the days of
old.

This your munition of Rocks (O Doves in the Cleft) shows before your Enemies,
but as a little Stone to be tumbled at their pleasure, by their Ingines and
Machinations of darkness.

But (O ye Inhabitants in the Mount on the top of all) you know it came out of
the Mountain without hands, and cursed are all they who lift up a Tool upon it,
for no Weapon formed against it shall prosper; yea, this is the Altar built
without a Tool, which no man can deface, and whereof no man must have the Glory.

So my Friends fear not, though the Heathen cry Aha, as though there were no
God; and though the Proud, and they that are at ease, cry lo, although he
trusted in God, yet is he fallen: For the Lord God of Hosts will thunder down
amongst them, that he may redeem Jacob his beloved, and Israel his chosen; It
goes on, the day draws near, even of Multitudes, Multitudes for the Valley of
Decision; Let nothing (not a hurtful thought) enter, think not time long, in
God stand still; keep your Minds out of all things in the Light of the Lord,
wherewith you are visited; Woe will be your Portions if ye depart from it: and
in this day nothing will be able to keep you to it, but the Power of it self;
Therefore watch to feel it, that you may stand, that the Glory of the present,
and approaching Day of God, you may be made Partakers of; for the Light that is
sprung up, by the Power whereof you are raised to bear Testimony to it self, is
the Law that shall bind all Nations, and plant them in their longed-for Rest.

A. R.

A Moving in the Spirit, for the Seed to Feel.
O Zion weeps, our Mother dear,
Jerusalem does cry,
For Babes brought up to Marriage Bed,
who then fall down and die.
And for the Beauty of her Babes,
which shined in Unity,
Her smitten Life does pant and groan
because of some decay.
Yet her Redeemer sounds aloud,
and says his Name he will raise,
And make the Beauty of her Babes,
of all the Earth, the Praise.
I Have heard his Voice which rends the Clouds;
he said, I Will rise in Zeal,
And I Will break through the dark shrouds,
which does Our Glory veil.
O Zion my redeemed Land,
I Have bought thee with my Blood:
Jerusalem my chosen Spouse,
my Life does seek thy Good.
And tho thy Enemy does rage,
and seek thee to devour;
Yet I will stop his crafty Course,
and smite Him with my Power.
And thou shall be redeemed from Grief,
and that which did divide,
Shall come als' short in Policy,
As't has in Power and Pride.
All Violence and deep deceit,
for ever from thy Land
I Will Banish quite; In my pure Power
and Wisdom thou shall stand:
For I have Sworn, and will perform,
my Life in pledge I give,
That from all Molestation,
thy Life I shall relieve.
All Tears, and Sorrows, Cries, and Pain,
shall pass from thee away;
And thy pure Consolation,
shall rise like Springs of day,
All bypast things, wherein thou wast
acquaint with grief and Tears,
Shall come no more into thy mind;
Love shall cast out thy Fears.
And in that State, I will create
Jerusalem a Joy,
And naught unclean, from hencoforth shall
her Blessedness annoy.
For I have sealed a blessed Decree,
for her eternal Good;
And my pure living Bread shall be
her everlasting Food.
A. Robeson.

THE END.

