THE DOCTRINE OF JUSTIFICATION CLEARED, By Animadversions on Mr. John Goodwins
Animadversions upon Mr. George Walkers Defense of the true sense of the
Apostle, Romans 4. 3, 5 etc.

Together with an examination of both parts of his Treatise of Justification.

Wherein the imputation of faith in a proper sense is denied, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness Active and Passive affirmed, against that
Treatise.

By Henry Robrough, Rector of Leonards East-cheape London.

Respondio: Luthero calumniam facit, non enim hoc sensu quo ipse fingit dixit
fidem id est qualitatem fidei esse formalem nostram justitiam, sed Metonymico
sensu dixit fidem, id est, Christum fide apprehensum, esse justitiam nostram.

Quem sensum (metonymicum) si oppugnat adversarius, certe non Lutherum
impugnat, sed Spiritum sanctum blasphemat, qui Christum express vocat nostram
justitiam, Jer. 23. 6. and 1 Cor. 1. 30. Pareus Castig. Bellarm. l. 2. c. 4. p.
418.

Justitia meriti seu (...) non est tantum sanguis and mors Christi, sed
complectitur totam obedientiam humiliationis ab articulo conceptionis usque ad
mortem crucis, ad Parens de act. and Pass. just. P. 186. Etiam Evangelica
justitia est legis impletio, neque pugnat cum lege: per Evangeliumenim Lex non
aboletur, sed stabilitur, Urs. Cat. p. 391. For you know the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that
ye through his poverty might be rich. 2 Cor. 8. 9.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. and are to be sold by John Bellamy and Ralph Smith,
at the sign of the three Golden Lions in Corne-hill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1643.

To his Worshipful, loving, and well beloved friends, Alderman Bunce and his
loving Consort Mistress Sarah Bunce.
ADAMS sin was a great one doubtless, I think the greatest of all; some
except the sin against the holy Ghost. I am sure the whole Creation groaneth
under it, and travelleth as in pain for it at this day, especially the little
world, mankind: The evils which are upon our bodies, souls, goods, names, are
hence. Hence diseases on and in the body innumerable, the freeing us from
which, and putting it in an equal temper, takes up the Art and industry of
the Physician; and when he has done all, there will be a dissolution of that
earthly house. Dust thou art, and into dust shall thou return again.

The divine is Gods special ordinance for the soul, and (blessed be God) there
is a complete remedy in that way for the foul, the saving of the soul,
beginning, consummation, and body too in the glorious resurrection, the
salvation prepared to be revealed in the last times.

A maine part of salvation is Justification, just making, by it such as believe
are holy, unreprovable, unblamable in Gods sight, white as Snow, and whiter,
perfected for ever; so are all those that are sanctified God deals with them
as such, pardons all sins, freeth from guilt and punishment properly so
called, whatsoever is compensatory or fatisfactory, and gives them eternal
life.

Hence peace with God, rejoicing in hope of glory, glorying in tribulations,
against Adams sin, the death caused by it, servitude to sin, freedom from
righteousness, the power that was, and the relics, yea and those of
omissions, and co^missions, against the worlds accusations, condemnations, the
Devil and conscience. It is God that justifies, who can condemn, who canlay
any thing to their charge? Physicians agree not about the cure of the body, nor
Divines about this of the soul. Some differences there are about other things.
(...) i^ about that by which, the form, or what is instead of it; some give it
faith imputed in a proper sense, so the Animad versor I deal with sometimes,
sometimes remission of sins, both which he calls righteousness,
(righteousness is confessedly necessary 'to justification.) Papists to faith,
hope, and charity; both make Christ the meritorious cause. It is his merit
whence faith is imputed and juctifieth, says one; his merit, that faith, hope,
and charity, justify, so the other.

I deny faith, hope, and charity; yea, faith alone in a proper sense Though I
allow faith to be the instrument applying, that by which, I profess my self a
friend of imputation of the Active and Passive obedience of Christ; that, as
that obedience is the meritorious cause, so the matter, and that imputed, given
or applied by God, the formal cause, or that which supplieth the place there
of: whilst some have been busy about other controversies of our times, and
others in an eager persuite of war; I (having a little more leisure then ever
before, not used to be idle) have labored in this controversy the clearing of
it. My first and last thoughts of some to whom I should Dedicate this, pitched
on you both, and I desire you to take it as a pledge of unfeigned love and
thankfulness for many loving kindnesses, for constant friendship. I hope the
cause (being the constant tenet of all Protestants against Arminians and
Papists) will defend it self; It is Jesus Christ's cause, he will never leave
it. If in your perusal of it, it shall contribute to your establishment, to
your peace and comfort in life and death, to your boldness in standing before
Gods tribunal here and hereafter which was Sc. Paul's defire, and the practice
of all that did ever so stand) I shall have mine aim in this mine in tituling
it to you both, whom I truly love, which I earnestly desire and pray for,
resting ever yours in all services of love to be commanded,

HENRY ROBROUGH.
April 3. 1643.
To my Reverend Brethren, the Ministers of Gods Word in the City of London,
with all others laboring in that work of the Lord in other parts of this
Kingdom.
Reverend Sirs,
YOu have here presented unto your view, Animadversions on Mr. J. G.
Animadversions, and an examination of his whole Treatise of Justification; He
has appealed to some of you, and I appeal unto you all. He asserteth the
imputation of faith for righteousness, and that in a proper sense, denying the
imputation of Christ's righteousness to Juctification.

Though he grants faith imputed, to be that whose object is Christ, p. 6.
Tr.1. and that it is its office to bring us to fellowship with Christ, and of
that justification and redemption which Christ has purchased, p. 5. ib. and
that it is essential to it to lay hold on Christ, p.14.

Yet he asserteth this faith not to be taken figuratively by a Metoy my or
Metalepsis with respect to the object, because it lays hold on Christ or
Christ's righteousness, Tr. 1. p. 14. but properly and formally, p.22. 36. 41.
and 44. etc. Yea, he says, neither is the righteousness of Christ, the object
of faith as justifying, p. 43. And that the righteousness of Christ (in the
variety of the objects of faith used in Scripture) is not to be found in the
least mention, p. 38. The Scriptures make not the least mention, or give the
least intimation of such a thing, p. 43. there is no found or intimation of the
righteousness or active obedience of Christ, p. 39.

And though he says (with what agreement to himself, let him look to it) Not
but that the righteousness of Christ is and ought to be believed as well as
other things revealed and written in the Scriptures, and is of nearer
concernment then other things to the maine, p. 39.

And that the Scriptures propound the righteousness of Christ or his obedience
to the Law, as that which is to be believed, and that, so it may be termed a
partial object of faith, that as somewhat that ought to be believed, p. 43.

Yet it may be believed by such a faith as the Turks and Jews have, p. 39. and
so the creation of the world is propounded to be believed, and that Caine was
Adams son, p. 43.

When as he denies the righteousness of Christ, that that is imputed to us
for righteousness, he adds, But it is that for which righteousness is
imputed, p. 17. that is, it procures that our faith should be imputed for
righteousness unto us, p. 101 plainly. The merit of Christ or of his
righteousness has so far* prevailed with God on our behalf, that by or upon
our faith we shall be accounted righteous before him, which in effect is the
same truth which we maintain, viz. That God for Christ's sake, or Christ's
merits sake does impute our faith for righteousness unto us, p. 11. and then,
in this sense only, and not any other, may the active and passive obedience of
Christ be said to be the righteousness by which we are justified, p. 13.

This faith (not in a figurative, but propersense) is required and accepted for
righteousness, and has the same favors, rewards, and privileges upon the
tender of it that should have been given to men in regard of that legal
righteousness had it been fulfilled, etc. p. 15. 16. It is as good, p. 6. as
available and effectual to justification, p. 15.

It is all that God requires of men to their justification in stead of the
righteousness of the Law, p. 92. And therefore if God shall not impute or
account it unto them for this righteousness, it should stand them in no steed
at all to their justification, p. 92. Yea,

He calls it from Phil. 3. 9. a righteousness which God himself has found
out, and which he will own and countenance and account for righteousness unto
men, and no other but this, p. 86. the righteousness there mentioned is as being
and standing in faith, etc. and he calls it a righteousness which will
certainly carry it, notwithstanding all the unlikelihood and seeming
imperfections of it, and that the thing is fully concluded and established with
God accordingly, ib.

This is the Helena he contendeth for, in Preaching first, and now in Print.
The condition appointed by God, and required on man's part, in opposition to
Christ's righteousness, the object; which he deneith the object of this faith
as justifying, p. 38. In this which is but inherent righteousness, a weak and
imperfect righteousness, which must have help to make it accepted, if ever it
be so, in this I say will he be found not that which is by faith as an
instrument, received and put on, and would have us to be so too, which God
forbid. It will not steed us before Gods tribunal, his friend Pareus calls
it Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, as in the front is showed; the Apostles
text is for faith of Christ, and his righteousness, his righteousness being
that which is imputed, Romans 4. 6. 11. as I shall fully show.

It is observable, that this which is here by him established, is
notwithstanding by him also in effect confounded with remission of sins which
with him formally justifies. This he calls the imputing of righteousness.
To show that God has no other righteousness to confer upon a sinner, but
that which stands in forgiveness of sins, Tr. 2. p. 7. That righteousness
which God is said to impute unto men through faith, is nothing else (being
interpreted) but the forgiveness of sins, Tr. 1. p. 75. this (he says) has
the privileges, though not the nature of a perfect righteousness, p. 76. But
let that pass, being fully considered in d^e places.

Again, the thing he mainly opposes, is the active obedience or
righteousness of Jesus Christ, of this he says, amongst the variety of the
objects of faith in the Scriptures, there is not the least mention as before.

And (establishing the passive obedience as the meritorious cause imputed in
its effects, now faith, now pardon of sins) tells us, That if Christ had
fulfilled the Law for us in our steed, there had been no occasion of his
dying for us, and that there is no light clearer then this, Conclus. 7. Tr. 2.
p. 10.

Yea though he calls it an efficient remote; not immediate, qualifying him
to, but having no immediate influence, Tr. 2. p. 69.

Yet it is not causa sine qua non, with him; Causa si^e qua non, is causa
stolida and ociosa, only present in the action, and does nothing therein, as
Dr. Abbot against Bish. p. 497. Causa sine qua non, non est causa, as the
Logitians. This is a remote efficient confessed, and so causa.

And for the active obedience of Christ in the production of this effect,
Justification, Mr. John Goodwine, seems to me to say enough to establish it
in good earnest, and to have no cause* of excluding the same, which yet he
often does.

We deny not the righteousness of Christ in it self, rather we suppose and
establish it, p. 16, neither the absolute necessity of it; neither the
meritorious efficiencie or causality, in respect of the Justification of a
sinner, p. 16. but believes, etc. we are justified for the merits sake of
Christ's righteousness, there being a full consideration in it, why God should
justify those that believe in him. It is true, he means the Passive
righteousness chiefly, p. 16. which does not exclude the Active.

Yea, that it falling into the Passive, and considered in conjunction with it
has influence into, and contributeth toward the justification of a sinner, as
acknowledged on both sides, p. 7. That, together they may be called a
righteousness; for which; but at no hand with which we are justified, p. 62.
Wherefore they must be both together included or excluded, and in the same sort.

He will not have the Active and Passive righteousness separated in respect of
this common effect justification, p. 132. and says, as the Active separated
will not profit; so neither will the Passive it self be found it self, that
is an atonement or expiation of sin according to the wili and purpose of God,
except we bring in the Active to it, p. 132.

And elsewhere, Though it be not satisfactory simply and directly in it self,
nor contributing any thing by way of merit toward the justification of a
sinner, so that God is moved thereby to justify any man, (these are his hungry
and cold; if consistent, expressions) Yet it cannot be denied -- but it has a
moving efficiencie -- qualifying in part the Sacrifice of Christ for the
fullness and height of acceptance with God, Tr. 2. p. 81. It was of absolute
necessity to qualify and fit the Sacrifice for the Altar, to tender him a
person meet by his death, and Sacrifice to make an atonement. -- The absolute
holiness and righteousness of the humanity it self was of necessary
concurrence thereunto, p. 201.

There is great weight and moment in the righteousness of Christ's person, to
assure or secure the consciences of men concerning their justification by his
death. -- It qualifieth his person at least in part for that meritoriousnesse
of his death, which may stand the world in steed for their justification, p.
204.

He acknowledges the infinite perfection and worth of it, p. 87.

And that the habitual holiness of his person and moral righteousness or
Active obedience of his life -- are essentially and directly requisite to make
his death and sufferings, Justification and life and salvation to them as has
been further opened in the former part of this Treatise, Tr. 2. p. 54. These
are to be considered.

It is true he teaches us, that Christ's Active obedience, that of nature and
life were due for himself. But will not consider that what is due cannot
merit, he that does all is but an unprofitable servant, he has done but what
he ought. And if the merit be destroyed, how can it make Christ a Priest, or
his Sacrifice an atonement? how is it, in its self an atonement or expiation
of sin as before?

And what is become of our justification and salvation, yea of the glory of
Christ?

You shall read dangerous doctrine about the imputation of Adams sin, that it
is ours but in the effect, not the sin it self, as his opinion is also of
the imputation of Christ's righteousness, as if our spiritual death in which
we were borne, supposed not our sin, Adams, ours sin by imputation.

Of Adams sin he says, (extenuating it much though he says he does it not)
It is a sinful s^^mbling or mis-carrying. Not out of envy, malice, or other
sinister end or intention, which are the maine aggravations of a sin, and
raising the offensivenesse of it to the greatest height; but out of an
inconsideratnesse or incogitance, which though it be no cloak for sin, yet
is it a root of the least bitterness or provocation from whence it is lightly
possible for sin to spring, Conclus. 10. p. 19. 20. 2. Tr. Are you of this
opinion of Adams sin? I think otherwise, and in due place show it.

And what do you conceive of this in his foureteenth Conclus. The sentence or
curse of the Law was not properly executed on Christ in his death. But his
death was a ground or consideration to God whereby to dispense with his Law, to
let fall or suspend execution of the penalty or curse therein threatened. --
Neither did God require the death and suffering of Christ as a valuable
consideration whereon to dispense with his Law, toward those that do believe
more, or so much in a way of satisfaction to his justice, then his wisdom* for
God might with as much justice have passed the transgression of his Law without
consideration or satisfaction, p. 33.

What I conceive I tell you in due places. I beseech you interpose your selves
to the settling of our brother. I persuade my self and know many of you are the
same with our learned reformed Divines, who whether they are for that I oppose,
and in that name enemies of this imputation, I leave also the world to judge.

I profess my self amongst the friends of Imputation (as Mr. G. calls us,
2. Tr. p. 147.) of the Active and Passive obedience of Christ; the opinion he
holds, I also hate, (I thank Christ) and as yet see no cause to change my
judgment.

If Mr. Goodwine has yet more to say in this cause, if he be more succinct,
replying in a Christian and brotherly manner (which I earnestly desire) he
shall find me cedere nescium, ready for a further trial; and if in any thing
I shall not agree with others, my reverend Brethren, and they shall lovingly
advertise me of it; they shall find me a lover and imbracer of the truth
showed; Homo sum, nihil humanum a me alienum puto. I do not willingly err,
against all my failings. Thanks be given to God for our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Lord our righteousness.

Your weakest Brother and Companion in the work of Jesus Christ, HENRY RODROUGH.

The Contents of the first Part.
THe worth of the Doctrine of Justification. p. 1 The censure of Mr. G.
opinion. p. 5. 6, 7 Divines against it, as Betrius, as the heresies of Socinus,
and opinion of Arminians and Papists, etc. p. 9. 10. etc. 22. 23. Objections
answered. p. 17. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 61, 62 Mr. Walker is not an Arminian. p.
15 Nor for your opinion. p. 25. 26 The phrase imputing, defended as by Mr. Wr.
p. 26. and 31. 32 Imputing an act of judgment and justice as well as mercy. p.
28, 29, 30. 35. 36, 37, 38 It is a judging of a thing as it is. Gods judgment
is according to truth. p. 30. 33, 34, 35 A thing is the same with it self. p.
38. 39 Christ's righteousness Evangelicall, how? p. 39 Passive obedience denied
satisfaction to the Law; proved. p. 40 Christ by imputation a sinner. p. 41. 42
Mr. Walkers contradictions not so. p. 42. 43, 44, 45 Believers not redeemers
from imputation of Christ's righteousness against Mr. Goodwins Popish
inference. p. 45, 46, 47, 48 Mr. Walkers 1. argument. p. 48. Sect. 11 His 2.
argument. p. 49. Sect. 12 3. Argument from 6. and 11. verse. Righteousness
that by which justification. p. 52. Tr. part. 2. 107 Justification by Christ's
works not excluded by the Apostle. p. 54 Imputation of Christ's righteousness
causes remission of sins. p. 55. It is Christ's righteousness. p. 56, 57, 58
4. Argument. p. 58 5. Argument. p. 60 Mr. Walkers 7. argument against M. G. not
named or answered but by queries, are particularly answered. p. 62 Quest. 1.
whether faith, Romans 5. 1. be our obedience to the Law. p. 62, 63, 64 Quest. 2.
p. 64. Q. 3. p. 64. Q. 4. p. 65. Q. 5. p. 65. Q. 6. p. 66. Q. 7. p. 67. Q. 8.
p. 67. Mr. Wotton of union not real. p. 68. Faith how an instrument. 68. Q. 9.
about Gods justice. p. 69. Q. 10. p. 70. Q. 11. p. 71. Q. 12. p. 71. Q. 13.
Christ's righteousness insufficient. p. 72. Q. 14. p. 73. Q. 15. p. 73.
Justification by righteousness. p. 73 Whether justif. in remission alone,
Calvine. p. 75. etc. Remiss. effect. p. 80. Passive demonstrations from what
outward. p. 81 Q. 17. Adams sin not imputed, Pelagianisme. p. 82. p. 83 Q.
18. p. 82. Q. 19. 20, 21. p. 84 Faith a condition in relation taking in the
object. p. 84. etc. Mr. G. 1. argument and answer. p. 89. 90 2. Arg. ib. and p.
91 2. Arg. p. 91. faith a work in Mr. G. sense. ib. Q. whether to worship
Christ as Mediator in the moral Law. p. 94. 95, 96 Q. 1. whether Christ needed
justification for himself. p. 100. 101 Q. whether bound to the Law for
himself. p. 102. 103, 104, 105, 106, etc. Mr. G. first argument against the
Relative sense. p. 110 Of Metalepsis. p. 110. 111 2. Arg. p. 112 See about 1
Cor. 1. 30. and 2 Cor. 5. ult. p. 113. 114. etc. 3. Arg. p. 116. Abrah. faith,
faith in Christ. p. 117. 118 4. Arg. p. 121. answered. 5. Arg. p. 123. etc. 6.
Arg. p. 124 7. Arg. p. 126. Vlt. Arg. p. 127. etc. On which side Authors stand,
see p. 137. 149 That Christ's righteousness be a meritorious cause, is not
sufficient, see the Learned. p. 139. etc. That is a Popish and Arminian shifti
ib. p. 145 Of Bucer. p. 150. Bullinger. ib. Luther cleared. p. 152 p. 153. etc.
and 159. Calvine. p. 156. Martyr p. 160 Pareus. p. 161. 162. Aretius. p. 163.
Beza. p. 165. Junius. p. 165. Doctor Abbot and Mr. Perkins. p. 166. Doctor
Preston. p. 168. Forbs. p. 170. Musculus. p. 171.
The Contents of the first part of his Treatise.
Chap. 3. Answering other proofs from Scripture. p. 1. etc. C. 4. Works of
the Law are not absolutely excluded, from Romans 3. 21. p. 10. etc. C. 5.
Answering that from Romans 5. 16, 17. p. 13 C. 6. Arg. 5. from Phil. 3. 9. p. 18
C. 7. That faith is imputed. p. 23 C. 8. From Gal. 3. 12. being the last
Scripture. from transferriblenesse. p. 24 C. 9. Arg. 1. that Christ's
righteousness cannot be imputed. p. 26 It is not fit. C. 10. 2 Arg. It is too
glorious. p. 31 C. 11. It is by remission of sins. p. 33 C. 12. From
adoption. p. 35 C. 13. From repentance, p. 39 C. 14. About remission of sins,
and prayer for it. p. 40 C. 15. Compliance with Gods not seeing sin. p. 42 C.
16. p. 44 C. 17. Three arguments more. p. 45. etc. C. 18. Three further
reasons. p. 48 C. 19. Five further demonstrations answered. p. 59 C. 20.
Answering 21. 22, 23, and 24. reasons. p. 63 C. 21. Last reason. p. 66
The Contents of the second part of the Treatise.
Chap. 1. 2. examined, being 14. Conclusions. Conclus. 1. p. 73. Conclus. 2. p.
74. Conclus. 3. p. 76. Conclus. 4. p. 77. Conclus. 5. p. 81. Conclus. 6. p. 84.
Conclus. 7. p. 87. Conclus. 8. p. 88. Conclus. 9. p. 92. Conclus. 10. p. 93.
Conclus. 11. p. 96. Conclus. 12. p. 99. Conclus. 13. p. 100. Conclus. 14. p.
100. Chap. 3. Examination of distinctions. Of Justification. p. 104. Of
Justice. p. ib. Of Christ's righteousness. p. 109 Of Imputation. p. III. Of
obedience to the moral Law. p. 115. Of Christ's keeping the moral Law. p. 117.
Did. 7. p. 117 Chap. 4. Examination of the causes of Justification. p. 118
Christ's righteousness the material cause. p. 120. etc. applied the formal.
p. 125. etc. Whether remission of sins be the formal. p. 137. Chap. 5.
Scriptures cleared, Psalm. 32. 1. Examined, p. 144. Jer. 23. 6. and 33. 6. p.
146. Is. 45. 24. p. 148. Is. 61. 10. p. 149. Romans 3. 21. 22. p. 156. Romans 4. 6.
p. 156. Romans 5. 19. p. 161. Romans 8. 3, 4. p. 165. etc. Romans 9. 31. 32. p. 174.
Romans 10. 4. p. 176. 1 Cor. 1. 30. p. 180. 2 Cor. 5. ult. p. 184. Gal. 3. 10. p.
187. Phil. 3. 9. p. 192. Chap. 6. Examining the answers to aguments against the
Imputation of faith in a proper sense Argument 1. p. 193. arg. 2. p. 195. arg.
3. p. 195. arg. 4. p. 197. arg. 5. p. 198. arg. 6. p. 200. Chap. 7. Our
Arguments vindicated. Arg. 1. p. 204. arg. 2. p. 205. arg. 3. p. 207. arg. 4.
p. 208. arg. 5. p. 209. arg. 6. p. 212. arg. 7. p. 214. arg. 8. p. 215. arg. 9.
p. 216. arg. 10. p. 218. arg. 11. p. 219. arg. 12. 219.
The Doctrine of Justification cleared by Animadversions on M. John Goodwins
Animadversions upon M. George Walkers Defense of the true sense of the Apostle
Romans 4. 3, 5. etc. containing the two first Chapters of his Treatise of
Justification.
Sect. I. THe Doctrine of free Justification is The worth of the doctrine of
free justificatio^.
worthily, highly esteemed of, by all Orthodox Divines. As by Heretics,
Praecip^e in controversiam vocatur.
it is principally called into controversy: so by the other against them has
it been maintained. When'as they have entered lists with them, they have set
the same amongst the chiefest Articles of Christian religion. The truth thereof
professed and maintained in the Reformed Churches against Romanists, I find
styled by one, Doctrinam Christi and Apostolorum de praecipuo salutis articulo
Dr. Pride. Lect. 5. de justif p. 143.
the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles of the chief Article of Salvation:
who afterward leaves this also upon record concerning it. Justificatio
principium est and cardo (ut ingenue cum Pighio agnoscit Bellarminus de Justif.
l. 1. c. 4. a quo pendent, vel in quo versantur omnes inter nos and Pontificios
controversiae. ib. p. 148.
Justification is a principle and hinge (as Bellar. with Pighius ingenuously
confesses) on which depend, or in which all contraversies between us and the
Pontificians are infoulded. Pareus calls it, Praeter caeteras maxim
necessatiam.
besides others most necessary; and gives this reason. Est enim quaestio haec
(de formali causa Justificationis) una ex maximis quibus sacra theologia a
Philosophia humana, Evangelium a Lege, Ecclesia Christi a Judaeis, Turcis,
Paganis; Evangelicia Papatu separantur.
For this question (of the formal cause of justification) is one of the
greatest, in which sacred Theology is separated from Philosophy that is
humane, the Gospel from the Law, the Church of Christ from Jews, Turks,
Pagans; Protestants from papists. Castigat. de Justif. p. 364. Potissima fuit
and est causa divortii, quod Ecclesiae Evangelicae annis ab hinc 97 a Romano
Papatu facere coach suemnt. ib. p. 364.
It was, says he, and is the chief cause of the divorce which the Protestant
Churches were enforced to make from the Roman Papacy. Learned Junius calls it
Velut nucleus Evangelii and Consolationis caput. These. 11.
as it were the kernel of the Gospel, and head of consolation. Gerhard. l. de
justif p. 435 in fol. p. 2. Hic locus est tanquam arx and praecipuum pro
pugnaculum totius doctrinae and religionis, quo vel obscurato, vel adulterato,
vel subverso, impossible est puritatem doctrinae in aliis locis retinere:
salvo autem hoc loco, corruunt per se omnes idolomaniae, superstitiones and
quic quid est corruptelarum in omnib. aliis locis. Ger. ubi supra, ex Clem. and
Luthero.
Gerhardus, This place is as a Castle and chief Fort of the whole doctrine and
religion, which obscured, or adulterated, or overthrown, its impossible to
retain pureness of doctrine in other heads; this being safe, idolatries,
superstitions, and all corruptions else, fall to the ground by themselves. Hic
locus est praecipuus in doctrina Christiana. Chemnit. exam. 231.
This head is the chief in Christian doctrine, as Chemnit. It especially
sets forth the free grace of God, and declares his righteousness. It is
the chief of those that glorify Jesus Christ; It sets and keeps the
Crown on his head. Its a foundation of solid peace and comfort to Christians
whilst on earth. In sanctification the streams run very muddy at the best,
here they are liquid, always very clear, from hence peace and comfort flow;
inflow into the heart and defuse themselves through their life: the soul is at
peace with God and with its self, and hence it glories in the saddest
condition, as appears by the word of God, examples in Scripture, and the
sweet experience of Gods Saints. If ever the soul did leap, was of good
cheer, and comforted, that was the time when as God justified it; when as that
was discovered unto the soul, with the bottoms and foundations thereof. Here
all doubts are answered and scruples satisfied and removed: for hereby such a
man is not only invested with the great privileges of a man perfectly
righteous, deliverance from death and condemnation, acceptance into favor
with God, as Mr. John Goodwin. 1 cap. p. 55. Edit. Walk. to which I may add a
Long, etc. But also made white, though before as black as a coal; though
before as Scarlet, as Crimson: as Scarlet in regard of the bloody Die of sin,
yet then white as wool, white as snow, whiter then the snow. Christ's Cum nigra
essem peccatis and per opera affinis essem and conjuncta tenebris, me pulchram
secit per dilectionem sua pulchtitudine commutata cum mea turpitudine In so
enim translatis sordibus meorum peccatorum, me sua puritate impertiit,
efficiens participem suae pulchritudinis. Hom. 2. in Cant. Greg. Nissen.
beloved is wholly fair, and there is no spot in her; they that are Christ's
are presented holy, unreproveable, and unblameable in Gods sight, exactly just
and perfect; perfected for ever, complete in Christ, and hence sins are
pardoned. I cannot say, they are In statu quo.
in the state they were before; the state of innocence, by pardon (as some)
which cannot be in regard of inherent righteousness in this life; which if it
were in them would be but justification by inherent righteousness, Popery; but
by that which is far exceeding, even the most perfect and exact
righteousness and obedience of Jesus Christ. By this is the true believer Just
before God as Christ is, the believer in him. Aeque justi sumus ( says that
learned Dr. out of the Chair) quia eadem justitia, licet non aequaliter, and
eodem modo; Ille subjective, nos imputative; ille de proprio, nos de illius
largitate. Dr. Pride. ubi supra p. 171. See Master John Goodw. as by Mr. W. and
Mr. W. from p. 55. to 62.
We are alike just, because with the same righteousness, though not equally,
and in the same manner: He subjectively, we imputatively; He of his own, we of
his bounty. This judging of God and account, is according unto truth:
deliverance from sin and condemnation and acceptance to the favor of God
follow righteously here; God's just in justification: Here fears, questions,
doubts, etc. which are and may well be where there is nothing but inherent
righteousness or faith in a proper sense, which are and arise in the minds of
men, still moving men to ask where is the righteousness, are calmed and
answered rationally. Here (if I be called to an account) I have to answer to
scrupulous conscience, to the Devil, to God! which will serve before God, and
is good in his righteous sight: a strong ground of comfort both in life and
death. All Christians have experience In agone; in agone quanti Papistis? says
Pareus, castig. de Justif p. 363.
in a conflict; of how great esteem to papists themselves in a confiict?

In all which names as a Christian, as well as a Minister of Gods word, I (the
least of many thousands) may not be blamed if in this cause, for keeping the
Crown on the head of the Lord Jesus Christ I appear and encounter gainesaiers.

When as the whole world stands engaged in this controversy i will not withdraw
my self. I Will give this golden Apple to none but Christ. If ever there was in
me that which is as new Wine, bubling and striving to have its vent; If ever
any word of the Lord was in me as fire, it is this, and it must have its went.
I have believed and spoken comfort to others from hence, and I cannot but
speak in this cause, especially being called thereunto.

Sect. 2. I take not upon me the honor to be a defender of him who has
engaged himself in this cause, he is an old Soldier, and I think his work
will bear him out. But as a wel-wisher i will offer my mite; and do humbly crave
leave of Master John Goodwin, to consider his reply to Master Walker, as I
find cause in his Animadversions, to animadvert, Veniam petimus dabimusque
vicissim.
We crave leave and will give it in like manner. In this let me be pardoned if
I do not walk in the same steps of Master Goodwin, that I profess the
contrary in the beginning, (it is what he desires in his second book) that I
Animadvert not on some and those the looser and fouler passages of his reply,
as he professes in the Frontispice of his book, and promises to do to
Master W. I conceive that evilly to conduce to the cause, as well as to the
Authors honor and worth, and respect in the world, and that it is but an
indirect way to steal hearts after the Author of the Reply.

It is no praise in a Reply to meddle but with some passages, a.
much less with the looser and fouler passages: That is but a kind of
cowardice, as the falling on lame, wounded, straggling parts of an Army: to
leave the Army we should oppose in full strength. Little honor is gotten by
the Captain that does and glories in this. These might have been neglected
with more honor. The soundest and fairest passages in which strength lies,
should have been his ambition, not loose and foul ones, much less the fouler
and looser passages. It is ominous, indeed a stumbling on the threshold.

O that there were not too manifest a truth in that passage b.
of your Animadversions, and that so much pains had not been spent about
foul and loose passages, there had not been so foul and loose a Recipe, the
reply had not been so full of foul and loose passages, much labor might have
been spared by him that replied, and those that read and answer the same. I
know not who can read with comfort, or content. It suited not with a grave
Divine, or so weighty a matter as the chief Article of salvation.

It was not now a time in that manner to laugh or See the Front of Master G.
book.
dance, in that manner to speak, to war with such weapons; the Scriptures
cited in the front are but abused. It was not a time of love, it relisheth of
somewhat else, it will have a time of weeping and mourning before there be
solid peace; such veins, how rich soever, yield much vanity; such jesting is
not comely: the Prophets practice will not patronage such ironies as abound
here. Our times have been times of license under the name of recreation: and
man's nature is foully degenerated that can recreate it self thus: It is not
wisdom to make a pastime of sin. The labor and strength to which, may well
be suspected that is thus repaired. It were evil in transient words, for which
yet we must give an account; it is worse in published books, which may
continue with the world. It is an evil example, some adversaries will laugh,
others blaspheme, the Lord give repentance for it to him that did it, and those
that take pleasure therein.

You will say, he was provoked: It should not have been, had it been so, wise
men should have borne with such as they account fools; and it was neither
wisdom nor strength to be overcome to such evil; evil should have been
overcome with good; this had been to be approved of men, and acceptable to
God. My profession is not to meddle with impertinencies, or to rake in fouler
and looser matters, but in a humble manner to follow the cause, as God shall
enable.

Nunc itaque and versus and caetera ludicra ponam;
Quod verum atque decens curo and rogo, and omnis in hoc sum.
Neither will I be a Patron of any evil word in any man, words against the
person of a brother, or Christian man, let evil words be applied to evil
things, and so far forth I cannot much blame Master Walkers language. M. W.
The censure of others.
has written or spoken little that way which has not been written long
before.

I could present the Reader with a large catalogue of such speeches.

Sibrandus Lubbertus against Bertius, that Prince of the Arminian band as you
phrase him; holding Justification by faith in a proper sense against the
figurative sense, which is yours, calls it Detestabilem and abominabilem
doctrinam, Epist. p. 1.
Detestable and abominable doctrine. Damnatam Serveti haeresin, p. 5.
The damned heresy of Servetus. Socini blasphemiam, p. 29. 33. 58.
Socinus his blasphemy. Damnatos Serveti surores, p. 26.
The damned phrensies of Servetus. Tradidit ante vos Servetus, fecit idem
Socinus, and Osterodus, ubi etiam Arminium secum sentire testem citat Bertium,
p. 6.
Servetus before you delivered it, so did Socinus and Osterodus, where he also
cites Bertius a witness that Arminius jumpeth with him. Ex Blasphemiis
Serveti and Osterodi, quas omnes Ecclesiae nostrae detestantur, desumptae, ib.
Taken out of the blasphemies of Servetus and Osterodus, which all our Churches
detest. Abominabilem and execabilem Serveti and Socini haeresin quae papisticis
erroribus deterior est, p. 116.
The abominable and accursed heresy of Servetus and Socinus, which is worse
then Popish errors. Dico esse blasphemam and ^e^que quaterque execrabilem
haeresin, p. 121.
I say it is a blasphemous and thrice and four times execrable heresy. Haec
tua thesis est causa quare statuam vobis, si ramen vobis ipsis constare vultis,
necessario eo tandem deveniendum esse ut cum Serveto, Socino, Osterode, meritum
sive satisfactionem pro nobis factam omnino tollatis, dicatisque neque Christum
nobis justitiam peperisse, neque nos ipsius justitia imputata justificari, p.
85. Illi negant Christi mortem esse satisfactionem pro peccaris nostris, ut
denique negant illum satisfactionem nobis imputari, and nos illa nobis impurata
justificari. Ita tibi faciendum est, p. 87. Quorsum enim justitia Christi si
non habet in se vim justificandi, and si nos non justificat? ib.
This thy position is the cause why I conclude, if you will be like your
selves, you must at length with Servetus, Socinus, and Osterodus, destroy
wholly the merit or satisfaction of Christ, and that you say that Christ
neither attained righteousness to us, nor that we are justified by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us, for to what end is the righteousness
of Christ if it has not in it force to justify? Ponis illa in tuis literis ex
quibus impia illa and blasphema Serveti, Socini, and Osterodi bdelugmata
necessatio sequuntur, p. 87.
You write those things from whence those wicked and blasphemous abominations
of Servetus, Socinus, and Osterodus, do necessarily follow. Passim audimus
viros doctos dicere Authors hujus opinionis Papismum non satis exuisse; quin
disette dicunt justificationem ob fidem proprie sic dictam, hoc est, ob opus
nostrum, esse ex reliquiis Monachalis Pharisaismi. Hoc certum est Socinum and
ante eum Servetum hoc a Papistis mutuatum esse, etc.
We hear every where learned men say that the Authors of this opinion have not
enough put off Popery, they plainly say justification by faith in a proper
sense, that is, our work, to be the relics of Monkish Pharisaisme. This is
certain that Socinus and Servetus before him borrowed this of the Papists. Non
nego Authorem hujus scripti nobiscum and cum Papistis sentire Christum pro
nobis satisfecisse: Sed quod dolendum est, dum hanc justificationem per fidem
proprie sic dictam probat; talia adhiber argumenta per quae meritum and
satisfactio Christi prorsus evertitur, p. 98.
I deny not the Author of this writing to think with us and Papists, Christ
to have satisfied for us; but which is grievous, whilst he proves this
justification by faith in a proper sense, he gives such arguments by which the
merit and satisfaction of Christ are overthrown. Qui haec diligenter expendunt
vident facillimum transitum esse ab hoc novo Samosatenismo ad Papismum, p. 98.
Those that wright these see the passage easy from this new Samosatenisme to
Popery.

Consider how nearly these may concern you Master G. who deny professedly the
imputation of Christ's righteousness to justification as Socinus does, which
yet Bertius professes, p. 104.

Si sequerer non veritatem sed mendacium neque Deum sed Socinum, Servetum, and
Osterodum sequeret, p. 117.
If I should follow I should follow not the truth, but a lie, not God, but
Socinus, Servetus, Osterodus. Ego autem ut me vel tellus optem prius ima
dehiscat, quam admittam, etc. p. 117. So Sibrandus.
I wish the earth might open is mouth and swallow me up rather then I admit it.

Beza (as Master W. cites him) calls it blasphemy, Master Forbs de
justificatione, gross impiety in placing it either in whole or in part in our
righteousness as it is our own work, seeing by no work of his own can man
possibly be justified, p. 78. and p. 80. he says, by this we may perceive that
the opinion of these men who place our righteousness in faith properly taken
as it is the act of our heart, without relation of it, as an apprehending
instrument to Christ, is much more pernicious then the opinion of the Papists,
p. 80.

Now it is certain that if God should justify us either by the works of the
Law, or by faith as it is a work or habit in us, God could never be seen to
be just in justifying of us, p. 29.

Which opinion can never be maintained with Gods honor, p. 163.

He calls it a dangerous error, p. 171. and a manifest error, p. 193.

Hearken to Pareus Quem sensum (Metonymicum) si oppugnar Adversatius, certe non
Lutherum impugnat, sed Spiritum Sanctum blasphemat qui Christum express vocat
nostram justitiam, 23. ler. and 1 Cor. 1. 30. Pareus Castig. p 419.
who says, Which (Metonymicke) sense if our Adversary (Bellarmine) opposes,
truly he does not impugn Luther, but blaspheme the Holy Ghost, who calls
Christ expressly our righteousness.

I my self cannot speak well of your cause, it were to call evil good, to
procure a woe. The justification of wickedness, abomination to the Lord. This
is my judgment, I will endeavor to make it good by answering this reply,
which I desire to do without passion.

Sect. 3. It offends you that Master Walker calls his interpretation the
true sense; there was no cause until he be refuted, and do not you the same
of faith in a proper sense?

What you, therefore, say they did of the golden Calfe, and of the practice of
those that adulterate Coin, serves your self as well as Master W. and may be
returned; but of this let them judge who read when they come to the end.

Neither does he abate of the true sense or his confidence by adding, according
to the common judgment of the most godly, learned, and judicious Divines of
the best reformed Churches, that argument is your own. You take upon you to
prove a proper sense by authority, as of Ancient, so Modern Divines, and
thereby pretend confidence; Master W. might have so much leave as you take to
your self, without the least diminution of his confidence. He may be far
more confident, if this be a ground; the authority of judicious and godly
Divines, they are not for you, but Master W. I think I shall make it good by
the time I shall come to the end of this work, what you say.

That there may be as great a difference between the true sense Mr. G.
and meaning of the Scripture, and the judgment of most godly and learned
Divines, as is between Heaven and Earth, and is in examples.

1. Is not to purpose, unless what may be, be a truth of Answ.
these Master W. means.

2. It is evilly urged against M. W. when as your self use them to proppe your
own cause, with such confidence.

3. It argues weakness on your side in the argument, and self conviction,
when you urge Authors, you do but pretend it and make a show.

4. In my weak judgment your wisdom will be to give over that argument in
this Name. I advise you to it, if it be not too late.

Whom Master W. means by Divines you need not curiously to enquire, they are
no secret pack, when he comes to that part he names the men. Luther,
Calvin, Musculus, Bullinger, are of those men, neither are they made by him.

When I found these mentioned by you in this cause, it put me in mind of the
practice of Bertius that Prince of the Arminian band, he for faith in a proper
sense makes the world believe that Luther, etc. were for his cause; but how
vainly, Lubbertus shows, who disputing against that proper sense, for that
which is relative and figurative, proves it out of the same and other Divines.
Let it please you to hear him, it may be what he says concerns you, though
he be dead, to this purpose in that book does he speak unto you. See Gerhard
de justificatione, p. 180. and p. 201.


In co consentiunt omnes Doctoresnostri, Lutherus, Melancthon, Brentius,
Bucerus, Cytreus, Hemingius, Calvinus, Zuinglius, Oecolompadius, Gryneus,
Bullingerus, Gnulterus, Simlerus, Beza, Daneus, Zanchius, Martyr, Musculus,
Vrsinus, Marloratus, luellus, Perkinsus.
In that (the Relative sense) agree all our Doctors, Luther, etc. Tu and
Arminius negatis, provoco igitur ad omnes Doctores nostors an non aliquid novi
in Ecclesiam nostram introducere velitis, p. 12.
Thou and Arminius deny it, I appeal to all our Doctors whether ye would not
bring in some new thing into our Church. Where also he adds. Jam peto abs te,
ut unum, unum, unum, inquam, Doctorem reformatarum Ecclesiarum producas qui
idem doceat.
Now I entreat thee to produce one, one, I say one Doctor of the Reformed
Churches that teaches the same.

He gives the testimonies of Pareus, Duneus, Vrsinus, etc. p. 15. 16. etc. The
Palatinate Catechism, Chemnitius, Musculus, Hemingius, Bucanus, p. 17.
Hesuchius, Martyr, Piscator, p. 18. the Augustane and Belgike Confess. and
Musculus, p. 19. Bucer, p. 20. Melancthon, p. 53. 54. and 60. Zanchie, p. 62.
and 76. Pezelius, p. 63. 64. Where also he repeateth his challenge to the same
purpose as before. Experire virestuas and vide an vel unum, unum, unum, inquam,
locum qui hoc claris and perspicuis verbis doceat adducere possis, p. 61.
Try thy strength and see whether thou can bring forth but one, one, I say
one place which teaches this in clear and manifest words.

I will transcribe one passage more thence, and I entreat you consider whether
it does not concern you in the same cause. Sibrandus having examined that
argument of authority says: Si haec dicta quae a doctoribus a te allegatis
exscripsi expendes, indicabit tibitua conscientia te hic vel ex inscitia
impegisse, and ho^um scripta nunquam legisse, aut ex malitia hanc sententiam
illis per calumniam attribuisse, ut imperitosatque incau^os ^alleres, illisque
persuederes summos illos vitos Lutherum, Malarcthonem, etc. appro^asse and
sovisse Serveli and Socini furores, quos vos calide and occulte in Ecclesiam
introducere conammi. Rectius dixeritis vos, spretis doctoribusnostris, haec a
Serveto and Socino didicisse. So Lubbertus.
If thou will weigh these sayings which I have written out of the Doctors you
allege, thy conscience will tell thee that here either thou haest stumbled
out of ignorance, or out of malice by a calumny given this opinion to them that
thou might deceive the unskilful or negligent, and might persuade them,
those chief men, Luther, etc. to have approved and fomented the mad conceits
of Servetus and Socinus, which you slily and secretly endeavor to bring into
the Church; you should more truly say that you despising our Doct^^s, learned
these things of Servetus and Socinus.

Pareus says, quae omnium Evangelicorum est sen^en^ia, castig de justif. p.
368.
Which is the judgment of all Protestant Divines. And thus before I am aware I
am come to consider whether the contrary exposition and cause built on it are
not Socinian and Arminian?

Sect. 4. And here I profess it my judgment, that if the assimulation of you
to Socinus, etc. be the inhumane practice of the tyrant Mezentius, it is not
Master W. but your own fault, for your faces answer faces, and hands hands, in
this question; and your self have coupled your self with these in this cause.
Master Walker is but a discoverer of what he found, and in part is showed to
have been in Bertius by Sybrandus, as in his judgment of your opinion, and
the last passages cited out of him in this cause. The shame that is in it, is
from your self, and sorrow, which if you take not to yourselfe, you may with
sorrow and shame also go down unto the grave (as you speak.) If his Withs
are green (as you say) they will hold you the stronger, your Art in Withs did
fail here, they are dry ones that snap asunder, they do so without fire. Your
Knife truth, (but why do you reprehend it in Master W. and offend in the same
thing?) is error at the least, and will never deliver you, and though you be
never so cunning (as you speak) in stretching on Tenter-bookes, and do your
utmost, Daedalus sis, liceat, mediocritatem excedis and ad ruinam tantum
ingeniosus videberis.

When as you tell us what you could do if you sought revenge on the man, and
of your confidence that you could make him hold up his hand to the Bar, to
answer the crimes of Heresy and Blasphemy; none believe you but your own
Disciples, I do not; you do but beg him to be erratique, the intelligent
Reader will judge these strains, militis gloriosi, and say, projecit ampullas,
etc.

But (say you) what if Socinus and Arminius were of the same judgment with you
in the interpretation of the Scriptures in question?

I should think that cause sufficient to say, that erra^ique Arminius (to
speak softly) and that heretic Socinus and your self in this opinion are
coupled, face to face, and ^ands to hands, that you are ad hoc gemelli, and
what the earned in this have laid to their score, lies on yours also, and must
stand there until you be acquitted.

Neither is it Popish Mountabankery for M. W. to put you ^n their company, to
number you amongst them. Sibrandus ^id so by the opinion before him, and it was
your own ault to be so indeed. Your being so is rather Popish Mounabankry in
the judgment of learned men, as before out of Sibrandus, as after shall
appear through our discourse; the weapons you use are for the most part
merely Po^ish, you may be noted for it. We read some taxed for ^oing in the
way of Caine; others for walking in the way of ^alaam: so long as there is a
real agreement between you and them, a man may say it.

Daniel was not by choice with the Lions, he was with them as Lillies amongst
Thorns, as the Lord Christ be^weene two Thieves, by Gods heavenly disposition.
You ^ight have bin so with these. No man would have accoun^ed you a Papist had
you been cast amongst Priests into the Gatehouse, or a Separatist for being in
the same room with them, or for suffering simply with them; Contraries may be
in ^he same subject, asflesh and spirit in the godly. You are bre^hren in the
same evil, the man that runs may see you the same in judgment, and speech,
and opinion, in this Exposition of Scripture, as it is showed afterward. It
were not absurd to say, Daniel and the Lions agree in animality, or the Lilly
with the Thorns in being vegetative. It is not affirmed of you that you agree
in all opinions, and it troubles us it is in this, this, we do judge too much.

But Master W. did not first prove it erroneous before those imputations. That
I confess should be done. Did we not do both in one work? has he not done it
since? was it not done to his hands by Divines of the reformed Churches? by our
own Divines in Print, as well as in Pulpit, moved thereunto by your Preaching?
If none of these be, the imputation is just so long as there is a real
agreement.

Have you not read it theirs before this, nor that it is censured as erroneous?

I think you have, and cannot be ignorantof this controversy between us and
Arminians, I, us and the Popish party. Have you not read their hatred against
this Tenet of imputed righteousness? read Gerhard. de justif. p. 234.
Doctrinae huic de imputatione justitiae Christi admodum iniqui sunt Pontificii:
Adeo ut appellent imputativam and imaginariam justitiam. Andradius in defens.
^id. Trid. p. 477. vocat amentissimam insaniam. Stapeltenus in Antid. Apost. p.
97. nominat spectrum cerebri Luthe. Cens. Colon. dicit, a seculo non esse
auditam. Will Rainold in l. contra Whitak. p. 314. vocat mathematicum
solifidianorum commentum, etc. Andradius hanc Mediatoris justitiam fide nobis
imputatam blasphemat esse commentitiam, adumbratam and fictitiam, sic Chemnit.
exam. p. 266. Osius dicit novam and a seculo in auditam esse vocem justitiae
imputativae. Item justitiam Christi nobis imputari, nec inCanonic is nec in
Orthodoxorum libtis reperiri, p. 270. ib


Have you not read that the Obedience or Righteousness of Christ imputed to us
by God apprehended by faith is the formal cause of our justification before
God? Have you not read it affirmed and proved by ours against Papists?

I think I heard it from Doctor Davenants mouth, and I am sure he has left
this on Record to be Communis omnium nostrorum sententia, neque quod ad rem
attinet quisquam e nostris aliter scripsit aut sensit, De justi. hab. p. 312.
The common opinion of all ours, neither for the substance has any one written
or thought otherwise. And does he not prove the same? p. 363 etc. he does by
many arguments.

Disp. 8. Dicimus imputationem justitiae Christi esse formam nostrae
justificationis ex part Dei, adversarii negativam in se suscipientes, etc. p.
334.
Johannes Crotius, We say the imputation of Christ's righteousness to be the
form of our justification of Gods part, our adversaries taking the negative
part on them, etc.

It is manifest by the state of the question laid down by See Bellarm. de
justis. l. 1. c. 17. p. alterum argumentum, p. 997. and l. 2. c. 9. 106^. See
Dr. Dan. p. 370. 371. Joh. Croc. de justif, imput. p. 358. and 420. and 335.
and 343. non relative Papanis D. Pride. p. 162.
Papists and Protestants, and in this you agree with them. Have you not read
faith to justify against them in a Relative and figurative sense? and that as
it takes in the object, the obedience and righteousness of Jesus Christ? See
Master Perkins, Master Wotton, def. p. 166. stating the question between us
and Romanists.

Did you never read Romanists in this controversy of justification, urging,
Romans 4. with your interpretation of a proper sense, against the Relative sense
which the Protestants urge? Do you not agree for the proper sense of faith
against the Relative, and against the imputation of Christ's righteouseesse?

Until you have answered all the arguments of the Protestant party, and so
far made good the Papists cause, you must be coupled with them. Sibrandus
shows what men said of this opinion before, and I shall do it often in this
work.

Did you never read in Festus Hommius this proposition gathered out of
Arminius, Ad Hip. Fidem pro pry loquendo, seu (...) credere nos justificare,
seu esse justitia^ qua coram Deo consistimus and justificamur. Dico ipsum fidei
actum, id est (...) credere, imputari ad justitiam, idque proprio sensu, non
metonymice, ib. Fides pro justitia habetur per gratiosam dignationem Dei.
Declar. p. 65. Quaestio movetur de verbis Apostoli Pauli ad Romans c. 4. hisce
vid. fides imputatur ad justitiam, utrum ea debeant proprie intelligi, sicut
ipsa fides tanquam actus, juxta mandatum evangelii praestitus imputetur coram
Deo, in, sive ad justitiam, idque ex gratia, cum non sic ipsamet justitia
Legis, an vero sic intelligi debeant, ut justitia Christi per fidem apprehensa
nobis in justitiam imputetur, idest, figurate and improprie: ego priorem
sententiam sequutus sum in thesibus de justificatione sub me disputatis.
Faith, speaking properly, or that act of believing to justify us, or to be
the righteousness by which we stand before God, and are justified. And, I say
the very act of faith to be imputed unto righteousness, and that in a proper
sense, not metonymically, faith is accounted for righteousness by Gods
gracious esteem.

A question is moved of the words of the Apostle Paul, Romans 4. faith is imputed
for righteousness, whether they ought to be understood so as faith it self as
an act performed according to the commandment of the Gospel, be imputed
before God in or unto righteousness, and that by grace, seeing it is not the
very righteousness of the Law; or whether that ought so to be understood that
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith be imputed to us for
righteousness, that is, figuratively and improperly: I indeed followed the
first opinion in the theses of justification disputed under me.

Where also you may find other like passages taxed, and cited out of Vorstius,
Bertius, and Arnoldus himself, who there p. 41. says, Arminius dicit fidem
justificate ut actum, qui opus illud Dei est, Joh. 6 atque ipsum (...) credere
in Christum, nobis in justitiam imputati.
Arminius says, faith justifies as an act, which is that work of God, John 6
and the very believing in Christ, to be imputed unto us for righteousness.

Does not Peltius in his Harmoniam Remonstrantium and Socinianorum.
Harmony of Arminians and Socinians instance in this point, (...) credere nobis
imputati p. 151. 152. 153
the believing to be imputed to us out of both? and show in the next Paragraph
the agreement of both in this, Fidem gratiose pro justitia haberi, etc.
Faith graciously to be accounted for righteousness?

Do not both show their agreement in this, Justitiam Christi non imputari in
nostram justitiam co^am Deo. Hom. p. 84. Pelt. p. 148. etc. through the whole
three Paragraphs. P. 33. de justif.
That the righteousness of Christ is not imputed for our righteousness before
God?

Does not that worthy Scholar Master Pemble show the Authors of this tenet,
Servetus, Socinus, Osterodus, Arminius? does he not give it to Bertius,
Vorstius, Episcopius, and Bellarmine? You could not but read this in Doctor
Prideaux, for you cite him. Lect. 5 de justif. p. 157. Asserimus nos, negant
pontificii una cum Socinianis and Remonstrantibus.
We assert it, the Pontificians, together with Socinians and Arminians deny it,
where he stateth the question.

In Mr. Wotton I find those Fidem formalem causam statuentes, vel in solidum,
ut Arminius aliique eum sequnti tradiderunt, vel pro part, quod Ecclesiae
Romanae placuisse intelligo; de recon. p. 102
That teach faith the formal cause, either wholly, as Arminius and his
followers have delivered, or in part, which pleases the Church of Rome.

Justitia imputata quam a Christo habemus justitiari nos cum ipso contra
Socinum ex aequo agnoscimus. Gat. pars ult. p. 8. n. 36. p. 84. 4.
We with you equally acknowledge our selves justified with imputed
righteousness which we have in Christ against Socinus.

Let these passages out of the Censura of those praised Theologs of Leiden by
you, p. 13. be observed, and it will be seen whether they are not of the same
judgment with you.

Moliuntur (Remonstrantes) quod Pontificii and Sociniani, etc. Ita ut fide
justificemur non ratione quadam Metonymica, qua fides sit instrumentum,
apprehendens justitiam illam quam Christus nobis obedientiae suae merito
acquisivit, quod quidem fidei officium ha ctenus in omnibus Ecclesiis
reformatis tanquam ei proprium agnitum fuit, p. 143.
Arminians do the same with the Papists, and Socinians, etc. so that we are
not justified by faith, metonymically as an instrument apprebending that
righteousness which Christ got for us by the merit of his obedience, which
office of faith as proper to it, has been hitherto acknowledged in all the
reformed Churches.

Paul said, only faith to be imputed to righteousness, and Paulus dixit
tantum fidem imputatam ad justitiam, at illi de suo addunt, ipsam, ut
loquutionem figuratam in propriam transforment, and suam interpretationem aut
potius commentum pro ipsis Paull verbis obtrudant, ne vid. fides accipiatur
Metonimice aut correlative cum suo objecto, nempe justitia Christi fide
apprehendenda, sed pro fide ipsa in se quae apud Deum habetur pro justitia,
etc. p. 146. Christi justitiam nobis imputari negat quidem Socin. iid.
Episcopi.. us alibi id expresserit non esse justitiam Christi propri^ id quod
imputatur. Disp. 12. these. 4. ib.
they add of their own that, that they may transform a figurative speech
into a proper one, and obtrude their interpretation, or rather error, for
Paul's words, lest says should be taken by a metonymy or relatively, with its
object, that is the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, but for
faith it self, in it self, which is accounted for righteousness by God.
Socinus truly denies Christ's righteousness to be imputed to us. Episcopius
elsewhere expressed it, that it was not the righteousness of Christ properly
that which is imputed.

By this time I hope you may be abundantly satisfied in this, neither is Mr. W.
the only censurer of your opinion, others have said as much of Arminius for
the same as he does.

Sect. 5. But when as Mr. Walker no Arminian.
Mr. W. cries out of Arminianisme, is not he himself the Arminian? surely (say
you) no two judgments ever jumped better together, the judgment of Arminius
the Heretic, and Mr. W. the Erratique in the point of imputation.

Why, what says Arminius? Arminius in resp. adart. impos. Justitiam Christi
nobis imputari, and fieri nostram gratuita aestimatione Dei. and arbitrari se
id ipsum contineri verbis Apostoli, Cor. 5. Christum fecit Deus pro nobis
peccatum, ut nos essemus justitia Dei in illo.
He says the righteousness of Christ to be imputed unto us and to be made
ours in the gracious account of God, and that he supposed the same thing
contained in the words of the Apostle. 2 Cor. 5. God made Christ sin for us
that we might he the righteousness of God in him.

1. I answer, yet Mr. W. is no Arminian: First, suppose he fully held the same
with Arminius. It might not denominate Mr. W. seeing the tenet is his in common
with all of the reformed Churches. Neither in that name, had it been a fault
in Mr. W. to hold the same Arminius did, how faulty soever Arminius else, it is
the substance of your own answer.

2. Arminius himself in that agrees not with himself, etc. Your self confess
him and some of his followers much more to express themselves on the other
hand, and to affirm the imputation of faith for righteousness, and not the
righteousness of Christ.

3. You say sometimes, if so, it is more then once, name another time if you
can; you might have said always, else: So that there is far more reason
denomination should be from what is ever his fault (being so indeed) you
constantly speaking with him, then that Mr. W. should be so styled from his
once.

4. Again, do you not clip his words? and does not Arminius say more then you
report in that point? and would he have these two, Christ's righteousness to be
imputed unto us, and faith to be imputed unto us for righteousness to be the
same? and did he there approve that phrase the righteousness of Christ to be
imputed to us for righteousness? which yet is Mr. Walkers, and of all
Protestants. Those praised Divines of Leiden, having repeated what you do out
of Arminius, truly observe and add. Sed non voluit idem esse Christi justitiam
nobis imputari, and fidem nobis imputari ad justitiam. Imo nec phrasin illam
volebat probare, justiam Christi nohis imputari ad justitiam.
But he would not that Christ's righteousness to be imputed unto us, and faith
to be imputed to righteousness, should be the same. Neither would be prove
that phrase, Christ's righteousness to be imputed to righteousness. Both which
Mr. W. would have done. So that Mr. W. and he jumpe not together. Nay Arminius
faith ( Fieri nequit, Deus Christum ejusque justitiam nobis imputer ad
justitiam. Epist. ad Hippol. Justitiam Christi imputari ad justitiam, mihi non
probari dixi. Quicquid imtatur ad justitiam, vel in justiti^, vel pro justitia,
idipsum non est justitia stricte and rigide sumpta: at Christi justitia quam
ille praestitit, est ipsissima justitia stricte and rigide sumpta: ergo non
imputatur ad justitiam.
It cannot be that God should impute unto us Christ's righteousness. He
professes he followed the contrary in his Theses, in his Declaration, and ad
art. 31. he says, I said I approve not the righteousness of Christ to be
imputed to us, whatsoever is imputed to righteousness, etc. that is not
righteousness strictly and rigidly taken: but Christ's righteousness which he
performed is righteousness it self straightly and rigidly taken: therefore it
is not imputed unto righteousness.

For my part I conceive that by his imputation of Christ's righteousness, he
meant not that, in it self, but in its effect, faith, the imputation whereof
is the effect of Christ's righteousness. Forsooth Christ by his righteousness
merited that faith should be graciously accepted in the place of
righteousness. So he constantly, and in the same sense answering to the
question of a proper or figurative sense, he denies the latter and asserteth
the former, with an, I plainly think so, wherein he agrees Ita plane sentio.
not with Mr. W. but your self; you are the men that jumpe together. These are
a sufficient defense of him, they show he does not (as you charge him) directly
maintain what Mr. W. does; there is palpable difference. Mr. W. says that the
right teousnesse of Christ is imputed to righteousness. Show me the same in
Arminius, then I will yield they jumpe, till then you come short of your
undertaking.

Sect. 6. But Mr. W. in this, Fairy-like, leaves a chanleging to the Arminians,
better favored then their own, giving them Mr. G.
an opinion rather, then relating theirs, to make the Arminian tenet and yours
to meet: forsooth the Arminians mean by faith not as Mr. Walker says that
grace only consisting in confidence and assent, but an universal obedience to
the will of God in all those duties which be requires of men in the Gospel.

Answ. For the practice of Fairies, I never read of it, and if it be so I shall
think better of them then I did. Those that tell tales of them, seem to say
otherwise, and I never heard of a well-favoured changeling before. But how
prove you that to be the Arminian tenet? you answer from those Divines of
Leiden, c. 10. Who challenge them for affirming the word faith to be sometimes
taken in Scripture Pro tota and universa illa) voluntate Dei.
for that whole and universal will of God, which before they said God would
have performed by us, in which sense they would be taken and understood in this
Chapter. 2. They are charged with Pontifician friendship, In eo quod opera
inter justificationis causas numerant, aequali cu^ fide jure.
In that they number works amongst the causes of Justification with faith by an
equal right. And after to have drawn this their notion of faith out of the
Socianin lakes. Memin isse debemus fidem hanc sc. qua justificamur, Dei
obedientiam esse.
We must remember this faith by which we are justified to be obedience of God.
And after, in Christum credere, nihil aliud est, quam Deo ad ipsius Christi
normam and prae scriptum obedientem se praebere: and after that by faith which
they hold to be imputed for righteousness, they understand and mean fidem
ipsam in se quae apud Deum habeatur pro justitia, quatenus fidei nomine
comprehenditur p^nitentia, resipis^entia and in universum obedientia hominis
Christiani.

Answ. To answer. First, were there a difference in Explication, yet there is
agreement in the same thing faith; neither can you blame men for disagreeing in
Explication who are therein notorious for agreement with Bellarmine, and
disagreement with reformed Divines.

2. Though I might let them stand or fall by their Explication. Yet I must do
them right. Those Divines you name say that they involve all in ambiguities, as
their manner is, so as one cannot easily attain their mind; so that one may
mistake them.

They do not peremptorily as you, but doubtfully as inquirers affirm. Id
tamen videntur velle, and videntur cum Sccino accipere, p. 142.
Yet they seem to mean that, and they seem to take it with Socinus.

Thus the Remonstrants in their Apology answer those Divines, and observe the
same. Istud aperte profiteri non audeant: ubique enim suum istud videtur
ingeminan, and conclusio tandem est cos propio^^s S^^^^^ quam Ecclesi^
Reformantae videri posse: quae loquutio quam sit, circumspecta and solcita,
quis non vider?
They dare not plainly profess it, for they every where double that there,
they seem, and conclude at length they may sceme nearer to Socinus then the
reformed Church; and much more to that purpose, which you would not or did not
see.

To that question, An Remonstrantes ^dei formam essentialem faciant obedientiam
and quidem operum lega'ium atqu^ imprimis Evangelicorum.
Whether the Remonstrants make the essential form of faith to be obedience,
that of the works of the Law, and especially of the Gospel; they seem to
clear the matter whilst they answer. Haec prima manifesta ca'umnia est.
Ausquam id a (...) in confessione ecrum factum prohabitur. C^ntrarium ^atet in
termiais Nam obedienr am no vamsive obedientiam propriedictam, quae in Scholis
ita vocatur, s^mp^r and ubique distingunt a fident effectum a causa sua, a qua
^manat ut rivus a lcnte, ut (...) a matre, contra quam So^inus faciendum esse
sentit, p. 110.2.
This is a manifest calumny, this will not be proved done in their Confession,
the contrary appe ireth in terms, for they always distinguish obedience
properly called from faith, as the effect from the cause from which it
fla^^eth, as a River from the Fountain, as the Child from the Mother, where is
Socinus thinks otherwise. Arminius himself disclaimeth it, ad artic. 5.

And when as they join works with faith in instification, they say it is but
a Grammatical or Logical controversy, and that the confessions of all
reformed Churches acknowledge faith to be Vivam.
living, not Mortuam, fidem quaeconjuncta sibi habet bona opera, imo quae sine
bonis operibus nec est, nec esse potest, esse fidem illam veram justificantem,
ut vocant, quae ista proprietate ab historica and temporanea ac miraculorum
fide ut ajunt, distinguitur.
dead, faith which bath joined with it good works, yea, which neither is
without good works, nor can be, to be that true justifying faith as they call
it, which by that property is distinguished from historical faith, temporary,
and that of miracles, as they speak. Where also they urge out of those
Censores, p. 11. Diserte obedientiam operum aecessatiam esse asserunt ad
justificationem, non quidem necessitate efficientiae, sed praesentiae.
They plainly assert obedience of works necessary to justification, not
indeed with necessity of efficiencie, but of presence.

So that you say they say it, and your witnesses that they seem, and
themselves deny it. Judge now whether Mr. W. gives them a better opinion then
they have to make you meet with them.

If they did so, Mr. Walker tells you that they are more tolerable herein
then your selves: you and Master Wotton: for it is more agreeable to justice
and reason that God should count all graces of renovation for righteousness
rather then faith alone in the proper sense, which is but one grace, and so Mr.
Forbs also.

Finally, whosoever shall read that Chapter, and the answer, and compare some
passages with your opinions, will see you meet indeed; and that you desire not
leave to dissent from those learned men for nothing. I could find much
observable. But I pass to what you relate out of Doctor Prideaux concerning
Vorstius. Who says:

He holds Fides imputatur immediate and formaliter, and meritu^ Christi mediate
and effective.
Faith is imputed immediately and formally, and the merit of Christ mediately
and in effect.

What is this but your own opinion? You say faith is imputed immediately, and
the merit of Christ but mediately, if at all. Roundly, you, in its effect, that
is faith, which is imputed.

But there he adds. Per fidem ulterius ostendit se observationem
Christianismi solumodo intelligere, quia credere idem est quod observare
Christi praecepta, nec dispuduit tandem concludere fidem justificantem illam,
esse illam inhaeientem justitiam quam Papistae urgent.
By faith be sarther shows be only underst andeth observation of
Christianisme, because to believe is to keep Christ's precepts, neither was be
ashamed at length to conclude that justisying faith, to be that inherent
righteousness which the Papists urge.

This is given unto him alone by the Doctor, and with a Ulterius.
further; belike, in this he went beyond Arminius. So Arminius himself, and so
the Remonstrants as before.

And I pray you is not faith obedience to Christ's commandment and Gods work?
(as you both love to speak, in opposition to the moral Law, out of the 1 John
3. and Job. 6. of which after.) And is not faith that justifies in a proper
sense the inherent righteousness the Papists urge in this cause by the same
text? Romans 4. The difference is.

Papists make it a part, the beginning, and give it to all the graces, you to
faith alone, both are for a proper sense against the Relative one.

Ours call it gross impiety to place that righteousness, whereby we are
justified in faith, in whole or in part, Forbs 78. And of faith properly taken,
and without relation he says, it is more pernicious then that of the Papists,
p. 80. Ne^ dum dispuduit.

But, a little before he says out of Corvinus, that Arminius was not pleased
that faith should be called the isntrumental cause of justification, which is
against what you teach.

It is true he says not so; you do, and yet that which the Doctor there
speaks to Arminius, appertains to and touches you both. Bona igitur side
dic Armini pro tuo acumine, qua ratione fides justificat? (...) credere, hoc
est actum fidei (dicit Arminius) imputa^i in justitiam, idque proprio sensu non
Me^onymi^^, quatenus objectum apprehendi^. Epist. ad Hippol.
Tell us in truth Arminius out of thine acute judgment how faith justifies?
The act of faith (says Arminius) is imputed for righteousness, in a proper
sense, not metonymically as it apprehends the object. If not as an
instrument, How? So the Doctor answers himself. So he denying, so you
calling it an instrument, both teach the (...) credere in a proper sense
imputed, for righteousness; both deny the figurative sense; you that teach it an
instrument, deny justification by it as an instrument receiving and applying
Christ's righteousness^ to justification; The agreement being such, it had been
wisdom to conceal this disagreement.

You say he cites Bertius, another Prince of the Arminian band; that he
acknowledges Hanc sententiam meritum Christi exclude^e.
this opinion to exclude the merit of Christ, which is contrary to what you
have taught and profess.

If he be a Prince of the Arminian band; you are no common Soldier, but ad
ho^, a Prince, as he, above him, a King. That he derogateth not from Christ he
shows, (with what agreement to himself let him look to that) Fides ista
meritum Christi respicit, atque hoc modo verum est quod dicitur, fides
justifica ^non per se, sed correlative, quatenus nimi^um apprehendit Christium
ejusque justitiam, Sib. Ep. p. 144.
That faith respects the merit of Christ, and thus it is true which is said,
faith justifies not by it self, but relatively as it apprehends Christ and
his righteousness: he is nearer the Protestant tenet in this then you, and if
descent will make it, he leaves you to be a King, you are lower or higher in
that band. That faith in a proper sense is imputed, etc. he says, and therein
is but one of the Princes with you.

When as the Doctor says Hanc sententiam.
this opinion; he has no relation to Vorstius, or that his opinion, of which
before, of faith so taken. When as he says Arminius his opinion to exclude
Christ's merit, it concerns you. Sibrandus said to Bertius. Haec tua thesis
est causa qua^e statuam vobis (^i tamen vobis constare vultis) necessario
tandem eo de veniendum esse ut cum Serveto, Socino, Osterodo, meritu^ sive
satisfactionem Christi pro nobis sactam omnino tollatis dicatisque neque
Christum nobis justitiam peprrisse. Ne^ nos ipsius justitia nobis imputata
justitiari, p. 85. Talia enim ponit fundamenta per quae meritum Christi
necessario eve^titur, ib.
This your thesis is the cause why I conclude, if you will be like your selves,
at length necessarily to come to it, that with Socinus, Servetus, Osterodus,
you altogether take away the merit or satisfaction of Christ made for us, and
say that Christ neither brought righteousness for us; (when you with Arminius
preach ye are not justified by any righteousness at all) Neither that we be
justified by his righteousness. Bertius said not the latter; Arminius and
Socinus, etc. did, Bertius must come to it. Bertius says it of Arminius. For
he lays such foundations by which the merit of Christ is necessarily
overthrown. For either it must be by faith in a proper sense imputed and
Christ's righteousness imputed, or one of them: If it be by faith in a proper
sense as in your Doctrine, justification by Christ's righteousness imputed, is
excluded; and it is your Doctrine as this latter excludes the proper sense of
Faith. Indeed at best the merit of Christ, as a remoter thing, must be
established, meriting that faith should be imputed, which is Socinianisme as
Sibrandus shows out of Osterodus, p. 10. and p. 97. and that which was taxed
by the Doctor in Vorstius, but even now; see your 15. p.

As for your charge on Mr. W. that he by his opinion Mr. G.
of imputation of the active obedience of Christ's righteousness does more
trench on the merit of Christ's righteousness then your opinion, it is
arresting, arraigning, and finding full of guilt.

Answ. You show not at whose suite, nor at what bar, nor in what. Neither can
I divine which way it will appear, less you be the accuser, the witness, and
the Judge in that Assise; open it when you please. Look at home, you deny it
to Christ's active obedience; as being Christ's
debt, and Christ's passive obedience also, when as thereunto you do call his
active obedience as an essential requisite, though not without contradiction.
Seeing nihil dat quod non habet, that which meriteth not, being debt, cannot
make his sufferings to be so, of this in the answer to your treatises.

The other things which you say you could improve, p. 16. I pass and leave to
the Readers to judge whether there be not Arminian blood in your tenent
apparent, which is that the (...) credere of Abraham in a proper sense is
imputed denying the imputation of Christ's righteousness to justification:
these are yours, they are of Arminius and Arminians, as before. In the words of
Sibrandus I will add. Hoc ipsum ante ^e docuit Servetus, scribit enima. libro
de lege and Evang. ut est apud Calvinum in refutatione errorum Michaelis
Serveti, p. 903. suum credere reputatum fuisse Abrahae ad justitiam.
This same thing Servetus taught before thee, for he writes, his faith was
reputed to Abraham for righteousness. Sed and Socinus hoc ipsum docet de
Christo servatore, p. 388. ejus verba haec sunt, cum fides nostra nobisad
justitiam imputatur, sensus est, fidem nostram pro justitia habe^i. Cum
justitiam Abrahae exemplo imputari docet, etc. sed ideo (nos justos coram Deo)
quia Deo visum sit fidem nostram justitiae loco nobis ducere.
And Socinus teaches the same. When our faith is imputed to us for
righteousness; the sense is, our faith is accounted for righteousness, when
he teaches righteousness to be imputed to us by Abraham's example. But
therefore, because it seemed good to God to account our faith to us in the
place of righteousness.

Socinus in one place writes Ne syllaba quidem in sacris monumentis exter, de
Christi justitia nobis imputanda. Utapud Sibrand in censuris p. 463 and
credidit Abraham Deo, and ob eam causam ab ipso justus habitus suit, p. 463.
There is not a syllable in the Scripture of Christ's righteousness to be
imputed to us. Abraham believed God, and for that cause was he accounted just
of him.

And when as you detract not justification from the blood and merit of Christ,
but give it the blood and death of Christ, what do you more then Osterodus?
these are his words. Quatenus sanguis ille and mo^s in nobis efficient eas res
propter quas Deus nos justificat, nempe fidem. Ex his quilibet videre porest t^
and Arminium ^dem docere de fide jus^^ican^e quod an^e vo^ Serven^^, S^cinus,
Ostero^us, de illa script^ l^^eris and viva voce docuerunt.
So far as that blood and death work in us those things for which God does
justify us, forsooth faith. I will conclude in Sibrandus words to Bertius. Out
of which every one may see thee and Arminius to teach the same of justifying
faith, which before you, Servetus, Socinus, Osterodus, wrote and p^ea^hed. And
if you desire to see farther agreement, see it in Peltius his Harmony de
justif. par. 3. and 4.

Here is Arminian blood, neither have you proved the same in Mr. W. nor can
you, sift and examine as thoroughly as you will. When as you say Arminian faith
imputed includes obedience to the Law of God. You hear they distinguish it
from works, and you know, it is called by them and your self, the work of
God, the commandment and condition of the Gospel Mr. Ws. faith in the Relative
sense indeed includes the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ to Gods Law.

You say Arminian faith is performed in their own person. So is yours: you say
it was Abraham's faith in a proper sense as before. Mr. W. teaches the
righteousness of Christ applied by faith so to constitute us just as if we had
performed it in our own persons.

You say the Arminia^ faith excludes Christ's merit from justification. So does
yours as before; as that which is immediate, as that with which imputed we are
just. You cannot say Mr. W. faith does little less; perfect righteousness is
that which faith applies in Mr. W. Doctrine, by which we are justified before
the Lord.

When as you ask, if Christ's righteousness and obedience be imputed to
righteousness, what need there is of any satisfaction or atonement by blood.

Mr. W. will answer you, both are debt, full satisfaction consists in them
both.

Mr. J. Goodw. will tell you it is an heinous crime to divide Christ's
righteousness: and that his active obedience infloweth, and is in a sort
satisfaction.

When as you tell us you have wrung the best weapons out of the adversaries
hands, you are but Miles gloriosus, (to continue your Metaphor) It was sine
host, tua te jact as in aula. And me thinks those that teach this doctrine
should not be professed enemies to you. The Church of England teaches the same
in her Homily, and the Articles of Ireland. As great and as godly as the lively
faith is (says the Homily) yet it puts us from it self, and remitteth, or
appoints us unto Christ for to have only by him remission of our sins or
justification, 3. part. hom. salv. p. 18. 19.

When as the world was not able to pay, etc. It pleased God to prepare for us
the most precious Jewels of Christ's body and blood, whereby the ransom might
be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and his justice fully satisfied, p. 15. So
that Christ is now the righteousness of all them that truly believe in him, he
for them paid the ransom by his death, he for them fulfilled the Law in his
life, so that now in him and by him every true Christian man may he called a
fulfiller of the Law; for as much as that which their infirmity lacked, Christ's
justice has supplied, etc. p. 15. Is this tenet your adversary? It is the
tenet of your Mother: It is not to know or acknowledge your Mother; to be her
adversary, and an adversary to your self.

And though you thus part with Arminianisme now in words; you are found not to
do so indeed, and shall be showed to do so, to the end.

For the other grand heresies Socinus holds which you do not; I know not
that Mr. Walker lays them to your charge directly. It is good you should
look to consequences. Sibrandus gave Bertius good cautions, p. 85. 87. 122.
etc. In the imputation of faith in a proper sense, and denying the imputation
of Christ's righteousness you agree, as Sibrandus to Bertius, of which before;
these he called blasphemous heresies.

Sect. 7. Here (passing many vain words, impertinences P. 21.
and froth) you say Mr. W. grants p. 7. that Abraham re^ing on the Lord by
firm faith for the performance of the ^^omises made unto him, the Lord counted
it to him for righ^eousnesse; and after, even faith was rockoned to him for
^ighteousnesse; and after p. 11. whereby faith (he says) he ^^eaneth the holy
spiritual faith and belief, which is before ^ewed to have been in Abraham,
and which is proper to the ^ect and regenerate. What of this? It agrees not
with his ^^inion, it is not his tropicall or metonymicall faith, it is ^aith in
the proper nature and direct signification; and so that have we to do with the
discourse following? he holds the ^ame interpretation of faith with you.

Softly Sir, his interpretation is out of your mouth ^^opicall, in this I see
no agreement with you, nor disagree^ent with himself.

By faith in Christ Abraham rested on God for perfor^ance of the promises, the
word to him was, In thy seed ^all all the Nations of the earth be blessed, in
him all promises ^re Yea and Amen. He must rest by faith in Christ, on God for
them; indeed in him he was Abraham's God, to ^im the promise is made first, in
him, to us, if ye be Christ's, ye be Abraham's seed and heirs, etc. Gal. 3.
ult.

This faith in Christ he says was reckoned to him for ^ighteousnesse, and the
faith which apprehends and ap^lieth the righteousness of Christ is proper to
the elect and regenerate, and is an holy spiritual faith and belief: ^ere is
no opposition to himself, or agreement with you, ^ou do but flatter your
self, and deceive your Reader.

But faith so often said to be imputed for righteousness, P. 22.
Mr. W. cannot understand a tropicall or metonymicall faith, ^iz. the
righteousness is evident (say you) because immediately after, p. 11.
interpreting the word righteousness, he says, by it is meant the
righteousness of Christ, etc. so that if by faith we understand the
righteousness of Christ, and by righteousness, the righteousness of Christ
too, we must make the Apostles meaning to run thus. The righteousness of
Christ is imputed to a believer for the righteousness of Christ, an hyper
absurdity.

The Remonstrants Apol. p. 113. giving a reason why they used not the phrase (
Christi justitiam nobis imputari.
) Christ's righteousness to be imputed to us, give this reason, ( Necesse est
justitiam Christi dicamus nobis imputari propter justitiam Christi, quae
loquutio non modo (...) sed manifestam in sese habet absurditatem.
) We must necessarily s^^ that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us
for the righteousness of Christ, which is not proper but absurd. It was
borrowed, Discipulum t^ facile agn^sc^^.

1. Faith in a tropicall sense is that which Mr. Walk teaches with all the
Reformed Churches.

2. The explication of Mr. W. is of righteousness imputed, which he says is
that which faith lays hold of, no^ those words, to righteousness, which you
might observe to have a distinct interpretation given it by Mr. W. His words
are by imputing and accounting that faith for righteousness to Abraham, and
every one of his faithful seed is be^ mea^^ Gods setting of Christ's
righteousness on the score and putting it on the account of the believer, his
judging them perfectly rightnesse.

By that phrase for righteousness, is not meant the righteousness of Christ
as you would fasten on him, no^ perfect conformity to the Law, as in the first
Covenant, personal righteousness of Abraham, but a righteousness by which
the believer is as if be had perfectly performed the Law in his person, in such
a state, and had never sinned, by which the believer is just in the sight of
God.

A believer is not so by faith in a proper sense, that is not perfect
righteousness, and cannot make a man so* But in a relative sense as it
applies the righteousness of Christ active and passive, by which imputed, set
on our score, it is that we are righteous, and so accounted.

Sect. 8. But let us come to the phrase of imputing, or Mr. G.
^^^^ting, and here Mr. W^. first fault is. He makes a suppos^tion, that to
impute and account are universally termini aequipollentes, to run always
hand in hand.

Answ. 1. He has no such words in that place, there i^ neither universally,
nor always.

2. If he did so, there is no ^ispri^ion from his own Scripture instances,

It had not been good English (you say) I and my son Solomon shall be
imputed offenders, and yet you must acknowledge to have offense imputed is to
be accounted an offender.

Your self confess in some cases and falls of speech, they may be of
indifferent use and signification, and in the case in hand to be expressions of
good propriety, and that there is not ^uch difference between them, except a
man has a mind to ^avill and wrang^e about words. The man then that quar^els
these words must be conceived ex confessis, to have a mind to cavil and
wrangle. Who then lays on tongue and multiplieth discourse? it is your phrase.

But this is his great fault indeed, namely, the description ^e lays down of
the sense of the phrase, imputing a thing ^o one, which description is this.
The phrase of imputing or counting a thing to one signifies both in the Old
and New Testament, an act of judgment and estimation by which a thing is
judged and esteemed, reckoned and accounted to be as it is indeed.

These are his words, but he calls it not a description once, as you do
twice, and so usually afterward: forsooth, that you may examine it by the
rules of a right definition, or description, as in your 2. exception, where you
try it by that Law.

But the bare giving of the sense of a word cannot be ^ermed a description,
neither is every description to be ^ried by the rules of a true definition,
much less every explication of the sense of a word; pass that, What say you
to it?

Capiat qui. potis est ^aper^, and confess his eloquence to Mr. G.
pass your intelligence.

Answ. Which surely is a wonder, when as he seems to explain his speech to a
common capacity. Do not you know what it is to judge a thing to be as it is
indeed? I would not have said so of you, his words following spell them more
plainly when as he adds, then it is just and according to truth. The
judgment is so not when it is judged as it is not, but as it is, for that is
unjust judgment and not according to truth. He adds, Gods thoughts are
always just, and his judgment is according to truth, Romans 2. 2. therefore a
just imputing and counting is here meant, says Mr. for God does account of all
persons and things, as they are. He gives instance of an unjust account and
false imputing, 1 King. 1. 21. and of true counting, Neb. 13. 13. and Levit.
17. 4. and Psalm. 22. 30. and do you not yet understand it?

Why do you dispute against it, and condemn Mr. W. for it in the entrance,
saying, The man is no where liker himself then in the description? Surely you
can never justly judge him or his cause in dispute, if so be that you do not
understand him: you might have spared your 1. 2. 4. and last onset against what
is said, and first have required Mr. W. explanation, that you might understand
him.

These are but words; the fault is in your will: he puts you to it, as we
shall see in examination of your opposition.

You say, I should have thought that Gods imputing faith for righteousness
(take faith in what sense you will) had been an act of grace and mercy in God,
and not an act of judgment.

1. By an act of judgment in Mr. W. sense you should understand, an act of
understanding.

2. But I suppose you take it for an act of justice, for judgment the exercise
thereof; and if, why may there not be in justification a concurrence both of
mercy and judgment? and both not be exercised in making men just? I should
have thought there is sweet agreement between them. I have read in one of our
Homilies, that God in our redemption and justification, with endless mercy
joined his most upright and perfect justice. Homil. salv. 1. part. That Gods
mercy did not deliver us without a just ransom, p. 14. that when as it lay not
in us to do, he provided a ransom for us, that was the most precious body and
blood of his own most dear -- who besides his ransom sulled the Law for us
perfectly, ib. that in this the justice of God and his mercy did embrace
together, ib. so that in our justification is not only Gods mercy and grace,
but also his justice, which the Law calls the justice of God, and it
consists in paying our ransom, and fulfilling the Law. The grace of God
shuts not out the justice of God in our justification, but only shuts
out the justice of, man, that is to say, the justice of our works, as to be
means of deserving our justification, ib.

I have read of Justification freely by grace through the redemption which is
in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth a propiriation through faith in his
blood to declare his righteousness -- in it God is just and the justifier,
Romans 3.

When as faith is taken in a relative sense with its object, Christ and his
perfect righteousness, and is imputed to Abraham for righteousness, Abraham
is made just perfectly, God judges justly in accounting him so, in pronouncing
him so, with this he may stand in judgment and be as if he had never sinned,
as if he had perfectly fulfilled the Law in his own person.

It is not so where faith is taken in a proper sense, neither is that
accounting faith for righteousness a righteous judgment; or that which is in
truth. Faith thus taken is a work of the Law, (some think) a part of inherent
righteousness, as charity, an imperfect grace, it cannot stand in judgment.

Faith in the relative sense establishes the Law (as you shall see) brings
in what it requires, and so justifies, and so justification is a work of
mercy and judgment.

I profess I could never endure what I read in Mr. Wotton and Socinians, that
Poena and venia sunt adversa.
punishment and pardon are adverse, in some, nay in it self it is joined with
denial of the satisfaction of Christ, and a destroyer of Gods justice. Look
you to it.

Justice shines through mercy, Mr. Forbs, p. 92. and this Perkinsi verba Wot.
in Bish. p. 174.
of faith in a proper sense is against the justice of God, (as he) When as we
are before Gods judgement-seate to be judged in the rigor of justice; then we
must bring some thing that may countervaile the justice of God, not only
acceptance in mercy, but also approbation in justice. Justos ess^ oportet si
simus ei accepti, Call. in Romans 5. 1^.
We must be just if we be accepted of him. Simul qualis si^ Christi justitia
interpretatur, tum vocat obedientiam, ubi nos abnotemus quaeso, quid nos
afferre inconspectu^ Dei opotteat si velimus operibus justificari, nempe legis
justiti am numeris omnibus absolutam, Calv. in Romans 5 19. Sed quia offerimus
per^ectam Legis gratuito donat, Calv. in Gal. 3. 6.
The Apostle shows what Christ righteousness is when be calls it
obedience. Observe what we must bring into Gods sight if we will be justified
by works the righteousness of the Law complete. But because we bring th
perfect obedience of the Law -- because we have it not in us, God freely gives
it. Non asia justitia admittitur in Coelis, quam integra Legis observatio,
Calv. instit. 1. 3. c. 14. p. 13.
No other righteousness is admitted in Heaven then the entire observation of
the Law. Justitiam Dei quae apud Dei tribunal approbabitur, Calv. in Gal. 3 9
The righteousness of God which shall be approved at Gods Tribunal. Non
vivimus coram Deo sine justitia, Calv. in Romans 1. 17.
We live not before God without righteousness. Primam justification is nostrae
causam non ad hominum judicium referri, cum ad Dei tribunal ubi nulla justitia
censetur perfecta absolutaque Legis obedientia, Calv. ib.
At Gods Tribunal no righteousness is so judged but perfect and absolute
obedience of the Law. At justitiam quae examen rigoremque judicii sustine at
nobis omnibus, integram perfectamque necesse est, Aret. in Phil. 3. 9.
We have need of righteousness which will bear the examen and rigor of
justice entire and perfect.

2. When as you tell us, p. 24. every Act of judging and esteening a thing to
be as it is, is not an imputing or accounting it to another, which yet must be
if it be rightly defined by the rules of a definition.

The Answer is Mr. W. did not define it, he said not it is, but it signifies,
which is not the manner of him that defines. Neither has he a word of
imputing it to another, upon which what you tell us of the Sun and Moon, etc.
are built, they are Castles in the air.

3. You say, when God imputes either my faith to me, or Christ's righteousness
(the one being the Scripture phrase, the other Mr. Ws.) for my righteousness;
he does not judge any thing to be as indeed it is: for neither is my faith, nor
the righteousness of Christ indeed my righteousness, but my faith in that
grace which God has consecrated and ordained to bring me into communion and
fellowship of that righteousness that is of that Justification, etc. which
Christ by the merit of his life and death has purchased for m^ and for all
those that believe in him. Therefore the phrase of imputing does not signify
an act of judgment, etc. by which a man judges a thing to be as it is.

1. The Scripture, and what has been spoken are directly against you, which
show Gods judgment according to truth. I oppose it to your bare negation.

2. For the Scripture as it mentions imputation of faith, which you confess
is not righteousness, and truly as in a proper sense, so it says
righteousness is imputed, which is also against your assertion that it is not
righteousness indeed, and elsewhere I shall make good to be Christ's; you shall
not name a third.

3. The righteousness of Christ is mine, he is my welbeloved, mine, he is the
Lord my righteousness. Sir, whether you will or no the Lord says it, this is
his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.

4. Faith in a proper sense brings not into communion with the righteousness
of Christ, as your self, though here you say it, elsewhere you deny it, and
here you confound righteousness and justification as if they were one; if so,
why do you deny it elsewhere? if it be different, indeed it is an effect of
righteousness imputed (so is justification) the matter, by imputation that by
which) Why do you confound them?

And here we may see what a goodly effect faith has, and what a bringing into
communion you mean, when as you deny communion with Christ's righteousness,
but in the effect of it, to which after.

5. Faith in a relative sense sets all at rights, it causes communion and
fellowship with Christ, and his righteousness to justification; by this
Christ's righteousness is our own; the judgment of God is according to truth;
when as the Lord imputes it to righteousness, as the stream of Protestants
runs.

4. When as you say, Mr. W. instances from Scripture, ^^^ply not naturally with
his description of the word Imputing. It is but a denial; a denial will
answer it. To omit, it is you, not Mr. W. that made it a description.

Vlt. You say, some instances contradict that description of his according to
his own interpretation, of the phrase imputing, as that of Shimei, Let not my
Lord impute iniquity to me, he does not (says Mr. W. truly but
contradictingly to himself) that David should not judge his iniquity to be
none, and therefore it is against all reason be should say, still it so
signifies; and so for that of Job 33. 10. whence you deduce it, does always so
signify.

To which the answer is easy. The words universally and always, before, still
and afterward repeated now again are not in Mr. W. they are your own, as
these, definition and description; devised to serve a turn. Where he says it
was so, he says, it is taken sometimes in other senses there named, when used
by a trope, a metonymy of the cause for the effect, etc. a metaphor, etc. see
his instances; neither has Mr. W. yet delivered you his application.

When as to show the contrary you instance in Romans 4. 8. and 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Where God is said not to impute sin, the meaning is not that God does not
judge a believer to have sin in him, and to judge as it is, but that God
absolving men from guilt and punishment, and so imputing righteousness, that
it is of a full different nature from judging it as indeed it is.

For my part I know not, but when as God imputes not sin, he judges as it
is, for there is neither guilt nor punishment properly so called to them that
believe in Jesus Christ; which is therefore true, because they are justified by
the righteousness of Christ, truly given them and applied by faith, by which
as they are accounted righteous, and are so indeed.

When as you say Mr. Ws. own tenet shows it, that God imputes Christ's
righteousness for the righteousness we should have performed in our own
persons, which is not our own personal righteousness. You misse-report it.
Mr. Ws. words are, when God imputes Christ's righteousness to a believer, he
counts him perfectly righteous by that righteousness, and so he is indeed.

And because you judge Mr. W. for that passage (which a reason why imputing
signifies an act of judgment) Gods ^oughts are just, and his judgments
according to truth, Romans ^ 2. as if Gods imputing righteousness to him that is
a ^nner, and has no righteousness, were an act of injustice ^ him, and
contrary to truth.

Answ. I suppose he did it with good cause. Then when ^ a man is accounted
righteous for the righteous for the righteousness of christ imputed by God,
applied by faith, as he is righte^us indeed, so the judgment or account is
true and righ^ous. Which not being a truth of faith imputed in a pro^r sense,
if it should be impu^^d, does therefore render ^ods account not true nor just.
So that directly you deny ^e one and other in this exception.

Neither is it a new practice of Mr. W. or his alone, but ^dinary to be found
in the learned.

Mr. Forbs, condemning imputation of faith in a pro^er sense, (which is your
opinion) and calling it pernicious, ^d more pernicious then that of Papists,
shows the same ^hus.

For when faith is not Relatively or instrumentally taken, ^ respect of Christ
apprehended by it, it can never contain per^ct righteousness, and so the Lord
can never justify us ^y it; for the judgment of God is just and according to
^uth, Romans 2. v. 2. 5. etc. They wittingly lay a ground ^ themselves touching
justification, wherein it is impossible that ^ods judgment can be according to
truth, seeing they make him ^ justify them, by that which in their own
confession is never answerable to the justice of God, p. 91. so he.

If God should justify us -- or by faith as it is a work or abit in us, God
could never be seen to be just in justifying of ^s, etc. p 92.

( Sybrandus to Bertius: Deus est justus and judicium ejus secundum veritatem;
fides autem, non est tota legis justitia, sed tantum exigua pars illius, p. 10.
Sed Dei judicium est secundum veritatem, Romans 2. 2. scimus, etc. Number autem ille
qui judicat secundum veritatem, and qui in judicando errare nequit, quique nec
fallere nec falli potest, exiguam justitiae portionem, eamque imperfectam, and
multis peccatis contaminatam, habebit aut habere poterit pro perfecta legis
justitia? p. 30.
) God is just, and his judgment according to truth, faith ^^ not the whole
righteousness of the Law, but only a little part ^hereof.

But Gods judgment is according to truth, Romans 2. 2. We know, etc. Will he who
judges according unto truth, and who in judging cannot err, who cannot
deceive nor be deceived, account or can be, a small portion of says imperfect
and much defiled, for the persect righteousness of the Law.

( Quando Deus nosre putat justos ex fide, veritas quae huic reputationi
divinae respondet, nonest justitia Christi formalterinhaerens in nobis, sed
justitia Christi reali^er participata and donata nobis ordinationedivina. Si
Deus ex eo quod nobis imputat Christi justitiam existima^e^ nos inhaerenrer
justos (quod nesas dictu) erraret Dei judicium atque esset in mente divina
existimatio cui veritas rei non respondet, Bish. Dav. c. 28. p. 171.
) When God does account us just by faith, the truth which answers this divine
account, is not the righteousness of Christ formally inhering in us, but the
righteousness of Christ really communicated and given us by divine ordination.
If God should esteem us inherently just from that, that he imputes unto us
Christ's righteousness, his judgment should err, and there should be in the
mind of God an account to which the truth of the thing answers not (which is
wickedness for a man to speak) ( Fallit ig^tur and fallitur Bellarminus
imputationem justitiae Christi vocans nudam existimationem sive opinationem
sine re, cum sit realis acceptatio peccatoris credentis pro justo in judicio
Dei, Pareus Castig. de justif. p. 485. Ut Cham. n. c 5. Sect. 24.
) Therefore Bellar. deceives and is deceived, calling th^^ imputation of
Christ's righteousness, a naked esteem or thought without the thing, seeing it
is a real acceptance of the believing sinner for a just man in Gods judgment.

Papists and Protestants agree that in justification Gods account is true and
right. Bellar. and Becanus urge the judgment of God according to truth, to
which Cham. ( Judicium Dei sateor esse secundum veritatem. Vere justi facti
sunt quicunque justificantur a Deo, sed aliter per inhaerentem aliter per
imputatam justitiam, p. 865. 866.
) I confess that the judgment of God is according to truth, they are truly
made just who are justified by God, but one way by inherent, another way by
imputed righteousness. ( Esto, imputare non simplici^e^ existi mare, ut cum
fallitut intellectus, and videtur hypocrita bonus qui tamen malus est: esto
potius conjunctum cum ^^^ veritate, sed sua: nimirum ut cuique Christiano, vere
and realiter imputetur Christi justitia^ hanc nos veritatem imputationis absit
ut oppugnemus, c. 13. Sect. 14. p. 20.
) Grant that to impute is not simply to suppose, as when the understanding is
deceived, and an Hypocrite seems good, who is wicked. Let it rather be joined
with the truth of the thing, but its own truth, that Christ's righteousness be
truly and really imputed to every Christian; this imputation God forbid we
should oppose.

Mr. Pemble to Becanus, urging Romans 2. 2. says. We embrace this rule, and the
reason of it, acknowledging that wheresoever there is justification, there is
justice, one way or other in the party justified. The question still stands in
the manner, etc.

We affirm that it is by imputing unto him the perfect righ^eousnesse of
Christ, accepting Christ's obedience for ^is.

We here take up the forenamed rule, laid down by our adversaries. De justif.
p. 13.
Whomsoever God pronounces to be perfectly just, be must needs be made
perfectly just, for Gods judgment is according to truth, p. 9. and elsewhere.
God accounts that only for perfect righteousness of the Law which is so
indeed and truth, but faith is not the perfect fulfilling of the Law: therefore
God does not account it for such. --

The major must be proved that God accounts not that for perfect justice, which
is not perfect indeed; this appears, Romans ^. 2. the judgment of God is
according to truth. When therefore any thing is not truly good and perfect,
there God esteems it not truly good and perfect, ib. p. 37.

Gualter (you say) an orthodox Interpreter finds grace and favor not
strictness of judgment in the phrase of im^utation. It teaches us that God
might indeed have dealt in ^rictnesse of judgment with us, and that we are
indebted to ^is free gra^^ that he deals not with us as we have de^^rved.

Who denies but God might have dealt in strictness, equired and exacted
personal obedience, and have execu^ed death on us for our sin? and that it
is mercy that God imputes or gives Christ's righteousness: the A^^stle
shows Christ and all his, gifts, and so effects of ^race, and yet in that
there is strict justice, and that is ^nswered by the L. Christ our surety by
his perfect righ^eousnesse, so that Gods righteousness is declared thereby. He
is just in justifying, and so Orthodox interpreters, our ^wne, and others, as
before. I may add more.

The Law must be satisfied, or else we cannot be just, for the Lord does allow
no other righteousness but the very same which ^s described in the Law, which
whosoever cannot attain are pro^ounced guilty of eternal death; therefore if
we will be righ^eous and saved, such a righteousness must be sought out, then
which the Law cannot require a more absolute -- and where shall we find it?
Our faith is but begun and we must always pray it may be increased in us --
but righteousness must be of that kind as that nothing at all may be added
thereunto. Dr. Whitak. against Camp. Englished by M. Stoke, p. 224. and p. 229.
230.


The justice that freeth us from the Law, neither increases nor grows, but
is ever most perfect and absolute, that is, Christ his obedience imputed to us
by faith; -- what that righteousness is see there. I will not make
application. ( Ad Dei tribunal, ubi nulla justitia censetur nisi persecta legis
obedientia, Toss. in Romans 2. 21.
) At Gods tribunal nothing is accounted righteousness but perfect obedience
of the Law. ( Nihil imperfectum aut maneum potest dici justitia Dei
justifica^s, Id. ad Romans p. 173. 7. Deum vere and sum justum in sponsore,
Beza. ad Romans 4. 25.
) Nothing imperfect or lame can be called the justifying righteousness of God.
( Nam ut alibi dixi nullos pro justis approbat Deus, nisi quos prius vere ac
sum (non in ipsis sed) in Christo suo, seu imputata Christi justitia
justifica^et, ut Pro. 17. 15. Bek. ad Romans 4. 21. 5.
) God is truly and most just in the surety. God, as I have elsewhere said, does
approve none for just, but those whom first he makes just truly, and in the
highest degree, not in themselves, but Christ's righteousness imputed. ( Junius.
Sola Dei Patris mi^ericordia justificari peccatorem ita profitemur, ut Christum
cum Officio Mediatoris causam proximam agnoscamus, qui sibi non natus sed
nobis, Jes 9. 5. ita offensi Patris sempiternam justitiam absolutissimae
persectionis (...) miseris hominibus reconciliavit, ut Deus justitiae laudem in
media misericordia non amitteret. Et si ut agens liber^imum quos and
quomodocunque velit justificare potuit; obedientiam tamen filii necessariam
fecit, tum natura ipsius qua infinite justus, tum patefacta in Lege voluntas
quae in Deo est aeterna and immota justitiae regula (sic and Calvinus instit.
l. 4. c. 10. Sect. 15. quae insuper immutabiliter requirit satisfactionem pro
peccato, and Legis impletionem per obedientiam, cum justificare impium sine
ulla justitia (...) esse dixerit, Pro. 17. 15. facta est igitur translatio
Legis, Heb. 7. 12. quae non potuit vivifica^e, Gal. 3. 2. in Christum qui pro
nobis sub Lege factus, Gal. 4. 4. Legi omnimodo ^atis^ace^et, These. Theol. 35.
p. 689.
) We so profess a sinner to be justified by the only mercy of God the Father
that we acknowledge Christ with his office of a Mediator the next cause, who
being borne for us, not himself, Jes. 9. 5. who by the ransom of most
absolute perfection so reconciled the eternal justice of his offended Father
to miserable men that God lost not the praise of justice in midst of mercy.
Though as a most free agent he could justify whomsoever, and in what manner
soever he would, yet both his Nature as he is infinitely just, and also his
Will revealed in the Law, which in God is the eternal and immovable rule of
justice: which moreover, in immutably requires satisfaction for sin, and
fulfilling the Law by obedience, seeing to justify a wicked man without
righteousness he has ^alled it abomination, there is therefore made a
translation of the Law which could not give life on Christ, who being made for
us under the Law might every way satisfy the Law for us.

( Hoc (...) pro^sus suit complendum etiam in nobis, ideoque Christus induens
nostram carnem nostro nomine persecte praestitit legem, Matthew. 5. non veni --
and 16. hic facilius est coelum -- pertinet hoc membrum ad beneficii Christi
applicationem ad nos, Aret in Romans 8. 4.
) This righteousness was altogether to be fulfilled in us, therefore Christ
putting on our flesh in our behalf perfectly performed it. I came not, etc.
Matthew. 5. and 16. here it is easier for the Heavens to pass, this member
appertains to the application of Christ's benefit to us. ( Nam tum demu^
redderetur inanis si illi non satisfiere^, vel per nos vel nostro nomine per
aliu^* atqui id per Christum est satisfactum, qui non venit solvere sed
implere, Matthew. 5. and eam in ca^ne nostra implevit ad Romans 8 Tossa^. p. 26.
Beza in Romans 8. v. 4.
) Then should it be vain if not satisfied by us, or in our name by another,
and that is satisfied by Christ who came not to dissolve, etc. and he did
fulfill it in our flesh. ( (...), illud ipsum quod requitit Le^ ut ex ejus
praescripto justi and integ^i coram Deo censcamur: nam tum ad peccatorum
remissionem and impletionem justitiae accesserit etiam hoc tertium, id est,
perfecta naturae nostrae integritas (quae omnia gratis consequimur in Christo
per fidem apprehenso) ut in omnes facies se convertat Satan, justi sumus coram
Deo, etiam ex illa absolutissima Legis formula quamobrem dixit Apostolus supra,
c. 3. 31. se Legem non evertere sed stabilire.
) That very righteousness which the Law required that by its prescript we may
be thought just and entire before God, for when as to forgiveness of sins
and fulfilling the Law this third shall come, the perfect integrity of our
nature, (all which we freely attain in Christ apprehended by faith) let Satan
do what ever he can we are just before God, and that from that most absolute
form of the Law, therefore the Apostle said he came not to destroy the Law,
but to establish it, Romans 3. 21. ( ^ustitia Jesu Christi, per quam justificamur
coram D^^est perfectissima totius Legis divinae obedientia -- justitia in
Evangelio pa^esacta est impletio Legis a Christo facta pro nobis, Polan. synt.
l. 6. c. 36. p. 2947. per Evangelium Lex non aboletur s^d stabilitur, R^^ 3. ^^.
) The righteousness of Jesus Christ by which we are justified before God is
the most perfect obedience of the whole Law of God -- the righteousness
manifested in the Gospel, is the fulfilling of the Law made by Christ for us. (
Calv. hunc scrupulum optime discurit cum ex ipsa Legis doctrina (...) Legis
ju^^^tiam. Calv. ad Romans 10. v. 5. Stabilimus, merito hoc dixit Apostolas, nam
Christ satisfactio quid aliud quam Legis minas ostendit, min^^e irritas esse,
quum (...) lucre Christ^^^ oportuerit? Sed and Christi justitia quid aliud est
quam plena Legis praestatio: doctrina igitur ex fide quum non prius nos servet
quam justificet (idest, Christum nobis pe^ imputationem applicet his omnibus
virtutibus Legis ornatum) certe justitiam (...) non modo non evertit, sed
potius stabilit in nobis, Bez. ad Romans 3. ult,
) He excellently takes away this scruple, when as out of the doctrine of the
Law he establishes the righteousness of the Law. (f) The Apostle well said we
establish; for what does Christ's satisfaction but show the threats of the Law
not void when as Christ must endure them? and what is Christ's righteousness
else but a full performance of the Law. The doctrine therefore of faith seeing
it does not save us before it justifies us, (that is, it applies Christ to us
by imputation, adorned with all these virtues) surely it does not only not
overthrow the Law, but rather stablisheth it in us.

Hitherto may I refer that eternal rule, Do this and live, see Mr. Perkins
argument. That which must be our righteousness before God must satisfy the
justice of the Law, which says, Do these things and thou shall live, but
there is nothing that can satisfy that justice of the Law, but the
righteousness and obedience of Christ, ergo. See Abbot. p. 387. see Abot. p.
389. See Sybrand against Bertius, p. 140. and 144. and Mr. Pemb. p. 149.

By all which much may be noted by you if you will put the same to use, and
that not only mercy, but justice, exact satisfaction to the Law, are by
Orthodox Writers established in free justification.

Sect. 9. You go on, and say ( when as Mr. W. by righteousness P. 27.
says is meant Evangelicall righteousness -- even the perfect satisfaction
and righteousness of Christ our Mediator and surety, which he the Son of God, in
man's nature performed to the Law.)

Riddle me, riddle me, etc. and that faith in any sense cannot be Mr. G.
imputed for the righteousness of Christ.

1. If it be a Riddle, how can you solve it without explication? your arguing
is a beating of the air.

2. And in the rest you do but trifle, that which is imputed is the
righteousness of Christ, so Mr. W. truly; that is Evangelicall, Dan. 9.

3. That for the righteousness of Christ is not Mr. Ws. but your own before
answered, see his explication.

4. To that question, (though impertinent) whether any thing may properly be
said to be truly and indeed the same with it self, and your reference of it to
Mr. Walkers own determination when his Logic returns again unto him.

I Answer, that I should think any thing may truly and properly be said to be
the same with it self; neither do I conceive any thing more truly and
properly the same then the thing it self: other things may be like, are not
the same. Every thing is every way the same with it self, identity is the
samenesse of a thing in my Logic. Your own immediately preceding words may
answer your question, which are, surely there is nothing truly, really, and
indeed the same with the satisfaction of Christ, but this satisfaction it self.

So that what Mr. W. said is a truth, that which God accounts for
righteousness is so indeed and makes the person righteous indeed.

So is faith (not in a proper sense) in a figurative sense apprehending the
righteousness of Christ, righteousness indeed, and your inference, p. 28. but
a formerly destroyed Remonstrant device.

When you comprehend not why Mr. W. should call the 2.
righteousness of Christ evangelicall righteousness, opposed to legal, and
yet define a legal righteousness to be every man's fulfilling the Law in his
own person.

I take it no difficult thing; take it as performed by himself, it was his
performance and legal; take him to be our surety, and consider him so
performing the same, and it graciously given unto us by God in the Gospel, it
is Evangelicall and rightly so called: Christ and all his benefits are
Evangelicall, such is his everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. ( Nec desunt apud
Prophetas loca de justitia justificante in Christi Regno, ut Isai. 45. and 53.
and Dan. 9. Tossan ad Romans p. 173.
) Neither are there places wanting amongst the Prophets of justifying
righteousness, as,

You say legal righteousenes of works cannot be inherent, because they are
matters transient. 3.


1. Though the works pass, the habit whence which also is strengthened by the
work, is inherent.

2. As sinful acts passing, leave a stain and skarre as well as guilt on the
soul, why may not acts of righteousness a contrary luster?

3. The acts of righteousness of Christ pass not simply, they remain with
God to whom they were offered to the ends and uses for which they were
performed as in the effects thereof.

4. Habits and acts in the Apostles disputes are infolded, neither does he
dispute against transient acts alone, but inhering habits, the habit is actus
primus, neither is it the love of God, or faith in Christ that acts not o^
him, conjoyning the soul and the object thereby.

You demand why he should say, that to be inherent in every 4.
man which was never in any but Christ.

That may have a fair account. Legal righteousness was inherent in Adam, as
well as in Christ. God made man just, what Adam had, the whole nature had in
him, and so it was in every man. There is also a proportion to the Law in every
Christian, the Law of God is in his heart, though it be imperfect and given by
the Gospel.

You know not why he should affirm Evangelicall righteousness 5.
to be a satisfaction performed to the Law. Why not? You grant it of the active
obedience of Christ, but how the passive obedience of Christ which Mr. W.
intends should be a satisfaction to the Law you apprehend not. You say the
Law was satisfied in that perfect and entire obedience which Christ exhibited
to it, and did not require of him (no more then it does of any other man that
shall fulfill it as he did) that he should be made a curse and die the death.

1. I answer, both make up full satisfaction in our behalf, the Law said, Do
this and live, and, Accursed is every man that abides not in all the
Commandments of the Lord to do them: both are our debt: our surety must do
both in these names. God required doing, he must fulfill all righteousness; as
God threatened death, Christ must suffer these things; he was accursed for us,
he died for us.

2. The Law requires full satisfaction of the surety as well as the
principal, and punishes the surety as well as the principal.

But he sets himself against the wrath of the Law, and Luther ad Gal. p.
160. 2.
takes it away, and satisfies the Law in his own body by himself, I
satisfy the Law for thee.

But the Law does not require that an innocent person should Mr. G.
die, but the transgressour, so you; he should not, considering the innocent
person per se, in himself, and qua, as a surety, it is not so: so considered
he was and might be numbered with transgressors. He was made sin for us, the
iniquities of us all were laid on him. They, sins were on his account, on
him, he bore our sins; hence guilt, hence punishment; Satisfactory it was
(you say) but not to the Law, it knows no satisfaction, but to God, because
he required it.

Answ. Whose Law was it, but Gods? you say God required Bez. ad 2 Cor. 5. ult.
Etsi peccatum victima ex Hebraeorum idiotismo, etc. Tamen ratio Antithesis
poscit ut potius Christus dicatur factus esse peccatum pro nobis, idest
peccator, non in se sed ex omnium peccatorum nostrorum reatu ipsi imputato. --
I pse peccatum and nos justitia, non nostra sed Dei, non in nobis sed in ipso,
sicut ipse peccatum non suum sed nostru^, nec in se, sed in nobjs factus est --
sic ergo sumus justitia Dei in ipso ut ille peccatum in nobis* nempe ex
imputatione. Luther. ad Gal. c* 3. 15. 13. p. 136. 137. C. 53.
it, Was it not in the Law? satisfy God requiring, and satisfy the Law: in it
he requires death on the transgression thereof.

Now that our Surety was by imputation a transgressour, hearken to Divines.
Although sin be taken for Sacrifice in the Hebrews speech -- yet the reason
of the opposition requires rather that Christ should be said to be made sin
for ^^s, that is a sinner, not in himself, but by the guilt of all our sins
imputed to him -- where he cites that of Augustine.

He was sin, and we righteousness, not our own, but of God, not in our
selves, but in him, as he is made sin, not his own, but ours, nor in
himself, but in us; -- We therefore are so the righteousness of God in him,
as he was sin in us, for^ooth by imputation.

Christ is innocent concerning his own person, and therefore he ^ought not to
have been hanged upon a tree. But because according ^o the Law of Moses every
Thief and Malefactor ought to be ^anged, therefore Christ also according to
the Law ought to be ^anged, for be sustained the person of a sinner, and of a
thief, not of one, but of all sinners and thieves. -- Therefore it behoved
that he should become a transgressour, and as Jes. the Prophet says, to be
reckoned and accounted amongst transgressors and ^respassers. And this no
doubt all the Prophets did foresee in spirit, that Christ should become the
greatest transgressour, mur^herer, adulterer, blasphemer, that ever was, or
could be in all the world. For he being made a Sacrifice for the sins of the
whole world, is not now an innocent person and without sins, is not now the
Son of God borne of the Virgin Mary, but a sinner which has and carries the
sin of Paul, who was a blasphemer, an oppressor, and a persecutor: of Peter
which denied Christ: of David which was an adulterer, a murderer, and caused
the Gentiles to blaspheme the name of the Lord. And briefly which has and
bears all the sins of all men in his, body that he might make satisfaction
for them with his own blood. -- He verily is innocent, because he is the
unspotted and undefiled Lamb of God: but because he bears the sins of the
world, his innocence is burdened with the sins and guilt of the whole world.

Whatsoever sins I and thou and we all have done or shall d^^ hereafter, they
are Christ's own sins as verily as if he himself had done them. -- But what
is it to bear? The Sophisters answer to be punished. Very well, but wherefore
is Christ punished?
Is it not because he has sin and bears sin? -- So Luther. See Gerhard
de justif. p. 207*
I pass others for the present.

Lastly, you call him a Dedalian Divine, and say he makes 6.
no clever work when he jumbles together the active and passive Mr. G.
obedience of Christ and subjecteth them to the same consideration in respect
to their performance to the Law.

Answ. Call him as you please, he has not exceeded his mediocrity, here you
prove it not. I find no jumbling. What if he had put them together? they
agree, and are his obedience. What was his taking our nature, what he did and
suffered, his making himself of no reputation, his taking on him the form of
a servant, his being made under the Law, but his obedience, which lasted even
until death? and what but answer to Gods will and commandment on him as our
Surety, what the Law spoke to our Surety?

Less then the whole will not satisfy Gods justice, will not justify,
procure our freedom from sin, and eternal life. I will try that with you
when you please. So that yet he has quitted himself.

Sect. 10. But before you leave him you play the Crier. If any man or woman
longs for contradictions, or other absurdities of the blood, I can yet releeve
them out of this tract of Mr. W.

Surely that office does not become you, you wanted an office when you took up
that, the Ware you vent is no commodity, it is not appetible, adversaries only
desire them in* such as they oppose for their own advantage. O how corruption
pleases it self with them! What a precious dish is it to please your admirers
in this your opinion! Let us examine the matter.

P. 6. He affirms, and that truly (as you conceive) faith to P. 30.
be the first and radical grace and virtue of renovation. I will 1.
agree with you both. Where is the contradiction or absurdity? Answ.
you say, yet p. 5. in his definition of faith he supposes the subject or
person in whom it is wrought to be regenerate, which doubtless is as much as
to be renewed.

Sir, are not faith and all graces wrought together, and Answ.
at once? are they not together? is the subject then a believer, and not
regenerate, and not renewed? Is not faith that which is born of God, and the
subject in that name regenerate and renewed? What is regeneration or renovation
but works of God by his spirit inabling to believe, etc. and is it not
necessary that in order of nature inabling to believe be before faith? This
will never save a man or woman's longing, nor tickle the Reader unless he be a
believer of you on those terms of Pythagoras his scholars, Ipse dixit, he
said it. Let us try another.

Again, p. 9. he affirms that God does account and judge 2.
of all persons and things so as they are, and yet p. 11. gran^th Mr. G.
that God accounted Job his enemy, which he was not.

Mr. W. said not that God counted Job his enemy, but Answ.
as Jobs speech: and then it is so asserted in an improper sense, and that
distinct to the other which was first named, so that this is no contradiction:
had he said the word is so taken, universally, always, still, (which you
untruly charge him with before) it had been somewhat to purpose, now it is
neither contradiction nor absurdity. Mr. W. professedly lays down diverse
senses of the word, and that with a sometimes -- as in that eleventh and tenth
page. Why did you not make more contradictions as many as he did put different
acceptations of the word?

So p. 5. he defines faith, which is here said to be imputed 3.
for righteousness to be the supernatural gift and grace of believing, and
yet p. 8. that God imputes a righteousness which Mr. G.
neither consists in any work or works, nor in any grace or virtue inherent,
and p. 12. he says, by imputing* faith for righteousness is meant Gods
setting of Christ's righteousness on the score, and putting it on the account
of every believer.

Faith questionless is a supernatural gift, but that it is Answ.
imputed in a proper sense, he says it not, he blames you for the same, but
still in a relative sense, as it apprehends and applies the righteousness
of Christ.

This righteousness imputed is neither any work or work or works, grace or
virtue inherent in us.

By imputation of Christ's righteousness is meant Gods setting it on the score
of, or putting it on the account of a believer, he sets it on his account,
or really and truly gives the same unto him. Here is not a contradiction to
save a man's longing. It is well for him, not for your credit who beat up the
Drum in Print and cry, If any man or woman, who may say, Parturiunt montes: let
the Reader look for itsg Enlish in your self.

Defining faith which the Apostle says is imputed, he defines 4.
it a strong faith, or faith in the highest degree, so that P. 31.
a weak faith is not capable of Paul's imputation for righteousness. Mr. G.


It is true he says, this faith of Abraham was not weak, Answ.
but a strong faith and belief without staggering, in that place. Does he say
the faith that is imputed must be strong or not imputed? Where says he, that a
true faith, if not strong and a weak faithed Christian must to Hell? No, it is
another question. Mr. W. holds faith justifying as a hand receiving, so it
receives the treasure be it never so weakly it inricheth, so it receives
Christ and his righteousness it justifies strong, and weak belongs to the
more and less, not to the nature of faith simply.

This also troubles you, that the spirit of God in working Mr. G.
faith confirms the heart with confidence and firm persuasion. Answ.
But why are you troubled? Is not the heart by nature weak, and do not the
works of such an one show it? Ezekiel. 16. Do not all graces strengthen, and
shall faith, the chiefest, not confirm?

Does it trouble you that he says, the spirit of God working faith confirms
the heart with confidence? it needs not, for whether confidence be of the
nature of that mixed habit faith (as I think) or the effect of faith, it must
^eeds confirm the heart. It needs not that he calls ^t a persuasion, it
was so truly called before you were born, and if it did not persuade, how does
the soul assent?

And as for firmness, it being a part of the inward and ^idden man which is
incorruptible, a part of the everlasting Kingdom of Christ, it must be
acknowledged firm; infused ^abits are so, all: they have more or less
firmness in them.

Lastly, whereas Mr. W. says that God sets Christ's ^^ghteousnesse on the
score, and puts it on the account of ^very believer; you would know whether his
meaning be ^^at God accounts every believer to have done and suffered; the
^ings which Christ did and suffered; or other tolerable constru^^ion.

I answer, his putting to account is such a valid dona^^on of the same to a
believer, that he by faith in Christ (...) as if himself had satisfied. We by
him died, we by ^im fulfilled the Law. He for them paid the ransom by his
^^ath, he for them fulfilled the Law in his life: so that now in ^im and by him
every true Christian man may be called a fulller of the Law. Thus the Church of
England in her Homily.

To your ifs.

If God puts the righteousness of Christ it self upon a be^evers Mr. G.
score, he puts the merit of Christ's righteousness upon his score also, for
these are inseparable: If he puts the me^t of Christ's righteousness upon his
score, he must put all the ^uits and effects of his merit also, for these
likewise are in^^^arable as the other, and so God shall have accounted every
^leever to have redeemed, justified, and saved the world.

I answer, God puts the righteousness of Christ on ^he score of a believer
and the merit also, and so the ef^^cts of his merit are communicated. So that
hereby man (...) just, has what to answer God requiring doing to life, and
threatening death for sins, Christ his righteousness and merits, and hence is
he justified, saved, etc. And yet follows not that God should account every
believer Sa^iour of the world. Your consequence is an absurd Popish one,
reasons are given by our learned Protestants answering Sivere imputaretur nobis
justitia Christi, profecto non minus justi haberi censerique deheremus qua^
ipse Christas, proinde redemptores and salvaroresmundi, quod est absurdum. Nos
autem absurdu^ dicimus. Tantum praecario, id est aliunde and in alio. Rursus
fieri non potest ut qui imputative justus est, sit redemptor mundi and
servator, sed tantum servatus and redemptus. Cham. de justif. c. 20. P. 23 24.
Ejusdem causae omnia effecta in unum individaum consundere. Quis neget solis
calorem applicatum arboribus, esse causam generatorum fructuum omnium, neque
tamen quisquam adeo insanit, u Piro applicaret generationem omnium sructuum,
quia piro vidit applicatum solis calorem Causa est, quia long differunt calor
and applicatio coloris. Calor consideratur in ipso sole unde manat in omnes at
bores, sed applicatio attenditur omnibus arboribus, ut non s^^ omnibus idem
actus communis, revera alius actus est cum calor applicatur Pito, and alim cum
Pomo and cum nuci and deinceps. Eadem ratio est justitiae communis est
servandis in viram aeternam, quandoquidem nulsum est aliud nomen sub caelo m
quo nos oporter salutem assequi, sed sua suit Paulo justitiae impuratio, sua
Petro. Johanm, jacobo. Absurdissuna ergo consequentia, imputari Paul's
redemptionem Petri, Iohann^, Iacobi, and aliorum Id. c. 21 P.3. In an answer to
an objection of Salmeton.
Bellarmine, whose it is against imputed righteousness. If the righteousness
of Christ (says Bellarmine) should be truly imputed unto us, truly we ought to
be accounted and thought no less righteous then Christ himself, and therefore
Redeemers and Saviors of the world, which is absurd. Cham. answering him,
denies the consequence in these words. We (Protestants) say it to be an absurd
thing, and denies us equally just, for as much as he has it inherently, a se,
from himself, and is per se justus, just of himself, when as we inherently are
unjust, and have our righteousness only by favor, that is elsewhere and in
another: and adds. Again, it cannot be that he that is just by imputation
should be a Redeemer of the world, and Savior, but only redeemed and saved.

Elsewhere he answers this to be, to pour all effects of the same cause into
one individual thing. Who would deny the heat of the Sun applied to trees
to be the cause of all fruits brought forth? Yet none is so mad as to give
unto the Peare-tree the bringing forth of all fruits, because he sees the
heat of the Sun applied to the Peare-tree. The reason follows. The reason
is, heat and application of heat have a far difference.

Heat is considered in the Sun it self, from whence it passes to all the
trees; but the application thereof is given to all the trees: so that it is not
the same common act to all, indeed it is one act when as the heat of the Sun
is applied to a Peare-tree, another when to an Apple Tree, and when to a
Nut-tree, and so for the rest. This he applies. There is the same reason of
the righteousness of Christ which is common to all that shall be saved to
eternal life, for as much as there is no other name under Heaven in whom we
ought to attain salvation. But Paul had his imputation of righteousness,
Peter his, and so John and James. It is therefore a most absurd consequence,
that the redemption of Peter, James, and the rest, should be imputed unt Paul.
Doctor Ames answering the same objection, lays down the Protestants tenent.

1. Christ's righteousness to be so 1. Christi justitiam, eatenus nobis
imputari ut cjus virtue, nos perinde justi censeamur coram Deo, ac si nosmer
ipsi in nobis haberemus quo justi coram ipso censeamur.
far imputed unto us, that we by the virtue thereof should be accounted so
just God, as if 2. Justitiam Christi imputati singulis fidesibus secundum eorum
particularem necessitatem, non secundum universalem quem habet valorem, sicut
gemma maximi pretii, quae datur pro variis captivis redimendis, applicatur
singulis non secundum universame aestimationem, sed secundum cujusque captivi
necessiratem: absurd igitur fit mentio mandi in applicatione singulari.
we our selves had that by which we are accounted righteous before the Lord.

2. The righteousness of Christ to be accounted to particular believers
according to their Particular 3. Justitia Christi non imputatur nobis ut
causis, sed ut subjectis tantum: ineptissime igitur insert Bellarminuss nos
posse dici redemptores aur salvatores, quia sumus redempti and salvati. Ame.
Bell. enerv. 10. 4. p. 139.
necessity, not according to all the worth of it, as a precious stone of great
price, which is given for ^he redeeming of diverse Captices, is applied to
particulars, not according to the universal worth, Ridicula illatio nam
redemptor and salvator est non qui accipit redemptionem and salu tem alterius
opera sibi impulata: sed qui praestitir alteri redemptionem and salutem sua
opera efficaci. Abimputatione igitur hujus insliti^^ redempti and salvati recte
affirmamur, sed redemptores a nemine qui mentis compos est appellamut.
Postremo, and illud perpenden dum, Christi justitiam non imputari huic aut
^isti credenti, secundum totam latitudinem efficaciae, fed prout unusquisque
illa opus habet. Non igitur Petro imputarur ut generale pretium redemptionis
pro omnibus, sed ut pretium qua illius anima in particulari redimatur, cujusque
merito ille in particulari ad vitam gloriae evchatur. Ex tali autem impuratione
hujus justitiae neque colligi potest nos aeque justos effe ac Christum, neque
omnino tedempteres dicendos. Dr. Dav. de justif hab. c. 24 ad arg. sextum p 331.
but according to the necessity of every Captive: mention therefore of the
world is absurdly made in particular application.

3. The righteousness of Christ is not imputed unto us as causes, but only as
Subjects thereof. Bellarmine therefore most unsitly infers us to be capable
of the name of Redeemers or Saviors, because we be redeemed and saved.

Our late Learned Bishop of Salisbury answers the same argument, and to that
part says, It is a ridiculous inference, for he is a Redeemer and a Savior,
not who receives redemption and salvation, another work imputed unto him;
but who performs redemption and salvation by his own effectual work.
Therefore we are rightly affirmed redeemed, and saved, from the imputation of
this righteousness, but we are called Redeemers by none that are in their
right wits. Last of all, that also is to be considered, Christ's righteousness,
cannot be imputed to this or that believer according to the whole latitude of
its efficacy, but as every one has need of it. It is not therefore imputed to
Peter a the general price of redemption for all, but as the price by which a
soul in particular is redeemed, and by whose merit he in particular is exalted
to eternal life. But from such an imputation of this righteousness, it can
neither be gathered that we are equal'y as just as Christ, nor at all to be
called Redeemers.

If we look on the truth of the righteousness which is imputed Si veritatem
justitiae nobis imputatae spectes non minus justi censemur coram Deo ac
Christus, nec tamen redemptores. Luc. Trel. p. 94.
to us, we are accounted no less just before God then Christ, and yet we are
not Redeemers. See the place.

Thus what you oppose to imputed righteousness as absurdity is opposed by
Papists, and the inference showed to be most absurd by the learned Protestants
against them, to their Bar you stand and must make an answer. In a word,
though every member has communion with the head Christ, and partaketh for, and
according to his need, as a member of a natural body from the natural head,
yet has he not Christ's merits to give to others, more then a member in the
body, suppose the finger, has life from the head and heart, to give to the
feet and toes: and this you may take as Master Walkers own answer.

Sect. 11. Come we now to the confirmation of the exposition Mr. W. gave,
neglecting what you fasten on him before sufficiently cleared; and many vain
lines together, p. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. for, debent neg'igi, they ought
to be neglected.

Mr. Walker judging the Apostle the best interpreter of himself, argues for a
tropicall sense, from Romans 2. 26. etc. where the word (...) to be accounted or
imputed, is first used. If the Uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the
Law, shall not his Uncircumcision be accounted for Cirumcision? from whence he
gathers that as by a double trope (at large explicated) Uncircumcision taking
in with it and comprehending the righteousness of the Law shall be accounted
and accepted for the state of an holy and righteous man, one circumcised in
heart, though he be uncircumci^and in a Gentile outward estate.

So by Aorobams believing by a Metalepsis or double trope the Apostle does
understand Abraham's standing in the state of a true believer united by one
spirit to God in Christ, and having communion of his satisfaction and
righteousness, faith comprehending the perfect rightebusnesse and full
satisfaction of Christ to be accounted to him given to him for righteousness,
or that which makes him righteous.

To this. ( Passing what you say this Scripture would do Mr. G.
if managed to throw down his interpretation, and the slight sum of all
granted, being but a cipher in your account, apparently such (as you say)
because you do but say both.)

1. By way of answer you demand, What if he could prove Mr. G.
that here were trope upon trope, and mountains of metonymies? Does this prove
a necessity either of the same kind of tropes or figures in other Scriptures,
which yet is the strength of the argument?

Answ. Mr. Walkers intent is not to prove a necessity by this argument, but
that the Apostle (the best expounder of himself) thus uses the phrase in
another place in the same Epistle as is here interpreted, that it is not
therefore so strange, harsh, and uncouth an expression, and figure of speech,
and not to be found in all his writings besides, as you charge the figurative
interpretation to be. See Mr. W. book p. 352. Tropicall speeches are usual,
and that is manifest place suting with this.

And this may suffice for this argument, your answer unto it, the rest p. 34,
35, 36, 37. are but impertinencies, which I may neglect without giving you
advantage or the least damage to Mr. W. cause: there is nothing unsound but
might well be maintained against your many words.

Sect. 12. Mr. Walkers first argument is taken from the fourth verse, and is
framed by you thus. That thing which is counted for righteousness brings
with it a reward to the believer, not of debt, but grace, viz. eternal life.
But it is the satisfaction and righteousness of Christ, not faith in a propo
sense, that brings this reward, eternal life with it; therefore it is the
righteousness and satisfaction, and not faith that is imputed for
righteousness.

To the proposition you answer by distinction. A thing Mr. G.
may be said to bring with it a reward either of voluntary and free covenant or
compact, or by way of merit and just retribution. In the former sense the
proposition is granted for truth because faith brings with it a reward in this
sense, as well a^ the satisfaction of Christ does in the other.

If he means by way of merit, the proposition is false, so tha^ which is
imputed does not necessarily bring with it a reward (...) such terms, or in
such a way. God in a gracious and free covenant has promised the same (if not
greater) reward to those that shall believe in Jesus Christ, which he has
promised to those that shall keep the whole Law.

Answ. For answer. First, for you distinction of free convenant, and merit in
this our business, I suppose things in it are divided and set in opposition
which God has joined together. For the merit of Christ is the confirmation of
the free covenant. God is so, by Jesus Christ the just, and the covenant is in
his blood, he and his righteousness are the promise of God. What is offered
and tendered in all ordinances for eternal life to faith, or receiving of him,
as Acts 10. 43. by believing and receiving him he is made the Lord my
righteousness, righteousness to me, to which the Lord performs life. The
Apostle shows them subordinate, when as he says we are justified freely by
grace through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth
a propitiation through faith his blood, Romans 4. 24 Your distinction is humane
merits, not the merits of Christ, the Surety of the Covenant.

2. I assert, Mr. Walker intends such a gracious way of merit, and so does
the Apostle disputing against our works, this does in this way infallibly bring
with it the reward, eternal life; which faith in a proper sense, not taking in
the righteousness and merit of Christ, does not, cannot more then man's works.

3. There is nothing else can do it says Mr. W. It is a gracious way
satisfying justice, the Apostle says, the spirit is life, that is, the soul
lives eternally, because of righteousness, the righteousness of Christ
imputed, Romans 8. 10. Hanc ipsam quam nos asse^mus justitiam imputatam. Cham. de
just. c 2. Sect. 59.
there by righteousness the Apostle means this same im^uted righteousness
which we assert againsi Papists.

4. Hence the assumption is sound, for howsoever faith ^n a relative sense and
Christ's righteousness imputed, (faith ^eing but the hand, the applying
instrument, Christ righ^eousnesse applied that alone which justifies as the
meriorious and formal cause) have a sweet and harmonious greement in our
justification. It is not so when as faith ^s taken in a proper sense, though it
be faith in Christ. Whence your selse, Armimius, and Socinus, asserting the
^mputation of faith, add, and not Christ's righteousness im^uted, and so put
them in opposition in the matter of Justi^^cation.

When as you lay down the manner of either, viz. that Christ justifies by way
of merit, satisfaction, and atone^nent making with God for sin. Here is a
truth, but not ^^l, for there must be imputation of it, real donation also ^f
Gods part to make us righteous, and faith must concur ^ot in a proper sense as
accepted for the righteousness of ^he Law in it self (as you say) but (as you
say also) as it ^ringeth us into communion of Christ's perfect righteousness,
by which says, (as by an hand receiving riches, riches do ^ake rich the
receiver) receiving the righteousness of Christ that makes righteous; faith
is as the hand, the ^ighteousnesse that which as riches corporal that way, do
^ake us thus spiritually rich, that is, righteous in the sight of God. Faith
does it relatively or by a figure not in a proper sense which you stand for:
thus much you say, also.

5. When as you say, the Lord has promised the same reward, ^r a greater to
those that shall believe in Jesus Christ, then which he has promised to those
that keep his whole Law, disputing against the relative sense for faith in a
proper sense. What does result but the Servetion, Socinian, and Arminian tenet,
delivered also by Bertius, faith is accounted for the Fides habetur pro omni
legis justitia quam nos praestare renebamur. See Sybrand. p. 9. ad Bert.
whole righteousness of the Law which we are bound to perform, which also
they attribute to gratuide acceptance.

Sect. 13. Mr. Wrs. third argument is taken from the 6. and 11. v. That the
thing imputed by God is properly righteousness, such as being imputed brings
forgiveness of iniquity and covers sins, and so makes the believer blessed.
Now there is no righteousness to be found amongst all mankind but Christ's
perfect righteousness and satisfaction and that is a perfect propitiation for
all sins, therefore it is the righteousness which is imputed for justification.

Of this argument you say it is built clean besides the foundation it
claims, and when you prove what you say, you shall have an answer. But to
what you answer.

1. You say, That the conclusion Christ's righteousness must needs be that
which is imputed for righteousness in a proper sense, is diametrally opposite
unto himself in several examined passages, particularly to that which says
faith comprehending in it the righteousness of Christ is imputed for him,
which differ greatly.

1. Though faith and Christ's righteousness differ, and Answ.
are opposed diametrally in your sense and acceptance they are subordinate in
Mr. Walkers.

2. And when faith is said to be imputed taking in the the righteousness of
Christ; You know Mr. Walker says faith is imputed in an improper sense, and
that Christ's righteousness is that which is imputed in a proper sense; that is
it which alone properly imputed makes us righteous.

2. You blame his understanding the Apostles phrase of imputing righteousness,
v. 6. supposing a proper pre-existent righteousness for the matter of such
imputation which is one of his mistakes.

I answer, Mr. Walkers understanding had been blame worthy, had he supposed
otherwise; for a proper perfect righteousness is necessary to make one so
righteous.

Gods people are holy, unreprovable, unblamable in Gods sight, perfectly just,
can that be without righteousness?

Mr. Bradshaw shows, that, the proper matter of Justification is justice or
innocence not caused or produced by the act of Justification, but existing some
way or other before, for a person is not therefore just because he is
justified, but he is therefore justified Mr. Bradsh. treat. justif. c. 2. Sect.
10.
because he is just. The justice of the party justified, being the cause of his
justification, and not his justification the cause of his justice.

Papist and Protestant agree in this, the one putting inherent Cum
justificationem sine justitia constituere, sit insomnium sine somno cogitare
Gerh. de justif. p. 135. Justificationis formam justitia constare cerru^ est,
quoniam justificamur sive justi constituimur per justitiam nobis a Deo donatam.
Wetton, de reconcil. par. 1. l. 2. c. 2. p. 34.
righteousness the formal cause, which being imperfect, is truly rejected by
us, and so faith in a proper sense. The other put the perfect righteousness of
Jesus Christ.

It is certain, says Mr. Wotton, that the form of Justification consists
in righteousness, because we are justified or constituted just by
righteousness given to us from God, which he shows out of Papists and
Protestants.

The Apostle says, by the obedience of Christ we shall be constituted
righteous. It is you and Arminius that talk of making just without any justice
at all.

That Mr. W. is mistaken you prove.

1. Because it is not said (...), but without the article, (...), which
intimates he speaks not here of any particular or special righteous. (...)
fixed in any subject as the righteousness of Christ is.

Here you grant righteousness, whether it be fixed in a 1.
subject or not, you seem so at least.

And when as you tell us of righteousness not in a subject, you tell us of an
accident without a subject; where was your Logique? There is no righteousness
whether it be general or particular, but it is in some subject; so is the
inherent righteousness, of which Papists in their opinion, so faith in that
opinion, and so the righteousness of Christ.

To your second, Then the righteousness of Christ must be 2.
imputed for the righteousness of Christ. We answered before. It is but a
borrowed jengle.

Thirdly, you answer, The righteousness here imputed is 3.
without works, which Christ's is not; works are the essence thereof.

To which you know is answered, the works which are excluded are not works
simply, and namely of Christ, but our own works.

Against this you argue, or say, such a distinction as this is, is without any
foundation in this or in any other Scripture.

But not truly, for as the Scripture denies Justification by the works of the
Law, so it establishes Justification by the righteousness and obedience of
Christ, Romans 5. 17, 18, 19. by this is there a perfect supply of what was not
in us, but should have been to life, as the Apostle, Romans 8. 4. and Romans 10.
4. and when as the Apostle objecteth, Do we make the Law of God void through
faith? He answers, God forbid, and yea we establish the Law. So does faith
applying the righteousness of Christ that establishes the Law.

The Church of England saw this, you might have learned it there. Where as it
lay not in us to do, (that was impossible Homil. salv. p. 14.
before) he provided a ransom for us, that was the most precious body and
blood of his own most dear and best beloved Son Jesus Christ, who besides
this ransom fulfilled the Law lb.
for us perfectly: and from the third of the Romans 8. and 10. our Church, there
must be on Christ's part to justification, justice, that is the satisfaction of
Gods justice, or the price of our redemption by the offering of his body, and
shedding of his blood with fulfilling of the Law perfectly.

So the grace of God does not shut out the justice of God in our Justification,
but only shulteth out the justice of man, that is to say the justice of our
works, as to be merits deserving our justification. lb.


Whereas all the world was not able of their selves to pay any part toward
their ransom, it pleased our heavenly Father of his infinite mercy, without
any our desert or deserving to prepare for us the most precious jewels of
Christ's body and blood, whereby our ransom might be fully paid, the Law
fulfilled and his justice fully satisfied. So that Christ is now the
righteousness of all them that truly do believe in him, he for them paid the
ransom by his death, he for them fulfilled the Law in his life, so that now in
him and by him every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller of the Law,
for as much as that which lb.
our infirmity lacked, Christ's justice has supplied. Here is the explication
of our article of Justification, and thus in the Art. of Ireland, Art. 35.
Other Authors are needless, these enough.

And hence may you perceive the necessity of the distinction; the Lew and
justice of God are hereby satisfied, which cannot be where works are simply
excluded, that it is not vain and frivolous, our justification else is
impossible.

Sect. 14. You argue that if the righteousness God is here 4.
said to impute, be the righteousness of Christ, then the description thereof,
v. 7. and 8. is impertinent and improper, being laid down, in imputing sins,
covering sins, not imputing sins; the imputing of Christ's righteousness in
the sense pretended is much more then forgiveness of iniquity or not imputing
sin. See Mr. Gatak. saepe contra Lucium. p. 9. 1. p. 10, l, 11, 21, 45 82.
98. 3. 64. 4. Imo vero hoc nondum a te demonstratum est, nec vero unquam
demonstrabitur, par. 1. Sect. 8. nu. I 2 p. 45. He to Piscator. Remissio
peccatorum fit per justitiam imputatam perfecta^. So Pareus. Castig. Bell. de
justif. p. 389. Estque justificatio revera proprius and verus justitiae
esfectus, quoquo modo ea justitia imputari sive communicari nobis intelligatur.
p. 34 M. Bradsh. p. 34.


For answer. You must prove that forgiveness of sins, etc. are the
description of that righteousness imputed. It is but begged.

Imputation of righteousness is not the same with forgiveness of sins. It
is more, it is the cause of remission of sins, this an effect of
righteousness imputed. This righteousness imputed brings forgiveness with
it, covers sin, making the believer in that respect blessed.

Remission of sins is caused by perfect righteousness imputed.

Mr. Wotton confesses Justification an effect of righteousness, and
Justification is indeed the proper and the true effect of righteousness what
way soever, that righteousness is imputed or communicated unto us.

Yea, remission of sins is an effect of Justification. Pardon is neither the
whole nor any essential part of Justification, but only a contingent effect
of it.

Finally you say, Gods imputing righteousness (in this place) is meant only
his justifying of men, or (as Mr. W. p. 10.) a dealing with men according as if
they were righteous.

It is so, not in deed, but in the effect thereof: indeed imputation of
righteousness is the cause, justification the effect thereof. Mr. W. says not
so, but that it is Gods accounting them righteous, and dealing with them
accordingly.

To that which follows I may say, that, to impute See Pareus on Romans 4. 7.
cited elsewhere.
righteousness is not the description of the act of absolution. It is an
effect following on that, upon imputation of righteousness, not imputation of
sin follows and no condemnation.

The same may be said to what is alleged out of the 11. verse. being
justified, and righteousness imputed differ as the cause and the effect.
Imputation goes before remission Causalitateimputatio praecedit remissionem,
and Recessario prae-requiritur. Polan. in Daniel. p. 324.
as a cause, and is necessarly pre-required.

When as you say, being justified, cannot be without righteousness, either it
is that which is inherent or imputed; not in herent, it is against the scope of
the Apostle denying Justification by works or habits whence they flow, and
therefore not by faith, which is a part of inherent righteousness considered in
a proper sense: therefore it must be by the righteousness of Christ; the
righteousness which is by faith as the word calls it.

From thence Tossanus gives to us as Saint Paul's Thereme. Unde extruit Paulus
istud theorema, justitiam nostram non esse virtutem moralem aut habitualem
justitiam, sicut cum Pharisae is Pontificii volunt, sed imputationem justitiae
Christi. Toss. ad Romans c. 4. p. 4.
Whence Paul lays down that Theoreme. Our righteousness not to be moral
virtue or habitual justice, as with the Pharisees the Pontificians would have
it; but the imputation of the righteousness of Christ.

To that you believe, that if the best interpreters be consulted, not one will
be found to contradict this interpretation of the phrase imputing to
righteousness in this place, or by righteousness to understand the
righteousness of Christ.

I hope your infidelity is not invincible, many things are in Interpreters
which you do not look after.

Though Gods imputing righteousness justifies; yet these differ as cause and
effect as has been showed. And

When you say they understand not the righteousness Ad Romans 4. 3. Ad
justitiam. Hic enim finis and scopus fidei ut imputatione justitiae Christi
peream apprehensi justificemur. ^b.
of Christ. It is apparently against all Protestant writers, who teach the
righteousness of Christ to be that which is imputed, and not faith in a proper
sense, as also from this that they denying the proper sense, are for the
relative and improper sense.

Beza to those words, to righteousness. For this is the end and scope of
faith, that we should be justified by the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ apprehended by it.

Who also adds, But there is in Sed est in verbis Hypallage, nam pro pry
dicitur Deus imputare justitiam per ^idem, ut mox loquitur Apostolus, v. 6. and
11. Quid autem intelligitur justitiae nomine, exposuimus adversus Sophistas;
supra, 1. 17. etc. 3. 20.
the words an Hypallage, (a figure so called) for God is properly said to
impute righteousness by faith as the Apostle by and by speaks, verse. 6. and
11. But what is understood by the word righteousness, we have expounded
before, against the Sophisters; above, cap. 1. v. 17. and 3. 20.

When Bellarmine said, our Adversaries Nullam in Scripturis aut Patribus locum
hactenus inveni^e potuerunt adversarii, ubi legeretur Christi justitiam nobis
imputari ad justitiam, vel nos justos esse per imputatam nobis Christi
obedientiam, e^go hoc falsum est.
(Protestants) could never hitherto find a place in the Scriptures or Fathers,
where it is read that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us for
righteousness, or that we be just by the imputed obedience of Christ,
therefore this is false. Pareus answers.

The Antecedent is false, for it is expressly Antecedens est falsum, legitur
enim express, Credenti fides sua imputatur; and mox, Beatus cuiDeus imputat
justitiam absque operibus. Haec Apostolo esse aequipollentia tam est evidens ut
negari non possit; proinde aequipollentia sunt, fidem imputari ad justitiam,
and justitiam imputa^i absque operibus. Evidenter igitur habetur justitiam qua
credentes justificamur nobis a Deo imputa^i, seu esse justitiam nobis a Deo
imputa^i, seu esse justitiam nobis imputatam. Cujus vero est haec justitia, id
exponit idem Apostolus, c. sequente, 5. 19 -- Habet Adversarius ubi leger^mus:
inde enim sic, ^ustitia qua credentes ^isicamur, nobis imputatur a Deo, Romans 4
5, 6. Justitia q^a credentes justificamur est justitia seu obedientia Christi,
Rome 5. 19. igitur justitia seu obedientia Christi, nobis a Deo imputatur.
Castig. p. 457.
read, To him that believes, his faith is imputed; and by and by, Blessed is
he to whom God imputes righteousness without works. That these are
equipollent to the Apostle, is so evident that it cannot be denied: therefore
they are equivalent, faith to be imputed to righteousness, and righteousness
to be imputed without works. It is therefore evidently found, righteousness,
by which we believers are justified, to be imputed unto us from God, or to be
imputed righteousness. Whose this righteousness is, the same Apostle
expounds in the following chap. 5. 19. Now our Adversary (Bellarmine) has
where we have read it, from thence thus, (we reason) Righteousness by which
believers are justified, is imputed unto us from God, Romans 4. 5, 6. the
righteousness by which we believers are justified, is the righteousness or
obedience of Christ, Romans 5. 19. therefore the righteousness or obedience of
Christ is imputed to us of God.

The same learned man, Neither is Nec resert quod Apostolus non dixit beatus
cui Deus imputat Christi justitiam: sed absolute, cui Deus imputat justitiam:
justitia enim imputata recte dicitur justitia Christi, quia Christus sua
obedientia eam nobis acquisivit -- imo Christi justitia express vocatur, Romans
5. 18, 19. Pareus Castig. ^^. p. 388.
it any thing that the Apostle said not, he is happy to whom God imputes the
righteousness of Christ; but absolutely, to whom God imputes righteousness:
for imputed righteousness is rightly called the righteousness of Christ,
because Christ acquired it by his obedience -- I, it is expressly called the
righteousness of Christ, Romans 5. 18, 19. The same Pareus, Ad Romans 4. 3, 5. p.
484.
justitia imputata Christi justitia dicitur, imputed righteousness is called
Christ's righteousness.

Our Ames. We read every where Legimus passim apud Paulum justos nos fieri and
justificari, per Christum, per Christi mortem, sanguinem, redemptionem
obedientiam and justitiam, and illam justitiam imputari nobis a Deo absque
oberibus. Bellar. Enerv. to. 4. p. 137.
in Paul, that we are made just and justified by Christ, by Christ's death,
blood, redemption, obedience, and righteousness, and that righteousness to be
imputed to us of God without Justificationem Apostolus describit, non sola
remissione peccatorum, sed etiam Justitiae Christi mputatione, ut apparet ex c.
4. ad Romans v. 6. and 7. Ge^a^d. de just^s. Sect. 63.
works.

To the same purpose, see Sybran. declar. Vorst. p. 94.

I will end this with that learned Doctor of our Church, Doctor Whitaker, to
Dureus, saying, our Doctrine of imputative Whitaker against Camp. and D^reus
Englished. p. 224.
putative righteousness to be against the word.

Thus you speak like a Jesuit, but what does the Scripture more celebrate?
Romans 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. a clear text for it, so that there being more then one
such Interpreters, you may believe it.

When Musculus says, the righteousness of God which is Justitia Dei qu^
gratis imputatur est non imputari peccatum.
freely imputed, is not to impute sin; He intends not that they be formally
one and the same, but in the effect, this as an effect follows that; so does
he call remission of sins our righteousness, as Mr. W. cites him, p. 348.
the book is not in mine hands.

Sect. 15. Mr. Walkers fourth argument runs thus, summed up by it self.
Whatsoever is here said to be imputed, is, that which serves for righteousness
to justification. Christ's righteousness is that which serves for
righteousness to justification, Romans 5. 19. Romans 8, 4. Romans 10, 4. Ergo, it is
that which under the name of faith is said to be imputed.

You answer, This was for substance before propounded and answered. To which I,
if so, repetition will be vain on both sides. Let it go.

You add, Though nothing but the righteousness or satisfaction of Christ will
serve meritoriously unto justification. Several things do ministerially, the
Word, the Minister, and so faith in Christ, etc.

Mr. Wr. is not about instrumentals in this argument, but that, which imputed,
justifies, which is (says he) by the Scriptures the righteousness of Christ.

When as you grant nothing meritoriously serving but the righteousness of
Christ, though we take it in part, yet we must have more, it must be also a
formal cause, or all one with it; Doctor Davenant may teach you to speak out.

Truly in Justification such a formal Revera in justificatione, talis causa
formalis ponenda est quae simul and meritoria esse possit nisi enim contineat
illam dignitatem in se, propter quam homo rite justificatus reputetur, nunquam
erit formalis causa per quam justificatus existit in conspectu Dei. De instit.
habit. el. 22. p. 312.
cause is to be put, which withal may be the meritorious cause: for unless it
contain that worth in it self, for which a man may be rightly accounted
justified, it will never be the formal cause by which a man stands justified
in the sight of God.

Grant then this meritorious cause imputed to justify, it satisfies Mr.
Walker, and serves the turn, else not.

He confesses and contendeth faith an instrument by which we have fellowship
with that righteousness to justification, faith being as the hand receiving
and applying the same, by which righteousness it is that we are justified, and
not faith in a proper sense; it not being the hand that properly makes rich,
but what is received by it: which you cannot endure (with the Remonstrants)
though a common Protestant expression in this controversy against the Romanist
denying also the proper sense of faith.

To omit that faith is not the righteousness of Christ urged, Romans 5. 19. nor
righteousness in which a man can stand before God, be made just, said to be
holy and unreprovable, and unblamable in Gods sight, perfected for ever, as the
man is that is justified, or otherwise then taken in a Relative sense to the
object thereof.

Sect. 16. Mr. Ws. fifth argument is, That this exposition is warranted by
other places of Scripture, which he proves out of Psh. 100. as the only
place: see the place.

This you bring on the stage, and say it has su h a visor on the face of it,
that a man cannot tell of what shape it is, only it is evident from his own
words, that here he starts, or rather conjures up a new conclusion as far
differing from what be labored to conclude, as the East is from the West.

Good Sir, if ( by reason of the visor on the face of it) a man cannot tell of
what shape it is, how is the latter so evident? may not a man question you for
the latter, professing the former, that a man cannot tell of what shape it is;
or are you more? this, and what follows such a profession must be accounted
roving.

But how prove you such a differing new conclusion? he writes (say you) that
the imputing or accounting of a thing for righteousness is no more but
declaring a man thereby to be righteous, and giving him the testimony of
righteousness.

Thus you deliver him. I find it not so in his Printed Copy, and even there
his conclusion is what was to be concluded, therefore this is to be judged the
best exposition.

Besides what he speaks of declaring is added for farther explication of what
God did, when as he imputed righteousness to Phineas as himself. God upon
this act gave him testimony and declared and judged him to be a righteous man
truly justified. But by this reasoning say you, be seems to imply that a man
is not constituted or made righteous, or truly and really justified by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness or satisfaction it self unto him, but
only that be is declared to be such, etc.

There is no such implication. That is necessarily employed by Gods declaration,
for God cannot give testimony contrary to what a man is indeed, God cannot ly,
his judgment is according to truth, and so his testimony; the visor troubles
you. You proceed.

Neither does that Scripture prove that heterogeneall conclusion, it does not
import any testimony from God of his personal righteousness or justified
estate before God, but only the righteousness of the particular act.

Surely that act did show him (as Mr. Wr.) united to Christ, and a partaker of
righteousness by faith, on which God gave him testimony.

And I suppose a righteous act imports personal righteousness inherent,
which are inseparable from righteousimputed, by which righteousness imputed,
that which is inherent, the acts thereof and person are justified. From this,
not inherent righteousness or acts thereof, it is that man is perfectly just
and so denominated. And thus Mr. Wr. passes to the Confutation of the false
exposition made by Socinus and other Heretics his disciples, etc.

Here you charge Mr. Wr. to be an Heretic maker, which Mr. Wr. may easily
discharge with repetition of the same words, and resolve his making Heretics
into Mr. John Goodwine as the maker of an Heretic maker, etc. The truth is,
if the interpretation be heretical (as some have said before Mr. W. as before)
not Mr. Wr. but Mr. John Goodwine, etc. have made themselves such by embracing
and broaching the same with those Heretics: and though Mr. Wotton be dead,
his opinion lives in his works and such as follow him. His fall is the
greater in this by how much the more he is exalted as a Cedar in Lebanen. It is
a truth of him and all the Princes of his opinion. That has been discussed
already, and we have seen Mr. Wr. far from affirming the same, detesting it,
constantly denying you his hand:

And for your appeal to the strong savor of Socinianisme in the beginning of
his fifth argument, you speak of, you neither there nor here doc show in what
that rankness lies. There, if you remember, it had such a Visor on the face
of it, that a man cannot tell what the face of it is, or its complexion.

Farther you say, none of the 3. etc. conceived or delivered that exposition
that is faith is imputed in a proper sense. But it is clear for Socinus; he
holds the proper sense, and so faith imputed. So does Mr. Wotton, you cannot
but know it, and it is your Helena.

But now let us come to Mr. Wr. his arguments, by which he proves the same,
and improveth the false exposition; they are 7. You do not so much as lay them
down or answer formally to any one of them.

All the answer you make is by Questions, and they are but of some things
contained in them, so that all the rest is left unquestioned and unanswered. I
will not do so with your Questions. Let us hear, what are they?

Quest. 1. You would know from what Fountain Mr. W. drankee that draught of
Divinity, that faith Romans 5. 1, 2. taken in a proper sense, should be a part of
our obedience to the moral Law?

You add, entire obedience to the whole Law was required of Adam, but not to
believe in Christ, the Law not being of faith, Gal. 3. 12.

To the first I answer. That faith which justifies in relation to its object,
considered as a work or virtue in a proper sense, is (as is supposed by such
as are learned) commanded in the moral Law. They say:

Where the L. requires me to have no other God, and wills me to have him to
be mine by faith; be wills me to believe in Christ, without whom God never
offers himself to be, nor can be mine, by whom it is I believe in him.

And where the argument runs, I am the Lord thy God, there faith in Christ
is required, to whom be is first a God, and in whom mine.

They take faith in Christ to be a special part of internal worship, such as
when I perform it to Christ, I perform it not to him alone, but to God, not
only himself, but the other persons. He that believes in me, believes not
in me, but in him that sent me.

And so they take it that the moral Law is the perfect rule of our worship of
God.

I suppose faith in Christ undeniably since the fall prescribed and called for
and answered by Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham; by what? but the moral Law. The
Gospel gives indeed, but it is the Law that requires it. They say:

That faith is required in the Law, none ever doubted: faith to all that is
written, then to the Gospel, to God as revealed in Christ, the lively faith
which works by love, which is none but faith in Christ; or else the dead
faith, that which is in the Devils.

Again, that that Grace is but one, and so that it is but the Some faith by
which we believe in Christ and God. Yea that grace, without which other graces
required are not. That radical grace, without which other graces and their
works cannot be such as God requires, such hope, such love, such fear, such
joy, such prayer, such praise, as God requires suitable to him as a God in
covenant and a Father, without which they cannot please God, neither aim at or
attain Gods ends, should not be excluded; the Law that requires those graces
else and their works, requires that faith; and that, if faith in Christ he
not required in the Law, infidelity will not be sin, neither can it condemn
him that is under the same.

That the rule of faith, etc. is Gods will contained in his word, and that the
manner of worship and faith is ordinarily given to the second Commandment.

For Adam in innocence, there might be a bond on him to believe in Christ,
though not as a Lamb and slain, but as only Mediator between God and man
for eternal life. I am sure he was ever the beire and Lord of life, and that
eternal life was for ever in him.

An obedientiall power to believe what ever word or revelation of God we
ordinarily meet with in orthodox Divines, as for obedience to Gods commands
simply, those, at least some, that dispute the contrary, drink deeply of
Arminian streams: had you given us reasons against it, we would have
considered them.

When as you say the Law is not of faith, Gal. 3. 12. It proves not that faith
in a proper sense is not required in the Law, neither need I to find out the
true sense, it not being to purpose.

Our Writers are of this opinion, that faith in Christ is in the Law.

So says he in this cause to that Fides qua opus pertinet ad primam legem
neque evadere potes. Sybrand. ad Bert. p. 57. Quin dicas nos opere legis
justificari, si dixeris nos fide quatenus opus nostrum est justficari.
Arminian Prince Bertius, Faith as a work appertains to the first
Commandment, neither can thou evade it. Thou must say us to be justified by
a work of the Law, if thou shall affirm us justified by faith as a work of
ours. He goes on.

Great Zanchius proves our opinion. Nostram sententiam probat magnus ille
Zanch. de nature. Dei, l. 4. c 2. Legis nomine intelligit omnia quae lex
praecipit; praecipit autem, non tantum externa facta sedimprimis interna^
renovationem, cordis circumcisionem dilectionem Dei, (nota) fidem. Ergo cum
Sctiptura dicit per gratiam Dei nos justifica^i, min^me autem per legem, omnem
renovationem and omnem inte^nam and externam ^onam actionem nostram ab officio
justificandi excludit, and soli gratuito favori ascribit.
By the word Law he understands all which the Law requires, but that
requires not only external works, but chiefly internal renovation,
circumcision of the heart, the Love of God, (note it) faith. When as therefore
the Scripture says we are justified by the grace of God, and not by the Law,
he excludes all renovation, and all internal, and external good action of
ours from the office of justifying, and ascribes it only to free grace.

It is true, the Law of works requires says. Ve^um est legem operu^ requirere
fidem. Cham l 22. c. 2. Sect. 9.


Quest. 2. You require where Wotton or Goodwine teach we are justified
(meritoriously, or else the charge vanishes) by a work, by a work of
obedience to the Law?

Answ. Mr. W. requires of you where he charge you with it in plain words?
his words are they that teach that, faith in a proper sense is counted for
righteousness, do teach that we are justified by a work of obedience to the
Law performed in our own persons: and that God on our behalf requires no
other righteousness for justification: which doctrine he says the Apostle
condemns, that is enough; this, all account inherent righteousness, Popery,
and worse then Popery, where all graces else are conjoined with faith.

To omit that, here you imply justification by a work of the Law, confessed,
so it be not meritoriously, in which I suppose you are alone.

Quest. 3. You demand how Mr. Walker proves that the righteousness imputed to
Abraham was perfect conformity to the Law.

I suppose it is evident, because conformity to the Law is in the definition of
righteousness, which if it be not perfect, has need of pardon, cannot
procure it of the Lord, cannot bear a man ou^ in Gods sight, cannot afford
peace with God, or conscience; can never make a man holy, unblamable,
unreprovable in the sight of God; white as Snow, and whiter then the Snow;
perfect him for ever; all which are true of Abraham by the righteousness which
was imputed, and so is it of the Church by Gods word.

As righteousness was imputed to him, Romans 4. v. 6. 11. so it was perfect
conformity to Gods Law, which Christ's righteousness is, not faith in a proper
sense.

Quest. 4. How does it follow that God must needs err, lie, or judge
unrighteously, if he imputes righteousness without works?

To this Mr. Wolker is not bound to answer, he affirmed it not. But that your
opinion, that God counts faith for righteousness, that is, thinks, judges,
and esteems it to be righteousness in a proper sense, charge God with
error and falsehood in his judgment, and so is blasphemy.

Quest. 5. How Mr. Walker proves that the imputation of faith for
righteousness makes the satisfaction of Christ and his perfect fulfilling of
the Law a vain and needless thing, which Mr. Goodwine conceives it
establishes both the one and the other.

1. I answer. This, if not proved, yet leaves the argument in force to that
part, viz. that it denies the means whereby God is revealed to be infinitely
just, merciful, and wise, which he urged, which has not so much as a question
to undermine it.

2. These are done by Christ our Surety, his perfect obedience in our nature;
in this wisdom, mercy, and justice, are revealed, as Mr. Walker and our
Church in the Homily. With which, though faith in a Relative sense does
consist, yet in a proper sense, excluding the imputation of the righteousness
of Christ to justification, it is opposed, your self putting the one with
Arminius say, and not the other.

Indeed if faith be that righteousness or instead thereof, that of Christ is
vain and void; and if this righteousness of Christ be it, faith in that
sense, (as works are) excluded in this matter, and exclude each other.

This Thesis of thine (says Sybrandus) Faectua Thesis est causa quate statuam
vobis (si tamen vobis ipsis constare vultis) necassario eo tandem deveniendum
esse, ut cum Serveto Socino, etc. meritum, sive satisfactionem pro nobis factam
omnino tollatis, dicatisque neque Christum nobis justitiam peperisse, neque nos
ipsius justitia nobis imputata justifica^i. Ad Bent p. 35.
is a reason why I may conclude (if yet you will be like our selves) you must
at length come to this, that with Servetus and Socinus, etc. ye altogether
take away the merit or satisfaction made for us, and say Christ neither to have
brought forth righteousness to us, nor us to be justified by his
righteousness imputed unto us -- For to what end is the righteousness of
Christ, if it has not in it force of Justifying, and if it justify us not?
Which (say I) it cannot, if faith in a proper sense be imputed for
righteousness.

Let the Reader observe the argument and proof of Mr. Walker, and this answer
of question (as the rest) will appear not to be satisfactory, but a lying
under the burden rather.

Quest. 6. How Mr. Walker can bring it about that the making of Christ's
satisfaction ou^s, as truly as if we had performed the same in our own
persons, should be a means whereby God is revealed infinitely just, wise, and
merciful? Mr. G. conceives that insufficient, because a man having sinned
could not be justified by personal performance of the Law.

1. That the righteousness of Christ's is so truly ours for righteousness as
if we had fulfilled the Law, you bogle not at: our Church is clear; so are
learned Writers. Indeed by faith he and his righteousness are truly ours.

2. Your supposition to be a sinner and personally to perform the Law, is a
contradiction, to fulfill it and not; none of Mr. Wrs.

3. When as Mr. Walker puts Christ's righteousness, his meaning is his
perfect obedience to the Law, our full debt Active and Passive righteousness,
wherein satisfaction for sin is infoulded, so that the person is wholly
fair; God seen to be just, merciful, and wise, this is sufficient.

Quest. 7. Whether God did not dispense with his justice in passing by the
sinner, inflicting punishment upon the innocent, and whether he will call the
one or the other an act of Justice? Mr. G. conceives that Gods justice led him
directly to the sinner to exetute vengeance on him, and that it was his mercy
that led him aside from him that deserved death, to another that had not
deserved it.

1. I answer, God was just and merciful in our Justification by faith in
Christ, as before is largely showed out of the word of God, and orthodox
Writers; neither can either be denied. It is freely by grace to declare his
righteousness. It was an act of justice not denying mercy, and an act of mercy
not excluding justice.

2. Though justice leads to the offender, and not to the innocent party, here
it cannot be so, the case is altened, the L. Christ cannot be said to be
innocent, but as our Surety a sinner, our sins being on his score. He
voluntarily accepted it, and undertook eternally to give these eternal life.
So is he proposed to us since the fall by God himself, his taking our nature,
doing all righteousness, and doing for us, proclaim the same, that he was a
Surety, in this name he must fulfill all righteousness. He must die, it was
his meat and drink to do, and he offered up himself. God spared not his
Son, at his command the sword ar^se and smote Christ, the man that is Gods
fellow, he declared himself righteous.

To exact a debt of a Surety, willingly giving the Creditor the hand, and let
the principal not able to pay, to go free, is justice: mercy indeed, did
sweetly meet in accepting a Surety, and giving him, and Christ accepting the
bargain, and giving himself to be the Surety, whereby that justice was
satisfied.

Quest. 8. What moved Mr. W. to think or say that those that hold imputation
of faith for righteousness should deny communion with Christ in his
satisfaction, when as Mr. G. still affirms that that faith is ordained by God
to bring men into communion and fellowship with Christ in his satisfaction, and
by virtue of such ordination justifies instrumentally, or which is the same,
is imputed for righteousness.

1. He might well so think of Master Wotton, who Quoniam non revera and
proprie sed improprie, and per similitudinem quandam unu^ cum illo corpus
efficimus. De reconcil. p. 16. and p. 110.
though he acknowledges uinon, and that by the Spirit; yet he says we make
one body with Christ, not indeed, and properly, but improperly, and by a
certain similitude.

When as he says it is not indeed, he denies union and communion, which is so
much the more absurd, when as yet he confesses it caused by faith and the
Spirit, then union, by which, there cannot be one more real.

2. You denying the imputation to our Justification, deny union and communion
so far, nay, both seeing they are inseparable.

3. The fellowship you affirm is not to fellowship with the righteousness of
Christ, but the effect thereof or return, pardon, which is not all.

4. When as you say faith justifies instrumentally, etc. yet you deny it as an
hand laying hold of and receiving Christ's righteousness which justifies, that
it so justifies as the hand that receives money makes rich, which though it
be an ordinary expressure of the Learned, you slighted and rejected in the
Pulpit as the Remonstrants, who give it a nuge.

5. For my part I suspect your calling it an instrument there is somewhat under
it, for if so be that faith be acknowledged an instrument indeed, it cannot
justify in a proper sense, which may be the reason that Arminius, etc. deny
it, but figuratively.

No man is ignorant but that by a figure called Metonymia, Nemo ignorant
instrumento per Metonymiam tribui quod est instrumentati, ( as Sybrandus to
Bertius.)p. 72. Si dicis penicillum dealbare parietem, omnes per Metonymiam
intelligunt hoc dici, Penicillo datur quod est materiae, albedinis. ld. p. 77.
that is given to the instrument which does belong to that which the instrument
subserveth: as if you affirm the Pencell to white the wall, all understand
this to be spoken by a Metonymie, that is given to the Pencell which belongs
to the matter, whiting.

This he shows out of Vrsinus. It is commonly said we are justified Vulgo
dicitur, fide justificamur correlative, hoc est eo justificamur quod est
correlativum fidei, nempe merito Christi, ad quod refertur seu quod
apprehendit, fides Nam fides and satisfactio Christi habent se correlative ut
accipiens and acceptum: recte au^m sic loquimur, quia tunc fides de causa
formali Justification is intelligitur, and sensus, est meritum Christi
justificat, non fides Apprehensum justificat, non apprehendens instrumentum.
Sed justificatio etiam sine relatione recte tribuitur fidei, ut causae
instrumentali: fide justificamur, hoc est, per fidem ut per medium. Usitate
enim effectus causae efficientis tribuitur instrumento. At cum dicitur, Fides
imputata est ei ad justitiam, and aliae ejusmodi propositiones, necessario
tantum correlative sunt intelligenda, quatenus nimirum fides est apprehensae
justitiae instrumentum and veluti manus, qua justitia Christi accipitur. Sybr.
ib. p. 80.
by faith correlatively, that is, we are justified by that which is correlative
to faith, forsooth by the merit of Christ to which it is referred, or which
faith does apprehend: for faith and the satisfaction of Christ are
correlatives, as the receiver and that which is received. But then we speak
rightly, because then faith is understood of the formal cause of
Justification: and the sense is, the merit of Christ does justify, not faith.
That which is apprehended justifies, not the instrument apprehending. But
justification is also without relation rightly given to faith, as to an
isntrumental cause. We are justified by faith, that is by faith as by a
means: for usually the effect of the efficient cause, is given to the
instrument. But when it is said. Faith is imputed to him for righteousness,
and other such propositions, they are necessarily to be understood only
correlatively, so faith is the instrument of righteousness apprehended, and as
it were the hand by which the righteousness of Christ is received. So the
learned man Vrsinus. But to the next Question.

Quest. 9. To your ninth Question. How your opinion denies the infinite justice
of God, to stand in strength or to require such a satisfaction as Christ, God
and man, made? when as they conceive no possibility of such imputation, but by
virtue of such satisfaction, nor can they imagine such a faith to be imputed
without supposing a Mediator, Christ God and man, on which it should rest, who
gives it the name and being that it has. It is true, they deny that the
justice of God simply and absolutely required such a satisfaction as Christ God
and man made, but on supposition that God would bring many sons to glory, and
save what was lost, they deny it not.

Gods justice cannot stand in strength where men are justified by that which is
no satisfaction to it, faith in a proper sense. And where the satisfaction
which the Law requires, is not so much as imputed to them for their
Justification.

2. Infinite justice requires such a satisfaction as Christ God and man made,
to Justification, because in that God declares himself just, as before.

3. Imputation of faith by virtue of the satisfaction of Christ, is to say that
Christ merited that faith should be imputed (as I conceive) and that
Socinianisme, Osterodus.

I do not detract it (Justification) Non detraho illam sanguini and morti
Christi, sed tribuo illam morti and sanguini Christi, quatenus sanguis and mors
in nobis efficient eas res propter quas Deus nos justificat, nempe sidem. See
Sybran. ad Bert. p. 10.
from the blood and death of Christ, but I give it to the blood of Christ, so
far forth as his blood and death work in us those things for which God does
justify us, forsooth faith.

4. Though they cannot imagine a faith imputed, not supposing a Mediator on
whom, yet they deny faith in a Relative sense, taking in the Mediator, to be
imputed, dispute against it for the proper sense, which satisfies not justice,
but destroys it, as before.

5. Gods bringing many sons to glory, and to save what should be lost by
Christ's satisfaction of his justice was Gods eternal and immutable purpose.
The glory of justice and mercy Gods maine ends required it; as Christ did in
time, God determined eternally: thus eternal will determined it self, and to
consider otherwise is but the work of idle brain, there is no reality in the
Lord to answer it.

Quest. 10. To the tenth question I answer, it appears you hold God can and
does by his Sovereign power and will, things contrary to his justice, in your
opinion: Seeing you teach God can, does, and will justify men, without
satisfaction made by the perfect righteoufesse of Christ their Surety,
accounted to them, putting faith in a proper sense, a created imperfect grace
Imputed for righteousness which cannot satisfy justice, which cannot stand
with or declare the same, so that either Gods end is not to declare his
righteousness against the Apostle in justification, Romans 3. 26. or else you
destroy that end, and so establish such a sovereign power and will.

Quest. 11. And to the eleventh, to accept for righteousness that which is not
so according to Gods Law, is contrary to justice, seeing it is a justification
of the wicked, abomination to the Lord; the holding of a guilty person
innocent, which the Lord will not do; being the Judge of all the world be
cannot do, doing right.

When as God accepts Christ's righteousness for the debt of a believer, and
imputes it to him, that righteousness is not the believers personal
righteousness, that is righteousness performed in his own person, so no
flesh living can be justified in Gods sight; but the righteousness of Christ
his Surety, his Head, his by real union and communion, as if it were personal
righteousness: the Sureties payment of a debt for the principal is all one as
if the principal did himself make satisfaction to the Creditor.

Quest. 12. Where Christ's righteousness is denied to be the the righteousness
of a true believer? I answer, where you deny Christ's righteousness to be
imputed for righteousness, and to be that whereby we are made just before God:
for those words formally I find not Mr. W. to contend about them, neither are
men denominated ever from what is internal and such a form. It may be from
that which is outward, as Doctor Davenant largely answers the Pontificians.
Neither is it enough that Christ's righteousness is a meritorious cause of
justification, it must be so applied by faith that the believer may be thereby
made righteous, which is denied where there is no imputation thereof for
righteousness. The word says he is holy, unreprovable, unblamable in the
sight of God, which cannot be but as by that which has merit and worth, so
applied and made mine; all the money in the world will not enrich any man
until it be his, enjoyed to that end. But to that which is a common evasion to
you and Romanists in this controversy, making Christ only the efficient and
meritorious cause, more after in due place, where I shall show Mr. G. sense
Apocryphal, Popish, con^uted by our learned Protestant^, answering them.

Quest. 13. To the thirteenth, the insufficiency of Christ's righteousness and
satisfaction for all, even Scripture sufficiency is there denied where Christ's
righteousness is denied to fit all men and women of all callings and
conditions, and counted an unreasonable thing, as that one garment should fit
all statures and proportions of bodies, or the same shoe all feet of all
sizes.

And why Sir, should not that fit all which is the Son of Gods fulfilling all
righteousness? when as by it all are perfectly righteous that believe, men,
women, of all statures and conditions.

Either it fitteth all, so that all sorts are perfectly righteous by it applied
alone, or none, which might have been said plainly; or being so, righteous,
they are so by somewhat else, and you must name that. What for men and women of
all sorts, of all callings and conditions?

I thought there had been neither male nor female, but alone in Christ; and
that it were vain else for all to put him on in Baptism sacramentally, and by
believing really, that the precept was vain (and impossible to some) that
requires it.

Did we grant faith in a proper sense, that righteousness, or imputed for it,
that would serve all, fit all in your opinion, belike; or else it is liable to
the same exception, the bride is arraied with it, and the Builder and Maker of
it both makes it and judges it fit: no matter for such curious speculators
else.

And when as you grant an absolute necessity of it, and sufficiency for a
world of sinners, to justification, neither man or woman of this or that
stature or proportion, not the tallest or biggest have any cause to fear, that
if he believe he shall not be fitted. To deny this fitting, is to deny
sufficiency, but this crochet savoureth more of the flesh then of the spirit.

Quest. 14. To the foureteenth* that which Mr. Walker says overthrows the
satisfaction of Christ, has this reason, that if we satisfy Gods justice by
our Surety Christ there is no Pardon, for pardon and satisfaction are
contraries, Pena and venia sunt adversa.
so Mr. W. So some of the stamp, Mr. Wr. disputes against. In this you are as
a Socraticall disputant, wisely too, as in all that kind of answer to Mr.
Walkers reasons.

Sir, our satisfaction by Christ to Gods justice and Gods mercy will stand
together in that name, every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller of
the Law; what our infirmity lacked, Christ's justice has supplied. So your
Mother taught you in her Doctrine of Justification, and to say that I by my
Surety have satisfied for my self, or debt, is no more then to say, that in
him and by him a believer has fulfilled the Law; neither does it deny, but
establish, that Christ has satisfied the justice of God for me.

Quest. 15. To the fifteenth, It is monstrous to reason Bish. Dav. p. 315. and
p 330. Tossan. ad Rom p. 38. Luther ad Gal. p. 70. 2. Aret. Romans 1. 17 and Romans
3. 21. Mr. Pemble de justif p. 4. and p. 16. Mr. Bradshaw c. 1. Sect. 1. and p.
ult. justifying Augustines speech. Justificationis forma est justitia, Wetten
de ree. p. 34. Justificationis formam justitia constare certu^ est, estque
justificatio revera propritis and verus effectus justitiae, quoquo modo ea
justitia imputari five communicari nobis intelligatur. Part. 1. l. 2. c. 2
Sect. 1. 2. Neque pontificiorum sed nostrorum Theologorum sententia est. Nam
^ine justitia justum censeri perinde esset a^ sine doctrina doctum, sapientia
sapientem censeri. Ib. Sect. 4. Id ib. Sect. 4.
to deny Legal righteousness to justification, seeing Justification is a
making man just.

This denies where withal both personal righteousness, and the
righteousness of Christ imputed. Mr. Wotton teaches you, righteousness is
the form of Justification; and, it is certain that the form of Justification
consists in righteousness, and Justification is indeed the proper and true
effect of righteousness, in what manner soever that righteousness is
understood to be communicated or imputed to us; of this he says, neither is
this the judgment alone of Pontificians, but of our own Divines. He names
those words out of Polanus. For a man to be accounted just without justice or
righteousness, is all one as for a man to be accounted learned without
learning, wise without wisdom.

That Justification (and in that name) should consist only in remission of
sins, excluding the righteousness of Christ imputed is as unreasonable, it
is without the cause by which. You tell us you have handled it at large, but
not where one may meet with it, had it been put here it should have been
considered. The joint testimony of many a worthy Divine is but set us a
Wooll-gathering.

For Calvine it shall be tried. I believe you mention him as Mr. Wotton does
the Church of England. He going about to prove Remission of sins to be the
formal cause of Justification, triumphs in the judgment of the Church of
England.

It says, Justification is remission of sins; and this Justification
Justifica^io est remissio pecca^ torum.
or justice is received, accepted, and approved of God for our full and perfect
Justification. To which he adds, In which words the whole nature of
Justification is comprehended, only in remission of sins, and that it is
affirmed the full and perfect Justification of God himself accepting it in
judgment: L 2. c. 3. Sect. 1.
and then adds, neither is there in the two other parts of that Sermon, a
syllable or letter which signifies any thing to be wanting, or to be repugnant
to this opinion. So he.

When he yet cannot be ignorant but our Church urges the satisfaction of
Christ his death and obedience to the Law, not excluding his obedience to the
Law, but our works, as before.

Our Homily shows a necessary concurrence on Christ's part of justice, that is
the satisfaction of his justice, which the Apostle calls the justice of God,
and it consists in paying our ransom and fulfilling of the Law. So the grace
of God does not shut out the justice of God in our Justification, but the
justice of
man in our works. -- And after laying down our insufficiency, it extolleth
Gods mercy without any desert or deserving of ours, to prepare for us the most
precious Jewels of Christ's body and blood, whereby our ransom might be fully
paid, the Law fulfilled, and his justice fully satisfied, so that Christ is now
the righteousness of all them that truly believe in him, he for them paid the
ransom by his death, he for them fulfilled the Law by his life. So that now in
and by him every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller of the Law, for
as much as that which their infirmity lacked, Christ's justice has supplied.
These are added for the more full understanding of what was delivered before,
and must not be left out. Nay, Christ and his obedience are established the
righteousness of believers, and so that by which we are just before God, as
before out of Mr. Wotton.

But to Calvine, I grant he says, Justification consists alone Sola remissione
peccatoru^ constat, and non alitet fieri justos.
in remission of sins, and that we are not otherwise made just. And yet I
assert, that in the exclusive he did not shut out the imputation of Christ's
righteousness; but only renovation, inherent righteousness and good works.
So to Nam si operibus aestimentur
show it he infers, for if they should be esteemed by works, he disputes
against the Popish opinion, not against imputation of Christ's righteousness,
and for both, read the 23. Sect. where you shall find his dispute to be
against Sect. 23.
works, in these words.

That vain conceit vanishes, that Si quidem evanescit nugamentum illud, ideo
justificari hominem fide, quoniam illa spiritum dei participat quo justus
redditu^ quod magis est contrarium superiori doctrinae quam ut conciliari
unquam queat.
a man is therefore justified by faith, because by that he partaketh the Spirit
of God whereby he is made just; which is more contrary to the former doctrine,
then that it can be reconciled. He excludes works not the righteousness of
Christ. One place more there.

It cannot be doubtful but he wants Neque enim dubium quim sit inops
propriae justitiae qui justitiam extra se quaetere docetur.
righteousness of his own that is taught to seek it out of himself: where
Vide, non in nobis sed in Christo esse justitiam nostram, nobis tantum ^o jure
competere quia Christisumus participes, siquidem omnes ejus (...) cum ipsa
possidemus.
urging the text, 2 Cor. 5. 21. he adds.

See, our righteousness is not in us, but in Christ, only belonging to us by
that right, because we are partakers of Christ, seeing with him we possess all
his riches.

And speaking of Rom 8. 3. says. And it makes nothing to the contrary, that
in another place, he teaches that sin was Ubi non aliud complemen^^ designat
quam quod imputatione consequimar. Eo enim jure communicate nobiscum Dom
Christus suam justitiam ut mitabili quodam modo quantum pertinet ad Dei
judicium vim ejus in nos transfundit. Aliud non sen^isse abund^ liquet exaltera
sententia quum paulo post posucrat, Quemadmodum per unius inobedica^i^m
constituti sumus peccatores, ita per obedientiam unius justificari Quid aliud
est in Christi obedientia collocare nostram justitiam, nisi asserere ca sola
not haberi justos, quia Christi obedientia nobis accepta sertur ac si nostra
esset? quare mihi elegantissime videtur Ambrosius hujus justitiae paradigma in
benedictione Jacob statuisse, nempe que^^ad* modum ille primogenituram a seipso
non meritus, habitu fratris occultatus, ejusque vest indutus, quae optimum
odorem spirabat, seipsum insimulavit patri ut suo commodo sub aliena persona
benedictionem acciperet: Ita nos sub Christi primogeniti nostri fratris
pretiosa puritate deli^oscere, ut testimonium justitiae a conspectu Dei
referamus. -- Et sane ita sefres habet, nam quo in salutem eoram facie Dei
compareamus, bono ejus odore fragrare nos necesse est, and ejus perfectione
vitia nostra obtegi ac sepeliri.
condemned of sin in the flesh of Christ, that the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us. Where he means no other fulfilling, then that which
we obtain by imputation. For the L. Christ does in such sort communicate his
righteousness with us, that after a certain mavelous manner, be pours the
force thereof into us, so much as appertains to the judgment of God. It
appears he did no otherwise mean by the other sentence which he had spoken a
little before. As by the disobedience of one man we were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one man we are justified. What is it else to set our
righteousness in the obedience of Christ, but to affirmthathereby only we are
accounted righteous, because the obedience of Christ is imputed unto us, as if
it were our own. Therefore me thinks that Ambrose has excellently well showed
how Sunt tamen qui existiment justitiam quae ad justificationem flagitatur a
Calvino etiam in imputatione justitiae Christi esse positam; ex horum numero
est ipse Bellar. qui de Calvino ita scripsit. Johannes Calvinus admittit quidem
cum Lutheranis non esse in nobis ullam inhaerentem justitiam and imputari
Christi justitiam, and propter eam condonari peccata.
there is an example of this rightousnesse in the blessing of Jacob: for Jacob
not having of himself deserved the preeminence of the first begotten son,
hid himself in the apparel of his brother, and being clothed with his
brothers coat that savoured of a most sweet smell, he crept into the favor
of his father, and received the blessing to his own commodity under the person
of another: so we do lie hid under the precious pureness of Christ our elder
brother, that we may get a testimony of righteousness in the sight of God. --
And truly so it is, for that we may appear before the face of God unto
salvation, it is necessary for us to smell sweetly with his Odor, and to have
our faults covered and buried with his perfection. So Calvin.

Now let these parcels be laid together, and no man of conscience not desirous
to cavil, can deny, but, though he excludes works, he does not the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ.

When Mr. Wotton had forced Calvine, yet he confesses; There are yet that
think that the righteousness which is required to justification, by Calvine
to be also placed in imputation of the righteousness of Christ. Of this number
is Bellarmine himself, who wrote thus of Calvine. John Calvine truly admits
with the Lutherans, that there is not us any inherent righteousness, and
Christ's righteousness to be imputed, and for it sins to be forgiven. And
after: Nam cum Calvinus instit. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 22. Et in Antidoto ad
Council. Trid. ad sess. 6. contendit justificationem esse positam in remissione
peccatorum, non excludit imputationem justitiae Christi, sed internam re
novationem and sanctificationem. Bell. de justif. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. Johann
eundem etiam Calv. reprehendir quod causam formalem justificationis du plicem
faciat, c. 2. Sect. sed non minori. Who also adds, Calvino respondet Pareus.
Part 1. l. 2. c. 4. Sect. 6.


Calvine when in his Institutions and Antidote he contendeth justification to
be placed in remission of sins, does not exclude the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, but internal renovation and sanctification. And he
reprehendeth the same Calvine, because he makes a double formal cause of
justification.

And now for Pareus, give me leave to show his judgment of Calvine in this
matter. When as Bellarmine urged Calvine, as you do to the same end, Pareus
answers.

But that vain wrangler (Bellarmine) Sed inanis ille vitilitigator ipsum se
Calumniae arguit, supra enim satebatur, Calvinum imputationem justitiae Christi
non excludete, hic etiam denuo fatetur Calvinum cum Lutheranis agnoscere
imputationem justitiae Christi and non imputationem peccatorum. Si igitur Calv.
justificationem in remissione peccatorum constituit and imputationem justitiae
Christi non excludit, quid a Luth. dissentit?
argues himself of Calumny, for above he did confess that Calvine did not
exclude the imputation of the righteousness of Christ. And here again once
more he confesses Calvine with the Lutherans to acknowledge the imputation of
the righteousness of Christ, and not imputation of sins. If therefore
Calvine did place justification in remission of sins, and did not exclude the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ; what does he dissent from the
Lutherans?

And then answering to that of his Antidote, he says.

But in saying this, he does dissent Verum hoc dicendo neque a se neque a
Luthero, Melancthone, vel quoquam also evangelicorum dissentir, particula enim
Sola, non excludit imputationem justitiae Christi, quod fassus est Bellar. sed
excludit reno vationem quam Tridentini in sua definitione cum remissione
peccarorum ad justificationem requirunt: hoc respectu etiam Lutherus in sola
remissione, and non imputatione peccatorum justificationem collocat; Melancthon
quoque, sic Martyr. Castig. de justif. l. 2. c. 6. p. 444.
neither from himself, nor from Luther, Melancthon, or any other Protestant:
for that particle Alone, does not exclude the imputation of the righteousness
of Christ, which thing Bellarmine confessed, but it excludes renovation, which
those of Trent require in their definition with remission of sins to
justification. In this respect also Luther does plan justification only in
remission and not imputation of sinnet -- Melancthon also -- so Martyr; thus
Pareus.

Doctor Dounbam may be added. For though many of our L. de justif. c. 5. p. 4.
Divines as has been said have taught, that unto justification remission of
sins is only required: yet their assertion it to be understood as Bellar.
himself understands Calvine, as spoken in opposition to Papists, who say
that to justification concur, not only remission of sins, but also inward
renovation, or sanctification. To contradict them our Divines have said that we
are justified by remission only, or not imputing of sin. Wherewith always
concurreth imputation of righteousness, and not by renovation or
sanctification. Their meaning therefore by the exclusive particle Only, was
not to exclude imputation of righteousness, which inseparably accompanies not
imputation of sin or Saint Paul proves, Romans 4. 6. 8. and Bellar. himself
confesses, but infusion of righteousness or renovation.

Doctor Davenant answering Bell. Quartam recenset Calvini qui (ut ille ait)
formalem causam justificationis in sola remissione peccatorum sitam docet. At
nemo nescit Calvinum imputationem obedientiae Christi requirere absque qua
nulla remissio peccatorum obtinetur. Si igitur quis a Calvine quaesi visset
quidnam tandem illud sit propter quod and per quod impius justificatur;
respondisset, propter and per meritum fil^i Dei, haec causa est remissionis,
and causa acceptationis, haec causa translationis alstatu mortis ad statum
vitae; Deus hanc filii sui obedientiam and justitiam respiciens ut a nobis fide
apprehensam ab initio recipit nos in statum justificatorum. Deus perpetuo
intuens hanc eandem justitiam nobis donatam and applicatam in reliquo vitae
nostrae cursu habet nos pro justificatis. De Iusti. habit. c. 22. p. 313.
The fourth be repeateth is Calvin's, who (as he (Bellarmine) says) teaches
the formal cause of justification to be placed only in remission of sins. But
no man is ignorant that Calvine requires imputation of the obedience of
Christ, without which no remission of sins is obtained. If therefore one had
sought of Calvine what that is, for which, and by which, a wicked man is
justified: he had answered, for and by the merit of the Son of God, this is
the cause of remission, and the cause of acceptance, this is the cause of
translation from the state of death to the state of life. God respecting this
obedience and righteousness of his Son, a^ apprehended of us by says, from
the beginning receives us into the state of justified ones. God always
beholding this same righteousness given unto us and applied, in the remaining
course of our life, accounts us for justified ones.

Chamier to Bellar. Objecting as you do, first answers out of Bellar.
himself, then out of Calvine, Instit. l. 3. c. 12. Potuitquic qua^ magis
contra Bell. figmentum dici? l. 21. c. 15. Sect 20. and Sect. 21.
Sect. 2. to which he adds, What can be more manifest? and Sect. 3. to which
he says, Could any thing more be said against that figment of Bellarmine?
Again he proves the same. We are sure that cannot first be (that we be not
accounted sinners) without imputation of the Certi sumus ne illud quidem (nos
peccatores censeri) prius constare posse absque imputara justitia Christi; unde
Calvini verba, justitiae imputatione nos absolvit.
righteousness of Christ; thence the words of Calvine, he does absolve us by
the imputation of the righteousness of Christ.

And before, We (Protestants) do Imputationem justistiae Christi omnino
censemus ejusdem justificationis fundum esse, qua neglecta prorsus illa nulla
sit, neque in toto neque in part, quomodo cunque tantum vel cogitatione
concipi queat. Ib.
altogether conceive the imputation of the righteousness of Christ the
foundation of the same justification, which being neglected, that is altogether
none at all, neither in whole nor in part, howsoever it may be conceived as
much as in thought.

I will add another witness for Calvine, Polanus. Now Partir. p. 114.
if any man will say that the found Teachers, Calvine; and others, do affirm
that justice or righteousness is the forgivenes of sins. And again, that
justice consists in remission of sins, we must know that it is very
certain they speak metonymically, meaning so as that either justice in their
writings, is Quid enim aliud peccata potuisset occultare nostram preter ejus
justitiam, etc. Justin. ad Diogutum.
the same that justification, because we cannot be justified but by justice, or
else that justice is said to be the remission of sins, because justice is the
cause of remission or forgiveness of sins; and that Calvine does speak by
Metonymia, is plain out of other places of his works, as l. 3. Instit. c. 17.
Sect. 8. -- And so in another place he plainly proves that by, through, and
for Christ's righteousness we obtain forgiveness of sins: and c. 3. Sect.
19. having obtained forgiveness of sins by means of Christ's righteousness
coming between -- and more plainly, c. 14. Sect. 12. and c. 11. Sect. 1. and
c. 14. Sect. 13. man being covered with the righteousness of Christ pleases
God and obtains forgiveness of sins.

So that if Calvine himself, and all these worthies are to be credited, nay
Bellarmine and Mr. Wotton themselves, you wrong Calvine, and hence the places
you talk of out of other Divines may receive their answer.

Quest. 16. To the sixteenth question, where the words are, etc. and that you
cannot find in Romans 5. 19. Romans 8. 4. Romans 10. 4. so much as one express word
either of the communication, much less of the imputation of Christ's
righteousness and satisfaction to us, least of all of their being made
formally righteous by such imputation.

To this, first your self grant (you say) we are justified formally too, by
the communication of Christ's righteousness to us in a sense, viz. in as much
as we obtain by such communication remission of sins which is our formal
justification (with you;) so that the thing is in a sense, though not in
express words, and you see it too.

2. Nay you grant remission an effect of righteousness communicated by these
texts; not only pardon, but communication of righteousness, so your words; so
that here is more then a meritorious cause, here is application by faith, which
you will not other where acknowledge.

3. Mr. W. denies not remission of sins an effect, he with Calvine and the
learned but now mentioned grant it, but that which all contend is also
imputation and communication to that end, without which pardon cannot be, as
before.

4. And Sir, if remission does formally justify, it is justice, as before out
of Mr. Wotton, and so conformity to Gods Law, deny one and you deny all.

5. But to those texts what you cannot see others have, See Dr. Dav. de bab.
Just. c. 27. arg. 2. p. 363. and arg. 4. p. 365. and others. Formae constituete.
and you might, had you received counsel of some dead and living still: that
is, consulted with the the learned, the words Romans 5. 19. that by the obedience
of one many shall be constituted righteous. Here is righteousness constituting
righteons, and then formal, for it is the nature of the form to constitute.

I know not what you can except but that the form is internal, and that what
is external cannot be so termed, and hence it is that you so often put in
(that sophistical term, as ours answer the Papists in the same controversy)
formally: and if that will not serve your turn, as was showed you at Cheswicke
out of Doctor Davenant, indeed, put a man constituted by righteousness,
righteous, if it be not by his own personal righteousness, it must be by
another, Christ's. The place that was then read unto you was:

We grant that the form of Justification Justificationis formam concedimus
illud per quod homo justificatus non modo reputatur and denominatur coram Deo,
sed efficitur sive constituitur: quia autem homo dicitur justificatus
denominatione passiva (ut ex ipsa Grammatica no^um est) non est absolute
necessarium, ut haec denominatio aut peratur a forma inhaerente, aut supponat
^ormam inhaerentem. Hujusmodi enim denominationes passivae, quandoque
recipient formam inhaerentem, ut cum patietem dicimus dealbatum: quandoque
non, ut cum dicimus hominem amatum, honotatum, damnatum, absolutum; haec enim
omnia de illo vere dicuntur in quo non reperitur forma inhaerens, quae fundare
possit hujusmodi denominationes. Annotavit hoc Gulielmus Parisiensis,
denominationes passive sivae praedicationes fiunt in rebus in quibus non sunt,
in eis, vel ad eas, vel de iis.
by which a justified person is non only reputed and denominated before God,
but made or constituted so. But because he is said to be justified by a passive
denomination (as it is known out of Grammar it self) It is not absolutely
necessary that this denomination be taken either from an inberent form, or
that it should suppose an inherent form: for such passive denominations
sometimes respect in an inherent form, as when we say the wall to be whited:
and sometimes not, as when we say a man to be beloved honored, condemned,
absolved. For all these are truly spoken of him in whom there is not found an
inherent form which may be ground for such denominations. William of Paris
noted this Passive denominations or predications are made in things in which
they are not, in them, or to them, or of them. Where he cites Vasques Ut
imbelle and inutile.
the Jesuit rejecting that kind of argument as weak and unprofitable. Saying,

I will not fight against this kind Nolo hoc genus denominationis impugnare
communi quodam argumento quo aliqui utuntur, nempe quod haec denominatio justi
videatur esse eorum quae postulant fo^mam intrinsecam: and mox, potest aliquid
dici justum extrinseca and aliena justitia. Dr. Dav. de hab. just. c. 27 Sect.
36.
of denomination with a certain kind of common argument which some use,
forsooth that this denomination of a just man seems to be of these, which
require an internal form. And by and by, A thing may be said to be just by
that which is external and another righteousness.

And Chamier. Every one that is just is so said indeed from Omnis justus
dicitur quidem a justitia, non ab inhaerente necessario, damr imputativa
justitia, datur compatentium ut Ezec. 16. Dies calamitosus ut de lac. and Ephesians.
5. propier ea quae fiunt in ipsis, ex Chrysostom. c. 5. Sect. 28. Sect 29.
righteousness, not necessarily from what is inherent; there is imputed
righteousness, there is righteousness of such as are compared Ezec. 16. an
evil day, as of Jacob, and Ephesians. 5. because of those which are done in them,
as out of Chrysostom.

Quest. 17. You demand where he finds it to be any branch of the Pelagian
heresy to deny Adams posterity to be made formally sinners with Adams sin
imputed to them in the letter and formality of it?

Sir, I suppose you intend not that I must find your term formally, and in
the letter and formality, enough of that but now, and that if I find it the
Pelagian heresy to deny Adams posterity to be made sinners by Adams sin
imputed to them, it will satisfy your question. For that see Vossius.

That I might meet with them both, Utrisque ut occurrerem ostendi quam vere
olim scripsit Vinc. Lirinens* neminem ante prodigiosum Pelagii discipulum
Caelestium, ^eatu praevaticationis Adae, omne genus humanum negasse adstrictum.
Voss. hist. ^elay. Epist. ad Lectorem.
I have showed how truly Vincentius Lirinensis in times past wrote, that there
was none before Celestius that prodigious Disciple of Pelagius, that did deny
whole mankind to be bound by the guilt of the sin of Adam.

The Pelagians did deny Adams sin to be imputed to posterity. Negabant
Pelagiani, Adami peccatum imputari posteritati. V^ss. l 2. These 1. p. 172.
Catholicorum contra sententia suit, peccatu^ primorum Parentum impurari omnibus
ac reatu ^eneti to^^m posteritarem, idque idcirco, quod peccante Adamo omnes in
lumbis ejus suimus. Ant^^^hes. 1. p. 174. In primis hominibus natura humana
peccavit, ac per hoc naturae humanae nulla nocu^^^ peccata nisi sua. Ib. e^
August. ret^act. l. 1. c. 10.


The Catholics opinion on the contrary was; The sin of first Parents to be
imputed to all, and the whole posterity to be held with the guilt, and that
therefore because Adam sinning, we were all in his loins.

In the first men humane nature sinned, and by this, no sins hurt humane nature
but its own.

Quest. 18. He must answer who are they that deny Insants dying before they
commit actual sin, are punished by death, because they are guilty of Adams
sin, or affirms that God out of his justice destroys innocent babes.

Mr. Ws. answer is, he heard it by many witnesses of good credit, that heard it
from your preaching.

And here you give him to understand that it is one thing to have the guilt of
Adams sin derived upon his posterity, another to have the act of his sin in
the letter and formality of it imputed to his posterity, so that for such
imputation they should be destroyed; the former you grant, the latter you
conceive will never be proved.

Dying babes then are innocent in regard of imputation of Adams act; It is
nothing but the guilt that is derived, not the act, It is the guilt, not the
act. Whether do you not in this answer deny the imputation of Adams sin with
the Pelagian? and so the orthodox tenet, which Pecca^um, and ^catus. Peccatum
imputari, and reatu teneri.
is the imputa^ion of Adams sin? I demand whether sin and guilt be one and
the same thing with them? Whether there be not sin to be imputed, and to be
held with the guilt, another and distinct thing: and whether they be not
distinguished in Divinity?

You denying the imputation of Adams act, as Bishop did against Mr. Perkins,
should have told us (as Bishop Abbot says to that Popish Bishop) how it is
true that the Sea p. 405.
Apostle says, That by Adams disobedience we are made sinners. For h^w should
we be made sinners by the disobedience, but for that his disobedience is
imputed to us?

Adam (says the same Author) bare the person of all mankind, Id. ib.
either standing to stand for all, or falling to fall for all, being to beget
children according to his image -- therefore when he sinned, we all being in
his loins (as Bellarmine says) sinned in Id. ib.
him and by him, and his sin by imputation lies upon us all.

For (says Doctor Whitaker) his Ipsius enim voluntas nostra fuit, ejusque
igitur transgressio nostra est, quia ille non ut homo unus consideratur, sed ut
radix generis humani, in quo omnes inclusi virtute fuimus, utque Augustinus
ait, omnes eramus unus ille homo. Dr. Whitaker de or. ig. pec. p. 43. De pec.
mer. and remis. l. 1. c. 10.
will was ours, and therefore his transgression is ours: because he is not
considered as one man, but as the root of mankind, in which we all were
virtually included, and as Augustine says, we all were that one man.

For neither should we ^e held either Neque enim aut reatu illo aut iniquitate
inde contracta teneremur, nisi ille actus quo Adamus Dei praeceptum violavir,
imputatione nobis adscriberetur. Id. ib p. 37.
with any guilt or iniquity contracted therehence, unless that act by which
Adam violated Gods precept, should be, by imputation, ascribed to us.

Here you see, in the doctrine of this great Divine, is the act and guilt,
both, and if there were no more but imputation of that act, here is enough to
clear Gods justice in destruction of babes.

Quest. 19. How such as deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness (viz. in
the letter and formality of it) to believers, do hereby ascribe as much
justification by it to infidels and reprobates as believers themselves: when
faith is maintained to be the means of bringing men into communion with
Christ, and to give him part in that great benefit of Redemption purchased for
the world?

Answ. You seem to me to do so, when as what you give faith notwithstanding,
you deny in the former part communication of Christ's righteousness to
justification, and our being made just by it communicated, which shows what
you give to be but in word and tongue, for a color and show. Still* faith
justifies, not relatively to the object, applying it as an hand, but in a
proper sense. Neither do you make the righteousness of Christ, as the
meritorious cause, so that by which, imputed, we are just, just as the Papists,
whose confutation you shall meet with after, by our learned Divines.

Quest. 20. and 21. But how can Mr. Walker hold it a mistake to say, that
justification and life are promised upon condition of believing?

For my part, I suppose he may say so in a sound sense. And to your argument,
either they are promised absolutely, or on condition of somewhat else, or of
believing, or not promised at all.

1. I answer, They are promised to faith in Christ, that is, faith taking in
the righteousness of Christ.

2. It is not made to every faith, not to a mere assent to the revelation, not
to your faith of a proper sense (though you call it faith in Christ) when as it
does not as a hand bring home the righteousness of Christ by which I am
justified. The faith you speak of infoldeth not the object, but opposes it in
this effect justification. Faith in a proper sense (say you) is imputed, and
not the righteousness of Christ.

Neither does Mr. Walker hang out a flag of defiance to the orthodox; you do
in your whole business. Doctor Dounham calling faith a condition, takes it
with its object as all the rest you mention, against your sense, whom they
oppose as they do the Papist.

Harken and learn. Junius speaking of the covenant Cujus condi^io extra nos in
Christo reperitur. p. 16. and 8. Sect 3.
of grace, says, whose condition is found out of us in Christ, and there he
says, that by that apprehended by faith we are just, etc.

Faith is wont to be considered two Fides in Scripturis and apud Patres duobus
modis considerari solet, proprie secundum naturam fidei simplici^er; altero
figurate, id est, metaleptice and correlative, qua fides apprehendit objectum
suum, etc. posteriori dicitur sola justifica^e. Trelca^. p. 85.
ways, in the Scriptures and amongst the Fathers, properly according to the
nature of faith simply, another figuratively, that is, by a metalepsis, and
correlatively, as faith apprehends the object, etc. in the last sense it is
said alone to justify.

Our justification is not with the Nequidem justificatio nostra est cum
condition fidei, qua fides est habitus in nobis, sed qua extra nos Christum
apprehendi^. Id. p. 88.
condition of faith, as faith is an habit in us, but as out of us it
appprehendeth Christ.

When as faith is an instrument, Cum fides instrumentum sit, non mi^um est, si
quae instrumentorum ratio est nomen and officium re^ cujus instrumentum est, ei
attribuitur. Id. p. 89.
it is no wonder if, which is the nature of instruments, the name and office of
the thing whose instrument it is, be given unto it.

Christ as to be applied, is the condition of the covenant. Qua applicandusest
conditio soederis. Ib. p. 100. Ad Gal. 64. 2*


Christ is the object of faith, says Luther, yea rather in faith Christ
himself is present.

Hence Bucanus. And how is Et quomodo ad justitiam imputatur? non absolute, sed
relative, cum fides non sola sed cum objecto suo crucifixo intelligitur;
quemadmodum manus quae recipit the sau^um donatum non dita^, sed the sau^us.
Bu^. ad q. 35.
faith imputed to righteousness? not absolutely, but relatively, because faith
not alone, but with his crucified object is understood, as an hand which
receives a treasure given, does not make rich, but the treasure.

This you account perilous, and preached against in my hearing once, you cannot
endure it to be set forth with its object Christ, or it to have the nature of
an hand, which yet is an ordinary orthodox expression: and to that of Bucanus
Ad Gal. p. 65. 2.
for your hearers sake, I will give you an account of diverse. Faith justifies
(says Luther) because it apprehends and possesses this treasure, even
Christ present.

Therefore Christ apprehended by faith, and dwelling in the heart of the true
Christian, is the true Christian righteousness, for the which God counts us
righteous, and gives us eternal Ib. p seq.
life.

Because thou beleevest in me, says the Lord, and thy faith Ib.
lays hold upon Christ, etc. therefore be thou justified and righteous.

Hence we have first in what sense Hinc habemus primum quo sensu
justificationem fidei tribuimus, qua^enus videlicet ea Christum amplectitur and
applicat. Unde Bez. (in confess* Major art 3. c. 4.) vocat unicum illud
instrumentum quo Jesum Christum oblatum apprehendimus, and vas unicum ad eum
percipiendum compaparatum: and post. art. 7 Quum ex Paulo affirmamus nos sola
fide, sive gratis, sive fide, sive sine operibus justificari (sunt enim haec
synonyma) non est hoc dictum perinde accipiendum ac si diceremus, fidem esse
quandam virtutem quae nos in nobis coram Deo justificer; id enim esset fidem
substituere in locum Jesu Christi, qui unus est nost^a persecta and integra
justitia. Verum ita loquimur, cum Apostolo, and fide sola nos justificari
dicimus eo quod amplectitur eum qui nos justificat, nempe Jesum Christum, quo
cum nos unit and copulat, ut simus and ipsius and omnium ejus bonorum
participes; quae quidem nobis imputata prorsus sufficient ad hoc ut coram Deo
absolvamur* and pro justis cens^amur. Cham l. 22. c. 2. Sect. 14.
we give justification to faith, forsooth so far as it imbraceth Christ and
applies him* Whence Beza calls it, that only instrument by which we
apprehend Christ offered, the only vessel provided to receive him. And after,
when as out of Paul we affirm us to be justified, only by faith, or by faith,
or without works, (for these are of the same signification) this saying is not
so to be understood, as if we said faith to be a certain virtue which
justifies us in our selves before God; for that were to substitute faith in
the place of Jesus Christ who alone is our perfect and whole righteousness.
But we so speak with the Apostle, and we say we are justified by faith alone,
because it does embrace him, who does justify us, that is, Jesus Christ, with
whom it does unite and couple us that we may be partakers both of him and all
his goods, which indeed beingimputed to us altogether suffice to this that we
may be absolved before God, and be accounted for just men.

Where he cites Bell. also, laying down the state of the Quam gratiam fides
credendo recipit: sicut cum manu pauper eleemosynam a divi^e recipit, ea manus
recipiens eleemosynam non est ipsa eleemosyna, neque causa efficiens
eleemosynae, neque propter ipsam -- sed solum relative concurri^ ad eleemosynam
obtinendam, quoniam dare and accipere sunt relata.
question, who gives to Protestants. -- Which grace faith by believing
receives: as when a poor man receives an alms of a rich man with his hand,
that hand receiving the alms, is not the alms it self, nor the efficient
cause of the alms, nor for it -- but it only concurreth relatively to obtain
the alms, because to give and receive are relates. Non male, nisi relative
concurrere esset phrasis apud nos inaudita.


Sect. 16. To which report of Bellarmine Chamier notes, He does it not evilly,
but that, that phrase, to concur relatively, is unheard of amongst us.

It ought rather to be named relatively, Debuit potius relative nominari, id
est, quat^nus fides consideratur cum suo objecto, ut cum dicitur Ecclesia super
fide Petri fundata apud veteres: nos alias evicimus interpretandum de Christo,
quem fides Petri consessa erat. Ib.
that is, so far forth as faith is considered with its object, as when the
Church is said to be founded upon the faith of Peter amongst the Fathers. We
have elsewhere evicted the place, to be interpreted of Christ whom Peter's faith
confessed.

Junius, But correlatively as they Sed correlative tantum ut loquuntur,
quatenus meritum Christi apprehendit, tanquam manus mendici eleemosynam. De
justis Sect. 16.
speak, as it apprehends the merit of Christ as the hand of a beggar does
the alms.

To conclude, that we may expound Denique ut metonymiam hanc quam evidentissimo
possimus simili exponamus; fides est tanquam manus, aut tanquam loculus
apprehendens thesaurum gratiae quam Deus nobis exhibet in Christo Jesu Comment,
ad Heb. c. 11.
this metonymy by as evident a similitude as we may; faith is as it were the
hand, or as the purse apprehending the treasure of grace, which God gives to
us in Jesus Christ.

Peter Martyr, And also faith it self, Quin etiam fides ipsa, si qua nostrum
opus est consideretur, ea justificari non possumus cum opus sit and man^um and
impersectum, long deterius quam requirit; sed illa justificari dicimur qua
promissiones Dei, and Christi justiriam meritaque per ipsam apprehendimus and
applicamus. L. de justif. Sect. 8.
if it be considered as it is our work, we cannot be justified by it, seeing
it is a work both lame and imperfect, far worse then he requires. But we
say we are justified by it as we apprehend and apply the promises of God and
Christ's righteousness and merits. Respondemus ( says the same Martyr) id quod
saepius alias diximus, fidem quatenus opus est non justificare; id enim habet
non ex vi aliqua sua sed ex objecto, ex morte enim Christi promissionibus Dei
justitia in nos derivatur: ita mendicus recipit eleemosynam manu le prosa vel
cruenta non tamen qua manum habet ita iufirmam and leprosam -- fidem ad hunc
usum factam esse and institutam a Deo. Ib. Sect. 62. and 71.


We answer, that which we have often elsewhere said, faith as it is a work
does not justify; for it has that not from any strengh of its own, but from
its object. For, from the death of Christ, the promises of God, righteousness
is derived to us. So the beggar receives an alms with a leprous hand, or that
which is bloody, yet not as he has an hand so infirm and leprous. -- Faith
was made and instituted of God to this use.

This Sir is the Protestant tenet, as faith takes in the Sea Gerhard. de
justif. Sect. 181. p. 658. Conditio praestita, instrumentum.
object it is a condition, and so it justifies; rejecting this, you desert
them, and join with the Papists, and Arminians, who calling faith a condition
performed, an instrument: they allow it an instrument in a proper sense as you.
Yet add not as if faith performed were made Non quasi fides praestita proprie
instrumentum fiat, seu instrumentalis actio, qua sicutananu apprehendimus aut
attr^himus remissionem nugae, etc. Remonst. ex Cens. c. 10. p. 112.
an instrument properly, or as an isntrumental action, by which as with an
hand we apprehend and draw to us remission: those are toys.

Neither is there fear of his agreement with Jews, Pagans, Def. Mr Wotton p.
34. Est haec una ex maximis quibus -- Ecclesia Christia Judaeis, Turcis,
Paganis, separantur. de justif. l. 2 c. 1. p 364.
and Mahometans, concurring with him in this that faith in Christ (as has
been said) is the condition of justification.

And if you believe Pareus, who of this question we dispute says. This is one
of the greatest in which -- the Churches of Christ are separated from Jews,
Turks, and Pagans. Where having laid down the difference he adds.

Truly the Protestant Church dares Evangelica vero Ecclesia talem formalem
causam justificationis non magis audet opponere judicio Dei. ( He speaks of
faith not applying Christ for in a relative sense) quam stupam igni. Sed credit
se justificari fide, gratis imputata justitia propter Christi meritum
. no more to oppose such a formal cause of justification to the judgment of
God, then stubble to the fire: but it believes she is justified freely by
imputed righteousness, for the merits of Christ.

Thus have I answered your queries which were no answer but tergiversation, and
an argument that they were too hot for you in a direct way to meddle with.

My next task is to examine your arguments, Mr. Wrs. answer, etc. And here
passing the entrance in which there is much very unsavory, with collateral
impertinencies, which your self rightly conceive, are but the crude and
indigested ebullitions of unnatural heat and passion; indeed vainglorious
babbling, deserving rather pity, then examination, Mr. G. arguments.
or as much as reading.

And come to the arguments.

The sum of your first argument as you give it, is. Imputation of faith is in
a proper sense, because the phrase is so often used in this chapter without
alteration or exchange: whereas the imputation of Christ's righteousness has
not the least relief either from sound of words or sight of letter in the
Scriptures.

Mr. W. answers, Tropicall speeches may be often repeated, and are in
Scripture, as Jer. 26. v. 3. 13. 19. and Gal. 3. Where faith is used ten times
in an improper sense. Therefore often repeating does not prove a proper
acceptance. What say you to this? Forsooth, the conclusion indefinitly taken
and in the general is unquestionably true. What then is become of your
argument? and what will help you?

You answer, Augustines rule approved by Divines. That Mr. G.
a literal and proper sense in Scripture is still to be preferred where there
is no necessity of rejecting it; or substituting an improper sense instead of
it. You say, in the places instanced in, there is need of a trope, but not so
here, neither reason nor religion contradicting it.

But Sir you cannot be ignorant but this interpretation of yours is against
reason and Religion too in the judgment of all Protestant Divines (except
heretofore excepted) improved by many arguments in Sybrandus against Bertius,
through all the Epistles, who calls it a blasphemous heresy; and witness as
many as are for the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and the relative
sense: and that faith does justify as an instrument taking in the object: to
them you must first answer.

Besides, is there not mention of imputation of righteousness as well as
imputation of faith? verse. 6. and 11. It cannot be faith in a proper sense,
that is but inherent and imperfect righteousness. It may be then the
righteousness of Christ.

If Mr. Walker says so, he is not alone, as before.

Yea, there is ground, seeing by the righteousness of Christ in the word, we
are said to be constituted righteous, Romans 5. 19. and where he is said to be
made unto us of God righteousness, and we the righteousness of God in him. For
which we have the stream of Protestants against Papists, Arminians and
Socinians, as before.

Is there not ground when as hereby God is declared just in justification?
which justice faith in a proper sense, destroys, as Mr. Forbs, and before,
seeing faith in it self is to divine judgment but as stubble to fire; needs
a covering, and must be justified as well as the person and other works. Here
is the Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, the just for the
unjust. What do you but not submit to the righteousness of Christ, that which
is by faith, and establish a work, your own work, so is faith?

We clear that place against Papists, as before, so does Bellar de justif l.
2. c. 9. ipsam fidem reputari, to whom Doctor Dav Sed srivola est haec
objectio; nam nihil usitatius quam causae applicanti illud tribuere quod
proprie and immediate pertiner ad rem applicata^: quia igitur fides applicat
and apprehendit nobis Christi justitiam, id fidei ipsi tribuitur, quod reapse
Christo debetur. p. 371. Pareus format argumentum. Cui fides imputatur ad
justitiam is justificatur, non etc. Sed justitia great is imputata Abrahae and
cuivis credenti imputatur sides. Ergo, p. 484. etc. 1. Licet fides quae
imputatur ad justitiam non sit justitia Christi absolute; est tamen relate,
quia justitiam quam in Christo quaerit, seu quia justitiam Christi sibi
applicat, de qua Apostolus, Romans 5. 18. Fide justificamur, aur proprie qua
qualitas, aut Metonymice qua, etc. non proprie, ergo Metonymice, Pareus Castig.
in Luc.
Calvine, as in Bellarmine. We answer thus to the Papist.

This is one of Arminius his arguments, who as he is Ad artic. quart. p. 297.
for the propriety of the words, mentions the repetition of the phrase
against the figurative sense.

And thus have I before I was aware answered what Mr. Walker called your second
argument also, to what you mention done elsewhere, there also is the answer;
for my part I know no other righteousness then that of the Law or Christ: and
if it be righteousness, and not of the Law, I mean our inherent
righteousness, it must be Christ's who was the end of the Law for
righteousness to such as believe.

That for which, or the scope of the Law, the fulfilling of Finis perficiens,
the end persecting, as Toss. out of August. (...) propter quod, vel scopum
Legis, (...) complementum. Lex ergo hunc habet finem ut facientes Legem and
recte viventes justificarentur; illum finem solus assequutus est Christus, and
nos assequimur dum fide cum apprehendimus. Ita in Christo exhibetur and
praestatur vera justitia quam Lex requitit, modo in eum credamus, ut air
Apostolus, Omni credenti: offertur enim quidem justitia omnibus, donatur autem
and imputatur solis credentibus. Dr. Toss. ad. 10. c. Romans
it. The Law therefore has this end, that those that do the Law and live
rightly should be justified. That end Christ alone attained, and we attain it
when as we apprehend him by faith. So in Christ there is given and performed
true righteousness which the Nihil impersectum aut mancum potest dici justitia
Dei justificans. Id. ib. 173.
Law required, so we believe in him, as the Apostle says, To every one that
believes: for truly righteousness is offered to all, but given and imputed
only to believers. Where also he says, nothing imperfect or lame can be
called the righteousness of God justifying.

But these things diligently considered Haec autem diligenter considerata
manifest dicunt, quid vocabulo justitiae Dei intelligatur, perfecta nimirum
illa and summa integritas humanae naturae, qua quisque donatus est (donatur
autem credentibus in eum, qui hac integritate secondum carnem absolurissime
praeditus est nostri causa postea declarabitur) sistitur coram Deo (...), ut
loquitur Paulus Col 1. 22. id est sanctus, inculpatus and qui nullius criminis
possit postulari. Ea igitur a Paulo dicitur justitia Dei, non modo quia
gratuitum est Dei donum, aut quia hanc largiendo, Deus se vere justum (id est,
fidelem ac varacem) praestat, sed etiam ut opponatur justitiae hominum sive ex
operibus, qua ^estatur David neminem justificari.
manifestly show what is understood by the word the justice of God. Forsooth
that perfect and most high integrity of the humane nature, with which every one
is endowed (but it is given to them that believe in him, who is absolutely
endowed with this integrity according to the flesh for our sakes, as it shall
be afterward declared.) He is presented before God as the Apostle speaks,
holy, unblamable, and unreprovable. That therefore is said to be the justice of
God, not only because it is the free gift of God, or because God in giving his
shows himself truly just (that is faithful and true) but also that it may
be opposed to the righteousness of men, or of works, by which David
testifies no man can be justified.

Sect. 17. But to the second Argument (passing bitter and vain words not a
few) which says, the scope of the Apostle Mr. G. p. 66.
is to put men by the false way of justification which lies through works, and
to discover the true way, that is to make known what they must do, what he
requires of them to justification, and will accept of them instead of the
works of the Law; and that is it which he here says is imputed for
righteousness. Now faith in the proper and formal signification is that which
they must do, etc. and therefore is faith in a proper sense to be accounted
for righteousness.

Against this one exception is, that you contradict your Mr. W.
self, for the doing you urge is but the way of works, so that it is not, and
yet is the way, it is the true and false way, both.

To this you answer, that Christ calls faith a work, John P. 67.
6. 29. this is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent.

To this I answer, the words are acknowledged, and that believing is a work,
receiving and applying is a work, and what is required there; so elsewhere
explained, John 1. 12. but deny faith to be Gods way, as a work in a proper
sense, opposed to the righteousness of Christ its object as accepted of God
for righteousness instead of the works of the Law. I do not, nor can think
that the meaning of Christ, Gods judgment is according to truth, it were not
so if he should account that so which is not, or accept of such an imperfect
work for the righteousness of the Law, of which before.

Then a man should be justified by a work, which is denied by many other
plain Scriptures, your self acknowledging it a false way, and the word, not
of works of righteousness which we have done, Tit. 3. 5. of which place
Sybrandus answering Bertius your Arminian Prince objecting the same text says,
that speech of the Apostle (not of works Firmissima est enim illa Apostoli
oration.
of righteousness which we have done) is most firm: your interpretation then
must be false, who also there cite Calvinus (of Papists:) the words at full are
these.

At the last when they are weary Cavillanrur in eo quod sides alicubi opus
vocatur, at que inde nos perperam opetibus fidem opponere. Quasi vero sides
quatenus obedientia est Divinae voluntatis, suo merito nobis justitiam
concilier, ac non potius quod misericordiam Dei amplectendo Christi justitiam
ab eo nobis oblatam in evangelii praedicatione cordibus nostris obsigner. L. 3.
Inst. c. 18. Sect. 10.
of wresting the Scripture they fall to subtilties and sophistical arguments.
They cavil upon this, that faith is in some places called a work, that we do
wrongfully set faith as contrary to works. As though forsooth faith in that it
is an obeying of the will of God, does with her own deserving procure unto us
righteousness, and not rather because by embracing the mercy of God, it
seals to our hearts the righteousness of Christ offered to us by him in the
preaching of the Gospel.

And here though you hold it not meritorious, yet a work, and oppose it to the
righteousness of Christ offered in the Gospel.

The Lord there calls for faith in the object himself, who is the end of the
Law for righteousness, as but now: Which the Law not being able to fit us
with, we have from Christ. Faith in the relative sense, as Sybr. there both out
of Melancthon and Calvine. Hearken to the Homily. So that as John The Baptist
although he were never so virtuous and godly a man, yet in this matter of
forgiveness of sin, he 2. Part. sermon. Salv. p. 18. fine.
did put the people from him, and appointed them unto Christ, saying thus unto
them, Behold yonder is the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world: even so us great and as godly a virtue as the lively faith is, yet it
puts us from it self and remitteth or appoints us unto Christ, for to
have only by him remission of our sins or justification. So that our faith in
Christ says unto us as it were thus. It is not I that take away your sins, but
it is Christ only, and to him only I send you for that purpose.

Faith thus considered, though but as a leaprous and weak hand, may do the
same, so that still you are entangled by your proper sense of faith.

Neither can you escape to say, by works excluded is meant P. 68.
the merit of works, or what is done with an opinion of deserving
justification.

As if the Apostle only disputed against their merit or opinion of deserving,
we know they deserve not, and must have pardon themselves. The dispute is
against them simply as causes, to keep this crown on the head of Christ
alone, which that leaprous hand faith and act of receiving does, without
opposition to Gods free grace or Christ's righteousness; thus faith
establishes grace and the righteousness of Christ to Gods justice, Romans 3.
24, 25, etc. and the Law to boot, verse. ult.

That phrase of faith in a proper sense, as a work accepted of God for, and
instead of the works of the Law, is down right the Arminian tenet, and
destroys as I conceive, the righteousness of Christ, making his doings and
sufferings void and vain; For to what end, if the condition be faith in a
proper sense, and that instead of the righteousness of the Law? It is to no
use, unless it be said to be a meritorious cause of faith being such a
condition, and such acceptance, as Osterodus before.

Once it destroys the justice of God with which it will never stand to accept
what is weak and imperfect, sin full in that respect, for perfect obedience
due unto the Law.

Before I go on, those words are considerable. Surely P. 68.
to serve, worship, and believe in Jesus Christ as Mediator, are Mr. Goodw.
just and lawful, yet no works of the moral Law, nor was Adam in his
innocence bound unto them?

To pass that of Adams obligation, which was obedience to what ever the Lord
did or should propose unto him, and that though it be not in the Law originally
it 2. Treat. p. 47. 48.
may be in the Law as if stands, with additions and improvements, as you
distinguish.

Give me leave as unsatisfied to propose some questions to you now and to
entreat your answer. I freely acknowledge you a learned man, answer
satisfactorily, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.

1. Whether the second Person in Trinity, Jesus Christ, Gods son, were not from
eternity, set and chosen Mediator, God giving us to him for life eternal, be
accepting of the same?

2. Whether since the fall that eternal purpose be not revealed, and Christ to
be him in whom alone is, and ever was eternal life for his Church, men and
Angels?

3. Whether as Mediator he be not to be worshipped? and whether it be not Gods
Commandment through the word in all times, as he was made known in the same
under the notion of an Angel, Gods Son, etc. by obedience, faith, hope, love,
fear, joy, subjection, prayer, and praise; and now with the observation of the
Lords day, our Christian Sabbath to his his honor, and righteousness, Romans 14.
18. his service: and whether these be, or which are, or which not moral?

4. Whether worship and service to God in Jesus Christ be required in the
moral Law, such faith, hope, love, fear, joy, obedience, prayer, praise, or
not? and what are the differences; and if, why worship of Christ shall be
excluded? Whether worship of God out of Christ be required, or abrogated?

5. Whether if it be not in the moral Law, it falls under the Judicial Law,
or Ceremonial Law, or be a Counsel, or is the Gospel a Law?

6. If to serve and worship Christ be just, etc. How can it not fall under the
rule of justice, which I take to be the moral Law?

7. If not, how is that a perfect and exact rule of works and worship, as Mr.
Bradsh. p. 43. the sum of what is to be done?

8. Whether Christ and his Apostles ever commanded other worship. I, or the
Prophets then Moses?

9. Whether the first Commandment does not require worship according to the
will of God?

10. Whether those words, I am the Lord thy God, prefixed to the Commandments,
be not the tenor of Gods covenant in Christ, to which there must be a suitable
answer?

11. Whether any Commandment in the decalogue has more requisites of a moral
Law, then faith and worship of Christ as Mediator?

12. Whether faith being a cause, a root, a mother of all good, an especial
requisite to make them good, be not required in the same Laws where
thoseworkes are

13. Whether faith in the worship of Christ the Mediator, be not that same
worship and honor that is given to God the Father and the blessed Spirit? So
that both or neither are moral? And how else is it that the constant practice
of the Churches is in prayer to begin in the name of Christ, and to end, to
whom with thee Spirit be glory?

I find it written that all should honor the Son even as they honor the
Father, and that he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father that
sent him, John 5. 23. And, Yet believe in God, believe in me also, John 14. 1.
And that, Jesus cried and said, He that believes on me, believes not on me,
but on him that sent me, John 12. 44. I find that in righteousness, the grace
and works of righteousness, Christ is served, Romans 14. 18, 18. I find that
as grace is from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 3. so that
the glory of it appertains to both.

I find those praised Divines of Leyden, doubting lest the Remonstrants
(naming the title of their eleventh Chap. of faith in Jesus Christ) would have
faith in Christ another from faith in God the Father, and in the Holy Ghost; to
which they speak thus.

For we who have known but one Nos enim qui unam fidem no vimus ex Apost. Ephesians.
4. v. 5. unum etiam terminum solum Deum agnoscimus; and in Christum credimus
quia Deus est, eandem omnino ob causam qua in Patrem: ita ut Christus quatenus
in eum credimus, sit cum Patre proptium ac primarium fidei salvificae objectum.
Etsi enim in Symbolo profiteamur distinct nos credere in Patrem, Filium and
Spiritum Sanctum, non tamen habemus tres illas distinctas personas pro tribus
differentibus salvificae fidei objectis; fatemur tamen fidem deberi Christo ut
Prophetae, Sacerdoti and Regi nostro unico, non aliam tamen officii and aliam
ratione personae, sed unam and eandem, qua qui recipit Christum, recipit eum
qui misit eum, Matthew. 10. 40. Ideo dicit Petrus nos per Christum credere Deo
qui excitavit eum a mortuis, and gloriam ei dedit ut fides and spes nostra in
Deo esset, 1 Pet. 1. 21. quo loco ostendit objectum ultimum seu terminum fidei
nostrae Deum esse, a quo Christus distinguitur non naturae sed officii ratione,
qua per Filium postremis temporibus nobiscum loquutus est Deus, Heb. 1. 1. --
Ubi nullum est discrimen fidei, sed una fides, quae primum ad Christum (...)
directa, propter Christum optima quaeque de Patre sibi pollicetur, in quem
alioquin extra Christum credere ad salutem non possemus, ideo author and
consummator fidei nostrae dicitur ab Apost. Heb. 12. 1. Est ergo una fides qua
Patrem and Christum com plectimur, quam etiam idem Apostolus ad Heb. 6. 1.
appellat fidem in Deum.
faith out of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 5. do also acknowledge God only the one
term of our faith: and we believe in Christ because he is God, for the same
cause altogether as in the Father; so that Christ as we believe in him, is with
the Father the proper and primary object of faith that saves. For though in
the Creed we profess distinctly we believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
yet we have not those three distinct persons for three different or diverse
objects of saving faith. Notwithstanding we confess faith to be due to Christ,
as to our only Prophet, Priest, and King, not one because of his office, and
another by reason of his person, but one and the same, by which he that
receives Christ, receives him that sent him, Matthew. 10. 40. Therefore Peter
teaches us by Christ to believe in God, who raised him from the dead, and gave
him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. In which
place he shows the last object or term of our faith to be God, from whom
Christ is distinguished, not in nature, but by reason of his office, as God in
the last times spoke to us by his Son, Heb. 1. 1. -- Where there is no
difference of faith, but one faith, which first directed to Christ God-man
promises to it self all best things of the Father for Christ's sake, in whom
otherwise out of Christ we should not believe to salvation; therefore is he
called the Author and finisher of our faith by the Apostle, Heb. 12. 1.
Therefore there is one faith by which we embrace the Father and Christ, Parem
esse fidem in Deum and in Christum. Censura. In cap. 1^. p. 154. 155. P. 68.
which the same Apostle, Heb. 6. 1. calls faith in God.

Where also they say, and prove by places brought to that purpose, that the
Socinians deny faith in God and Christ to be the same.

That also must be considered, where you say by works, (the false way) is not
meant whatsoever may in any respect be said to be done by a man himself, if
any thing should be upon any consideration required of him in reference to his
justification.

To which I say, it is true in the Protestant sense, taking faith in a Relative
sense; I, and of all graces else as Companions, and present with the faith that
justifies, for it is not alone when it justifies, though it alone justifies,
(as the Learned acknowledge) but then, that any thing but faith as an
instrument receiving, should have efficience, that there should be somewhat,
any thing, faith it self, accepted of God instead of the works of the Law, to
justification, I am afraid to acknowledge. Truly Sir there is more in this
first heap then I was aware of at first sight, and I think you must to work
again.

Another thing Mr. Walker excepteth against, is that you say. God does not
require of us the righteousness of Christ to Justification, this be required
of Christ himself. To which you say, that before Mr. W. shows the
grossness of this error, himself drops two gross errors indeed.

What is the first? That (say you) God requires nothing of us to
Justification, when as it is notoriously known that he threatens damnation
except we believe; and to credit his saying, he cites, Romans 3. 24. whereas the
verse following quite overthrowes it, wherein the condition of faith is
expressly mentioned.

I answer, here is no error if you will understand Mr. Walker, his meaning is,
he required no works or doing of ours for it, it being done freely by grace in
Christ, which grace will not stand with our works.

Neither does he deny faith required as a condition in a sense, Relatively, or
as the hand and instrument receiving Christ's righteousness to justification.
He denies it as our work, for, or instead of the righteousness of the Law to
justification.

When you say, God threatens damnation, except we believe, is it not a sin?
a transgression of the Law? Is it not the Law's to minister death? It seems
this faith is therefore required in the Law. You go on.

He (say you) drops a second error more gross then the former, saying, that
faith is a qualification to us for the receiving, applying, and enjoying
Christ's righteousness, that is, faith is a qualification to us for believing;
for what is the receiving, applying, and enjoying the righteousness of Christ,
but believing as before observed?

1. Here you see Mr. W. excludes not faith believing as a qualification, which
was your late charge, your self discharge him.

2. To say that a man may receive, that is, apply and enjoy the righteousness,
which receiving is believing, he must be qualified, is no more then to say, he
must have a power that he may do; be habitually disposed, that he may act,
which is so far from being an error, that it is impossible that a man should
believe, receive, or apply in this kind without faith.

And with your leave Sir, faith in a proper sense qualifieth not, but as
isntrumental, as an hand it receives and injoyeth, it brings home treasure
which inricheth; the righteousness of Christ which justifies. It is so far
from opposition to the righteousness of Christ in justification, which is your
tenet.

Finally, here is more granted to faith by you, then an assent, or work of the
understanding, which is of some use.

But let us return to what Mr. Walker taxed, that is, You said, God required
not of us the righteousness of Christ for justification; this (you say) Mr.
Walker calls a gross error, and instead of proof, complains of it as an
harsh, unsavory, and absurd phrase: and that to justify his complaint, he
says God requires not the righteousness of Christ, but of Christ himself,
implying he had need.

1. I answer, Mr. Walker in all charge you here but with one gross error,
and if that be made good it is enough.

2. It is true, he calls Gods requiring of us the righteousness of Christ
for justification, absurd, etc. which he shows, and you touch not: see the
place.

3. I suppose what you infer as his proof thereof is not so, nor to that end
intended, but a plain passing to it (as he conceived) a gross error, and so
your jests p. 70. fail, are but irrelativenesse and impertinencies.

Before I come to the maine thing (not having your writing, I must speak to it
as it is related) What if one should contradict your position, and say, God
requires of us the righteousness of Christ to justification? you say he
requires faith, and faith in Christ, a believing, which is receiving, applying,
and enjoying. Why may I not put in the object received, applied, and enjoyed,
the righteousness of Christ to justify me? Is it not a receiving him, an
applying him, and enjoying him, to justification and salvation? I hope it is
with his righteousness. He that threatens damnation for not receiving,
applying, and enjoying Christ, requires of me receiving Christ and his
righteousness also to justification, as he requires that I be just, and
reveals him our righteousness, he requires applying and receiving him,
putting him on for justification; that, or perfectly to perform the Law, which
being impossible it is that; and the Scripture says that by the obedience of
one I am constituted righteous, Romans 5. 19.

But to the business, God required not of us the righteousness of Christ for
justification. This he required of Christ himself: so you. This last he
calls an error indeed, There he puts an Accent. This says Mr. Wr.
implies Christ had need of justification, and was bound to fulfill the Law for
himself, and savoureth of Socinian and Samosatenian heresy, which denies
Christ's Godhead; for if Christ's humane nature being from the first conception
most pure, upright, and holy, was personally united to his Godhead, and so the
Son of God, and heir of all things; Who can doubt but in himself he was
worthy of all glory, at Gods right hand from his birth: as his taking of our
nature upon him, was altogether for us: so his infirmities, sufferings, death,
and continuance on earth for the performance of all righteousness and
obedience to the whole Law was for us, and for all the elect, who of old
believed in him to come for them, who do now believe in him exalted to glory
according to his humanity. To think or say that he had need to justify
himself, and to merit by his righteousness the state of glory, is in effect
to deny he was God, infinitely worthy of all glory as he was the only begotten
Son of God and Heir of all things. Thus Mr. Walker.

Here we must lay aside laughing irrelativenesse and impertinencies.

What say you to this? It seems a gross error by what is said.

I could I conceive (say you) put some Queries to him, that would a little
trouble him to make good the truth thereof in a positive way.

You should first answer, then propose Queries. Your answer by Queries is but a
wile, tergiversation. I will be plain in answering you, as I shall be able.

How he can prove that Christ had no need of justification? 1. Quere.
Surely Christ was a justified or righteous person in the sight of Mr. G.
God, this justification was not superfiuous, or no wise useful to him; and
what is not superfluous, we men of the lower form of learning judge to be some
ways needful.

1. Mr. Walker answers, if justification be forgiveness and pardon of sin
only, (as you elsewhere say) when as he is said to have need of justification,
he is infoulded a sinner, to have need of remission of sins. Which if it be
too too gross, by it may be proved that he needed not justification for
himself.

Yea, to be in need of forgiveness of sins, and so righteous a person as you
speak, are pugnantia secum frontibus adversis, a contradiction.

But it seems as he was a righteous person, that was not superfluous,
therefore some ways needful.

You must say for himself. But he needed it not for himself being Gods Son,
God blessed for ever, and comprehensor from the first moment of his conception
by personal union with the holy Ghost. It was needful then for us. He was our
Surety, and in that respect they might be needful for us, though not for
himself else.

Being our Surety, what was our debt must be paid, it Likewise in the example
of David in the remission of sins the Apostle must needs understand the
imputation of righteousness, without the which he can never pass by the gates
of Heaven, which are the gates of righteousness, that is, where at the
righteous shall enter* Master. Cartwright in Romans 4. v. 6.
was necessary to our life; our debt was perfect obedience to Gods Law. It was
also death, the wages of our sins, to free us from death he must die, and he
must fulfill the Law, that we may live, by the whole we come to be wholly
fair, holy, unreprovable, and unblamable in his sight, complete.

I conceive our election to salvation was by and in him before the world as our
Mediator and Surety, and we made accepted in him Gods beloved one. That he was
verily ordained before the foundation of the world, such, but manifested in the
last times (a Lamb without blemish or spot) for us who by him due belteve in
God. He was set for our rising, sent to and for us. Raised up an horn of
salvation for us, borne to us, given to us. When the fullness of time was come,
God sent his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law to redeem us that are
under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. That his making
himself of no reputation, taking upon him the form of a servant, humbling of
himself, becoming obedient to death, even the death of, until the death of
the Cross, was for us. So was his fulfilling all righteousness, and coming to
fulfill the Law, his coming to do Gods will, his always doing things
pleasing to God; thus God purposed, thus he obeyed. He was a righteous branch,
the Lord our righteousness.

You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ (says Saint Paul) that though he
was rich, he become poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2
Cor. 8. 9. For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be
sanctified.

When as the Scripture shows him to be made a Surety, it is enough to show he
was not made for himself, but for us.

It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, he is the head of
the body the Church; ye are complete in him.

Though therefore it was not useful to himself for himself, it was not
superfluous, he being our Head, our Mediator and Surety; It was most necessary
for us. What the Law could not do, God sent his Son, etc. that the
righteousness of the Law; whatsoever the Law requires to justification, might
be fulfilled in us. And thus is he the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes, as before out of Doctor Tossanus, enough to that
question: to the second next, which is,

Quest. 2. How he would prove Christ was not bound to fulfill the
righteousness of the Law for himself.

Mr. Walker told you, you answer him not. I may propose some reasons to your
consideration which persuade me so to think.

1. He had no need of forgiveness of sins, neither was he ever forgiven, and
so had no need of justification, which consists therein as you hold.

2. He did all for us, our need, being our Surety, in that name he was bound,
God spared not his Son, exacted it, and our Lord Christ undertook the work,
and finished the work.

3. I read in our learned Writers largely observed. See Polanus, Symphonia
Cathol. whose Thesis is. P. 165. 166.
Christ is incarnate for us, he obeyed Christus pro nobis est incarnatus: pro
nohis obedivit Patri: pro nobis baptizatus, passus, mortuus, resuscitatus,
glorificatus.
his Father for us, was baptized, suffered, dead, raised, glorified for us;
Christus nihil propter se aut secit aut passus est, sed propter salutem omnium.
Primas. in Romans 11.
which he there proves by the Fathers.

And so on Dan. 9.

See Doctor Dounham using reasons which are to be answered. P. 202. 203. 20^.
De justif. 1. 1. c.2. Sect. 9. 10. Ad Gal. c. 4. p. 184. 2.


Luther. I could have overcome the Law by my absolute power without mine own
smart, for I am Lord of the Law, and therefore it has no right over me. But I
have made my self subject to the Law for your cause which were under the Law,
taking your flesh upon me -- I suffered the Law to have dominion over me which
was his Lord -- which it ought not to have done.

Because, neither has Christ righteousness Quia nec in alium finem perfectam
justitiam Christus habet quam ut imputer, nec aliud imputat quam justitiam, nec
aliter justitia nostra est quam per imputationem, as Trelcatius. p. 82.
to any other end, then that he may impute it, neither does he impute any other
thing then righteousness, neither is he otherwise our righteousness, then by
imputation.

Christ was the Lord of the Law. Christus Dominus legis fuit. -- Tossan ad 4.
Gal. p. 212.
He willingly subjected himself, although the Law was not given to him Sponte
se subjecit, licet illi ab utero justo and sanctificato lex posita non esset.
lb. p. 213
being just and sanctified from the womb.

The end also is showed by the Apostle, Finis etiam ostenditur ab Apostolo,
quod videlicet non sibi ipsi sed nobis talis est factus. lb.
forsooth, that he was not made such for himself, but for us.

Therefore these axioms are to be Tenenda igitur sunt haec axiomata, Christum
non sibi sed nobis factum legi obnoxium: and nostram esse totam Christi
obedientiam, atque adeo nobis imputatam. ld. ib.
held. Christ was not made subject to the Law for himself, but for us. And that
the whole obedience of Christ is ours, and so imputed to us.

Calvine. That he may admonish Quanquam ponit (...) sed (...) Christi, ut
admonear ipsum non sibi privatim suisse justum, sed justitiam qua praeditus
fuit, latius patere, ut collato sibi dono, fideles locuplcret. Calv, in Romans 5.
17.
us that Christ was not just for himself privately, but that the
righteousness which he enjoyed was more large, that he might make rich the
faithful by the gift conferred upon him.

Therefore Christ the Son of God, Christus ergo Filius Dei qui immunis jure
suisset ab omni subjectione, Legi suit subjectus, ut libertatem nobis
acquireret. Quemadmodum enim qui liber erat captivum se and vadem constituendo
redemit and induendo vincula exuit: Ita Christus Legi servandae obnoxious esse
voluit, ut nobis immunitarem acquireret; alioquin frustra ^ugum Legis
subiisset, cum sua certe causa non secit. Calv. ad Ga: 44.
who by right had been free from all subjection, was subject to the Law, that
he might gain unto us liberty. For as the man that was free, by making
himself a captive and Surety, redeemeth, and putting on chains, takes them
off another: so Christ would become a keeper of the Law that be might gain
unto us freedom, otherwise he had in vain undergone the yoke of the Law,
seeing certainly be did it not for his own cause.

And for the undue obedience of the Et proprer obedientiam Filii non debitam,
debitum remittit. Ar. in 3. Phil. p 49.
Son he remitteth what is due.

Junius. But also when as he was not Sed etiam cum non esset proprie Legis
debtor in se, neque respectu humanae naturae (alias enim propter identitatem
(...) logos ipse pro se ad Legis obsequium ^eneretur, quod in Legis authorem
soret contumeliosum) nec respectu personae: Sed respectu dispositionis
voluntatiae omni tamen ex pa^^e Legi satisfecit, ut exuberans infiniti plane
meriti plenitudo nobis in Christo parata, etc. Jun. these. de justif Sect. 7.
properly a debtor of the Law in himself, nor in respect of his humane nature,
(for otherwise the Word himself by reason of the samenesse of the person,
should for himself be bound to the obedience of the Law, which would be
contumelious to the Author of the Law) nor in respect of his person; but yet in
respect of his voluntary disposition he did wholly satisfy the Law, that the
overflowing fullness of his indeed infinite merit prepared for Sibi non na^us
sed nobis. Id. Sect. 4. lb.
us in Christ, etc.

He was not borne for himself, but us.

Our righteousness is only the satisfaction Justitia nostra est sola
satisfactio Christi praestita Legi pro nobis and tota humiliantis Christi, etc
quiquid denique fecit and passus est, ad quod ipse tanquam justus and Dei
filius non suit obligatus, est satisfactio ejus quam pro nobis praestitit, and
justitia quae nobis credent ibus adeo gratis imputatur: ea enim satisfactio
aequipollet vel impletioni Legis per obedientiam, vel paenae ae^ernae propter
peccata, ad quorum alterutrum Legi obligamur Vrsinus p 39 ^.
of Christ performed to the Law for us and the whole, etc. of Christ humbling
himself, etc. whatsoever, to conclude, he did and suffered, to which he, as a
just man, and the Son of God was not bound, is his satisfaction which he
performed for us, and righteousness which is freely imputed to us believing by
God. For that satisfaction is equal Ger^ar dat Neo-Photinianis Christum quidem
perfect implevisse Legem, sed ad obedientiam illam pro seipso adstrictum
fuisse. De justif. p. 463. Sect. 35. and Socino, etc. Sic Chemn^t exam. de
justif. p. 252.
either to the fulfilling of the Law by obedience, or eternal punishment for
sin, to both which we are bound by the Law. Vise Echardum sasc. Controvers
citantem Calvinum. l. 2. c 17. instit. Sect. 6. Ma^l^ratum in Psalm. 4. 4. and
Polanum quaest. de obedientia p 1^0. and p. 398.


These are enough, they may satisfy you.

You prove Christ was bound to fulfill the Law for himself, by Mr. Deering in
his second Lect. on Heb. Christ by his spirit still filled his manhood more and
more with grace, till the fullness of all righteousness was within him, that
so his manhood might inherit salvation according to the promise, Do this and
live.

Whose book is not in mine hands that I may examine it. Only I say that it is
not said that he merited for himself T^ere might be more and more powerful
exercise, and e^tern^^ manifestations, not increase in grace simply. He was
perfectus vir in ventre, etc. Jer. l. 6. in Hier. tom. 5. full of grace and
truth ab initio beatu^ extitisse. Asserunt Patres, Aug. l. 4 de consensu
Evangel. Leo. Ep 97. c. 3. Ubi testatur divinitate^ assumptam humanitatem
beatificasse, ut glorificata in glorificante permaneat. Se Salmer. tract. 47.
p. 441. To 3. etc. c. 13
by works of righteousness which he did, but the spirit filled him with
grace. For those words more and more till, etc. they are not to be justified by
me, it is certain he had the spirit, was anointed with it, not by measure
from the moment of conception; by that, and personal union from that moment he
had eternal life, and was comprehensor, and did inherit.

When Mr. Bradshaw says, Christ was a servant and bound to the Law, not freed
by hypostatique uni^n: He

Yet says, that state such as he needed not to have undergone, and that the
reason was his taking on him to satisfy, etc.

He says, as Christ was borne of a Woman, not for his own sake, but for
theirs, whose Savior and Redeemer he is: So being borne of a Woman, he was
made under the Law also, not for his own sake, but for ours; yea, therefore he
was borne of a Woman, that so for our sakes he might be under the Law. Also as
he became a servant for our sake, so in that very regard he came under the Law
of a servant, it being all one to become a servant, and to be made under the
Law of a servant, the being under the Law of a servant, etc. All which is in
sum, he needed it not for himself, but as our Surety, of which before. Sect
6.


You say. And he that holds Christ as man, was not bound to Sect. 7.
fulfill the righteousness of the Law for himself during his continuuance Sect.
9.
on earth in the flesh, must, if he be true to his principles, hold Ib.
withal that Christ as man had a liberty, or dispensation from the Sect. 13.
Godhead, to transgress in respect of himself, and that his dispensation P.
71.
could not take place or be put in execution only because Mr. G.
of the work of redemption he had undertaken.

Answ. I answer, that I conceive there is no such need, their principle is
hypostatique union, whence he was Comprehensor; I, the Lord of the Law from the
first moment: his Union, and his Unction by the holy Ghost, are inconsistent
with sin, as inconsistent with sin as with his bringing about the work of
redemption undertaken: sinning is inconsistent with souls made perfect, how
much more with that person, full of grace, that is glorified fully, the most
blessed GOD?

Thirdly, you say, I would put him on this, to prove such 3
an absolute inconsistency or diametricall opposition as he seems Mr. G.
to imagine between Christ's fulfilling the Law for himself and for us, as if
at no hand they could stand together.

I answer, to do for life and glory during his continuance on earth, and to
enjoy it from the first moment of his conception is vain: and so inconsistent
with nature; absolutely inconsistent with that person which is the most wise
God.

Therefore the scope of Christ in obedience must not be himself, his life and
glory, but us and our life and glory.

Neither does it follow which you say, if Mr. Walker had in this work his
scope to discharge his conscience, and the benefit of others, that Christ's
scope in obedience was his glory as well as man's good; seeing he has that
glory as Comprehensor before his obedience, when as a faithful Ministers
discharge of conscience by a work of this nature, cannot be but by this work,
when the work is done, conscience discharges it self.

When as Bernard says, that the work of our redemption was, opus aeque
nostrum ac suum ut angelorum; there may be truth in it in diverse respects. He
says it not with respect to his own redemption or justification, and so not
to your purpose.

You say it would cost him many of his thoughts and much of Mr. G.
his learning to give a sufficient and clear account, how it should any way
entrench or so much as look toward the denial of Christ's Godhead to conceive
that Christ might he bound to fulfill the righteousness of the Law for
himself.

I answer, for Christ to be bound to fulfill that righteousness, for himself
his justification as you before, is to imply him a sinner, and so to deny him
God.

It is also to imply him vainly bufied; living and enjoying life eternal
being the fountain thereof, to do that he may live, and so to deny him to be
that fountain, and to be that person that is God.

You conceive it is far more dangerously to shake the truth Mr. G.
of his humanity to deny that he was no ways bound to keep the Law for
himself.

I conceive no danger in it, for being absolutely righteous from the first
moment, and so not to need obedience or doing for himself, is so far from
denying humane nature, that it sets it forth most glorious: as it does stand
with humane nature to be perfect in glory, though then it works not to that
end; so does it in Christ's humane nature, to be perfectly righteous, though he
never does one work to that end.

And Mr. W. entreats you to tell him whether you now deny Christ to be true
man, when as sitting at Gods right hand he is not bound to obey the Law, and
die, as he did on earth? So that it is not to be compared, in the kind, with the
error of the Ubiquitary.

You say, It is mavelous to me that he being the seed of the Woman, by the
Law of his Creation should not be bound to keep that Law which both the man
and the woman stood bound to keep in their innocence.

1. Sir, Wonderful was one of the names of Christ, it is no wonder if there be
many wonders in him.

2. Had he been mere man, what you say might follow, being also God, there
was never such a man or woman in innocence.

3. Adam and Eve must do to live, doing was the way to it, but Christ was
alive as soon as he was a man, there is difference.

4. He being God-man was eminently just, Jesus Christ the just, and if ever
that was true of any, which the Apostle speaks, The Law is not given to the
just, it is true of him. By this he was the Lord of the Law, the person was so,
and exempted; only as a Surety, for us he was made under the same.

You say as the personal union with the Godhead could not Mr. G.
privilege his humane nature or body against those properties which are
natural and essential to it, as locality, quantity, finitnesse,
commensurablenesse to its place, nor communicate, nor conveigh over those
properties of imm^nsity, ubiquity, omnipresence, etc. which are essential to
the Divine nature. So neither could it privilege his manhood against those
moral habitudes, relations or conditions which are his essential in another
way, as videlicet, subjection to God, obligation of serving him, and fulfilling
his will, etc.

1. I answer, essential properties of man are inseparable.

2. And essential properties of God incommunicabla.

3. It is not suqtilis hominis oration, to speak of man privileged against
properties, his privileges (as you call them) being destructive and
inconsistent with his nature.

4. The opinion that Christ did not obey for his own life from moral
habitudes, or relations, or conditions which you call essential in another
way, subjection to God, obligation of serving him, fulfilling his will: We
grant all these, necessary that he might be our Surety, which is that for which
he was incarnate, he came to do Gods will; we say he was so from the instant
of conception perfectly, else was he not Comprehensor, and urge that as a
reason why he did it not for himself, but us. It is one thing to be so, and
thence to do for us according to Gods will, another to do for that life and
glory which he possesses.

I deny not but God promised him the glory of that work of mediation, and that
he wrote with an eye to that, and so prays for it as due by Gods eternal
compact, John 17. glory there being that which he had with his Father by
covenant on doing that work before the foundation of the world, that is one
thing, living on personal doing is another, it was not needful he should do
for that being his by union in conception.

And I question whether if his obedience was debt, his own debt, he could
merit and satisfy thereby for himself or us, seeing debt and merit cannot
consist. When man has done all that he is bound to do by Gods Law, he must
say, and truly, he is an unprofitable servant, it is what he ought, and so not
worth thanks at the Creators hands. Which yet you imply, when as before you
say Christ's scope in obedience, was his glory as well as man's good, p. 180.
before, and where you say in a sense it had an influence. What will become of
man's justification by his passive obedience, which is confessed to have
absolute necessity of his active to make i^ a Sacrifice propitiatory, how is it
an essential requisite, if due for himself?

That doing or suffering is of no force to satisfy which is Mr. Brad. c 7.
done by bond, though the party offending bad committed no fault at all, it
being ridiculous to account the payment of one debt for the discharge of
another.

Nothing satisfies but that which meriteth, nothing meriteth Ib. Sect. 12 and
12.
but righteousness, which must be by another.

Concerning Christ's meriting his exaltation (you say) Mr. Goodw.
you will not strive with him for the present, and believe you may both wade
deeper and know more then you do, viz. Rev. 5. 12. Heb. 12. 2. Phil. 2. 7, 8,
9. etc. Luke 24. 26. etc.

I answer, I believe it, for man's knowledge is but in part. It is but a little
that we know of him, O that we knew it and could walk more humbly, and so might
pass them as not against us.

Only I must put you in mind, that if those places make for your purpose, and
in your sense, they prove that the Lord Christ suffered for himself as well as
for us.

And when we grant the places of the glory of his mediation: It will not follow
of glory simply for his humane nature, which certainly he had before.

We come now to another exception that you call faith a thing done and
performed by us, it being the gift of God and motion of his Spirit in us; in
which Mr. Walkers scope is not to accuse you of making believing Gods act, or
to deny man the subject thereof: but to note to you, that, the act of man in a
proper sense believing, and as our work, is not the condition of the Covenant,
of which before.

And now let us to the bottom of this heap (as you speak) frothy words shall
not stay me. Here you are charged to say, that if the Apostle had said they
must be justified by Christ, or by the righteousness of Christ, this had been
rather to cast a snare upon them, then to have opened a door of life and
salvation, for which be (Mr. W.) curses with Anathema maranatha, the man that
proclaims it and obstinately maintains it.

To this you answer, he keeps back part of your words, and supply them thus.
To have said they must be justified by Christ or Christ's righteousness, and
with all not to have plainly signified what God requires of them, and will
accept at their hand, to give them part and followship in that righteousness
or justification, had been rather to have cast a snare upon them, then to have
opened a door of life and salvation.

I answer, I think intimation of that whereby needful, and that it is done,
as where faith and receiving, as the hand and instrument are called for; so
where the object of that is laid down, Christ and his obedience, as Romans 5.
19. 2 Cor. 5. 21. so that there is no snare. Let us go on.

In the next place Mr. Wr. proposes your first argument Arg. 1. Sect. 18.
reduced, which is.

That the Relative sense fathers upon the Apostle an harsh and uncouth
expression often used without explaining himself, when he says faith is
imputed to righteousness, and means Christ's righteousness is imputed, which
is rather to conceal then reveal it.

To this the answer is.

It is no harsh, strange, or uncouth expressure to use a Answ.
figure of speech, and to mean by faith and believing, faith with its object,
the righteousness of Christ, or state of the man, etc. which is showed out of
Romans 2. the four last verse. by Beza's interpretation.

To this you reply, It is true, there are many figures of speech which are no
harsh expressions. But,

1. There are plain and direct expressions which will be made Mr. G.
strange and harsh, if men will Metamorphose them into Metalepticall and
figurative, as sweet wine becomes sharpest vinegar.

2. If men coin such new forms of speaking, and will call them figures, they
may well be strange and harsh expressions.

I answer, It is not altogether what men will do, though Answ.
what such and so many men do, as do this, is not to be despised by you, but
what the holy Ghost does, interpreted by Scriptures, as is showed.

And as for that Jeere on those that call it Metalepticall, it might have been
forborne. It is the practice of Figuratu^ genus praedicationis, per Metalepsin
p. 404.
more then Mr. Wr. divines not to be contemned by Mr. G.

When faith is said to be imputed, says V^sinus; It is a figurative kind of
predication, and names it Metalepsis.

I observe it in Lueas Trelcatius, Fides in Scripturis and apud Patres, duobus
modis considerari soler, proprie secundum naturam fidei simpliciter; altero
figurate, id est Metaleptice and correlative, qu^a fides apprehendit objectum
suum. p. 85.
Faith in the Scriptures and amongst the Fathers is wont to be considered two
ways, properly according to the nature of faith simply; another, figuratively,
that is, Metaleptically, and correlatively, because faith apprehends its
object. So does he, answering Romanists.

To an objection of Arminius, Doctor Prideaux his answer is.

We do not properly give justification Nos non proprie justificationem fidei
attribuere, sed Metaleptice quatenus objecti actus propter arctam connexionem
inter illam and habitum, uisitata Scripturae phrasi in habitum transfertur. De
justif. p. 170.
to faith, but by a figure called Metalepsis, so far forth as the act of the
object, because of the near connection between it and the habit by a usual
phrase of Scriptue is given to the habit. Note that we and by an usual phrase
of Scripture.

Sir, all Protestants are for a figure, and these name it a Metalepsis, they
deserve better language then to be called Metamorphosers and coyners of
figures, users of Metaleptique oil elsewhere, and of it as a sure pinhorse, p.
82. Mr. Wr. needs not be ashamed of using it, but yon rather; but (it may be)
you knew not who used it. Now to a second exception.

Which is that your denial of this figurative speech used in the Apostle is
false.

This Mr. Walker might well do, having proved it out of Romans 2. the four last
verses, until you disprove him; neither will that stand for an answer, that
the Scripture he cites stands in the utmost corner of one only chapter, much
less the calling his work non-sensicall figuring and missefiguring. When you
send your Reader to what is done, let it be a bargain, and let him take in Mr.
W. p. 255.

A third exception is, that you say the Apostle uses the phrase of faith, etc.
without either explaining himself or changing his speech, which M. W. shows
to be otherwise, v. 6. and 11. where it is said that God imputes
righteousness and that righteousness is imputed, as it is called faith, verse.
3. and 5. in these places, righteousness; in the former using a figurative,
and in the latter a proper speech.

Neither can he by righteousness imputed mean faith in a proper sense, it is
not righteousness, or if what is imperfect, on which ground the learned reject
that, and call it figurative, comprehending the righteousness of Christ which
is used twice, and is righteousness indeed as Mr. W. P. 190.
shows at large Socinianisme.

When as you admit that by righteousness in these places P. 78.
the Apostle means faith: You will us to see what a fair market Mr. G.
Mr. Walker has brought his Hogs to. Let me (passing your Rhetorique) demand
what is the market?

You say the sense must be, when God imputes righteousness to a man that
believes, that God imputes faith to him that believes, which is to obscure
what was said before.

To this Mr. W. answers, that it is a Pigge of your own Sow, you are owner
and driver to the market, and leaves you to look to it.

What you have done, as you say before, has answer. The rest may be retorted
on you, whose the argument was, who gave him the charge.

Come we now to your second Argument. Sect. 19.


That faith which is imputed is his before imputation, which cannot be said of
the righteousness of Christ, that it is a man's before it be imputed, at least
in order of nature, though not in time; therefore by faith to be imputed cannot
be meant the righteousness of Christ.

To this Mr. W. that Christ's righteousness is as truly his as his faith. You
reply here you are friends in earnest, you grant the righteousness of Christ
the believers, but that is not the question. What is it then? Whether it be his
in such manner as it was Christ's himself? that is, whether we be made
righteous with it as Christ was, whether not only for it and not with it?

I answer, there is no such question proposed in this place, neither does Mr.
Walker, when he says we are justified by the righteousness of Christ, say it
is his that is justified in such a manner as it is Christ's: nor that we are
made just with it as Christ was, and yet he may well say we are made just, not
only for it, but with it.

The righteousness of Christ is that robe in the Prophet, that garment of
salvation, with which the Church as a Bride is arraied, whence white as Snow,
whiter: Wholly fair in his beauty, as Jacob in Esaues apparel to Isaac, as
Calvine before out of Ambrose.

And if you compare it to money, it is that by which we are rich, by his
poverty, all that he did or suffered in his humble estate, we are made rich as
the Apostle. He is the treasure, faith indeed applies him, but it is he that
makes rich. Take the learned Doctors answer if you please, and let him
determine this question.

We are alike just, because with the Aeque justi sumus ac Christus, quia eadem
justitia, licet non aequaliter and eodem modo: ille subjective, nos imputative,
ille de proprio, nos de illus largitate. De justif. Doctor Pride. p. 171.
same righteousness, though not equally, and in the same manner; be as the
subject of it, we by imputation, be of his own, we of his liberality.

If you regard the truth of imputed Si veritatem justitiae imputatae spectes (
Trelcatius) non minus justi justi censemur coram Deo ac Christus, P. 89.
righteousness, we are accounted no less just before God then Christ; and
that, that is the money and clothing too, we shall show at large anon.

But Mr. Walker, say you, to prove the righteousness of Christ to be the
believers as well as faith is his, miscites two Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2
Cor. 5. 21. Christ is said in the first to be made unto us righteousness, but
this proves not that the righteousness of Christ is made ours, as faith is,
etc.

1. Lanswer, that, as faith is an adding to what Mr. Wr. spoke, not spoken by
him.

2. That the righteousness of Christ is ours, you granted but now, saying,
here we be friends in earnest. It is a received conclusion. Junius.

Neither ought it to seem absurd that we are justified with that righteousness
which is in him as the subject, as another. When as it is so another, that it
is also ours Neque vero absurdum videri debet nos justitia quae Christi
subjective tanquam aliena justificari, cum ita sit aliena ut etiam nostra sit
imputatione, pro nobis enim proprie praestita, and a Deo tanquam nostra
accepta, quemadmodum fidei jussoris pro debitore solutionem perinde recipit
creditor ac si debtor ipse eam secisset; and quod est proprium capitis nostri
Christi, jure communionis reliquo corpori, id est Ecclesiae and singulis
membris tribuitur.
by imputation. It was performed for us properly, and accepted of God as ours,
as the Creditor so receives the payment of the Surety for the Creditor, as if
the Debtor himself had made it. And that which is the property of our head
Christ, by right of communion is given to the rest of the body, that is, the
Church.

When God gives Christ, he gives his righteousness, we receive both by
faith, and so both are ours, and therefore Justitia Christi vere nostra, licet
non in nobis. Olev. ad Phil. p. 49.
is he called the Lord our righteousness. The righteousness of Christ is
truly ours, though it not in us: where he proves the same. See him, p. 50. 51.
where speaking of righteousness imputed, he says, nec minus nostram esse quam
si corporibus and animabus nostris adhaeresceret, it is no less ours then if
it did adhere to our bodies and souls, Olev.

3. For the texts themselves, hearken to some, of whom you say they are on your
part; they from them show the righteousness of Christ ours to justification.

Calv. on the words, he was made unto us righteousness, says: In which he
understands us accepted Quo intelligit nos ejus nomine acceptos a Deo, quia
motte sua peccata nostra expiaverit; and ejus obedientia nobis in justitiam
imputetur.
of God in his name, because be expiated our sins by his death, and that his
obedience might be imputed to us for righteousness.

Though Christ and his righteousness differ, Christ's righteousness is ours by
imputation in Calvines judgment.

He is made unto us of God righteousness, Justitia nobis a Deo factus, quia in
eo solo justi habemur: reputamur illius merito justi, Aretius in locum.
because in him alone we are accounted righteous, we are reputed just by his
merit.

And truly righteousness not in part, Et quidem justitia ( says Tossanus) non
ex part sed tota nostra justitia, per remissionem peccatonim and imputationem
totius suae justitiae, sic Jer. 23. p. 19.
but our whole righteousness, by remission of sins and imputation of his
whole righteousness.

Righteousness, that is our Justifier, Justiria, hoc est justificator noster,
donan nos vera justitia coram Deo per fidem.
bestowing on us true righteousness before God by faith; which is so not
formally, that is, inberently, as Pareus speaks, but by imputation. Pareus


Abraham is justified not with Abraham justificatus est non inhaerente sed
imputata justitia per fidem
inherent, but imputed righteousness by faith.

To that text, 2 Cor. 5. Calvine. Jam apertius docet quod su pra attigimus,
tunc Deum nobis esse propitium quum pro justis agnoscit, perinde enim valent
haec duo, esse nos Deo acceptos, and justos ab ipso reputari. Justitia hic pro
imputatione accipitur, eo quod accepta nobis fertur Christi justitia.
Now he more plainly teaches what we touched before, that then God is
propitious to us when he acknowledges us just, for those two are of the same
force, that we are accepted of God, and reputed just by him. Righteousness is
here taken for imputation, because righteousness is accounted to us.

And in that place, to the question, How are we just before God? He answers.
Forsooth Quomodo justi sumus coram Deo? etc. Ita sc. nunc justi sumus in ipso,
non quia operibus pro priis satisfaciamus judicio Dei, sed quoniam censemur
justitia Christi, quam fide induimus ut nostra fiat. Calv.
we are now so just in him, not because by our own works we may satisfy the
judgment of God, but because we h^ accounted the righteousness of Christ,
which we put on by faith, that it may be ours. Aretius on those words, that we
might be made the righteousness of God.

That we may be pronounced just, Hoc est justi pronunciatemur, imputativa
justitia ia tanquam vest omaremur: dicitur autem justitia, quia nostra non est
sed precario. In ipso, significat extra Christum nullam esse justitia qua nos
possimus ornare and quae valeat in conspectu Dei. Ib. Arct. in loc.
that we might be adorned with imputed righteousness, as it were with a
garment: but it is called the justice of God, because it is not ours, but his
free gift. In him, he signifies, that out of Christ there is nor
righteousness with which we may adorn our Ut nos efficeremut, says Toss. hoc
est justificaremur, non justitia inhaerente, sed in eo, propter communionem
quam habemus cum illo, and imputationem ejus just itiae. In locum. Summa loci
est: sic sumus justi sicut Christ is peccator: at Christus est peccator
imputatione nostrorum peccatorum, non reali corruptione, aut actionibus pravis:
ergo nos imputatione ejus justitiae sumus justi. etc. Olev. in Phil. 3. 9. p.
46. Sic Gerhard: de justif. Le^^. 61.


That we may be made, that is, that we may be justified not with inherent
righteousness, but in him, because of the communion we have with him, and the
imputation of his righteousness.

We be just with God, not indeed Justi, says Beza, apud Deuminon quidem
justitia nobis inhaerente, sed quoe cum in Christo sit, nobis per sidem a Deo
imputatur: ideo additum est, in eo Sic ergo sumus justitia Dei in ipso, ut ille
peccatum in nobis, ex imputatione. Bez. in locum.
with righteousness inhering in us, but which, when it is in Christ is imputed
to us from God by faith: therefore it is added, in him. Therefore we are so the
righteousness of God in him, as he is sin in us, for sooth by imputation. So
that in this you oppose not Mr. Walker alone, but the word and interpretation
of our learned Authors.

Secondly, he answers (say you) that this righteousness of Christ is the
Believers, in order of nature, before it be counted or imputed for
righteousness unto him. For God, whose judgment is according to truth, does
not account that to the beleover which he has not before communicated, or at
the same time does communicate to him. Well, what of this? you say, He begges 1.
the question that God does impute the righteousness of Christ to a Mr. G.
believer in his sense.

I answer, we are past begging now, and when your Answ.
sense appears, it will be, and is found, Arminian, Socinian, and
Pontifician, as shall be seen anon, and Mr Walkers the sense of all
Protestant Dlvines against them.

You say he proves idem per idem. I answer no, he proves 2.
the righteousness of Christ the believers from the truth of Gods judgment,
whence he does not account that to the believer which he has not before, or at
the same time communicates to him.

To your descant on his words, before, all I will say is, 3.
there is added or at the sametime.

If it be true at the same time, it is enough to evade the inconsequences,
which arise from its being before, and you should have taken notice of this,
or. And now to the third Argument.

The third Argument was, granting a Trope, yet is follows 3. Arg. Sect. 20.
not that the righteousness of Christ should be imputed here, but God or the
promise made to Abraham.

I answer, the Apostle calls it righteousness, verse. 6. and verse. 11. as
before. Neither do you disprove it, by saying God or the promise, you e^illy
oppose Christ's righteousness, God and the promise.

Is not God Abraham's in Christ, and so Abraham's says in Christ supposed to his
faith in God? 1 Pel. 1. 21. We by him do believe in God. Is not the promise of
Gods being Abraham's God in Christ, to whom it is first made, and in whom it is
Yea and Amen, to Abraham and his seed? The Apostle says, If we be Christ's, we
be Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to promise, so Abraham and believers
are Heirs in the Heir, by being Christ's, and so the promises containing our
inheritance, are ours. Hence amongst the rest we are Heirs of the
righteousness which is by faith.

Sir, in that promise you might have seen the seed, the seed is Christ, and
in the promise, his natures, offices, adaptations, doing, dying, rising,
sitting at Gods right hand; our salvation, our justification by his
righteousness. Abraham by faith saw his day and rejoyeed: saw all these by
faith. So did Abel, his Sacrifice witnessed he was righteous, accepted in the
righteousness of Christ, and so his Sacrifice. So did Enoch please God, which
is impossible without faith in Christ, in whom God is well pleased. So did
Noah, and hence was he just before God, an Heir of the righteousness which is
by faith. So did Abraham believe in Christ, and it was counted to him for
righteousness. So David, etc.

The Prophet after opens him a righteous branch, and the Lord our
righteousness.

The Apostle more plainly as before, the promise was the Seed, and
blessedness, and we are blessed with all in Christ, they are the inheritance
of believers in and by Christ the Heir.

Glevian has passages this way observable. Having said, Cum Deus sit justus,
ideo non imputat peccatum, quia imputat hlit justi^ nam.
seeing God is ^ust, he imputes not sin, because he imputes the
righteousness of his Son. He adds,

David did therefore build on the Sacrifice and intercession of the highest and
eternal Priest, of whom he seake by the holy Ghost; Thou are a Priest for
(...), etc. And so David believed, not in righteousness inhering us himself,
but in that which was imputed from the High Nitebatur igitur David Sacrificio
and intercessione summi and aeterni sacerdotis, de quo per Spiritum sanctum
loquutus est, Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum, etc. Arque it a David non in
inhaerentem in se justitiam, sed imputatam a summo Sacerdore Christo credidit.
Sic Abraham non in se quaesi vit justitiam, sed side extra se vidit diem
Christi and gavisus est: dies autem non solum tempus dispensation is gratiae
Christi significat, sed totum beneficium tum demum exhibirum cum venit
plenitudo temporis. P. 48. ad Phil.
Priest, Christ. So Abraham sought not righteousness in himself, but by faith
out of himself, he saw the day of Christ, and rejoyeed. The day signifies,
not only the time of the dispensation of the grace of Christ, but the whole
benefit then as length exhibited, when the fullness of time came.

Therefore that inscription of the Ideo inscriptio illa soederis in tarne
Abrahoe sigillum justitiae sidei appellatur, propterea quod Abrahain ex
semetipso utpote corrupto and injusto egressus, side in promisso semine
justitiam possederat; eique in praeputio credenti imputata suerat: nunc autem
impresso sigillo rei extra ipsum positae and eminus conspectae suit in carne
ipsius confirmata possessio. lb. p. 50.
Covenant in the flesh of Abraham, (Circumcision) is called the Seal of the
righteousness of faith, because, as a corrupt and unjust man, had possessed by
faith in the promised seed, and it was imputed to him believing in
Uncircumcision: But now the possession was confirmed by an imprinted Seal in
his flesh of a thing placed out of himself and seen afar off.

Abraham believed, says Pet. Martyr. Credidit Abraham -- at the quid credidit?
hocsc. semen sibi dandum ese, unicumsc illud, ut Paulus interpretatur, in quo
omnes nationes essent benedicendae, quod est Christus Jesus, Genesis 15. 6. Gal.
3. 16. L. Com. de just. Sect. 23.
But what did he believe? Forsooth this seed to be given unto him, that one
seed, as Paul interprets it, in whom all the Nations of the earth were to be
blessed, which is Jesus Christ.

Amongst other things Abraham believed. Pareus adds, Sed etiam spirituali per
Chri stum caput seminis, ex quo in totum semen benedictio and gloria coelestis
sluere debait. Apostolus enim promissum semen express dicit esse Christum; nec
dubitari porc^^, seminus promissionem cui credidisse Abraham dicitur, cohaerere
cum promissionibus antegressis and subsequ^tis de semine and benedictione
omnium geatium per illud. Fuit igitur Abrah^ sides generalis quidem seu
Catholica (ut vocant so phistae) assentiens o^^l verbo Dei: Sed and specialis
promission^ data de semine, quod est Christus Ira Ambro^^^ in Comment. Credidit
Abraham Deo, Quid credidit; sethen se habiturum ^^^linmin quo c^^es gentes
justificarentur. In Christo igitur suit sundata Abrahe sides. Ad Romans 4. ad
verse. 5. p. 263.
But also of that which was spiritual, by Christ the Head of the seed, from
whom the blessing and heavenly glory should flow unto the whole seed. For the
Apostle expressly says the promised seed to be Christ. Neither can is be
doubted but the promise of the seed which Abraham is said to believe, to agree
with the promises going before, and following of the seed and blessing of all
Nations by it: therefore the says of Abraham was indeed general or Catholic
(as the Sophisters call it) assenting to every word of God, but also special
to the promise given of the soed, which is Christ. So Ambrose on his
commentary. Abraham believed God, What did he believe? that he should have
seed, that is, a Son in whom all Nations should be blessed. Therefore
Abraham's says is founded in Christ.

And here may you be well minded of your Doctrine, that the object of the
faith, that is imputed, is Jesus Christ, and that it brings into communion
and participation of him and his benefits; which being true, how could Christ
and his righteousness be excluded?

But now to your tedious discourse following involved in many vain words,
which I will not touch.

1. You complain of his friend Metalepsis, which you do but play with, to
which having seriously answered before, I say no more.

2. Then you demand, whether because a man cannot, believing, separate the
righteousness of Christ from Christ, by God there must be necessarily
understood the righteousness of Christ.

To which I answer, you do but trishe, Believing insoldeth God his in Christ,
Christ and what ever is lapt up in that word Blessedness; temporal,
spiritual, eternal, with Jesus Christ: visiting, redeeming, raising up Christ
an horn of salvation, salvation from evil, righteousness and eternal life,
are the mercies promised to Abraham, Gods holy covenant and his oath, in
Zacharies song. There is more in it then I suppose you are aware of, as if you
had but trifled in earnest.

You marvel why Mr. W. still mentions the satisfaction of P. 83.
Christ with the righteousness of Christ. Whereas you intend no difference or
dispute about the satisfaction of Christ but his active obedience to the Law.
Whether this be imputed that thereby we may claim Heaven, by Do this and
live. And that his thrusting in of the passive obedience or satisfaction is to
presents you odious as an enemy to Christ's satisfaction.

1. I answer, Sir, we must cry you mercy, or else wonder as you, why you had
act opened this before this time.

2. It seems you are then for the imputation of Christ's Passive obedience to
obtain pardon, and then Passive righteousness is that which is imputed, and
faith in a Relative sense to that. And what is become of your proper sense then?

This Mr. Wotton blames in Piscator, Yet I no where find in holy Scriptures
that there is need of Tamen nusquam in sacris literis reperio imputatione
passivae Christi obedientiae ad eam consequendam opus csfe, licet verum and
perspicuum sit, illus perpessiones (ex Dei decreto) suisse necessarias ad
veniam nobis impetrandam. Neque (ut vere dicam quod res est) intelligere possum
quis veniae relictus sit locus, si (paenas in Christo persolvendo) Irae divinae
satisfecisse, and supplicium peccatis debitum pertulisse existimenur, nam paena
and venia adversa sunt. Manuscrip. accepto Jan. 13. 1613 of Mr. Wotton.
imputation of the Passive obedience of Christ to obtain it, (Justification or
pardon) though it be true and clear; those sufferings to have been necessary
(by the decree of God) to obtain pardon to us. Neither (that I may truly say
what the thing is) can I understand what place is left to pardon, if we should
be judged by suffering punishment in Christ, to have satisfied Divine wrath,
and borne punishment due to sin: for pardon and punishment are adversaries.
Tell us by your next whether and how far Magister sit hic ^^^endus.

3. Mr. Walker finds our debt to the Law to be not only death for sin, but
doing that we may live, and we think both must have satisfaction, and are
inseparable; and if Christ be the object, why shall his righteousness be
excluded? is he (...) the Lord our righteousness? is not the Lord's being in
(...) and all the return thereby the issue of Christ and his righteousness?
is not the new Testament confirmed in his blood? are we not by his obedience
constituted righteous? is it not by the righteousness of one that the free
gift (...) upon all to justification of life? The Apostle says, that the
promise to Abraham that he should be the Heir of the world, was not through
the Law, but through the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 13. that is the
righteousness of Christ which faith lays hold on and applies, by that the
promise was made. And why shall we not think his faith then built on that
righteousness? You will not question but we have all for Christ's sake, his
righteousness sake and merit, they must be imputed, and we by faith have
fellowship with them, or never have benefit.

4. Mr. Walker does think Christ's Passive righteousness to be obedience to the
Law, that which the Law exacted of us, and we being insolvent of our Surety,
and that you cannot escape by calling it satisfaction to God, not to the Law,
seeing it was Gods Law; and in satisfying God his Law must be satisfied.

To your demand. Does it follow (though a man cannot separate the
righteousness of Christ from Christ himself in believing) that the
righteousness of Christ must needs be the object of faith as justifying? And
add, much less does it follow that this righteousness of Christ must needs
be signified by this word God, or by the promise of God concerning Christ,
which himself grants to have been the object of faith, as justifying.

I answer, it is suitable to reason to pitch on the righteousness of Christ in
matter of justification, seeing without righteousness there is no
justification, and by righteousness, what ever it be, there must be
justification, of which before. The rest has a full answer as I suppose also.
There are other reasons besides inseparablenesse.

For what is remaining in your own words, I must say F. 84.
that they are of that manifest inconsequence and indigestednesse, that I will
rather trust the Reader with his own apprehensions concerning them, then to
trouble him or my self with a farther answer.

The righteousness of Christ can in no tolerable construction be A^g. 4. Sect.
21.
called that faith by which Abraham believed in God that quickneth the dead,
therefore the righteousness of Christ is not that faith which is here said to
be imputed for righteousness. I Will add the first proposition, that faith which
is said to be imputed to Abraham for righteousness, is that faith by which he
believed in God that quickened the dead. This (you say) is your next argument
whereby you p^on^ by the Word, that faith in these passages is not meant the
Active obedience of Christ.

1. I answer, first, in this expressure added, you change the conclusion. It
was never Mr. Walkers meaning by faiths object to stand on, alone, Christ's
Active obedience, but both Active and Passive obedience.

2. When you exclude this, it seems you allow that which is Passive to be the
object. So that faith may be in that and him that quickneth the dead; the other
inseparable part must not be excluded.

3. I answer, it is faith in Christ and his perfect righteousness whereby we
believe in him that quickneth the dead, by faith in Christ I believe in God, be
is my God as Abraham's, by which our Lord proves the resurrection, Matthew. 22.
against the Sadduces, it reaches that blessing; by faith in Christ, Abraham,
saw Christ's resurrection, and so his own, as David did the resurrection of
Christ, Acts 2. 30. as Gods oath to him, which was the same he swore to
Abraham. Yea, he saw and believed his own resurrection; indeed lapt up in
Christ's resurrection, as of a member in the raised head, and rejoiced at it,
16. Psalm. fine, compare the places.

The Apostle says the spirit is life because of righteousness, Romans 8. 10.
which life is without question (though I exclude not life simply) the quickening
of the dead, as in the next, v. by righteousness, I take imputed
righteousness meant; Hanc ipsam quam nos asserimus imputatam. Cham. de just.
c. 2 Sect. 59. c. 15. Sect. 36. Sect. 37.
and, Chamier calls it the very same we call imputed; and for that quickening
of the dead, see the same Cham. out of Tolet, and Cajetan calls it the
righteousness of Christ.

Neither is there opposition here, but subordination, between Christ and God
and life and faith in Christ and his righteousness.

Neither are these effects of two faiths, faiths of adifferent kind, but of the
same, there is but one faith, by which, as I believe in Christ and his
righteousness, so in God, as he is in Christ for blessedness simply, the
remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, and everlasting life; the
naming of one excludes not, but necessarily implies all the rest.

And though Mr. Walker (as you conceive) Reads not Christ's lying three days
and three nights in the grave, any where called faith, or signified by that
expression, yet I suppose I read the Gospel to be called faith, and if that you
mention be Gospel, it must be called faith, infolded under that expression. I
am sure faith by which I believe remission of sins, resurrection of the body,
and everlasting life, to be faith in God through Christ satisfying, obedient
even until death, continuing Gods set time in the state of the dead, for us,
our justification and pardon, yea, salvation, to the glory not only of free
grace, but exact justice, and do you consider the same.

Abraham's faith imputed to him, was such a faith wherein Arg. 5. Sect. 22.
he was not weak, nor doubted of Gods promise, verse. 19. and 20. This can be
no description of Christ's righteousness.

I answer, though this be no description of the righteousness of Christ, yet
Abraham's faith imputed might be a strong faith in the righteousness of Christ,
and this makes nothing against the Relative consideration of faith: what ever
the degree of faith is, the object is the same, nay the stronger the faith is,
the more is a man united to Christ, the greater is his communion with Christ
and fellowship with God, and so is his hold fast of righteousness, and so his
peace and comfort. So that this hinders not, but righteousness under the
notion of faith, may be imputed.

When you say the question is not whether Abraham had communion with Christ in
his righteousness or no, either more full or less full; but whether what is
here affirmed of Abraham's faith, can be applied to the righteousness of
Christ, and be conceived as spoken of that.

I answer, it can be applied to the righteousness of Christ, and thence
Abraham's communion with Christ in his righteousness, in that full manner faith
being so full and strong.

When you demand, Was that faith whereby Abraham P. 85.
doubted not of Gods promise, the righteousness of Christ?

I answer, it was the same faith by which he apprehended the righteousness of
Christ, by which he believed the promise, and in God: What was that promise of
but the seed, Christ and his righteousness and blessedness in and by the same?

You say your Antagonist starteth a new question, you remember not you ever met
withal from the Pen or mouth of any Divine, viz. Degrees in Justification, as
if he held because Abraham's faith was stronger, it had fuller communion with
Christ in his righteousness then other believers have, and so must needs be
more justified, and consequently others justification unperfect.

1. Then there is somewhat you never heard of, I have between two famous and
godly Divines in my time, though I approve not that Justification has degrees.
It is none of Mr. Walkers, there may be, and are degrees of union and communion
with Christ, and so of faith, by which neither of these I suppose are here
perfect. It follows not of Justification or righteousness, seeing every one
is perfected for ever, wholly fair, complete. Mr. Walkers aim is no more
then this, that he more strongly applied it, that his a apprehension was
stronger, and that he had more sensible communion with him in his
righteousness. Mr. Calv. on those words, Romans 1. 27. unto faith faith, because
so much Quia quantum progreditur sides nostra, qua^tumque in hac
cognitioneprosicitur, simul augescit in nobis Dei justitia, and quodammodo
sancitur ejus possessio.
as our faith goes forward, and so much as in this knowledge it profits, the
righteousness of God together increases in us, and after a manner its
possession is established. Let the last phrase explain the first, that of
increasing, and what is said in my poor opinion is safe.

This your argument I read urged by that Prince of the Arminian band, Bertius,
p. 135. where it is answered by Lubbertus.

Faith imputed to Abraham was that by which he was assured Arg. 6. Sect. 23.
that he who had promisnd was able also do it, verse. 21. and 22. But Christ's
righteousness is not capable of any such description as this is, therefore it
is not imputed.

I answer, though Christ's righteousness be not capable of such description,
that by it Abraham was fully assured, yet faith which apprehended the
righteousness of Christ, was, it seems it was of its nature, assurance is
opposed to doubt, as by faith he received it, he as a reasonable and
understanding agent did it, and knew the same, by faith he was persuaded and
assured of the same, and so of God in Christ as revealed, of the promise in
which God appeared to him Almighty, engaging power for the same. This being
added, let your argument and Mr. Walkers answer be turned loose together, and
stand or fall.

For his ill-sounding phrase or two, at best, deserving rods, Scorpions: Let it
be tried, the first is the repetition of the expressure censured in the former
answer, to which all I will say is, let what is said by you and answered, be
turned loose.

But he says, the more Abraham rested on Gods power, the more justly did God
count him a righteous man and impute G.
Christ's righteousness to him; which implies God does with less justice
impute the righteousness of Christ to a strong faith.

I answer, more justly may be considered in regard of expression or
manifestation of it to us, for if it appear justly to be done where the faith
is weak, where it is strong the appeareance is more clear. Truly your advise
is good, we cannot speak too too considerately and advisedly. I will say here,
Nemo sine crimine vivit, and optimus ille qui minimis urgetur. He is an happy
man that offends not in what he blames another. Woe be to your writing, this
book, if Rods and Scorpions be made use of for every inconsiderate and
unadvised word or speech.

Finally, that which is said, that the object of Abraham's faith, was Gods power
and ability, and your inference therefore not the righteousness of Christ, is
in effect Bell. argument to exclude special mercy.

Abraham did not believe sins to be Abraham non creditit sibi per specialom
miscrico rdiam remissa suisse peccata; sed se patrem suturum multarum gentiu^,
etc. Idest, credidit Deum qui promiserat omnipotentem ac sidelissimum, arque
haec sides eireputara suit in justitiam: ergo.
for given to him by special mercy, but that he should be the Father of many
Nations, etc. That is, he believed God who had promised to be omnipotent and
most faithful, and this faith was reputed to him for righteousness.

Pareus answering, grants that Abraham did believe those things which his
adversary says, but that did not exclude his faith of special mercy in pardon
by Christ, and then:

Abraham believed God not only Credidit Abraham Deo non solum promittenti
silium ex Sara, sed etiam promittenti benedistionem omnibus gentibus in semine
nascituro ex silio Saroe: In semine tuo benedicentur omnes Gentes. Hoc vero
semen Apostolus ad Galatas docer esse Christum, and benedictionem interpretatut
redemptionem ab execratione, and justificationem per sidem, ad Romans 4. 11.
clarius dicit Abrahamo suisse imputatam justitiam sidei, etc.
promising a son of Sarah, but also promising blessedness to all Nations in
his seed to be borne of the son of Sarah; In thy seed shall all Nations be
blessed. The Apostle to the Galatians, teaches this seed truly to be Christ,
and interprets the blessing Redemption from the curse, and justification by
faith, and Romans 4. 11. be more clearly says, that unto Abraham was imputed
righteousness by faith.

We believe in Jesus Christ for Pardon in the Creed, and God Almighty, so did
God appear to Abraham. Christ and his righteousness are not opposed to Gods
omnipotence, they are subordinate: And now to the seventh Argument.

That faith that is imputed, is believing in him who raised Arg. 7. Sect. 24.
up Christ from the dead, verse. 24. Christ's righteousness is not our believing
in him that raised up Christ from the dead: it therefore is not imputed.

I answer, your assumption and conclusion (which is a common fault) are laid
down only of the righteousness of Christ, not of faith, whereas, what you are
to improve, is faith in a Relativesense, and taking in Christ and his
righteousness, which had you done, the answer had been easy. This faith
taking in Christ and his righteousness is faith in God which raised up the
Lord Christ from the dead, the same faith that believes in Christ and his
righteousness, believes in God that raised up Christ, so is it laid down, 1
Pet 1. 21. upon it our justification depends; and if it were not, the Apostle
says our faith is vain, and we are yet in our sins. Christ's Resurrection
supposes him fully satisfying by obedience, even until death, acquitted. In
the Creed there is faith in God Almighty, and in Jesus Christ, dead and risen,
etc. whence our remission of sins and life everlasting. Who can lay thing to
the charge of Gods chosen? Who can cordenone? It is Christ that is dead, yea,
rather that is risen, etc.

Here is sweet harmony, I will leave this also to any reasonable judgment.

The sum of it is thus much as laid down by your Vlt. Arg. Sect. 25.
self. The point of imputation in justification being only handled in this
Scripture, and no where else explained, it is no ways probable but that the
Apostle should speak somewhat distinctly and plainly of the nature of it,
otherwise he might seem rather to lay a stumbling block in the way, then to
write any thing for the learning and comfort of Christians.

To this I will first take the boldness to answer, and then consider of the
matter as between you and Mr Walker.

1. I answer the point of Imputation is not only handled in this Scripture, it
is handled, Genesis 15. 6. and then Psalm. 32. which are the foundations of what
the Apostle here does concerning the same, and after, Gal. 3. 6.

2. It is elsewhere explained manifestly, Romans 3. 24. Romans 5. 17, 18, 19. Romans
8. 4. and Romans 10. 4. Yea, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. ult. whereas Christ, and his
righteousness, and obedience are laid down that by which, so by imputation.
C. 7. Sect. 14.
To be made just by the justice of another, is to be just by imputation, it
being not possible for any man to be just by another justice, but by
imputation, says Mr. Bradshaw. So is Adams sin ours, so is our sin Christ's
righteousness ours by imputation, as all our Divines.

Now by the foundation judge of your superstructives.

I add, this speech is a distinct and plain speech, which appears by the
unanimous judgment of all reformed Writers (but you Mr. Wotton, Arminius,
etc.) against the Papists, who stumble at Christ's righteousness, and establish
their own.

As also by all places of Scripture wherein the effects given to faith that
justifies, are given to it in respect of its relation to Christ, as his proper
effects to faith merely as an instrument causing union and fellowship with him
by whom they are effected.

Your interpretation is a mere stumbling block, and destroyer of comfort.
This a principal foundation of comfort. The kernel of the Gospel and head of
consolation, as Junius. Saint Paul judged it so when as he accounted all as
dung, and would be found not having his own righteousness, therefore not
faith in a proper sense, his, and a kind of righteousness, but that which is
by faith. I will finish this, making it my prayer, which Doctor Prideaux did.

The greatest and best God grant that Faxit Deus optimus maximus ut nos omnia
pro detrimentis habeamus, and comperiamur in eo non habentes justitiam nostram
quae est ex operibus, sed came quae est ex fide. De justif p. 171.
we may account all for loss, and may be found in him not having our own
righteousness, which is of works. (I will add) faith in a proper sense
opposed in justification to the righteousness of Christ; but that which is by
faith, which faith receives and applies, the righteousness of Christ Active
and passive; those robes of righteousness and garments of salvation. In him to
that end.

But it is meet you should be heard.

You say, to this Mr. Walker answers mum. Let the Reader see there, and in
his last book, and judge if his answer be mum.

You go on. Only he gravely instructs us, that it is more comfortable to us
for to rest on Christ's righteousness, etc. then to build on faith, which in
the best is mingled and stained with many doubts often times.

Surely this is geave advise, though you jest, you may find it one day as some
Papists have dying, what ever you do in dispute, when as your soul shall be
ready to take its flight from your body, and that to appear before Gods
tribunal. It will wish it may (and I pray it may) appear, nay it must appear
in, clothed with this righteousness of Christ imputed by God, applied by
faith, if then it has comfort: in, agone quanti Papistis? Papists then esteem
of this.

You go on relating what Mr. W. says, viz. Therefore the Apostle doubtless
intends Christ's righteousness, and so be does express in plain words (to
another purpose) c. 5. 19. 8. 4. and 10.4.

I answer, those words to another purpose, are your own words, in good time it
shall be tried.

These are more then mum, and Mr. Walker says the Apostle plainly expresses
that faith imputed, is called righteousness imputed by those texts, verse. 6.
and 11. It had been fairer for you to have answered mum.

Against part of this (you say) Mr. Walker makes an opposition between things
of the most direct and essential subordination that can be, and which do
inseparably involve one the other, resting on Christ's righteousness, and
building on faith.

1. I answer. If Mr Walker did do so, he failed as you in all your arguments,
or most of them. Your fault was to make opposition between those things which
are subordinate, as before.

2. It is none of Mr. Walkers fault, he does not make opposition between e
faith and Christ's righteousness. It is your self in stating the question. You
say, faith in a proper sense is imputed, and not the righteousness of Christ:
as a work in a proper sense, you oppose it, and it is indeed opposed to the
righteousness of Christ, so there is no subordination. It is true of the
figurative sense you dispute against, that faith involveth the righteousness
of Christ in this place overthrows your cause; you must be beholding for an
interpretation here to your friends the Papists, or you are gone.

You say it is impossible that a man should not build on faith, that does not
rest on Christ's righteousness, that is, the satisfaction which he has made,
because faith is a resting on this satisfaction, and so a resting on Christ's
righteousness, includes a building on faith; for who can rest on this
righteousness, except he believes that such a resting as this will stand him
instead?

1. Here you grant faith a resting on Christ's rightcousnesse. It is true, the
faith that receives and applies the same, cleaves and adhereth to it and
rests on it, then is it not an affent alone, or work of the understanding:
this establishes our Relative sense.

That other, building on faith, and that by on other believing, it is but a
Castle in the air; at best it is but an assent or belief which the Devil
has, who believes, that he that believes in Christ shall be saved. It is a
believing in abeleeving, which in your sense is a work, which is opposed to
Christ's righteousness in justification by your doctrine. For the establishing
the one, you deny the other, and so destroy subordination. It is safest to rest
only on that Rock Christ, there is no other foundation; S. Paul did so, When
as he would be found not having his own righteousnet, as faith in a proper
sense, such as it is.

But you say. Sure I am that Paul built upon faith for justification as well as
on the righteousness of Christ (as Master Walkers beloved phrase is) though in
a different manner (which has been formerly explained, when be said we know
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, and as Christ speaks concerning himself, John 12. 44. He that
believes in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent me, that is, not so
much in me, as in him that sent me. So may it be said, he that builds on
faith, builds not on faith, but on the truth and faithfulness of him who has
promised forgivenes of sins and salvation to him that believes.

1. Let the Reader note, how you speaking of building (for justification on
faith and on the righteousness of Christ) the former is current, the other Mr.
Walkers beloved phrase; building on the righteousness is Mr. Walkers phrase;
would a man think this man a Christian that reads this so jeeringly
proposed, or that there were such a direct and essential subordination as was
asserted but now, and such an inseparable involution? surely it would raise
much doubt. It is very offensive to me, and I conceive it much more to God and
Christ, no marvel that establishing faith in a proper sense you say and not
the righteousness of Christ.

2. Do you not bring in Paul building on two oppofite foundations according to
your doctrine? a work and Christ? the error he refuteth to the Romans and
Galatians?

And whether he be not brought in equally building on faith and Christ? your
phrase is as well, whether it agrees with Saint Paul's spirit, who would be
found in him, not having his own righteousness? which faith is in yoursense,
but that which is by faith which it receives. Saint Paul's words that he
believed in Christ, that he might be justified by faith of Christ, are no more
then this, that he believed in Christ, that so by that faith in Christ he might
be justified; knowing that (not works) the only way, here is no believing by
believing on believing, his building by believing is in Jesus Christ, which is
no other then believing in him for justification. By that very place faith as a
work is excluded by Saint Paul.

If all works together justify not, Si enim omnia o pera simul non
justificant ( as Pareus) quomodo o pus fidei justificarer, hoc est justos
faceret coram Deo? In Iocum.
how should that work of faith justify, that is, make just before God? Note
it then.

The true sense is, which the Apostle Sensus verus est quem Apostolus c. 3.
explicabit, nos fide benedictionem Abraha suscipere; benedictio autem Abrabae
est remissio peccatorum and justitiae imputatio propter Christi meritum fide
accepta, hoc ad Romans 4.6. dixit, fidem nobis imputari ad justitiam: quae
phrasis correlative intelligenda est, pro obedientiam Christi fide applicatam
nobis imputari ad justitiam, seu justitiam imputari propter obedientiam Christi
fide applicatam, uti in Comment. ad Romans prolixc est demonstratum, Id. ib.
in the 3. c. will explain, that we receive the blessing of Abraham by faith.
Now the blessing of Abraham is remission of sins, and imputation of
righteousness received by faith, because of Christ's merit. This Romans 4.6. he
said to be imputed to us for righteousness: which phrase is correlatively to
be understood, for that, the obedience of Christ applied by faith to be imputed
to us for righteousness, or righteousness to be imputed for the obedience of
Christ applied by faith, as is largely demonstrated in my Commentary on the
Romans.

And for the other place where you say, It may be said be that builds on
faith, builds not on faith, but on the faithfulness Utconsideratur cum
objecto suo, ut cnm dicitur Ecclesiae super fide Petr^ fundata apud veteres,
and nos etc. as Cham.
of God, promising forgiveness to a believer. Though it be true of Christ,
that he that by faith believes on him, builds on Gods faithfulness, or as
otherwise revealed, and of faith in a Relative sense. As it is confidered with
his object, as when the Church is said to be founded upon the faith of Peter,
by the Antiens, and we have showed.

It is not so of faith in a proper sense, your faith.

There is somewhat considerable yet, and that is the subordination here spoken
of, especially as in the cited text, John 12. 44. he that believes in me,
believes not in me, but in him that sent me. And I entreat you to ponder.

1. Whether faith in Christ the Mediator and God be not the same, and in the
moral Law as faith in God, surely either both or neither are by this text,
that sticks you see in my stomach.

2. That it is not incongruous that the same faith which lays hold on Christ
and his righteousness, should lay hold on God also, it is in him, and him that
sent him; him as revealed, God, as Romans 4. a quickner of the dead, able,
raising up Christ. What then becomes of those arguments you make to exclude
Christ and his righteousness from faith imputed to Abraham? It seems these
may consist, there is a subordination and involution of God as in Christ, in
faith in Christ.

It may occasion other thoughts to put the Crown on Christ's head, to deny it
to faith in a proper sense as opposed to the righteousness of Christ, in the
point of Justification.

You say, for the mixture or staining of faith with many doubtings, this is no
consideration at all, to detain or keep a man from building upon it, if it be
faith unfeigned and true, because there is the same justification and salvation
promised to the weakest faith and to the strongest.

If faith were taken in a Relative sense, it might be granted, because of the
object, the righteousness of Christ, here is perfect righteousness, all the
Law requires, he being the end of the Law for righteousness to a believer;
take both, you have the condition of the Gospel: no matter for strength or
weakness of faith in the point of Justification.

It is not so for faith in a proper sense, not involving, but excluding the
righteousness of Christ.

You have nothing to object to Gods just judgment; gratuide acceptilation of
faith, for the perfect obedience of the Law, in a proper sense, that Arminian
brat destroys Gods justice: and that faith can no more be accepted then any
grace else, it is worse, then to put all graces as the Papists do, as our own
teach you, you shall never prove it the condition of the Gospel.

Why may I not say the same of Repentance in general, of love, or the fear of
God? these as imperfect as they are, justify as well as faith (in your sense)
if that be a sufficient reason alone, it is what has the promise, see 1 Jes.
16. 17, 18. faith so taken is not the only condition or quality; all graces,
I, works else have their place. It is not faith alone that justifies: and how
can any of these be instead of personal righteousness, perfect obedience due
to the Law, which is your tenet of this faith. It is necessary to take in
Christ and the righteousness of Christ, for which faith has a peculiar
working; it is the consent of the soul, whence marriage indeed, union,
communion with Christ his righteousness, and all his benefits.

In the next place answers are given to those places where P. 88.
faith and hope are used to signify their object.

1. To which Mr. W. says, First, you grant the Apostles used such tropes.

2. When as you say the habit of faith may be used to signify the object, but
not the act, he answers, Gal. 1. 22. and 3. 23. and Col. 1. 5. the habit and
act both, yea the act is principally meant.

3. And thirdly, that you grant the act so used, but shife it by denying
Christ's righteousness the object of believing, which he has proved.

4. And lastly, that you deny Christ's righteousness the object of faith as it
justifies, whereas it is the proper object.

To these you say, That you will not be troublesome to the Reader here to
relate the passage be strikes at, and tell us of copies in some men's hands.

These I must pass, necessarily keeping counsel, and take for granted what is
not accepted against.

The substance of the answer consists you say in two or three untruths.

1. When he says the act of faith is to be understood, Gal. 1. 22. and 3. 23.
and Col. 1. 5. its contrary is true.

To which all I will say is this, that I know not how to define faith or hope
without the mention of the object therein, and that to the being of faith and
hope there is necessarily union with, or acting on the object; there is no
faith, nor hope in God, but it butteth on him.

2. Whereas Mr. Walker says he has proved the righteousness or active
obedience of Christ to be the object of faith as justifying. You say he has
not in all his discourse made the least hair of that head black or white.

1. I answer, first, those words or active obedience of Christ are your words,
not Mr. Walkers, his words are Christ's righteousness, which though Mr. Walker
excludes not, yet with him that is not all, he means active and passive
righteousness.

For the Passive obedience, I hope that shall be acknowledged Romans 3. 25.
the object of faith as it justifies. Christ dead is the object of faith in
the Creed for remission of sins; and the Apostle says, as that we are
justified freely by grace through, etc. So whom God has set forth a
propitiation through faith in his blood.

And I demand whether faith that justifies be not confessed by you faith in
Christ, and that it is an instrument causing union, bringing us to
participation of him and his benefits; Christ and his righteousness are the
object of faith, which you granted to be an instrument.

I demand what that righteousness of God, Romans 3. 22. Quod eam nobis Dominus
sua misericordia largiatur, aut ideo quia sola coram Deo consistit. John verse.
21. Ubi nulla justitiace^sctur nisi perfecta absouraque Legis obedientia.
which is by faith of Jesus Christ to all that believe? whether it be not
Christ's? whether it be so called, Because God of his bounty bestows it on us,
or therefore because it alone holds water before the Lord? as Calvine on the
place. Once he resolved it, quam per fidem obtinemus, which by faith we
obtain; and that which must be justice at Gods tribunal, as Calvine. Where
none is accounted righteousness unless perfect and absolute obedience to the
Law, as the same Author, where I read farther.

If so be that no man be found that has attained such exact holiness; it
follows that all are Quod si nemo hominum reperitur qui ad tam exactam
sanctitatem conscenderit, sequitur omnes justitia in se ipsis destitui. Tum
occurrat Christus oporter, qui ut solus justus est, ita suam justitiam in nos
transferendo justos nos reddit. Nune vides ut justitia fidei, justitia Christi
sit; ut ergo justificemur -- Christus materia, verbum cum fide instrumentum;
quare fides justificare dicitur, quia instrumentum est recipiendi Christi, in
quo nobis communicatur justitia* Postquam Christi sumus participes non ipsi
solum justi sumus, sed opera nostra justa reputantur coram Deo.
without righteousness in themselves. Then Christ must help, who as he is
alone just, so by transferring his righteousness on us, makes us just. Now
thou see how the righteousness of faith is the righteousness of Christ;
that therefore we may be justified -- Christ is the matter, the word with faith
the instrument. Therefore faith is said to justify, because it is the
instrument of receiving Christ, in whom righteousness is communicated to us.
After that we are partakers In Christu^ impingebant, per quem unum ad justitiam
adipiscendam patet aditus, act verse. 30. Datus nobis in* justitiam Christus
est. v. 32. Christi dignitas in hoc sita est, ut sit lumen, salus, vira,
resurrectio, justitia, medicina nobis omnibus. lb. Diximus autem alibi quomodo
justitiam* fide induant homines, quia sc. imputatur illis Christi justitia. lb.
C. 10. 3. and v. 5. Meminetimus ergo qui fide justi sunt extra se justos esse,
nempe in Christo. Justi coram Deo censemur, quia afferimus perfectam Legis
obedientiam, nam justitia transgressioni Legis etiam in minimo apice opponitur;
quia eam non habemus in nobis, Deus nobis gratuito denat, lb. id. ad Gal. 3. 6.
of Christ, not only our selves are just, but our works are reputed just
before the Lord. So Calvine.

What righteousness is that, Romans 4. b. and that righteousness of faith,
verse. 11. What that the Gentiles attained, and the Jews submitted not to, but
stumbled at? Romans 9. Says Calvine, they did stumble at Christ, by whom alone
the way to obtain righteousness is open.

Christ is given to us for righteousness.

Christ's honor is placed in this, that he be light, salvation, life,
resurrection, righteousness, healing to us all; where also we may see of whose
and what righteousness he speaks.

We have elsewhere said, how men put on righteousness by faith, because for
sooth Christ's righteousness is imputed to them.

And then he shows the righteousness of faith to be established out of the
very doctrine of the Law.

Let us remember therefore, that those that are righteous by faith, are just
out of themselves, for sooth in Christ.

Who says elsewere, we are accounted just before God, for as much is we bring
the perfect obedience of the Law, for righteousness as opposed to the
transgression of the Law, even in the least point; because we have not that in
our selves, God does freely give it us.

What is that Phil. 3. where Saint Paul will be found in him having that
righteousness which is by the faith of Christ, the Fides offertnudom homihem
Deo, ut Christi Justitia induatur. Deus nos justificet, sua bonitate, vel quod
justitiam ab ipso donatam fide recipiamus. Justitiam Dei accipio, quz apud Dei
tribunal approbatur In ipso says Aretius, sc. Chri sto Domino meo qui est
justitia -- fidei autem est quia per fidem illam apprehendi* mus cum
sicimputata and Christi merito nobis applicetur. Ad Phil 3. 9. Inveniri in
Christo tacitam habet relationem ad Dei judicium; is enim in amando
contemplatur unum sirum Christum in quo acquiescat, itaque quos comperit in
Christo esse (id est Christo per fidem insitos) in ^is nullam invenit
condemnationem, quia justitia quale^ ille requirit a no his, id est, perfecta,
accumulata, exornatos eos invenit, nimirum Christi justitia per fidem nobis
imputata. Bez. in locum.
righteousness which is of God by faith, on which place Calvine. Faith offers
man naked to God, that he may be clothed with Christ's righteousness.

Where also he says, righteousness of faith to be of God -- but because God
justifies us by his goodness, or because we may receive by faith righteousness
given from him.

I take that to be the righteousness of God which is approved at Gods tribunal.

In him, forsooth, Christ my Lord, who is righteounes -- But it is said to be
of faith, because by faith we apprehend it, seeing it is imputed and is applied
to us by Christ's merit.

To be found in Christ has a secret relation to Gods judgment, for be in
loving does behold his one Christ in whom he is well pleased: therefore those
whom be does find to be in Christ, that is, inset to him by faith, in those he
finds no condemnation, because he finds them adorned with righteousness such
as he requires of us, that is, perfect and heaped up, forsooth, Christ's
righteousness imputed to us by faith.

Christ himself must be put upon us that we may be found Dr. Whitaker against
Camp. and Dar. English. p. 231. Ib.
in him, Romans 13. 14. Phil. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 5. etc. with his clothing our selves
must be clothed, that they may be beautified and gloriously adorned, Phil. 3.
9. when he excludes all kind of works, he must needs understand the
righteousness of Christ.

This also is the constant doctrine of all reformed Churches, some few Divines
excepted, and those noted too.

And lastly say you where he affirms this righteousness of Christ to be the
only object of faith, as justifying, whereas it has been evidently
demonstrated, that is neither the proper nor less proper object thereof as
such, and that the Scriptures no where speaks so of it.

1. To which I answer, by righteousness Mr. Walker means not a part, but the
whole.

2. Here may men take notice of your sincerity, calling Christ and his
righteousness the object of faith, and faith an instrument in justification,
when as yet you deny Christ's righteousness to be the proper or improper object
of faith as it justifies.

What follows is but evil language.

I will pass that.

We come now to the fifth and last act of our Tragedy, as Sect. ult.
you speak.

And pitch on that. He blames me farther for not being P. 92.
ashamed or blushing to affirm that from the times of Luther and Calvine, the
fairest stream of Interpreters run to water and refresh mine interpretation.

To this you answer, No, and you know no reason you have G.
of being ashamed or blushing for standing up for the truth. And that if you
should do otherwise, concerning the judgment of
the best Interpreters, since Luther and Calvines time touching the Scripture
in question, then I do, then I should be like unto you and speak what is
contrary to the truth.

1. To all which, all that I will now say, is that I cannot Answ.
but so much the more wonder at you.

2. For Arminius his interpretations being quite another way then yours.

And his being of the twain nearer Mr. Walker, then Mr. Goodwine, we have
seen already; let the Reader judge.

You say you have named Orthodox Authors for faith in a proper sense, and are
ready to examine and scan their testimonies with any sober and dispassionate
man whatsoever. Were I worthy to be accounted such a man, I would be for you.

Concerning Abailard, their dealing with him for incontinency. You say it is
well for Mr. Walker that there is not a Law of like penalty amongst us for
incontinency of tongue, and fear Mr. Walkers manhood would be one of the first
that should suffer.

But quis tulerit, etc. all I will say is; It is well for you, you would
scarcely escape scotfree, were this book of yours in that respect before equal
Judges. You would lose your manhood. For that man I have read that story, and
elsewhere find Mr. Walker was not the first that charged this error on him.
It is observed by that Lord.

This controversy a certain man Hanc litem contra Bernar dum excitat
Abailardus quidam, multis post seculis; qui licer in postremis, non ullo tamen
hic posterior. Morney du pless. de missa, p 13. 27.
called Abailardus stirred up against Bernard many ages after, Who though he
were of the last, yet here was not behind any. Where he shows out of
Bernard; The obedience Obedienria Christi utique non minus nostra, quam
peccatum Adae.
of Christ is no less ours, then the sin of Adam. He is werthy reading. For
your testimonies, Mr. Walkers answer and they must be also turned loose
together, as you Print them and himself since, to which this contains no
answer but vain words, p. 94.

Only you say, except much learning or somewhat else had set him and his wits
at ods, he could never have affirmed that no one Orthodox Divine either ancient
or later ever understood by faith imputed for righteousness, faith in a proper
sense, but the satisfaction of Christ himself, and that himself has done it
often in this discourse.

1. For him you have not showed it.

2. For others it had been easy to give an instance.

3. Sibrandus was of the same opinion, who therefore challenges Bertius twice,
to show, but one, one, I say one Velunum, unu^ unum, inquam locum qui hoc
perspicuis verbis doccat.
places which teaches this in plain words. I am so yet, I have not met with
one but Mr. Wotton, etc.

For his Testimonies, you promise briefness, and why? Because, say you, I
verily believe the Author himself would have spared it, had he but rightly
have understood the opinion against which he has armed himself with so much
fury, and what is meant by faith in a proper sense.

Confidens animi, etc. I wish the knowledge had been still kept with you.

For Testimonies you say, because they prove that which no man questions, viz.
Justification by the righteousness and satisfaction of Jesus Christ in a
meritorious way, and do not so much as touch or come near the point in
controversy, except it be in way of contrediction i^ himself that produces
them, I take my leave of them at once, and wish them rest and peace.

Sir, I commend your wisdom, this is a short cut, if you can so get off. But
you must not thus escape, nor your meritorious way. It is as a City of refuge
when you are closely followed. You think your self safe when as you get it
once over your head. It is (as you say of Metalepticke oil) your surest
pinhorse; in this it differs, that is showed the answer of learned
Protestants; this is a borrowed shift of Popists, who use it as you against the
imputation of Christ's righteousness. I meet with it often confuted by the
Worthies of our side. It may be they may satisfy you, I promised it before,
now I will labor to be as good as my word.

I therefore assert that it is not enough, and so neither the scope of the holy
Ghost, nor writers Protestant, that Christ's righteousness be a meritorous
canse of justification, but there must be also an application thereof to this
effect, which is done by Gods imputation and our application of the same by
faith; by which imputed by God and applied by us, it is effectual to our
justification, that whereby we are just before God.

For Christ should be in vain given for righteousness, unless Frustra enim
in justitiam Christus datus foret, nisi fruitio ex fide suerit. Call. in Romans 3.
24. Ubi vero ad Christu^ ventu^ est primu^, primum in eo invenitur exacta Legis
justi^ia, quae per imputationem nostra fit* Id. ad verse 31. Imo vero utcunque a
Christo redempti sumus, donec tamen vocatione patris inscrimur in illius
communionem and tenebrae and mortis haeredes and Dei adyersar^i sumus. Calv.
Instit. l. 3. c. 14. Sect. 6. Me^ium Christi materia extra nos subjective,
imputative vere nostra, says Doctor Prideauxl De justif. p. 196.
there shall be an enjoyment by faith.

But when we come first to Christ, first there is found in him exact
righteousness of the Law, which by imputation is made ours.

Yea truly, howsoever we be redeemed by Christ, yet until by the calling of
the Father we are inset into his communion, we are both darkness and heirs of
death, and the adversaries of God.

The merit of Christ is the matter, out of us subjectively, imputatively truly
ours.

Doctor Davenant to that part of Bell. where he laying down the state of the
question, says.

The question is of the formal cause, Quaestio est de causa sormali, at vocula
propter non formalem sed meritoriam designat.
but that word for, does not denote the formal but meritorious cause.

Let therefore Christ's obedience be the Sit itque, says the Doctor, Christi
obedientia causa meritoria justificationis nostrae propter quam Dous nos
justificar.
meritorious cause of our justification, for which God does justify us. What
follows now?

And truly in justification such a formal Atque revera in justificatione talis
causa formalis ponenda est quae sunul and meritoria esse possit, nisi enim
contineat illam dignitatem in se, propter quam homo rite justificatus
reputetur, nunquam erit causa formalis per quam justificatus existat in
conspectu Dei De Just. hab. c. 22. p. 312.
cause is to be put which also together may be meritorious; for unless it
contain in it self that worth for which a man is rightly reputed justified,
it will never be a formal cause by which a man shall be justified in the sight
of God. And elsewhere.

Therefore one and the same righteousness Eadem igitut and unica justitia
Christi, in se and suo valor considerata, est meritoria causa humanae
justificationis; considerata autem quatenus imputatur, donatur, applicatur
tanquam sua singulis credentibus, and in Christum insitis, subit vicem causae
formalis -- Deus ergo qui non justificat nisi respectu ad absolutam justitiam,
Christi justitiam quae sola talis est, intuetur, atque came Christi membris
impurare dignatur, quo facto agit cum illis and statuir de illis ac si esses
illorum, atque hoc est facere Christi justitiam causam formalem justification
is nostrae. Arg. 10. c. 28. p. 373.
of Christ, considered in it self and its worth, is the meritorious cause of
man's justification. But considered as it is imputed, given, applied as their
own to all believers, and inset into Christ, it is instead of a formal cause
-- God therefore who justifies not but with respect to absolute
righteousness, beholds Christ's righteousness, which is only such, and is
pleased to impute the same to Christ's members; which being done, he deals
with them, and determines of them, as if it were their own, and this it is to
make Christ's righteousness the formal cause of our justification. Where also
take notice of his stating the question between us and Romanists.

The most perfect obedience of Christ Christi mediatoris in nobis inhabitantis
atque per spiritum sese nobis unient is persectistima obedientia est formalis
causa justificationis nostrae, utpore quae ex donatione Dei and applicatione
fidei fit nostra. Id. p. 313.
the Mediator dwelling in us and by his spirit uniting himself to us, is the
formal cause of our justification, as that which by the gift of God and
application of faith be made ours.

There is Protestant Doctrine flourishing in Cambridge in my time, the
Antithesis of the Papist follows.

The obedience or righteousness of Mediatoris obedientia five justitia non
donatur five applicatur credentibus, vice aut per modum causae formalis, cujus
virtute stent justificari aut Deo in aeternam vitam acceptati. Id. ib.
the Mediator, is not given or applied to believers in the place or by way of
a formal cause, by whose virtue they stand justified or accepted of God to
eternal life.

I need not to make uses of these passages, they are clear, as for other, so
the present purpose.

I will take one place out of that Orthodox Doctor Tossanus.

The matter truly is the obedience of Materia quidem est obedientia Christi
sive meritum ipsius -- sorma est illius imputatio, and remissio peccarorum,
quae sit per and propter sanguinem Christi, quae imputata facir ut justitia
Christi quae erat aliena nostra fiar, vere and realiter, non minus per
imputationem quam est Christi per actionem, quia ei insiti sumus and nobis vere
donatur, and vere a Deo acceptatur. These. 11. p. 62. ad Romans
Christ, or his merit -- the form is the imputation thereof, and remission of
sins; which is done by and for the blood of Christ, which being imputed
causes that the righteousuesse of Christ which was another is made ours,
truly and really no less by imputation then it is Christ's by action, because
we are inset to him, and it is truly given to us, and indeed accepted of God.
So the Palatinate.

Come we now to that great Doctor of France, Chamier, he speaking of Papists,
says:

Therefore they believe not Christ's Itaque justitiam Christi non credunt esse
intrinsecam causam, hoc est materiam, ut nos loquimur, justificationis, sed
exttinsecam duntaxat, five meritum. L. 21. c. 1. Sect. 28.
righteousness to be aninward cause, that is the matter as we speak of
justification, but outward only, or the merit. He goes on.

Andradius ( a great stickler in the Council of Trent taught,

That our justification in Christ, or Andradius in Christo nos justificati,
sive Christum esse justitiam nostram nibil significare aliud, quam Christum
veram expressamque justitiam nobis promeruisse.
Christ to be our righteousness, to signify no other thing, then Christ to
have merited true and express righteousness for us. Thus he lays down their
tenet. Now for the Protestants, thus:

But Protestants conclude -- But justification Catholici vero statuunt -- sed
justificationem per quam apud Deum justi sumus, esse imputationem justitiae
Christi inhaerentis: quae non potuerit alio ullo modo nobis mereri vitam nisi
sic imputaretur.
by which we be just with God to be imputation of righteousness inbering in
Christ, which shall not be able any other way to merit life unto us unless it
be so imputed.

I will transcribe another passage, and so do two things at once, that is,
speak to this and the point of being sinners by Adam. For in both these you
agree with Papists, the matter will be manifest by bare laying down.

Truly we grant by the disobedience of Concedimus sane per inobedientiam Adami
constitui omnes vere and reipsa inherente in justitia injustos: sed alteram
patrem non Adami justitia imputata hoc dicimas esse salsum. Imo contra negamus
posse nos fieri injustos injustitia inhaefente per waum hominem, nisi hujus
unius hominis injustitia nobis imputetur -- quare falsum est non imputari
posteris injustiriam Adami. C. 2. Sect. 9
Adam all to be constituted truly unjust and with injustice indeed inbering.
But the other part, that we are not unjust by the injustice of Adam imputed, we
say this is false. Yea on the contrary we deny that we can be made unjust, by
injustice inherent, by one man, unless the injustice of this one man be
imputed unto us -- therefore it is false that the disobedience of Adam is not
imputed to his posterity. He goes on.

Neither does Pererius ( the Jesuit) Nec movet me Pererius commentans in haec
ipsa Pault verba -- non dixit Paulus (inquit, quasi aliquid magnum, neque aliis
observatum in theologiam in veheret) inobedientia Adami constitutos esse
peccatores ne quis putaret per inobedientiam imputatam: sed dixit per
inobedientiam, videlicet per peccarum intrinsece manens in ipsis ab Adami
inobedientia prosectam. Similiter ergo non quod Christi obedientia constitut
justos quasi fiant homines non per justitiam inhaerentem sed per imputatam: sed
per obedientiams constituti justos, quia haec causa suit meritoria. Enim vero
cui se speravit persuasurum priorem illam Phrasin, justitia justos, injustitia
in justos fieri non nisi formaliter (ut illi logui amant) alteram vero per
justitiam, per obedientiam non nisi meritorie significare? -- quare nihil
obslat phrasis quidem quo minus illud per justitiam unius multi constituentur
justific intelligamus dictum, at justitia illa sit non tantum meritoria causa
sicut Papistae volunt, sed etiam formalis pet quam nos nunc sumus apud Deum
justi, Ib. Seth. 11. 12.
move me commenting on these very words of Paul -- Paul said not (says he as
if he brought into Divinity some great thing, and not observed by others) us to
be constituted sinners by the disobedience of Adam, lest one should think it
by imputed disobedience, but he said by disobedience, that is, by sin
remaining within them, coming from Adams disobedience. After the same manner
therefore, not that Christ's righteousness should constitute just, as if men
were made just, not by inherent righteousness, but by imputed: but to be made
just by obedience, because this was the meritorious cause. But whom did he hope
to persuade, that first phrase to be made just by righteousness, injust by
unrighteousness (...) otherwise their forformally (as they love to speak) but
the other, by righteousness and obedience, not to signify otherwise then by
way of merit? -- Therefore that phrase truly nothing bindereth, but that, by
the righteousness of one many shall be constituted righteous, we may so
understand to be spoken, that, that righteousness may be not only the
meritorious cause as the Papists would, but also the formal by which we are
now just with God. And again.

The first place out of Romans 5. Primum locum, ex Romans 5. Bellarminus and
Becanus ita explicant ut negent obedientiam Christi dici formalem nostae
justificationis nostrae causam sed efficientem: probant quia opponatur justitia
Christi inobed entiae Adami, and sicut per hanc injusti ita per illam justi
dicamur constituti: arqui per inobedientiam Adami non formaliter, sed
efficienter and meritorie constituimur injusti: ergo similiter per obedientiam
Christi non formaliter sed efficienter and meritorie constituimur justi. Sed ad
hoc sophisma jam disputatum est, c. 2.
Bellarmine and Becanus ( both Jesuits) do so expound, that they deny the
obedience of Christ to be called the formal cause of our justification, but the
efficient; they proveit the obedience of Christ is opposed to the disobedience
of Adam, and as we may be said by this to be constituted injust, by that just.
But by the disobedience of Adam we are constituted just not formally, Hic ergo
iterum concedo and inobedientiam Adam, and obedientiam Christi constituere nos
and efficienter and meritorie injustos justosve, nam and de illa nemo nos audit
negantes, and de illa express disputavimus ipsi tomi hujus, l. 9. Sed non
imputati nobis utramque constanter negamus. Imo negamus posse nos meritorie
efficere sive injustos sive justos, nisi prius imputentur: nam si non
imputentur nullo modo nostrae fiunt, sunt enim actus singulates and individui,
itaque proprii eorum a quibus sunt, and proinde personales, actus autem
proprios and personales esse commines absurdum est and contradictiorium. Itaque
oporter imputati, nam haec communicatio non opponitur proprietari quia ratio
long est alia; Itaque ipsum Adami peccatum, ipsam illam inquam inobedien iam
necesse suit imputari poslerls ac promde etiam Christi obedientiam. Illam
quidem quia Adamus is suit in quo esse censebatur universum genus humanum per
narutam. Ista vero quia in Christo est universa multitudo fidelium, per (...)
inde factam, ut non tan^um per Ad^^^^ peccatores facti sint omnes, sed in ipso
peccasse dicantur, quod long aliud est. Dico igitur certum esse, and ab Adam^
realiter injustos omnes esse consti^utos, and a Christo omnes fideles, realiter
justos, sed nego^^d ab Apostolo considerari, qui causas potius inquitar primas,
tum illius condemna^ionis, tum illius justificationis. Nam and (...) considerat
jam tum in Adamo, non tamen Adamo peculiare, sed pertinens ad omne genus
humanum. Ut sensus sit, jam tum cum Adamo damnatum fuisse universum genus
humanum sive sic factum reum inobedientiae in Deum, unde etiam apud Augustinum
peccatum dicitur originis paena primi peccati; quomodo autem paena esset nisi
illud ipsum primum peccatum imputaretur?
but efficiently and meritorioush. But to this sophisme we have already
disputed in the second chapter.

Here therefore again I grant, both the disobedience of Adam and the obedience
of Christ, to constitute us both efficiently and meritoriously just or unjust,
for of that none heard us denying; and of the other we have expressly disputed
in the ninth book of this Tome; but we constantly deny that both are not
imputed unto us. Yea, we deny they can meritoriously make us either injustor
just, unless they be first imputed, for they are no ways made ours unless
they be imputed. For they are singular and individual acts, and therefore
proper to them from whom they are, and therefore personal. But for proper and
personal acts to le common it is absurd and contradictory. Therefore they must
be imputed, for this communication is not opposed to propriety, because there
is a far other reason of them, therefore it was necessary that the very sin
of Adam, I say that very same disobedience should be imputed to his posterity,
and therefore also Christ's obedience. That truly because Adam was he, in whom
humane nature in general was judged to be by nature, but the other because
there is the universal multitude of believers in Christ by Similiter in
Christo ipso universa fidelium multitudo dicitur facta sive justificata, sive
quod idem est ipse Christus sactus omnibus justitia, sive omnes in Christo
facti justitia. -- Sed quia illa ipsa Christi justitia sit nobis communicata
per gratiam, tam certo, ut certo sit nostra, nec minus certo quam si ipsi
praestitissemus, qui non potuimus. Breviter utrumque verum est, justitiam
Christi esse causam efficientem sive meritoriam nostrae justitiae. -- Et
rursus, sive formalem ut Bellarminus, sive materialem ut nos maluimus, causam
nostrae justificationis. Cham. de justif. c. 17. Sect. 10. 11, 12, 13. etc. p.
902.
grace; whence it comes to pass that not only all are made sinners by Adam,
but are said to have sinned, which is far another thing.

I say therefore it is certain that all are from Adam constituted really
unrighteous, and all the faithful from Christ really righteous. But I deny
that to be considered of the Apostle, who rather inquireth into the first
causes as of that condemnation, so of that justification, for both according to
judgment, he considers it in Adam then, yet not peculiar to Adam, but
appertaining to whole mankind that the sense may be, even then when Adam
sinned, whole mankind to be damned or made guilty of disobedience against God,
whence also in Augustine, original sin is called the punishment of the first
sin. But how should it be the punishment unless that same first sin should
be imputed?

In like manner in Christ the whole multitude of faithful, is said to be made
or justified, or which is the same, Christ himself made to all righteousness.
-- But because that same righteousness of Christ, so communicated to us by
grace, so surely, that it may be surely ours, nor less surely then our selves
had performed it, which we could not do.

Briefly, both are true, that Christ's righteousness is the efficient or
meritorious cause of our righteousness. -- And also either the formal cause,
as Bellarmine, or the material, as we would rather, of our justification. See
him again. Sect. 22. and 23. 27. Nos ergo sic statuimus Christum dici
justitiam nostram.


For both causes, both because Christ is the efficient cause of righteousness
inhering in us, and because his satisfaction or merit is imputed unto us; we
therefore thus determine Christ to be called our righteousness, and so as it
follows.

You see here your distinction and answer Popish, and refuted by our learned.

Know you not (says Doctor Whitaker to Campian the Jesuit) that our sins
were imputed to Christ, and why may not Christ's righteousness be imputed to us
in like manner, etc. seeing you are compelled on the one side against your
will, to confess an imputation, why do ye not also grant it in the other?
especially seeing the Apostle Against Camp. Englished. p. 224. Armin. scripsit
causam meritoriam Christi obedientiam, etc. non objectum imputationis, fest.
Hom. p 84.
himself propounds to us this Antithesis, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Therefore we are so
made righteous in Christ as he was made sin for us, which must necessarily be
understood of imputation, the payment is ours, no otherwise then by imputation.
Consider on what side you are, and come about.

It is no marvel Arm. went before you and M. W in the same Arminius wrote
Christ's obedience to be the meritorious cause, etc. not the object of
imputation. Let us hear himself.

I say faith is imputed unto us for Dico fidem nobis imputari propter Christum
and justitiam ejus, in qua ennunciatione fides est objectum imputationis:
Christus vero et obedientia ejus, est causa justificationis impetratoria, sive
meritoria, quia Christus cum obedientia sua objectum est nostrae fidei, and non
objectum justificationis seu imputationis Divinae, quasi Deus nobis Christum
ejusque justitiam imputet ad justitiam, quod fieri nequit. Armin. Epist: ad
Hypol.
Christ's sake and his righteousness; in which proposition, faith is the object
of imputation, but Christ and his obedience the obtaining Cause or meritorious
of justification, which Christ with his obedience is the object of our faith,
and not the object of justification or divine imputation, as if God did impute
unto us Christ and his righteousness, which cannot be. Let your admirers
behold this, and your self denying your opinion to be Arminian, and they will
say your opinion is as like as if it came out of Arminius his mouth. It is the
same in this business.

You go on and say.

Only I cannot but take notice of a very strange piece of Divinity wheresoever
he had it -- Concerning Calvine, here he teaches that sins of commission are
taken away by that part of Christ's satisfaction imputed, which is called his
Passive obedience or voluntary suffering the penalty of the Law: and sins of
commission by his Active obedience in fulfilling the righteousness which the
Law requires, which is the other part of Christ's imputed satisfaction. This you
call a Lernean Lake, of hideous and portentuous Divinity, things you should
have censured Mr. Walker would not have received, though an Angel from Heaven
should have brought them to him.

But -- sua narret Ulysses.

The sum is, there are sins of commission and of omission, such are all
defects of what was to be in man, perfect righteousness. Though the guilt and
punishment of all be taken away by the blood of Christ a Lamb, the defect must
also be made up by the perfect obedience of Christ our Surety, he must and did
do this that we may live.

But say you, he affirms the taking away of sins of omission by the Active
obedience of Christ only, whereas the Scripture teaches that without
bloudshedding there is no remission.

I answer, only is your own, none of Mr. Walkers, and though it be given to
the blood of Christ as justification is, it is by a Synecdoche, as Calvine and
others use to speak; his Active righteousness is not excluded. It was the
precious blood of Christ as a Lamb without spot. Yea, his sufferings even to
death were his obedience.

Still you must remember that there be what is debitum in esse, to life, for
which there is provided the active obedience of Christ; the Church is holy,
unreprovable, unblameable, wholly fair, not by taking away spots alone, but
the beauty of Christ put on it.

You say he makes the Active obedience of Christ penal and satisfactory, as
if to live righteously and holy here had been a punishment, when as himself
says it was his meat.

Sir, what if he had said so? It was no less to take man's nature to be made
under the Law. It was the becoming poor of him that was rich, his humiliation
and abasement.

Yourselfe say, it cannot be denied in all this, but that the Active obedience
of Christ may in some sense and respect be called satisfactory too, as
concurring and falling in with its influence into the blood or death of Christ,
etc.

Your reason, it was his meat, etc. is a truth of Gods whole will in his hand.
It was his meat to do; I, and to suffer; he did it willingly, which yet you
confess was penal.

3. You say, the worst is, he divides the satisfaction of Christ into parts,
and utterly destroys and abolisheth the infiniteness thereof: for what may
be divided must needs be finite, and that which is the part of another cannot
be infinite.

And I pray you, are they not distinguishable into Active and Passive? either
they are, and differ, or are the same; and why do you establishing the one (if
you do so) dispute against the other? is it not by both if they be inseparable
and not to be divided?

Neither does division of Christ himself, or doing and suffering abolish the
infiniteness of Christ. There are in him distinct two natures, three offices,
body and soul, his Active obedience has parts, and by parts were his
sufferings made a whole. All which stand with Christ's infinite nature, and the
infinite value of his satisfaction.

And what do you excluding Active obedience, which yet you confess to be in a
sense satisfaction, and give all to what is Passive?

Mr. Walker making our righteousness to consist in the whole righteousness of
Christ is farther from division, less destructive then your practice, denying
and rejecting the Active obedience as the object of faith in justification.

Your objections urged, p. 98. are trifling impertinencies, grieving your
self, separating them, not Mr. Walker who is for the whole obedience of Christ.

Amongst them there is one passage to be taken notice of as a gloss corrupting
the text, the text is, If righteousness be by the Law, Christ died in vain,
Gal. 2. 21. Your gloss, that it is true of the Law performed by Christ as well
as by men themselves, and then if the righteousness of the world be by the
Active obedience of Christ his death must needs be in vain.

This is but a corruption of the text. The scope is, justification is not by
man's personal obedience to the Law, and that if man had been able to obey
perfectly, the death of Christ had been vain; man not being able, but being a
transgressor, Christ's death is necessary, which does not exclude his obedience
to the Law for us, Christ's death does not (alone taken) make us just, as is
required, and thus is it by our Surety supplied.

Your self say it is satisfaction in a sense, and to fall in with death, so
far righteousness is by the Law, Christ's obedience unto the fame.

You must acknowledge Christ a fulfiller of the Law, and and an establisher of
it this way, and that faith in Christ does not make the Law of God of none
effect, as the word speaks, and learned Expositors, of which before. And when
as works or the righteousness of the Law are excluded; it is not Christ's, but
a man's own.

Our Church in the Homily puts Christ's death as a ransom, and yet add^^,
who besides this ransom fulfilled the Law for us perfectly. It requires on
Christ's part justice, that is satisfaction to Gods justice, or the price of our
redemption, by the offering of his body and shedding of his blood, with
fulfilling of the Law perfectly and thoroughly -- So that in him our
justification is not only Gods mercy and grace, but also his justice, which
the Apostle calls the justice of God, and it consists in paying our ransom
and fulfilling of the Law, and so the grace of God does not shut out the
justice of God in our justification, but only shuts out the justice of man,
that is to say, the justice of our works, as to be merits or deserving our
justification: thus our Church in the Homily.

That which you call your last labor, p. 98. is but tri^ling, such at least is
the Livery you give the learned men who use the figure Metalepsis. And that of
wilful men and importune spirits, and that the bare laying down the words is
enough, and that Mr. Walker has ratified it. All these are but trifling, and
so I pass them. Let us come to something.

You say, concerning those testimonies in general, I desire to propound but
this one consideration, whether it be probable, etc. That so many learned
interpreters through so many generations, expounding a Scripture which they
conceive Tropicall, should none of them give warning, or so much as take notice
of a Tropicall expression, but deliver their minds in the same words, wherein
the Trope shall lie.

Sir, I answer. First, the thing may be done by many 1.
Ancient and later Divines too, and those never the wiser that neglect the
search of them, out of coneipt of their own great light.

Our learned ( exceptis before named) to a man have 2.
expressed themselves for the Relative sense and faiths justifying as an
instrument, and the challenge is in Print many years agone to Bertius bragging
of testimony to name vel unum, as much, or little, as one express place or
Doctor for the contrary. For ours there are testimonies enough before.
Romanists themselves, as you for a proper sense, confess Protestants to be for
that which is Tropicall, when as some urge difference amongst us, ours answer
there is none. You were not borne, nor your by-way observed by those that were
curious to object the same. P. 312.
Doctor Davenant clears Luther by the Jesuit Vasques. And to that which is
maine in our business of them of those who teach the obedience and
righteousness of Christ imputed to be the formal cause of justification he
faith,

But this is the common sentence of At haec communis est nostrorum omnium
sententia, neque quod ad ipsam ^^m attiner* quisquam ^ nostris a^^ter scripsit
au^ sensi^. Ib.
all ours neither if we respect the thing it self, is there any one that wrote
or thought otherwise. One may be confident of it in his judgment, he knew none
of ours, if there were, they are without; indeed yours is but of yester-day
amongst us. And shall we now think they held your proper sense? Iudeus Apella,
non ego.

Whereas you persist in the contrary, Mr. Walker has given testimonies, and
many more may be given to fill books.

For Bucer I wonder you mention him, when as your Mr. Wotton speaking of him
says,

Whom I persuade my self to have Quem ego hujus de imputatione opinionis
authorem fuisse mihi persuadeo. Part. 2. l. 1. c. 14. p. 170.
been the Author of this opinion of imputation. Where also you may read his
exposition of that Article in the Augustine confession, in these words, in the
conference at Ratisbon, Anno 1546.

That is, because by this faith we apprehend Quia hae fide apprehe^dimus
justitiam perfectam Christi, ideo Apostolus dixit credenti in eum qui
justificat impium, fidem ejus reputari in justitiam, fidem sc. apprehendentem
justitiam Christi, id est, ipsam Christi justitiam.
the perfect righteousness of Christ, therefore the Apostle said, to him that
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith to be reputed to
righteousness: faith, fors^oth, apprehending the righteousness of Christ,
that is, the righteousness of Christ it self. Where Mr. Wotton is willing to
use the Popish shift of a meritorious cause, if it would serve, as you before.
I find Bucer also amongst those of Sybrandus, and his writings are not now in
mine hand.

For Bullinger I have read in him, Constat ergo ex his Christum implevisse
^egem, and hunc esse perfectionem in or^e omnium, Dec. 3. ser. ^. p. 177. 1. He
infers it from the text, Romans 8, 4.
It is certain therefore from these, Christ to have fulfilled the Law, and him
to be the perfection of all men in the world. And then:

In him there is the most perfect love In eo est dilectio Dei perfectissi^a and
justitia per omnia absolurissi^a, and hanc nobis imperfectissimis communicate
gratis, si credamus; condonat enim nobis peccata factus pro nobis expiatio, and
communicate nobis suam justitiam quae imputata vocatur, ex 2 Cor. 5. ult. and
Romans 4. credidit Abraham, etc. Fide enim comprehend^mus Christum quem credimus
absolurissime pro nobis Deo satisfecisse, a^que Deum nobis pacatum esse propter
Christu^, and nobis Christi justitiam gratis imputari tanquam nostram (and
revera ex donatione, nostra) quia nos sumus jam filii Dei.
of God, and righteousness every way most absolute, and he does freely
communicate this to us that are most imperfect, if we believe; for he pardons
to us our sins, being made for us a^ expi^tion, and communicates to us his
righteousness which is called impu^ ^^ive, (which he proves 2 Cor. 5. ult.
and Romans 4. Abraham believed, etc. For by faith we comprehend Christ, whom we
believe most absolutely Quando nullus mortalium exact satisfecit Legi per se,
quomodo igitur promittitu^ justitia, vita and salus servantibus Legem: nimirum
respicit ea promissio ipsam Christi perfectam justitiam quae imputatur nobis.
Ib.
to have satisfied for us, and God to be at peace with us for Christ, and the
righteousness of Christ to be freely imputed unto us, as our own (and Unde
jam clarum est istas Christi Domini sententias aequipollere, Qui credit in me
habet vitam aeternam; and, Si vis ingredi in vitam serva mandata, etc.
truly our own by his gift) because we be now the children of God.

When as no mortal man exactly Tota ergo decalogi abrogatio in illis de quibus
jam ante diximus consistit, quod sc. Christus in fide est perfecta justitia
nostra. p, 179.
satisfied the Law for himself, how therefore to justice is promised life and
salvation to such as observe the Law? No wonder, for that promise respects
that perfect righteousness of Christ which is imputed unto us.

Whence it is now clear those sayings of the Lord Christ to be equivalent, He
that believes in me has eternal life, and, If thou* wilt enter into life,
keep the Commandments.

Therefore the whole abrogation of the decalogue, consists in those things of
which we have spoken now before, that Christ in faith is our perfect
righteousness.

And now Reader see how truly he says of his Authors, that they exclude all
other things whatsoever, without exception, from this i^^^tation; and thus for
this demonstration, as you are pleased to call it, we shall see more afterward.

Come we now to your second demonstration, which as far as it will reach, say
you, makes the matter greater then contradiction, that the Authors could not in
their expositions and commentaries possibly take the word Faith ^^ Believing in
a figurative sense, but in a proper.

Let us see this Demonstration.

Because (say you) the word faith taken in a figurative sense for the
righteousness of Christ, is partly manifest and open blasphemy, partly most
ridiculously absurd; for example, Luther on Gal. 3. 6. Deus reputat istam
imperfectam fidem, etc. for perfect righteousness, if by faith there we
understand the righteousness of Christ, and not faith properly, he makes
Luther an execrable blasphemer, for he calls the righteousness of Christ
imperfect righteousness. Illiricus a beggarly faith, etc. and therefore.

1. I answer that Calvine and Luther take the word, faith, in this point of
justification, as an instrument Relatively, figuratively, and that it
justifies as it takes in its object Christ and his righteousness, and not in
a proper sense, as a work considered in and by it self, and that they teach
the righteousness of Christ to be that which being imputed by God, and applied
by our faith, to be that whereby we be just before God, is as evident and
clear as the Sun in the firmament shining at noone day.

2. That the rankest enemies of Gods grace, whether Arminians or Papists; yet,
never (knowing the same) were so inconsiderate to lay such a charge on them.

3. That it is an injurious kind of dealing with Authors, to force them to
speak against manifest expressures of themselves in their writings, a
miserably poor shift, a sign that a man is near driven in a strait,
desperate, especially in writing to do so. It were more modesty to say we
understand them not, or deny their authority with reason, to say they err,
then thus as it were to snarle at them, and bite them.

4. When as we speak of faith that it is imperfect, beggarly, leprous, we
speak of it (though an instrument) as it is in it self, and therefore taking
it so, deny it to justify as a work, or for its worth, and say it has need
of justification it self; and that in justice God cannot account it for the
righteousness of the Law, we speak of it as of an hand that receives riches.
Whether it be weak, or unclean, or leprous, so it affords a strong argument
against your proper sense, and a necessity that when as it is said to justify
that it should do so in respect to the object it is employed about, the
righteousness of Christ which it receives.

And when as by a Trope the righteousness of Christ is signified, or taken in
with faith the instrument, there is none that says either that faith is the
righteousness of Christ, or whatsoever is predicated of the instrument faith,
is true of the object of it the righteousness of Christ. When you prove these,
Christ shall be and his righteousness as is said of faith, imperfect, leprous,
etc. till then, though the faith that is imputed be so, it will not be true of
the object, imperfection and leprosy is its own. Justification properly is
the effect of Christ's righteousness, which is given to faith not as imperfect
or weak, or strong, but as an hand receiving the righteousness of Christ,
which applied, justifies.

Thus as I am able I have endeavored to answer you, not leaving willingly as
much as one passage unanswered, and now may say, what you say not withstanding
or do against Mr. Walker, or the cause, He may still have Peliade stomachum
cedere nescii. The stouter a man is for the truth, I say the truth, the greater
is his glory.

For a close, give me leave to the many testimonies used already, to add some
more out of some learned modern writers, by which the Reader may see whether
the proper sense of faith, or that which is Relative to its object the
righteousness of Christ has their constant patronage, and whether we be
justified by faith in a proper sense, or the imputation of the righteousness
of Christ.

Luther shall lead the way. He to the Galatians has many places. I in my
reading him over have observed these, as he is in English.

I have another righteousness and life, which is Christ the son P. 8. 1.
of God. Wherefore Christ apprehended by faith, and dwelling in the heart, is
the true Christian righteousness, for the which P. 65. Col. 2.
God counts us righteous, and gives us eternal life. Whosoever shall be
found having this confidence in Christ, apprehended P. 66. 1.
in the heart, him God will account for righteous; this is the mean, and this
is the merit, whereby we attain remission of sins P. 66. 2.
and righteousness. Because thou have laid bold on Christ by faith, through
whom thou art made righteous.

We are indeed justified and made righteous in Christ. P. 70. 2.


And teaches what true Christian righteousness is, namely that righteousness
whereby Christ lives in us, and not that P. 82 1.
which is in our person.

Now, because Christ lives in me, the refore look what grace righteousness,
etc. is in me, it is his, and yet notwithstanding the same is mine also by that
unspeakable union and communion P. 83. 1.
which is through says, by the which Christ and I are made one body in spirit.

For as much as Christ lives in me, it follows, that as I must P. 91. 1. p.
83. 2.
needs be partaker of grace, righteousness, etc. I am now one with Christ,
that is to say, Christ's righteousness, etc. are mine.

Christ died for sins that he might make us righteous, therefore when I feel
my self a sinner, through Adams transgression, P. 89. 1.
why should I not say that I am made righteous through the righteousness of
Christ.

I will account and pronounce thee as righteous. P. 112. 1.


But because I am covered under the shadow of Christ's wing, Ib.
as the Chicken under the wing of the Hen.

Through whom we are made perfect, sin is pardoned for Ib.
Christ's sake in whom thou beleevest, who is perfectly just, whose
righteousness is thy righteousness, and thy sin is his sin. P. 113. 1.


For all the promises past are contained in Christ to come, therefore as well
Abraham as the other Fathers, are made righteous P. 116. 2.
by faith in Christ, they by faith in him to come, we by faith in him now
present.

Therefore all the world is blessed, that is, receives imputation P. 119. 1.
of righteousness, if it believe as Abraham did.

Therefore to say that the Nations are blessed, is nothing else P. 119. 1.
but that righteousness is freely given to them, or that they are counted
righteous before God.

Moreover, if the Nations be blessed, that is to say, accounted P. 119. 2.
righteous before God, it follows that they are free from sin and death,
and are made partakers of righteousness, etc. by faith in Christ.

Genesis 12. 9. speaks of such a blessing as belongs to imputation of
righteousness; which is available before God, and redeemeth Ib.
from the curse of sin, now this blessing is received
only by faith, for the text says, Abraham believed, etc.

To make us righteous before God there is a far more excellent price
required, which is neither the righteousness of man, P. 120. 1.
or the Law. Here we must have Christ to bless us, etc. as Abraham bad.

Whom Abraham himself by faith did apprehend, and through him was blessed. So
making an happy change with us, Ib.
he took upon him our sinful person, and gave unto us his innocent P. 139. 2.
and victorious person, wherewith we being now clothed, are freed from the
curse of the Law. He that does so (believe) has this innocence and victory of
Christ, by says only therefore we P. 140.
are made righteous, for faith lays hold on this innocence and victory of
Christ.

The Law threatens unto thee death, etc. but be not afraid, P. 160. 2.
fly not away, but stand fast, I supply and perform all things for thee, I
satisfy the Law for thee.

Therefore there must come a far other Mediator then Moses, P. 161. 1.
which may satisfy the Law.

The putting on of Christ, consists in putting on Christ's innocence, P. 175.
1.
his righteousness, his wisdom, etc.

But Christ himself is our garment, etc. to be apparelled with Christ is not,
etc. but with an incomparable gift, that is to say, Ib.
with remission of sins, righteousness, peace, -- and Christ himself.

But you are clothed with a new garment, to wit, with the righteousnsse of
Christ, now when we are apparelled with Christ P. 176. 1.
as with the rohe of our righteousness, and salvation, etc.

For as much as Christ pleases God, and we are in him, we P. 188. 2.
also please God and are holy.

In him do I believe, if I be a sinner and err, be is righteous P. 189. 1.
and cannot ^rre. He with all that is in him is made P. 145. 1.
unto me of God righteousness.

Faith Gods gift and work in our hearts, which therefore P. 47. 1.
justifies us, because it apprehends Christ our Redeemers

We say faith apprehends Christ, which is the form, which P. 65. 1.

adorneth and furnishes faith, ^s the color the wall. P. 66. 1.


Very form and perfection of faith.

Faith therefore justifies, because it apprehends and possesses P. 65. 1.
this measure, even Christ present.

To him that believes, sin is pordoned, and righteousness P. 67. 2.
imputed.

Calvine.

God to be without Christ always angry with us, that we In Romans 3. 24.
are reconciled by him whilst we are accepted in his righteousness, etc.

By faith we come to the possession of that benefit. Ib.


But by naming blood alone he would not exclude other parts of redemption. But
rather under one part to comprehend the whole sum. -- So by a Synecdoche the
whole expiation is Ib.
named.

For Christ should be in vain given to us for righteousness, unless there
shall be fruition by faith. Ib.


When we come to Christ, first in him there is found the exact Ad verse. 31.
righteousness of the Law, which by imputation is made ours.


Neither do we otherwise attain righteousness, but because, as it is brought
unto us in the promise of the Gospel, so we see the In Romans 4. 3.
possession of it as it were by faith.

From whence we gather that it is not disputed what manner of men, men are in
themselves, but in what place God accounts them, not that -- but because when
the cause is sought why God Ib.
loves us, and acknowledges us as just, there is a necessity that Christ
should come forth who may clothe us with his righteousness.

For (that a man may be justified) there is required perfect and numeris suis
omnibus, 1. every way consummated obedience as the promise of the Law sounds,
Lev. 18. 5. Those that are already apparelled with the righteousness of
Christ, they not only have God favorable to them, but to their works, whose
spots and wrinkles are covered by the holiness of Christ, that they Ad. v. 6.
7. 8.
come not to account, if so the righteousness of faith be the only cause why
works are accounted just. --

But by Christ's righteousness we are another way restored to salvation,
neither is it therefore accounted to us, because it is within Ad Romans 5. 17 and
19. verse.
us: but because we possess Christ himself with all his goods, given to us by
his Fathers bounty, the free gift of righteousness signifies imputation.

But indeed that we may come to the participation of the grace of Christ, it
behooves that we be inset into him by faith. Ad verse. 17.


That thou may enjoy Christ's righteousness, it is necessary Ib.
that thou be a believer, because by faith we attain fellowship with him.

But it behooves us to be just if we be accepted to him. Ad verse. 18.


When he pronounces us to be constituted just by the obedience of Christ,
hence we gather, Christ in that he satisfied his Father, to have attained
righteousness for us; whence it follows, that the quality of righteousness
is in Christ, but that which is proper to him to be accounted to us. He
'interpreteth also what is the righteousness of Christ, when he calls it
obedience. Where I beseech you let us observe what we must bring into the sight
of God if we would be justified by works: forsooth the righteousness Ad verse.
19.
of the Law -- every way absolute.

You see therefore us to be altogether excluded from the righteousness of
works, and therefore that we fly to the righteousness Ad Romans 8. 3.
of Christ, because there can be none in us.

Which is especially necessary to be known, because we be never clothed with
the righteousness of Christ unless we first surely know. --

Now he shows the manner whereby the heavenly Father restores to us
righteousness by his son. --

There is no doubt his righteousness to be called; which is his Adc. 10. 3.
gift.

But we have elsewhere said, how men put on his righteousness by faith; forsooth
because Christ's righteousness is imputed to them.

But after he cast all under guilt, he substituted a new righteousness in
Christ. -- Which being given freely, is accepted by faith.

He excellently takes away this scruple, when as from the very In verse. 5.
Doctrine of the Law he establishes the righteousness of faith.

The place is out of Lev. 18. 5. where the Lord promises eternal life to
those who shall keep his Law.

And so by their own defect constrained they might learn to Ib.
fly to Christ, 1 Cor. 130. be was made -- whereby he understands us in his
name to be accepted of God, because by his In 1 Cor. ^. 30.
death he has expiated our sins, and his righteousness should be imputed to
us. For when as the righteousness of faith consists in remission of sins and
free acceptance, we obtain both by him.

Now he more plainly teaches what we before touched, that then God is
favorable to us when as he acknowledges us for just, for those two are all
one, that we are accepted of God, and that we are reputed just. Righteousness
here is taken for acceptance, because Christ's righteousness is accounted to
us.

How are we just before God? forsooth, as Christ was a sinner, for after a
manner he took upon him our person, that he might be made guilty in our name,
and might be judged as a sinner, not with his own, but others faults, when as
himself should be pure, and free from all fault, and should under-goe the
punishment not due to himself but us. So forsooth are we just in him, Ad 2
Cor. 5. ult.
not because by our own works we may satisfy the judgment of God, but
because we are decounted the righteousness of God, which we put on by faith
that it may be ours.

When as he says, that be believed was imputed to him for Ad Gal. 3. 6.
righteousness, he therein signifies him to be just who is accounted such
with God, but when as men have net righteousness laid up in themselves, they
attain it by imputation, because God accounts it to them for righteousness;
therefore we are said to be justified by faith, not because he transfuseth the
habit or quality of faith into us, but because we are accepted of God. But why
is so great honor given unto it that it should be called the cause of our
righteousness?

1. We must know it to be only the isntrumental cause, for
speaking properly it is nothing else but Gods gracious acceptance, in which
our salvation is laid. But because the Lord in giving unto us a testimony of
his love and favor by the Gospel, communicates unto us that righteousness
which I called it, therefore we receive the same by faith.

Therefore, when as we give to faith man's justification, we dispute not of the
principal cause, only we observe the manner whereby men come unto true
righteousness, this righteousness is a mere gift of God. -- but it is
possessed only by faith.

Therefore all those phrases of speech are as one, that we are justified by
grace, Christ to be our righteousness, Gods mercy to be the cause of our
righteousness, righteousness to be attained for us by the death and
resurrection of Christe-Righteousnesse to be bestowed on us by the Gospel, that
w^^ by faith obraine righteousness.

We have put you in mind, that those that are just by faith, that they are
just out of themselves in Christ, not because we have praise of honesty among
men, are we accounted just before God -- but when we bring to him the perfect
obedience of the
Law -- because we have it not in our selves, God gives it us freely.

I pass what Mr. Walker has gathered out of these and other Authors, and
Printed, and many testimonies of others, which I truly have by me already
gathered, which needed but transcription. I will content my self with the
testimonies of some few your self name, and but a few, that the world may see
what faith is due to you in citing Authors. I confess I have not all their
writings by me, either to examine your testimonies, or bring them for my self,
so far as I have will give a sufficient taste to the Reader.

For Bucer I refer me to what was observed before.

And so for Bullinger, and the Reader may turn to Mr. Walker.

Luther on that very text you cite, has these passages. Gal. 3. 6.


Because I am covered under the shadow of Christ's wings.

Flying to Christ our Mediator and Reconciler, through whom we are made
perfect; Through him we have all things who only* does supply whatsoever is
wanting in us. For Jesus Christ's sake in whom we do believe.

It is forgiven thee for Christ's sake who is perfectly just, whose
righteousness is thy righteousness, and thy sin is his sin.

Christ which was given for us, whom we apprehend, that causes that God does
account that faith though it be imperfect for perfect righteousness.

This object I bring sent from the Father pleased you, and because you have
apprehended and embraced this object, therefore ye please him.

Nothing comes between (me a sinner and Christ's love) but Christ the
Mediator. -- Imputation of righteousness is also necessary, sins do remain
in us which God does utterly hate, therefore it is necessary that we should
have imputation of righteousness, which we obtain through Christ, and for his
sake who is given unto us, and received of us by faith.

The reconciler (whence sin is no sin, damnable and not) is the Mediator
between God and man, even the man Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 1.

Judge now whether he excluded the object or no, whether he takes it not in as
what is apprehended and applied by faith.

Peter Martyr has these words.

But also faith it self, if it be considered Quin etiam fides ipsa, si qua
nostrum opus est consideretur, ea justificari non possumus, cum opus sit and
mancum and imperfectum, long deterius quam requitit. Sed illa justificari
dicimur qua promissiones Dei, and Christi justitiam meritaque per ipsam
apprehendimus and nobis applicamus. Loc. Com. de justif. Sect. 8.
as our work, we cannot be justified with it, seeing it is a work both lame
and imperfect, much worse then (God) requires; but we are said to be justified
with it, as by it we apprehend the promises* of God, and the righteousness of
Christ and his merits, and apply them to our selves.

Suppose to thy self the most filthy Fingas tibi mendici hominis foedissimam
and leprosam manum, qua capiat eleemosynam ab offerente: certe mendicus ille a
foeditate s^^ lepra manus haud quaquam juvatur, sed eleemosynam qualicunquc
accipit. Sect. 8.
and leprous hand of some beggar, with which he may receive an alms from him
that offers it; surely that beggar is not helped from the filthiness or
leprosy of his hand, but by whatsoever hand it does receive. Ib.

He that has Christ in himself, he Qui in s^ipso Christum habet, is omnino
justitiam habet, de illo enim Paulus scribit ad Cor. 1. c. 1. qui factus est
nobis sapientia, justitia, etc. Sect. 52.
has righteousness altogether, for of him Paul writes ad Cor. 1. 1. who was
made to us wisdom, righteousness, etc.

Here he calls that righteousness Hic (Phil. 3. 9.) came justitiam quae es^
ex operibus and ex Lege appellat suam: eam vero quae est ex fide quamquam
maxim optat appellat justitiam Jesu Christi. Sect. 52.
which is of works and the Law, his; but that which is of faith, and which he
most wishes, he calls it the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Abraham believed, etc. But what did he believe? forsooth Credidit Abraham,
etc. At ille quid credidit? hoc sc. semen sibi dandum esse, unicum, viz. illud,
ut Paulus interpretatur, in quo omnes nationes essent benedicendi, quod est
Christus Jesus, Genesis 15. 6. Gal. 3. 16. Sect. 23.
this only seed to be given unto him, that is, as Paul interprets, in which
all Nations were to be blessed, which is Christ, Genesis 15. 6. Gal. 3. 16. Pareus.

What did Abraham believe? to Quid credidit Abraham? nempe, concionem illam
consolatoriam de Dei gratia singulari -- de semine nascituro ex Sara --
Apostolus enim promissum semen express dicit esse Christum. Nec dubitari
porest, seminis promissionem, cui credidisse Abraham dicitur, cohaerere cum
promissionibus antegressis and subsecutis de semine and benedictione omnium
gentium per illud. In locum.
wit, Gods consolatory Sermon of Gods singular grace -- of seed to be borne of
Sarah -- for the Apostle calls the promised seed, expressly Christ. Neither
can it be doubted the promised seed which Abraham believed to agree with
foregoing and following promises of seed and blessing of all Nations by it:
and then Abraham's faith was a general faith or Catholic (as Sophisters call
it) assenting to every word of God, But also special resting See Pareus in
cap. 4. dub. 3. Justitia ergo fidei imputata est, etc. p. 310. and ib. At
Abraham sola fide etc.
on the promise given of seed, which is Christ. So Ambrose, Abraham believed
God: What did he believe? that he was to have seed, that is, a Son, in whom
all Nations should be justified. Therefore Abraham's was founded in Christ. The
Apostle will more clearly declare this faith about the end of the chapter
expressly teaching; Justifying faith ought to be fastened in the death and
resurrection of Christ. Pareus, p. 268.

And in the former page, Now on Nunc contra probat Abrahamum justificatum esse
fide, hoc est, justitia gratis imputata credenti, idque diserto Scripturae
testimonio.
the contrary, he proves Abraham to be justified by faith, that is, with
righteousness freely imputed to the believer.

And there having denied faith as a virtue to justify, though it be most
excellent, etc. Abraham is proposed not as working -- but as by faith freely
receiving righteousness, p. 270.

Again, When faith is said to be imputed for righteousness it is not to be
understood but Relatively, because righteousness shall be freely imputed to
the believer, or because the believer of Sed Meronimico sensu dixit fidem, id
est, Christum fide apprehensum, essenostram justitiam.
grace shall be reputed just.

I will name but one place more now of Pareus, he is often before cited, who
when in answering Bellarmine, he had said of Luther but in a metonymicke sense
he said faith, that is, Christ apprehended by faith, to be our righteousness.
-- Adds.

Which figurative sense called Metonymia, Quem sensum metony micum si oppugnat
Adversarius, certe non Lutherum impugnat sed Spirium sanctum blasphcmar, qui
Christum express vocat justitiam nostram, Jer. 23 6. and 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Casting. 1. 2. c. 4 p. 418 419.
if the Adversary opposes, surely he opposes not Luther, but blasphemeth the
holy Ghost, who calls Christ expressly our righteousness, as Jer. 23. 6.
and 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Calvine follows, in both places mentions the object. Abraham by believing
does no other thing then embrace the grace tendered to him, by which he means
the promises; Christ that seed especially and his righteousness, and that is
infolded in the goodness of God which it is said to apprehend.

And on the same place. But by faith they borrow from elsewhere Fide autem quod
sibi deest aliunde mutuantut, ideoque apt vocatur imputativa fidei justiria.
Resertur illic promissio semin is suturi. Ubi causa quaetitur cur -- pro justis
agnoscat, Christum pro. dire necesse est, qui sua nos justitia induat. Aliena
justitia nos fides ornat quam a Deo mendicat. And on Gat. 3. 6. Fides hic
relationem habet ac respectii ad tale. verbum Dei, quo sreti homines acquie
scere in ipso possint. Quum autem justitiam in se repositam non habeant
homines, imputatione hanc adipiscuntur. Primo sciendu^ est esse causam duntaxat
instrumenta^em, nam proprie loquendo justitia nostra nihil alind est quam
gratuita Dei acceptio in^qua fundate est nostra salus. Sed quia Dominus
testimonium nobis amoris sui and gratiae per Evangelium reddendo, illam quam
dixi justitiam nobis communicate, ideo side illam percipimus.
what is wanting to them, and therefore it is openly called imputed
righteousness by faith.

Thither is to be referred the promise of future seed.

Where the cause is sought. Why -- he acknowledges us for righteous, it is
necessary that Christ come forth, who clotheth us with his righteousness.

Faith adorneth us with another righteousness, which it beggeth of God.

Faith here has relation and respect to such a word of God, which men
believing can rest in it. What the promises are be shows toward the end of
his Commandment on that place, as Pareus and Martyr before.

Which righteousness seeing men have not placed in themselves, they obtain it
by imputation.

To that question, why is so great honor given to faith, that it is called the
cause of our righteousness? he answers.

First, we must know it is only the isntrumental cause, for to speak
properly, our righteousness is no other then Gods free acceptance, in which
our safety is founded.

But because the Lord in giving us a testimony of his love and favor by the
Gospel, does communicate to us that righteousness I called, therefore we
receive it by faith.

Therefore when we give man's justification Ergo cum fidei tribuimus hominis
justificationem, non de causa principali dispuramus, sed tantum notamus modum
quo perveniunt homines ad vetam justitiam: justitia enim haee est meram Dei
dotum, non qualitas quae in hominibus haereat, sed fide tantum possidetur, etc.
to faith, we dispute not of the principal cause, only we observe the manner
by which men come to true righteousness: For this righteousness is Gods mere
gift, not a quality which may inhere in men, but is possessed only by faith.

We have therefore called to mind those Meminetimus ergo qui side justi sunt,
eos extra se justos esse, nempe in Christo.
that are just by faith, are just out of themselves, forseoth in Christ.

We are justified before God, Quam afferimus persectam Logis obedientiam, nam
justitia transgressioni Legis etiam in minimo apice opponitur, eam quia non
habemus in nobis, Deus nobis gratuito donat.
when we bring the perfect righteousness of the Law, for righteousness is
opposed to the transgression of the Law, even in the least point, because we
have it not our selves, God gives it to us freely.

Abraham therefore is not justified -- Non ergo justificatus est Abraham -- sed
quia Die gratiamamplexus est fretus Mediatore promisso in quo omnes Dei
promissiones sunt Etiam and Amen.
but because be embraced the grace of God trusting in the promised Mediator in
whom all Gods promises are Yea and Amen

Let the Reader observe but these passages on the same place, and he may
observe the vain considence of this objector of Calvine, for his proper sense
of faith, and opposition of the common tenet.

To Gualter, M. Wr. rightly wills the Reader to see how hardly we are put to
it, when as you cite the bare words themselves to prove your interpretation:
for Aretius (for I have not to examine by either Musculus or Gualter, or
Illyricus, etc.) Shall in the next place be considered.

The isntrumental cause is faith of Organica causa est sides Jesu Christi,
haee est, justitia illa Dei imputativa applicatur nobis per sidem in Christum.
In Romans 3. 22.
Jesus Christ, that is, that imputed righteousness of God is applied to us by
faith in Christ.

It is called the instruments of jusiification, Organum justifieation is
dicitur quod justitia Dei nobis applicetur per sideth.
because the righteousness of God is applied to us by faith.

Because seeing it is of God, and in Quia cum Dei sit, and in Deo proprie nobis
tamen imputatur and applicatur, adeo ut cum rei mortis simus, Deus nos absolvat
a paena and justos pronuntiet imputata nobis sua justitia; hinc imputata
justitia dici potest and gratuita. In Romans 1. 17.
God properly, yet it is imputed and applied to us, so as when we be guilty of
death, God absolveth us from punishment, and may pronounce us just, his right
cousnesse imputed unto us, hence may it be called imputed and free.

With which he makes us just, this Qua nos justos facit haec imputativa est,
nam aliena justitia impurarur in justis per se, de hac loquitur in paesentia
etc 1. verse. 17. e cap. 3. Romans v. 21.
is imputative, for another righteousness is imputed to men unjust by
themselves, of this he speaks in the present place.

Consider (in justification) the sin Considera non imputari peccatum quod
inest homini, sic contra in justificatione imputa^i justitiam quae non inest
homini. In. c. 4 v. 6.
which is in a man not to be imputed, so contrary in justification, that
righteousness to be imputed which is not in man.

Faith therefore so holy and so firm Fides igitur tam pia and tam firma pro
justitia ci imputata est, quia haec apprehendit misericordiam and propositam
promissionem, hinc justitia ei etiam impuratur. Adv. 22.
is imputed to him for righteousness, because this apprehends the mercy and
proposed promise, hence righteousness is imputed to him.

Christ is made to us of God righteousness, Justitia a Deo nobis factus est,
quia in eo solo justi habemur, reputamur illius merito justi. Ad 1 Cor. 1. 30.
because in him alone we are accounted just, we are reputed just with his
merit.

That we might be made the righteousness Ut nos efficeremur justitia Dei, hoc
est, justi pronunciatemur, imputativa justitia taoquam ves^e ornaremur: dicitur
autem justria Dei quia nostra non est sed precario, etc. Ad 2 Cor. 5. uls.
of God, that is, might be pronounced just, and be adorned with imputed
righteousness as with a garment. It is called the righteousness of God
because it is not ours but freely.

In him he signifies that out of In ipso significat extra Christum nullam esse
justitiam qua nos possimus ornat^, and quae valeat in conspectum Dei. lb.
Christ there is no righteousness with which we can array our selves, and
which avails in the sight of God.

That he might perfectly fulfill the Ut perfect Legem impleret quod nobis
impossible erat, deinde paenas, etc. In Gal. 4. 4
Law which was impossible to us, etc.

Thus for Aretius, who no whit digresseth from the former.

Beza. And not rather an instrument Aut quasi sides sit illud quod nos
justificar, ac non potins inst umentum duntaxat and quidom gratis nobis da^um,
quo tanquam manu quapiam Chris^um iustitiam nostram apprehendimus. In c. 4 ad
Romans 2.
only and freely given us, with which, is an hand, we apprehend Christ our
righteousness.

To righteousness, in those words there is a figure called Hypallage.

For properly God is said to impute Nam propric dicitur Deus imputare justitiam
per sidem, ut mox, verse 6. and 11. quid autem sit, supra ad 1. verse. 17. and 3.
20.
righteousness by faith, as by and by in the 6. and 11. v. what that
righteousness is, is opened before on c. 1. verse. 17. and c. 3. verse. 20.

For Junius, the man might be thought either blind, or un sound in his
principles that will but mention him.

By the promises which Abraham by says embraced, include that of Christ our
seed.

Faith in the predicament of relation Fides in genere (...), non justitia cat
in quantum habirus -- sed ratione differentiae relativae quae gratuitam
justitiae and vitae aeternae promissionom fiducialiter amplectitur. Jun. Tles.
de justif. Sect. 11.
justifies not as an habit -- but by reason of its relative difference, which
considently imbraceth the gracious promise of righteousness and eternal life.

But relatively only as it apprehends Sed relative tantum quatenus meritum
Christi apprehendit, tanquam manus mendici eleemosynam. Sect. 16.
death the merit of Christ, as the band of the beggar does the alms.

The occasion therefore was this, that Occasio igitur haec fui^, quod Abraham
side simplicistima acqureverit simplicibus illis Dei promissionibus,
justitiamque Dei eadem prehenderet prour a Deo non operantibus ad morcedem, sed
credentibus ad justitiam and vitam imputa^u^ quemadmodum Apostolus optime
interpretatur. In Genesis 15.
Abraham with a most simple faith did sit down in those most simple promises
of God, and laid hold of the same righteousness of God by the same faith, as
it is imputed not to workers to a reward, but believers to righteousness and
life, as the Apostle does best of all interpret.

To conclude, that we may expound Donique ur Metonymiam hanc quam evidentissimo
possimus simili exponamus, sides est tanquam manus aut tanquam lo culus
apprehendens the sautum gratiae quem nobis Deus exhibet in Christo Jesu. In
Hch. c. 11. 1.
this Metonymy by as evident a simily as we can. Faith is as an hand, or as a
purse apprehending the treasure of grace which God in Jesus Christ exhibiteth
to us.

Doctor Abbot is added in his defense of Mr. Perkins. I believe the words are
there, though I cannot find them, and have four times inquired, and spent
more time then will make an answer. Where we have first, righteousness imputed
without works; secondly, what that is by your relation, the reputing of faith
for righteousness, for that thereby we obtain remission and forgiveness of
sins.

And you conclude, he that will undertake to divide this Author and the opinion
we contend for, must be more severe then to give a man leave to be of his own
mind.

I find the words otherwise cited in your Master Mr. Watton, and will say
nothing to them, until I find them, but suspend.

But this I am confident of, that the Author no more favors your opinion,
then any of those that are called your adversaries in this question; and who
ever shall read his whole chapter, and consider whom he defends, and what
against Bishop, shall see our arguments for the imputation of Christ's
righteousness which you oppose proposed by Mr. Perkins, opposed in many things
by Doctor Bishop the Papist, and made good against him by Dr. Abbot, who does
it as a son of the Church of England indeed. What he undertakes you may see,
p. 381.

That our justification and righteousness before God stands not in any
inward virtues, etc. but in the imputation of Christ's obedience and
righteousness made ours by faith, shall be proved P. 381. P. 383.
to him, God willing, by better arguments then be shall be able to disprove.

In that place, for this by the way he names, 1 Cor. 1. 30. But the Gospel
teaches us to acknowledge Christ immediately and wholly our righteousness and
salvation, in whom, and not in our se'ves, we are made the righteousness of
God, that is, just in the sight of God, in that his obedience and
righteousness
performed and wrought in our name, and for our behoof, is imputed P. 384.
unto us by faith in his blood.

1. Mr. Perkins argument is, That which must be our righteousness before God,
must satisfy the justice of the Law, which says, Do these things and thou
shall live.

But there is nothing that can satisfy that justice of the Law P. 387.
but the righteousness and obedience of Christ. Ergo.

This argument the Doctor defends.

He shows this Scripture meant of the Morall-Law. P. 389.


Now Mr. Perkins to take away the opinion of our own righteousness, and to
show that we have no other but the righteousness of Christ to rest safely
upon, alleges as Gregory does, the rigor and severity of Gods judgment
which admits of nothing but what is exact and perfect, according to the rule
of justice P. 396.
prescribed to us.

2. His second argument is taken out of 2 Cor. 5. ult. As Christ was made sin
for us, so we are made the righteousness of God in him. But Christ was made
sin by the imputation of P. 399.
our sins being most boly. Therefore a sinner is made righteous, in that
Christ's righteousness is imputed unto him.

Which are made good out of Anselme, Augustine, and Hierome.

Where you shall find a comparison made good against you.

And, that answered that he was made sin not by imputation, P. 401. etc.
but a Sacrifice. Where he demands why the Sacrifice of sin should be
called by the name of sin. See him who is large in speaking thereunto, out of
the Trope and Fathers. There I find Christ needed not for himself to be made
under the Law, for to perform the righteousness thereof for his own
justification before God, being otherwise simply and absolutely just. But what
he did he did it for our sakes, that we thereby through faith in P. 402. 403.
him should be justified in Gods sight.

It follows that the righteousness of God must be understood of another
righteousness, which is that whereof the Apostle instructs Romans 4. 6. 1b.
us, whereby the Lord imputes righteousness without works, according to the
words of David, etc.

Hitherto the Argument stands good. As Christ was made sin, so we are made
righteousness; Christ was made sin by the imputation of our sin, we are
therefore made righteous P. 404.
by the imputation of his righteousness.

Mr. Perkins his third Argument, is from Romans 5. 19. As by the disobedience of
Adam, men were made sinners, so by the obedience of Christ are they made
righteous. But men are made sinners by the imputation of Adams sin unto them,
and P. 404.
not only by propagation of natural corruption: Therefore by imputation of
Christ's justice we are made righteous.

The case is very clear, that if we be sinners by the imputation of Adams
sin, then are we also righteous by the imputation P. 405.
of the righteousness of Christ.

Where he defends the imputation af Adams sin, which he proves against
Bishop, (and Bellarmine himself somewhere, and you) out of Bellarmine citing
Bernard for it, etc. and Augustine, p. 406. and Bernard, p. 407. and
Chrysostom.

Now I pray thee Reader do but judge whether this Doctor be of Mr. John
Goodwines side, the opinion he contendeth for or against him, and never credit
his testimony but on examination.

Doctor Preston makes himself a stranger to the Tropicall interpretation of
this Scripture, and improveth that which is literal and proper, Treat.
Allsuff. p. 12. and 13. In this sense faith is said to be imputed for
righteousness. Abra. believed God Genesis 15. God indeed made the same
proposition that he does here for substance, he tells him what he would do for
him. And (says the text) Abraham believed God, etc. Now it was accounted to
him for righteousness, chiefly in this sense, as it is interpreted, Romans 4.
that this very taking of the promise, and his accepting of the Covenant, in
that he did receive that which God gave, that put him within the Covenant, and
therefore the Lord reckoned him a righteous man, even for that very acceptance
and believing.

But that is not all, but likewise he accounts faith to him for
righteousness, because faith does sanctify and make a man righteous, etc. And
then cry out evidence.

1. Does the Doctor in all this discourse mention your proper sense?

2. Does he establish it with an, and not the righteousness of Christ imputed?

3. Does he not insold the object? He tells him what he would do for him. So
that all that he would do for him was what he believed, on which imputation.

Your self add. This very taking of the promise, and his accepting of the
Covenant, and that he did receive that which God gave, was that wherefore the
Lord reckoned him a righteous man.

Is not here receiving the object, the promise, the covenant, and what God gave.

Is not Christ and his righteousness in all these, the seed, and
righteousness of God? If it be by receiving these, he was accounted just,
these must not be excluded, this testimony is not against us, but for, and
against you, who exclude these.

I will entreat the Reader to consider some of his particulars in the same
work.

The Covenant is the ministration of life and justification -- New con. p. 75.
the Covenant of grace shows him a righteousness to satisfy this Law, that
himself never wrought; shows him a way of obtaining pardon by the
satisfaction of another.

Abraham says the Lord, I will give thee a seed, and in P. 108.
that seed both thou thy self, and all the Nations of the earth shall be
blessed.

There was no other way to make mankind partaker of the Covenant of grace but
only by faith, by believing God, and taking P. 118. and 119.
the promise and the gift of righteousness by Jesus Christ. P. 120.


Because we believe the promises and the Covenant of grace, therefore the Lord
accepts us and counts us righteous.

I would die that I might have Christ and his righteousness. P. 170.


What difference is there now between him and the rest of ours, who make the
same things objects, and taken in to make us just?

As that of Christ the seed, etc.

And though righteousness be not named there, it is infolded, and explained by
the Prophets who reveal Christ in the Covenant, the Lord our righteousness,
and that with him was to be brought in everlasting righteousness. And it was
granted when the Apostle lays down circumcision the sign and seal of the
righteousness of faith: faith receives righteousness which God promised,
being the Seal of the whole Covenant there is infolded the seed, Christ's, and
Christ's righteousness.

Mr. Forbs is the last, to which testimony I answer.

1. In the same place he says. That opinion of the Metonymicke sense of faith,
agrees with the truth of the matter in it self.

2. When he says that it is taken properly, yet it is with cautions. If they
that take it so, err not in the signification of it, or the true sense of the
imputation of it.

3. And now let us consider what he does farther. C. 31. p. 161.


He teaches Christ's righteousness the only matter of justification.

And the Lords imputing thereof the form. That opinion (of Gods accepting our
imperfect righteousness) can never be maintained P. 163.
with Gods honor.

That God justifies us by accounting unto us Christ's obedience, which is in it
self perfect righteousness, in such a sort as by this his imputation, it is
ours as truly, and does as truly clear P. 164.
us before God as if it were our own indeed, and we our selves had indeed
performed it.

We must first have righteousness, for God justifies no man P. 169.
that has not righteousness. It is abomination, Prove. 17. 15.

That opinion of those who place our righteousness in faith, properly taken,
as it is the act of the heart without relation of it as an apprehending
instrument unto Christ, is much more pernicious
then the opinion of the Papists. P. 80.


Nothing in Heaven or Earth in man or without man, is the matter of man's
righteousness before God, except only Christ and his obedience. Therefore it
is said by the Apostle that he is made to us of God, etc. 1. Cor. 1. 30. and in
the Prophet, Jer. 23. 6. P. 85. P. 90.
and 33. 16. where also he urges that text, 2 Cor. 5. ult. and clears it,
and Dan. 9. 24.

He urges Gods justice in justifying, and that if God should justify us -- by
faith, as it is a work or habit in us, God should never be seen to be just,
etc. the Saints in Scripture have acknowledged their faith imperfect, whence he
concludes nothing P. 98.
can be righteousness except Christ alone.

And now let the learned judge of those passages: The clear approbation of
many Authors. The judgment of able, learned, P. 1. trea.
and unpartiall men is found in perfect concurrence with it: And that

From about Luthers and Calvines time, the fairest stream of P. 44.
Interpreters runs to water and refresh this interpretation.

And so whether you have cause of shame and blushing for the same, and whether
Mr. Walker had not cause of blaming you for not being ashamed and blushing: I
say let the Reader judge.

Musculus is clear for us, as by these testimonies transcribed.

Est quidem sides vera quaedam qualitas in pectoribus nostris, sed non
justifications quatenus est nova qualitas, sed quatenus gratiam Dei in Christo
oblatam apprehendit, In Romans 3. 24. etc.

Quomodo illa in nobis impleta est per Christum, primum imputative, aliena
justitia, quae Christi est, adeoque and nostra, quia caro sumus de carne ejus
and os de ossibus illius: hac ratione vere justi sumus, quia scilicet Christus
nostra est justitia, sanctificatio, redemptio, 1 Cor. 1. ad Romans c. 8. verse. 3.
etc.

Huc etiam facit quod justitiam fidei vocat justitiam Dei, non ob hoc tantum,
quod illa Deo tribuit justitiam, sed and ob id quod nos per illius justitiam
gratis in Christo filio ipsius justificamur per fidem, ita ut aliena justitia
justi simus, non propria. Maxima pestis est totius mundi, quod hanc Dei
justitiam talem esse non agnoscit, per quam nos justificemur, sed putat nostra
ipsorum nos esse justitia salvandos; electi vero non ita, unde quid Apostolus
scribat, Arbitror, inquit, omnia etc -- Ex eo vero non ascribemus nobis aliam
justitiam quam eam quae est Dei per fidem Christi. In Romans 10. 3.

Verum placuit antithesi uti peccatorum nostrorum and justitiae Christi. Nos
peccatores eramus, ille justus. Ut commutatio fieret, nostra peccata imposuit
filio justo, ac vicissim justitiam illius communicavit nobis peccatoribus.
Propter aliena igitur peccata factus ille peccatum est, and nos propter alienam
justitiam justitia Dei facti sumus: sicut enimille non suis, sed nostris
peccatis peccatum a Deo, ita nos non nostra ipsorum, sed ipsius justitia
justitia Dei facti sumus a Deo. --

Facta namque mutatione peccata nostra sua, and justitiam suam nostram fecit,
etc.

Sed secit nos justitiam, id est, imputavit nobis justitiam, idque non nostram,
quae nulla est, sed suam, gratuitam videlicet and olementer a se imputatam,
quam habeamus non in nobis, sed in ipso filio. --

Loquitur de justitia quam nobis in Christo imputat sicuti peccata nostra illi
imputavit -- In hac commutatione omnis nostra salus est sita, ubi and Augustini
illud; Ipsiergo peccatum, etc. in 2 Cor. 5. ult.

Deinde sub Lege esse debitorem est esse faciendae Legi, ad obediendum illius
praeceptis, ac subeundum transgressionis paenashic quaeritur an isto quoque
sensu factus fuerit sub Lege Christus Dei Filius? Etenim si justo non est Lex
posita sed injustis, quisna^ reperietur ex omnibus hominibus, ad quem minus
pertineat subjectio ista qua Legi sit subditus, quam Christus Filius Dei omnium
innocentissimus ac justissimus? Accedit and hoc, quod qui Dominus est Legis
liber est ab ejus observantia: talis autem est Christus, etc.

Verum ut paucis sententiam meam expediam, non impediunt rations, quo minus
etiam hoc posteriori sensu, Christum sub Lege factum esse intelligamus. Licet
enim hand quaquam propter se subjici debuerit Legi; subjectus tamen suit
propter alios quos redimere debebat. Qui aliorum in se debita recipit, non
minus debtor est quam si propter sua ipsius esset debita creditori obstrictus.

Christus autem propterea missus suit in hunc mundum ut debita nostra inse
recipenet, proque illis satisfaceret; sic venit in sua factusque est sub Lege,
haud propter se, sed propter cos qui sub Lege servient es condemnationi erant
propter illius transgressiones obnoxii sic subjicit, ut eos qui etc. Musc. in
Gal. 4.

And now for your other two Treatises of the same matter, God willing I shall
examine all in your own order.

An Examination of all the remaining parts of Master John Goodwins Treatise of
Justification.
CHAP. III. Containing other proofs from Scripture.
ROM such passages of Scripture where the works of the Law are absolutely
excluded from Justification, Romans 3. 28. etc. Gal. 2. 16. and Romans 3. 20. etc.
If man be justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed, he shall be
justified by the works of the Law.

Answ. 1. When as we hold Christ's Righteousness imputed, its not of the active
obedience alone (which is pretended) but passive also; both; by both these
imputed, we are made just before God, justified. Let notice be taken of this
once for all.

2. Works of the Law cannot be absolutely excluded. When as there is an
absolute necessity of their concurrence and influence contributing to the
sacrifice of Christ and his Priestboo^, raising them both to that height of
acceptance for others: excluding those works. You exclude the passive
obedience also, which is not (without the other) sufficient, ex concessis,
which it seems you intend not in objecting only against that which is active.

3. If works of the Law be absolutely necessary (as is granted) to the
sacrifice and Priesthood, whither those, namely the perfect integrity and
purity of his nature and obedience, confessedly concurring and inflowing to
Justification, are not so to him as Mediator?

4. The acts of Christ's humiliation, all of those servile Obedientiae meritum
hoc respectu consideratae nobis imputarilibens concesserim, ut quae
Justificationis rationem ex part constituit. Haec autem omnia quarenus
humiliationis rationem obtinent, eatenus et satisfactionis naturam induunt,
atque ea ratione nobis ad justificationem imputantur. M. Gat. adver. par. 1. p.
1. n. I, 2. Satisfactio autem Christi actibus perpessionibusque illis
comprehensa, est justitiae, propter quam nos justificamur, materia. ad Gom. p.
5.
acts performed by him are confessedly concurring to Justification; mediatory.
I shall willingly grant the merit of obedience in this respect considered, to
be imputed to us as that which in part does constitute the nature of
Justification; all these insomuch as they are humiliation, so far they also
put on the nature of satisfaction, and in that consideration are imputed unto
us. And elsewhere, The satisfaction of Christ comprehended in those acts and
sufferings is the matter of the righteousness, for which we are justified.

These (it is true) are distinguished from those acts conformed to the Law,
flowing from internal holiness: by that reverend Author. If truly, then
those acts of humiliation did not flow from internal holiness, etc. they did
not proceed from Christ's love to God and man, from humility, from righteousness
and piety in his soul. And if they did, the whole was performed to the
mediatory Law* and for us, not himself, that he should live who was
comprehensor from the first moment, lived certainly.

Master Bradshaw, though he acknowledge Christ bound as man to the Law
(notwithstanding personal union) yet he makes it a part of Christ's
humiliation, p. 62. And some part, a part of his mediation, ibid. (truly what
was a part of his humiliation, was a part of his Mediation) Every part thereof
being of that nature that without the same no other satisfaction could have
been availeable or effectual, and all proceeding from such an estate and
condition, as he needed not to have undergone, nor bad not if he had not taken
upon him to satisfy for sinners. Some part of the satisfaction which be made,
must needs consist therein, and therefore it must in some degree or other be
imputed unto them, to their justification, id. p. 63. It must needs be also in
some measure or other a part of the righteousness in and by the imputation
whereof a sinner is justified, p. 64. Therefore the very assuming of our
nature, and all the obedience he yielded thereupon, and by reason thereof, etc.
seem to be some part of the actual execution of his Priestly Office, by
means whereof, in part he pacified God, and consequently in part satisfied for
sin, p. 65.

He was borne of a woman, not for his own sake but for others, whose Savior
and Redeemer he is, so being borne he was made under the Law also, not for his
own cause, but for ours. Yea therefore he was borne of a woman, that for our
sakes he might be under the Law. Also as be became a servant for our sake; so
in that very regard he became under the Law of a servant, p. 66.

So much of his conformity to the Law, as concerns his humiliation, must
either be unnecessary, or part of his Satisfaction, ib. p. 66. etc.

By all which it is apparent that works of the Law are not absolutely excluded
from Justification.

5. The very passive obedience of Christ, will not absolutely exclude the Law
from Justification. Christus in vita passivam habuit actionem, in morte
passione^ activam, dum salutem operatetur in medio terrae Bern. Sermon. 4. hebd.
panosae, Col I 24. In passione summus amor Dei and ardentissima erga genus
humanum dilectio, patientia. obedientia, humilitas, fiducia, invocatio, spes.
Et damnati patiendo satisfaciunt legi, si Christus patiendo, Gerrard de Iustif.
sect. 6.
Christ in his life had a passive action, in his death an active passion,
whilst be wrought salvation in the midst of the earth. In his passion there
was the highest love of God, and most ardent to mankind, patience, obedience,
humility, trust, invocation, hope. And the damned by suffering satisfy the
Law, if Christ did so by suffering.

Christus ca pro nobis praestitit quibus legi illi pro culpis a nobis admissis
satisfactum est Imo operum etiam legem in Justificatione peccatoris
interveniente satisfactione, stabisiti, cerissimum est.
The Law was satisfied by the sufferings of Christ. Christ performed those
things for us, by which satisfaction is made to the Law for our sins. And
it is most certain that the Law of works is established in justification by
satisfaction intervening.

If there be an equivalent price of obedience and righteousness Si obedien^iae
sive justitiae illi quam nos legi, vel Deo potius vilegis debebamus, quod
aequipolleat, pretium aliquod sit a Christo pro nobis depensum, and a Deo ips^o
eo nomine acceptum, legi certe divinae nihil quicquam derogatur* S^abilitur dum
impletur in Gat advers. par. 1. Sect. 10. n. 8, 9. p. 42. Etiam paena est
impletio legis, Pareus de act. and pass p. 83. Obligamur ad paenam velad
obedientiam, ib.
paid by Christ, and accepted in that name by God, which we did owe to that
Law, or rather to God by reason of that Law, then nothing certainly is
derogated from the Divine Law. -- It is established whilst it is fulfilled.

Punishment is the fulfilling of the Law. We are bound either to punishment or
obedience: There is justice and righteousness in repairing injuries and
wrongs. Thus much will arise from passages in your 1 Concl. tr. 2. p. 3. so
that there is not an absolute exclusion of the Law when as sufferings are
asserted.

6. Again, It seems much to me that you should hold an absolute exclusion of
the works of the Law when as you establish Faith in a proper sense, and as a
work of obedience, as righteousness, if it be required in the Law (which
considered against your denial, the learned hold) the Law is not to be
absolutely excluded. And though it be not in the Law originally; yet you know,
It may be superadded, and in the Law as now it stands with additions and
improvements: Which is your own distinction, Treat. 2. p. 47. and 48. I may
apply it to my purpose.

7. Once more, if there be no medium between a perfect freedom from sin, and
perfect and complete righteousness. And that in freedom from sin, the man is
ipso facto made perfectly righteous, Righteousness being perfect conformity to
Gods Law. Supposing that freedom to appertain to Justification, to be the
form thereof as you. I wonder how this conformity to the Law can be absolutely
excluded from Justification. If there be a truth in your 2. Conclusion, your
absolute exclusion will not stand.

8. Then if Remission of sin (the form of Justification as you) includes the
imputation or acknowledgement of the observation of the whole Law, as the
imputation of the Law fulfilled includes not imputation of sin, that such an
one is looked upon is one that has fullfilled the Law. If in the act of
remission of sins, there be included the imputation of a perfect
righteousness, which is all one with a perfect fulfilling of the Law, as you
Conclus. 4. p. 5. 2 Treat. Whether this absolute exclusion of the works of the
Law from justification be consistent with it, both true?

9. I will but name it. Others (you know) are against you and teach a necessity
of obedience to the Law to justification, as our debt, and that eternal way of
God to live.

And that these places intend not obedience to the Law simply, but performed by
our own persons, though this is not personal performance, and that such
obedience is impossible, it follows not of the Law, performed for us by our
Mediator. So our Church, etc. See before, and some of the reasons now named are
confessedly, enforce; as, where the death of Christ, is satisfaction to the Law.

But you cannot endure this answer; and therefore against it, say, 1. Not to be
justified by the works of the Law, is as much as not to be justified by any
works of the Law whatsoever.

I answer, True, performed by a man's self, not by another, and whether what
has been premised, be not sufficient against an absolute exclusion of the
Law, which is in your argument, and that ex concessis, I leave to your second
thoughts.

2. Neither is there blame in the Apostle, or unfaithfullnesse: Seeing, where
he lays down that we are made righteous by the obedience of Christ, he
lays down the works of obedience of Christ to the Law. Not to use
repetitions else premised, that necessary influence and concurrence of it with
the passive obedience.

3. Neither is it therefore a snare upon men, seeing there is intimation
sufficient, and inclusion of his obedience to the Law, so manifest as has
been showed.

4. Neither had Saint Paul need your teaching him to preach, he Preached Christ
our Mediator and Surety, humbled to death for us, Obedient to death for us.
And justification by Faith in him. All which notwithstanding, they were
ignorant of that which is called Gods righteousness, and hence they
established their own Righteousness, and submitted not themselves to the
righteousness of God, which is Christ, the end of the Law for righteousness
to believers. When as there is such an evident, absolute, necessary concurrence
and inclusions and interpretations as have been spoken of, you may see the
vanity of this illusion.

Here you urge objected against your self, that Paul gave sufficient
intimation of the righteousness of Christ, when as he first excludes what is
done by our selves, and mentions Christ's doing the works of the Law. The
first from Tit. 3. 5. and the second from Gal. 4. 4.

To which you answer, and first to that of Titus. 1


That the active obedience of Christ should be wholly excluded, G. P. 62.
and be made a stand-by, so as to have nothing at all to do in the great
business of Justification, this discourse no way affirms. It has been
expressly acknowledged from the beginning to have a gracious and blessed
influence thereinto, as it issues and falls into his passive obedience.
Which together may be called a Righteousness for which, but at no hand a
Righteousness with which we are justified, etc.

Very well, this is what I observe, the destruction of Answer.
your argument from an absolute exclusion (this to be the matter of form, is
not an absolute exclusion, which yet is your conclusion in this argument where
you call it an essential requisite.) In the mean while, You know there are
many, all that I know, there are many, all that I know, but two or three of
you, that make it the matter of our Justification, and form also as it is
applied, and establish the merit, what ever you say, and but say, to the
contrary.

Therefore ex concessis the rejection (in those words) 2
of works which we have done;

First, may suppose, the works of righteousness of Christ, as part of the
satisfaction necessarily inflowing: which is answer to what you say.

Secondly, This must be supposed and established, as you, p. 16. in this
business though not named.

When as it is said not by works of Righteousness which we have done, it is
all-one as to say our own selves have done, for we and our selves are all one.

May? nay must, seeing they are a cause and absolutely necessary, as your self
teach. As Christ's death is supposed, so this inflowing necessarily, being an
essential requisite.

Neither will it be put out of question, because the Apostie names 3
Gods mercy. For as Gods mercy and Christ's death stand together and have place
in Justification, so Christ's works concurring with Christ's death, the mercy of
God and Christ's merits agree sweetly.

Neither by that that mercy is explained in the new birth, 4
and washing with the Holy Ghost. For mercy in the effect regeneration will
consist also with Justification: washing is a general Justification and
sanctification species or particulars thereof, at the same time performed by
the same Spirit, as 1 Cor. 6. 11. they are inseparable.

Yea saving implies as freedom from guilt and punishment, so righteousness
by which, though it be not here expressed. Finally, passing that nonsense,
given as a reason, why this place is impertinent, in these words: Because it is
evident that the Apostle here rejects the works of Righteousness, which he
names from being any causes antecedamously moving God to save us, and not from
being the form of Justification. For it makes the Apostle not to exclude
works of Righteousness from being the form of Justification, and so to be a
Patron of Popery, whose tenet that is. To what follows.

That, If it be granted the works of Christ must of necessity G.
be here employed: All that will follow is, that not our works but Christ's moved
God to save us, by the washing of the new birth.

To which I answer, not Christ's works, but Gods mercy in Christ, and by his
active and passive obedience. Mercy moved God to choose us in Christ, to appoint
us to salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, and accordingly to
execute the same in whole salvation, in Justification; though it moves as
being the meritorious cause, it is also the matter, as after, and form as
applied in washing us by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit applying or sprinkling us
with the blood of that holy Lamb, washes, sanctifies, and justifies.

The same blood of that holy Lamb, or active and passive obedience of Christ
that justifies, is not only a meritorious cause, and so sit matter (which
could not be, if it had not worth) but also that which applied supplyeth the
place of a form justifying, which were it never so worthy, without application
it could never do. When you lay down Reasons you shall hear more.

To that place, Gal. 4. 4. that you may illude it, you say, P. 66.
First, Christ's being made under the Law, does not signify Christ's subjection
to the Moral Law, but rather the Ceremonial Law; that was it we were under,
from that he redeemed us, and it is not reasonable he made under any other Law.

I answer, We were under the Moral Law, its curse and condemnation, under its
strict and personal performance, as well as it, considered as a rule of life.
And though it continues as a rule of life, we are by Christ redeemed from the
curse and condemnation thereof, and strict personal performance of it. And
this was the effect and end of Christ's making under the Law. And there is more
reason that this should be infolded, for as much as this was the greatest
bondage of the twain.

Secondly, Yousay, Taking it for the Moral Law, it was G.
not to the preceptive part, but the curse. Which standing, the case is plain,
here is no place for the works of Christ. No Author, affirming either the
death of Christ, or the imputation of his death, should be the formal or
material cause of Justification.

1. It was to the preceptive part as well as the curse. Both are our debt, our
Surety was accursed for us, and fullfilled all Righteousness for us; paid our
whole debt.

2. When as you say his death was the price, by which he deserved our
Justification. You will have us, and we you, to remember, It was not so
without influence of the active obedience of Christ. You will not have the
active obedience separated from the passive, nor again the passive from the
active, in respect of this common and joint effect of forgiveness of sins,
or justification arising from a concurrence of them both, P. 132. etc.

And Sir, it is the common tenet of Protestants, that the obedience of Christ
is the matter of justification, and imputation, the form, that is such by
analogy, and instead thereof. And Saint Paul says, that By the obedience of
one, many shall be made righteous, constituted. Nothing but righteousness can
make righteous, that applied makes us so, or justifies us, and you must
acknowledge that your own phrase, often used.

CHAP. IV. A Demonstration from Scripture of the non-imputation of Christ's
Righteousness for Justification.
FRom Rom 3. 21. But now the righteousness of God is made manifest without the
righteousness of the Law, having witness of the Law and the Prophets; even
the righteousness of God which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and
upon all that do believe.

If the righteousness of faith consists in the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, then is it not, nor can it be made manifest without the Law,
the works of the Law; but the righteousness of faith is sufficiently
manifested without the Law, therefore it does not consist in the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, P. 70.

The righteousness of faith is that which faith receives, which God gives or
imputes, are righteousness of Christ, and it is revealed without the Law;
(says Pareus) Non in Lege, non est ergo legalis.
Not in the Law, therefore it is not Legal. By that is the knowledge of sin,
not of the righteousness by which we are are justified. Lex ex professo eam
non tradit, sed urget justitiam operum; qui fecerit ea vivet in eis Pareus in
locii.
The Law, professedly delivers not that, but urges righteousness of works;
The man that does whom shall live in them. Dixerat supra, c 1. 17 retegitur per
Evangelium: quod hic repetendum. Sic innuit praeter Legem aliad doctrinae genus
in Ecclesia a Lege distinctu^, argumento and usu. Lex in praeceptis sita est,
arguit peccata, and damnationem adfert: Evangelium in pro missione gratiae
consistit, offerens justitiam and salutem gratuitam credentibus in Christum --
innuit etiam duplicem esse justitiam; unam hominum vitio: alteram reus in locum.
He had said before, c. 1. 17. it is revealed by the Gospel which is here to be
repeated. So be intimates another kind of Doctrine besides that of the Law,
distinct from the Law, in the Church, hoth in argument and use. The Law is in
precepts, it argues sin, and brings damnation; the Gospel does consist in
the promise of grace, offering to believers in Christ righteousness and free
salvation -- he does intimate also that there is a double righteousness, one
of the Law, or legal, or of works, ineffectuall and impossible by man's fault:
another of the Gospel, or Evangelieall, or of faith, effectual and salutary.
What that of faith is we know, that which faith apprehends, so Pareus in a
Metonymick sense, laying hold of the object. Adfore hac sides justitiam, non
effective, quasi habitualiren justos justos efficiat -- nec materialites, quasi
ipsa fit illudiquo justi consumu^ sed objective quatenus in Christum qui est
justitia nostra dirigitur, and organice, quatenus donum justitiae Christi
merito credentibus gratis imputatae apprehendir, Par inv. 22.
This faith brings righteousness, not by working it, as making us habitually
just -- nor materially as if faith were that by which we are counted just: but
objectively, as it is directed to Christ who is our righteousness, and
instrumentally, as it apprehends the righteousness of Christ, a gift by
Christ, me^^ts freely imputed to believers. Where is added, ^^mel observetur,
Phrasinm^^ qui poll^ntiam (amongst others) Justia non nostr^^, asiena; or non
propria, or prop^^^ See p. 191. 190. and 187. And that it is justi^ia per
o^^dienti^^ Christi, and justitia impurata^ D^o, p. 190.
Let the equivalence of the phrases be at once observed. righteousness not
outs, another, not our own, or our own, that it is righteousness ty the
obedience of Christ, and righteousness imoputed by God.

1. So that I answer, that righteousness is not in the text of my book.

2. Those that are justified by Christ, etc. are so by a righteousness not
revealed in the Law. But the righteousness of faith is the righteousness of
Christ imputed, which is expressly manifested by the Gospel without the Law.

To the Argument I deny the consequence of the major: that which the Law
reveals is our own, ^e that does them Qui. (...).
shall live in them, as before.

It is not another, not Christ's, not imputed righteousness, not Gospel
righteousness, the righteousness of God, as the Apostle calls it, or the
righteousness of faith.

When as you say the body and substance of the righteousness it self, is
nothing else but a pure Law or the works of it. Your adversaries say it
consists in both active and passive righteousness; and being that it is a
righteousness not performed by us, but another, our Surety: (that of the Law
being, Qui* fecerit ea, vivet) you may perceive that it is not legal, and that
it is manifested without the Law.

To this you seem to object. 1. That this Sanctuary has been already
polluted, and the ho^^es of the Altar broken down. I answer, Let the Reader
and your self g^ again and see.

2. The righteousness of faith cannot be fully taught without any
consideration of the Law, ex concessis, seeing Christ's righteousness active
has a necessary concurrence and influence to make his passion a fit atonement.

3. Though the works performed by Christ be the works of the Law, and we
justified by them (together with the passive) which also is obedience to the
Law, yet they are not legal righteousness: Qui fecerit ea, is the voice of
the Law; were they our proper personal works, it were to purpose; being the
righteousness of another, the Law reveals it not, neither are they properly
legal.

4. To this righteousness active and passive, the Law, and Prophets give
testimony as unto the Surety himself, so to his righteousness; and this is that
which we teach to be applied by faith, which you confess has testimony. The
Law, etc. open the seed of the woman, the blessed seed, the Lord our
righteousness, making an end of sin, bringing in everlasting righteousness.
And when as that is so Absolutely necessary as is showed to constitute our
Priest and his Sacrifice, and the efficiencie of both then and new: It is a
wonder to me that the same mouth should argue to an utter exclusion of it.

Finally* this is to all and upon all by faith, we confess opposition between
faith and the works of the Law, personal performances, neither is there
perfect agreement between the works of Christ and the Law, there is as much
difference in justification as between our own and another, a sureties, what
is given and imputed by God, received by faith, and what a man does in his own
person: Hearken to Calvine on the place.

In a few words he shows what Paucis verbis ostendit qualis sit haec
justificatio, nempe quod in Christo resideat, per ^idem ve^o apprehenditur.
manner of justification this is, forsooth that it resideth in Christ, but is
apprehended by faith.

After that he gathers. First, the Primum justificationis nostrae cansam non
ad hominum judicium re^erri, sed ad Dei tribunal. Ubi nulla justitia censetur
nisi perfecta absolutaque Legis obedientia. Quod si nemo hominum reperitur qui
ad eam exactam sanctitatem conscenderit: sequitur omnes justitiam in se ipsis
destitutos. Tum occurrat Christus oportet, qui ut solus justus est, ita suam
justitiam in nos transferendo justos nos reddit. Nunc vides ut justitia fidei
justitia Christi sit.
cause of our justification not to be referred to men's judgment, but to Gods
tribunal. Where no righteousness is judged such but the perfect and absolute
obedience of the Law. If so be that no man be found who has attained that
exact holiness, it follows that all are without righteousness in
themselves. Then Christ must come to help; who as he alone is just, so be
makes us just, transferring his righteousness on us. Now
you see that the righteousness of faith is the righteousness of Christ.
Where he calls Christ the matter, and the word, and faith the instrument, and
adds:

Wherefore faith is said to justify, Quare fides justifica^e dicitur quia
instrumentum est recipiendi Christi, in quo nobis communicatur justitia.
because it is the instrument of receiving Christ, in whom righteousness is
communicated unto us.

And then, After we be made pertakers Postquam factisumus Christi participes,
non ipsi solum justi sumus, sed opera nostra justa reputantur coram Deo.
of Christ, not only we are just, but also our works are reputed just before
God.

Where you have our complete Doctrine. -- And consider with what vain
confidence you call him to your part.

CHAP. V. From Romans 5. 16, 17. Compared; where
THe gift of righteousness, as v. 17. which is by Christ in the Gospel, is
said, v. 16. to be a free gift of many offenses to justification. Whence thus,
that righteousness which is the gift of many offenses, that is, the
forgiveness of many offenses or sins to justification; cannot be a perfect
legal righteousness imputed to us, or made ours by imputation. But the
righteousness which is by Christ in the Gospel by which we are justified, is
the gift of many offenses unto justification; therefore it cannot be a perfect
legal righteousness, made ours by imputation.

I deny the gift of righteousness, and the free gift or forgivnes of many
offenses are the same, they differ as cause and effect, as sin and condemnation
are cause and effect, so righteousness and remission of sins. Righteousness
imputed has its immediate effect, justification. It is a righteous making, of
which remission of sins, is (to speak properly) a concomitant or consequent
effect. Those that receive abundance of grace and of the gift of
righteousness, are thereby justified, and so receive forgiveness of sins.
So verse. 18. By the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all to
justification of life. Where there is the effect or end, and the cause by which
Sions converts shall be redeemed with righteousness, Isa. 1. 27.

Life reigns out of abundance of Vita regnat ex redundantia gratiae, hoc est
redundante gratia and dono justitiae, quod a Deo redundanter nobis imputatione
donatur, ^ nobis autem fide accipitur, Pareus p. 367.
grace, that is, by grace abounding, and by the gift of righteousness, which
is abundantly give^ us of God by imputation, but is received of us by faith.

If we desire to be freed from Si ex illo liberari (Regno) and in hoc
transferri desideramus, do number justitiae in Christo fide accipiamus necesse
est, Par. p. 368.
that Kingdom, and translated unto this, it is necessary we receive the gift
of righteousness in Christ by faith. That received, justifies, on which
remission or freedom follows.

Life ever accompanies righteousness, Vi'a perpemo comitatur justitiam, ut
mors peccatum; sicut ubi peccatum ibi mors est ex ordine justi^iae, and
veritate comminationis divinae, sie ubi justitia -- five gratis impurata ut in
fidelibus electis ibi vita R egnat partim ex eodem justitiae divinae ordine,
partim and maxim ex promissione gratiae, Qui credit ^n filium habet vitam
aeternam.
as death does sin: as where sin is, there is death out of Gods justice, and
the truth of divine threatening: so where righteousness -- or freely imputed as
in the elect believing, there life ra^^neth partly out of the same order of
Divine justice, and specially by the promise of grace; He that believes in the
Son bath eternal life.

1. We say not that the righteousness by which we are justified, is a perfect
legal righteousness, that is, righteousness performed by our own persons.

2. Yet we affirm that righteousness by which imputed we are justified,
includes our Sureties full satisfaction to Gods Law, and does not absolutely
exclude the the same as you teach.

Take that part, Christ's death for us this the Apostle Jute vocat (...), justam
satisfaction em, quoniam suit Legis impletio per paenam, p. 370. in v. 18.
rightly calls a just satisfaction (says Pa^e^s) because it was the
fulfilling of the Law by punishment. Here we shall have you bound, so that the
fulfilling of the Law simply cannot be excluded: and then you know the
confessed concurrence and influence of Christ's active obedience and necessity
thereof is afferted by your self; and that the Devil and damned suffering do
not satisfy the Law to life, as Gerhardus.

We deny not, but affirm the righteousness of Christ in the Gospel by which
we are justified, extends unto a man's justification and forgiveness of
sins: but may well deny that justification is by the forgiveness of sins.
It is by righteousness imputed, on which remission follows, and if it should
be by it, and that as the form (as you) it should be in order of nature before
justification.

It is by imputation of both active and pass^^^ obedience, both which have a
precedence in order, both to justification, as that by which, and so to pardon
of sin by the same reason.

When you say, if a ma^s, sins be once forgiven him he has no need if
imputetion of any farther righteousness; p. 75. for his justification; I
subscribe: yet that they may be forgiven there is need of the imputation of
Christ's perfect obedience, active and passive, that which justifies, on which
there is no imputation of sins.

That remission of sins is whole justification or justification properly; I
deny: it is an effect of righteousness imputed by your texts, verse. 16. 18.
following just making or justification, which we assert against you, must be by
righteousness; and that applied to them, for they are said to be holy, and
unreprovable, and unblamable, wholly fair, white as Snow, whiter then the
Snow, perfected for ever, for which there must be somewhat applied effecting
the same. We profess no such righteousness elsewhere, but only the active
and passive righteousness of our Surety given us by God, and applied by faith.

When as you tell us that the righteousness we have by Christ, wherewith we
are said to be justified before God by believing, is only a negative
righteousness, not a positive, it is nothing but
not-imputation of sin, which you call a righteousness by interpretation, as
having the privileges, but not the nature of a perfect legal righteousness.

1. We say not that the positive righteousness by which, is legal, that is,
of our own performance, but another; and so must be called Evangelicall.

2. We put a righteousness, Christ's entire obedience from conception even to
death, as Romans 5. 19.

3. We deny it to consist in nothing but a non-imputation of sin, that is no
righteousness, it is righteousness in your interpretation, not the Lords.

The privileges of one legally just your self give to faith elsewhere, as
here to forgiveness, and faith in that respect may be our whole justification,
if that be enough to have the privileges, so I may say of repentance.

Let us see how you make this good.

1. You show it out of Romans 4. 6. compared with the 7. and G.
8. where it is called a righteousness without works, which must needs be
negative; the imputation of righteousness is interpreted nothing else but a
not-imputing of sin^^, and so it consists in pardon of sin.

1. I answer, these places your self urge for imputation of faith in a proper
sense, and so confound faith and justification or imputation of righteousness.

2. Righteousness positive is said to be imputed, v. 6. v. 11.

3. That is taken for the righteousness of Christ, which I have proved is
righteousness without works, that is, not personally performed by us, though
it be by another, that is, Christ.

4. That non-imputation of sin is not the same with imputation of
righteousness, but the latter is the cause, the former the effect, as is
showed by me.

And as for Calvine, he excludes not the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
and calls this the effect thereof, which also is showed before.

You add, 2 Cor. 5. 19. and 21. that which he calls v. 19. in God the not
imputation of sins unto us, he calls verse. 21. a being made the righteousness
of God in him.

I deny it, and there they differ as cause and effect, that in the 21. verse.
For, etc. is the cause of that in the 19. verse. and Calvine on the place faith,

Righteousness here is taken not for Justitia hic non pro qualtitate aur
habitu, sed pro imputatione accipitur, co quod accepta nobis fertur Christi
justitia.
a quality or habit, but for imputation, because Christ's righteousness is
accounted to us. To that Question.

How are we just before God? forsooth Quomodo justi sumus cotam Deo? qualiter
Christus suit peccator, personam enim nostram quoda^modo suscepit ut reus
nostro nomine here and tanqu^m peccator judicaretur, non propriis sed alienis
delictis; quum pu^us foret ipse and immunis ab omni culpa, paenamque subiret
nobis non sibi debitam. Ira sc. nunc justi sumus in ipso, non quia operibus
propriis satisfaciamus judicio Dei, sed quoniam censemur Christi justitia, quam
side induimus ut nostra hat, Calv.
as Christ was a sinner, for in a sort he took our person that he might be
made guilty and judged as a sinner, not by his own, but others sins, seeing
he was pure and free from all fault, and was to undergo punishment due, not to
us, but himself. So now we are just in him, not because we may satisfy the
judgment of God by our own works, but because we are accounted in his
righteousness, which by faith we put on that it may be made ours.

But Acts 13. 38, 39. opens it clearly, where the Be it known unto you that
through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, and by him all
that beeleeve are justified from all things from which you could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. Justification hence is laid down by the way of
negative G.
or privative righteousness, not a positive; so that the justification is not
with righteousness, (properly so called) but a justification from sin, etc.
p 77.

1. This place proves that through Christ is preached A.
pardon and justification, etc. It follows not that there is no positive
righteousness. Nay through this man infoldeth the same, that is throught his
entire satisfaction preached also.

2. Forgiveness and justification from, etc. implies that party righteous,
else should God justify a wicked man which is abominable.

3. Recount your great axiom of things immediate contraria. And see whether
from the position of pardon you do not infer and put perfect righteousness,
and suppose it to the passive obedience, its energie or being propitious.

4. Finally, the dispulsion of darkness, etc. any contrary is by the
introduction of its contrary; light, etc.

It is righteousness imputed that has attending pardon.

You say this is the proper signification and most usual, not G.
to signify giving or bestowing a complete positive righteousness, but
discharging, citing, Prove. 17. 15.

This is showed otherwise by that text: when God justifies a wicked man, he
makes him just first, thence the rights and privileges of just men, these
privileges of a just man go together, else shall the privileges of a just
man be common to him with the wicked, abomination.

And one would believe just making should be proper and most usual who shall
observe it your own ordinary
expression, See p. 35. p. 38. out of Haymo. Treat. 2. p. 112. 116. 117. 118.
144. twice 145. 150. 163. 136. it is nothing else, p. 211. and I find
remission of sins confessed the privilege of a man just. p. 5. 1. Treat.

That text Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay, etc. it is God that justifies,
shows the effect by the cause, because God justifies there is no
condemnation, so Romans 5. 9. justification is by the death of Gods Son, and
this we confess done by faith, as Gal. 3. 11. as an instrument, not by our
doing this; yet must you not exclude the obedience of Christ until death, that
which qualifieth: yea, its included in death that it be a pleasing sacrifice,
the synecdoche will salute that, of which more after, it answers that Jes.
53. 11. where he is said to bear our iniquities.

For Calvine and the rest cited by you, they have the same answer, and that
truly in the judgment of many witnesses; amongst whom there is Cbamieere one
of your Authors, I and Pareus, who shows that the judgment of all, Calvine
and all the rest; and let the Reader judge who is injurious, of which you
complain.

CHAP. VI. Argument 5. P. 84.
THis is taken from the opening of Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him not having
mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God through faith. Hence you
observe.

1. He says not that he may be found in his righteousness, much less in his
righteousness imputed unto him, but simply in himself.

To be found in him not having his own righteousness, is to be found having
union and communion with him and his righteousness. Christ righteousness must
be supplied in opposition to his own, to be found in him, is to be found in
the Lord his righteousness, in him there is redemption, remission of sins in
his blood. You grant his passive righteousness, yet here you oppose him,
Christ and righteousness; and as for your exception against imputation, herein
you are a Wottonist, an Arminian, and Socinian, and will not understand that
imputation, is but the application and donation of the righteousness of Christ
by God apprehended by faith, which are necessarily supposed to mine having him
and his righteousness.

Beza will teach you better, To Inveniri in Christo, tacitam habet relationem
ad Dei judicium. Is enim in amando contemplatur unum suum Christum in quo
acquiescat. Itaque quos comperit in Christo esse (id est, Christo per sidem
insitos) in iis nullam invenit condemnationem: Quia justitia qualem ipse
requirit in nobis, id est, perfecta, accumulata exornatos eos invenit. Nimirum
Christum justitia per sidem nobis imputara.
be found in Christ has a tacit relation to Gods judgment: for be in loving
does contemplate his own Christ in whom he may be well pleased. Therefore
those whom be finds to be in Christ, that is, in-set into Christ by faith) in
these he finds no condemnation, because he finds them arraied in
righteousness, such as he requires in us, that is, perfect and heaped down,
even Christ's righteousness imputed to us by faith.

In him, that is, Christ my Lord, who In ipso, sc. Christo Domino meo, qui est
justitia, etc. Fidei autem est quia per fidem illam apprehendimus, cum sit im
putativa and Christi merito no bis applicetur, Aretius i^ lo.
is righteansnesse, etc. It is of faith be-cause by says we apprehend it,
because it is imputative, and is applied to us by Christ's merit, as Aretius.

So generally he opposes man's merit Ita generaliter meritum hominis opponit
Christi gratiae: nam cum Lex afferat opera, fides offert nudum hominem Deo, ut
Christi justitia induatur, etc. Calv.
to the grace of Christ: for when as the Law brings works, faith man naked
to God, that he may be clothed with Christ's righteousness, Calvine.

Christ himself must be put upon us, that we may be found in him, etc. with
his clothing our souls must be clothed, that they may be beautified and
gloriously adorned -- Phil. 3. 9. where he excludes all kind of works, be
must needs understand the righteousness of Christ.

I have read that our faith has been excluded by this Whitaker against Camp.
which Dureus Englished, P. 231.
text, never that the righteousness of Christ should be so, by a Protestant,
it is Christ's righteousness alone which will endure the pure sight of God here
and hereafter.

2. You observe from those words, But that which is of God by faith, here is
not the least jot or tittle of any mention, etc. of any righteousness he
should have by imputation of the righteousness of Christ. No, nor any
righteousness by or through the righteousness of Christ, but only such a
righteousness as is (...), through faith of Christ, or believing in him; and
this is that righteonsnesse say you, and that righteousness of God. 2. A
righteousness which God himself has found out, and which he will own and
countenance and account for righteousness, and no other but this. -- The
mentioning of this righteousness the second time, as being or standing in faith,
is doubtless emphaticall. -- It is to show that this righteousness will carry it,
notwithstanding the unlikelihood and seeming imperfections of it, and that the
thing is fully concluded and established with God. -- If Paul had had any mind
or inclination at all to have placed the righteousness by which we are
justified in the righteousness of Christ imputed, here was a tempting occasion.
-- But here is loud speaking again and again of the righteousness of faith,
but altum silentium of any righteousness from the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, p. 87. and 88.

That which Paul would be found having, is not his own, Nimirum Christi
justitia applicata.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith.

This we interpret the righteousness of Christ given by God applied by faith.
So Beza, you faith in Christ it self.

But first it cannot be faith it self, seeing the text is, that righteousness
which is through faith, and of God by faith, where faith is but an instrument,
by which I have that righteousness, it is not said, believing, but by
believing: that faith is the righteousness he would be found in, but that of
God by faith. Bertius that Prince of the Arminian band urges this text against
Sibrandus, Epist. p. 57. and has this answer.

As for that saying, Phil. 3. It professedly destroys the conclusion Quod ad
dictu^ ad Phil. 3. c attinet: Serveti, Socini, ^uamque sententiam ex professo
destruit, diserte enim inter fidem and inter justitiam distinguit. Versu enim
9. dicit, interpret Beza. Sed ut habeam eam justitiam, quae per fidem est
Christi, equidem si haec justitia est Christi per fidem ut Beza interpretatur:
vel si est per fidem Christi, ut verus interpres habet, ^um justitia haec non
est ipsa fides. -- Deinde Apostolus Serveti, Socini tuamque sententiam prorsus
rejicit, diserte enim scribit, scribit, verse. 9. ut inveniar in eo non habens
meam justitiam. Mea igitur justitia non est qua justificor: and hoc recte,
diserne enim Spititus sanctus doce, Romans 5. 19. nos obedientia Christi
constitui justi, hoc est, nos justitia Christi justificati. Sed fides quam ego
habeo (si secundum Scripturas loqui velis) est tua fides, Hab. 2. 4. Justus
fide sua viver, Jac. 2. 18. Ostende mihi fidem tuam ex operibu -- and ego
ostendam -- fidem meam. Si^gitur fides mea est justitia mea, and ego hac fide
mea justificor, tum utique justificor mea justitia: and debeo inveniti in eo
habens meam justitiam Proinde aut imprudenter facit Apostolus cum scribit, ut
inveniat in eo non habens meam justitiam: aut vos imprudenter sacitis, dum per
vestram justitiam justificari vultis: vel quod idem est, dum vultis inveniri
habentes vestram justitiam. Quid quod Apostolus docet justitiam quam cupit
habere, verse. 9. esse Christi: Sed habens eam justitiam quae per fidem est
Christi, verum mea fides, quocunque tandem modo accipiatur non est Christi
justitia, neque est illa justitia quae est per fidem Christi. Sed obedientia
quam Christus Patri pro me praestiti^, est Christi justitia. Atque hac ego
justificor, Romans 5. 19. Nihil igitur imprudentius a te fieri potuit, quam istum
locum ad hunc errorem stabiliendum allegare.
clusion of Servetus, Socinus, and your own, for it does plainly distinguish
between faith and righteousness; for in the 9. verse. be says, Beza
interpreting it, But that I may have that righteousness which is of Christ by
faith, surely if this righteousness be of Christ by faith, as Beza
interprets it; or if it be by the faith of Christ, as the old Translation,
then this righteousness is not faith it self. -- Then the Apostle does wholly
reject the opinion of Servetus, Socinus, and you: for be plainly writes,
verse. 9. that I may be found in him not having mine own righteousness. But it
is not my righteousness by which I am justified; and this rightly, for the
holy Ghost plainly teaches, Romans 5. 19. us to be constituted just, that is,
that we are justified with the righteousness of Christ. But faith which I
have, (if you will speak according to the Scriptures) is thy faith, Hab. 2. 4.
The just shall live by his faith; and Jam. 2. 18. Show me thy faith by thy
works, and I will show my faith. If therefore my faith be my righteousness,
and I am justified by this my faith, then I am justified by mine own
righteousness, and I ought to be found in him having mine own righteousness:
so that either the Apostle does unwisely, when he writes, that I* may be found
in him having mine own righteousness; or you do unwisely whilst you will be
justified by your own righteousness, or which is the same, whilst you will be
found having your own righteousness. The Apostle teaches the righteousness
which be desires to have, v. 9. to be of Christ, but having that
righteousness which is by faith of Christ; but my faith in what ever manner it
be taken, is not Christ's righteousness, neither is it that righteousness
which is by the faith of Christ, but the obedience which Christ performed to
his Father, for me, is Christ's righteousness, and with this I am justified,
Romans 5. 19. Nothing therefore could be done more unwisely by thee, then to
allege that place for the establishment of thine error.

Besides, it is much worse in you then him, Because you take faith in Christ,
not in relation to its object, Christ's righteousness, taking in that, but in a
proper sense, Fides ista meritum Christi r^sp^cit, atque hoc modo ve^u^ est
quod dicitur fides justificat non per se sed correlative, qua tenus nimiram
apprehendit Christum ejusque justitiam. Ipse vider it.
and direct opposition to Christ's righteousness. Whereas in one place of
Bertius I find, That faith respects the merit of Christ, and thus it is true
which is said, faith justifies not by it self, but correlatively, as it
apprehends Christ and his righteousness. How he agrees with himself, let
him look to that, as your Mr. Wotton once said.

When faith is that, and as a work, (as elsewhere from John 6.) How am I not
justified by a work, and that of the Law too, if faith be required there, as
some conceive, and I speak to elsewhere? See Sybr. p. 56. and 57.

And when as it is not righteousness, or but inherent; Am I not justified by
inherent righteousness? an opinion worse then that of Papists, who join hope
and charity, etc. with faith, as Mr. Forbs.

And when as it is an imperfect grace, how can God, whose judgment is
according to truth, account this perfect righteousness? it has need of
somewhat else to cover and to justify it. You acknowledge it imperfect, the
Papist pressing it plead its perfection in this life.

And what will become of the Passive obedience of Christ, if this be that
righteousness in opposition to the righteousness of Christ? What need is
there of him or his righteousness? Less it be to merit that faith be
accepted, as Osterodus.

What need of remission of sins? your interpretative righteousness by which
I have the privileges of a righteous man? I have it by faith in your doctrine
and then, away with that as well as the righteousness of Christ. And here let
all men take notice of your mind, when as you call it faith in Christ, and
that it is an instrument to bring us to fellowship with Christ and his
benefits; when yet, here, and in the whole controversy you deny a relative or
figurative sense taking in Christ and his righteousness, and put it in
opposition. If you will be Prideaux.
found in, that do; my prayer is with that Doctor, that I may be found not
having faith, mine own righteousness, if righteousness, and such as it is or
ever shall be; but that which God gives or imputes, Christ's, by faith. I
believe, help mine unbelief. See after, the last Scripture, out of Zanchy,
see Doctor Ayrie in locum. Olevian.

CHAP. VII.
SIxthly, that that God imputes for righteousness in justification, is not the
righteousness of Christ himself, but faith it self, by Romans 3. 28. Romans 5.
1. and all confess that men are justified by faith, as act or habit, and why
do they condemn it in me?

I answer, faith with us is an instrument laying hold of the object Christ and
his righteousness as an hand does riches, by which righteousness applied, I
am righteous, as rich by the object received riches.

You say you divide not faith and the object, you imply the G.
object with it, as the usual manner of the Scripture is, and 2. that it
justifies instrumentally, p. 90. 3. and grant as it takes hold on Christ's
righteousness, (though the Scripture never mentions it under this
consideration) yet still it is an act of faith.

1. You say it justifies not as an act, ib. and yet take it in a proper sense,
opposing it in justification to the righteousness of Christ, faith and not the
righteousness of Christ.

2. When you give all be granted to faith, that it has Christ the object, and
lays hold on Christ's righteousness: Yet you teach us that Christ's
righteousness (in the variety used in Scripture of the objects of faith) is
not to be found in the least mention, p. 38. Neither is the righteousness of
Christ the object of faith as justifying, p. 43. only is propounded to be
believed as the creation of the world, or that Caine was Adams son, p. 43.
neither is it imputed for righteousness in respect of the object, or because
it lays hold upon Christ, or Christ's righteousness, p. 14.

Whereas the orthodox whom you oppose, not only teach faith in Christ, and
that an instrument laying hold of Christ and his righteousness applying it,
but justifying as applying that righteousness, by which applied we are made
just.

Faith is as the pencill, it is an instrument, the matter, whiting; the pencill
makes not white but instrumentally, it is the whiting applied by the pencill.

The hand receiving riches is an instrument making rich. I, but instrumentally,
riches received properly make rich, faith is but an instrument laying hold of
the righteousness of Christ, by it as an instrument we are justified, but that
which properly does is the righteousness of Christ himself; and here we say not
that whatsoever faith lays hold on justifies, but signanter, we name the
righteousness of Christ.

So, figuratively taking in the object, Christ's righteousness, it justifies,
as an instrument to this effect, so it justifies; so faith is imputed for
righteousness: here is somewhat equivalent and exceeding the righteousness of the
Law, which is false of faith not applying Christ's righteousness, and then is it
the condition of the Covenant whenas it takes in the object, as is elsewhere
showed.

CHAP. VIII. The last proof from Scripture.
THe Scriptures do absolutely deny a transferriblenesse, translation or
transferring, or moving the righteousness of one person to another, from Gal.
3. 12. and the Law is not of faith, but the man that does them shall live in
them, it denies it to be done with faith, which was the likeliest hand under
Heaven -- by which he intends to make the righteousness of the Law as
performed by Christ incapable of this translation or imputation -- faith
derives remission from Christ, but not the righteousness of the Law, the scope
shows it is the very doer that shall live, etc.

1. Removing righteousness from one person to another, are not our words, we say
not that Christ's righteousness imputed is removed, or that it is taken from
Christ, we teach it to be subjective in him self.

We assert his righteousness transferrible, that is, that it may be, and is
imputed or given to us.

He was our Surety, he satisfied for us, if there be an absolute impossibility
of transferring what is done for another, you destroy suretiship, Christ's being
our Surety.

3. His death is imputable, or sufferings of death, you must hold that
imputation of them, or else confess your self a Socinian, Mr. Gat. exempteth
himself thereby, dealing with Lucius.

If his sufferings, all of them, from his incarnation or conception to his
death, his being man, doings and sufferings, form of a servant, services in
that form, all his poverty, unto, till death, as well as death it self; in
which there are many servile acts to the Law. Mr. Gataker excludes not them or
their imputation, nor Pareus; your self teach a concurrence and influence of
works absolutely necessary to make atonement.

And if Christ did not obey for himself (which was vain, seeing he lived from
the first moment) it was for us; his being man holy and just, etc. was his
humiliation, poverty, he became poor, that we through his poverty might be
made rich.

His sufferings were fulfillings of the Law, even punishment Etiam paena est
impletio Legis Par. de Just. Act. etc. p. 183.
is the fulfilling of the Law.

If sufferings are imputable, the fulfilling of the Law is in all these
respects, and are imputed, or else we have no good by them. It is nothing that
there is such virtue in Jesus Christ if there be no application, and
application receiving on our part necessarily puts giving and imputation
from the Lord.

Now to your argument, we deny the Law to be that by which we are justified, or
that the righteousness by which is Legal. It is evident (say we) because that
runs, The man that does this shall live; if we were so legally, we must be
so in and by our selves personally, do this neither needed we a Mediator; we
cannot do this, this and faith are asystata, put this, faith is vain in this
matter, when we disclaim personal do this, there must be grace, and that in
Christ. He must be a Surety, conceived, borne, obedient, even to death, dead to
make satisfaction; Gods giving him to us, our receiving of him, believing in
him, by which we have union and communion with him, and his obedience, Passive,
and what necessarily concurreth and in-floweth thereunto. In Christ we have
pardon, and adoption, and eternal life; imputation of righteousness is
necessary to pardon; by imputation of righteousness we are made just, and so
justified from sins; by adoption we are heirs of the righteousness of faith,
that is, the righteousness which faith apprehends; we inherit the promises,
that of righteousness by which we are white as Snow, whiter.

And this righteousness is necessary to life, the Spirit is life because of
righteousness, imputed, Chamieer, Romans 8. 10. they which receive abundance of
grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life even by one Jesus
Christ, Romans 5. 16. Grace reigns through righteousness to eternal life,
verse. ult.

This is Gods righteousness; what he gives, and we by faith receive; there is a
subordination between Gods grace, the promise, Christ, his obedience, pardon,
life, faith, righteousness is not personal but of the Surety. And this is
notably set forth as by foreign Divines, so by our own, and the Doctrine of
our Church, to which we have subscribed. I will send you thither, and proceed.

CHAP. IX. Argument 1. That righteousness of Christ cannot be imputed. Thus,
THat righteousness which will not fit and furnish all believers with all
points or parts of that righteousness which the Law requires of them, cannot
be imputed to them for justification.

But the obedience Christ performed to the Moral Law, will not fit and furnish
all believers with all points of righteousness, which the Law requires of
them: therefore it cannot be imputed to believers for their justification.

I will grant the major, and if Christ's righteousness imputed Answ.
be not complete, serving all, it is nothing worth; only consider how your
imperfect faith shall be imputed, and whether it be or can be imputable, and as
do this was prove the minor.

Servants are indebted to Masters, Ephesians. 6. 5. obedience with fear and
trembling, wives, husbands: He declined doing justice, refused the office of a
King, etc.

That our Lord Christ did what pleased his Father in Answ.
our behalf is unquestioned, the voice from Heaven was, 1.
In whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. that we are accepted in the well-beloved,
Ephesians. 1. It is said he came to fulfill the Law, Matthew. 5. and Matthew. 3. That as
it became him he fulfilled all righteousness. In fulfilling the Law, there is
no place for want. In all righteousness, there is that which was due by all
sorts without exception, the debt of all, was but all righteousness; all this
not for himself, but us, because he lived from the first moment and needed it
not, because he was our Surety, bound to pay our whole debt. It was of him our
great Mediator, as p. 108. I suppose that in Christ there is neither bond or
free, male or female, King nor Beggar, all are one in Christ, Gal. 3. 28. which
is inferred from this, that as many as are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, and we are all the sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ.

Christ is be who knitteth Jews Christus is est qui Judaeos and Gentes in unum
corpus seminis Abrahae connectir; itaque (...), tollit personarum discrimen, de
quo mox, verse. 28. quicunque verse. 27. ut tollatur gentium status and sexus
discrimen, ^it ut apparet ex sequenti versu Metaphora sumpta a vestibus ut
dix^^^ 'Luc. 24. 49. and alibi saepe, sed quae mysterium nostrae cum Christo
conjunctionis, quasi oculis sub^iciat. Oporret enim Ecclesiam Christo tanquam.
vest quadam operiri and sub co delitescere ut sancta sit prorsus and
inculpabilis, Ephesians. 5. 27. Ideoque Apostolus semen Abrahami uno Christi nomine
fignificavit supra, v. 16.
and Gentiles together in one body of the seed of Abraham; therefore all takes
away the difference of persons, of which by and by, verse. 28. whosoever, verse.
27. is that the difference of the state of the Gentiles and of sex. may be
taken away, as it appears from the next verse. That putting on of Christ is a
metaphor taken from clothes as we said, Luke 24. 49. and elsewhere often, but
such as may set the mystery of our union with Christ before our eyes; Omnes
homines, velint, nolint, sunt unu^, id est una res specie renus -- unum
individuu^ quasi ut in Christo serventur -- per cum ipsum Christum. -- Sed hoc
demum sciendum, nos per fidem Christo ipst uniri Spiritus sancti vinculo ut
bonorum ipsius fi^mus participes, ut omnes fideles hac ratione sint unus
Christus mysticus, ut loquitur etiam Apostolus, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Bez. in loc.
for the Church must be covered with Christ as it were with a garment, and lie
hid under him that it may be wholly holy and without blame, Ephesians. 5. 27. and
therefore the Apostle signified the seed of Abraham by the one name of Christ.
Sensus est, nihil hic vale^e personas, Unus estis, quo significatur sublatum
^sse discrimen, Caiv.


All men whether they will or no, are one, that is, one thing in kind, -- as
it were one individuum, that they may Est illis omnia meritorie; nam dum fiunt
una persona mystica cum Christo, illis impertit meritum passionis, mortis,
obedientiae, justitiae, and he factus est illis adeo sapientia, justitia,
sanctificatio and redemptio, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Daven. in. Col 3. 11.
be saved by the same Christ -- but this is to be known, that we by faith are
united to Christ himself by the bond of the holy Ghost, that we may be
partakers of his good things; that all the faithful in this respect are one
mystical Christ, as the Apostle also speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 12.

The sense is, that here persons avail nothing, You are one, in which he
signifies the difference to be taken away.

He is all things to them meritoriously, for whilst they are made one mystical
person with Christ, he gives to them the merit of his passion, death,
obedience, righteousness, and so is made unto them of God wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, says the
Apostle, Col. 1. 19. Hence are they presented holy, unblamable, and
unreprovable in Gods sight, v. 22. and ye are complete in him, c. 2. 10.

And let your next Chapter be read, and see whether there can be any defect for
any man, where there is so much and so great abundance.

He that is arraied in this, and presents himself before God, is so say you.
Not in the habit of a just or righteous man, but in the glorious attire that
makes men just and righteous, the great Mediator of the world, whose
righteousness has heights and depths in it, a length and breadth which
infinitely excecded the dimensions and proportions of all men whatsoever. --
The glory of this righteousness does transcend the condition of the creature.
-- All the parts of this righteousness, all the acts of obedience that he
performed, he performed them as one that had received the spirit without
measure; there was a righteousness and worth in them which did fully answer
the fullness of that grace that was given him above all his fellows, etc. p.
108. 109. 10.

You object to your self, love is the fulfilling of the Law, Christ's perfect
love, is perfect fulfilling the Law; and therefore being imputed may serve,
though some acts of obedience wanting. To this purpose you object; but Sir, we
say not that there is any thing wanting.

1. You answer, love may be an Evangelicall fulfilling the Law and accepted,
yet holds not out weight and measure for any man's justification in the covenant
of works.

But to no purpose, that objection urges not our love but Christ's, and not
therefore justification by a covenant of works, but of grace by Christ.

And it will not follow that if his love be imputed, other acts of
righteousness were vain, for what you call other, are no other then love, so
all are acts of righteousness

2. I answer to the second, that the love of Christ is the fulfilling of the
whole Law (both Tables.)

3. I answer thirdly, that love (as you grant) being a cause of the being of
the rest, and having (what you call) the rest vertually in it, a spiritual
unfeigned affection of love is an inward principle of that nature which
inclines and disposes a man to the performance and practice of all manner of
duties required in the Law. Grant Christ's love this: It will not be ridiculous
to say his love is imputed for their righteousness. Propter quod unumquodque
es^tale illud est magis tale.
For being a cause and vertually including fulfilling, it will serve. It is
more to be a cause then to fulfill the Law, and love consists not only in
affection but acts themselves, they are love in words and deeds.

And there is somewhat in it when as Paul professes his life to be by faith in
the Son of God who has loved me and given himself for me, in which there are
both his active and passive obedience, 2 Gal. 20. and the objects of his faith.

2. You object, It is sufficient though there be what is equivalent to such
particular acts of righteousness, and answer.

1. The Law must have jot for jot, tittle for tittle, point for point, letter
for letter, otherwise it has a curse.

1. I answer, not questioning but Christ yielded jot for jot, tittle, etc. He
infinitely exceeded the dimensions and proportions of all men whatsoever, as
you: where is more, there are jots and tittles.

But Sir, How shall your faith not taking in this righteousness of Christ, nay
opposed, be jot for jot, etc. and how will Gods judgment be according to
truth, if that be instead of do this?

2. And secondly, I answer to the second, that the acts of Christ imputed are
the acts of him that was our Surety, which infinitely exceeding the dimensions
and proportions of all men whatsoever, serve the necessities of all men
whatsoever; every man's turn is served here, even that which the Lord requires
of him; to omit that those differences are taken away.

3. You object to your self equivalence in his doings as in his sufferings,
the debt was eternal death, he paid it by what was not eternal, but
equivalent, and so might by doing. And answer.

1. Denying those words Thou shall die the death, must of necessity mean
eternal death, according to the letter.

2. Neither that nor by way of equivalencie, was not Gods meaning, but the
evil of punishment* represented and known to him by the name of death,
without consideration of duration. I answer.

1. Sir, to die the death is such a punishment, which though it has not
eternity of its nature, yet it has eternity a concomitant as your self out of
Scotus, and that is In fe.
in it self (because of concomitancy) for ever, the freedom from it is
accidental. It is eternal in the threat, as is seen in execution on Devils
and wicked men, it had been so to us if our Surety had not borne it, and been
on him for ever had he not overcome it.

3. But then you answer, 3. that though God did take liberty to vary from the
curse, and to use equivalency, it follows not God should accept such legal
payment as is equivalent.

I answer (still premising that Christ yielded complete satisfaction as before)
that if God did vary in the curse, he received legal payment which is
equivalent, death was legal payment, and doing you object is but legal
payment; The soul that sins shall die, is the voice of the Law.

To that you farther add of God that having received a full satisfaction of
all the transgressions of the Law he may by a second covenant accept of what he
pleases to instate men in this benefit, which is to him evivalent to perfect
legal righteousness.

I answer, that which Christ paid being the full satisfaction of the Law,
answers our debt completely, and there is no need of any thing else to be
accepted, (It is injurious indeed) that is equivalent to complete legal
righteousness, that satisfaction of righteousness only graciously imputed to
us as performed by our Surety for us, is enough. Faith indeed has the place of
an instrument or hand receiving what is accounted or given, by which applied I
am just, and so have privileges; but has no equivalence to the righteousness
of the Law, as in it self, in justification, excluding the righteousness of
Christ as you hold it out; and the satisfaction of the Law by Christ our
Surety, to such a faith is what God does by the covenant of grace. --

To what you add more, that may suffice which I have already spoken, I will
hasten to your 10. chap.

CHAP. X. 2. Ground, thus.
THat righteousness which is exactly and precisely fitted to the person and
office of him that is Mediator between God and man or Redeemer of the world
cannot be imputed to any other for his righteousness.

But such is the righteousness of Christ: Therefore the minor opening the
riches of the righteousness of Christ is granted, and use made of it in the
former argument as destructive to its* pretended unfitness in our Sureties
righteousness.

To the major I answer, by denying it, the precise and exact righteousness of
Christ our Mediator can be and is imputed to us, we are clothed with the robes
of Christ's righteousness, his righteousness which has heights and depths,
Juxta veritate^ aeque justi sumus, quia eadem justitia, de justif. p. 171.
etc. so that according to the truth (as Doctor Prideaux explaineth our tenet)
we are equally just because with the same righteousness, in that we are as
just as if we had personally performed it our selves.

1. Yet, 1. Rob him not because we are found herein by his consent and
commandment of application, by his giving and his inabling us by faith to
apply the same.

2. For the equality, he that affirmed Aeque justi sumus quoad veritatem, quia
eadem justitia; licet non aequaliter ex eodem modo, cum ille justus sit
subjective, nos imputative; ille de proprio, nos de illius largitate.
we are for truth equally just, because with the same righteousness; though
not equally and in the same manner, seeing be is just subjectively, we
imputatively, he of his own, we of his bounty, opens our sense for equality.
Doctor Ames answering Bellarmine, lays down our tenet.

Christ's righteousness is so far imputed Christi justitiam catenus nobis
imputati, ut ejus virture nos perinde justi censeamur co^am deo acsi nosmer
ipsi in nobis haberemus quo justi coram ipso censeamur.
unto us, that we are by virtue thereof so accounted just before God as if we
our selves had in our selves that whereby we are accounted just before him. And
then,

Christ's righteousness is imputed to Justitiam Christi imputari singulis
secundum eorum particularem necessitatem, non secundum universalem quem habet
valorem.
every one according to their particular necessity, not according to the
universal value thereof.

Whence you may see how we take and take not that robe of unmensurable majesty
upon us, and how much you are deceived, and deceive when as you imagine that,
and thereby grieve the truth; the generation of disputers teach you otherwise,
Doctor Prideaux, Doctor Ames, and so Doctor Davenant proposes it.

It is to be weighed that Christ's Perpendendum Christi justitiam non imputari
huic aut illi credenti secundum totam latitudinem efficaciae suae, sed prout
unusquisque ea opus habet.
righteousness is not imputed to this and that believer according to the whole
latitude of its efficacy; but so as every one has need of it.

And that may answer what is urged, p. 110. and we avoid presumption or
blasphemy, and shows what a communicablenesse we hold measured only by our
need; (Let the Reader see more in the former part) and so conceive what every
member receives from Christ the head, and how that is used. The head infloweth
according to the need of every member, and the member receives so much, so
much as makes us perfectly just, perfectly holy in the sight of God. The
imputation of which your argument teaches not.

When as you say, p. 113. that Christ with his members are a body only by way
of resemblance. If withal you acknowledge our Union true and real in its
kind it shall suffice, if otherwise, you must with Mr. Wotton answer the
charge Mr. W. lays on you before.

CHAP. XI. Athird Ground, p. 119.
THere is no necessity of this imputation of Christ's righteousness, Mr. G.
he that is completely justified by having his sins forgiven, is justified
without the imputation of this active obedience of Jesus Christ.

You say this proposition is generally granted, but you beg A.
it, for those that contend for imputation of Christ's righteousness, active or
passive, both, make it the cause of remission of sins, as before.

But a believer is sufficiently justified before God by the remission G.
of sins, therefore I conclude there is no need, etc. this you say was
proved, c. 5.

And there you have answer.

Then you object to your self, that remission is but a part of justification,
not the whole, and that imputation of righteousness must be added.

To answer which, you cite Calvine. Let what you say and I answer before, be
considered by the Reader, and he shall see your head and his opinion at odds.
He makes remission an effect, See l. 3. c. 14. Sect. 12. hac nos instructi,
etc. There shall you see your rashness in that assertion, and the maintenance
thereof, and Pareus his testimony against himself, and your vanity in urging
their objection as arguing a diverse tenet amongst Protestants, by both Pareus
and Doctor Davenant, etc.

When you p. 127. excuse your imputation of faith in a proper sense being the
same, that justification stands in remission of sins only.

I answer, it is vain, for faith in a proper sense without a Trope, justifies
with you both, and they say that justification consists In regeneratione and
remissione peccatorum.
in regeneration and remission of sins; you make them the same, both of you
dispute against imputation of Christ's righteousness, which yet is the
Protestant tenet ( Piscator, Pareus, Mr. Gataker not excepted, who teach the
imputation of Christ's passive obedience.)

Neither do the Scriptures expressly demonstrate it, Romans 4. 6. 7. nay verse.
6. and 11 there is a manifest and express imputation of righteousness as well
as not imputation of sin, and that they are cause and effect is showed by
Authors in the same place; and as for that Synecdoche, it is not so needful
there, seeing there is such an expressure of both imputation of righteousness,
and non-imputation of sins.

When blood is mentioned, it is by that figure, and it does not exclude other
parts.

Sanguinem aute^ solum nominando non vol^it alias redemptionis parts
excludere, sed potius sub una patte totam summam comprehendere; sic per
synecdoche^ tota expiatio nominatur, ad Romans 3. 24. Calv. So Ecchard p. 398
fasci. controvers. who cites Trelcat. p. 148. Bucan. p. 337. and Ursin. p. 452.
In naming blood only, he would not exclude other parts of redemption, but
rather under one part comprehend the whole, so by the figure Synecdoche the
whole expiation is meant.

Who says, when as we come to Ubivero ad Christum ventum est, primum in to
invenitur exacta Legis justitia quae per imputationem etiam nostra fit, Calv.
in Romans 3. 31.
Christ, first there is found the exact righteousness of the Law, which also
by imputation is made ours.

And thence answer may be given, that when we are said to be justified by
Christ's blood, Romans 5. 9. the active obedience is not to be excluded. You see
it is Calvines Doctrine, and so Bucanus de justif. ad Q. 15. nay your self
make this an essential requisite, as afterward.

What is said of supply by adoption, as you refer us to the next chapter, we
will refer thither our answer.

Neither need you argue against your adversaries, as separaters and dividers of
the active and passive obedience of Christ, and such a putting them into parts,
it is but your own conceit.

If there be absurdity, it is your own, who exclude the active obedience, and
so separate and divide them. We confess, in your words, that the active
obedience of Christ will not profit men if they separate it from the passive,
John 12. 14. neither will the passive it self be found it self, that is an
atonement or expiation for sin, according to the will and purpose of God,
except we bring in the active to it, etc. you wound your self, not us, in
that, and what follows.

Finally, neither will it follow that the formal cause is double, but one;
Christ's obedience active and passive, not to be divided or separated, is the
matter, it imputed supplieth the place of a form and constituteth us
righteous, as Saint Paul himself, Rome. 5. 19. and so must you interpret that
place, or else separate and divide, offend in the very thing you reprove
(though causelessely.)

CHAP. XII. 4. Reasons, p. 136.
THat which dissolves and takes away the necessity and use of that sweet and
Evangelicall grace of adoption, cannot hold a straight course with the truth of
the Gospel. But this imputation in the sense contraverted dissolves and takes
away, etc. the necessity of adoption. Therefore.

You say the minor is evident, that we introduce* this imputation of Christ's
righteousness, that we may have a title to life or Heaven, according to the
tenor of the covenant, Hoc fac and vives.

By remission we say accrues no right, and that truly, therefore we compel the
righteousness of Christ to take this honor; neither is another use
conceivable of it, then to qualify men to Heaven, which is proper to adoption,
this is to frustrate the purpose and counsel of God, etc.

1. I answer, imputation of righteousness, righteous making, gives a title to
life or Heaven; if regeneration does so which is but imperfect (wherein yet
adoption is founded) perfect righteousness given and received much more, which
is of the twain, the chiefest foundation of adoption: the Spirit is life
because of righteousness, Romans 8. 10. which learned Chamieer interprets of
imputed righteousness, those that receive abundance of grace and of the gift
of righteousness, shall reign in life, Romans 5. 17. By the righteousness of
one the free gift came upon all to justification of life, verse. 18. Grace
reigns through righteousness to eternal life, verse. ult.

2. Yet we say not according to the tenor of that covenant, Do this and live,
that is by personal performance, righteousness of Christ imputed is of
another, yet ours, given and received, establishing the Law; see Calvine on
Romans 3. ult. cited but now, and ad Romans 10. 5.

He does excellently dispell that scruple, Hunc scrupulum optime discutit cum
ex ipsa Legis Dooctrina stabilit fidei justitiam -- est autem locus ex Lev. 18.
5. ubi dominus vitam aeternam pollicetur iis qui Leg^m suam servavetint. --
Atqueita defectu ^uo coacti ad Christum confugere discerent, ibid. Calv.
when as out of the very Doctrine of the Law he establishes the Doctrine of
faith -- the place is taken out of Lev. 18. 5. where the Lord promises
eternal life to those that shall keep his Law -- and so compelled by their
own defect, should learn to fly to Christ.

3. We say not we have no right by pardon, and it is not true, seeing I find
that concurring as the consequent of righteousness, Romans 5. the places you
cited; especially if he that is freed from sin is ipso facto made perfectly
and completely righteous, as you conclus. part. 2. p. 4. He that is free from
death and no ways obnoxious thereunto, cannot but be conceived to have a right
to life, there being no middle condition between life and death; and conclus.
5. p. 8. where speaking of adoption and title thereby; you say the Scriptures
seem to give it to that.

We deny it not to adoption, when as we give it to righteousness imputed, we
exclude not Gods gracious dignifying, no we give a place to every grace, faith,
hope, love; which have the promises of Salvation. We conceive adoption will not
in its claim exclude the righteousness of Christ imputed, which is the maine
thing: we be heirs of the promises, all, of righteousness lapt up in the
promise thereof.

Noah was an heir of the righteousness, which is by faith, Heb. 11. 7. that
is, the righteousness which faith apprehends, and that is that which God
imputes or gives, Christ's, so that adoption does not exclude it.

Yea, we read that the promise was not made to Abraham that he should be the
heir of the world, or to his seed through the Law, but through the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 13. in which the promise of heire-ship is made
to him by that, as it were antecedent. I will not contend against adoptions
title, and you must beware you contend not against the title which is by the
righteousness of faith, and beware of your conclusion of its being proper to
adoption or consequences against such pregnant Scriptures. Indeed salvation is
by faith in Christ, hence adoption, participation of righteousness to
justification, to salvation. You cannot exclude the death of Christ from being
a cause of our salvation, nor reasonably leave out the active obedience of
Christ, its essential requisite; neither is of force to that end, but as given
and received, which is imputation to the believer.

And hereby you may perceive your error, 1. in making* these of diverse and
contrary natures.

2. In that you make the righteousness of Christ, which is another, our
Sureties, graciously performed for us, and given unto us, Evangelicall, to be
Legal.

3. Consider whether you be not too wise in arguing the vanity of the one from
sufficiency of the other, when as God has joined them together, when as they
are subordinate to, that effect: adoption is founded in regeneration that new
birth which qualifieth to justification, but much more in imputed
righteousness, which alone is perfect righteousness; which justification
qualifieth to life, whom be justified be glorified.

All the distinct graces in which adoption is founded, make up a plurality of
means qualifying to justification, to pardon and life. It is very false that
nature has not a concurrence of many causes to effects, the sun and man,
male, female, not to exclude God who is the first. It is very false that God in
the Gospel still allows but one mean And see P. 143. the text cited, Eccles.
11. 6.
for one purpose, the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, Communion, and Saints, etc. are
all ordained to the strengthening of our faith, and to our salvation. Neither
does the Lord complain of plurality of means, but of such as are none of his,
or contrary, such is legal righteousness, personal obedience: so the places,
Romans 4. 14. Gal. 3. 18. and 21. Gal. 2. 21. where yet verse. 20. he professes
his life of faith in the Son of God, loving him, and giving himself for him.
The Law is opposed to grace, Christ, the promise, faith; Christ and his
righteousness, neither to grace nor promise, they are subordinate, all
Evangelicall as in that text. See that you be not one that laugh these to
scorn.

And see whether your faith in a proper sense be not under your own lash,
opposed professedly to the righteousness of Christ; from the position of one
subordinate to the negation of another established by God, is a vain and
frivolous argumentation.

CHAP. XIII. 5. and 6. Grounds, p. 145.
IT dissolves the necessity of repentance, the righteous has no need of
repentance.

I deny what is assumed, a Christian complete in Christ, white as Snow,
whiter, yet needs repentance, has it to qualify him to the promise of
righteousness, justification, remission: as it supposes faith, which alone
justifies, so repentance qualifying faith, and conditioning the person, that
faith that justifies is not alone, those that are sanctified are perfected for
ever, the same Spirit sanctifies and justifies at the same time.

If it stood in an universal non-imputation of unrighteousness or pardon, is
not such a man perfectly righteous, as your selves teach; are they not
contraria immediata, as your selves urge? yet you teach need of repentance
daily, as qualifying the subject to the promise; there is the same reason: here
pardon supposes in deed imputation of righteousness by which our sins are
not imputed, therefore it is that they stand not guilty of any sin before God.

Yea, we assert they have the rights and privileges accompanying such a
righteousness not in possession, but in Christ their head, in the promise
which abides for ever, by faith and hope, as the man, perfect by
non-imputation of unrighteousness; (he has right to life, he has everlasting
life, John 3. 36. and yet that consistent with sin, where there is no
condemnation, nay, everlasting life, there is a lawless Law, etc. Yea there is
an imperfect faith which is not without sin.

When as p. 148. you tell us of the intrinsecal and formal property of a work
of the Law, that it has power to justify out of internal worth and dignity.
You agree not with truth, which teaches that when a man has done all, he must
say, he is an unprofitable servant, doing but what he ought, nor with your
self, p. 191. He has done what was duty to do: and this by our Saviors
rule, Luc. 17. 10. makes but an unprofitable servant, i. (I conceive) It is no
ground to demand or challenge any great matters at his Masters band, except it
be by covenant or promise from him: these are your words.

It takes away the necesity of his death.

It does not, but establish it, by both these imputed a believer is justified,
indeed had he Been so before this imputation, or not by it and with it,
somewhat might be said, now nothing against it, the righteousness of the Law,
Gal. 2. 21. is personal, the man that does it shall live, Christ's imputed, is
not legal.

And what you talk of imputablenesse of Christ's active obedience, without his
deaths is ignorance, that his obedience was to begin with life, and to end in
death; and you forget now your former doctrine of concurrence of active and
passive obedience, and absolute necessity of both to make atonement, and that
both make up but one obedience and satisfaction.

When you argue against the imputablenesse of this righteousness of Christ by
a question; Why should not men be capable of imputation thereof in the midst
of their sins, as well as Christ was capable of imputation of their sins, in
the midst of his righteousness?

I answer, First, it is impertineut to our question. Secondly, the reason is,
the inconsistencie of justification and wickedness. Thirdly, abomination to
the Lord, and the promise of God requires a lively faith to participation of
the same, receiving it, and making it ours, the promise is made unto a believer
repenting. Is. 1. 16.

CHAP. XIV. 7. Ground, p. 151.
IMputation, etc. leaves no place for remission of sins, though it be quoad
veritatem, non quoad modum, as some of that way think to distinguish
themselves safe.

The major is Doctor Prideaux's, as before, and the assumption is false from
the position of a cause, to the denial of the effect, as the learned; as Mr.
Gataker also, though in somewhat not agreeing with them, acknowledges
forgiveness of sins to be so, or a consequent.

And in truth when as God imputes Christ's righteousness, and pardons them,
they have no more sin then Christ to be pardoned; all are pardoned, these are
contraria immediata, and you know there is no third or middle: though not in
the same manner Christ was, yet quoad veritatem, and thus for this argument.

The exception and answer you make of remitting first, and then imputing, is a
fancy of your own to be neglected. Both are together for time, the order is
imputation of righteousness, just making, then remission of sins.

You object by way of addition, that Christ has taught us to pray for
remission after this imputation, unless it be taught infidels only, but to
ask forgiveness and conceive our selves as righteous as Christ, is rather to
make God, then worship him.

I answer, that petition for pardon after justification is Christ's ordinance,
whether justification consists in imputation of righteousness or pardon, it
mattereth not to that, all must do it.

2. That by justification (whether it consist in one or other) it is confessed
that person is perfectly righteous.

3. That he that does so does not mock God, seeing it is obedience to that
commandment, seeing it is Gods way whereby pardon is sued out to the quiet of
a man's conscience.

4. That the same is as much against your self, who make it to stand in
remission of sins, unless you think your self not thereby perfectly
righteous, or being so, not bound to use that prayer; answer your self, and
you shall save us a labor.

5. Finally, what you object against us, holds against imputation of faith in
your sense, for let faith be righteousness or not; if it be by Gods
acceptance, as do and live to justification, and I am by it interested in all
the privileges of a just man. Why may not I be said to mock God (when as I
conceive my self as perfectly righteous in Gods account) in asking pardon, as
in being so indeed? I do but suppose: there is as full a justification, as
perfect a deliverance from death and condemnation, as in the former case, as
yourselfe grant.

Besides, the question is not of being of sin or of perfefection of
sanctification, this is denied on both sides, and sins being is granted,
though not imputed, and so though righteousness be imputed, and thence no
imputation of sin.

Neither is the righteousness of Christ imputed a legal righteousness as
has been showed, that is, personal doing this, being it another thing is
consistent with sin ex concessis.

CHAP. XV.
IF it were Christ's it would have no compliance with that error, that God
sees no sin in his people.

How do you prove that it has compliance?

Whosoever is perfectly righteous, in him God can see no sin, but every
believer is so by the imputation of Christ's righteousness: therefore.

Leaving here your loose Rethoricke, which is truly applicable to your self.

I answer, by a distinction, which I will premise first, and then apply.

God may be said to see sin either with a simple sight, or else to impute or
punish it: the former was on my knowledge his error, the latter is a truth, as
we shall see. Out of Zanchy long agone I answered him, for the words are: We
say also that God has so Dicimus etiam Deum ita firmam tenere omnium scientiam
ut omnia sint semper ejus aperta oculis, and in conspectu ipsius praesentia ita
ut nussius ire eum capere possit oblivio. Nam quod sacris Scripturis saesaepe
dicitur, Deum oblivisci iniquitatum nostrarum and peccata nostra esse illi
tecta* item ca projecisse in profunda maris; haec and alia id genus dicta non
sunt intelligenda de simplici cognitione Dei, quasi Deus ea non amplius norit,
sed de cognitione judiciali ad paenam, quod nolit sc. ea contra nos in judicium
proserre, sedcondonare* a^que hoc est quod Aug. in 3 1. Psalm. Beati quoru^
tecta sunt peccata; si texit peccata Deus, noluit adver^e^e^si noluit
advertere, noluit anim advertere si noluit animadvertere, noluit punire, noluit
agnoscere, maluit agnoscere; quid est enim Deum videre peccata nisi punire
peccata?
firm a knowledge of all things, that all things are always open to his eyes,
and present in his sight, that he can forget nothing; for what is often said in
the holy Scripture, that God forgets our sins, that he has covered them,
and cast them into the bottom of the Sea; These and such like sayings are not
to be understood of knowledge simply, as if God knew them no more, but of a
judicial knowledge to punishment, that he will not bring them against us in
judgment, but forgive them. And this is that which Augustine on the 31. Psalm.
Blessed are they See Zanch. de natura Dei, l. 3. c. 2. q. 14. p. 216. and
Polan. Synt. c. 35. similiter.
whose sins are covered; if God has covered them, he would not perceive
them, if he would not perceive them, he would not consider them; if he would
not consider them, he would not punish them, he would not acknowledge them, he
would rather pardon them; for what is it for God to see sin, but to punish sin?

I answer, he that is made just by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, in him
God can see no sin to punish, that is all that follows, and here is no
compliance with that error which was for a simple sight.

Where there is pardon of all sins by imputation of active or passive
obedience, one, or both; the same follows that God sees no sin in that man
to punish, and I hope that has no compliance; free your self, you clear our
tenet by the same labor.

It is one thing for sin to be, another to be imputed or punished, and so to be
righteous, that sin may not be, and that it may not be imputed justification
respects not the being simply, but being in force, binding to punishment:
justification respects the latter only, though there be a destruction of the
being of sin, and it is further in fieri, and shall have an utter abolition
by virtue of fellowship with Christ, yet that falls not under our question.

There is an ultra (I see) to the line of your apprehension, and here is no
Riddle.

CHAP. XVI. A ninth demonstration is an heap indeed of slanders.
SUch is the leader, i. That it is true that many that hold the way of
imputation are not ashamed, nor afraid to confound the two Covenants of God, of
Works and Grace. That God never made more Covenants then one; that the Gospel
is nothing else but a gracious aid or relief from God to help man out with
the performance of the Covenant of works: so that that life and salvation
which is said to come by Christ, shall in no other sense be said to come by
him, but only as he fulfilled the Law of works for man; and such is that of
their inheriting life and salvation according to the strict and rigid tenor of
the Law, Do this.

These are your demonstrations foundation, the rest are superstructures; to
answer them were to fight with a shadow: this I answer without demurring. I
profess I never read man that did hold those tenets as laid down by you.

We give to Gods grace in Christ the whole salvation of believers, beginning,
consummation, adoption, justification, pardon, sanctification, mortification,
graces, exercise, growth, perfection, the saving of the soul and glorious
resurrection.

We give all to free grace, we say it is founded in another, a Surety, Jesus
Christ satisfying Gods justice in our behalf. We teach the death of Christ,
nay, the necessity of his incarnation, his taking our nature, doing and
suffering in the form of a servant, obeying to death; the necessity of his
resurrection, ascension, and sitting at Gods right hand.

We say to our justification his righteousness or obedience active and passive
are necessary, they are the material cause, we teach the imputation of both,
so the stream, they are but few that exclude the active; none but you, Mr.
Wotton, Arminius, etc. deny imputation simply; you admit of servile obedience
to the Law; Yea, of the active part, necessarily concurring to make the passive
an atonement, we to make the satisfaction full. We teach the subject a believer
in Jesus Christ: find these in the Covenant of works, and then I will yield I
am out.

You object to your self, the righteousness of Christ imputed, and the Law
personally wrought by a man's self are differing conditions; and answer, the
substance of the agreement is still the same, righteousness of the Law are
that same by whomsoever wrought.

1. I answer, there is more then obedience to the Law, in doing; there is
dying, so that there is no samenesse.

2. The Laws condition was, the man that does, it is not here so, it is not
the same. It is believing, taking in the object, another, a Sureties
righteousness.

3. If Adam had fulfilled the Law, he had not been justified with the same
righteousness believers are, that you should have proved.

To what follows, we say not Gods imputation is the condition of the
Covenant, but faith taking in the object Christ's obedience, and we say they
justify not as works simply, so they have the place of the matter thereof
only, they concur materially with the sufferings of Christ; and justify
not, but as imputed, neither justifies, not imputed or not applied: but enough
to this was answered in a bare denial.

CHAP. XVII. P. 158. 3. Arguments more.
THat for which righteousness is imputed to those that believe, A^g. 1* ^*
that cannot be imputed unto them for righteousness. But the righteousness of
Christ is that for which righteousness is imputed to those that believe:
therefore it self cannot be imputed for righteousness.

The Major is proved, because it is impossible that the thing merited should be
the same thing with that which is the meritorious cause.

I answer, confessing that which is imputed the meritorious cause.

2. Denying that what is merited is the same with the righteousness of Christ,
that is, justification is not the same with the righteousness of Christ
imputed, they differ as cause and effect.

The major by your proof of it in plain terms is this. The meritorious cause
of justification (for you twice here confound righteousness and justification)
cannot be imputed for righteousness. But the righteousness of Christ is the
meritorious cause of justification. Therefore.

I answer, confessing the minor, Christ's righteousness is the meritorious
cause of justification.

Denying your major, and so do all ours, who teaching the righteousness of
Christ the meritorious cause, yet hold it that which is imputed. Doctor
Davenant.

Indeed in justification such a formal Revera in justificatione talis causa
formalis ponenda est, quae simul and meritoria esse possit: uisi enim contineat
illam dignitatem in se propter quam homo rite justificatus reputetur, nunquam
erir causa formalis per quam justificatus existat in conspectu Dei, De justit
hab. c. 22. p. 312.
cause is to be put, which also may be a meritorious cause: for unless it
contain in it self that worthiness for which man is rightly reputed
justified, it will never be the formal cause by which a man is justified in
the sight of God.

Your proof of the major is, that it is impossible that the meritorious cause
should be the same thing wi^h what is merited. You should have proved it
impossible being the meritorious cause to be imputed for justification; here I
will leave you sticking, till you expedite your self.

If the righteousness of Christ be imputed to a believer for Arg. 2.
righteousness in his justification, then the meritorious cause of his
justification is imputed unto him for righteousness. But the meritorious cause
of a man's justification cannot be thus imputed unto him.

This denied before you prove, because the meritorious cause being a kind of
efficient, as the righteousness of Christ is, cannot be either the matter or
form of justification.

1. It may be the form, as out of Doctor Davenant; nay if it were not worthy
it could not justify, not every righteousness, not our own, being unworthy;
but that of Christ being only worthy, is that by which imputed we are
justified.

2. It may be the matter, and so is it commonly termed by Divines. See Pareus
on Vrsinus his Catech. Christ's Satisfactio Chri st^ est causa materialis
justitiae nostrae, ad q. 6. p. 355.
satisfaction is the material cause of our righteousness. See Calv. whom you
bring as opposing himself, where this shall be spoken to more fully.

And hearken to Pareus in the same place, whom you elsewhere pretend your
friend, and you shall find him in direct opposition.

We are justified by the merit of Merito Christi justificamur, pattim ut causa
materiali justificationis, quatenus obedientia Christi nobis applicata placemus
Deo, and ea quasi vest induti pro justis reputamur; partim ut causa impulsiva,
procata^ctica and meritoria quatenus propter came nos absolvit.
Christ, partly as the material cause of justification in so much as we please
God by the obedience of Christ applied unto us, and as clothed with it as with
a garment are accounted righteous; partly as by an impulsive cause outwardly
moving and meritorious, as for that he absolveth us.

It is in both against you, and if the matter had not due worth it would never
do the work. It must be a sufficient price that makes satisfaction paid by a
Surety for man's ransom, or else it is worth nothing to that effect: It were
not such righteousness as God would accept. It applied would not effect
justification, and that which is the effect thereof, remission of sins.

And for your axiom read Pareus. Christus vary se haber ad justificationem
nostram, 1. ut subjectum in quo est justitia nostra, 2. ut causa adjuvans, quia
impetrat, 3. ut efficiens principalis, quia una cum patre justificat and dat
fidem, qua credimus -- satisfactio Christi est causa materialis justitiae
nostrae, ib.
Christ has diverse considerations to our justification, 1. as the subject in
which our righteousness is, 2. as an adjuvant cause, because he obtains it,
3. as the principal efficient, because together with the Father he justifies
and gives faith by which we believe -- Christ's satisfaction is the material
cause of our righteousness.

Himself also calls the imputation of Christ's righteousness the formal
cause often times, not in the Papists sense, as inhering in us, that it does in
Christ, in which sense he denies it the formal cause, Castig. de justif. p.
469. and adds that remission of sins is made by perfect Remissio peccatorum
fit per justitiam imputatam perfectam, Castig de justis p. 389.
righteousness imputed. And as for the final cause, questionless there is
the glory of Christ as Mediator, which is enough to infringe your inviolable
Law; and you should remember you are in an action, where matter and form
properly so called have no place, but by analogy, or by supplying the place
and stead.

And here take notice that your conclusion, that the righteousness of Christ
it self cannot be imputed unto us, as Antecedens falsum and blasphemum: in
Scripturam, negat enim posse ^^e^i, quod Scriptura affirmat heri, and
necessario, heri, Castig. l. 2. c 7. p. 468.
it is Bellarmines, so Pareus gives it this answer: the Antecedent is false
and blasphemous against the Scripture; for it denies that possible to be done
which the Scripture affirms necessarily to be done.

The 12. is of affinity with the former.

If the meritorious cause of our justification be imputed unto us, or may be
conceived imputable, then the effects themselves of this cause may be imputed
to us also, and so we may be said to have merited our own justification and
salvation, and whereby the whole world is justified. Thus we are in the midst
of Rome instead of Jerusalem.

The consequence is denied, and largely answered by the Learned before, and you
shall find it Bellarmines against Protestants; and so your self in urging it,
truly, in the midst of Rome. To omit it is against imputation simply, even of
the death of Christ also, wherein you are deserted by Pareus and Mr. Gat. left
with your friends Arminius and Socinius.

CHAP. XVIII. Three further reasons. Argu. 13.
I If the active obedience of Christ be in the letter and formality G.
of it imputed unto me to my justification, then am I reputed before God to
have wrought that righteousness in Christ.

But I am not reputed by God to have wrought this righteousness in Christ:
therefore.

Passing your language, letter formality, and other expressions, I answer in
the words of our Homily, He for them fulfilled the Law in his life, so that in
him and by him every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller of the Law;
for as much as that which their infirmity lacked, Christ's justice has
supplied. Homil. p. 15. The performance of the Surety for me is accepted as if
my self had done it.

Against this you argue, then is Christ in his sufferings reputed to have
sinned in me, an assertion uncouth and un-Christian.

To this I answer, my sins were his by imputation, they were laid on him my
Surety, and in that sense he was a sinner, as well as a Sacrifice for sin.
And questionless a being either in other, union and communion are supposed to
his bearing my sins, and my having his righteousness. In Gods purpose there
was that order, and so when as there is an actual commutation of sin and
righteousness in Gods purpose he bore the persons of all the elect, obeying
and suffering for them, which is then accounted to me when as I am incorporated
to him when also my sins are reckoned to him, and I am actually freed from
them.

Against this supposed imputation I argue, if the active Arg. 14^
be, then the passive is imputed also; for there can be no sufficient reason
given why the one should be taken and the other left. But the death and
sufferings of Christ are not in the formality and letter of them imputed.

1. We hold the imputation of both. 2. This argument A.
is denied by your friends, and against them, who teach the imputation of the
one, and not the other. 3. You are against imputation simply, and so a
Socinian, as Mr. G. answers Lucius. But you will prove it.

If the death and sufferings of Christ are imputed to me, then G.
may I be accounted to have died in Christ, but that can at no hand be in
letter and formality.

I answer, what my Surety does for me, is at any bar my act or suffering, his
payment is mine, mine or his own, and then he is a sinner, as he for me
fulfilled the Law in his life; so, he for me paid the ransom in his death, as
our Homily.

Of which when as I am said to be justified or acquitted, I must needs be a
partaker, it must be mine that I may be acquitted; neither does the Scripture
deny it, when as it says a Christian is dead to sin. It is a truth to the
power, and guilt, or punishment, it is our freedom from either. It excludes
nor, but supposes our insition into his death, As many of us as are baptized
in Christ, are baptized into his death, and are with him, as buried, and
raised, dead; he that is dead, is freed from sin, Romans 6. there is a
fellowship with his sufferings, Phil. 3. and thence the virtue thereof in
justification.

You say we are freely accepted in the beloved, 1 Ephesians. 6. yet it cost blood;
our iniquities were laid on him, and so by his stripes we were healed, we
establish our Surety Christ.

Gods free forgiveness and punishing our sins in our Surety is all we urge,
as you out of 2 Cor. 5. 21. we suffer not but by him.

Your letter and formality are your po^terne, you deceive us, indeed much more
your Clients, and so your self. Postico fall clientem, it is a Sophisters
trick.

To omit that at no hand, and yet according to the letter and formality, is no
hand, and a left hand.

Supposed imputation with you is as Bellar. putative righteousness.

But then we are justified in part by the ceremonial law, he Arg. 15.
was circumcised and kept the passover. But, etc.

Sir, those were parts of Gods worship, both instituted Answ.
by him; and so required in the second Commandment, requiring all worship
according to Gods word, which binds Jews and Gentiles, thus both are
satisfied for, and thus in Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile, all are
one; and your consequences vanish.

CHAP. XIX. 5. Further Demonstrations.
THey must pass for Demonstrations, call them what you will, and that reason
and Logic are friends to your conclusion, and not Rhetoric; as if Reason
and Logic were two things, and you used not your Rhetoric.

Then are our sins imputed to Christ in the same manner, in Arg. 16.
his death, etc.

But our sins are not imputed in that manner.

For then God looks on him and reputeth him as one that had truly and really
provoked him, and sinned him. But God looks not on him so, etc.

For then he should look on him as one truly deserving death. But that God
does not.

Because Christ offered himself without spot unto God. He A.
had no spot of his own, yet was a sinner, and deserved, being 1.
our Surety, he was made sin, our iniquities were his: the Surety is as
liable to the Law as the principal, his undertaking makes it his own debt,
and him as deserving. Had he personally sinned, it is true he could not
satisfy for us. That denied, now satisfying as a Surety, we are free. Our 2.
personals were his by imputation, inherent in us, not in 3.
him; and when you grant the punishment his, the Scripture says the sins are
so without which he could not have been punished as elsewhere is showed.

If the righteousness of Christ, etc. then does God look upon Arg. 17.
on us as worthy of that justification. But that is an unclean saying.

I answer, God looks on us in the worthiness of A.
Christ our Surety, and so are we worthy, by his merits imputed.

This is a truth, though our fulfilling the Law be not worthiness, for we are
debtors, it is what we ought, and are but unprofitable servants when we have
done all.

Neither is our worthiness by the merits of Christ imputed, opposed to (...)
grace, (as you object) Romans 11. 6. grace and Christ's blood, and Christ's
obedience are subordinate. It holds against personal worthiness, not that
of our Mediator.

And when as the Scripture says, God justifies the ungodly: I hope he that is
justified is a believer, one that has union and communion with Christ. Yea and
repentance too, these qualify to the promise of pardon of sins, Is. 1. 16.
etc. and they are not in that moment ungodly: that was the state before faith
and repentance, and so justification, but is not when God justifies; to
justify the wicked is abomination, God will by no means do it; you will
distinguish between a believer and an ungodly man: now faith receiving and
applying the righteousness of Christ imputed justifies not for our
worthiness, but the worthiness of our Surety, faiths object.

If men become formally just by Gods imputation of Christ's Arg.. 18.
righteousness unto them, then do men do men become formally sinful by the
like act of God imputing Adams sin. But men are not made, etc. for then the
act of God should be as the life and soul of that sin in men. Therefore.

I answer, Christ's righteousness imputed is that which is the form of
justification, that which is as a form giving him that name and esse. And that
by Adams sin imputed I am constituted a sinner, for imputation it self, and
righteousness imputed wherein your crochet lies, I suppose the distinction
but a vain strife of words. We all consider the righteousness of Christ as
the matter, the imputation of God his act applying it, by it applied we are
just.

The act of God is not the form that only applies it, by it applied we are
just, and so sinners not by that judiciary act of God, charging it on us, but
it charged.

To omit that by formally, we mean not inherently, righteousness inhereth in
Christ sin in Adam, and are ours by imputation; by the one imputed we are
righteous, and by the other imputed sinners. This is an advantage from an
expressure, a mere cavillation.

If righteonsnesse consists partly in the imputation of Christ's Arg. 19.
righteousness, partly in remission of sins, then must there be a double
formal cause of justification, and that made up by two several natures,
really differing one from another.

That which justifies is the righteousness of Christ imputed, remission of
sins is properly the effect and inseparable companion of it.

So the Learned, Calvine and Chamieere, and reason; for, justification being
justifaction, constituting righteous by Christ's obedience, fully satisfying,
freedom follows.

Calvine never used your rod, it were to beat himself, as is demonstrated
(spare that confident word your speech demonstrations) Calvine, Chamieere
interpreting him, gives it an effect of righteousness imputed by which we are
justified; besides there is greater opposition between righteousness infused,
and pardon whence inconsistence, then imputation of righteousness and
remission, which who so denies to be Calvines, must have a face that cannot
blush or be unsound in his senses and intellectuals; if remission be an effect
of righteousness imputed, and consequent to justification, they must really
differ, or cause and effect do not really differ. In genere conformitas cum
Deo and Lege divina, justitia est consornias creaturarum rationalium cum
legibus ad ipsas perrinentibus: denique justitia est impletio Legis, and
conformitas cu^ Lege est ipsa. Hoc tenendum quia oport. nos justificari per
impletionem Legis, is Pareus on Vrsin p. 348


And therefore remission of sins cannot be properly called imputed
righteousness in their judgments.

And when as you say remission may be called imputed righteousness, partly
because it is no absolute legal or text righteousness, but a righteousness
by interpretation and construction of favor, and partly because such
righteousness as it is, it is notwithstanding given in the strength and
mediation of the righteousness of another, which is Christ.

I answer, remission cannot be called properly imputed righteousness. Your
reason, because it is not absolute legal righteousness, may be better
answered, because it is no righteousness at all, for righteousness is in the
kind conformity with God, and the divine Law, righteousness is the conformity
of the reasonable creature with Laws appertaining to them: to conclude
righteousness is conformity with the Law, and conformity with the Law is the
same: this must be held because we must be justified by the fulfilling of the
Law.

2. When as you say it is not text righteousness, we are sure you can have no
text for it, and your construction is its corruption, and it is the favor you
bear your own cause.

3. When as you say it is given by the mediation and strength of the
righteousness of another Christ. It must be his righteousness imputed or
applied, and but an effect which we spoke of before, and the confirmation
thereof.

If such imputation be necessary to justification, it is either in Arg. 20.
respect of the justice of God, because he could not be otherwise just in
pronouncing us just, or in respect of mercy, or for salving and advancing some
other attribute.

But there is no necessity in respect of these.

You answer your self, that it is necessary in respect of Gods justice. And
argue against that.

1. There is nothing thereabout necessary by way of satisfaction of justice,
since Christ's one offering on the Gross, etc. G.


Yet there is a necessity that there be an application of A.
that righteousness, else can there be no justification, and were not that
done God should justify a wicked man, which is abomination to the Lord; when
as the Lord justifying does to that end apply the righteousness of Christ.
Gods judgment is according to truth, justice in God requires that a man be
just, that is, justified, God will not hold a guilty person innocent.

2. You answer, God may as truly pronounce that man righteous that wants a
literal or legal righteousness upon him, G.
especially supposing another righteousness, holding any analogy or proportion
thereunto, as he may account any man's uncircumcision circumcision, or call the
gentile circumcision, or John Baptist, Elias, etc. in these Christ spoke truly.

So may God, a man not legally just, having qualification which holds
proportion with such righteousness in any point, etc.

I answer, we want legal righteousness, that is, our own personal
righteousness, but in Christ's righteousness have what God accepts us in,
our Sureties righteousness is our own, it is the righteousness of God. Such
can you name no other that is so indeed, so that the Lord may thereupon
justify when you mention remission of sins; besides, that it is not
righteousness, conformity to Gods Law, we grant it but as an effect of
righteousness imputed, of which before.

And when as you in the third place answer that remission is a true and
complete righteousness in the kind, though it be not a through conformity
with the Law. I may answer, nonne te vides pugnantia loqui? that which is not a
through conformity to the Law, is not a complete righteousness; it has not
its nature, it is an effect of righteousness imputed Christ's, we are complete
in him, Gods judgment is according to truth, and so is his pronouncing such a
man just.

CHAP. XX. Containing the 21. 22, 23, and 24. Reasons.
PAssing your Apolgy for further demonstrations, as you call them. Let us hear
the demonstrations themselves.

That which having been done in our own persons, could not Arg. 2.
have been our justification nor any part of the righteousness by which we
could have been justified, cannot be made our justification, or any part of it
by imputation from another.

But the righteousness of the Law pretended to be imputed from Christ in
justification, had it been wrought by our selves in our own persons, could
not have been our justification or any part of that righteousness, nor any
part of our righteousness by which we were to be justified; therefore the
righteousness of Christ cannot be made our justification, nor any part of it
by imputation.

I will not stand on the altering the state of the question, which is not
whether it be our justification or part of it, but whether we be justified by
it imputed: the difference is as cause and effect, and in the minor proposition
being our justification and part of the righteousness are confounded.

I might dismiss this argument with this note. But I will suppose all right. I
answer,

1. We speak not of the active without the passive obedience of Christ, we
teach the imputation of both.

2. Performance supposed, is either of man standing or fallen. If standing it
could have justified, had Adam done this he had lived. In the sense the major
is false, you confess it.

If fallen, the supposition is impossible, Romans 8. 3. and there must be more
then action, passion also, which are impossible to a man's self. Personal
passion could not satisfy, so the damned might, there must be doing also,
which is impossible.

3. What could not be therefore our righteousness and justify, being done and
suffered by another and imputed does it, that which is impossible in a person,
is found in Christ perfect obedience. By his obedience we are constituted
righteous, Romans 5. 19.

That which men are not bound by any Law of God to do in Arg. 22.
their own persons for their justification, cannot be imputed from another to
any such end.

But men are not bound to observe the moral Law to justification, therefore
the observation of it by another cannot be imputed to that end.

1. I answer, Do this, was Gods Law to life: the moral Law must be perfectly
performed if it justify, as you, p. 99. and 103. Lex aeterna, and aete^nae
obligationis. p. 67.


2. That this is eternally obliging, your self call it, an eternal Law, and
of eternal obligation. And God requires it still, either by our selves or
Surety; had it not been due of our part, our Sureties obedience until death,
poverty, etc. had been vain; but it was for us, our debt. When as our L.
required to life, keeping the Commandments, he showed it a debt, and that he
being insolent in his person must look for a Surety.

The Law of faith is sufficient as an instrument applying what the Mediator did
and suffered, to put it on; there must be somewhat else, the object of faith,
which applied to us, answers for us that debt, and thus faith establishes
the Law.

Faith properly taken is not. Read V^sinus again, and Quia non fides proprie
sedobjectum fidei seu meritum Christi fide apprehensum imputatur nobis ad
justitiam. Haec eriam est conformitas Legis, fides enim Legem non inanem reddit
sed stabilit. Romans 3. 31.
he in terms teaches you, Because faith properly is not imputed to
righteousness, but the object of faith, or the merit of Christ apprehended by
faith: so he, or Pareus, or both, as 5. object. p. 364. and of another
righteousness, not inhering in us but Christ.

They say, this also is conformity of the Law, for faith makes not the Law of
none effect, but establishes it. This wheel runs merrily, I will save
labor in further oyling of it. It is your own Rhetoric, and serves my
turn.

If God requires only faith of men to their justification, then he imputes
this faith unto them thereunto, but God requires only faith. Arg. 23.


I answer, only faith is faith considered in it self properly, or in relation
as taking in the object Christ's, righteousness, applying it; the former (which
you hold) is not all, or Gods condition further then it takes in Christ's
righteousness, which is in deed the condition, as elsewhere I have showed. So
Pareus but now, and all the learned Protestants except Armin. Socin. Mr. W. and
Mr. Good. the faith which God requires is an appropriation of the perfect
obedience of Christ, by which we are constituted righteous, as the Scripture
speaks, therein alone is the virtue or value; faith is but the instrument
applying, which to that end yet is necessary.

And this is the will of God; neither (to answer what follows) can man
receive it but on supposition of Gods imputation and giving; giving and
receiving are relates; this wheel runs as merrily, and will need no more
oyling for this argument.

That which was imputed to Abraham for righteousness in Arg. 24.
his justification, is imputed to other believers also.

But the faith of Abraham was, etc.

And you refer for proof to the second chapter, where it is sealed by the
choycest learning of ancient and modern, where also he may see the ashes, of
the contrary interpretation, consumed and burnt up with the fire of the trial,
etc.

But here you give us Rhetoric instead of Logic. Turn what is said on both
sides loose, and excepting Socin. Armin. etc. you have not a man with you.

The faith of Abraham took in the promises, the seed, Christ his
righteousness, in whom is all happiness, it did justify, laying hold, and
applying his righteousness imputed, verse. 6. and 11. the effect of what is
applied is given to the in^^rument as the whiting of a wall to the brush or
pencill, as making rich to the hand of a beggar; by a Trope a Metonymy, or a
double Trope Metalepsis, relatively, as all ours, see before out of Sybrandus;
so our Doctor Davenant answers Bellarmine, so Pareus, so Chemnit.

Faith is imputed to righteousness, Fides imputatur ad justitiam non propter
dignitatem virtutis, sed quia apprehendit in promissione Evangelii meritum
Christi, etc. p. 271. nam neque action fidei nostrae justificamur: sed ea re
tantum quae per fidem apprehenditur, quae est Christus cum sua obedientia,
justi censcmur, and sic illud intelligo: Credidit Abraham, etc. Genesis 15. 6.
quid reputatum? non actio, sed^ id quod credidit seura alii loquuntur* ipso*
fides, non sui apprehendentis, sed objecti apprehensi respectu* Zanch. in Phil
3. 9.
not for the dignity of the virtue, but because it apprehends the merit of
Christ in the promise of the Gospel; for neither are we justified by the act of
our faith, but by that thing only which by says is apprehended, which is
Christ with his obedience, we are accounted just: and thus I understand that,
Abraham believed, etc. What was reputed? not the action, but that which he
believed, or as others speak, faith it self, not in respect of it self
apprehending, but of the object apprehended.

CHAP. XXI. The last Reason.
IF the righteousness of the Law be not imputable or derivable (in the letter
and formality of it from one man's person to another) then cannot the
righteousness of Christ be imputed to any man in justification after any such
manner.

But the righteousness of the Law is not imputable from ou^ man's person to
another. Therefore the righteousness of Christ is not imputable (much less
imputed) to any man in his justification: this is mentioned with proofs, c. 8.
the reason is, the man that does shall live and no other.

You needed not to name this twice, nor I to answer it more then once; yet I
deny the consequence, for the righteousness of Christ is not Legal, but
Evangelicall: the Gospel reveals it.

And then I deny that that righteousness which Christ performed for us is not
imputable, or imputed, he was our Surety, performed obedience to death for us,
if it be not imputed it is vain, we have no benefit by it. But looking back,
I shall but deliver the same; I will ^urne you over.

The Law requires personal performances, the Gospel admits of a Surety,
the man that is found in Christ having his righteousness, lives; By the
obedience of one, many shall be made righteous: suppose imputed or given by God
and applied by us.

You object to your self, If the transgression of the Law be imputable from
one to another, then may the righteousness of the Law. But the transgression
of the Law is imputable from one man's person to another, ^^ Adams sin.

By way of answer you first deny the majors consequence, and give reasons.

1. In the tenor of the Law there is no such emphaticall restraint of the
guilt or punishment due to the transgression of it to the person, as there is
of the reward promised to the observer, as Gal. 3. 12. The man that does this
shall live: it is no where found on the other hand, the very man that
transgressseth them shall die for his transgression.

Did not God say to Allam, In the day thou shall eat thereof thou shall die
the death? Genesis 2. 17* did you never read, The s^^le that sins it shall
die? Ezekiel. 18. 4.

2. You answer, giving a difference, that sin demerit it is greater of
punishment then obedience in deserving a reward.

This exception notwithstanding there may be a specificall samenesse of reason,
and the difference but in a degree, greater less; You grant obedience should
merit, though not so much, which yet is simply destroyed, when as it is found
due, and we having done all are unprofitable servants.

But it cannot be denied, but whole nature was in Adam, in his loins, willing,
doing, receiving, as he by covenant, to have been brought forth in his
likeness, pure and holy as himself; had he continued so, as he, unclean, did
bring forth such as are unclean; more, less, merit or not, is not the
question, but imputablenesse: the samenesse thereof, you confess it when you
put the difference more and less, p. 192.

You now* come to the imputation of Adams sin, to his posterity, assenring
its imputation only in the merit of* it, it is a curse or punishment, and then
propose to us certain conclusions about the same.

The first is, The Scripture no where affirms either the imputation of Adams
sin, or of the righteousness of Christ to those that believe; where ever it
is used, it is only applied to something of the same persons to whom the
imputation is made, and never to or of any thing of another.

Besides what has been spoken, to which I refer the Reader.

1. This conclusion is against imputation simply of what is another, and is
for Armin. Socin. etc. against all Protestants, even such as hold the
imputation of Christ's passive obedience, which is another.

2. It is against the word which speaks of imputation of righteousness, Romans
4. verse. 6. and 11. which I have showed to be Christ's, and is confuted by the
Protestant stream, who interpreting faiths imputation, take faith tropically
and include the righteousness of Christ given or imputed by God. Pareus his
speech is, quem sensum (metonymicum) si oppugnat adversarius, certe non
Lutheruum impugnat sed Spiritum sanctum blasphemat, etc. and what Sybr.
teaches of the same we have heard before.

The privileges, remission, etc. suppose Christ's* righteousness not only
performed, but given and received, as the effect the cause.

So does our death for Adams sin, and that sin is ours, the Scripture
shows we sinned in him, and that sin went over all by one man's
disobedience; we not only die, but sin, death passed over all, being all
have sinned, Romans 5. 12. and by one man's offense many are made sinners, verse.
19.

As Adams posterity are implied to be in his loins to punishment, so to sin
whence punishment, and this your self often confess, which by imputation
becomes ours, when as we are conceived.

To impute sin, is only to charge guilt of sin on a man, 2.
with a purpose to punish him for it, as Romans 5. 13. not sin it self.

I answer, the Scripture charge us with both Adams sin and the demerit or
guilt thereof, and I would know whether sin and guilt demerit are separable?
if not, how there can be guilt charged, and demerit, and not sin, as the
sin is, the demerit is, inseparably, though not the charging of it.

Has many parts, the first is, That imputation of the righteousness 3.
of Christ to believers, or the sin of Adam to his posterity, are expressions
at least unknown to the holy Ghost in Scripture.

1. The answer is, this was once before named and answered, and must be now
neglected. Hosius the Papist said it of Christ's righteousness, you are like
him.

2. You say, you grant there are expressions in Scripture concerning both the
communication of Adams sin with his posterity, and the righteousness of
Christ with believers, that will fairly enough bear the term of imputation,
if it be rightly understood.

So the terms are granted, the difficulty is about the right sense; thus you
destroy what you built before twice in this chapter. Now for the sense.

You say, Romans 5. 19. concerning Adams sin, many are said to be sinners, and
righteousness of Christ, many are made righteous* and upon that if the meaning
of imputation of Adams sin to condemnation be that the demerit or guilt of
Adams sin is charged on the whole posterity, a maine part of which punishment
of Adams sin redounded and ran over as it were from his person to his whole
posterity, a maine part of which punishment is that original defilement
wherein they are all conceived and borne, and thereby are made truly and
formally sinners before God. Let it pass. But if the meaning be that sinful
act wherein Adam tronsgressed in the letter and formality of it; and as it was
Adams own personal sin is so imputed that his posterity is made formally
sinners before any of the part of the punishment come upon them, this
imputation you are sure the Scripture will not justify.

I answer, granting the former part, for guilt and punishment, that by which we
are formally sinners, that is inherently. But add that is not all, the act of
Adam as well as the demerit, nay therefore because the demerit is imputed, and
by it as I am formally a sinner by pollution of nature, which is an effect, so
am I truly a sinner, thence denominated, not formally as it inhering, and yet
charged on me, with, and as the internal guilt and demerit. So that I am as
truly a sinner by imputation of that act, as the effect thereof, so the texts
of which before.

1. You plead first the weight of the demerit, or sinfulness of it
demonstrateth the equity of Gods proceedings in binding over Adams posterity,
as his person to the same punishment.

2. The narrowness and scantnesse of Adams person* to bear all that wrath
himself.

3. The peculiar and near relation of the posterity of his person, they mere
in his person, and somewhat of his, when the sin was committed. Adam was all
us, we all were that one Adam. The whole generation of mankind is but Adam, or
but Adams person interpreted.

All these as grounds of Gods equity and just dealing in punishing Adam and his
poslerity, you largely lay down, and then by Scripture.

And who opposes you? what is this to the not-imputation of his sin? the
texts are clean we are sinners, and reason that the internal demerit and sin
are inseparable, you call it demerit or sinfulness.

Imputation therefore (say you) if there be any, is of every man's own sin in
Adam, we being in his loins as Levi in Abraham, not Adams, etc.

If it be our own, then not the punishment only but the offense is ours, we
are sinners thence as well as from inward pollution* and as it is equal as
soon as we exist that the punishment should be laid on us, and the demerit, so
the sin it self, as that for which, which we all conceive to be by Gods
imputation or charging it on us.

God righteously punishes and righteously reputeth me a sinner. And yet it is
Adams sin, the sin of one in Scripture; he only existing, made ours by
Gods just judgment in conception and birth, and that by imputation, which we
conceive Gods way of communication which you granted but now, for which there
is such equity as you speak of; for more to this head I refer you to what is
before largely spoken unto twice to this head, of Orthodox against Pelagians
and Papists, and on occasion given in what follows.

I have done examining the first Treatise, and now come to consider what
commission and power you have to disarme and take away the weapons of us whom
you call your enemies, your second part: and first to examine your conclusions.

EXAMINATION of Mr. GOODWINS CONCLUSIONS.
Being Chapter 1 and 2. of his second part.
WHich you say Give light to the Question, and serve as foundations and grounds
to give answer upon, to Objections made against your discourse.

Concl. 1. He for whose sins a plenary satisfaction has bin made (either by
himself or another for him) and has been accepted by him, against whom* etc.
is as just and righteous as he that rever sinned, but had done all things meet
for him.

1. I answer, a plenary satisfaction respects the whole debt: that made and
accepted he for whom it is paid is as just as you speak.

2. Acceptance is necessary to a plenary satisfaction for sin, to that
perfect righteousness; this acceptance is in and for Christ's perfect sati
faction; we are accepted, in the beloved, 1 Ephesians. in him God's well pleased;
when as we are found in his righteousness, as Jacob in Esau's apparel: in
Christ, not having our own righteousness, but that which is by faith,
apprehending and putting on, that man is free from sin, and likewise holy,
unblameable and unreprovable in Gods sight; white as snow, and whiter then the
snow, complete, perfect, perfected for ever; every way, to this end; and thence
remission of sins as before.

Thus is evident because there is as much righteousness in repayring wrongs, as
in abstaining from wrongs.

I answer it is true, and grounded on my former answer supposing a man in the
righteousness of Christ.

Else it is short: for though there be as much righteousness in repairing
wrongs, as in abstaining from them* Neither are sufficient to make a man
completely just; there must be also a doing right, a doing good.

He that trespasseth by cattle; and fully satisfyeth for that spoil is done to
his contentment, is as good a neighbor, and deals as justly and honestly with
him as he that never trespassed.

True, and yet is not so good as he should be by the Commandment, it forbids
evil, and requires love and good, and from this positive part is he
denominated.

No trespasser can by himself satisfy God, he must do it by another, putting
him not only in a state of abstinence from evil, but also of righteousness,
both which are done by the imputation of Christ's active and passive obedience.
Whence pardon.

The esserce of Justice, as in the definition of Justice is suum cuique
tribuere, to give every one that which is due to him: there is no more due to one
injured, then that which is his own; that is fully valuable to the injury we
have done unto him.

The former part I grant, so that there be all that is due but deny it enough,
not to do evil; good must also be done; so that Commandment. And Repentance
requires, as abstinence from evil, doing good; as not to bring forth evil so
to bring forth good fruit. nova vita est optima paenitentia, and that by which
a man abstaineth from evil, is positive goodness.

This Conclusion makes nothing for your Faiths imputation, in a proper sense.
It makes for imputation of active and passive obedience, in which there is full
compensation; giving God what is due.

Concl. 2. There Is no middle condition between a perfect freedom from finne,
and complete righteousness. He that is discharged from sin, is completely
righteous.

I answer, and grant that he that is discharged from sin, is so on imputation
of righteousness, that, the cause is supposed, and he is completely righteous,
and so there is no medium.

Mr. Bradshaw's passage is on supposition of things, thus done and suffered
jointly; in with the righteousness of Christ consists, by which a man is
justified p. 75. p 22. and so p. 23. and said to be imputed, p. 24. and thence
your named inference which is for our purpose against your self.

Your reason, Because nothing can any way diminish perfection of
righteousness, but sin, as degrees of darkness, perfection of light; as the
air free from darkness must needs be perfectly light: So he that is perfectly
freed from all finne, must needs be perfectly righteous.

I answer, though nothing diminishes perfection of righteousness but sin,
as degrees of darkness do the perfection of light; and although from the
perfect freedom from darkness, perfect light must needs be put; and he that
is perfectly free from sin, must needs be perfectly righteous.

Yet both are on suppositions, of perfect light, and perfect righteousness;
which suppositions are necessary.

It Is the approaching light that begins the dispelling of darkness, and
perfect light leaves no darkness at all. In sanctification flesh and spirit
are contraries, then when as there is infusion of grace, and thereby corruption
is mortified and dispelled; there is fight and Vn^m ^ont^triorum, vi^^endi co^rum
^^t al (...)* ^ummu (...) unius (...) put de (...)*
victory on graces part. One contrary by overcoming does corrupt the other; and
it is the highest degree of one contrary which leaves nothing of the other. So
that though it be darkness that hinders perfect light, it is perfect light
that disp^lleth all degrees of darkness.

So it is imputation of Christ's perfect righteousness, which causes complete
pardon: and though the man that is freed from all sins is perfectly righteous.
That perfection of righteousness is not from pardon: but pardon, yea
justification from imputation of Christ's perfect obedience, active and passive.
By this applied a ^ effect thereof.

And here is poor relief for you: for remission of sins being the form of
justification; in opposition to imputed righteousness, for which we have the
text, By the obedience of one many are made righteous. None for your Faiths
proper sense.

Concl 3. Adam while he stood was completely just, as just as if he had
continued, to this day; as Christ from the womb: therefore by r^mission to
grant a man in statu quo, Adams, before his fall, which is granted, is to grant
the point in controversy.

Adam was not so just as he had been continuing; nor so just as the
Commandment required, seeing it required also continuing on which he was to
receive life.

Justice to life required, doing this, Gods whole Law; whereof abstaining from
the forbidden fruit, was a pledge and experiment; on this life was promised,
the contrary threatened with death, to which Adam yielded, and in that way
looked for life, this as a trial was the sum of all. He was also to continue
therein to that end, as the Law opens it, seeing he is accursed that abides
not in all.

Though Adam had perfection of righteousness, ability, he was not a doer,
neither did he continue, and so had not right to life.

Though he lived by that righteousness, in which he was created, yet not that
life which was promised; that was everlasting life: death threatened was so and
therefore life; what good thing shall I do to inherit eternal life* was a
received Doctrine, not contradicted by Christ, but established, when as he
willed him to keep the Commandments, which had he done, he had not sinned, or
dyed at all.

2. Ideny that Adam was as righteous as Christ from the womb* because Christ
was as righteous, and having right to: for living comprehensive from the first
moment of his conception by the Spirit and hypostacie Ejusdem possessione
gaudebat*
union, he did possess it, as Mr. Gat. p. 28. which was not true or ^^ (...):
therefore there was no need or his doings to life, his own; but even as our
surety, satisfying our debt; as else where.

3. For that grant that by remission of sins, man is in statu quo, of Adam
before his fall.

1. I answer. He is in a far better and more excellent one.

2. This is a truth, supposing imputation of righteousness, by which that
remission of sins.

3. It Is false otherwise. Adam was just by perfect righteousness, quum
perfecta justitia imbutus, Mr. Gat. p. 28. that being inherent he was formally
so. It Is not thus with your justified one, by remission of sins. What is that
righteousness? Faith? or that and other Graces? no we are not perfectly
righteous that way as Adam; and so not in statu quo Adamus, in the state in
which Adam was* If God should account such an one so, it were not according to
truth. It were justification by the Law, which Papists teach. So they and that
these are perfect; but you know it is otherwise.

Suppose now imputation of the righteousness of Christ; then that effect
pardon will follow and a person is perfectly just; here is righteousness far
more excellent then Adams justifying, and causing pardon; and such a man may be
said to be in statu quo, with advantage.

Concl. 4. Perfect remission of sins includes the imputation or
acknowledgement of the observation of the whole Law, even as the imputation of
the Law fullfilled necessarily includes* non imputation of sin, or
forgiveness.

2. He that is looked upon as never offending, must needs be looked upon as one
that has kept the whole Law, which is to have a perfect righteousness, or
which is the same, a perfect fulfilling of the Law imputed to him: So that
besides pardon, there is no needer place for imputation of Christ's righteousness.

1. I answer, the first part is true, as we have explained before, remission,
supposing the cause imputation of righteousness; imputation of righteousness
being attended with non imputation of sin.

2. So we have man as never sinning.

3. And so the necessity of imputation is apparent: and that it has a
necessary place: else where is that observation of the Law included? how else
can Gods holy eyes look on a man as perfectly righteous? the believer is not so
by faith, or any other grace unless that be accepted for perfect
righteousness, which yet is imperfect, which yet is no righteousness indeed;
as your self else where. Interpretative must be your own speech, very
improper, far from exactness as after.

When as you will us to compare Romans 4. 6, 7. and 11.

We answer, we have done it and find imputation of the righteousness of Christ
(as interpreters before) and so pardon or non imputation; by the obedience of
one we are constituted righteous. These we find not your interpretation. To
impute righteousness and not impute sin, are indeed different in name and
nature, as cause and effect; when either is named, the other is unfolded; and
by them both, is our blessed estate set forth.

Your simile of a Physician by one act recovering from sickness, restoring his
patient to health, holds with Gods imputation of Christ's righteousness to
justification: hereby we are delivered and recovered we are so really. Its for
us. There Is question of recovery still where Christ's righteousness is denied a
place, and yet man asserted perfectly righteous and an observer of the Laws.

For that other similitude. That act by which the sun dispells darkness, may
be called the act by which he fills the air with light.

I answer. Those acts are not the same, but differ as cause and effect: the
filling of our air with light is the cause, dispelling darkness the effect;
the latter ever supposes the former, and so does pardon, non imputation of
sin; the imputation of the righteousness active and passive of Christ to
justification, whence absolution or pardon. You say,

Forgiveness of sins, and imputation of righteousness, being but two
different names, expressions, or considerations of one and the same thing, and
so one and the same act of God, is sometimes called forgiveness of sins, and
some times an imputing of righteousness; and the forgiveness of sins is
sometimes called an imputing of righteousness, to show and signify that a man
needs nothing to a complete righteousness or justification: but the
forgiveness of his sin: and again, the imputing of righteousness is
sometimes called forgiveness, to show that God has no other righteousness to
conserre upon a sinner: but that which stands in pardon, those two terms do
but aid and assist each other.

1. Note here, that if imputation of righteousness, and forgiveness, be one and
the same; then imputation of righteousness, cannot be denied, when as pardon
is mentioned: and why are you so vehement elsewhere against imputation of
righteousness? of Christ's? no other is imputed: it is showed before.

2. Justification and righteousness are not to be confounded, it is an ordinary
practice of yours, the one is the cause, the other the effect.

3. Neither are imputation of righteousness, and pardon the same, but differ
also, as cause and effect: as before.

4. I deny pardon righteousness, that which formally justifyeth and have
proved the same. I name another righteousness, Christ's, for by it are we
constituted righteous 5. To. 19. that is righteousness indeed. You objest to
your self:

How can God impute a righteousness that never was or had being, nor
righteousness, or not of the kind of that we speak of, there being no other
perfect righteousness, but that of Christ? and Answer. 1. There Is as express
and complete arighteousnesse to the Law, as ever Christ performed: 2.
arighteousnes more proper and appropriable to all sorts of men, then Christ's
personal righteousness, which Christ himself performed; and what if it be
said, that in remission through Christ, from and out of the Law, God imputes
to every believer such a righteousness, as is proper to him. And say its more
agreeable to Scripture and reason, then to held an imputation of such
righteousness, a sisteme and frame of such actions, which were a
righteousness indeed to him that wrote them, the Law requiring them of him:
but cannot be to another, the Law requiring the same acts of none besides; for
none are rightcous for doing what the Law requires simply, but for doing what
it requi^eth of him in reference to his personal condition, calling relations,
etc.

I reply, 1. denying forgiveness of sins righteousness, as before, it has no
conformity to the Law, which yet Christ's righteousness had, and all grant
Christ's righteousness to be mere pardon.

2. It Is not only his, but Gods act (if righteousness) neither performed by
us, nor Christ our surety for us.

3. It Is an effect of righteousness imputed (as before) or a consequent act on
it imputed.

4. The Law neither requires it, nor reveals it, nor accepts it, and
therefore it is not express to the Law, no proper righteousness; it is a
righteousness, and not a contradiction.

5. As for Christ's righteousness, he obeyed not for himself, but us, as a
surety for the debtor, and so the Law requires them of him, being once a
surety; his doings and sufferings our debt.

He fullfilling all righteousness, respected and yields to every member his
just proportion: of which before you have a full answer.

And when you answer further, That to say God cannot impute a righteousness
which never had a being, which was never really performed by any man, is to
deny that God has power to forgive sins, because it is an imputation of
righteousness, such as the Scripture teaches, is without works, 4. To. 6.
and Romans 3 28. i. a righteousness not consisting of any works performed to the
Law by any man; and what is this but such a righ^eousnesse as never had a being?

1. I answer. A righteousness there is never performed by any man, (as the
essential righteousness of God, and that of Angels) truth falls not under our
consideration, and it is a righteousness indeed.

2. A righteousness that never had a being, implies a contradiction; a
quality, or actions not being: and God cannot account that properly to be so
that never had a being.

3. You must prove that the denial of imputation of such a righteousness, as
is none, is a denial of Gods power to forgive sins.

4. I deny forgiveness of sins to be imputation of righteousness, it*s but
the effect thereof.

5. Righteousness without works simply, is a contradiction, denies the
definition thereof. Justification without our personal works we confess, not
works simply, of the Mediator suppose; and that is the Apostles meaning, as our
Church and the learned; and you hold them an essential requisite.

Concl. 5. He that is fully acquitted and discharged from sins, needs no
other righteousness to give him a right or title to life: 2. The reason thereof
is, death is the wages of sin, and sin only. Now he that is free from
death, has a right to life, because there is no middle.

1. I answer: a full discharge supposes a full satisfaction that is by active
and passive righteousness, ours by imputation, whence, forgiveness, and right
to life: so there is no farther need, nor middle, between one just and
pardoned, free from sin: you put the cause the righteousness of Christ
imputed.

2. deny that supposition, I deny pardon, orright to life.

3. Christ's death without obedience active in flowing, is insufficient to
constitute him a Priest for us, or his sacrifice propitiatory, ex concessis:
and therefore to full pardon.

4. Pardon without righteousness, supposed qualifieth not to life; life is the
sequel, as of that so of somewhat else, whether Christ's righteousness and
adoption, or adoption (founded in inherent righteousness, that birth of God, and
Christ's perfect obedience, which is principal) the eternal rule is, do this
and live: for which Christ was the end of the Law for righteousness to
believers, dying and doing, as our surety for our debt: thus is the Law
established.

Adam whilst innocent had right to life, and enjoyed it, else could he not be
threatened with death, 2. Genesis 17. though he had not done the Law to have right
to have right to life. If he had not right by freedom from sin, what
quantity of obedience, and how long must he have obeyed to have right to life?

It Is true, Adam innocent had a natural life, and what was connaturall also,
consisting in Gods image, by which he was conformed to the Law, and so was free
from sin and death; and so had promise of continuance of thoselives, and also
of a glorious life: So has the man to whom GOD gives the righteousness of
Christ, and so pardon: what is this to him that is supposed without righteousness
simply? there is no likeness.

To your Question though I cannot, nor do answer, it helps not your
conclusion.

Yet I should think he must have all righteousness, and what is for ever: this
I have, being complete in Christ, I have everlasting righteousness, and am in
statu quo rather a better, which no man is or can be by pardon (supposing it
possible to be, which yet cannot be, seeing they are contraria immediata, and
cause and effect.

You say, The Scriptures of the new Testament, seem to place the immediate
right, believers have of heaven and glory, rather in adoption purchased, then
in any righteousness.

1. The life then which was promised was glory which Adam had not enjoyed not,
as not doing this, or tell from that, was, and is the promised life, in old and
new Testament.

2. If it be rather founded in adoption, then that discharge why do you give
right by that discharge? you thwart your self, or else must give it to both.

1. When you say, it is not by any righteousness, you say it is not by
remission of sins, or deny that to be (which yet is before asserted)
righteousness.

2. And why do the Scriptures old and new require, do this to life: The
spirit is life says St. Paul, because of righteousness, 8 To. 10 see Pountium
and Chami^r of imputed righteousness.

And what need you to argue our being in statu quo, from a full discharge, and
to a perfect righteousness, if it furthers not to life?

If we be in statu quo, and have perfect righteousness, we are qualified to
that life thence: so where Christ's righteousness is acknowledged imputed; or
else to what end is it? and if it be not so (that is we are not in statu quo)
as it is certain, where this is denied, your arguments thence must be
confessed sophistical.

But you may evade by your manner of proposal, it seems, it may seem in your
borrowed light, and not be, qu^dam videntur quae non sunt.

To which you add, the reason may be happily, this life, etc. which comes by
Christ through Faith, are of an higher nature then that promised Adam, as wages
for work, or obedience to the Law, requiring a fuller and richer title, to
interest the creature then that. Work performed intituleth sufficiently to
hire and wages: but the gift of an inheritance requires grace and special
favor as adoption, to make a man regularly and according to the course of
humane transaction capable thereof.

1. I answer. Life by Christ is eternal. 2. Eternal life was promised to
those that do this: as that question what shall I do to inherit eternal
life? and the answer of Christ shows in the Gospel. 3. This was of an higher
nature then that life which Adam had and enjoyed, but not then was promised.
Had Adam done it was not wages or hire, because it was what he ought, and was
justly punished for not performance; when we have done all we are unprofitable
servants, and do but what we ought. It Is a favor and a mercy to make a
promise of eternal life to a creature.

4. We have by Christ a richer title, Christ his merits, his active and passive
obedience, doings, sufferings imputed; by his poverty we are made rich, by his
obedience we are constituted righteous; these performed by our surety accounted
to us entitle us to life; the spirit is life because of righteousness.

Were it by adoption it may be by righteousness, we are heirs of the
righteousness of faith, if life follows our new birth, in which adoption is
founded, which is imperfect, how much more the perfect righteousness of
Christ, by which we are completely like unto the Lord? so that there is no fight
or opposition, but sweet agreement. When as the Apostle says, that precious
faith is obtained through the righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ; of Jesus Christ who is our God and Savior, adoption or Sonne-ship the
effect of Faith, must needs be an effect of righteousness; the cause of the
cause, is the cause of the effect, and by the same reason adoption is not an
higher title then the righteousness of Christ, it is founded in it. Our life
was the hire and wages of Christ, our sureties obedience. There Is as well grace
and favor in the obedience of Christ, and justification, as in adoption and
life: all are of free grace, justice and grace are both in Justification 3.
Romans 24. etc.

Concl. 6. That satisfaction which Christ made to the justice of God, and
thereby procured remission of sins (or perfect righteousness; and
reconciliation with God for those that believe, consists only in that obedience
of his, which be performed to that peculiar and special Law of mediation,
which God imposed upon him, which we commonly, though perhaps not so properly
call his passive obedience, and not at all in that subjection which he
exhibited to that common law of nature, which we call Moral.

1. Remission of sins, and perfect righteousness are not the same, they
differ in the cause and effect, as Mr. Gat. and we before have showed.

Reconciliation, though it infoldeth remission of sins, is of a larger extent
then remission. It contains slaughter of enmity simply, between us and God,
and positive amity that which is perfect in regard of Christ's righteousness
imputed, as well as what is inherent according to its degree.

I confess Christ's satisfaction does consist only in that obedience of his
which he performed to the Law of mediation, imposed on him by God, and that was
our whole debt, which was not only death, but obedience to the Moral Law. We
owe unto God perfect obedience, our surety must satisfy that; death excluding
obedience was not sat is, it is an ingredient absolutely necessary to cause
death to be propitiatory or satisfactory. You call obedience to the Moral Law,
the common law of nature: Nature owes it then, it must be paid by our surety,
or it is not satis.

The whole humiliation of Christ, beginning at his conception continued to
death, consummated in death, was what was due, what was imposed, what was
performed; our nature, holiness and righteousness of nature and life; his
whole subjection to the Law, were all due by that law of Mediation; and that
was as large as our debt to the Moral Law, the fullfilling of it: deny this,
there is no fullfilling the Law of a Mediator, no satisfaction. As for Christ's
obedience to the Law for his own life, it is vain, seeing he was perfectly
living from the first moment of his conception.

Your reason, because nothing can be satisfactory for sin to divine justice,
but what is penal; without bloodshedding there is no remission nor satisfaction.

1. I grant without blood shedding there is no remission nor satisfaction:

2. And nothing can be satisfactory but what is penal, so was Christ's whole
exinanition and obedience penal laid on him, and submitted unto as our surety,
for us.

3. satisfaction for sin is but a part, justice requires the whole debt, and
that must be and is where there is complete satisfaction; your self hold that
active obedience an essential requisite to make sufferings effectual.

The obedience or subjection of Christ to the Moral Law was no ways penal to
him, 1. it could not be in respect of his Godhead, it not being passive, 2. not
to his humane nature, because it was required of him in innocenty, imposedon
Adam before his fall, and ever lies on man, and Angels, and Jesus Christ now
glorified; love the fullfilling of the Law never falls away. To make
obedience to the Moral Law penal, is to affirm man was punished by order
from God, before his fall, and that the glorified Saints, Angels, and Christ,
are now punished in heaven.

1. What was imposed by God before the fall and ever lies on man, lies on
man, never falls away: the fullfilling of the Law is his debt then, by an
eternal Law, and must be answered by a man's self or Mediator. It being
impossible to man our surety must make satisfaction.

2. Subjection of Christ to the Moral Law, he being our surety, that our debt,
must needs be penal to him; so was his being man, and making under the Law,
Gal. 4. It was necessary for our Redemption, who were under the Law, and to our
receiving the adoption of sons. It was his humiliation and emptying of
himself; his being in form of a servant, his poverty, the person was thereby
abased.

Neither was he bound to be Man for himself, or to obey for himself, but us,
the children by predestination being partakers of flesh and blood, those that
were given to him from eternity to give life unto, sinning occasioned his
Incarnation, etc. neither was it needful for himself to obey being Man, that
he might live when as he lived from the first moment of conception.

So that though it be not penal simply, and to all it must be confessed so to
Jesus Christ our surety.

Besides Christ our surety, In vita passivam habuit actionem, and in morte
passionem activam dum salutem operareter in medio terrae, as Gerhard out of
Bernard. In passione summus amor Dei and ardentissima, erga genus humanum
dilectio patientia obedientia, humilitas, fiducia, invocatie, spes; and damnati
patiendo satisfaciunt Legi si Christus us patiendo: that is only by sufferings,
excluding his obedience to Gods Laws. His death was obedince, Sponte enim
Christus oppetiit pro nobis mortem -- quia and voluntati patris etiam obediens
esse, and salutem mun di perficere summo desiderio volut, cui voluntati? au
generali tantum, qua omnis creatura rationalis, tenetur? imo comprimis
singulari sibi impositae, ut vitam poneret pro ^vibus suis. Verusque voluntatis
obsequium morte prestitit. Generalem legem moriendo pro nobis caritate summa
implevit. Nulla enim charitas major quam dare vitam pro amiois, ne dum pro
inimicis quod fecit Christus. Charitas vera est impletio Legis, etc see Pareus
on Romans 5. 19. p. 372. Vniversa Christi vita quid fuit, nisi perpetua quaedam
passio quam morte tandem consammavit pro nobis. ib. See him after in dub. 7.
Deinde in passione etc. sedet (...) totius Legis Mosaicae impletio
deprehenditur, charitate -- precepta moralia implevit p. 399. amplius quam
nudam satisfactionem reperiemus in (...) filii Dei tanta cum alacritate
persoluto ib. p. 400.

You go on. Scriptures ascribe not this satisfaction we speak of nor any part
or degree of it to the holiness, innocence, or active obedience of Christ:
but still to his passive.

The Scripture gives it to Christ's subjection to the Law, Gal. 4. to his
obedience, Romans 5. 19. obedience from the moment of his Incarnation unto his
death and these are confessedly absolutely necessary to the constitution of him
our Priest, and his sacrifice propitiatory, essential requisites.

Places which mention his passive obedience, exclude not, but include his
righteousness, by a synecdoche, as Calvin and other reformed writers, of which
before they may not be separated also before.

Concl. 7. If Christ had fullfilled and kept the Law for us, in our stead, till
the u^most period of his life, there had been no oceasion or necessity of dying
for us; there is no light clearer thou this.

1. Sir you say you see. 2. Both death and obedience were our debt, and are
necessary to our surety.

Could a believer be supposed perfectly, personally righteous doing this, it
were insufficient, in himself, in his surety, the debt being larger, and so
for death.

You say. If we stand before God by virtue of the perfect obedience of Christ's
life imputed unto us as righteousness, etc. perfectly righteous; we are no more
obnoxians to the curse of the Law, and so have no need of satisfaction to
divine justice, nor of any remission of sins in his blood, there needs no
more to a perfect justification, then a perfect righteousness, and a perfect
fullfilling of the Law.

1. If there need no more, how say you it is unnecessary? and how can you give
us a perfect justification without a perfect righteousness?

Our perfect righteousness by the righteousness of Christ imputed, includes
Christ's passive obedience, they must not be nor are severed by us; death and
obedience are our debt, our surety satisfied by both, and was insufficient.

This the Apostle clearly lays down, Gal. 2. 21. I frighteousnesse be by the
Law whether performed by our selves, or another for us, (for there is the same
reason in justification) then Christ dyed in vain.

You must prove your interpretation, it is expressly against as what is said, for
the Articles of Ireland and our Doctrine of Justification, it is true of legal
righteousness personal, not by our sureties; righteousness is necessary to
justification as your self seemed to say but now; if not our own, another,
our suretie's Christ's, in which St. Paul would be found, not having his own
exclude this you put Justification without justice; justification of the unjust
there is no middle.

To your Objection of Piscator, I oppose his opponents Lutherans and Calvinists
and to Mr. Gataker Lucius and Gom. the S^riptures, your selves, who make what
Christ was bound unto lege mediatoria, necessary, which was his whole humility
from, or obedience begun in his incarnation continued to his death, as
Paraeus. I oppose the Doctrine of England and Ireland, and am ready to examine
any of your reasons; and I must tell you none of these are for faith in a
proper sense: nor deny, but teach the imputation of the righteousne of Christ
as Paraeus, which you do not with Mr. Wot. Arminius and Socinus.

Concl 8. The union and communion which true believers have with Christ does no
wise require or suppose such imputation of his righteousness to them as is
conceived.

Union and communion with Christ simply does not suppose that imputation: but
union and communion with Christ's righteousness to justification, there must be
in order of nature giving and receiving to union and communion, and so
Justification. When you add.

That union and communion which the Wise has with the Husband, does not
require that whatsoever he husband does should be imputed to the wise; or that
the wife should be reputed to have whatsoever the husband has; she is not
reputed wise, because the husband is wise, nor honesty, which he may have, and
she be loose and false.

I answer 1. There Is no simile that runs on all four feet omne simile est
dissimile.

2. It follows not from dissimilitude, in husband and wise: that it is so in
our union with Christ:

The Scripture says, Christ, is made unto believers of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption and that by union; and by his
obedience we are constituted righteous: and that the members of Christ are
conformed to their head: men and women may have fools to husbands and wives,
and dishonest, and be so denominated thence; Christ has no such members.

3. Our husband

3. Our husband is our Savior, by way of surety, as a surety he dyed and obeyed
for us, by union we have Neque vero ^bsurdum vide 1 debet nos justitia illa
quae Christi est subjective, tanquam aliena justificari cum ita sit aliena ut
etiam sit nostra imputatione, pro nobis praestita and a Deo tan nostra a^c
epta, quemadmodum fidei jussoris pro debitore solutionem, perinde recipite
editor, ac si debtor ipse eam secissec, and quod est p^oprium capitis Christi
jure communications reli quo corpopi, id ^^ Ecclesiae, and singulis membris
tirbuiter, Iunius p. 13.
communion with his death, and obedience to our Justification,

You demand, Whether Christ's soul and body must needs be imputed to them,
because believing they have union with them, wisdom, power and glory also: so
that they are esteemed of God as wise, as powerful as glorious as himself.

And I answer, we say not whatsoever believers need neither bodies nor souls;
they are, though in state of condemnation; we speak of righteousness to
justificaon. We read of imputation of righteousness, and that Christ's, seeing
by it, (we read also) we are constituted righteous.

Our union is made good by these particulars. 1. That by it we are members of
that body whereof he is head. 2. That we are partakers of the same spirit; have
fellowship in the same fruits of the spirit with him. 4. That we have part in
Redemptionpurchased. 5. Special interest in his wisdom, power, and other
perfections of his person. 6. Complete title to that immortal inheritance,
reserved in the heavens. 7. Communionwith God himself and communion one with
another. Whence to deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness, is no more to
deny or obscure their union, then to deny the miracles Christ wrought, are
imputed to us, or that to deny a man sees with his hands, or hears with his
heels, is a denying the members of the same body to have union with the head.

I deny that there is the same reason of imputation of Christ's miracles, and his
righteousness, from our union with him, or of seeing with hands, or hearing
with heels, from union of members with the head, and imputation of Christ's
righteousness our head in union, etc. This is but a cunning or rather palpable
puddling of a clear stream, for your own evasion, and it is observed to be
your manner. I cannot see with my hands, in your sense, nor hear with my
heels; neither need I hands to see; nor heels to hear. I can be righteous
with the righteousness of Christ. It Is necessary absolutely, that I may be so
perfectly.

How richly soever you be clothed else. I profess my self naked, and have
absolute necessity of the robes of Christ's righteousness, to cover my
nakedness. It Is what I owe. My Saviors, my sureties: payment for my freedom in
necessity. God made him righteousness to me, and I am constituted righteous by
his obedience. God never made mine hands eyes to me nor heels ears, neither
by one or other am I constituted, seeing or hearing. So miracles are not my
debt.

And though the one follow not from the other; yet from what you grant by union
and communion I question not but I shall deduce by divine or Scripture-Logicke
participation of righteousness to justification.

1. From the first, that by union I am a member of the body, whereof Christ is
the head.

2. I am a member of Christ mine head. 2. and complete in him, which cannot be
for righteousness, but by his, no justification; without that, no pardon. I
may believe it seeing his righteousness was for me: and the word is, by it I
am constituted righteous.

3. You say, we are partakers of the same spirit. Then is our union real,
revera, and not metaphorical only.

The work of the spirit of my God, and in the name of Christ, is washing,
that is a general sanctification; both parts; and justification, the Spirit
applies Christ and his righteousness, puts on me the best robe, and inableth
me by faith to cooperate, thereunto to apply the same.

3. Part in redemption, enfoldeth part in Christ's ransom or payment of my
debt, my debt being death and perfect obedience, require answerable death and
obedience; death is insufficient without this essential requisite, I have a
necessity of this righteousness then to this freedom.

5. If by union I have special interest in his wisdom and power too, and
other perfections, why not in his righteousness? It Is a perfection most
necessary.

6. If I have complete title to that immortal inheritance reserved in the
heavens; have I no title to that by which adoption and pardon? I and Christ's
righteousness by which I live; by which I am perfectly like God. Is it not the
righteousness of Faith, that which we are heirs of, as well as of glory?

7. If I have communion with God himself, and his Love, have I not it in pardon
and justification, and righteousness, by which? is not giving of Christ's
righteousness or imputation thereof, his making me wholly fair, white as snow,
and whiter, which is by the fairness and beauty, or righteousness of Christ?
Is not his Covenant everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. and his gift Christ's
righteousness the righteousness of Faith, given by God, received by faith:
does not he by the obedience of one (becoming our God) constitute us
righteous? these seem so to me; do you consider the matter a second time.

Concl. 9. The sin of Adam is no where in Scripture said to be imputed to
Adams posterity; neither can any other imputation berof, be proved either by
Scripture or reason, then the which stands either in a communion of all his
posterity with him therein (except Christ) in a propitiation of his nature
defiled therewith, or lastly, in the punishment, that is come upon the world by
it, etc.

Do you not see how you speak that which fights with it self! If it does no
where, how in such a sense? if in such a sense, how no where?

And why shall not all the posterity be granted, constituted sinners by an act
of Justice imputing unto them the sin of Adam; when as by the same justice
there is an act punishing for that sin, such you confess and such is that
defilement, whence we are formally sinners; can justice impute the effect and
not the cause? is it not spiritual death for sin?

When as all were in his loins, it was the sin of all which act of Adam
passing, our s^lves not existing can no other ways be in the judgment of the
learned Protestant and Papists too sometimes) but by imputation, that is the
manner when as it is communicated by generation.

Adam (says Bell for BP. Dounham cites him and both give you an instance of
mine assertion) alone did indeed commit that sin by actual will, but to us
it is communicated by generation: In that manner which that which is passing
can be imputed, by imputation, for it is imputed unto all: Eomodo quo
communica^i potest is vod transi^^, nim^^um per imputationem omni^^ enim
imputatur.
for it is imputed to all who are borne of Adam, because we all being then in
the loins of Adam, when we sinned in him, and by him we sinned. Yea and
further he rightly disputes says that Bishop, that if Adam's sin were not
ours by imputation, neither the guilt of u, nor the corruption following upon
it had belonged to us, de justi. li. 4 c. 10. vise. which I touched even now,
and remember it touched twice before. I may not abuse the Reader by writing
over and over the same things: See Ans. to your last Reason. etc.

Concl. ^0. Though justification and salvation came into the world by Christ,
the second Adam, as condemnation and death by the first, yet there are many
different considerations and circumstances between their commings in.

Grant this, yet when as the Apostle affirms the one and the other; and when
as he shows agreement in this, that as by the disobedience of one many are
made sinners, so by the obedience of one many are made righteous, which is all
we contend for, both which being by acts transient, communicated to men, not
then, but after existent, the orthodox expressure has been, that the manner is
imputation. For the first Adams disobedience, and the seconds righteousness.

The differences you mention out of the 15. and 16. of the 8. of the Romans,
concern not our question. And for the rest:

1. The act of Adam was the act of the nature of his posterity not existent,
existence was future, and imputation future, yet both to be by Gods decree, in
and by propagation; and then it was theirs actually.

The obediences of Christ, etc were the acts and sufferings of us, that were
given Christ, and might be so called not personal acts or we existent, but as
we were to be in time; they were to be ours by imputation in Gods purpose and
Christ's intention by union and communion with Christ in effectual call: as
Adam was a root, Christ was a surety both in Gods purpose; either did, for
others. Adam for his posterity, Christ for the children given unto him in Gods
eternal bargain: as we are dead and risen with Christ, we may be said to have
done and dyed, seeing the whole poverty was for us.

2. As Adam brought condemnation to those who were in his loins, and had a
being natural in him, being in time to exist by propagation from him.

So Christ's salvation to such as were his children in the purpose of God, in
that relation, as well as others his body, bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, and so in his loins, to be spiritually* actually by faith in time,
though also to be first Adams, aliens and enemies.

3. As all the posterity of Adam had their being at once in Adam: so had all in
Christ in Gods purpose as Came existed first and then ^udas so might one first,
and another after be in Christ notwithstanding.

4. As Adams was active, so Christ's, active in his passion, and passive in his
action.

5. As the burden of condemnation by the sin of Adam depended on the merit
and relation of those that were condemned by him, videlicet in Gods purpose, as
future and to be in act by propagation.

So that weight of our redemption, depended on the merit of Christ, and
relation future by Gods purpose; in act by faith, to be in time, by which
Christ and his merits and benefits are mine, without which actual application
the worth of what was done and suffered, were to no effect.

To that sin of Adam, eating the forbidden fruit, the Lord threatened death,
and it merited the same; so the smallest sin does, as the satisfaction of
Christ did life; and that we might enjoy it, there must be relation founded in
union and communion between us and Christ without which how great soever the
merit, the profit to Peter would have been no more then unto ^udas.

We deny not but the Scriptures give our justification and salvation to the
sake of Christ: we assent also that speaking of our death, by one that is Adams
sin (though the words for his sake, are not found) yet (the wages of sin
being death.) It Is equivalent with his sins sake, denoting its merit; there is
equipollent speech; and judge whether the Apostle does not so lay them down,
Romans 5. 19. and there is a necessary implication of the merit of the sin of
Adam; that mediated by way of merit this condemnation, the wages of sin is
death; and cursed is every one that abides not in all the Commandments of
God: And he that does these things is worthy of death, are the measure of those
by one, etc. and through the offense of one and were it not a meritorious
cause, the Lord must be charged with injustice.

Whereas you lessening the offensivenesse of this sin of Adam, put a note on
that word (...), as if the offensivenesse of that sin, and heights of its
merit were not intended: and to denote that it was a sinful stumbling, or
miscarriage, not out of envy, malice, sinister end, etc. maine aggravations,
and raysings of the height of it: but out of inconsiderateness, incogitancie,
a root of the least bitterness, or provocation from whence it is lightly
possible to spring.

For my part I never feared such Doctrine: And 1. from that word it will not
follow (it the speaking of God in the Word be the rule) I find that word used
for sins of all sorts, the greatest and most heinous, which are forgiven by
the Lord. It Is used 5. Romans 10. the free gift is of many offenses to
justification: And 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ, etc. not imputing (...)
etc. I suppose in these and other places, not meant such sins as you mention
alone, but what are of the highest nature; the stumbling and fall of the Jews,
which had aggravations of the highest nature, are set forth by that word, 11.
Romans 11. etc.

Whosoever shall consider the state in which Adam was created, the God and
goodness against whom he sinned; the confessed effects, sins, simply else,
of nature, of life all men's deprivation of Gods image and through deprivation
in nature and life; from the relics whereof we are not freed till death it
self, with the deaths which attend on the same, will be far from lessening
this sin its demerit. There are that call it omnium gravissi^um, and that
except none but that against the Holy Ghost, as our Dr Whitaker. So that had
there been more relations all that can* be imagined: there must be also and was
the heynousnesse of the crime demeriting.

That which he first called offense here, he calls disobedience, Quod prius
vocave^at, (...) lapsum hic vo at (...) n Obedientiam iPrimi hominis. Sic
Gravitatem ejus peccat^xaggerat, tantum fuisseimmune*, ut haud mirum si omnes
suo^eath involverit, foeditate inquinare. In obed* entia enim vix aliud
nefasgravius datur in Dei conspectuquasi peccatum ariolandrest rebel lio et
^uasi sce^us idololatriae est repugnantia, Inquit Samuel 1. 21 23. Paraeus in
18. 19.
so he amplifyeth the greatness of that sin, intimating it so great, that it
was no wonder that it involved all in its guilt, polluted then with filth: for
there is scarcely a more grievous sin, as the sin of witch craft, so is
rebellion, as Idolatry, ^aith Samuel, 1 Samuel 11. 23.

It grieveth us not that there is such an abundance given to Christ* we glory
in it. And yet say the Lord saw this a sufficient remedy for that disease, and
those that came by it: and the disease is not lessened but intended by the
greatness of Christ's merits.

And though Adams fall was by a permissive decree of God yet was the effect
infallible. The execution whereof in his fall was supposed, in the manifestation
of Gods love in Christ, and in the purpose of God foreordaining him a Lamb, to
take away sins; That sin; and the consequences, thereof: all which set
forth the hamousnesse of this sin. Neither is it extenuated by the freeness
of Adam.

And I leave to the Readers consideration, whether though you profess the
contrary; you do not grossly extenuate the demerit and guilt of Adams sin.
And the invalidity you plead, is not against us, but the Apostle who tells us
there is an agreement.

Conclu. 11. That which makes a true lively faith instrument all in
Justification, is nothing that is essential or natural unto it; Whether
descent pr^perly or act. But somewhat that is extrinsecall and purely
adventitious. The force and ^fficacy of that will, good pleasure, ordination,
covenant, and appointment of God in that behalf.

Therefore its unquestionably evident, that Faith does not justify as it
relates to Christ: or as it apprehends him, Or Redemption by him,

In this illation you show yourselfe in opposition to all Protestants as
before. Who teach that Faith justifies in relation to the Object, and that as
an instrument apprehending and applying Christ and his righteousness, and
join with Papists and Arminians, as before.

The reason you give Gods ordination, is no reason; we grant Gods will and the
nature of Faith are not opposite but subordinate. Gods will is our
Justification by Faith that which has of its nature embracing laying hold of
receiving Christ and his righteousness; causing union and communion with him;
from whence this righteusnesse and Justification is received and remission, of,
sins. The will of God is by this Faith to justify. When God called Aaron to
be an high Priest, he thereby fitted him with all requisites. And so when God
ordained faith, it was such a Faith.

Neither is there fear if faith should justify by receiving or applying the
Object, that it should do it for the dignity thereof.

Faiths receiving flying for refuge to Christ, is the greatest argument denying
the dignity thereof and demonstration of indigency and emtynesse at home, and
is withal, most advancing and extolling the righteousness of Christ.

In that text Judge. 6. 40. Gods will establishes this Faith. And thereby it
carries Justification by receiving and applying it, as the water of ^ordan did
cleanse the Leprosy of Namaan, by Gods pleasure, so this receiving faith
justifies before all other. You say,

When causes have a natural power to produce their effects its improper if not
ridiculous. To ascribe such effects to the will and pleasure of God.

But it is ridiculous, to say so; seeing Gods will is the cause of nature, and
the properties thereof. It Is the will of God by patience to make men patient,
humility to make men humble. By natural causes to produce natural effects.
You confess it a truth, and when as therefore you deny it the savor or weight
of truth. You deny in your self a right savor of truth, And show your
judgment a false, balance against concession, denying it weight of truth, The
holy Ghost leading into all truth: savoureth all truth, and gives to all its
due weight.

Joh. 1. 12, might be added, where God to those that received Christ, that is
believed in him, gave the power and prerogative to be his Sons: and by virtue
of that decree really made them such on believing. Which shows believing in
Christ as such does, not make a son of God, but receives this power by special
gift.

Faith then by a power it receives of Gods gift, does this; so does patience
by a power and humility, by a power received, make patient and humble. So fire
burns by a power given to it. And so every natural agent produces its
effect. Faith puts on Christ, and his condition of a son, it makes us
Christ's and Abraham's seed, we are all the sons of God by Faith in Jesus
Christ. God gives it that power, that strength and power to receive, and so to
justify.

Gods grace and Christ and Faith and Gods justice the declaration of it are
subordinate from the position of on you put all, and deny none, not faith
receiving or applying the Object. You add,

Neither is that Plea so frequently insisted on* that Faith justifies in
relation to the object, or as it receives and apprehends Christ
righteousness of any value if duly considered; the strength of it is usually
bound up in that similitude, as the haud is said to enrich a man because it
receives the money or treasure whereby it is enriched, so faith because it
receives Christ who is our righteousness; and by whom we are justified.

You confess this frequently insisted on it is so by Protestants against
Papists. I have showed the one and other by all Protestants let the world see
how these are of your opinion, for faith in a proper sense; but what say you
against it?

I answer its not the taking of the Silver or Gold that inrich^th, a man may
not be the richer, but the poorer receiving gold not by law, as a thief
breaking into an house taking it away, or purses it makes rich by a Law; so
there must be a law that faith receiving should be a man's righteousness or
justification.

All this is not to the purpose, for faith receiving Christ and his
righteousness to justification (not being his righteousness or justification
as you love to speak, not we) is what we have Gods command for, calling us to
come unto him, to receive him and Sir receiving riches is that by which as an
isntrumental action I am enriched, the riches make rich received and so our
Lord Christ's righteousness, your case is where there is no law, ours has
command and promise for it. Yet to explain your self. You desire,

When I deny faith justifies in it is relation to it is Object, or as it lays
hold on Christ, I am far from conceiving any faith should justify, but that
only which lays hold on Christ; yea I grant and verily believe that whereas
there be very many acts of Faith, else yet that decree of good pleasure of God
(which I conceive makes faith justifying concurres with it, toward this great
effect only in that act of laying hold on Christ. Only this I deny that this
act of faitth whereby it receives or lays ^old on Christ has that in the
nature or inherently in it or any other ways then from the will and good
pleasure of God which makes it available to justification.

This grants that it has it in its nature from the will of God, then by the
will of God it does it; It Is nature being* to lay hold on the Object: we never
opposed the will of God, but suppose it.

And though you grant it, yet, would you speak out we should find you grant
not that faith as an instrument does it, laying hold on Christ's righteousness,
by which applied I am just. You will leave the object and rest in faith which
by gracious acceptance is a righteousness which God will own as before, p. 84.
of 1. Treat, Argu. 5. c. 6. my Answer.

Conclu: 12. It has no foundatian either in scripture or reason to say that
Christ by any imputation of ^in was made formally a sinner: Nor that sin in
any other sense should be said to be imputed then as the punishment due was
inflicted on him. And so we are not made formally righteous by any
righteousness of Christ imputed. This has been partly argued.

And its given in with both hands by the chief Masters of that way which we
oppose. Doctor Downham. c. 19. p. 1. 2. and p. 4. Davenant de justit. inher. c.
24. p. 33. id. p^. 333.

1. I answer, formally properly taken is by sin inherent in Christ, this you
deny; so do our Doctors, so imputation of our sins does not make Christ a
sinner.

2. What is added, nor that sin in any other so^se should be said to be
imputed, when as the punishment due was inflicted; is but begged. Ours show an
imputation of sin, whence guilt and punishment, sins, were inherent in us
only. Laid on Christ by imputation as our surety, and thence his punishment.

3. When as you add so we are not made formally righteous by any
righteousness of Christ. It Is granted taking formally for inherently. It Is
inherent in Christ, its imputed and given us, so that it constituteh us
righteous, and supplyeth the place of a form, which externalls do and may,
and so denominate; as elsewhere, out of Doctor Davenant is clearly explayned
The righteousness of Christ is the matter, that applied or imputed supplyeth
the form, constituteth he was made sin that know no sin, that ^e might be
made the righteousness of God in him. But ^o this sufficiently before.

When as you cite Bish. Dow^ham you read this his Tenet, and he repeateth it
often times, as is known, that Christ was not only hostia, but a sinner by
imputation.

And Bish. Davenant denies your consequence there, and else where fully
explaineth himself in this business, to which I remit you, p. 367. secundus
locus, etc. and 368.

That these were chief Masters of that way of imputation; might teach you they
were more learned then to contradict themselves.

They were prime Doctors in their times, maintainers of the Doctrine of our
Church and all Protestants in this point of Justification, and you have never I
believe, never shall find any but Papists opposing themselves to them.

In this question, which yet here you do without making bones of it, and are
but an alone man. 13. Con: That no man is indeed a person justified in the
sight of God, until he obtaines this grace by believing.

With this Conclusion for my part I have no controversy, and therefore pass
further examination of any thing about it.

The purpose is eternal, the act is in time, on call to Faith and fellowship
with Jesus Christ, whence communion with his righteousness and Justification,
as I conceive.

14. Conclu: The sentence or curse of the Law was not properly executed on
Christ in his death, but his death was a ground or consideration unto God,
whereupon to dispense with his Laws, and to let fall the execution or suspend
the penalty or curse therein threatened because the curse was bent on
transgressors, not innocents as Christ.

If by properly you mean for his personal sins, and that in that name he
was no transgressor, I will grant both. He was a sinner by the imputation of
our sins, as our surety he had them said on him, and was accursed, what the Law
threatened, curse and death, he endured he died for us, and was accursed, so
the word, and on this ^issueth our freedom from death; and the curse; this I
am sure God did, and intended; seeing he was ordained ^efor the foundation of
the World, a Lamb; the price of our Redemption, its called Gods will, Christ
came to do it, and he was made under the Law to redeem those that are under
the law* you confess it the curse of the Law, i^curred by us which ^ur surety,
ought to suffer, and your self say, that he ^uffered was of the same nature,
and kind with those things which God intended by the curse of the Law.

For the body of penalties which you deny he suffered. I know not but its
comprised in those terms accursed, and death. I suppose those comprise the
whole system; the word says it was an atonement, that it was a sweet favor to
God, that it declared God just in justifying.

And until I comprehend his suffering fully who was a man of sorrow like to
whose sorrows there were never sorrows, I will not make them less then Gods
law.

I suppose the law was executed on him according to Gods eternal purpose as
our surety and that it was executed on him, that it might not be executed on
us: and must have been executed on him that it might not be executed on us. You
say,

Neither dia God require the death and sufferings of Christ as a valuable
consideration, whereon to dispense with his law, toward those that believe,
more (if so much in a way of satisfaction, to his justice then in wisdom; for
God might with as much justice have passed by the transgression of his Law
without consideration or satisfaction.

1. Christ's death was required, it was required as a valuable consideration on
which there was no execution on believers. It was in satisfaction of Gods
justice and wisdom. It was according to his wise will whereby Christ was
ordained a Lamb, it was to declare his righteousness, that he might be just
and a justifier, and both infinite. It Is too curious to inquire or determine
whether it were rather wisdom then Justice. It savoureth of one that would
willingly deny Christ's satisfaction to justice: so does that reasoning from
man, I find the same spoken In Deo esse justitiam essentialem punientem peccata
necessario p. 12, 13. etc.
out by, Socinus de Christo servat. l. I. c. 1. see Sybrandus examining this.
See Peltius his harmonia, where Soc. and Remonstrants agree in this, that there
is not essential justice in God punishing sin necessarily.

I guess it the rather because there is a bringing in of testimony that if God
had pleased he might have pardoned Adams sin without atonement by the death
of Christ, which is but a supposition and that of a will in God then
undetermined, indifferent against what is evidently otherwise revealed, and
that to be so determined from eternity, nay of an indifferent will even after
Adams fall: Iam confirmed Nec necesse fuit, ut Christus morte sua justitiae de^
pro nost is peccatis satisfaceret, sed Deus absque satisfactione Christi
peccata nobis potuit condonare, see S^ci.
from the inference, therefore it had bin no way contrary to the lustice of God
nor dergatory to the glory of it: if be had freely pardoned it without any
consideration of atonement in any concept. Neither was it necessary that
Christ by his death should satisfy the Justice of God for our sins, but God
without the satisfaction of Christ could forgive us our sins. It could not be
because Gods decree was Justification by the blood of Christ and to declare his
righteousness, 3 Romans 25, 26.

And that the satisfaction of Christ is agreeable to that nature in God which
we call Justice, agreeable to and what we call see Socinus, etc. do deny it,
and that it had been but a loss of opportunity of declaring it to the World,
yet had done nothing repugnant to it, and so you subscribe; no marveile you
wave the curse of the Laws execution on Christ properly in the beginning.

Its well in wisdom God could not; as if Gods wisdom and justice were at
odds, and that in the Apostles Judgment, who established Gods declaration of
Justice in Justification by the blood of Christ, as if infinite wisddome was
not seen in that sweet agreement, between the mercy and Justice of God in our
Justification by Jesus Christ.

I am of opinion that God in the law required of Christ (voluntarily
undertaking our suretiship) the suffering of what he suffered, and those
things, he suffered were the same the Law threatened, and we should have
suffered our selves in value, and importance and the kind comprised under the
words death and curse. And thus for your Conclusions.

CHAP. III. DISTINCTIONS.
DID. 1.

Justification, 1. active, signifies that act of God whereby he justifyeth, 1.
absolveth a believing sinner from guili and punishment.

Here Is to be supposed his making him just by the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ whence ab^o^ution as the effect thereof; you often call
it just making.

It may signify also in this active signification any act of any efficient --
yea to this may be reser^ed the act of the form ^n formal cause it self,
which a so in a way proper to it way be said to justify.

Consider if the form of justification be remission of sins, then remission
of sins works justification, and so is in order of nature before it: and so
remission of sins absolvech a believer from the guilt of, and punishment due
unto his sins, and so is the cause of it self; the cause and the effect also.

2. That which is passive, is the effect. The former is of God, this of man who
is justified.

DID. 2. Of Justice, has these Distinctions. It signifies,

1. The universal and absolute holiness and integrity of his nature, making him
infinitely averse from doing any thing contrary to the rules of justice, and
inclines him only to do things agreeable thereunto, 11. Ps. 7.

2. Sometimes the nature of God we call truth, or faithfulness in keeping
promise, 36. Ps. 6 6. He. 10. 1. Joh. 1. 9.

3. That gracious disposition to his people, whereby he is still propense to
do them good, relieve, support deliver, psh. 145. 7.

4. The gracious purpose of God, for for giving, saving faith in due time, 2
Pet, 1. 1.

5. Most concerning our question, by the righteousness of God is meant that
justification, way, method, or means of Justification whereby God makes men
righteous 5. To. 21. so 1. Rom, 17. 10. Romans 3. by righteousness of God is
meant Justification, or way of making men righteous, which Gods wisdom has
found out.

6. Sometimes I conceive it may well betaken for Gods severity to punish, 3. To.
25. 26. that he might appear a severe judge and punisher of sin.

7. Christ sometimes seems to be called the righteousness of God. 42. Ies.
21. 51. les. 8. because he is the great author of that righteousness or
Justification which God vouchsafes to the world.

Ult. The society of those that are made righteous by GOD through Christ, are
called the righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

^. I know not but Gods holiness and righteousness are distinct attributes, nor
how righteousness should be defined by holiness

1. I grant it making his nature adverse to what is contrary to rules of
Justice, his will and revelation of it in his word.

Inclination to do things agreeable, your text is more, he loves; it is what he
does with delight.

2. The second is granted for faithfulness, but does it respect only
promises and not threats?

3. The 3 has no difference from the former, for doing good and delivering his
people are his promise.

4. And so is that of giving faith his promise to Christ to Abraham, under the
head of blessedness, coming, calling, gathering, saving.

Though in that place it seems more fitly to mean the righteousness of
Christ see Bish. Downham; who to that purpose cites this Text, where (says
he) it is called the righteousness of God, and our Sav tour Jesus Christ
which is an excellent testimony to prove the deity of our Savior like to that,
2. Tit. 13. for it is not said of God and our Savior as noting two Persons,
but (...) of God and our Savior betokening one, 2. because it is that very
righteousness of God whereof the Apostle speaks in the places now mentioned, 1
Romans 17. 3. 21. 10, 3. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

The righteousness of that per son who is God, l. 4. c. 2. p. 2.

And so you see, there is no difference between this and the last place, nether
is their meant Justification, but the righteousness of Christ the mediator the
only way and means, by which God makes men just; this is that the Lords
wisdom found out to declare his righteousnesle, and which is revealed in the
Gospel, of those texts, see the Author and place before named.

And therefore is he called, our right ousnesse, because we are made righteous
by his obedience, 5 Rom 19, and so in that, 2 Cor. 5. ult.

For your sixth it denotes his just will to punish sin and punishing
thereof, that place proves it, 3. Romans 26. 27. when Christ is set forth a
propitiation in blood, to declare Gods righteousness, that he might be inst
and the Iustifier: by it God perfectly hates sin. Vengeance is his, and out of
Justice, he will repay it, 9. Heb. 30. It Is the just judgment of God, that
those that do such things are worthy of death 1. To 31. it is a righteous thing
with God to render affliction to them that afflict you, 2 These. 1.6.

2. This word, applied to men signifies sometimes that gener all frame of the
heart consisting of all holy disppositions and affecti^^s in some degree in
every child of God, Genesis 7. 1.

This I suppose confusion of righteousness and holiness, which are distinct
ordinarily in Scripture.

Noah's righteousness was the righteousness of faith, Christ's righteousness
applied by faith, and all so in regard of a gracious disposition of a soul
conforming him to Gods law and congruous motions, which are properly your
second signification, 10. Act. 3 5. and 1 Ioh. 3. 7.

3. Your 3. dealing equally with men; is the same, gtving every one what is his
own according to Gods law.

4. A fourth sense: Justification (in the passive sense) is sometimes by a
metony my of the cause for the effect, expressed by the word righteousness,
Galat. 2. 21. if righteousness, id est. Justification, so 10. To. 4. Christ
the end of the law for righteousness, i. Iustsfication, and for ver. 5. 5. To.
17, and 18. by one procurement of Justification, 8. Romans 4. 9. To. 30. 10.10.
1. Co. 1. 30. so 5. Romans 19. compared with 18. 21. to make righteous and to
justify is the same.

Here righteousness is acknowledged the cause of justification indeed, nothing
can make righteous but righteousness. They are distinct as cause and effect,
and though the cause being put the effect follows, or it is ordained to this
effect; Yet its not to be excluded, and I affirm this righteousness as that
which is imputed, 4. To. 6,11. so the righteousuesse of Christ, so Romans 10. 4.
Christ is the consummation of the Law, for righteousness to justification to
every one that believes, that is, applies it; so expressly in, 5. Romans 17,
18, 19. so 9. Romans 30. It was the righteousness of Christ which is of faith,
he was the Stone in which they believed, and were not ashamed: the Stone the
Jews stumbled at, of which they were ignorant, and submitted not to the
righteousness of God, So was Christ, and revealed in the Gospel.

You grant here the cause for the effect, now name any other righteousness but
Christ's; faith is not righteousness, though relatively, and as an instrument
it applies that righteousness and these are distinct as the Instrument and
the matter with which.

Remission of sins is not that righteousness, is the effect as your self
ponder these things.

5. Christ himself as the procuring cause is usually called the righteousness
of men, ^by an Ell^pfis 1. the Author or procurer of Justification or
righteousness Jere. 23, 6, 33. 16. so our hope our life our sanctification our
redemption.

Christ by his righteousness procured our Justification, it is the meritorious
cause, but not only, it is the matter and the Application of it constituteth,
ours show it against Papists as I have showed before, and shall hereafter.

6. By a metonymy of the cause for the effect, or antecedent for consequent, as
well the benefits and rewards os a ma^^ righteousness in the 1 and 3.
acception of the word, as the blessings and privileges which accompany that
righteousness which we have by the merits of Christ in our justification, are
sometimes expressed by the term righteousness, God will render unto man his
righteonsnes, 33. Job. 26. 112. p. 9. 5. Gal. 5.

I confess all those benefits and privileges infoulded, in the promise and
performance of this ighteousnes of Christ, supposing that so in the first
place: he shall pray unto God (that is man in affliction) the effect is, he
shall be favorable unto him, God shall forgive him. Per remissionem peccatorum
jamjam pro justo eum habens, imputata ei Christi ^^l^j sui justitia, ^. Merce^.
in loc.


Upon which he shall see his face with joy, for he will render unto man his
righteousness. By remission of sins by and by accounting him for just,
therighteousnesse of Christ his son being imputedunto him.

Your self say we have them by the merits of Christ, in our Justification, I
add impuced, made our's by Gods donation, our receiving. It his
righteousness, applied.

In the second pla e righteousness remains, not only consequents.

In the third: our hope, things hoped for are the effects of righteousness of
faith. Christ's righteousnefle applied by faith. Supposing that applied.

7. The word righteousness in some construction of words, has no precise or
proper signification distinct from the word, with which it is joined, but to
gether makes a sense of one and the same thing; thus imp^^ting righteousness,
Romans 4. 6. 11. imputing does not signify one thing, and righteousaes another,
but together they signify the same act of God, which w^ call free justifying,
so that to impute righteousnesis but freely to justify, and righteousness
imputed frec justification.

Righteousness is one thing, imputing another, Gods application or donation of
it, Justification a third; the effect: of righteousness applied. By Gods
imputation of Christ's righteousness the believer is justified; made righteous
and pardoned.

You in the fourth sense confesle them cause and effect. Ult. The word
righteousness according to the propriety of the hebrew tongue signifies a
company of righteous ones, etc. 2 Co. 5. 21. That we should be made the
righteousness of God in him, etc.

1. I confess that place of a company; we, all believers.

2. I deny that the word Righteousness signifies a company for then were it
not true of a single man.

And the abstract put for the Concrete, will be that we might be made a company
of righteous ones, which we accept, it will be by the righteousness of Christ,
for the text says in him, not in our selves but him.

DID. 3. Christ's Righteousness is of 2 Kinds, one Divines call justitia
personae: the other justitia meriti.

The terms Active and Passive, where in this Distinction is commonly
conceived, are not altogether so proper, because in that we call Passive,
Christ was in some sort active, willingly and freely submitting himself unto
it.

The righteousness of his person, is that whereby he justifies himself
only, his merit that where by he justifies others, the former consists
partly in the integrity of his nature partly in the obedience he performed to
the Moral Law, or that which is imposed upon all. The latter is that he
performed to the peculiar law of Mediation; as his submission to death, to
which he was bound as Mediator.

1. If Christ was active in his passion by voluntary submission. Look how you
asserting the passive, deny that which is Active, and dispute against it, and
exclude the imputation thereof.

They were interwoven from his incarnation to his Christus in vita passivam
hab^^^ actionera et in morte passione activam dum sa tem operaretur medio
terrae.
death.

2. For your Distinction, personae et meriti. Let me entreat you to make it
more clear to me, I cannot down with it as it is proposed.

I thought lustitia personae, had been the righteousness of Christ, God-man,
and that the righteousness of his merit, had been his meritorious
righteousness. Which is the righteousness of his person, of Christ God-man: and
can see no difference.

Whereas you say the righteousness of his person is that whereby he justifies
himself only. I answer he neither was so nor did so, for himself, he lived
and was comprehensor from the moment of his conception, needed it not for
himself.

We were bound to have that integrity and that obedience, he as our surety
was bound to yield it for us.

And do not you give as a concurrence, so merit to the active obedience of
Christ in the matter of our justification. How then shall it not be, justi^ia
meriti? And how shall it be for his Justificatio n alone I confess I
understand it not. And if so be that it was for himself it was due, and so not
meritorious, as you argue. And how shall it make Christ's death to be
marveilous? His death will be left insufficient, and we in our sins; either
this is true or it was for us, not for himself.

As for that obedience he was bound to the law of mediatorship^ it consists
in his whole poverty. When as being rich he became poor; to enrich us his
riches consisted in that glorious estate he had, being in the form of God,
equal with God; his poverty in taking our nature, the integrity of his nature
in regard of divine grace and the obedience he performed by it: and sufferings
simply, obedience even to the death of the cross, were all his poverty his
humiliation; when he took this, he as itwere emptyed himself, and became a
servant: the excellency of that nature by unction with the holy Ghost was but
poverty to his former rich estate and the Apostle says the end was our
enriching. When as you say.

He that maintains that Christ was bound by the mor all Law to die for the
sins of men, says in effect if he had not died he had bin a sinner.

1. Ianswer, put him our surety voluntarily ing^ging himself to pay our debt,
this being our debt, I question not but he was bound to it. You see a surety
is bound for that debt, and must to prison if he pay; not the surety, not
paying transgresses the law therein.

Paraeus makes Christ's death obedience to the Law, Bish. Davenant in that
place. If the righteousness of Christ Si justitia Christi satisfacient^^,
nostra fiat per impitationem cur non etiam justitia Christ, legen implentis.
satisfying be made ours by imputation; why not also the righteousness os
Christ fullfilling the law? How well he and B^. Downham and Paraeus agree with
you the world knows and I have in part manifested.

DID. 4. A thing may be said to be Imputed.

1. A Man's own acts good or evil, when as he without reward or punishment is
reputed the doer of them so Christ's Active and Passive obedience, to Christ,
and sins of believers ^o themselves and no others.

1. This is confessed not used in the Scriptures.

2. If this be so Christ did not obey for himself, his ife, which is your
doctrine, nor suffer sor glory your doctrine before, or Gods imputation is not
without blemish: seeing doings are not without reward, nor suffeing without a
return.

3. It crosleth the Scripture which lays his poverty ^own to make us rich. 4
Sins of believers are not so impued unto them, seeing some kind of punishments,
chasisements follow in all whom God does receive seeing ^hey are imputed to
Christ who satisfies for them.

These at first sight seem to be against this Distinction.

2 Doings good or evil may be said to be imputed to him then he is actually
rue arded or punished for them; or shall be in ^ime, unless some reasonable
and just occasion shall intervene to ^lter either of these purposes concerning
him.

Let this go, yet alteration in Gods purpose, is an ^arsh expression:
alteration in such as are good may ^ee supposed, and so such as are evil but
not in Gads ^urposed.

3. An other man's offense may be imputed to us, when ^ee are looked on as
Counselors, etc. or are punished as accessory and so good, when we are
conceived authors, teachers. True and both justly or unjustly as we are not
counselors, etc.

4. Hither refer your fourth upon mistake.

5. Wickedness or virtue of one, may be said to be imputed to others, when
they are either punished or rewarded, because of relation to that man. -- In
this sense (and in this only the sins of men may be imputed to Christ,
because he sufferea the things be did suffer in consideration of them, and
these sufferings to us because we are justified in consideration of them. But
that our's are reputed to him because he is reputed to have committed them, or
that his righteousness Active or Passive: should be there fore said to be
imputed to us, because we are repu ed by God to have done or suffe ed one or
other, has neither footing nor soundation in the Scripture or reason.

1- Virtue in one may be imputed to another in a bare relation, an other may
fare the better out of grace and bounty.

2. A bare relation is not enough for a just imputation of evil.

3. Our relation to Christ is not a bare one, he is one head, husband, Savior,
Redeemer, surety voluntarily, interposing himself between us and God,
undertaking our debt, satisfaction of God our actual justification and
salvation, the Lord graciously and righteously well pleased with the same.

4. Our surety bare not only our sorrows but our sins, and was a sinner, not
by committing them, (or inherently) but by imputation, there must be the
imputation of sin, else not of punishment: And both justly seeing he was in
this relation of a surety, and in bonds to God for us, God made him sin who
knew none, in this sense laid on him the ^^iquity of us all. Luther calls him
the greatest sinner.

And so his righ teousnesse active and passive are imputo us, by which we are
made just and acquitted. They are subjectively in him, but by Gods gift or
imputation ^o ours, as if our selves, and satisfied. We are found having his
righteousness, made righteous, made the righteousness of God in him, as we are
said to satifie when our surety does it so here. So that n^w we may be called
fullfillers of the Law, says our homile.

This is a Colewort often sodden, a Papists device manifested to be so out of
their Authors, discovered and defeated by ours before.

6. That may be said to be imputed to a man which essentially and directly,
conduces either to the benefit or punishment which accrueth to him from that,
which is more properly and immediately imputed to him, when the good deeds and
veriue or evil deeds, and the corruption whence are imputed suppose to Wife
and Children.

In this sense as well the habitual righteousness of Christ's person as
active obedience may be said to be imputed to believers, because these were
directly and essentially requisite to make his death and sufferings
Justification and life, and salvation to them. -- 2. Because its remote and
unusual, and has no maanner of countenance srom the Scripture. Piscator,
Paraeus, and other Orthodox Divines have simply denied all imputation of the
Active obedience of Christ, and the doctrine of justification would not at all
suffer, if the expression were laid aside.

For your doublesse and those Divines practice, Two or three have many
thousands against them and you, who show the contrary; I have read
Piscatorrecanted.

For Paraeus when as he puts Christ's humiliation from his incarnation to
his death, that which is imputed, cannot exclude the Active obedience of
Christ, indeed his passion was active. But I argue whatsoever isdirectly and
essentially, requisite to make thedeath of Christ Justification, and life and
salvation. That has countenance in the Scriptures, those divines cannot
reasonably deny. And if it were laid aside, would cause the doctrine of
Justification to suffer; destroy the very essence of it, nay Christ's death.

But both the habitual righteousness of Christ's person as well as his active
obedience are essentially and directly requisste, etc. as has been further
opened. Ergo, That which is essential, is not causa sine qua non, causa sine
qua non is called, causa stolida and oci^sa, because it is only present in the
action and does nothing therein: Doctor Abbot against Bish. p. 497. It Is
absolutely necessary and eternally. Its the matter or form or both.

7. A thing may be said to be imputed to a man when as (...) is dealt with, as
if he had worth, but comes to have right in the privileges some other way, so
righteousness is said to be imputed, to him that believes 4. Rom 6. 11. etc.
be enjoys privileges promised to a perfect righteousness of the law, though
there be none such found in him: because Christ by his death has purchased
such a right to those privileges, which is settled on him on bell eving; So that
God looks on him with the same grace and favor where with he would look upon
him lagally righteous never sinning.

I take what you lay down, that a believer by believing in Christ, is looked on
with the same grace and favor wherewith God would look on one never sinning
legally righteous? That there is no such righteousness in him. That its,

1. Purchased by Christ's death. O but deny that all, that's meant by imputation
of righteousness, Roma, 4. 6, 11.

2. That death has active obedience an essential requisite ex concessis; and
I affirm, that the right and privileges may be settled on us believers: there
must be an imputation of, the righteousness of Christ, as the cause; Of that
right and privileges. I am found in Christ's righteousness, so God looks on
me as never sinning, as legally righteous. I am by this imputation constituted
righteous and so dealt with: the imputation of passive righteousness is granted
by Piscator and others to avoid Socintanisme; and that which is Active is not
to be excluded, is inseparable, if it be an essential requisite to his death,
that we may be justified by it.

8. One thing may be said to be imputed to a man for another, when the rights
of one are conferred on the performance of the other. Or when on one offense he
is charged with the guilt of another, the guilt and consequences* whereof are
more notorious. Thus he that provideth not for his (...) denies the Faith. i.
The Gospel, imputed unto him, because the evil consequences of both sins
are much the same. But are more readily acknowledged to arise from the later:
so faith is said to be imputed for righteousness, 4 Romans 3. 5. etc. Because
the same privilege, which originally did belong unto legal righteousness, are
now settled on believing.

I have need of comment upon your comment and text two, my brains are very
muddy, you be mudde what should give cleerenesse, to what you intend.

But I answer, faith is said to be imputed for righteousness in a figurative
sense, taking in the object the righteousness of Jesus Christ, as at large
before: And therefore is a man by faith as one legally righteous, in a more
excellent estate, and hence the privileges, From Faith as an Instrument
applying that righteousness which God imputed: From which properly those
privileges, belong and come unto us.

9. Matter of profit coming to a man by way of debt or donation, may be said
to be imputed to him: thus To. 4. 4. the reward, viz of Justification and life,
is said to be reckoned or imputed^^ him that works, and so deserves it: If
God should reward man with life upon obedience to the law: such a reward should
not be looked on as matter of grace but debt.

1. The Apostles plain words to him that works is the reward, not reckoned
of grace, but of debt, so we look for nothing but by Gods free grace through
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed to us by God, received by Faith.

This word you say is encumbered with variety of acceptations, never more thank
your self to my remembrance I never read it so much encumbered else where in
any man's writing. (as that Fish) you be mudde clear water. It shows to me
you would feign escape undiscovered in this mudde and blind eyes, that they may
not see your error.

I now come to the 5. Distinction: Obedience to the Moral Law, may be said to
be required.

1. By way of Iustifications has a man's ways may be esteemed perfectly
righteous by God and have all the privileges.

2. By way of sanctification, that he may testify his express, subjection to
God in both respects, it was required of man in innocence, and Angels still:
and of Christ himself, campare Ma. 3. 16. with Jo. 15. 10.

Since the fall its not required by way of Justification in the sense expressed
but only in the way of sanctification. 1. Because a sinner is not capable of
such obedience. 2. Because Gods other way is faith in Christ.

Therefore to affirm the fullfilling of the Law is required of any man either
by himself or another in his stead: For Justification is ^^ affirm, that a
man that has sinned, has not sinned, or that which God has said he has
unsaid.

Obedience to the Moral Law, required of Adam was nothing else but his
express subjection to God, and pleasing him in all things. this was perfect
righteousness: to which performed life was promised so to Angels.

There Is an other reason of Christ, of whose poverty this was a part, he became
a man, submitted to the Law for us, became poor for us, and not for himself.

Thus Mat. 3. 15. It became him to fulfill all righteousness; as a surety
borne to us, given to us, and I think that particular, his baptism, is
numbered amongst his me diatory acts by the fautors of that distinction: to me
it seems there is a samenesse of reason of that particular and all
righteousness, all beseemed him as the Mediator and as our surety. And what
was due by us, was Gods commandment to Christ and on him as our surety. Since
the fall we cannot subject our selves to the Law that we may be thereby just
before God, neither is subjection by sanctification, the only way that is
required.

Perfect obedience is still required to life, though we are not able; and it is
impossible it is due and in force on our surety. I have read the moral law to
be, lex aeterna, at ^rnae obligationis, and of eternal obligation, Treat 1. p.
67.

That then we may have life, either it must be answered by our selves or
another, that other I assert to be our Surety Christ, who as he died for my
Justification, obeyed the Law for believers in Jesus Christ; remember that
essential to his death that we may live. By Gods imputation of the perfect
obedience of Christ to Gods Law; we are righteous not as by sanctification, but
perfectly, and we enjoy it by Gods other way, faith in Christ as you speak.

To affirm that the fullfilling of the law, is required of any man, or an
other in his stead for Justification. Neither affirms that a man that has
sinned has not sinned, nor yet that God has unsaid what he has said.

Gospel righteousness is the fullfilling of the law, performed, Evangeli^^
justitia est impletio legis non a nobis sed ab alio pro nobis praestira nobis
autem adeo per fidem imp^tatta* as Parus, V^. Cat^c. p. 348, Etiam evangelica
justitia est legis impletio, neque pugnat cum leg^ po cuangeli^am enim lex non
aboletur sed ^^. b litur, id ib.
not by us but another imputed to us.

Even Gospell-righteousnesse is the fullfilling of the Law; neither does it
sight with the Law, for the Law is not abolished by the Gospel, but
established.

DID. 6. Christ may be said to keep the law in reference to our
justification 2. ways. 1. for us. 2. in our stead; in the former sense it is
admitted not in the latter. The former imports only it had an inflluence into
our Justification, and did contribute that which was of absolute necessity
thereunto. The latter imports that the keep^ng of the Law was primarily
required of every man for his Justification, since the fall: And that God (man
being unable) sent Christ to perform it in their rooms: which supposition
stands convict of manifest untruth, in the former distinction, and else where.

See the former Distinction, and the place and you shall see it cleared: It Is
indeed opposition to the Apostle almost in terms, To. 8. 3, 4. as has been
also showed, and shall bewhen I come to that Scripture afterward.

DID. 7. Justification of a sinner, I mean Passive* though ^^ be the same
entire effect may be ascribed to many causes very different.

This if it be a distinction, we subscribe to; and think it against your
self, when as you establishing the ordination of God that Faith shall
justify, deny faiths doing it as receiving, in that name, we have observed
both to have their place and yield it of all the rest of the causes.

CHAPT. IIII. Containing EXAMINATION of a Delineation of Juctification in the
Causes of it: According to the Conclusions and Distinctions laid down.
I Shall be very brief in Examination. Your scope is to discover the
weakness of arguments, brought against your Conclusion that is, that faith in
a proper sense is imputed for righteousness and not the obedience of Christ.
If I pasle what has not this scope, I suppose I do enough to our purpose: You
promise rules.

Rule. 1. There are 4. causes to which every being is to b^^ reduced.

This I grant, though there are who refer all to 2. and some 3. and some 5..

2. And your second, I grant.

3. I Will de^^urre on the the third, till I come to application; your self say
in an improper sense there is some exception; and I know not that causes are not
improper as well as proper.

P. 69. P. 5. Causes ^^e either remote or near. The personal holiness and
active obedience of Christ to the Law, is a^ efficient remote cause, qualifying
him for such sufferings, whereby Justification was pro^^^ed, but had no
immediate influence ^her^u^te.

Sir, I think it as near as the sufferings of Christ, seeing its essentially
requisite, to make his death and suffering to effect Justification, as your
self: which will appear if we prove it part of the matter, and that it is
applied in the form thereof.

Page 73. You make our subject the matter of an accident, and that it has ^o
other but the subject or object, and wish it noted as concerning a special
vein of the question.

In your application you say: Page 77. God is the efficient of Justification
and no other kind. But whether is he not the final cause? Does he it not for
himself? The glory of his wisdom, mercy, Justice? if so he is efficient and
final.

When you speak here of God, out of authority, and power, and mercy
justifying; you name not Justice, yet the Apostle joyneth that with grace, 3.
Romans 15 etc.

So Christ is the impulsive moral external cause, his death, 4 Ephe^^^^. 3.
Romans 24. Neither can the death of Christ with any show of reason, or with any
colorable construction of congruity of speaking, be referred to any other
cause, but the impulsive only. -- And it is yet more repugnant to reason, it is
to make. Christ himself, or any righteousness of his whatsoever, the matter
or material cause of Justification: as the Socinian discoverer; Pa. 139. or
the form. But it is a streine of unreasonablenesse above all the rest, to make
them the material and formal cause too.

Now to these in Order.

Again, I grant Christ a Moral, external, impulsive cause; a meritorious
cause of his death; yet his Active obedience may not be excluded. To this kind
of cause, say you, Pa. 81. must be reduced the active or personal
righteousness of Christ: And whenas you add, though it be not satisfactory
simply and directly in it self, nor contributing any thing immediately by way
of merit to Justification. How can it be truth seeing of that Active obedience.
You said but now, that: that these were directly and essentially requisite to
make his death and suffirings Justification and life? Sufferings cannot exclude
his Active obedience, being directly and essentially requisite, to that end.
And also seeing it qual^f^eth in part our sacrifice of Christ, for that
fulness and height of acceptance with God, of which offer what is essential
will not be put a far off from sufferings when they produce this effect.

You say Christ dying righteous, and being God, his death holds out weight and
worth, merit and satisfaction for the whole World, Page 203. and call it the
qualification in part, for that meritoriousnesse of his death: which may stand
the whole World instead for their Justification, Page 204.

When as his blood is mentioned, his obedience is not excluded by which we are
righteous 5. Romans 19.

And when as you urge those words for his sake, Ephesians. 4. though there be truth
in them as applied yet the words are (...) as God has been gracious unto you
in Christ.

Obj: But cannot be referred to any kind of cause else, but the impulsive only.

1. Christ is not only the impulsive efficient, but principal, ^araeus
calls him, Cansa adjuvans quia impetrat, efficiens principal^s quia una cum
patic justificat.
an adjuvant cause, because he obtains, and efficient principal because
together with the Father he justifies.

The Son of Man has power to forgive sins, he is exalted, a Prince and
Savior to give remission of sins; we are justified in the name of Christ,
by the spirit of our God.

Obje. It Is a great fault that Mr. Walker makes Christ or any righteousness
of his, the matter or material cause of our Justification.

Mr. Walker was not the first by many that speak and write so. Paraus on
Visi^us Catec. p, 355. he says, satisfactio Christi est causa materialis
justitiae nostrae And the learned show this in the margent. Whenas he had said
observandum ergo, non eodem sensu dic^ nos gratia Dei et merito Christi --
justifica ri; prima intelligitur de causa ^^. pulfiva in Dco se und^ de causa
materiali; When we are said to be justified by themevit of Christ, it is meant
of the material cause, and then merito Christi iustificamur partim ut causa
materiali justificationis quatenus obedientia Christi nobis applicata placemus
Deo, et ca quasi vest induti projusti reputamur partim ut causa impulsiva
procata^ct^ca et meritoria, quatenus p^opter came n^s ab absolvit; he says
nihilpraeter meritum Christi est justitia nos^ra ^oram deo. Justificamur^d abus
rebus sed dv^ersimod^ fide ut instrumenta apprchendente justitiam; merit^
Christi ut causa materiali nostrae justitiae page 359. Ego docendi causa
materiam appellabo, de justit act. et pass. 173 his materia justificationis est
quad ^^plexi illa Christi justitia, alij, 3. posteriores justitias Christi,
materiam, etc. statuunt. Tertij du^^ tantum justirias Christi posteriores
materiam faciunt; page 174, you see himself and all agree in the, by his
judgment. Mr. Perkins. see Mr. W^t. defense. p. 210. See Cossac. These 11.
drafit p. 62 Calvin. l. 3. instit. c. 14. p. 17. and in Rom, 2. 21. and c. 3.
24 so Trelcatius p 80. Bucanus ad c. 1. p. 310 Chamier de justif. c. 1. l. 21,
p. 5. Iunius These. in augurat. our Doctor Do^nham. l, 1. c. 5. p. 2. Doctor
Pridea^^ dejustif. p. 156. Mr. Forbs, mothing says he, in heaven or in man.
or without man ^ the matter of man's righteousness before God, except on ^ly
Christ. c. 22. p. 85. etc. You see it is the matter nay beth against your third
rule in part.


Now let us hear your argument, against this.

Page 85. 1, By making these the material cause of Justification they divest
and spoil them of the honor of causality, which is proper unto them, and
seven times more honorable then that which is this way attributed to them,
vid. of that causality we call meritorious.

1. Then they are both meritorious which you see me to deny, p 81.

2. Did we deny it meritorious, your argument might be to some purpose. It Is
requisite, that the essential causes of our Justification, should have worth
in them, and be meritorious.

But this cannot be, say you, by our third Rule. That no one cause whatsoever,
can put on more habitudes, or causality then one, in respect of the same
effect: So that if Christ be the meritorious and impulsive cause, which is
granted on all hands, even by the men against whom I reason, it cannot be
deemed the material cause also.

1. Your Rule is false as by that instance of God, who is the efficient and
final cause. Himself does all for himself, the last end, of him, and through
him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen, 11. Romans ult.
Gods self is the end which moves himself, the efficicient, to work.

The Logician calls this a most clear Axiom, the last end and the first
efficient is altogether the same thing: or that God in Praeclarum ^x* ioma, res
omnino eadem est ultimus finis, et prima causa efficions. scil, deum proprie
loquend^ nihil agere propter finem a se diver sum, K^k^^og* de fin^.
proper speech does nothing for an end diverse from himself.

2. Your Rule is false in the judgment of all those who give Christ the
meritorious cause, and the material, as I have proved.

3. Yea I pray you consider whether Christ be not a final cause also, whether
he had not respect to the glory of himself as mediator? Was it not Gods
covenant with him, on his execution of Office? 55. les. 5. that he having
glorified God on earth, and finished the work he gave him to do, prays for
17. Joh. 5. and now O father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
glory which I had with thee, before the world was, it is not essential glory*
but what God covenanted to give him on finishing the work of man's redemption,
and the Saints have given it to him, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15, 16, and Iu. 25. and what
was that high exaltation of Christ to the Philippians,, but the glory of his
mediator-ship?

Who knows not but man believing is an efficient? You also call him the
matter of Justification,, and you make the great subordinate end which lies
fairest and fullest in view to the sight of all men, the advancement of persons
justified to that exceeding height of glory, etc. p. 84. and faith is an
instrument and impulsive cause, true as you. p. 83.

2. You argue, the righteousness of Christ Active or Passive or both, cannot
be the matter of Justification, because the matter of a thing is always ens
incompletum, until the introduction and union of the form with it which gives
perfection and being and existence to it, but Christ's righteousness has a
perfect being neither can it fall under imagination: whatform it should be
capable of that by union with it, should add beuty and perfection to it.

The righteousness of Christ how perfect soever in it self, yet has the
nature of ens incompletum, where and so long as it is matter not applied by
Gods imputation, and the faith of such as do believe as the nature of man,
though compounded of Elements, is incompletum, in regard of that effect man,
before information.

Application of the righteousness of Jesus Christ in stead of a form
compleateth not the matter, but the Justification of a believer.

And yet then has it and insomuch (as it were) its desire, it is appetite to
it, and acquiescence in oying it, as being intended by God and Christ to that
work believers Justification, and other end, as we say of natural matter.

3. If it be the matter either properly or improperly so called; Matter
properly so called it cannot be which they call materia ex qua: because this
kind of matter, I. Is proper to substantial natures, only is it self always
a substance, is always a part of the nature and the weaker part of it: Whereas
Iustificasion has only an accident all being, not substantial, etc. not in
the predicament of substantia: 3. It cannot be a part of justification, it
being an action, this a form or quality: and one predicament all being, cannot
be of the nature of another: Lastly being of that infinite perfection and worth
it cannot be the weaker and less worthy part.

I Answer: Matter, properly so called, we cannot affirm it to be, nor yet do;
whence the labor you take here is lost: When you say matter is proper to
substantial natures* you seem to speak of all substantial natures, and so
to belong to forms, and they shall be material.

When as you say it cannot be the matter of justification, it being an action,
that a quality: You cannot but remember that accidents simply are reduced to
quantity and quality, and justification being a just making, as there must be
somewhat that has proportion to matter ex qua, so Christ's righteousness
consists of actions, and his passions were active as before, so that there is
good analogy; but I might pasle this.

2. That it cannot be matter improperly called, may be demoustrated, for that
it is either in qua or cerca quam: the subject or object. The righteousness of
Christ can be neither of these.

There is a third that's neither subject nor object. Your self in your
explanation of this cause prove a third, the whiteness in the wall. It Is
enough there be some kind of analogy to matter properly so called in
accidents. As your self speak to the whitening of a wall, there must be some
matter; this I call the color in chalk or lime the subject; this is the
matter the Plaisterer uses to white the wall, the chalk-stone or lime in which
the color is not that that whiteth, but qua whiteness adhereth, here is
analogy; So when as the Lord makes just and righteous, he does it with the
righteousness of Christ; as the wall is made white with that color, so a
believer righteous with righteousness; and in this I see the judgment of
almost all Divines concurring, as before. And thus I pass to what you say it
must be.

It must be either the subject or object of Justification, God or man: the
former is unquoth; it must be then subjectum recipiens, or objectum, and then
that, I believe there is no other matter.

But Sir, if man believing be the matter, either qua man, or believing? not qua
man, a substance cannot be the matter of an accident or action: if qua
believing faith's an instrument, and so an efficient, and by your third Rule
cannot be the matter. And though our subject and object are termed matter, yet
the Logician tells you, that it is confusion of those which matter Abutimur
nomine materiae cum illud tribuimus subjecto et objecto, ipse Malancthon says,
that Logi^ian Keckerman: de Materia.
and abuse: who therefore handles them distinctly.

Before I pass to the form, I Will consider what is said to the instruments.

P. 12. Here you confess, faith by the uniforme Doctrine of Reformed Authors,
is an isntrumental efficient.

Of this we have spoken; Divines make it an instrument, and give the effect to
it, because of that of which it is an instrument, the righteousness of Christ
so all. Musculus and Aretius, as is showed. The impulsive is Christ's
righteousness which is not of the same kind with faith, and there is the same
reason of other places, where deliverance is given because they believed, which
was but a flying for refuge to God in Christ, and laying hold by faith as an
instrument, that which has the promise.

How Sacraments should become isntrumental causes or means of Instification,
must be known by inquiring at the Oracle at Rome for neither the Scriptures
nor the Reformed Religion have any of this learning in them.

Sacraments are visible words, and their office is to sign and seal to
believers, the whole Covenant in the blood of Christ. The Apostle calls
Circumcision, the sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith, 4 Romans 11. by
which justification and pardon: and when as the Supper of our Lord is the New
Testament that is a sign and seal of the New Testament in the blood of Christ
shed for remission of sins.

I question not but they are powerful instruments for confirmation of our
faith, of Justification and pardon See Dr. Pride. ^^ just. p. 156.
of sins; and I remember not that I have read the contrary, otherwise I hold
them not causes isntrumental.

And now for the formal cause:

And here passing the Pontifician opinion which makes it to consist in Faith,
Hope and Charity, come we to your conceit of the opinion of the Socinian
discoverer, Mr. Walker, which is, P. 139.


Not better but rather at far deeper defiance both with reason and truth. What Is
the matter?

Doubtless here is too much matter to make a good form.

But if all be rightly taken, there is what does it. Justification is by the
communion and imputation reciprocal of our sins to Christ and his
righteousness to us: that which follows shows how it is effected by the
Spirit dwelling in us working faith; this reciprocal imputation and communion
is the formal cause of our Justification.

By this the matter is applied, we are made perfectly righteous, and freed from
our sins. Against this you object:

If the form stands in that communion between us and Christ, then Christ is
justified with the same Justification.

Had you put in and reciprocal imputation of our sins to Christ and his
righteousness to us, you would have perceived, what is communicated on either
side.

And you know we all hold we are justified formally (that is, as it were by a
form there being a kind of analogy) by the same righteousness with which
Christ is justified, though not ^odem mode, which you must destory before you
get the mastery.

2. That communion is not righteousness directly or indirectly, conforming to
the Laws equivalently or interpretatively, and therefore:

The righteousness of Christ is the matter communion and imputation thereof
with him, is ever the form, not communion but communication, imputation,
application of righteousness, you mistake him.

3. The formal cause must needs be the impression of the effect of the act of
Instification, the effect of God, as himself, p. 137. Where as communion
arises from the Holy Ghost, and therefore its impossible that this communion
should be the cause formal of ^ustification.

The effect of Gods act justifying is justification, how that shail be the
formal cause of it self, I cannot yet conceive.

Let it be granted an act of God, yet its by the communion of the Spirit in
that place, as if we were not justified by the Spirit of our God, or the Spirit
were not God, as if God did not justify us by calling us to fellowship with
his Son; so we partake of his righteousness and justification, and God
calls and causes that union and communion by the Spirit, and mutual
imputation.

4. This communion between us and Christ, is a consequent of our
justification, and takes not place, nor has being till after we be fully and
completely instisied; this he teaches when be writes it arises from
communion with the Spirit, which is (hedon believing, and consequently after
our Instification, for Instification follows faith closly, as imagination it
self can imagine, its evident from 7 Ju. 39. and 15. Acts 8. 2 Acts 28. and 6
Acts 5. Acts 8. 15. 16. Acts 11. 17. with 15 Acts 19. so that union follows,
and can not be the formal cause.

1. When you speak of a full and complete Justification, An individ^all act
and Whole together.
you intimate an incompleate one and degrees, justification has none but is [
actus individius and simul torus.] as Divines speak, and thereby difference it
from sanctification.

2. Its a most unsound position and unworthy a Divine, which makes communion a
consequent, and after justification, for by fellowship with Christ we have
fellowship with his death and resurrection, and so sanctification and
justification; In whom we redemptiou, remission of sins, Col: 1 Ephesians: (all is
to the fellowship of Gods Son, in Whom we partake of righteousness and
redemption.

When Mr. Walker says, it arises from fellowship or communion by the Spirit,
he says, that communion by the Spirit is before it, its rise is from thence.

Grant the Spirit shed abroad in believings (which yet in order of nature is
first causing believings, God by the Spirit calls to faith whereby we receive
Christ, and have union and communion with him, by both these we are one with
Christ and have communion) it follows not that its after justification, but
before to union and communion and so justification, and though justification
follows faith closely, yet its faith in Christ uniting and causing communion
with him, from whence also sanctification arriseth, which in order of nature is
before justification, qualifying Faith, and conditioning the person to the same.

That believers shall and do receive the Spirit, makes not for you, for the
Spirit received justifies, but you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you
are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: 1
Cor. 6. 11. God does it by his Spirit, Acts 15. 8, 9. God giving the Holy Ghost
to the Gentiles as well as the jews, put no difference between us and them,
purifying their hearts by faith. God by the Holy Ghost purified their hearts by
faith, in regard of sanctification and justification.

Acts 2. 39. they must believe and repent and be Raptized for remission of
sins, when its said, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: the
meaning is, that extraordinary gift which they heard and saw at that time in
others, which all believers have not; and I entreat you to tell me whether
believing and repentance are not the gifts See Act. 8. 15, 16. and 19. 2. and
11. 15.
of the Holy Ghost given such by the Lord: Act. 6. 5. both are coupled, Faith
and the Holy Ghost, and he gives the Holy Ghost to believers, Acts 11. 15.
but wha^s that to prove the giving of the Holy Ghost after justification?

Your 5th. is the same with your first argument, and has answer there, and if
you would have understood his words, you might perceive he understood a
reciprocal imputation, in which as we are asserted to be made partakers of his
righteousness, he was of our sins.

And justification of Christ as well as us might follow, if righteousness were
communicated or imputed to him in Mr. Walkers speech by the Holy Ghost, or from
us, but these are dreams and mistakes you say,

If communion be reciprecall, imputation is not, which yet, is affirmed by the
same breath, because this is an act of the Father, where as communion flows
from the Holy Ghost, these are acts really diffiring, impossible to combine as
one form. etc.

The consequence is denied, and the reason that they are two differing acts;
both denote but the application of the matter, which is by analogy the form,
or introduction of it, and when you prove it because one is done by God the
Father, the other by the Spirit, you seem to forget that both persons are one
God, and that God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost justify: the Spirit is the
Spirit of our God and we are justified by the spirit of our God.

7. Reciprocal imputation by it self cannot be the form, because it
comprehends two distinct acts of God, imputation of our sins to Christ and of
his righteousness to us, which really differ, now its impossible that any
form should be made of plurality os ingredients.

They are the same acts of God; God on man's believing conferreth the
righteousness of Christ on him, and acquitteth him of his finnes, they being
by the same act put upon the score of Christ. This I suppose was his meaning.

And if our question were of a form properly so called, we might nearken to
your axiom, and yet put you to work to tell us what is for ma misti, whether
it has not many ingredients, whether the forms of the several elements are
annihilated, or made matter, or are ingredients to the form, and if not, how
there can be a resolution of them, and how there are still their proper
qualities; but this were to be wanton.

For accidents its manifest, learning as a form makes learned, and when we
judge one so indeed, its from all or many sorts of learning, there is not only a
plurality but multiplicity of Learning.

2. Its impossible, because only the believing sinner is (as has been fully
proved) is the matter of justification; now the form is ever in conjunction
with the matter proper to it, and never with any other: Christ being no
believing sinner, is no fitting matter for the form of that Instification to
be coupled with it, it cannot be that imputation of sins to him should be the
form is self.

That which is the foundation is sandy, that a believing sinner is the matter
of justification, its showed to be so before; there is no justification of Christ
aslerted, and so no need that he should be a believing finner.

When God justifies us he acquiteth us of our sins by the same act he
removes them from us, he translateth them to Christ's account.

3. No imputation whatsoever, or of whatsoever can be the form of
Instification. 1. Because its no righteousness, where as a forms of
Justification must of necessity be a righteousness; righteousness imputed is
a righteousness, but the imputation of righteousness cannot be righteousness.

Righteousness, its true, must be to make one righteous, but that's the matter,
imputation of it or it imputed is the form, the introduction of this which is
imputation has the place of a form.

2. And this introduction gives denomination, it is a constitution of a man
righteous.

9. The Author falls off from this, and affermes the righteousness of Christ
it self to be this form.

He is like himself, and never meant other thing by it, as it seen hereby.

10. In this voluminous multiformed description of the formal cause, there is no
mention of forgiveness of sins, as if they had no dealing together, Reformed
Divines think them of near affinity.

And so do we, for the one is the cause, the other the effect or consequent, as
is often said.

3. Neither can that opinion stand which makes the imputation or application
of the righteousness of Christ, the form of Justification.

This is the same, and how you have proved it we have seen, you need not
repeat it, and yet you further argue against it.

If the righteousness of Christ be the matter and imputation thereof the
form, then one righteousness must be the form of another righteousness,
because the form must needs be a righteousness; if the matter and form be a
righteousness, one must inform the other; a greater absurdity then the reason
of any considering man can bear

I deny the consequence. I deny the proof, that the form must needs be a
righteousness: the opinion is, the application of that righteousness is the
form, so the Author, you make, and you must bear the absurdity.

2. Then what is less perfect shall be the perfection of that which is more
perfect, now this imputation being by the acknowledgement of the Authors of it
somewhat inherent, must be of inferior worth, neither can it be conceived any
thing should be of a perfecting nature of the righteousness of Christ.

1. That rule you apply here to accidents, before appropriated to substances;
to matter and form properly so called: you must consider whether it will hold
in both. The Author you speak of holds not that we are justified by, to be
inherent in us: Its out of us in Christ, ours only by imputation, inherent
they deny it to be, or our selves so justified, they distinguish between the
denomination of one just and justified: the former is from what is inherent the
latter from what is extrinsecall.

And you may conceive, how Christ's righteousness being matter until it be in
conjunction with the form Dav. p. 360 and so p. 361.
that is imputed or applied, has not its end to which it is ordained, is but
in potentia, and so by application actually attaineth it, our justification,
and glory of Christ, and Gods grace. Then is it in its perfection, When as it
produces the effect and not before considered as matter.

4. The Scriptures favor it not, neither do the Authors so much as pretend
Scripture for it.

Why do you answer the Scriptures this way if it be a truth? that is tried, and
shall be in examination of your answers.

Ult. Bish. Davenant is absolutely against the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, and pleads for the righteousness of Christ imputed.

The imputation of Christ's righteousness, or Christ's righteousness imputed to
be the form, is all one with them; either denote the application of Christ's
righteousness; the expressions are therefore indifferently used by them and now
as if it were different you dispute against that, Christ's righteousness
imputed to be the form.

1. Because it is the efficient it cannot be the form, it cannot have more
habitudes.

The vanity of that rule and argument is opened before.

2. These must needs hold the person justified, to be the material cause
thereof, on which supposition, I reason thus.

No individual form can inform two several subjects, really differing
Christ and the sinner.

1^. Their's no necessiy, the contrary has been showed, and so your
supposition is begged, and what is built on it frivolous.

The righteousness of Christ, which we teach the matter of Justification,
applied to thousands, the whole body of Christ, how different soever from
themselves and Christ denominateth all; Christ just as inherent in him us
justified, as applied to us.

Christ and we are one mystical body, all called Christ by virtue of which
union and communion, that which is the heads, is communicated to the body; the
husbands to the spouse, the Church.

3. And when as you object we are not one natural body, not therefore capable
of the same natural form.

You fight with your shadow: No man affirming either. When as you reason,

2. Then the same sinfulness of nature may inform them also, and Christ
should be sinful and corrupt with the same, that is in the belieuer.

It Is true, both we are righteous by his righteousness, and he a sinner by
our sinfullnes neither inherently, both by imputation.

3. Then the meritorious cause may be the form.

True as applied or imputed and if so be there were not worth in it applied,
it could not justify.

But the one is extrinsecall, the other always intrinsecall, he that is
always without cannot be ever within.

Its true of natural forms, not of all that are accidental when man is said
to be justified it is by a Passive denomination: It is not absolutely necessary
that this denomination Et non est absolute necessarium ut haee denominatio
petatur a formainhaerente aut supponat formam inhaerentem. Vt cum hommem dkimus
amatum, honoratum absolutum; haee omnia de ill^ vere dicuntur in quo non
reperitur forma in haerens. He shows is out of Gulielm, Paris, and Vasques
rejects it. Dave. ^. 27. p. 360
be taken from an inherent form or should suppose it, as when we say a man is
beloved, honored, freed, all these are truly said of him in whom there is not
found an inherent form.

4. Then is a believer reputed righteous with the righteousness of Christ: but
that not to be so I demonstrate, for be that may be reputed righteous with
the righteousness of Christ may be lawfully reputed never to have sinned:
because that righteousness which admits sin in the same subject with it,
can be none of the righteousness of Christ the essential property whereof was
to be his who never sinned, but that a justified person should be reputed not
to have sinned, is notorious.

I deny that he that is reputed righteous, with the righteousness of Christ may
be reputed never to have sinned: I deny, that because his righteousness
admits no sin in the subject who has sin, it cannot by imputation be a
believers: Its true it cannot be subjectively in us that are sinners.

It may be by imputation, so we that in our selves, are sinners are in him
righteous, as he who was in himself righteous was yet a sinner, by the
imputation of our sins though not by inherencie.

5. Then are they righteous with that which is meritorious and may have the
merit of such righteousness he ascribed to them: and they reputed meritors of
whatsoever is due to such a righteousness, which gives them the redemption of
the World.

This reason is a popish one, urged before, and fully satisfied by our Authors
answering them, of which I have given a sufficent account before, and will not
(...). You object it was, meritorious as in him not as imputed to us, which you
call a begging of the question, and is a position manifestly convicted of
untruth. Let the reader Judge. 2 You add.

2. The meritoriousnesse of it must needs be essential to it, and inseparable,
it goes with it.

I grant it for the person to whom its imputed, the believer receives it and
its given him not for others to save them with, or communicate to them, but for
themselves. And Authors clear this in the place I named before.

6. If the righteousness of Christ be the formal cause, either that which is
moral alone, or ceremonial alone, or mediatory alone, or of all, or some two.
But neither,

I answer the two first are the same, for the Ceremonial righteousness was
required in the second Commandment, being the manner of Gods worship contained
in his word, which with his sufferings (you call mediatory) make up one full
righteousness, the righteousness of our mediator, that by which imputed we
are justified. His active and passive obedience: against this we have nothing,
your 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and last, are Arrows shot at random, they hurt not your
opponents nor profit your self.

7. and lastly, Its the confession of the learnedest abbettors of the way of
imputation which has been opposed in this Treatise, deny the righteousness of
Christ imputed to be the formal cause of Justification.

Whenas Dr. Prideaux denies that we are formally justified by the
righteousness of Christ imputed: His words immediately following are of an
inhering form.

Dr. Dounbam teaches it a false charge that we hold our An non formam quam
libet inhaerentem qua formalli^er justi denominemur semper explosimus?
selves formally righteous, by that righteousness which is not in us, but out
of us in Christ, that not we but Christ was formally just by that which is in
him.

And that he does not deny the righteousness of Christ imputed to us to be
the formal cause of justification, see by two passages of the same Author, the
one immediately before, the other after. The title of that fifth Chapter is,
and that against your Mr. A. W. That the formal cause of Justification is the
imputation of Christ's righteousness.

And having said, But the thing wherein chiefly they err, is, That which
Socinus the Heretic they deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and
consequently do hold, that neither the active nor passive obedience of Christ,
is that which is imputed to us for righteousness What then? Forsooth the act
of faith. He adds, Of these men's error I shall not need to say much in this
place, because besides that which has been already delivered, in the 3.
Chapter I have plentifully and fully proved in my whole 4 h. Book, that the
righteousness of Christ is the matter which is imputed to Justification, and
in my whole 5th. Book that the imputation of Christ's righteousness is the
form of Justification. And having said, he wondered they could be so absurd,
etc. these words follow, But we teach that Christ's righteousness both
habitual and actual, by which he was formally just, is the matter and the
imputation thereof the form of Justification.

We say that the righteousness of Christ it self is not the formallcause of
justification, or that by which we are formally just, but the imputation of it,
etc. The righteousness whereby a man is formally just is inherent in himself,
for what is more intrinsecall then the form. But Christ's righteousness is not
inherent in us more then our sin was inherent in him; And yet as he was made
sin or a sinner by our sins, not formally (God forbid) but by imputation,
so we are made righteous by his righteousness, not formally (as we are
justified, or in our selves but in him, viz. by imputation.

Not formally or in our selves, inherently is the thing he denies, not the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, and so all.

Thus Dr. Davenant Atque hoc extrinsecum licet non habeat in nobis existentiam
formae Phisicae, supplere tamen vicem ejus, atque illo scusu recte dici
formalem causam justificationis nostrae ubi deest formalis intrinseca seu
inhaerens, where he explaineth that term, c. 27. p. 361.


And thus I follow you passing to another opinion, p. 28. Remission of sins
which has the fairest and largest P. 28.
quarter in the judgments and writings of Protestant Divines, to what is done
in the former Treatise. 1. and 5. Chap. you add 2 eminent Divines. That you
are to prove, is that remission of sins is the formal cause of Justification.

Pareus, the light of whose reading and judgment together could discover no
other opinion touching the formal cause of Justification, either in the
Fathers or any chief Protestant writers, but that it should stand only in
remission of sins.

In the words you cite or place, there is not one word that remission of sins
is the formal cause of Justification. It Is true, he lays down that opinion,
solum^ passivam christi obedientiam esse justitiam nostram, et justificationem
sola remissione peccatorum dfiniri, which he says is proved by an Argument a
materia, an other a forma justificationis; the proof from the formal cause
is, Scriptura totam justificationem nostram definit remissione peccatorum
propter sanguinem Christi. Ergo sola sanguinis effusio est id cujus imputatione
justificamur, et remissio peccatorum est tota justitia nostra: here though the
effect be remission, the cause is the blood of Christ impated; as the
righteousness of Christ is the matter, so the imputation thereof is the form,
as it is called; and else where, Omnum consensu nos morte Christi justificari
cum propter eam habeamus remissionem peceatorum, p. 174.


Imputation of righteousness is the cause, remission. of sins the effect,
with PAREVS. Remissio pecatorum fit per justitiam imputatam perfectam, Castit.
de justif. 389. and else where to Bellarmine. Falsum quoque Apostolum e^ non
imputatione peccatorum, colligere imputationem justitiae. ^mo hunc non ex illa
colligit sed per illam declarat ut cuivis textum adspicienti manifestum est
praecedit enim imputatio justitiae, ver. 6. Sequitur exegetice remissio tectio
non imputatio peccatorum. ver. 7. 8.


And when as he calls it our whole justification how c^n it be the formal
cause of it self? neither where it is so termed if you show the same, can it
be maintained.

As for Mr. Gataker, though he cite many that hold justification to consist in
remission of sins, yet his words are, for my part I deem erroneous, and
suppose I have elsewhere e^idently showed it so to be: and its marvel you
would quote him in this cause. The thing is evident, neither will your seeming
large sense given to him, Justificatio nostri coram deo et remissio peccatorum
sunt revera prorsus unum et idem, ut patet ex Romans 4. 6. 7. Justificatio et
remissio peccatorum plane non sunt idem.
excuse you.

When as Piscator had said, our justification before God and remission of
sins are truly one and the same.

Mr. Gataker, Justification and remission of sins plainly are not the same.

And though he hold them not to differ as the whole and part he adds, It is
rather a necessary consequent of effectual Justification. Potius est
justificationis efficacis consequens necessarium. p. 11. and p. 21.


And when as Piscator had said, he had once and again demonstrated, remission
of sins and imputation of righteousness, to be plainly one and the same.

Mr. Gataker answers, Yea but this is not as yet demonstrated Remissionem
peccatorum et justitiae imputationem unum prorsus idemque esse.
by you, neither truly will it ever be demonstrated.

As for the 3. Mr, A. W. He is the man whence you must be denominated, what
constant opposition he Imo hoc nondu^ a te demonstratum est nec vero unquam
demonstrabitur. p. 45.
found, is known.

For proof making you promise:

1: Justification being an action has no form properly called, nor any form
properly a part of it.

2. The respect it has is but as it makes an alteration in the person, or
rather his condition.

3. The precise effect of that act is the form.

4. Our Question is of a sinners justification by the blood of Christ.

5. We inquire of that which is constitutive, Gods making a man righteous,
whence declaring follows: And thus I proceed to demonstrate the truth of that
proposition, that remission is the formal cause of Justification.

1. I take granted, your fourth; its of such a justification.

2. Its granted, it has no proper form, and that properly it can not be a
part, yet there is a form, and that is a part, it is constitutive as your self,
essential, a part.

3. That it makes a real change, for it makes a sinner just, it makes an
unjust man righteous.

3. That the effect of the act of God justifying is the form, I deny, its
whole justification, and all such essential parts as make it up, and you must
remember the forms act has efficacy, for dat esse. see c. 3. did. 1.

4. It Is granted, it is constitutive of justification, as anima rationalis of a
man. And now for your Demonstrations.

1. Because remission of sins is the first precise effect of that act,
therefore its the formal cause of Justification, there is noother imaginable
effect intervening, there is an immediate connection between justification and
the sinners absolution, when its called Justification from sin, 13 Acts 38 so 6
Romans 7 he that is dead is justified from sin, this is the first privilege
that comes upon a sinner by means of justification.

1. I deny the consequence, the effect is passive justification as you
distinguish, and that signifies most properly and most frequently that
complete and entire effect, wherein all their several influences and
contributions meet and center together, p. 38. Whole justification, the entire
effect, and the form are not the same, the form is but a part of a thing, and
cannot be the entire effect.

2. I deny remission of sins, the first precise effect, there is imputation or
application of righteousness, of which justification is an effect, as is
showed out of Mr. Wotton, 1 tr. p. 84. of righteousness communicated, on which
pardon follows.

Neither does their connection prove it, such is there between sanctification
and justification; and for that place Acts 13. you urged it to this purpose
once before, and have an answer in the fifth argument.

2 Because remission of sins gives denomination of justified, it is the
form.

Grant this, (though the illustration be not by whiteness and whitning,
wherein you make whiteness the form, which is the effect, the form is
whiting, application) you must prove the minor, that it denominateth, which you
do thus.

If a sinner be therefore and thereby justified because he has his sins
remitted unto him, then remission of sins gives denomination of the
justified to him.

This is a mere begging of the question, what is to be proved; and I deny a
sinner therefore justified, unless you prove it, justification by an effect,
or thereby, your Reason.

Because Justification it is a vindication or exemption from punishment.

It is so in effect, that is that follows, but somewhat is supposed
thereunto, just making and being just, else will it be the justification of a
wicked person abomination to the Lord, as both the Scripture, and Divines
pleading the same.

3. Remission of sins is the formal cause of Justification because it is that
alteration and change that is caused in the person justified by that act of God.

1. I deny the consequence, every change or alteration the person, is not the
form.

By that act of God is not the form, so peace of A.
conscience should be so, for its an alteration which supposes pardon, which
supposes imputation of righteousness, whence justification and so pardon, etc.

2. So is justification it self in that change that is made, yet is it not
therefore the form of it self, nay its an effect of the form. Your Reason.

Its a politic act, and it has a suitable effect, not a Moral, the change is
not so, now, then this there is no other imaginable act, before this he was
under guilt, now freed by this.

It Is a divine act* and though it be granted politic and that the effect,
there is a Moral change, such a man as has his sins forgiven him, was under
guilt but now free; true, he was also unjust whence that guilt, and now he is
righteous, constituted righteous, holy and unblamable, white as snow, whiter by
a beauty put on him, whence remission a consequent, here is an other change

4. That which makes a justified person completely righteous before God is the
formal cause of Justification, this cannot be denied by our keenest
adversaries.

I answer, making is ambiguous, every cause makes the efficient the final,
the material, the formal, a blunt man might make exception. But let it pass,
let us see your assumption.

But remission of sins makes a justified person formally and G.
completely righteous, because he is as clear from sin or the guilt as he
that kept the Law and never transgressed.

I answer, remission makes not formally righteous, and I deny the reason, for
though he be without sins guilt, nay so righteous, the cause is
righteousness imputed, supposed, by Christ's obedience we are constituted
righteous.

5. If remissiion of sins be perfect and complete righteousness, then is it
the formal cause of Justification.

The light set up to this.

Because no perfect or complete righteousness can be found in any man that
has sinned, but that which is given and conferred by God in his Justification.

But remission of sins is a complete righteousness, which proposition has
been often alreedy exalted upon the Throne of evidence, and unquestionablenesse
of truth.

It is and has been as often denied, and with reason too: be it so, let the
Reader judge; but now we must take a further demonstration.

That righteousness which needs not fear the presence of a most district
judgment of God, is a complete righteousness. But remission is such, it will
hold weight and measure.

That which* you are to prove is that remission is a complete righteousness,
this you prove it by, beggeth what is the question that it is righteousness,
every thing that will abide the presence of God is not by and by
righteousness, in our love there is no fear, yet is it not righteousness by
which we are justified, when as you add.

What shall hinder but that immediately on remission of sins ensue a perfect
union of love and peace between them.

In these you seem to lay down the issue of pardon to be a union of love and
peace between them; It Is true there is a love and peace that follows, but as
for an union as if that followed and did not go in nature before, is not to be
suffered, we have showed the word says, in whom we have redemption, remission
of sins in his blood, its what we have in him, and therefore must be first in
and have union, it is what we have by communion, participation of his
righteousness as we have showed, which supposes union, remission of sins
without union is remission of sins not by and in, but out of Christ.

6. You argue. For givenesse is the formal cause, because it is the
righteousness which God imputes in Justification, which you prove to follow,
because the righteousness which God imputes in justification, must needs be
the formal cause thereof.

The minor is the assertion of the Holy Ghost, Romans 4. 6. Gods imputeing
righteousness, ver. 7. is interpreted to be forgiving iniquities and covering
of sin.

1. It is our tenet, that righteousness imputed is the formal cause of
justification.

2. But we deny that righteousness to be forgiveness of sins: It Is not
righteousness; It Is an effect or consequent of justification by the
righteousness of Christ imputed, and of that righteousness of Christ we have
showed, the Apostle to speak, ver, 6. and ver. 11. and this not our own but
as received by faith of the God of our salvation.

7. Remission of sins reaches home unto, and is given to men by God for
their justification, therefore it is the formal cause thereof, this is
evident, because by the formal cause we mean nothing else but passive
justification.

I answer. 1. Many things may be given by God for justification some ways or
other, which yet are not the formal cause thereof, the word and faith are
given for justification.

2. I deny remission given for justification; I assert justification given for
pardon, for it is its effect, or consequent, as has been often showed; Romans 5.
16. mention is made of remission, a gift: There Is also mention of the gift of
righteousness, whence justification and pardon also, ver. 18. 19.

And if remission of sins be justification passive, the effect of God
justifying, it cannot be the formal cause thereof, it has as good an
efficient, so the formal cause active thereunto as your self, where you name
that distinction. par. 2. p. 37. It can not be cause and effect both, before
and after it self, the whole and a part.

Lastly, Remission is the formal cause, because that and not imputing sins
signify the same privilege, which you prove because the Holy Ghost
interprets the righteousness which God imputes by non-imputation of sins,
Romans 4. 6. compared with ver. 8. and the righteousness that is imputed in the
formal cause.

1. I grant that righteousness imputed is the formal cause. 2. And that
remission and non-imputation are the same: Yet deny the consequence, and that
because remission of sins is not righteousness, neither that which is
imputed, the text calls it faith, which is not forgiveness of sins, and
being faith, it must be in a figurative sense, taking in the righteousness of
Christ's righteousness, as we have proved from ver. 6. and ver. 11. otherwise
there is noe perfect righteousness to be imputed, noe formal cause. I have
often showed non imputation the consequent of imputation of righteousness. And
thus for your reasons. I shall be ready to examine any other reasons, and you
shall find an answer to what you say in the following Chapters.

1. Your Answer to that objection; Remission of sins is no true
righteousness, in the 4^h. conclusion, is there satisfied.

2. That objection, That the righteousness of Christ must be joined with
remission of sins to make the complete form of justification is none of
ours, see c. 11. 1. par. of your Treatise.

3. That objection, that remission of sins is the consequent or effect of
justification, therefore not the cause, answered in this Chapter is there
maintained* Mr. Gataker tells Piscator so often.

4. 5. That the righteousness of Christ imputed or imputation of the
righteousness which is the same. is the form, is maintained against your
exceptions.

6. None object that the communion between Christ and the believer is this
formal cause: this also is cleared in this Chapter.

7. That objection, that justification may be where there is no remission of
sins, and remission where there is no Justification, cleared c. 3. of this 2.
par. and sect. 29. of this, is not objected by us, what is there laid down is
there examined.

And thus by what is said in answer, the Reader may judge of your description
of Justification, for brevities sake I avoid the running over of the same
things, and so pass to your 5. Chapter.

CHAP. V. Wherein SCRIPTURES are cleared, brought for the imputation of Christ's
Active obedience with their true sense according to the Judgment of the best
Expositors of the Protestant Party.
YOur first Section contains a Preface, and its Application: the Preface.

When Men conceive thereby thoughts countenanced from heaven in the Scriptures,
their confidence lifts up it self very high. The reason you give is: The
opinion in this case being their own, must needs have a strong and perfect
sympathy with all the powers of nature yet unsanctified and so must needs
engage these, and being looked on as a divine truth -- It ingageth all the
powers of grace to contend for it. Hence an extafie of zeal for main enance --
resolutions of sacrificing credit, name, estate; friends, himself upon the
honor and service of it in case it be opposed.

One sign thereof is the maintaniers are ambitious to heap us citations of
Scripture proofs, without end to overwhelm their adversaries, when as it is to
be suspected that what is every where is no where, when men sharke about for
Scriptures, and sind not those that freely offer themselves.

The Application.
The Scriptures are many which are mustred, by the masters of Imputation which
we oppose, amongst all theirs not one that speaks plainly or directly to the
business, they speak not, but the spirit of men in them, and now come to give a
perfect account, by examination -- the greatest part have bin touched and
cl^^ered and you begin with those of the Old Testament.

I Answer, Your reface is common, I grant all: The Masters of Imputation whom
you oppose (as you call them, may retort all on your selt* mutato nomine ac te
fabula narratu; and may say the Man has a face that cannot blush, who pretends
this opinion of yours, and interpretation to be according to the best
Expositors of the Protestant Party.

It Is known those were the adversaries of Socinus, of Arminius, Mr. Wotton
Papists and your self, who deny imputation of the righteousness of Christ and
are against the figurative sense of those words, To. 4. I have showed it, and
appeal to the World.

The Masters you elsewhere instance in Doctor Davenant, and Doctor Downham,
trace the same steps, and are above your envy. I hope I the least of thousands
not worthy a name amongst them shall be able to show it. Away with vain
words, let us go to down right blows. I Will follow you foot by foot and though
I cannot find who alleges them, and consequently inform my self of their
following the same (you mentioning not the Objectors or Authors whence you take
them) you laying them down also as weakly as can be. I am sure without the
force I find in our Authors.

Yet I will examine all as I am able.

The covering of sin, is by some conceived to be by the Active righteousness or
obedience of Christ, which God imputing covers all their sins therewith.

Answ. We confess covering of sins, non-imputation and forgiveness all one,
and that these are done by Justification as consequents thereof: Yet is there
wherewith and this I aslert the obedience of Christ constituting us righteous,
5. Romans 19. I say not the active obedience all one, but the Passive also That
Mr. Gat. and Piscator, and Pareus, hold imputed to this effect you must if you
be not on Sec^^us part, and if you hold that, the active being an essential
requisite is not to be excluded, as before

The Prophet has this Phrase, my God has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, he has covered me with the Robe of righteousness, 61. Jes. 10. as
there is a covering of sin there is wherewith all.

The Apostle, Romans 4. 6. 11. besides non-imputation Authors thus ordinarily Mr.
Zanchie speaking of, insufficiency of inherent rihgteousnesse, says, opus
habet, tum perfecta Christi justitia qua tanquam vest preciosa illius labes
contegantur j uxta illud, Psalmi 32. Beati quorum remissae sunt in iniquitates,
et quotum tecta lunt peccata, etc. proinde a postolus hanc justitiam per se
solum considerans et ab altera distinguens, dixit se nolle inveniri, etc. ad*
Philip. 3. 9. Praeclare vero etiam justinus Martyr, Epistola ad diogneium: Quid
ali^d (inquit) peccata nostra tege^e potuit quam Christi justitia* In quo alio
nos iniqui et impij pro justis habe^i possumus nisi in solo De^ (...) O dulcem
perc^nctationem; O imper vestigabile artificium; et beneficia e^ p^ctationem
orane ^ superantia ut iniquita^ quidem multorum in justo uno a^ scondatur
justitia autem unius faciat ut multi injusti justificentur, Pareus. whence he
proved what he had said that the Gospel evidently witnesses God ^^ nec ^egere
iniquitates nisi per Christi obodientiam, c. 4. ad Romans ad dub. 3. quarta
denique p 315. Hac (innocntia Christi qua nos induit) nos instructi assiduam
peccatorum remissionem in fide obit, nemus; Hujus p^r^ta^e velatae
nostraesordes et imperfectionum immunditiae non imputantur. Sed velut sepultae
^ontegutur ne in judicium Del veniant. Call. l. 3. c. 14 Se. 12. Vb^^n Christum
insiti sumus ideo justi apparemus coram deo quia ejus innocentia conteguntur
nostrae iniquitates l. 3. c. 17. Se. 10. Fides offert nudum hominem Deo ut
Christi justitia iuduatur, Call. ad Phil. 3. 9. Who also out of Amb* ose uses
that of Jacob in Esaus apparel. Ita nos sub Christi primogeniti nostri
fratris praeciosa puritate delicescere u^ teitimonium justitiae a conspectu Dei
eferamus, inst. l 3. c. 11. p. 13. Tegi dicuntur peccata* -- tum quia Christi
justitia sunt expiata tum quia eadem nobis per fidem imputata tanquam
nitidissima vest operiuntur, ne in conspectum Dei deformitus corumveniat,
Paraeus Castig, de justif, p. 491.
mentions imputation of righteousness, on which nonimputation follows.

These are enough to show that besides that remission, there is by Scriptures
and our authors, the righteousness of Christ, by which there is that covering of
sin. What you speak against this that the active obedience of Christ cannot
cover.

Seeing sin is wholly dissolved by the passive obedience of Christ, and this
before the imputation of the Active oebdience of Christ and that that which is
wholly dissolved needs no cover.

We have no such opinion, that sin is forgiven by the passive obedience,
imputed before the active, we hold the imputation of both together, which make
up our full righteousness, and that by these imputed we have Justification,
and so concerning dissolution or remission of sins, in regard of guilt and
punishment.

It cannot be by the Passive alone, its insufficient seeing the active is
absolutely neceslary to the merit thereof and an essential requisite to life,
ex concessis.

4. You say the active obedience of Christ is so far from being a covering of
sin, that its rather a means of discovery, setting it out.

I Answer that is not to purpose, yet you grant it an essential requisite, to
the Passive obedience, and it is doing away our sin.

As for that crotchet of yours about covering of finne it crosses your self
and your authors who make them the same, and I will not spend time in
consideration of it not being to our purpose.

2 Place. p. 3. Jer. 23. 6. and 33 16. Where its said Christ shall be called
the Lord our righteousness. You answer,

1. It is not said the righteousness of the Lord shall be our righteousness, nor
that is shall be imputed to us for righteousness.

1. When it is said he shall be the Lord our righteousness, It must needs be so
in regard of his righteousness.

2. His being our righteousness infoldeth faith, receiving Christ the Lord, 2
Col. 6. our righteousness may be rightly supplied, and that implies Gods
giving him for that, the imputation of it: the Apostle, Romans 4. 6. supplyeth
the word. And S^ Paul's desire is to be found in him, not having his own
righteousness.

It Is all one with that place, where he is said, to be made Mr. Zanchie, est
enim Christus ipse per fidem apprehensus quatenus ipse pro nobis legem
perfectissima obedientia servavit, quatenus item, ipse sua morte et Sanguine
peccata nostra expiavit, patrique reconciliavit, etc. Hi^respectibus Christus
est justitia nostra, ideo merito Apostolus cum vocat justitiam nostram, 1 Cor,
1, De quo antea Hierom, 23. Et hoc est nomenejus quo vocabunt cum Jehova
justitia nostra, in 3. 6. Epist. ad Philip. p, 196.
unto us of God righteousness, and we are said to be made the righteousness
of God in him, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and 2 Cor. 5 ult.

So Paraeus when as in answering Bellar^ine he had said Sed me^onymico sensu
dixit fidem 1. Christum fide appreheasum esse nostram justitiam; adds quem
sensum Meronymicum si oppugnat adversarius, certe non Lutherum impugnat sed
spiritum sanctum blasphemat qui Christum express vocat ju^ti^iam nostram 23.
Ler. 6. ^^ ^^^. 1. 30. Castig. l. 1. c. 4. P. 418, 419. Sec c. 10. p. 501. 502.
where 1 Cor. 1. 30, and this place of. Ier. are vindicated, pro imputata
Christi justitia. In answer re which. Bell. gives us the whole cause, ^^ Para.
ib. and Ames. Ch^. c. 17. p. 24. 25. Bell. ener. p. 145. de Justice. Tom. 4. so
Chamier de justit. c. ^. whereby this place, etc. He proves that we are just
non nostra inhaereate, where he cites an excellent testimony opening this
text, Cirillus Glaphyron. 5. c. postr^m^. Hoc est ^omeo ejus quod voca verit
cum Dominus Iosedeck in Prophetls, regnavit eaim super nos justus rex Christus
justitiam secit nomen vero ipsi Iosedeck hoc est justitia Dei, justificati enim
sumus in ipso Id circo etiam dicit Deus te Pater appopinquat celeriter justitia
mea et misericordia mea revelabatur misericordia enim et justitia nobis factus
est Christus a deo ae Patre. So where he proves us justfied, aliena justiti^,
c. 17. he cites this text, Sect. 2. To which I may add Doctor Downham who two
times urges this text to this purpose. l. 1. c. 3. p. 5. 1. 4. c. 2. par. 2
Which is enough so give a taste of this Scripture by Protestant Divines and that
against Papists. You except.
of Luther.

2. Its against Gramaticall and Rhetorical importance of the expressure of the
words, disagreeing from Scripture phrase, to put such a sense on them as Ch is it
is our righteousness by imputation, the imputation of a person was never heard
off therefore.

That Is your opinion, its not so of learned men, as you hear, its no more then
Christ being made to us of God, righteousness, or that our being made the
righteousness of God in him of which before: Our righteousness implies
imputation or donation of God to us believing, for righteousness by which we
must stand holy and unreprovable and unblamable in the sight of God.

3. The direct meaning is. He shall be acknowledged by the Jews, the great
author and procurer of that righteousness or justification in the sight of God,
for righteousness is put for Justification, Cap. 3. p. 3.

1. I answer Justification and righteousness differ as cause and effect as in
your, 3. c. Sect. 3. righteousness is the cause, Justification the effect.

2. Grant this place then to be meant, he shall be called the Author and
procurer of our Justification, but yet by righteousness which is a cause
thereof: We yield it the meritorious cause, and the matter, and being applied,
imputed, ours, the formal cause: so that the direct meaning establishes our
interpretation, we granting him the Lord our righteousness, by his
righteousness made ours to produce this effect, Justification: I hope you that
interpret him the author of Justification will not deny righteousness, the
cause. And as for application you must grant, he must of necessity be our
righteousness, that he may be to us the author of justification.

1. Thus according to his name is his work, he justifies us by his
righteousness applied.

2. Thus is he the procurer of our righteousness and the effect thereof
Justification, which are not but where he is our righteousness, that is, his
righteousness is applied.

3. And thus remission of sins shall have it is due place, to be an inseparable
consequent of Justification, or just making, as that is an effect of the Lord,
becoming our righteousness, this puts both those and all consequent
privileges. And thus I pass to the fourth par.

Some have dug for imputation in that field, Jes. 45. 24. Third Place Se, 4.
Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength.

You suggest.

1. There are several readings and interpretations of this Scripture. And

2. Answer there is not the least breathing of imputation so much wondered after.

3. The direct meaning and import is doubtless, only a profession made by him of
his free justificati by God in and through Christ.

I answer, wh^ at last you give us the true and direct meaning, it was vain to
pretend several readings and interpretations and want of pregnancy in the
place, to build a disputable point of faith on.

2. When as it is a profession of free justification by God in and through
Christ it must be by Christ's righteousness and in him, which denotes
application, imputation.

3. The sense is most plain in the words of the interpreters In Christ the
Lord I have righteousness, having it infoldeth Gods giving it and our
application by faith, we grant justification and pardon to be as effects
infolded. Its a profession of justification by righteousness posessed in
Christ.

I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in Loc. ulo Jes.
61. 10.
my God: for he has clothed me with the garment of salvation, he has covered
me with the Robe of righteousness. These garments and Robe are conceived to be
the righteousness of Christ imputea as a Robe or Garment put on them, wherein
and by which they stand justified in the sight of God.

You answer.

1. This clothing with righteousness, etc. bare expressions chiefly, if not
only of the Church of the jews in their restoration from Babylon, if not
that under which they lie now at this day, external and temporal, not
Justification by Christ.

Neither by the Robe of righteousness are we to understand the whole obedience
of Christ to the Moral Law, there not being word, syllable, letter, tittle,
leading to such an interpretation, but in the effect of the righteousness that
is of the truth and faithfulness or graciousnes of God: or both deliverance
from captivity safety and other sweet and comfortable privileges.

Grant this of the Jews, then or now, Its not only: as by the 3 first Ver.
It Is of Christ, and there is neither lew nor Gentile in him, and preaching the
Gospel Its not to beconfind.

Grant it of the Jews especially now.

That it is of externalls and temporalls and not of justification by Christ, is
very inconsideratly asserted.

1. Deliverance, safety and other sweet and comfortable privileges, confessed
seem to import more then outward and temporalls.

The 3 first verses show that Prophet and Christ anointed to preach other
things then temporalls, there ore other evils on them, then temporalls
supposed and remedies preached. There Is more in that ver. 6. there is the
instauration of divine workship Christ shows that he will adorn his Church
his Spouse, with righteousness, lefe, and eternal glory. Instauration as
Scultetus in locum. Cultus divini Christus oftendit se or naturum ecelesiam
sponsam suam justitia vita et gloria aeterna. Tremel. and Iun. pro fat. ad
caput. etc.
there is more external, ver. 6. internal, ver. 8. In everlasting joy, ver. 7.
I will direct their work in truth, Scul. More in that, I will make an
everlafting Covenant with them, ver. 8. There Is Christ and righteousness and
pardon and all spiritual blessings with Christ. It shall be seen ver. 9.

God shall be their God, they shall greatly rejoice in him, for this, he has
clothed me, etc.

And what is meant by this, let Saint John show you 19. Rev. 7. 8. where the
Spouse of Christ returning shall be clothed with fine linen clean and white,
which is the righteousness of the Sames. God shall do it by application of the
righteousness of Christ's Robes of righteousness, garments of salvation of all
sorts. But let us proceed. You say,

2. If we carry those metaphors in and understand them of Justification by
Christ, the promise supposed to be contained in them, and to be made to the
Church, will not be suitable or proper thereunto, because the Church is already
and at all times clothed with the robe of the righteousness of Christ in such
a sense, that is, in a justified condition by him: Yeaher Justification is that
which gives her her very being as she is his Church. its to promse what they
have, so that doubtless it is no Spiritual privilege, as least not
Justification by Christ of all other.

1. That these are supposed ever clothed with the righteousness of Christ,
justified, then, or now is worthy consideration further.

Then though there were some justified they were but few: many the most
Uncircumcised in heart in their sins, only justified Sacramentotenus in
regard of Circumcission, the sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith,
outwardly circumcised a truth of many, elect ones, for their present state, to
be justified in their call when God shall call them to repentance and pardon
them. Then Gods promise is to work these, and so their return, 44 Ic. and yet
the Church.

Now, they are not called, not justified, cut off for not submission to the
righteousness of God for establishing their own righteousness, to be
justified when as the Lord shall call them.

I deny then that promise not suitable to them that they do not need
justification: your supposition that this was and shall be that peoples state
before their call is groundless.

That justification gives a Church the very being of a Church as this was
Visible is groundless, uncircumcised in heart were members of the Church; yea
hypocrites are so: even such as are the Catholic Church or invisible ones,
Saints indeed are first in natures order sanctified, before justified; the
promise of pardon is made to repentance, if we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us, etc. wash you make you clean, put away the
evil of your doing, cease to do evil, learn to do well, and then if your
sins were, etc. 1 Jes. The Scriptures abound this way; yea in order of nature
before sanctification there is effectual call: call to faith and call to
fellowship with Christ whence that sanctification and so justification, and
it is call that gives her her being as she is the Church. Ecclesia is of (...)
as you know calling out that a consequent privilege of those that are called
out, distinct, whom he called he justified, Romans 8. so that this objection is
of no value.

Lastly, If we understand it of outward and temporalls, as Musculus and other
Interpreters, the Metaphor will be found sweet and lively, and consonant to
other Scriptures.

The Jews and other N^tions clothed themselves according to their condition,
they had times for sackcloth, they were now as Captives, prisoners; he will
change their estate and make them free, possessors of their own land,
honorable, all this is signified by the change of their habits, proportioning
clothes to their dignity, so 19. Rev. 7, 8. which you clear and answer by the
way) Its not of justification or righteousness, but the great honor Christ
will bestow on them justified long before.

It Is given in remembrdce of herrighteousnes, that is, her holiness, etc. under
persecution.

Pure and shining linen, that is the bright glory, wherewith the Church is
invested, is said to be the righteousness of the Saints, because the reward of
it, the linen is, etc. a reason why the Saints so arrayed.

It Is Parallel is, c. 3, 4. these shall walk in white, for they are worthy,
they are the reason. So the great City was clothed in fine linen and purple,
18. Rev. 16. There Is nothing inward meant, touching the inward condition of the
Church, much less his justification by the active righteousness of Christ,
and it is strange to build a dog maticall point of faith upon metaphorical
expressions, there being no plain ones to warrant it.

1. I believe not that Musculus or any other, hold it of temporalls, only,
Musculus is not in mine hands. I have instanced in Sculretus; and Tremelius,
and Iunius are clear for spiritualls; if all the interpreters in the world
were of that opinion, unless I were blind I must oppose them, as by the
particulars in the Chapter; of which before.

2. I grant outward temporalls to have their place, freedom, their lands,
honor and that habits were proportionable by other places of Scripture. I deny
there was not spiritual freedom, right to the creatures, and true honor,
which is of God, consisting in spiritual Privileges.

Nay the latter are, what are cast in over and above.

Jun. and Tremel. Note that cJus et authoritas ecclesia vindicata per Christis
in res omnes creatus, quae per antishesin miseri et ignominionsi status,
precedentis illustratur, in ver, 6. 7.
the right and authority of the church over all created things vindicated,
which is illustrated by opposition of a miserable and ignominious estate
foregoing.

But there are far higher privileges promised, Christ was anointed for other
matters, as in the 3. first, etc.

Their is that acceptable year of the Lord, reconciliation with God, redemption
comfort. They shall be trees of righteousness. Their s an everlasting covenant
in which God becomes their God in Christ: showing it in sanctification,
justification, adoption, in giving the spirit to all those ends, to the
exercise and growth of grace the saving of the soul, and resurrection of the
body. These are prime blessings, and primely intended; though you (as if the
Old testament contained none of these) see nothing but externals, temporalls.

3. If sweetness and livelynes, and consonancy to the Scripture, be our card
and compass. Let any spiritual man judge.

1. If there be sweetness and life in temporal freedom, possessions, honor.
Spiritual excels, it is of an higher kind, there is no comparison between
them, were man in the greatest want of the one, having the other, he were an
happy man: and on the other side, miserable in the midst of those without
these: that man did never taste God in these, and is blind wholly that judges
otherwise.

2. For agreement with other Scriptures.

This has so, as where mention is made of putting on Christ; where we are said
to be found in him, as Paul. 3. Ph. 9. When he desired to be found in him,
not having his own righteousness, which imports that he would be found
in, is the righteousness of Christ: It Is as in agreement, of which see our
examination of your 6. Argument out of Phil. 3. 9. and what is urged in defense
of 32. ph. 1. the first Scripture passing which

Let us consider those in the Revelation 19. and 3. and see whether there be
nothing inward meant, or of the inward condition of the Church, much less
Justification by the active obedience of Christ.

The words are, And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine
linen, cleene and white, for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints.

Christ the Husband in the call of his people (his ancient people the Jews, as
it seems) gives her to be arrayed, clotheth her with fine linen, clean
and white, which is explained to be the righteousness of the Saints, the
righteousness which God gives them, and they receive by faith.

Here Is not only the privileges and return, but the righteousness of the
Saints, a spiritual thing which you cannot exclude by your interpretation, and
it is expressed.

2. Though metaphors are used, they are explained, they mean the
righteousness of the Saints.

3. When as this is a dogmaticall point of faith. 1. it should have moved you
to more care and fear of adventuring to oppose it against all the reformed
Churches: Your error if it be proved, will be the greater in regard of
Preaching and printing against it, it will be against a dogmaticall point of
faith.

Let us now to the interpretation of chief Protestants; you have brought not
one for your interpretation which yet was your promise.

As in the argument of that, 61. Jes. Jun. says, Christus se ostend ^se
ornatutum ecclesiam Sponsam suam justitia, in the very words of this their
seems agreement, here is Christ adorning his spouse with righteousness.
Christ shows that he will adorn his Church his spouse with righteousness.

Are speaking of the ornament of his Church shows whence it Aretius in locum.
De ornat^ Sponsae loquutus; ostendit unde illum habeat nimirum a sponso
Christo, datum est ci, hoc est a Christo. datumest, solius enim sponsi est
vestire sponsam et ornament is donare. Deinde nominat vestimentum Byssum purum
et splendidum, hoc est can, didum, stola est innocentiae, bonorum operum quibus
nihil est splendidius coram Domino nihil purius. 30. exponit vestitum hunc
nihil aliudesse, quam justificationem sanctorum. igitur vestitur Sponsa Christi
Justificationibus, hoc est meritis et justitia sui Sponsi. Hoc etiam dixit
Apostolus ad Philip, 3. 9. Comperiar in ipso non habe n^ meam justitiam quae ex
lege est led quae est ex fide Christi, illam in quam quae est ex Deo justitiam
per fidem. H^c justiti^ ornatur Sponsa.
has it, that it is given by her husband Christ to her, that is, that it is
given by Christ for it is the office of the husband only to cloth his spouse,
and to give her raiment, then he calls the garment linen pure and shining,
that is the white garment of innocence good works then which nothing is more
shineing before the Lord, nothing more pure. 3. He expounds this raiment to
be nothing else but the Iustifications of the Saints, therefore is the Church
adorned with the Iustifications of Christ; that is, with the merits and
righteousness of her husband: this the Apostle said, Phil. 3. 9. That I may be
found, etc, the church is adorned with this righteousness.

Hearken to learned Brightman, Illi alteri) that you Quae squalida ^u^pis, nuda
ne pannis obsita jacebat antea byssinae vestes dantur quibus deformem suam
nudi^atem operiat. Haec autem Byssus est Jesus Christus factus ^oster ad
Justitiam et salutem per imputationem; qua vest carebant Judaei d^m respuentes
Dei filium, ejusque justitiam propriam justitiam constituere studierunt, sed
tamen insiti per fidem renunciabunt suae pristinae spei et hanc salutatem
amplectentur, amicti hoc uno glorioso, indumento. Haec Bissus est pura et
splendida; Pura ratione justificationis, quia sistit nos coram Deo in culpatos
et irrepre^ensibiles, immunes omnis labis et maculae; Splendida respectu
gloriae, tum apud Deum qui peopter hanc puritatem in suo filio nos haeredes
constituit aeterni sui regni tum apud homin^s quibus adoptionem nostram
splendidissimis suis fructibus indicat, etc.
may see it to have the same scope with that, 61. Ies.)

To them (the church of the Jews) which before lay filthy, naed, in rags,
linen clothes are given to cover her deformed nakedness, this linen is Jesus
Christ made ours for righteousness and salvation by imputation, which garment
the Jews wanted, whilst refusing the son of God and his righteousness, they
endeavored to establish their own, but being inset by faith; they shall
renounce their own old hope, and shall embrace this saving one, being arrayed
with this one glorious garment. This linen is pure and shining pure in regard
of Justification, because it presents us before God unblamable and
unreprovable, without any spot or wrinckle, shining in respect of glory as well
with God, who for this holiness in his Son, has constituted us heirs of his
Eternal Kingdom, as also with men to which he shows our adoption with it is
shining fruits.

The place more clearly and fully expresses the Protestant sense, who take
righteousness for good works; as Beza, which yet he calls, vivae fide (...)
in locum.

The Rhemists acknowledge, that when we say, bona opera meant, that they are
the fruits and effects of Faith, and of the justice we have by only faith,
Remist. in locum. Which they denying Doctor Fulke replyeth. This Text compared
with Rev. 7. 14. shows whence the beauty of this garment comes, verily not
of the justice of men but of the blood of the Lamb, and the merit of his
Sacrifice, 1b. If you say that is not the active obedience, you must hold your
peace, seeing that makes the other meritorious and is an essential requisite
thereof confessedly.

Who also adds in truth all these Iustifications (good works) are the effect
of one Justification which is by faith, only in the merits of Christ, ib.

Mr. Brightm. after on these words. Bissus enim justifica^iones sunt sanctorum
non ex seipsis aut rebus insitis mamat, sed soris haeret in externa vest,
nimirum Christo quem per unam fidem induimus, and then. Nullla similitudo
dilacidius ante oculos ponit imputationem justitiae per fidem, quam haec vestis
tam ^rebro in-Scripturis usurpata*
Linen are the righteousness of the Saints, not from them selves or what
flows from what is inward, but it cleaves from without, in our outward
garment, Christ whom we put on only by faith: No similitude does more clearly
put the imputation of righteousness by Faith, then this of a garment so often
used in the Scriptures.

But let them remember this merit to be given to the garment, not And on the 3.
c. v. 4. to the Papists, he says, Sed meminerint hoc meritum tribui vesti non
corpori. id est imputationi justitiae Christi qua tanquam vest induim^r.
Brightman.
to the body, that is, to the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, with
which as with a garment we are clothed.

Places of the New Testament.

3. Romans 21, 22. But now the righteousness of God without the law is
manifest^a being witnessed by the law and prophets even the righteousness of God
which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe.

They say is here meant the righteousness or active obedience of Christ, who
is God imputed to all that believe.

When as this place is urged by ours against Pontificians, etc. by
righteousness, none mean the active obedience of Christ excluding the
Passive, they speak of both* you Answer.

1. This text is fully opened, Trea. 1. c. 4. and found to speak plainly for
the imputation of faith, no ways for the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ.

Let the Reader judge, and to that end look so far back and he shall find,
that argument satisfied.

And in this text faith is not mentioned as righteousness, but what is distinct
from it, that righteousness is by the faith of Jesus Christ.

2. Some by the righteousness of God understand Gods faithfulness in keeping
promises as Ambrose.

On examination before our learned have found it ootherwise, and the scope of
the Apostle shows it.

3. By, the righteousness of God is doubtless meant that that method way or
means which God himself has found out to justify or make men righteous. Of
which, c. 3. S. 2. p. 40. Or that very righteousness by which we stand justified
or righteous in the sight of God, neither have I found any that understands it
of the righteousness of Christ.

The method and means God has found, and is revealed is Christ and his
righteousness, to prove which and help you, you may meet with both out of
Par^us, and Calvin on the place, see before.

Let Beza be consulted with, what may be understood by Quid vocabul^ Justitiae
Dei intelligatur, per. secta nimirum illa et summa integritas humanae naturae
qu^ quisquis donatus est (donatur autem credentibus in came) qui h^c integritate
secundum carnem absolutissime praeditus est, no stri causa ut postea
declarabitur. ^istitur coram deo (...) ut loquitur Paulus, 1 Col, 23. Ea igitur
a Paulo dicitur justitia Dei nou medo quia grat^itum Dei est donum etc. in 1
Romans 17.
the word righteousness, forsooth that perfect and highest integrity of his
humane nature, with which every one is endowed (it is given to those that
believe in him) who is endowed according to his humanity with this integrity
most absolutely, for our sake as shall be declared afterward. He is presented
before God holy unblameable and unreprovable. That therefore is said by St Paul;
the righteousness of God not only because it is the free gift of God, etc.

Beza on the text those words, of Jesus Christ. Id est quae ha, betur Christo
vel quae Christo nititur. Hoc enim addendum fuit ne quis ex* istimaret fidem
esse illud quod justificat, quum sit duntaxat instrumentum quo Christum
justitiam nostram apprehendimus.


That which is given to Christ, or which rests on Christ: for this was to be
added lest any one should think faith to be that which justifies, when as it
is only the instrument by which we apprehend Christ our righteousness.

Read the passages out of Calvin and it shall be evicted that the man that met
not with Christ's righteousness was either willingly blind or negligent.

3. Romans ult. The last ver. of the 3. Romans is laid hold on as a favourer of
their imputation.

It Is not ours but the Lords: Let imputations be laid on it, as that it is ours
it does but conform them who do so to that brood of Papists with whom they
have this in common, that they cannot endure the word, as elsewhere has been
observed. The words are, Do we make void the Law through faith? God forbid! yea
we establish the Law. You say,

They conceive that the Law cannot be said to be established by faith or by the
doctrine of faith, but only by imputation of Christ's fulfilling of it.

We say the Law is established by faith when as it is said to justify us, it
does it by application of Christ's perfect obedience to the Law, active and
passive imputed unto us. What say you against it?

1. That there is no necessity that in this place should be meant precisely the
Moral Law, Calvin understands it of the Moral and Ceremonial, etc. therefore
he is far from conceiving, that the imputation of Christ's righteousness should
be established by Paul's affirming the Law to be established by faith.

Let it be understood of both, the Moral Laws establishment cannot be denied
to be by faith, nor that of the imputation of Christ's obedience, by that
establishment, but confirmed also. Calvin tells you, When as Vbi ventum est
ad Christum, in co invenitur exacta Legis justitia, quae per imputationem etiam
nostra fit.
we come unto Christ, in him is found the exact righteousness of the Law,
which also by imputation is made ours. The righteousness of faith is the exact
righteousness or obedience to the Law, which is by imputation made ours.

I see not what this is to prejudice our doctrine, or to what it tends.

2. You say it is more probable that Paul here asserts the establishment of the
Ceremonial Law, etc.

To what end is this? I know not truly, and therefore will pass it. It
establishes both.

3. When you say there is no necessity that the Moral Law should be established
by the imputation of Jesus Christ.

1. I answer that cannot be excluded. See Calvin, see also Paraeus, who answer
that other objection, that faith establishes the Law in sanctification, which
none deny. Calvin and Paraeus oppose not these, but establish both.

2. As for what you object fourthly, I include in the obedience by faith in
which I hold justification: those 2 make but one consideration, and they are
not to be separated. fifthly, Your last conceit crosses all before, so that
here is no answer to the objection of the enemies of Christ and the Apostle who
thought them enemies to the Law, and their doctrine, Mat. 3. and Acts 15. which
See Chemnit. exam. p. 352. de Iustif.
yet is laid down to be the scope of the Apostle, both by Calvin and Pareus in
the place.

This has been an unpleasant digression, how that text and for what it is urged
you may better consider. where we urge it to show that righteousness by which
we are justified must be anexact conformity to the Law. For which see places
urged from interpreters.

Romans 4. 6. To whom the Lord imputes righteousness.

That righteousness can be no other then but the righteousness of Christ. To
this you answer,

1. This is fully opened in mine answer to Mr. Walker, p. 41. whither the
Reader is desired to repair for answer. I desire it also, for mine answer
thereunto, he shall find it full.

2. That the Apostle rather requires a righteousness suitable to every man's
condition, then that of Christ, which has no such property already, presented
in this discourse, there shall thou find it examined also, C. 2. sect. 5. p. 7.

3. That righteousness which God is said to impute, is placed by the best
Expositors in remissiion of sins. so Paraeus.

Of him we have seen before, in our Defense of Mr. Walker, and in this place
he calls righteousness and fin immediate contraries, in which the
consequence is necessary Contraria immediata, in quibus necessaria est
consequentia a negatione unus ad positionem alterius et contra: ubi peccatum,
ibi non est justitia; tibi non peccatum ibi justitia; recte igitur Apostolus,
beati quibus Deus non imputat peccatorum; ergo beati quibus imputat justitiam.
from position of one to the position of the other, and contrarily, where there
is sin there righteousness is not, where sin is not there is
righteousness, therefore the Apostle rightly, blessed are they to whom the
Lord imputes not sin, therefore they are blessed to whom he imputes
righteousness.

It follows not therefore there is no imputation of righteousness. But e
contra ergo imputat justitiam. Paraeus, in Romans 4. 7. Thus that great engine
does batter your Observa 1. hoc versu. 6. express doceri justitia^ imputatam,
Deus imputat justitiam ergo est justitia imputata. Hunc igitur lacerent
Sophistae ut velint nunquam nobis execurient
own Bullwarke. Paraeus in the same place urges, as observable.

Observe. 1. in this 6. ver. imputed righteousness expressly to be taught: God
imputes righteousness, therefore there is imputed righteousness: Let the
Sophisters tear this as they please they shall never take it from us.

Therefore expositors exclude not, nor can imputation of righteousness as we
have seen, and with Paraeus his leave, that righteousness is subjectively in
Christ, as ours show, and that out of the Apostle, 2 Corin. 5. ult.

4. To impute sin signifies, either to look upon a person as justly liable
to punishment, or to inflict punishment for sin: the latter I find most
frequent, either to hold a man liable to punishment, for sin or to execute
punishment; then to impute righteousness imports to look upon a man as a
righteous person, and to invest him with those privileges.

To impute sin infoldeth a man a sinner and guilty of death and Gods
chargeing it on his score, and an holding him so, so long, whether he show it
in punishment or not, punishment may be deferred, God may after that inflict
it, but is an infallible consequent except man repent and God forgive.

Not to impute sin is not only not to punish, but not to hold guilty, and so
to forgive, which God does not where a man continues a sinner, God should hold
the guilty innocent, acquit a wicked man. He is therefore supposed just and
righteous when as the Lord does so, and that by the righteousness of Christ
applied to him, by righteousness imputed: the imputing therefore of sin, or
charging it on a man's score, denies imputation or application of that
righteousness, the not imputation thereof puts the imputation of
righteousness ex concessis of Paraeus, and Gods laying it to our account.

As therefore punishment is a consequent of sin, etc. God chargeing it upon a
man, so the privileges of a justified person the consequents of righteousness
imputed to that man.

In the former God is a just judge, the just judgment of God is, that they
that do those things should die; man's sin and perdition are of himself. In
the latter righteousness is by the free grace of God, yet declaring himself
just in Justification through the blood of Christ applied by Faith, which also
makes further differences, destroying your conclusion. But to the last,

Ult. Here is neither peer nor peep, of the least ground or reason to
conceive that by righteousness should be meant the righteousness of Christ.

A righteousness is necessary as has been showed in defense of Mr. Walker,
and that there is no other to be found, by which it may be done amongst the sons
of men.

Let that place be consulted with, and you shall sind it cleared, and that by
the interpretation of Protestant Divines, Paraeus, Ames, Whitaker, etc. Let the
judicious reader both read and judge.

The next place you mention is.

Romans 5. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many are made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

Hence you say we argue.

That as by the imputation of Adams disobedience men are made formally sinners,
in like manner by the imputation of Christ's righteousness men are made formally
righteous.

For your formally. I find it not in any of our Divines from this place, when
as they urge it against the Papists; for to prove we are justified by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, if you make use of these words, therefore
you shall but vainly jangle, our sense has bin sufficiently expressed before.

Doctor Downham may be seen, l. 5. c. 2. Sect. 1. See Mr. Perk Refor. cath.
and Abbot defense. p. 404. Doctor Ames Bell. Enerv. Tom. 4. p. 144. Its a place
urged by all Protestants against Papists, to prove the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ.

To this you answer.

1. Somewhat has been spoken of the sense of this Scripture and the
inconcludency of this argument, Par. 1. c. 21. Sect. 2, 3. where that may be
also found, examined.

2. It Is not said here by imputation of Adams sin men are formally sinners,
but sinners, that is, obnoxious to death and condemnation, or sinners by
propagation, so that her*s neither little nor much for imputation.

1. Formally taken for inherently we mean not.

2. When as they are said obnoxious to damnation; they are not denied sinners
as has been showed. If the sin it self had not bin imputed, then as
Bellarmine himself somwhere argues; neither the guilt nor the corruption,
says, Doctor Downham (I may of the rest of the punishment) had not belonged
unto us.

And he adds which has been observed before that.

Things that are trasient when they are once past and gone, cannot be otherwise
communicated then by imputation. ubi supra p. 27^.

When as you say, or by propagation not imputation.

1. None question but we are formally sinners by propagation; corruption of
nature is spiritual death wherein we are conceived and borne, the deprivation
of Gods Image, and depravation of nature are what we have by propagation,
which argues the cause our sin in Adam.

When as you deny imputation, and not by imputation, you run into the
Pelagian Heresy, as Vossius before, where he shows the contrary the Orthodox
doctrine. You join with the Papist, of whom yet many are against you and
Bellarmine himself, against himself as Dr. Downh. shows l. 4 c. 10. Sect. 2.
and Se. 4. and Dr Abbot against Bishop: all ours hold as inquination of nature
by propagation so imputation of Adams sin, whence guilt and punishment. (...)
not wast time in numbering them, hearken to your master, he is amongst the
Prophets here

We affirm Adams sin is imputed to us to our just condemnation, so Wot. in
Defense Mr Perk. p. 178.

3. Neither does the Apostle compare one act with another, but the satisfaction
with the provocation and remedy with the disease, therwise he should make sins
of omission to be no disobsdience, because they are no acts, in which yet also
Adams sin stood.

The comparison is between disobedience and obedience, disobedience infoldeth
his omission and commission: Christ's obedience the perfect remedy, but what is
this against the imputation of it?

4. By the obedience of Christ whereby its here said, many are or shall be
made righteous, we cannot understand that the righteousness of Christ, which
con sists only in his obedience to the moral Law, but that satisfactory
righteousness which he performed to that peculiar law of mediation, which was
imposed on him, and which chiefly consisted in his sufferings, see c. 3. of
this part, Sect. 4. p. 45.

The most interpreters compare this with 2 Phil. 8. where it is said he humbled
himself and became obedient unto death.

1. None of our's mean by the obedience of Christ that which consists only to
the moral law, they infold his Passive obedience.

2. You do not well in opposing that obedience to the Law, to what is mediatory.
I have showed he obeyed not that law for himself but us and your self hold it
an essential requisite to the Passive obedience, where you have considered of
this you must seeeke for satisfaction.

3. When this is compared with that 2. Phi. in that you shall find not only
Christ's death and sufferings, but his incarnation with all that ever he did and
suffered even till death, his whole doings and sufferings becoming man was his
poverty, not for himself but us: neither is there here an exclusion of his
Active obedience.

When as you object, out of Paraeus ( as you say) if by the obedience of Christ
we understand, Universalem ejus conformitatem cum lege. 1. The Antithesis will
not stand, between the disobedience of Adam, and the obedience of Christ,
Adams disobedience being but a particular transgression.

I Answer, 1. when we understand his universal obedience to the law, it was
but our debt, we exclude not Christ's sufferings, which Paraeus calls
satisfaction to the Law.

But to the opposition, Adams sin is called disobedience, and Christ's
righteousness obedience; the one was universal obedience you say, and was not
Adams universal disobedience to the whole law? Yes, but this is a lesser
reason, there is a greater.

The effect, righteous making has been hitherto attributed to his blood.

We establish that the other cannot in your judgment be excluded, seeing it is
essential neither is blood sufficient without that which is absolutely
neceslary, nay essen^iall.

5. Suppose that contrary to Scriptures and general current of Interpreters;
we understand that active obedience he performed to the Law, yet will it not
follow from hence therefore men must be made righteous by imputation, for the
righteous making here is the same with that, ver. 16, 17. 18. now that
righteousness as he calls it, ver. 17. is described to be the gift,
forgiveness of many offenses, and that cannot stand in the imputation, of an
observation of the Law.

It Is a weary task to run over and over the same things which yet I must do
if I examine you, the Reader may see I do but follow you let it be mine
Apology.

1. It Is not contrary to Scriptures, and as for the general current, the man
cannot blush that denies we have many for us against one that opposes.

2. Righteous making in one and other place are the same, here more fully
delivered to be by Christ's obedience, nothing but righteousness can make
righteous, and no righteousness but Christ's; remission is a consequent as has
been showed that which supposes imputation of righteousness passive all
confess, but you, etc. and you hold that active obedience to be a necessary,
nay essential requisite to that and meritorious, how another righteousness
can be ours, but by imputation we know not.

6. Lastly, Its loose arguing from a thing done to a determinate manner, as
Peter was slain with death, therefore, by a beast or with a Dagger, so from
this that we are made righteous by Christ's disobedience to this aeterminate
manner by Imputation, there being other manners of righteous making.

This arguing is not loose an others sin or righteousness can be no other
ways ours but by imputation, being transient as we have showed: I cannot be a
sinner or righteous by the same otherwise, which yet the Apostle asserteth:
righteousness of Christ active or passive will not do it unless it be
applied, imputed by God.

Imputation of sin is read in the same Chapter. v. 13. and so is imputation
of righteousness twice in the former, but it seems it will not stand with
your imputation of faith in a proper sense.

Another text is Romans 8. 4. that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us.

Say you,

It Is argued that the righteousness of the Law can in no sense be said to be
fulfilled in us but only by the righteousness of Christ or obedience to the
Law imputed.

I answer, this text is usually urged for our justification against Romanists,
but that it should be only Christ's fulfilling of the Law excluding his passive
obedience, I know none that asserteth it but this is your common practice in
laying down our arguments to intimate to the world your opposition against men
that are only for the imputation of Christ's active obedience.

You tell us,

1. Some Learned and Orthodox understand it of sanctification rather then
justification.

I answer, the scope shows the contrary which is to prove though there be
corruption in Gods people, yet no condemnation to them that are in Jesus
Christ: these words show what the Law could not do God sent his Son, etc. that
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us see D. Downham, l. 7. de
justif. c. 7. sect. 10. 11. Musculus and your self are rather otherwise [huc
omnes proprudent quos viderim Papistae] Sed nostri tamen, etc. Cham. l. 11. c.
7. sect. 18. 19 Neither does one or an others opposition hinder, but the
strength and reason of it.

And here I Will cite some of many, who plainly interpret it that way.

Our Homily amongst other texts, mentions this, whence as it takes notice, 1
of Gods mercy, so 2. of Christ's justice: upon Christ's part justice, that is the
satisfaction of Gods justice, or the price of our redemption by the offoring of
his body and shedding of his blood, with fulfilling of the Law perfectly and
thoroughly. -- It consists in paying our ransom, and fulfilling of the Law. --
whereby our ransom might be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and his justice
fully satisfied: So that Christ is now the righteousness of all them that do
truly believe in him, he for them paid the ransom by his death be for them
fulfilled the Law in his life, so that now in him and by him every true
Christian may be called a fulfiller of the Law, for as much as that which their
infirmity lacked Christ's justice has supplied. 1. par. Sermon. Salvation.

It Is a manifest allusion to this place, and these contain the Doctrine of the
Church of England about this business. Let Beza follow.

(...). Illud ipsum nimirum quod requirit Lex ut ex ejus prescripto justi et
integri coram deo censeamur. Nam cum ad peccatorum remissionem et impletionem
justitiae accessit etiam hoc tertium, id est, perfecta naturae nostrae
integritas (quae omnia gratis consequimur in Christo per fidem apprehenso) ut
in omnes facies se convertat Satan justi sumus coram deo etiam ex illa
absolutissima legis formula quam ob rem etiam dixit Apostolus supra se legem
non evertere sed stabilire.

In nobis, non dicit Apostolus a nobis. Neque enim idcirco in nobis nulla est
condemnatio quod justitia fit in nobis inchoata: sed quia in Christo sumus in
quo plene sumus sanctificati, etc.

Bullinger. Ex loco infert, secundum posterius sequitur ex priori, nempe cum
lex nos nec vivificare potuit, neque nos praestare potuimus, quod lex requiret
a nobis, Deus qui Dives est misericordia, et bonitate filium suum misit in
mundum ut hic incaranretur, moreretur pro nobis atque ita peccatum
imperfectionis nostrae tolleret, et perfectionem suam nobis conferret in fide;
quae est perfectio et plenitudo legis, Constat ergo ex his Christum implevisse
Legem et hunc esse perfectionem in orb omnium. Der. 3. Sermon. 8. p. 137. 1.

Deinde implevit legem Dominus quia voluntati Dei absolutissime per omnia
satisfecit, cum sit ipse sanctum sanctorum in quo nulla est macula,
concupiscentia prava nulla, peccatum nullum. In eo est dilectio Dei
perfectissima, et justitia per omnia absolutissima, et hanc nobis
imperfectissimis communicate gratis, si credamus condonat enim nobis peccata
factus pro nobis expiatio et communicate nobis suam justitiam quae imputativa
vocatur.

Aretius, hoc (...) prorsus suit complendum etiam See Chimnit. de justit. P.
255.
in nobis ideoque Christus induens nostram carnem, nostro nomine perfect
prestitit Legem, Math. 5. non veni etc. -- pertinet hoc membrum ad beneficij
Christi applicationem ad nos ad Romans 8. 4.

Chamier. Sed nostris tamen magis placet (...) intelligi jus Legis duobus
comprehensum capitibus: uno paenas decernente adversus peccatores, altero ctiam
fic plenam obedientiam exigente, nec aliter quenquam absolvente. Quorum neutrum
nos in hac carne peccati poteramus praestare, itaque nihil erat certrus aeoerna
damnatione. Sed providit Deus, et dedit Mediatorem a quo utrumque impletum est;
et quidem pro nobis: nam et paenas dedit violatae legis et legem tamen plene
implevit. Utrumque illud cum sit pro nobis non habet amplius quod a nobis
requirat, it a que jam pro certo ^ulla damnatio est ijs qui sunt in Christo. l.
11. ^. 7. Sect. 19.

The justification of the Law is fulfilled in us or by us, because the
righteousness of Christ through faith is so reckoned unto us as if we our
selves had done it, etc. Cartw. Annot. in Loc.

Dr. Davenant, answering Bell. citing this text thus, Respondeo ad primum
Locum: et si nos non implemus Legem, tamen justitia Legis impletur in nobis qui
inserimur in Christum; primum, quia Christus satisfecit Legi, pro omnibus
membris suis, patiendo mortem carnis; secundo quia illorum nomine exact ad
minimium usque apicem totam legem implevit, etc. c. 52. de actuali justitia, p.
562.

Idem Deus suo decreto (quia homo per peccatum infirmatus fuit) transtulit
legis impletionem in christum. (...), atque voluit ut illa obedientia et
justitia quam christus in carne nostra praestaret per imputationem nostra
fieret. Ergo, etc.

Probatur, ex Romans 34. Sensus loci hic est: Christum a patre missum renatos
omnes et sibi insitos, a damnatoria vi legis et peccati exemisse, poenam nostro
nomine sustinendo; quam nos sustinere non potuimus, legem nostro nomine
implendo cum nos implere non potuimus; atque sic nos in christo reputamur totum
jus Legis implevisse, quia et perpessi sumus propter peccata nostra poenam quam
lex intentat, et praestitimus simul exactam illam obedientiam quam ipsa effla
gitat. c. 28. arg. 4. p. 365.

Ergo hoc ad veniam refer necesse est: quia dum nobis accepta fertur Christi
obedientia, Legid satisfactum est, ut pro justis senseamur -- sed quia suam
justitiam nullis communicate christus nisi, etc. -- Calvin in locum.

Ubi non aliud Complementum designat quam quod Imputatione consequimur. Calv.
instit. l. 3. c. 11. p. 23. adlocum, and Romans 8. 3.

Eo enim jure communicate nobiscum Dominus christus suam justitiam ut mirabili
quodam modo quantum pertinet ad Dei judicium, vim ejus in nos trans fundat.

Aliud non sensisse abunde liquet, ex altera sententia, quam paulo ante
posuerat quemadmodum per unius obedientiam constituti sumus peccatores ita per
obedientiam unius justificari: quid aliud est in Christi obedientia collocare
nostram justitiam nisi asserere eo solo nos haberi justos, quia Christi
obedientia nobis accepta fertur ac si nostra esset. etc. vise.

Paraeus in locum Altera causa finalis liberotionis nostrae per Christum fuit,
ut jus Legis impleretur in nobis hoc est ut maledictioni Legis maledicta morte
crucis Christi satisfieret, eaque satisfactio nobis imputaretur non secus acsi
a nobis impleta fuisset. Impletur in nobis dum nobis imputatur per fidem, hoc
est acceptatur a deo quasi per nos praestita dum propter eum nos a peccatis
justificat. Observe his phrases and imputation.

I have been too large enough, if not too much of conscience to show our sense
by Interpreters. Let us now consider what is opposed.

2. It cannot be meant of active obedience imputed, because it must be such a
righteousness and fulfilling which may be apprehended a proper effect of
Christ's condemning sin in the flesh, ver. 3. The latter is intended a fruit
of the former; now Christ's active obedience or imputation of it cannot be that
effect, condemning sin is by death, and he that has the guilt of his sin
taken away by death needs no other righteousness or imputation whatsoever; as
Conclus 1. and 4. 2. cap. of this Treatise.

Beza shows the preposition (...) Nulla ratione potest hanc interpretationem
admittere; neque nunc Apostolus agit de morte Christi et nostrorum peccatorum
expiatione, sed de Christi incarnatione et naturae nost rae corruptione peream
abolita, etc. See the place.
can by no reason admit this interpretation, neither does the Apostle now
speak of the death of Christ, and the expiation of our sins, but of his
Incarnation and the corruption of our nature abolished thereby. and he gives
Condemnavit
condemned, Abolevit.
Abolished, as you, and Nam imputata nobis Cstristi sanctificatione peccatum
pro nihilo habetur, quam vis supersunt reliquiae ejus in nobis.
shows how it does come to pass for sin is accounted nothing though the
relics thereof remain in us, by Christ's righteousness imputed unto us.

2. Suppose it of forgiveness of sin by death, you cannot exclude
imputation, nor imputation of the active obedience of Christ, Christ's death not
imputed does not do away guilt, and Christ's active obedience is an essential
requisitc as you say to that. Let us entreat you then that both may be imputed;
what you say is examined.

3. But it must be the end of condemning sin in the flesh. No, but an other
end of sending Christ, etc. one was for Altera was says paraeus, ut jus Legis
impleretur in nobis, ut maledictioni Legis maledicta morte crucis, satisficret
^aqu^ satisfactio nobis imputaretur non secus ac si a nobis ipsis impleta
fuisset -- Impletur in nobis d^m nobis imputatur.
sin, the other was that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us, that by the cursed death of the cross satisfaction might be made to the
curse of the Law, and that satisfaction imputed to us, as if it had been
fulfilled by us. -- It is fulfilled in us whilst is it imputed unto us.

By the sufferings of Christ Paraeus means his whole poverty, obedience from
his Incarnation to his death, from which Christ's active obedience to the Law
cannot be excluded, it was part of his subjection and humiliation, and as for
you, your grant that its an essentiaell requisite to what is Mediatorie will
stop your mouth.

3. Its an unquoth expression in them, for it denotes subjective inhesion or
some kind of efficiency: friends of imputation affirm Christ's righteousness
subjectively in him, in us by imputaeion, not by way of efficiency, for they
are not works, therefore an imputed righteousness cannot in any tolerable
construction be said to be fulfilled in men.

1. (...) your self (p. 14. in 7.) give us the clear meaning of the place: in
us or upon us, made good and fully manifested in us or upon us, viz. in our
Justification.

In which sense their's neither subjective inhesion of the righteousness of
the Law nor efficiency.

2. When as it is said to be [(...)] we deny it [ a nobis] in that name with
Beza, and may oppose with him. Sed quia in Christo sumus in quo sumus plene
sanctificati. nam quod de imputata Christi sanctificatione dicimus ita
accipiendum est ut sciamus non id ^ir^o ^^^ sanctos coram Deo haberi quod
Christi hominis integritas sarciat quod nostrae deest sed quod ille nos in
solidum sanctificavit in sese in eternum.


But because we are in Christ, in whom we are fully sanctified, for that
which we speak of the imputed holiness of Christ, is so to be understood that
we may know that we are not therefore accounted holy before the Lord because
the integrity of the man Christ, does piece out what is wanting to ours, but
because he has wholly sanctified us in himself for ever.

It is fullfilled in us whilst it is imputed by faith: that is, it is accepted
of God as done by us, whilst for it he justifies us from our sins.

4. If complete obedience which every believer according to the great variety
of their several callings and conditions, etc. stand bound to perform: it is
not truth its fullfilled in them, by the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ, scarce a believer but Impletur in nobis dum nobis imputatur per Fidem;
hoc est acceptatur a Deo quasi per nos praestita dum propter came nos a peccatis
justifiy cat.
stands bound to particular acts not found in the works of righteousness
performed by Christ.

Its strange when as he fulifilled allrighteousnes, but of that see the place,
and the next argument taken from it is superabundance, etc.

5. (...) translated righteousness signifies not conformity with the Law; but
that Justification which was the end and intent of the Law, etc.

And yet you see they hold and gather the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
that contention about the word will not stead you.

6. Neither must we of necessity and with all precisenes, understand the moral
law, and that it cannot be meant precisely of the moral law is evident:

1. Peter Martyr has these words, I say those words cannot Ista inquam verba
non possunt exponi de lege ceremoniarum. loci Com^d^ ju^^it. Sect. 2o,
be expounded of the Ceremonial law.

And the concupiscence he comfort himself against is undeniably in the
moral law, and that was it which had the promise of life.

1. To your Arguments, I know not that the Ceremonial Law or judicial were
impossible, bu^^hensome it may be; or if, there is no comparison between them for
impossibility, with the moral. The wisdom of the flesh, is not subject to
the Law of God nor can be, not to that law.

2. Its false that they built so much on those as these; And if it were granted
the moral law cannot be excluded from man.

When as you say.

4. The moral law suppose it had not been weak by the flesh, could not by
exact observation have justified Jews who were bound to the observation of the
other two, and had been found sin s.

But you must consider both these were added because of hat weakness; and
suppose it, which destroys your supposition.

And when you say.

It Is evident that by the righteousness of the law in this place, the Apostle
means such a law which of it self was able to justify had it met with
strength in men answerable to it, and therefore it cannot be meant here
determinatly of the moral Law which has no such ability in respect of the
Jews.

You see not how you destroy your own assertion, for the moral law was able
but on our weakness disinabled: It had that ability to whole mankind, the man
that did it should live: of whatever Nation or condition.

As for your determinatly and precisly I have no skill in them. (if they
pleasure you ought) I know not who against you uses them.

4. Lastly, because Jews had bin never the nearer justification by the
righteonsnes of the law imputed from Christ, being under the transgression of
other laws.

Christ fullfilled all righteousness, which imputed is as large as they need,
and how it can follow that the moral Law is not meant, were there is a
fulffilling all righteousness, or a righteousness imputed, which is the
fulfilling of all righteousness, I conceive not.

7. The clear meaning of the place seems to be this, that that justification
or way of making men righteous which Moses writings, held forth, by faith in
the Messiah to come, to be made good or fully manifested upon us, who walk
not, etc. giving evidence the great justifier of Men, MOSES foretold is come,
etc.

1. This interpretation is confirmed by the sweet agreement it has with such a
fullfilling of the Law in those that believe and live accordingly, and the
sending of the Messiah, as in the former, etc.

What truth soever there be in that, that, what Moses prophesied of is
fullfilled in such, as believe; and that there is an agreement, as in the reason.
Yet it is not the scope of the place, which has been showed.

Besides that interpretation we give of imputation of the righteousness of
Christ agrees both which Moses and David, as the Apostle shows. It Is a
fullfilling of what Moses spoke ^n thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth
be blessed, and with Gods sending of the Messiah which was to make an end of
sins and to bring in everlasting righteousness, of which Daniel, etc.

The sense of fullfilled is not lost in our exposition, Calvin Dum nobis
accepta fertur Christi obedien^ tia legi satisfac tum est, ut pro justis
censeamur, in loc.
found it when he said, when as Christ's obedience to the law is given to us,
satisfaction is made to the law, that we may be accounted just.

He designeth no other fullfilling to us then that which we attain by
imputation. And when be says, non aliud complementum designat quam quod
imputatione conse quimur.


See before; and Paraeus; surely, when as Christ came to fulfill it he did so
and it is fullfilled in us when as it is applied. As if we had done it.

3 You say questionless, righteousness here is the same with that Romans 3. 21.
witnessed by the law and the Prophets, and Impletur in nobis quando applicat^r.
established, ver. 31.

Of the text Romans 3. 31. enough has been spoken twice before, and also the
21. verse. Thither I send the Reader that I may spare often doing over the same,
See Calvin on both places.

And to your fourth, I grant this place agrees with that, Rom 2. 21, 22. 25.
etc. But deny in either, that the righteousness of God, that is, the way or
means, God uses for Justification stands in remission of sins, only seeing
it must needs be by righteousness and seeing remission of sins is a consequent
of Justification, it cannot be a way and means of God unto it.

And Secondly, I deny that it can well be called the righteousness of the Law.

Thirdly, though it was not so fully revealed in the Law and Prophets, as after
Christ's incarnation and death, yet Christ was a Lamb slain from the beginning
of the World, and so sin was condemned in the flesh of Christ, the virtue of
it had the same effect, but this last is not to our business.

The next Text which comes to your understanding used from this cause is.

9. Romans 31, 32. But Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has
not attained to the law of righteousness, wherefore? because they sought it not
by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law.

That is, had the Jews who followed after the law of righteousness believed
in Christ, they had attained the Law of righteousness, that is, should have
had the righteousness of the Law performed by Christ imputed to them.

Had the Jews who sought after righteousness and Justification by the works
of the law, by their obedience to the Law of God, believed in Jesus Christ for
righteousness and Justification they had attained righteousness and
Justification, God had imputed it, they had received it and bin justified by
it. But they knew not this righteousness of God, they submitted not to it, they
rejected Christ and it, and would be justified by performance of the Law, and
so mist it. Noluerunt eam amplecti, Paraeus nolen^e, ejus justitiae subdi; hoc
est fide amplecti.


1. It Is said c. 10. 3. they knew not Gods righteousness, that which he
reveals in the Gospel, Christ our righteousness or his righteousness, the
righteousness of GOD our Savior, 1 Pet. 1. They went about to establish their
own Ignorantia et superbia quadam justitiam Dei in Cstristo oblatam contemnunt
et abijciunt, contemnunt finem legis qui est Christus. Ignorant quam in Christo
fide consequamur, Par, in ver, 4.
righteousness inherent; that which was not, or short of what God required to
that end. they submitted not to it, they would not embrace it by faith.

They would be justified by there own works, not another.

They ignorantly and proudly contemned it, etc. The Gentiles obtained
righteousness, 9. c. ver. ^0. as a gift given by God, received by faith as an
hand See Paraeus in the Margent.

Let us now examine your answer You say,

1. By the law of righteousness they sought after but could Obtinuerunt fide
in Christum ve^bum (...) innuit, justitiam ut donum a Deo; offeiri: fide ut
manu a nobis accipi. ut s pta, c. 5. verse. 17. Fides apprehendit justitiam
gratis imputatam -- Istam apprenenderu ^t fide accipientes remissionem
peccatorum et do^ number justitiae in Christo. there Obser. 5. Aliud sit fides
a^ud Justitia. justitia ex fide est imputata, Cham. de Justif. c. 3. Sect. 25.
859.
not attain, is not meant the moral Law: or any law properly so called,
moral cer^moniall or judicial, but as after Justification or righteousness,
as in answer; the fifth.

1. I answer, Justification and righteousness really differ as cause and
effect, and may not be confounded: You might more properly say righteousness
to Justification.

2. I his they sought but attained not, because they sought it by the works of
the law, that is by obedience to the law nor only the moral but coremoniall
law.

3. When you say. God had given them those laws.

I Answer none urge the seeking of the Law, as not having them; but the Law as
a means of righteousness to life. When you add,

Their study to keep the law, could not be a cause of coming short of
righteousness.

I answer yes when as they did it to attain righteousness to Justification;
It was a Pharasaicall practice; condemned by Christ and his Apostles; holy
obedience to the commandments, for ends required by God is on thing, for
righteousness and Justification is condemned because it is impossible and for
many reasons else.

2. To the second answer I reply, we mean righteousness.

3. As Calvin and Musculus, neither do we restrain this ^o the Moral law,
and this satisfies the 3 also.

4. Neither could either do them good, supposing their attainment, being
sinners, though it be impossible which is all I will say to the 3.

5. Your fifth is granted it was righteousness to justification as before They
sought it then by the works of the law, and could not attain it, it was not
the course or means of God. There is another way then which the Gentiles
walking in obtained perfect righteousness, by, and for Justification, that is,
the righteousness of Christ given us by God, applied by faith.

The next Place is.

10. Romans 4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one
that believes.

Therefore (say the masters of that way of imputation, which we desire to
hedge up with thorns.) the righteousness of CHRIST or the obedience performed
by him, to the morali Law is that which is imputed to those that do believe
for their righteousness.

Let the Reader peruse, that which was taken out of Paraeus, it serves to lead
us to the opening this place. Quod praeter justitiam operum sit justitia alia.
quae est fidei seu Christi.
That which they ( seeking righteousness by the law, establishing their own,)
were ignorant of, and submitted not to was the righteousness of faith, the
righteousness which faith receives and God imputes, so here the Apostle
shows. Solus Christus came prestat ad justitiam cuivis credenti. At justitia
fidei imputatur, dubiorum ex plic. p. 796. 5.


Paraeus (having showed that the law was given to give life) and the
impossibility of attaining it but by coming to Christ, not by the laws fault
but want of obedience in us not able to obey it) he says, only Christ
performs it to righteousness to every one that believes. Diximus alibi,
quomodo Dei justitiam fide in duant homine, quia sc. imputatur illis Christi
justitia. Calv. in loc. Ab ipso uno (Christo justitiam gratuitam petamus, See
Tossan id ib. Postqnam tamen omnes ^n reatum conjecit novam substituit in
Christo justitiam, quae operum meritis non acquiritur, sed gratis donata fide
recipitur; id ib. Bera showing that the attaining the end of the law, not
hindered by any quality of the Law, but the viciousness of our flesh adds.
Cui demum ita medetur Christus ut in eo uno gratis per fidem nobis imputato
finem legis consequamur, per illum justificati qui pro nobis legem implevit,
pronobis maledictiones omnes in se recipit, et in quem pro nobis omnes
benedictiones sunt effusae ut fieret nobis justitia sanctificatio, etc quam
obrem etiam Apostolus dixit supra, 3. 31. se per fidem non tollere legem sed
stabilire in loc Paulum opinor non modo legem a Christo impletam dicere sed de
hujus impletionis efficacia nobis videlicet per imputationem justificatis, id
ib. Intelligitur (^ocus) de vera et persecta justitia quam in Christo gratis
imputato consequimur. Paraeus having spoken of those texts. Romans 1. 17. 3. 21.
and 10. Romans 3. says, perpetuo intelligit eam justitiam, quam Deus peccatori
credenti donat, non per infusionem sed per imputationem interpret Apostolo,
Romans 4. 6. 11 Castig, p. 22. see p. 497. of the same. Dr. Davenant urges thus
text in the place before p. 365. 10. Romans 3, 4. Hic finis de quo loquitur
Apostolus est primaria legis intentio, sc; ut homine n justificet et ad vit am
perducat per ejusdem observationem, quia aaetem nostro vic^o, contrarium potius
in nobis, efficit; succurrit Christus et sua obedientia omnium crdentium nomine
praestita primarium finem legis implet; hoc est justificat suos et ad aeternam
vitam perducit, ib. thu he urges against Papists. For the justice of God in
the verse. (10 Romans 3.) verse. 4. is put the perfect fullfilling of the law by
Christ which is every ones righteousness which does believe. Cartw, annot. jn
Rhemists. This place is urged by out Homily, and what is gathered thence on
that of Romans 8. 3. we have heard Dr. Downham urges it, l. 1. c. 2. Sect. 9.


Which as before he calls righteousness imputed.

Let us now examine your answers.
1. There Is (...) of Reason that by Law in this place should be meant the
righteousness of the Moral Law precifly and (...).

That the Moral Law is meant is enough, I know none exclude the Ceremonial
Law, and that will be special, being eterna lex et eternae obligationis, as
your self.

2. Its not true that the righteousness of Christ imputed to believers
(supposing such imputation) should be called the end of the M^^^^^ Law, for
nothing can be properly said the end of a thing, but only that which in
reason may be obtained by it; there is an utter impossibility that Justification
by Christ should be obtained by the Moral Law: obedience has no causality, to
such an effect, it may more reasonably be said the end of the Ceremonial Law,
as tipifying Christ and his blood, not as a Law; which was to expire on Christ's
coming.

The text is, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one
that believes; what man shall in vain look for by the works of the Law, by
faith in Christ he may obtain on that ground.

Justification might be obtained by the Law, the fault was not in the Law, but
our selves, as the Apostle and Expositors: thence impossibility as before. We
urge not that justification by Christ should be obtained by the Moral Law, but
faith apprehending the righteousness of Christ, and yet the Moral Law
accidentally (as Mr. Gat.) leads to Christ, and instructs, as your self in
ult. Christ is the complement of both for righteousness, the perfection of
them.

3. That which you give the mind of the Greek Authors; that Christ exhibited
to them that which the Law propou^d^^ to its self, but could not, viz.
Justification. Is what say. (if you add righteousness) as the text. and
Chrysostom. some to Justification, without righteousness there is no
Justification.

4. The 4. your self reject.

5. Is because by his incarnation and death he put an end to the Mosaicall
dispensation; you say its a truth but no true exposition.

1. Its no truth, de ceremoniali verum, de morali non item, so Paraeus of it.
It stands not with what he delivered c. 3. ult. per doctrinam fides Legem
stabiliri. So Tosanus to that place.

2. It Is no true interpretation as Tossanus, ibid. from the scope.

6. The plain meaning seems to be this, that the Law (meaning the whole
Mosaicall dispensation, was given to the Jews by God for this end, that it
might instruct them of the Messiah to come to die for them, that so they might
believe in him accordingly, and be justified: and further to prepare them for
the Messiah himself and perfect service of God which he should bring with him.

1. If this be Gods aim in the whole Mosaicall dispensation, its of that part
the Moral Law and how is there then an utter impossiblillity that
justification by Christ should be procured or attained by the Moral Law? sect.
19. secondly, the whole was given by God to them say you) for this end that it
might instruct them of the Messiah, that so they might believe and be
justified. I know not but these are inconsistent.

2. Whenas Mr. Gataker rather inclines that Christ was the end of the Law, for
that reason simply, quia lex revera populo Deslata est quae a^ messiam viam
premuniret, quoderat ministerij Mosaic^ praec^pium ^u^^s.

Though there be a truth in it, that the Law instructs and leads to Christ
Ceremonial yea and Moral, as Mr Gattaker (which latter I know not how it will
consist with your opinion in point of preparation and yet you must hold it
because it is the office of the whole)

1. Yet that is confessed accidental.

2. There Is an other given by Gomarus, with us. Finis Vox, aut complementum (ut
Chrysostomo placet) aut causam cujus gratia Lex est, designat, nempe
obedientiam perfectam, quae cum nobis natura desit, soli vero Christo adsit ea
nostra fit perfidem, ut justi simus et jus vita aeternae obtineamus.


It Is true, it is called strained but without reason given, Interpretationem
Chrisostomianam ego quidem non illubenter admisserim: Christum Legis
complementum dici qui Legi anobis violatae plenissimam pro nob^s satisfactionem
exhibendo eam quam consummatissime implevit. (quo modo et illud accipio quod ad
Romans 3. 31. de lege per doctrinam Evangelicam stabilita dicitur.
to omit that it is the common tenet, and Mr. Gattaker says,

3. Chiefly and properly. Per^se et maxim proprie ( says Paraeus noting that
you give accidental) Christus est finis Legis hoc est complementum, et
perfectio quia Legis impletio in solo Christo est et habetur si^ut dicit ipse,
no^ vnei lege^ solvere sed implere, Implevit. Moralem Conformitate naturae et
vitae quam solus ipse habuit et habet. 2 Satisfactione pro maledictione et pro
peccatis nostrisper humilitatem et mortem. Et perse finis legis fuit,
justificatio nostra quia precipit perfectam obedientiam et hanc praestantibus
promittit vitam. Paraeus.


Neither does Mr. Gataker deny this legis finem per se.

4. I demand why finis per accidens shall exclude that which is per se? and for
the scope its proper, the question is how the Gentiles obtained righteousness,
how the Jews mist it, these sought it by the works of the Law, they knew not
Gods righteousness, submitted not to it, Christ in quo solo legis, imple^io
est et habetur, who therefore is the Justitia ve a nou est nisi per impletionem
Legis, and legis impletio non est nisi^n Christo. Neque is justitiam meruit
sibi; erat enim in se ipse justitia eterna. Alijs igitur est finis Legis, ad
justitiam, hoc est justitiam meruit, quibas vero? ca^ vis credenti, Lex hunc
habet finem ut facientes legem et just viventes justificentur says Tossanus,
Illum finem assequutu est solus Christus et nos assequimur dum fide eum
apprehendimus; Ita in Christo exhibetur et praestatur vera justitia quam lex
requirit modo ^^^ eum credamus. Offertur quidem justitia omnibus donatur can em
et impatatur solis credentibus.
perfection of it, and this is that of faith, and that righteousness of faith
is imputed (as Paraeus else where) and when he demands ad quid? he answers,
ad justitiam out of the text and,

Grant the Law now by accident leading to Christ, yet in Christ the complement
and perfect fulfilling of the Law it is and is to be had, est et habetur. It Is
to righteousness, which is not without fulfilling the Law and it is all one in
Christ merited for them that believe, given to them that believe and imputed.

Christ's conformity and humility, was nothing else but perfect fulfilling, his
whole poverty consisted in these, and is our riches.

The text would be granted if no more were urged then Christ's sufferings and
passive obedience, but you that hold the other an essential requisite to the
efficacy of that passive obedience, cannot exclude it, and this text is evident
for full obedience to the Law.

But I Will return to you. You confirm what you say,

1. By the renor of the context, for his meaning is doubtless Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness by the observation whereof as their own, they
sought to be justified, which was as well of the Ceremonial as the Moral.

This excludes not the Moral Law, nor that in Christ is the perfect
fulfilling of it to righteousness, and so justification of believers.

2. Neither yet, that the Ceremonial Law was a Scoolemaster to Christ. 1.
Seeing thereby unquestionably is meant the whole frame of body or the
administration of Moses, as your self in the same place, and by this you
oppose your self to Mr. Gattaker, who is only for the Ceremonial Law, which
yet concerned not every believer (which is the Apostles here) but Jews, and so
long the words had a truth before it, and will have eternally, so that the
maine scope is that the only way to find righteousness to justification is
by knowledge of Christ and submission to Christ the righteousness of God:
Faith in Christ is the way of obtaining righteousness before God, and that
because he is the Complement of the Law to that end, in eo est as habetur; Let
me be found not having mine own but that which is by the faith of Christ, the
righteousness of God, which is so per imputationem as Paraeus out of the
Apostle, c. 4. ver. 6. and 11. of which before.

The next text is,

1 Cor. 1. 30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us
wisdom and righteousness, etc.

Because Christ is said to be made to us of God righteousness therefore the
righteousness of Christ is imputed to us.

Here is less color for the deemed imputation, then in any of the former
Scriptures.

Let us a little view Interpreters, for by them you did propose to give us
satisfaction.

Your adversaries as you call them, who suppose and propose strength in this
place for the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us, are all Protestants
that I know not one excepted.

To satisfy your Hearers and Readers I will enquire a little into Expositors.
Calvin, Quo intelligit nos ejus nomine acceptoresse deo quia morte sua peceata
nostra expia^^^^, et ejus obedientia nobis in justitiam imputatur, nam cum
fidei justitia in peccatorum remissione et gratuim acceptatione consistat,
utrumque per Christum consequimur, In Locum; see him Instit. l. 3. c. 3. Sect
19. This I find urged, pro in putata Christi justitia, against Romanists, and
vindicated in the castigatore of Bellatmine. Paraeus brings it into form
thus, Justitia nostra seu nobis donata justificamur. Nulla ^li^ nisi Christi
justitia nobis per fidem imputata, est nostra coram Deo justitia. Nulla igitur
alia nisi Christi justitia nobis imputata coram Deo justificamur. See him
large. See what is mentioned on, 23. Jer. 6. before, for both these places go
hand in hand. See Ames. p. 144. and Chamior sect. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, and
24. Justitia a Deo nobis factus est quia in eo solo justi habemur, reputamur
illius merito justi. Aret. In Loc. Tossen. in Loc. Sic justitia nostra per
sanguinem ad Romans 3. Et quidem justitia non exparte sed tota nostra justitia,
per remissionem peccatorum et imputationem totius suae justitiae, fic Ier. 33.
p. 19. ad Locum. Seeing we had no such virtue as to obtain righteousness for
us of the Lord, Christ was given us by the Lord who performed perfect obedience
to the Law, that by his obedience we might be made righteous, for this
obedience of Christ imputed to us and apprehended by faith, is that
righteousness of ours, 5 To. 19, etc. placed in Christ, who is made unto us of
God wisdom, Righteousness, 1 Cor 1. 30. etc. And this is our righteousness
Christ himself, whose righteousness and Innocence being ascribed to us, does
bring assured remission of sins and true righteousness, Dr. Whittaker p.
229, 230. in Camp. et Dure Paul affirms Christ to be made unto us, ibid. See
Joh. Crotiu on that Text, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and 23 Ier. 6. Si Christus nobis factus
est justitia ergo non ipsi nobis sed sumus justi per imputationem ibid. De
justitia imputata p. 391. See him confuting Exceptions of Bellar. and Be anus.
Novinus ae ^u^pollere Christus est nostra justitia; et Christi justitia est
nostra justitia, Christus enim nec qua est persona nec ratione quarum vis
aliarum perfectionum est nostra justitia, sed ratione obedientiae
satisfactoriae, si ratione obedintia et (...), Christus sane non potest esse
nostra justitia, qum, ipsius justitia nostra sit justitia, p. 39, 394. ubi
nobiscum citat patres. 327. and Dr. Downham de Justit. l. 4. c. 9. Sect. 3, etc.


Let us now hear you.
1 Christ is no otherwise affirmed to be, or to be made Righteousness to us
then wisdom or sanctification, therefore there is no more ground to conclude
hence imputation of Christ's righteousness for our righteousness, then of his
wisdom etc. This is unsavory: This special manner cannot be made good herce.
The meaning is he is made the Author or sole means by way of merit, purchased
for us by his death.

1. As I find this Text urged by Protestants for Imputation, so I find in
Papists this objection. Becanus makes it, to whom Ioh. Grocius and Cham^^e
give a particular answer.

2. Though there be granted something general wherein Christ is said to be all
those, it follows not but there are special differences. Aliter, says
Chamier, sanctificatio aliter justitia nimirum vel inhaerenter vel imputative.
Et hoc quidem tanto certius quanto distinctius posita justitia et
sanctificatio; nam justitia inherens eadem est sanctificatio quia utra que
inhabitu utra jue in operibus justio quae eo ipso quod iusta sunt ^uod sancta,
sect. 20. and sect. 21, unless therefore the Apostle shall twice say the same,
tegungenda est a sanctificatione iustitia, et quia sanctificatio est iustitia
inhaerens, accipienda justitia pro ea, quam nos imputatam dicimus. So he.


For sanctification is the same with righteousness inhaerent, and therefore
must it be an other righteousness which we call imputed.

Paraeus gives it to the Apostle out of Romans 4. 6. and 11. as before. He
shows the same out of Bernard. Crotius answers more largely to the same
purpose, and cites Fathers for it, sect. 44. and 46. proving the same, p. 397.

And though this manner cannot be made good hence in the word and phrase, yet
you see there is a necessity of distinction; and whenas the Scripture says, that
by Et tamen non negemus, effective, factum meritorie sapientiam justitiam
sanctificationem, redemptionem, certe enim ille mecitus est a deo qui ^uid
gratiae aut habem^s aut habere possumus, sed nimirum mer^it ut, et inherenter
sanctificemur et imputativ^ justificemur, etc. c. 17. sect. 23.
his obedience we are constituted righteous, and shows the way imputation of
righteousness, Romans 4. 6. 11. we may well supply it, and thereby put a
difference.

3. To the second part of your answer, it being made by the same Jesuit,
Chamter answers, granting his merit and extending it to justification by
imputed righteousness, as well as to our inherent sanctification.

For the reasons you give:

1. The word righteousness is frequently put for justification.

You must remember that is by a metonymy, for its the cause, justification the
effect; and if he be made justification he must be made righteousness to
that end cause and effect put each other.

2. That righteousness is still given to the death of Christ, and never to his
active obedience.

It Is righteousness as well as passive obedience, and due on our behalf to God
by his eternally obliging Law.

We exclude not Christ's death.

What you lay down is the question and is no stronger then your proofs.

And its wonder to me how you can exclude it who make it essentially requisite
to the meritoriousnesse of his suff^rings, and these not to be separated, as
before.

3. We profess both active and passive, It Is not therefore against the
principles of themselves, none hold it of his active obedience only, that
ever I read of, but the man of clouts your self put up and shoot at in this
business.

4. Expositers are for this. Who by Christ's being made righteousness unto us,
understand our justification or just making by (...): some plac^^g it in
Remission* some ascribing it to his sufferings, none to his active obedience or
imputation of this to us.

1. What Expositors have done we have given a taste, and 2 There Is none that take
it for active obedience alone and imputation thereof excluding Christ's passive
obedience. 3. Many join the active and passiv both, all that I know, either
directly as those you o pose, or in effect; whenas they make hat which indeed
was active also as Christ's whole humiliation our obedience as Paraeus. An as
for imputation* I know no enemies it has but Soci^us, (...) and Mr. Wotto^
(Mr. Ga^aker disclaimeth it: So does Piscato^, justitia. 1. cujus sa^isfactione
nobis donata atque imputata justi sumus. M^ton. effecti. (...) and P^raeus) and
Papists: and yet the evidence of truth is such as from this place where he
answers Calvin he yields what we desire: and Imputation as the Mars. of
Controversies observed to us, and is to be seen l. 2 de justif. c. 10. sect.
deinde: and that out of Bernard.

So such as place justification in remission of sins which supposes
righteousness and that of Christ and that imputed or applied to that end, it
being an effect or consequent, as Mr. Gattaker himself, and ours at at large
before showed.

And it is but your presumption to think that on your Popish objection answered
before you made it, which you will not take notice of, that Imputation of
Christ's active obedience will not more be urged or contended for from hence.

The next is, 2 Cor. 5 ult.
For he has made him to be sin for us* who knew not sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him.

As our sins are imputed to Christ, so Christ's righteousness meaning his
active obedience, is imputed to us. Mr. Gataker has well observed, this place
is pregnant against themselves.

Let us a little view Expositors on the Text, and see whether there be a man
opposite to the imputation of Christ's righteousness, I still say active and
passive from this text. Bell. Dicto lo^o, gives it to Calvin and others: hinc
enim se^ui (...) Vt nos justi s^mus ipsa justitia dei quae est in Christo,
sicut ipse dicitur peccatum, i^ est peccator* pe^ peccata qu^ sunt in nobis; ut
enim imputantur i'li peccata nostra i^a imputatur nobis justitia illius. Calvin
in loc. Justitia hic non pro qualitate aut habitu sed pro impuratione (...) eo
quod accepta nobis sertur Christi justitia, nunc ad (...) redeamus justitiae e^
pecca^^. Quomodo justi* sumus ^oram deo* qualiter ^c. Christus f^it peccator.
Personam enim nostram quodammodo suscep^, ut reus nostro nomine fieret, et
tanquam peccator judicaretur non proprijs sed alie^^s (...) -- I^a ^^^ nunc
justi sumus in ipso non quia operibus proprijs satis^aciam^^ judicio* Dei ^^d
quoniam (...) Christi justitia, quam ^ide indu^mus ^^ nostra ^iat, in loc cit
l. 2. Instit. c. 16. sect* 6. Nam ^ilius dei omni (...) purissimus iniquitatum
tamen nostratum prob^^m ac (...) ac sua vicissem puritate nos ope^uit. Vides
non in n^bis sed in Christo esse justitiam nostram, nobis tantum ^^ jure
competere quia Christi sumus perticipes, si quidem omnes ejus divitias cum*
ipso possidemus, in loc Instit l. 3. c. ^^. sect^* 23. Sic Beza, in loc.
Justitia dei ad est* justi apud deum* et ^uide^ justitia, non n^bis (...) sed
qu^ cum in Christ^ sit nobis ^e^ ^idem a d^o imputatur, ideo enim addi^^^ est
(...) Sic e^go sumus* justitia Dei in ipso ut ille est (...) in nobis, nempe ex
imputatione, where he shows how Christ ^^ made sin. Pareus Castig. l. 2.
c. 10. p. 509. Propositio nostra est manifesta, etc. et assumptio pa^^^.
Cha^ie^. of the place, in quo magnum pondus, qu^a non tantum nos dicimur ^acti
justitia, sed etiam Christus factus peccatum, (...) vis (...). August (...). c.
41. d^ justis. c. 17. Sect. 38. (...) peccatum ^t nos justitia noc nostra sed
De (...) nec in nobis sed in ipso, sicut ipse peccatum non (...), sed nostrum
noc in (...) in nobis. Secundus locus (...) evincitur Christi justitiam (...)
nostram per imputationem habetur, 2 Cor. 5. ^^^ Dr. D^venant c. 28. p. 367.
Vtr^mqu^ hoc loco habemus et Christo imputatum quod nostrum ^uit e^ (...)
vici^^^m imputa^^^ quod Christi suit. So Dr. (...) l. 5. c. 1. Sect. 4, 5, etc.
So Dr. Ioh, (...) ubi supra* disp. 8. Sect 47. 397. (...) Bell. (...)* Abbo.
against ^ishop. Dr. Whit^ake, ubi supr^ (...) in locum ut nos effice^^^^^
justitia Dej; hoc est justi (...), imputativa justiti^ tanquam vest or
naremur. In ipso significat extra Christ^^ (...) esse justiti^^ qu^ nos
possimus (...) et qu^ val^at i^ conspect^ de^, ^b. Toss^^^s ut nos (...); hoc
est justifica^^mur non justitia inherente, sed ^o propter unione^ eum illo et
imputationem eju^ justiti^, in loc. (...) although we ^e in our s^lves
altogether sinful and (...), yet even that man that is impious in himself,
full of iniquity, full of sin him being found in Christ, etc. puts away
his sin by not impuring, takes (...) away the punishment thereunto due by
p^^doning is and accepts him in Jesus Christ as perfe^^ly (...) as if he had
fullfilled all the whole law. I must take heed what I say. But the Apostle
says God^^^^ him to be sin who know no sin* etc. such we are in the sight
of God the father, as the very son of God himself. ^ in the world but this,
that man has sinned and God has suffered, that God has made himself the
sin of (...), and that men are (...) the righteousness of God, (...). Hooker
on the (...). ^. 4. p. 7.


But you must be hear^.

1. There is no footing in the Scripture for the inference drawn^ from it,
here is nothing of (...) of our sins to Christ or his imputation of
righteousness to ^s, Christ's being made sin imp^r^s ^^ such imputation, etc.

We deny it, lets see whose reasons are best

2. Dr. Davenant, says there is not the same power of (...) ^^righteousnesse, to
make Christ ^^righteous, which is of his righteousness to make th^se that
believe righteous, see more Sect. 19. p. 26.

You heard the Doctors Argument. I spare more but remit you to what is answered
to that named place.

3. Th^^'s not so much a^ the face of comparison, between Christ's being made
sin for us, and our being made the righteousness of God but the latter i^
affirmed a^ the effect, and, and conseq^^^t of the f^rmer.

1. There Is an agreement, as he was we are and both no other way then by
imputation. W^^ton def. Perk. p. 175. And Dr. Abb^^ ib. p. 400. who maintains
the comparison against Bishop, when Bishop, denied comparison: Mr. W^tt^^
answers there is some comparison or likeness employed by the Apostles.

2. Grant this the effect the former the cause the for mer cannot be, nor cause
this effect without imputation. Nor yet the latter without application,
imputation of the same.

3. Thirdly, in him must import faith and Gods imputation, thence participation
of his righteousness, not in our selves but another, him, which can no
otherwise be as you are often answered.

4. The clear meaning is, that God for that end made Christ sin, that is, a
sacrifice for sin; that we may be made, etc. That is a society or remnant of
righteousness, after the peculiar manner of Justification or righteous making,
which God has contrived through the sacrifice and offering of his Son.

This is but a general, and it is taken up by parts after, to which we will
give particular answer.

1. It Is a frequent expressure to call the sacrifice for sin by the name of
sin simply.

It Is granted and yet the same tell you, that interpretation, a sacrifice for
sin, is short, and that he was made sin, without which he could not be a
sacrifice; not by inherence but imputation.

So Doctor Downham. If God did make Christ a sacrifice Beza tamen natio
Antithesis pos. it ut potius Christus dicatur factus esse peccatum pro nobis i.
peccator non in sese, sed ex omnium nostrorum pecatorum reatu ipsi imputato,
e^hujus rei figura suit hircus illc geminu, cajus homentio Lev. c. 16 Beza in
loc m. Et si patros non nulli peccatum int elligant hostiam peccati tamen
uterque sensus stare potest quoniam utrogue modo Christus factus est peccatum
pro nobis, tum qula peccata nostra ultro in^e derivavit gesta^da, luenda, tum
quia victima factus pro illis revera luit. P 110. tamen sensus hand dubio est
ve^ior, et Chrysostomo placuit, etc. he was debtor coram Deo: quid est antem
debtor coram Deo nisi peccator cum debita nil sunt nisi peccata. Pareuscastig.
l. 2. c. 10. p. 510. Thus Parzus to Bellarmine objecting as you. S. Crotius p.
401. and p 406. who proves it from the tipe, 16. Lev. Audio illi imponi
peccata populicum portare peccata, unde polluebator hircus ipse et
polluebatalio, que causa est quod absolutione indigerit. qui ipsum tetigeret
ver. 24. and 26. hun tipum fuisse Christi non dubitantivere Christiani toll
nanc imputationem peccatorum a Christo et vetus ceremonias falt in annis,
quippe cui non respondetet veritas, etc. 407.
for sin he imputed our sins unto him, etc. neither can it be conceived
how he should be made a sacrifice for our sin, unless our sin were imputed
unto him. Who shows the agreement between the types and Christ, p. 267, 268.
See Mr. Wotton defenc. Perkins. the place may be expounded otherwise, he made
him to be counted a sinner, etc. Thomas and Catherine and p. 190 of Defenc,
our sins were charged to him as the sins of the people were in a type laid on
the escape goat, Lev. 26. 21. It Is Mr Perkins argument, Dr, Abbot defends it
largely, p. 204.

2. To express a number or company of justified ones Sect. 3. p. 45.

There it is examined.

Of that from the righteousness of God, we have spoken, it is of Gods donation
and contrivement, I and of God, that person as before.

4. The effect is meant, deliverance from the guilt and punishment of sin not
impatation of his active obedience.

If the effect be meant, it follows not that the righteousness of Christ
expressed shall be excluded, imputation of righteousness, the passive none
exclude, and you cannot the active if it be an essential requisite to the
passive, remission follows justification or just making (as you speak) a man
cannot be made just but by righteousness.

Your sixth is but an affirmation of expositors without places the contrary is
largely showed. I suppose.

One Scripture more, whence the argument being more ridicalous, it shall be
insisted on with more brevity.

You are a merry man that can laugh at Arguments brought from Gods word, all
are ridiculous, this more with you, you laugh at all Protestant Divines, and
truth it self, God may laugh at you in agone, when you shall stand, and be
found not in Christ's righteousness, but, a weak faith.

3. Gal. 10. For its written cursed is every one that abides not in all things
which are written in the books of the Law, and do them.

The argument is given in thus.

If every one be cursed that abides not, etc. then can no man be justified but
remains accursed, who has not the perfect obedience of Christ to the law
imputed to him, because no mancan obtain such personal observation thereof.

You say, it deserves not an answer; and the man of the argument is consederate
with Stapleton the Papist, at least in part: who maintains against Calvin,
that the righteousness of the law and the righteousness of faith, are not two,
but one and the same righteousness.

I know not the man of the argument, neither yet reason of your slighting him
or it.

2. Confedracy with Stapleton is a great matter, It seems in the man of this
argument. Your confederacy with them out of your own mouth must be
acknowledged a great crime.

3. The righteousness of the Law, which Christ in our stead as our surety
performed for us; Active and passive, which latter Paraus caleth obedience to
the law, is all one with the righteousness of Faith, that which faith applies
to our Justification.

Yet is he no confederate with Stapleton, seeing righteousness of the law with
him is, that which is inherent in us. Which has no agreement with us, but
rather with you, who establish faith and that instead of that of the Law; and
what is it but a part of inherent righteousness, required by the law? You call
it righteousness on 3. Phil. 9.

But lets hear your answer.
1. If there be no other way to dissolve the curse but Christ's perfect
fullfilling the law, woe a thousand times to the World: For 1. That there is none
such has been proved. 2. If it were it would not dissolve the curse, it
cannot be but by the blood of Christ. He must be made a curse.

These are words, and so is your first Reason, and your second: For we exclude
not Christ's blood that is obedience as the Apostle and Paraeus as before: and
how can you exclude Christ's Active obedience, which you confess Essential to
the blood to this effect dissolution of sin, that it may be a sacrifice?

2. He that is fully discharged of non-continance, is out of danger of the
curse: and it is consistent with the opinion opposed to ascribe perfect
forgivenes to the passive obedience, without imputation of the active to that
end that is pleaded not to bring men of the curse has under the blessing, or
promise do this.

1. Christ's sufferings are not in themselves a full discharge, they must be
imputed.

2. They must have concurring as an essential requisite, Christ's active
obedience, if which they be imputed they take away the curse: did you never
hear of this before: and yet dispute it so often?

Your self confess, where there is perfect forgiveness, that man is perfectly
righteous; I Will say so too. That I require is that as you affirm it you show us
a cause, and tell us wherewithal.

We can when as we name the imputation of both, as there is righteousness given
us there is a cause.

And so when as you make the Active obedience an essemsiall requisite to his
sufferings, there is a cause. You that deny it, deny the cause. But as we have
showed before the imputation of both must be supposed in the same; here is
pardon, here is righteousness, here is no curse here is a blessing and the causes:
your self deny Christ's death enough without that essential requisite: chew on
this good Sir.

To omit that just making goes before pardon as before: and the contrary were
the abemination spoken of urged by our's to justify a wicked person.

3. Imputation of a perfect fullfilling of the law from another cannot maks him
such, a continuer in the law who breaks it daily and leaves him under the
Curse.

All the imputation in the world of whatsoever from whomsoever cannot make him
that has not continued to have continued in them.

This argument is a bloody and merciful spirit bearing down all before it to
hell.

Imputation of Christ's Active and Passive obedience which is our Tenet, meketh
him a continuer in the works of the Law, notwithstanding the many things
wherein all offend, in Gods account: those that hold the imputation of the
Passive obedience alone do so, or must grant no man living in Gods account a
perfect fulfiller of the Law, or perfectly righteous, which yet you argue for;
for it takes away sins and that man is perfectly just as you teach.

Whenas therefore you say all the imputations under heaven, of whatsoever, from
whomsoever can not; you oppose imputation of an others righteousness or
obedience simply, imputation of that which is passive of Christ also. And now
let the Reader judge whose argument or tender is a bloody one; for deny this
imputation of Christ's obedience, ex concessis, and all are as by nature,
Children of wrath still, and under the curse. These are but words.

5. Ult. The meaning is, every one that expects justification by the Law, the
Curse will fall heavy upon him. It Is to be limited to the universality of them
only who depend on the Law for justification.

1. I grant that every one that expects justification by the Law is accursed,
by this Scripture; but this answers not the Argument, which is that therefore
to avoid that curse there must be perfect obedience imputed by which we must be
perfectly righteous, and avoid the curse, we must have it to avoid the Curse,
either our own or another, its impossible by our own obedience, we must have
it by another, and that cannot be but by imputation, and so might pass the
rest as not to the matter.

2. It Is a truth of those, but it must not be limited to them; if so, then
only justiciaries that look to be justified by the Law personally performed
are under the curse and not sinners simply (especially, which in the Church,
and so under the Law) impenitent men though they hate that opinion are under
the curse, by that place of Scripture.

Your first Reason.
1. What the Law speaks, it speaks to all that are under the Law, and no
other, and those that ex^pect it by faith are not under the Law but under
Grace, the curses concern them not, against such is no Law, etc.

1. This proves not that those only that will be justified by the Law, are
under the curse; it is a truth of others who seek it not that way, being yet
under the Law, as all are that are not under Grace.

No man denies what you say of the believer in Jesus Christ, neither does it
prove your restriction, or limitation: Faith in Christ, applies the
righteousness of Christ, of which before, By which we are justified, and have
no condemnation, and it establishes the Law.

2. Say you the context leads us to this limitation. 1. because the preceding
words are, for as many as are of the works of the Law are under the Curse, for
proof of which he alleges this text. 2. It Is proved by the 9 ver. those
that are of faith are blessed with Abraham: these, not those that would be
justified by the Law, which he proves because they were under the Curse. So
that continuance, etc. is only required of those either to avoid the Curse or
obtain a blessing; who seek to be justified by the works of the Law, and not
of those that believe and depend on Christ for justification.

I grant as before, justitiaries accursed, only believers blessed:

And to the 3. the just to live by faith: Is the curse therefore limited to
justitiaries? No, but it is true of other sinners simply.

When as you conclude,

Therefore that Justification which we have by faith in Christ cannot be said
to be by a continuance in all things Written in the Law to do them, because
it is nothing else but justification it self by, the Law.

1. What agreement there is between this conclusion and what you took to
prove, the limiting the curse to Justitiaries, I understand not.

2. I know none that defends that justification by faith is by our
continuance in the Law to do it. Its by the righteousness of Christ his active
and passive obedience, his dying for us and fulfilling the Law for us, or death
with his obedience that essential requisite, in our Doctrine apprehended by
faith, imputed by God, by which we avoid the curse, and enjoy the blessing, as
before.

Sect. 29. Whereas it may be objected, may not a man be justified by faith and
that Law, and be l^tit^led to a righteousness of that Law by faith; you answer
ver. 12. the Law is not of faith, he cannot fulfill the Law one woves or other
by faith, it requires a personal observation, of which c. 8. 1 part. ( and
then tell us) that here is we Sanctuary for pretended imputation, but an high
hand of heaven to overthrow it.

I need say no more then what I did immediately before answer, we plead not for
personal observation, more then you, yet observation by another we urge; that
others passive obedience with it is essential requif^te as you call it.

The former is not of faith this is the righteousness of faith, and profefle
in these words of our Homily, Christ in the righteousness of all them that
believe in him, be for them paid the Ransom by his death, be for them
fulfilled the Law in his life; so that now in him and by him every one
Christian man may be called a fulfiller of the Law, for as much as that which
our infirmity lacked, Christ's righteousness supplied.

As for the place you refer the Reader to, he may find it examined.

Some plead, Phil. 39. but we having elsewhere upon a diligent search found
this Scriptur looking a quite contrary way, etc.

1. The Some, are all Protestants against Papists: 2. you found it not but
endeavored to make it look a clean contrary way; but in vain as on that
place is showed. See Zanchius on the place in the Margent. In Christo^^^mpe
insitus et incorpotatus eoque habere non suam propriam justitiam, quae
videlicet ex lege est, id est operiam, sed justitiam Christi quae per fidem
habetur. Hi exuti propiia -- Induuntur justitia aliena hoc est Christi qua vere
justi faecti, etc. ibid. Sola aliena vere, in conspectu Dei justificari
possumus -- Est una epraecipius controversijs quae inter nos sunt et
Pontificios non postrema. In Christo est, fide tantum a nobis apprehensa-Opus
habet -- Tam perfect a Christi justitia qua tan quam vest pretiosa illius
labes contegantur juxta illud, p. 32. beati quotum, etc. 1 p. c. 6. Nempe
Christi imputata qua sola vere in conspectu Dei justi reputamur. Est nostra non
alia ratione nisi quatenus per fidem apprehenditur et nobis imputatur.. -- Mere
aliena est justitia et tantum nostra per imputationem nam neque action fidei
nostrae justificamur; sed ea ^c tantum quae per fidem apprehenditur, quae est
Christus cum sua obedientia justi censemur, et sic illid intelligo credidit
Abraham et impatatum est illi ad justiciam, Genesis 15. 6. quid reputatum? non
actio qua sed id quod crededit seu ut alii loquuntur, ipsa fides non sui
apprehendiatis sed objecti apprehensi respectu -- Haec vero est. Tum Christi
ipfius obedientia qua pro nobis et legem implevit et mortuus est. 2 Phil. et 5
Romans per hunc enim justi, constatuuntur multi est credentes - Denique haec
justitia est Christus id ipse factm pro nobis, obediens usque ad mortem, 1 Cor.
1. and 2 Phil. haec demum est illa justitia de qua loquitur Apostolds quae sola
fide percipitur, non est igitur nostra propria sed aliena non nisi ex illa
habetur id que manu fidei -- Quare-Et nisi per justitiam quae est in Christo
justus esse nemo potest nostra sola imputationenon ut opus, etc. Sed ut
justitiam Dei in se apprehensum habens justificat, sicut oculum non ut aurium
Sed vinum in se continens sitim exting it. Capite 5. concludit sicut per in
obedientiam Ad ae nobis nimirum imputam facti sumus omnes peccatores, sic per
obedientiam Christi nempe pa: iter imputatam, noc qui in eum credimus justos
constitui, etc. ubi textum profert, 9 Romans 29 30. 10 Romans 3. Zan. in lo. Hinc
seq^^^r neque action fidei nostrae tanqua^ vel justitia vel part justitiae
no, justificari. ib.


And thus I have examined the Scriptures which you oppose. Let the Reader judge
whether you are as good as your words and undertakings.

Arguments against faith in a proper sense propounded and answered.

1. Arg. That which impeacheth the truth or justice of God, can have no
agreement with the truth.

But the imputation of faith in the sense declared does so.

Ergo.

The minor is proved, because if God should impute faith for righteousness he
should account that to be so which is none.

The major is confessed an anointed truth, the minor is denied, and to the
proof answer is made.

This was the plea of that fanatique Spirit Swinkfildius as Zanchie: and the
Council of Trent as Calvin observes, to prove that the word justification was
not to be taken in a judicial sense for absolution, but in a Physical or
Moral sense for constituting or making a man properly and completely just, and
is the common argument of Papists, for justification by inherent grace: yet I
conceive it very unjust to charge either with Swinkfieldianisme or Popery.

The plea is good as it is made by us, and made good out of the Learned in our
vindication of Mr. Walker, and that by our Orthodox Divines.

What Swink fieldius held I cannot find though I have sought, and cannot
speak to it, it is not in that place of my Book.

For the Popish opinion of just making by inherent righteousness, and ours by
what is imputed, they differ as a opposed opinions, the question is of that
which constituteth a man properly and completely just: we deny inherent
righteousness, by the same argument faith, these are imcompleat and imperfect,
there is somewhat else that does it, and there is the perfect righteousness of
Christ, here is a truth answering Gods account, see it at large before.

And methinks the word just making should not conform us to them more then
your self, who use the same often, as somewhere I have gathered and observed
to you.

2. It does not follow God should account that for righteousness which is none
-- for faith is righteousness, in truth and propriety of speech.

It Is not perfect righteousness, and therefore it is not enough that it be
righteousness, it must be perfect, what makes a man so in the saight of God,
if God should pute that which is imperfect for this righteousness, Gods
judgment shall not be according to truth. It shall be but in herent
righteousness if you stand to that and what the Papists urge. You say,

3. You mean not Gods accounting such an act, a righteous act, much less that
he esteems it a perfect observation of the Law. But that God looks on a
believer, and intends to do as graciously as it were with a man pe^fectly
righteous. Of this further, c. 19. 1 par. sect. 6. and 7.

1. I answer that which is imputed is not only righteousness, but exact
conformity to Gods Law, such doing such suffering.

2. I add, When God looks on a believer so, and deals so it is not with
respect to faith but that perfect obedience fo Christ, which faith
apprehends, it is in his beloved, in him I am well pleased, is but the
applying instrument.

3. That Is not all, it constituteth righteous, holy, unreprovable, unblamable,
in Gods sight, a believer is so though not inherently, in and by the imputed
righteousness of Christ, as Christ himself, because with his righteousness,
which faith in a proper sense does not, and therefore.

4. Best writers say, God accounts men righteous or perfectly just, who have
for givenesse of sins, and are not so in exactness of speech.

I grant it, we are not so in our selves, yet in exactness of speech are so in
Christ: It Is certain from forgiveness of sins, which is a consequent of
righteousness imputed, yea of Justification, those do not exclude Christ's
righteousness, nor imputation: but suppose it, and so does Mr. Gataker, of the
passive obedience, and you must do so if you will not hold with Socinus, and if
you hold the imputation thereof, what is essentially requiste, cannot be
excluded.

But what is all this to your saiths imputation in a proper sense, all hold it
relatively taking in the object, as before.

Object. 2. If faith in such a sense should be imputed for righteousness, then
should justification be by works or somewhat in our selves: But the Scriptures
reject Works and all things in our selves. Ergo You answer.

1. Either by works and somewhat else in our selves is meant the merit of
works, o^ else by way of simple performance. In the former the Proposition is
false, and consequence donyed, faith may be imputed in the declared sense, and
yet not by merit: If in the latter sense so the minor is false, for the
Scripture rejects no where every thing that may go under the name of works,
or that may be done by us from having to do inthe matter of justification, God
attributes justification to faith which he calls works, 6 Joh this is the
work, etc. thus Writers call faith a work.

1. That you oppose is the imputation of Christ's righteousness as the formal
cause of justification; you deny Christ's righteousness the material, and it
imputed the formal cause: You establish faith. Our argument is, if by faith,
then by a work or somewhat in our selves; when you deny the consequence, if it
be taken by it is merit.

I answer, that which justifies as matter or form, must have worth and merit,
so has Christ's righteousness, and therefore we pich on it, otherwise it could
not be the matter or formal cause though imputed, and we know works cannot
merit, when all is done we are uprofitable servants: So your self, 1 Treat. p.
191. And therefore also we may reject faith in proper sense because it is not of
worth and value, it cannot justify formally. In the latter sense the Scripture
rejects works yea faith as a work as the matter or form. Paul will be found
not having his own righteousness, not faith, the place it has is only as an
instrument, receiving that by which we are justified; as an hand by which we
receive riches by which we are rich, as a golden Cup, Non ut aurium sed vinum
in se continens sitim extinguit, as Mr. Zanchy but now, in regard of the
object, that which is proper to the righteousness of Christ is given by you to
faith, and it excludes Christ as you defend it, the Argument is strong against
you.

3. Object. Imputation of faith for righteousness in that sense makes
justification not of Grace. To this you answer,

I deny the minor, there is anentive consistence between faith and Grace, 2
Ephesians. 8. Romans 3. 24. it is purposly required, 4 Romans 16. It Is free because
nothing is required but a receiving, believing is nothing else but a receiving
that righteousness the justification which God gives us with his Son, 1 John 12. So that there is no prejudice to grace.

1. It Is a good argument.

2. Though what you say be good and true of faith as an instrument receiving
the righteousness or justification which God gives by Christ his Son, in
which speech the weight of justification is put on what is received, the
righteousness of Gods Son, which is our expressure against Papists, wherein
Christ's righteousness is allowed the matter and meritorious cause, and it is
application or imputation the form, where it is given faith as the
isntrumental cause only, but to the object to be that by which we are made
just.

3. Yet this answer will not serve you, if you remember the question; if you
consider faith is not in conjunction, but opposition to Christ's righteousness,
and in a proper sense, that of an instrument is relative, and so is receiving,
you exclude Christ's obedience, the object, deny a figurative sense, thus I
affirm it a work, and righteousness in its self, a man's own, I deny it,
subordinate to grace or Christ, but in opposition.

4. Argu. Faiths imputation for righteousness in this sense is an occasion of
boasting unto the flesh.

This you deny.
Because its by Gods gift, 2 Ephesians. 8 its what he receives, and if why boastest
thou thy self, no man has just cause.

The minor is truth:

That Is no cause of denial because it is received, therefore it is not an
occasion to the flesh: It Is true, there is no true cause, yet the flesh will take
it, and it is an occasion given it. The Pharise gloried in what he did, and
looked to be justified by it, and yet he knew he received it, and therefore
thanked God, they that urged works of righteousness with faith and Christ and
Grace, yet still gloried. The Apostle therefore will be found not having his own
righteousness, and will have that of faith, Christ's; this excludes boasting
not faith which is held all one with do this, and which is set in opposition,
as by you and not the righteousness of Christ.

2. Suppose the act of believing were from a man's self, yet he has no cause
of boasting, because the weight of glory given it, and consequents, are not
given it for its worth, but by Gods good pleasure.

As a man to whom a King for taking a pin from his sleeve should be made
honorable, and it were ridiculous he should brag. This is the case of
faith, though a believer has given him forgiveness, right and title to
heaven, its no ground of boasting.

When God chooses weak and foolish things, occasion of boasting is put off,
had men fulfilled the Law, there were cause, because they, had done it out of
themselves, abillities essential to nature, which are not in faith, or the act
of believing

1. The act of believing is a man's own, when a man lives by faith its by his
own faith, though God gives him ability thereunto.

2. It Is an act of obedience and righteousness as you say, and the Scripture
says, Paul would be found, not having his own righteousness, and not of works
of righteousness which we have done.

3. Papists may answer so of charity; etc.

4. So long though there be not cause there is occasion for the flesh, the flesh
may, will and does take it.

That it is not given for it is worth but Gods pleasure is not enough, Gods
pleasure is only in Christ, in whom only is worth, which you exclude as an
enemy to it, in the very question, and not the righteousness of Christ: had
faith its place of an instrument (the good pleasure of God being in Christ)
taking in the object it were somewhat: your proper sense indureth it not: The
King that does it for a pin, is not every way free, we deny a pins-worth in
faith: a pins-worth and a poundsworth diffen not in kind but degree: a faith in
this similitude is worthy, though it be never so little.

Receiving, giving pardon and heaven to Gods Grace in and for Christ's
righteousness are excluders of boasting, nothing that excludes that
righteousness of Christ establishes Free grace.

5. If faith in a proper sense be imputed for righteousness then are we
justified by that which is imperfect, what needs a justification.

You say, you have me^ with such an one, and answer,

1. The words import either we are justified without the concurrence of any
thing that is perfect, or that somewhat which is comparatively weak and
imperfect, may somewaies concur, and contribute thereunto.

In the former sense it false, it does not follow if faith be imputed, there is
nothing perfect required, it supposes more things then one, Christ's perfect
atonement for sin, which if it had not been there had been no place for the
imputation of faith, etc. upon this it is that God imputes our faith to us.

If says be imputed, we are justified by that which is imperfect, is as clear
as the Sun.

When you say it opposes Christ's atonement.

1. The effect you give it is not that by his sufferings imputed by God and
applied by faith we should be justified, which is all one with our tenet if it
be taken with what you call an essential requisite, active obedience.

2. Nay you make Christ's merit to be faiths imputation which is the Socinian
and Arminian tenet.

3. And do what you can it is but imperfect and cannot justify otherwise then
as an instrument applying the object, Christ's active and passive
righteousness, to what follows.

If in the latter sense, that somewhat that is weak and imperfect may
sometimes concur and conduce to justification, so the proposition is granted
and the minor goes to wrack, for that faith and the Minister by whom, are
weak and imperfect, both which concur, ministerially and instrumentally we
may be justified by what is weak.

Our question is about what we are formally just before God or justified,
whether imputation of faith in a proper sense or the righteousness of Christ.

When we assert the latter to be that by which we are formally just before God,
we deny it by faith in a proper sense: That which God imputes to
righteousness must be perfect, it cannot constitute us perfectly righteous,
else, faith in a proper sense is* imperfect therefore it cannot; take faith now
for an instrument in a relative sense we do, It Is true how weak soever,
because it lays hold of and applies what is perfect, but in a proper sense,
denying what is figurative, and opposed to the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, it cannot be so.

It Is one thing to be ministerial and isntrumental, an other to be the
material and formal cause, so much as you take from perfection of those yea
from merit and worth, so much you take from the perfection of our
rightousnesse, no effect can exceed the cause of it.

6. Argu. Some have opposed the imputation of faith we plead for, seeing God
should rather receive a righteousness from us then we from him. But in
justification God receives not a righteousness from us, but we from him.

The major follows not, that God should receive from us or not we from God. 1.
Because faith is not a righteousness properly, but that God by the means
thereof, and tender of it looks on us as righteous, not as made meriteriously
or formally righteous by it, but as having performed the condition to which the
promise is made of making us righteous, meritoriously by the sufferings of his
Son, and formally by remission.

Whose reason this is I know not but if faith be imputed, etc. we receive not
from God a righteousness, but God from us, by the tender thereof say you God
looks on us as righteous.

To the Reason, 1. Faith in a proper sense, is properly a righteousness, that
which is called inherent. It may both with truth and properiety of speech be
called and counted a righteousness, yea the smallest degree, so you, p. 176.
on tender of this that follows, so that we still receive not.

2. That which is excluded is denied, that whereby we are formally justified,
and therefore that which is asserted, faith in a proper sense should be by
opposition the formal cause; that its a means in our sense is not questioned,
and that which makes us formally must be as righteousness so having worth.

3. Faith when as it is a condition is not to be understood in a proper sense
and in opposition to the righteousness of Christ, but a relative sense taking
that in, for that received and applied is the condition, and by it are we (as
meritorius and formal) made just, that righteousness consists in the
sufferings of Gods Son as you, not excluding Christ's active obedience that
essential requisite, to make it meritorious, thus it receives from the Lord,
excluding this, it receives not but tendreth to him remissionof fins is a
consequent of justification, and therefore cannot be the formal cause.

2. If faith were righteousness, it follows not, that God receives from us a
righteousness, we rather receive faith from God for our justification.

Our receiving faith from God, hinders not that on our tender and his
receiving it, God receives righteousness from us to our justification, which
is denied.

3. Our imputation of says supposes a righteousness given unto men and
received from God in justification, because it could not be traly said that God
does impute faith for righteousness, unto any man except he should make him
righteous upon believing. Now as it is impossible that a man should be made
righteous without a righteousness in one kind or other, so it is impossible
that righteousness whereby a man is made righteous in justification, should be
given him from any but G^d; and this is forgiveness of sins.

If imputation of faith supposes a righteousness given whereby man is made
just in justification, then God in justification gives a righteousness
whereby and without which it is impossible that a man should be made just; and
this must needs be that which formally justifies; your words they are, I
subscribe; the question will be what it is? either faith that is imputed of
remission of sins, or Christ's righteousness active and passive.

Faith is not that 1. faith supposes this. 2. Indeed its that by which this is
received* be it either righteousness Whenas causae applicanti tribuitur quod
proprie et immediate pertinet ad rem applicatam, as Dr. Davena. p. 371.
explaineth that Place, Romans 4. 5. quia fides apprehendit et applicat nobis
Christi justitiam id fidei ipsi trib ^itur quod re^pse Christo Debetur.
Zanchius. neque action fidei nostrae justificamur sed ca re tantum, quae per
fidem apprehenditur, quae est Christus cum sua obedientia justi censemur et sic
illud intelligo credidit Abraham, etc. quid reputatum ^ non actio qua sed id
^^od credidit, sive ut alij loquuntur, ipsa fides non sui apprehendentis, sed
objecti apprehensi respectu, so Zanchius on Philip. 3.
or remission of sins. 3. It is not perfect righteousness. Remission of
sins cannot be it, for though we receive it by faith, yet 1. it is but a
consequent of justification as before. And 2. Its no way righteousness, it
has not the definition of it, and therefore cannot possibly be that which
makes righteous; the truth then is* that it is the righteousness of Christ, by
it the word says, we are constitued righteous as the word shows, God
imputes righteousness. Faith taking in this object by a Metalepsis, is
granted imputed.

The difference will be then what righteousness, passive, or both active and
passive; and thus this controversy being an other comes in. I hold both and
so must you, when the Active is an essential requisite to the passives
meritoriousnesse. Let these particulars be considered and they will notably
tend to the streighting this Controversy.

What you further say you have answered, in that to Mr. Walkers are examined,
and what you say in defense of your self not to be an Arminian and Socinian in
this point, and the weakness of the charge that is laid on the contrary
opinion, we have examined what is charged on the active obedience of Christ by
P^raeus and Piscator, c. 2. sect. 8. conclus. 7. where Mr. Gattaker is also
mentioned, whither I remit the Reader and your self.

When you infer, Impartial men judgeing between both parts, would clearly
see to set the Saddle of Arminianisme and Socinianisme on Our opinion as the
right Horse. I entreat Judgment and desire no favor Sir, Mr. Gataker accused
by Lucius of that crime denied it on this ground he held the imputation of the
passive obedience of Christ, justitia imputata quam a Christo habemus
justifica^^ nos cum ipso contra S^cinum ex aequo agnoscimus. sect. 84. sect
alter. p. 8. n. 36. In that name himself and Piscator are free, Mr. Wotton and
you his Just itia imputat quam a Christi habemus, justifica^^ nos cum ipsa
contra So inum c* equo agnoscimus, p. 84. sect. 8. n. 3.
Scholar are left in the lurch, and Paraeus is free, between whom and us
though there be controversy, whether only the Active and passive or both are
imputed, to which you have sto^ne for shelter of you in your opinion of the
Tocredere, yet I suppose, Piscator, Paraeus and Mr. Gataker abominate your
imputation of faith in a proper sense denying a metonymicke sense. I am sure
Paraeus tells Bellarmine denying the metonimick sense, he did not so much
oppose Luther in it, as blaspheame the Holy Ghost of which before.

And I must tell you It Is before the Reader to Judge how you have cleared your
self of agreement in this, not only with Arminius and Socinuus, but with the
Papists. In this you have a common purse, and it is a point of faith as you call
it. And those not as points in which Papists and we agree but such as are
defended by Papists, against the Reformed Churches, and controverted. Neither
have we assailed you merely, with words but Scriptures also and Reasons.
Neither are they calculated for the meridian of Women and Childrens temper
alone, we profess no special skill in that, but for men of understanding, let
them judge of them, and the Lord give true understanding.

CHAP, VII. Arguments are proposed (as you ^ay) an^ you desire acceptance of
Answers elsewhere given without repetition.
YOur entreaty is mine own, let all be confidered together.

1 Argu. If there be no standing in Judgment before God except we be endued
with perfect righteousness, then must the righteousness of Christ be imputed
to us in our justification.

But there is no standing for us, etc.

I deny the consequence, there may be no standing in judgment before God, and
yet the righteousness of Christ, in the sense controverted not be imputed.
Remission of sins purchased by the death of Christ is so, as in the 5. first
conclusions, p. 3. and 4. Yea our Divines as Calvin find sufficient strength
for confidence in the death of Christ alone.

1. The righteousness of Christ asserted by us is his active and passive
obedience, what weakness is it then for you to assert his passive obedience by
way of opposition unto us, and to deny imputation thereof. And I appeal to the
Reader how you can exclude the active obedience of Christ, and separate it from
the passive, which you assert the purchaser of pardon, when as your self call
that active obedience an essential requisite to constitute the passive
obedience meritorious.

Calvin does not exclude the imputation of Christ's active obedience to the Law
from Christ's death; I appeal to what is answered before out of him.

2. Remission of sins is no righteousness, neither is it to be confounded as
if it were the same with Christ's death, they are cause and effect: remission
indeed is a consequent of Justification; let the Reader observe the Reference.

2. Arg. He that is justified by an others righteousness must be justified by
Christ's imputed, for no other righteousness is fit.

But every man that is justified is justified by the righteousness of an
other, and not his own.

1. I deny the Major, a man may be justified by the righteousness of another,
and yet no necessity of Christ's active obedience (of which only the question
i^) to be imputed to him, the passive obedience of Christ: by merit of which
communicated in free pardon without further righteousness derived upon them in
a way of imputation or however, of which sec 4. or 5. Conclus. p. 5. 6. 7.

I answer, by the righteousness of Christ we mean active and passive, and I
never read of one that held the active alone, you do but fight with a shadow.

2. And showed but now that you putting the passive, cannot exclude the active,
the passive without that isnot meritorious and that the imputation of both are
necessary to justification of which pardon is a consequent.

Your communicated and our imputed are one with us and with you, or else with
Mr. Wotten and Socinus you deny imputation of Christ's passive obedience in
which you are deserted even by Mr Gattaker, etc.

To the Minor, by a^stinction, a man may be said to be justified by the
righteousness of another and not his own: Either 1. by way of merit, or 2. by
way of form, whosoever is justified by the righteousness of another and not
his own, is justified by the merit of the righteousness of another and not his
own.

In the latter sense it is altogether untrue, for the righteousness where with a
man is formally justify dis always his own by donation and possession and not
another, except only in respect of procurement Christ's, or collation, and so
it is Gods. Remission of sins whereby a believer is formally (a^ often) is a
man's own in such a sense a^ repentance or faith.

Every man that is justified, is justified by the righteousness of an other and
not his own, the distinction is Saint Paul's, 1 Philip 3. and answer, that that
which does formally justify is also meritorious it cannot justify applied,
that has not worth and merit in it, as ours truly teach.

Christ's righteousness we grant as the material so the meri^orious cause, and
it imputed that which supplieth the place of a form. So nothing that is our
own (inherent su^pose) is or can be.

Righteousness may be said to be his own and man formally justified either
inherently as Faith, Hope, and Charity which are not only given but by way of
infusion and so inhere only in those to whom it is given, or else by
imputation, so as the sin inhering in such as believe is Christ's, laid on him
as in the Type, and so is the righteousness which is in him subjectivly, is
ours given by God, and received by us, this also is given by God, ours by his
donation and possession as Christ is, who dwelling in us by faith is the
subject of it.

Now by formally you may know (and do acknowledge somewhere I remember) we
mean not inherently, that is the Popish form of Justification which we oppose;
this is so our own as it is not another, so is my Faith, and Hope and Charity.

And you shall never prove that we are justified by that which is so our own
and no others.

That we are justified by, is Christ's inherently or subjectivly only, though
ours by donation and possession, not subjectivly further then as Christ in whom
it is dwells in us, by his Spirit and faith, it is his and ours as he is the
Lord our righteousness made unto us righteousness.

Remission of sins, though ours by Christ's procurement and Gods donation
received by faith, is no righteousness, as has been answered and proved, and
being a consequent of Justification as has been answered and proved, can never
formally justify. It cannot be before and after justification, neither does it
inhere in man as Faith and Hope, nor can it therefore be so our own, as they
are.

The Argument you may read in Chamier, de justit. c 17.

Iustificatio per alienam justitiam, est imputativa. At nostra justificatio est
per aliena in justitiam. which he proves and defends against Papists ibid.

3. Argum. If believers have a true and real communion with Christ, then is
his righteousness theirs by imputation. But the former is certain, therefore.

1. The proposition wants truth, because a true and real communion with Christ
may stand without his active obedience being made theirs by imputation, see c.
10. sect 4. and 5. of the former par c. 2. p. 9. and 10. of this 2. par

The question is what makes man righteous; we assert the active and passive
obedience of Christ imputed or given us, and applied by faith: we add this is
done by real. Communion, for so our finners are counted actually to him, and
his righteousness to us. It be comes ours for making us just. To your
exception, Communion is denied where his active obedience is not made ours.
It Is a demonstration, Communion is the cause, Christ's active obedience it is
being, ours the effect, it is like that of the Apostle; as many of us as are
Baeptized into Christ, are Baptized into his death, 6. Romans 3. the difference
is, his death is named and not his active obedience: It Is not excluded more
then his Resurrection; and if it infloweth and concurreth; be an essential
requisite, to the efficacy of his death, With what face can you granting the
one, deny the other? Imputation then is the business: but imputation of
Christ's passive obedience is granted to us by Piscator, Paraeus, and Mr.
Gataker, we are altogether here against Socinus and Mr. Wotton, and you being
Judge, the essential requisite cannot be left out. Imputation is nothing else
but that act of God whereby he applies that to us that believe, be not offended
with those that speak thus with Saint Paul 4. To. 6. 11. who as he says, by
the obedience of Christ we are maderighteous, c. 5. says, when God justifies
he imputes righteousness. Let the Reader see your places examined.

And Sir, if the feet be sinful, they need righteousness, and if they are
made righteousness (not having of their own else) it must be by the
righteousness of the head, communicated or applied to the same. Once the
Apostle says, we are complete in him who is the head, 2 Col. where we see it a
truth of the body and by Communion.

2. It wants reason, it has neither color nor show of truth in it, that the
unic^ and Communion which believers have with Christ, should of necessity imply
or draw with it the appropriation of his active obedience by way of imputation,
at least such an one, as is the golden Apple, etc. that is so that it become
thence formal righteousness, either in whole or in port, for what difference
can be assigned out of that union and Communion which interceds between Christ
and a believer; why rather the active obedience or righteousness of Christ
then the wisdom or power or glory of Christ should be made the believers by
imputation.

The question is of justifying, that it may be done, there must be
righteousness, the Scripture says, that by Christ's obedience we shall be
constituted righteous, and the Scripture does tell us of imputation thereof. So
is Christ made unto us, of God righteousness. The wisdom, power, glory of
Christ, though they have place in my Justification, etc. yet do not as his
righteousness make me just, and the Scripture which teaching imputation of
righteousness, mentions neither the imputation of his wisdom, power or
glory, we are wise according to what is written.

5. Arg. If there be no other end reason or necessity why Christ should fulfill
the Law, but only that his obedience thereunto might be imputed unto us for
righteousness in our justification. Then is not the imputation, th^rof to be
denied.

But no other end reason, or necessity can be given.

But.

The monor proposition i^ unsound, there^^re (...). 1. T* gai^^ Authority, to
his Doctrine, he did what he tought. 2. T* Gods glory^ therefore, he, did it as
a debtor with all mankinde^, and as mediater to that Law. 3. For
exemplarinesse; 5. Ephesians. 2 4^ to (...). 5. It kept him i^ God^ fa^our, (...)
Joh. 10. 6. It Is of absolute necessity to fit the Sacrifice to the Altar, etc.
which ^^ largely argued so that (...) at (...) the pretended imputation, and
(...) against such as say the (...) of the natures, did sufficiently
qualifi^it. 7. It qualifieth him eternally to his Priesthood. 8. His own (...).
4. Joh. 34. Therefore the Argument, from the (...) of it otherwise is weaker.
Passing with denial that he did the Law as a debt or for himself, and that
which, I might say else that the holiness etc. of Christ is a necessary result
of union of both ^aturs.

I answer. I know none that urge this argument, and that there was no other
end. Neither is it needful: when as you press all these it follows not that
our justification was not an end: and that this was an end with the rest, that
necessary concurrence which you here plead, and calling it an essential
requisite to Christ's suffering for justification shows it, which inflowing
and concurring produces the effect by imputation, or application. Gods
imputing it to us, and our applying it by Faith. That this was his end is
evident, where it i^ said that by the righteousness of one many shall be made
righteous, which it never attaineth, but by imputation or application.

5. Argu. Because we are debtors to the Law in punishment and perfect obedience
also, otherwise our sinning against the Law should exempt and privilege us
from subjection to the Law.

This minor I name because the major has nothing said to it, and you say,

It labors of ambiguity, when it says, we are debtors to the Law in
perfection of obedience, as well as in matter of punishment, it may be true and
false. If the meaning be believers are debtors to the Law in perfection of
obedience to justification it is utterly false, there is no need to depend on it.
It Is freely by blood, 5. Romans 9. Neither are they debtors in regard of
punishment, Christ having born it.

It Is true, unbelievers are debtors in both respects, if they mean to be
justified, otherwise then by Christ, because there is no third way, he must
keep the whole himself.

Unbelievers as you say are debtors in both, to do and suffer to justification.
Very well, their surety then must pay their debt, if he will be their
justifier he must suffer he must fulfill the Law.

Put Christ doing and suffering, and man a believer, I yield he is not bound to
do, to live, he was before faith, by faith, being a partaker of the
satisfaction of Christ,

God accounting the same unto him, it is as if he had satisfied, his surety
has don it, he then is acquitted, freed from death, freed from strict rigorous
performance of the Law to Justification from personal obedience, this is what
we say.

When we speak of Christ's blood, it is our mind. But you must not exclude his
active obedience, that fulfilling of the Law (which is eternalex and aeternae
obligationis to life, (being my debt: and where is the merit of that blood if
it be without Christ's obedience to the Law, which you call it is essential
requisite to our life?

2. You have our meaning, our question is to justification: and though
obedience by sanctification as gratitude be granted by us a debt, yea and in
order of nature in some degree before justification as conditioning faith, and
qualifying the person to the promise, we intend it not in this question, what
you say in the 3. place.

3. We are not privileged from keeping the Law no not in respect of
justification because we have transgressed it, but are 1. incapable of such
keeping, whether personally or by imputation, which may amount to
justification. 2. and that the release we have from such observation to
justification accrueth to us to justification, by Christ's death for ^^, Romans 7.
4.

1. If transgressors are not privileged from that obedience in respect of
Justification, It Is their debt still, and must be satisfied.

2. Though we are incapable of observation, such as amounts to justification,
and exemption from punishment, whether personal or imputed, by the death of
Christ, whence we have freedom from punishment; yet death being not all it is
insufficient to satisfy; and where there is an impossibility of what is
personal, imputation is necessary, both are our debt, our sureties
satisfaction is of both, and your self grant, Christ's death insufficient
without the concurernce of his active obedience, as an essential requisite;
you cannot exclude it, there is hope you may come over, you must or eat your own
grant. You say,

4. God never required of any man but only Christ exact obedience to the Law
and subjection to punishment due, conjunctim, but divisive only, the Law
says, do this and live, and he is not threatened that fulfilleth it, punishment
is on supposition of sin.

You grant God required both of Christ together, why? but because he was our
surety, and both our debt, to our freedom from punishment and life, both were
necessary therefore required of him, therefore he took our nature and obeyed
to death.

2. A sinner we speak of, and he is a debtor of both, he owes subjection to
punishment for sins simply, for his inability to obey. He owes obedience to
life, Gods Law is a Minister of death to such and promises not life but to
doing, it concerns Christ because of us; us as principalls, him as our
surety. Your self said but now.

It Is true, those that believe not in Christ, may (...) said in this sense to
be debtors to the Law, as well in matter of perfect obedience as of punishment
if they mean to be justified and escape punishment otherwise then by Christ p.
109.

Then both are required conjunctim of them, as well as their surety, and
therefore of their surety.

You add,

5. Jn case a man has sinned and suffered (by himself o^^r other for him) he
is no further a debtor to the Law in point of justification; because the (...)
is of equal consideration to the Law, to absolute conformity. So that ^s no
man is or over or can be bound to fulfill the Law twice for his Justification.
So there is no reason that he that has suffered to the full, the penalty of the
Law, which suffering is everyway as satisfactory to the Law as exactest
obedience, and of one and the same consideration, it is to require a double
satisfaction.

1. In point of justification life is infoulded, and in case a man suffers by
himself or another bare suffering is not equivalent to exact obedience,
toward attainment of his life, it is seen in the Devil and damned, who suffer
for themselves, they are far from justification or life. He fulfilleth not
the Law once to life, who only suffers and does not.

So that we being unable, it being impossible to us to fulfill the Law* either
way to life; you see an absolute necessity of Christ our sureties doing and
suffering to our life; to omit the insufficiency of either without the other.
You can never escape this Argument.

6. Argu. But there neither can be any justification without a perfect
righteousness, nor any such righteousness found but only the righteousness
of Christ performed to the Law. To this as guilty and weak you answer.

1. Though it be true that justification cannot take place without a perfect
righteousness it being nothing also but a making a man perfectly righteous, yet
such a tale of acts as Christ performed to the Moral Law determinately, is not
of any absolute necessity ther^ to, for if the Jews were justified by Christ's
righteousness, the Ceremonial Law also must be included as before, 1 Tr. c.
18. p. 3.

1. I take what is granted, and that there is no justification without perfect
righteousness, it is of good use, it is our minor proposition in part.

2. I know none limitting Christ's obedience to the Moral Law, it was to
whatsoever, though that was a perfect rule of life, and as for the Ceremonial
Law it was reducible to the 2 Commandment, as God manner of Worship so that
this aliquid is not against what we urge, see the place whereunto you refer.

2. It Is not absolutely true, there is no perfect righteousness to be found but
only that of Christ, there is as absolute and complete a righteousness in
the Law as Christ's, and it is more probable that God furnishes them out of the
Law it self for Christi sake, then that he should impute Christ's to them See
c. 2. sect. 5. etc. 5. sect. 2. 2 par. You mean remission of sins.

1. Remission is no righteousness. 2. It Is not in the Law. 3. Such as have it
are not furnished out of the Law with it, see the places examined.

3. Perfect righteousness wherein justification consists, and wherewith men are
made formally l^st, is nothing else but remission of sins, as in. 2. and 4.
c. of this par. etc. 5. sect. 5. 1. par. etc. 4. sect. 28. of this latter, and
that Calvin excludes not only Regeneration but all other things whatsoever,
and that others bring horrid blasphemy on his head.

This third is the same with the second many times urged, and answered. See the
places I appeal.

Sect. 16. It is so seeing it is equivalent to, and virtually conteines the
most absolute obedience to the Law, as has been demonstrated, c. 2. p. 4. 2.
par.

See it there answered.

2. It may bare the name of righteousness, and that which is complete,
because it has the privilege of Christ's righteousness, as elsewhere.

There it is answered, so faith should be perfect righteousness, I and charity
in it is place, it has the promises of privileges, and that is enough as your
self though it has not the nature and essence of a perfect righteousness,
what if it has the name so long as it has not the essence? but it has not
the name neither will similitude serve the turn, as there is showed.

This Argument does not complain but glory it has no satisfaction, seeing
there is no other righteousness.

7 Argu. Do this and live is an everlasting rule, therefore the active obedience
of Christ must be imputed to Justification.

This is a truth, you answer.

I grant it an everlasting Rule, he that does it shall live, but this is not to
purpose, it is without the face of an Argument, because whosoever abides, etc.
shall live whether the righteousness of Christ be imputed yea or no. I deny it
either is, ever was, or will be, a perpetual rule for men to be Justified by,
and that he only that does this can be said to be justified, for God has
always had an other, believe this and live, see c. 4. 1 par. and answer to
Gal. 3. 10. c. 5. 2. par.

If this be an everlasting truth, he that does this shall live, that is
perfectly fulfill the Law, it is as everlasting that he that does it not shall
never live.

None can do and live without the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

This I find Mr. Perkins his Argument, That very thing that must be our
righteousness before God must satisfy the Justice of the Law which says, do
this and live. Now there is nothing can satisfy the Justice of the Law but the
righteousness o^ obedience of Christ for us, See it in Mr. Wortons defense, p.
170

If it be a rule of life everlasting, it is of justification, and must be
answered as debt by our selves or surety.

2. God has not always had that believe and live, or else God required faith
in Christ of Adam in innocence expressly, and God did never require do this
and live. Or else they are both one.

3. Believing to life is believing in the Lord Jesus, applying his perfect
doings and sufferings, it is an instrument or hand taking in Christ's
righteousness, not opposed to it, or excluding of the object, so all as
before* and let the Reader see your former deeds this way in those places
examined.

8. Arg. That righteousness which God accepts in our behalf is the
righteousness imputed to us in justification. But the righteousness of Christ
is that which God accepts on our behalf.

You deny the Major and distinguish on the Minor. The reason of the first is
because God may and does accept for us which he needs not impute, as the prayer
of Abraham for Isaac.

So these for whom Christ's sufferings were accepted, receive unspeakable
benefits by them, yet it follows not God looks on them as if they had
personally endured, which is the imputation specially opposed in this Treatise,
but because they be the sufferings of his Son.

1. The proposition is firm, that he accepts to justification is
righteousness imputed.

2. God accepts not Abraham's prayer to Ishmaels justification, or the
justification of any other. Perfect righteousness does it, God accepts no
other, and there is no way else to have it but Gods imputation.

3. Those for whom God accepts Christ's death, have Christ's death imputed to
them to justification and are looked on as men that have satisfied, not by
their own personal sufferings, but those of his Son our surety.

2. To the Minor, If by obedience is meant that he performed to the Common Law
considered a part from that he performed to the Law of a Mediator. It Is false,
for God did not accept that on those terms to justify us with it or for it,
as has been ten times said and proved.

If you means his passive obedience, so it may be granted, but then it will be
a paralogisme with 4* terms.

1. We mean Christ active; and Passive obedience as has been told you twenty
times; and this we contend due in Christ as a surety by the Law of mediation.

We say, what he did to the Moral Law was our debt, which our surety must pay,
that we may live, it is part of his obedience by which we are made righteous.
Qui sponsor pro nobis factus est at que totius nostri debiti solutionem in se
suscepit, illius obedientia atque justitia nobis imputatur, et imputata valet
eque ac si propria et nobis inherens fuisset. See p. 370. Christum autem
ordinatum et acceptatum a deo pro sponsore nostro testatur Apostolus. 7. He.
22. At Christus nostro nomine non modo subivit per pessionem crucis sed etiam
impletionem Legis. Quando igitur in jus vocor, atque debitum Legis a me
exigitur, ostendo: side justorem meum hoc debitum exolvisse, atque proinde me
liberatum esse atque Chirographum illud quo obligatus tenebar, deletum esse et
ab^ogatum. 2 Col. 14. Atque sie Christi justitia mihi prodest a^
justificationem periude ac^^ in ^^ repertarta (...) fuisset, atque hoc est
supplore vocem causae formalis, unde completi dicituur in Christo (...)
innobis, ver. 10. Argumenty.


When you grant it of his sufferings, how can you exclude his obedience to the
Moral Law, teaching the world that that obedience was an essential requisite
to the benefit of justification; and it is no paralogisme.

9. Arg. If. Christ were a public person standing in the place of all those
that should believe in him, then all he did and suffered are reputed as don and
suffered by these, and imputed to them. But Christ was etc..

1. The Major is weak and untrue, his standing in the place of beluvers is no
ground that all that he did and suffered are leaked on as done and suffered by
them, as his incarnation, birth, circumcision, subjection to Joseph, etc.
Redemption of the World, why should I a believing Gentile be looked on at one
circumcised, what advantage have I to be looked on in Christ as one that was
subject to Joseph, how should I fear and tremble to conceit that God should
look on me as having redeemed the world out of the greatest acts Christ did.

This argument is put in public words not proper to disgrace it, whose it is,
as laid down I know not, but think it your own.

I would put it, That which Christ did and suffered as the surety of believers
in their stead, which they were debtors in to God; that is looked on as done and
suffered by them* their's by imputation, the Scripture shows him our surety:
this is our Churches language, and it is Dr. Davenants Arg.

Had you taken our Arguments as laid down and urged but this Doctors, it would
have been somewhat: such hungry laying them down as is found in you, leaves
out their heart, and is not ingenuous.

And here we may see how what you object would vanish, redemption of the world
was none of my debt. It Is enough that in him I have redemption.

2. It has been demonstrated that it is not truth to say the sufferings of
Christ are locked on as mine, it may be said he suffered in my stead, we
cannot be said to be punished for the same sins in and with Christ for which
we have remission in his death, as Dr. Willet.

1. Your demonstrations (as you love to speak) are all examined, and that in
it is place.

2. We say no more but that he suffered in our stead, it is, perinde ac si in
me reperia, aut a me prestita fuisset.

What my surety does, is as if I had done it, and so our Homily, every
Christian man in him and by him may be called a fulfiller of the Law, what was
lacking in us being supplied by him.

3. The issue of the business is not all, our question is not about the
effect, justification pardon, life. But that by which; which is granted to be
by satisfaction made to God our Creditor by our surety Christ, which as it was
performed for us, is ours imputed as the Scripture, the word says, we have it
by fellowship with his blood. I and with his obedience to death, by his
obedience we are made righteous, when you say,

4. It Is not so sound a truth as supposed, that Christ stood in the stead or
place of believers, in all things performed by him... Christ did a thousand
things and suffered many of which we had no necessity as to be borne of a
Virgin:

1. This is the same with the first: as it is laid down out of the Doctor, there
are no such unlimited words, but as our surety, and as satisfaction for our
debt.

That we keep our selves to, we say Christ for us; and we say that he was
obedient that by it we may be made righteousness: You will us to see, c. 3.
sect. 11. of the 2. part. Which you shall find examined.

2. If Christ suffered many things we have no need of tell us whether it was
for himself, or whom or in vain

Arg. 10. If we cannot be justified by the righteousness of Christ otherwise
then by imputation of it, then must it needs be imputed to us in our
justification.

But there is no way of being justified, but only by the imputation of it.

You answer.

The active obedience of Christ has influence otherwise, qualifying the person
for the Sacrifice of himself, by which justification is purchased, as before.
That it is not by imputation has been proved by 3 demonstrations and 4. and
that our quiver is well nigh exhaust. I know not 2 Arguments more really
differing.

1. Your Demonstrations against imputation are all examined.

2. Put that influence of the active obedience in to the sacrifice of Christ to
make it propitiatory, I hope it does not deny imputation, that is granted by
those that hold only Christ's passive obedience: It Is urged and observed by
them that they may not be accounted Socinians, nor numbered with them. I see you
will leave them there and be so your self if you deny the imputation of
Christ's righteousness.

The Scripture lays down imputation of righteousness, which is Gods way of
application, his giving it to us clothing us with it, without which we shall
never be the better for it. And it follows not that our quiver is exhaust
because you know no more, one may judge you willingly ignorant. Let any man
read our Worthies in this question, against Papists, and he shall read many
arguments untouched; I wisse Arrows feathered and headed and shot in an other
manner of bow, by an other manner of arm then is presented by you.

They stick in the Babilonians sides, and you and they shall never be able to
pluck them out.

To omit that there is not one, but is managed against your gainesaying. But I
will not word it.

11 Arg. If we may be said truly to be dead with Christ, crucified, quickened
raised, and to sit in in heavenly places with Christ, then may we be truly
said to have fulfilled the Law with Christ also (there is no difference) and
consequently it is imputed to us and counted ours.

But we may be, etc.

I protest against the Majors consequence, etc.

Whose this is I know not, nor am I bound to spend time about it. It may be you
made it as a man of clouts your self, or mared it otherwise made, that you
might shoot at it: the force that is aimed at (if I miss not) is to the same
purpose that we have spoken to in that head of Communion of which enough, and
so I Will pass to your last named argument.

Arg. 12 Whosoever is a sinner and so continues whilst he lives cannot be
justified otherwise then by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ. But
every man, Christ only excepted is so.

You Answer.

If there be no other way or means the condition of the world is miserable,
for such there is none, as has been proved, beyond all reasonable denial,
except I be mistaken:

But blessed be the Father of mercies. -- who without that Key has opened an
effectual doors of Justification to sinners, believers are not under the Law
but grace and there is no condemnation to them, and if any man sin we have an
Advocate, etc. Dissolving guilt needs no imputation of the active obedience,
the propitiation by blood has done this service, before this imputation is
supposed to come at them. The merit of Christ's death is not so far exhaust on
pardon that it will not serve to acceptance, etc. Adoption is from his blood.
The perfect holiness of his person and righteousness of his life presupposed
as has been said. He that has communion with his death shall not know what to
do with the imputation of his life, after it, but enough if not more then
enough of this before.

Here Is enough indeed, and more then enough of this.

1. Let the Reader judge an otherwhile, you may be mistaken, and in a miserable
case, being so professed an enemy to imputation, and the cause of mistake to
so many others.

2. Who questions believers being under grace, or says that they have
condemnation? etc. will not these stand with imputation of righteousness? are
you alone the Dr. of those conclusions? are your adversaries, enemies to those
enclusions? you take too much upon you.

3. Dissolving guilt needs imputation of righteousness; nay, thence follows
non-imputation of sin as the Apostle. And Paraeus so answers Papists as
before.

4. Dissolution of sins guilt by Christ's, blood before imputation is
dissolution before application that which puts the effect before the cause,
your friends will not hold with you.

5. Let the merit of Christ death be infinite if it be not applied, imputed by
God, received by us, it will not have any effect, there is neither pardon, nor
adoption; there must be communion with his death first, before there be the
effects, which is by imputation.

And who sees not but that despised things, the holiness of Christ's person
and righteousness of his life are supposed by your self, to this efficacy of
his blood, to make it a Sacrifice to Justification, that without which Christ's
death was in vain? and must there not be fellowship with it, bloods essential
requisite also.

Fellowship with one and other are together, not first with death then life,
the issues are from both; imputed or given to us, received by faith. Will you
separate blood and it is essential requisite or communion with them to
Justification? you cannot.

And now you make an end with, we have overcome, and yet I am not satisfied,
and I have labored to give you an account thereof, the issue I leave to God,
praying in your form; The Lord by his Spirit lead us in to the way of truth
and keep us that we turn not aside either to the right or left hand, that we
may be soundly built up in our holy faith and fitted for his everlasting
Kingdom.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Add 1 Arg. p. 48. 1 Par. for first, p. 49. put second 2 par. for justitiam
justitia. p. 12. for which righteous, in p. 13. p. 16. no to himself but us,
read Christi p. 19.

2 Part in the Conclusions, Errata.
For comprehensive, p. 76. par. 2. l 36. read comprehensor. and in the ne: tl.
for hypostacie hypostatique. and p. 77. for even ours. l. 2. and for quam qnia.
ib. l. 11. for Laws p. 78. read Law. for meare read none. l. 11. for truth, p.
8. penult. l. which for Dontiam r. Dawnham. p. 82. for in, p. 84. 2 par. as,
for in or. p. 87. l. 34. for and, p. 88. one, l. 11. for for. p. 88. l. 18. so,
dele by. l. 2^. ibid, for false, false, p. 89. l. 13. for corpopi, corpori. p.
89. for after both parts read sanctification se^ before p. 91. for propitiation
r. propagation. p. 92. for for, as ibid. l. 30. for, 8, 5, Romans p. 93. for
Christ's, Christ. p. 94. 4. 2. for fear, read, p. 95. for depri, deprivation. p
95. l. 33. for Iud. Ioh. p. 97. add, is after will. p. 97. l. 30. for, when,
then. p. 100. l. 7. dele A. p. 106. for, for, so. p. 107. for marveilous,
meritorious. p. 110. add, or, we are or. p. 112. l. 2. for one, our. p. 112.
20. for and, had. ibid. l. 37. for. Papists, Popish. p. 113. l. 2. dele, part
of. p. 119. l. 2. and 5. in its ibid. and read for, in, is, ibid. for our the.
ibid. l. 4. for 15. 26. ibid. dele that. ibid. l. 34. for our the. ibid. l.
ult. dele, in the Margent. p. 12. for quadruplexi, quadruplex. p. 120. for
Cossac. Tossan. from folio 120. to 127. mend what is amiss. for which with. p.
124. amended. p. 15, add in. p. 138. 31. for good God. p. 141. l. 21. ibid.
add or, of Christ or, l. ult. for one are. p. 149. l. 34. dele her. 150. for
minimium, minimum. p. 168. folio it right from fol. 119. to 113. for
librotionis liberationis. p. 169. for insolent insolvent p. par. 2. p. 64. l.
ult. Ceremony for Ceremonius p. 189. for merciful, unmercifull, p. 189. l.
31. for oculum poculum, p. 193. for pure impute, 194. read reapse, p. 202. and
Socinus for Sociniuus, p. 203. and put out, nor p. 204. l. 8. dele, is, p. 206.
l. 17, righteous for righteousness, p. 208. p. 9*


