DIVINE MEDITATIONS, AND CONTEMPLATIONS upon several heads of Divinity.

By G. R.

Compiled for his own private use, and published for the common good.

PSALM. 1.1,2. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel, etc.

But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate day
and night.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Sam. Enderby, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Star in Popes-head-Alley, 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF WARWICK, etc.
Right Honorable,
IF (having neither merit or other relation to usher the admittance) I seem to
intrude this present of so mean condition (whence ^ver it came) upon your
Lordships favorable construction, and acceptance, the report of those many
excellencies in you, employed for the honor of your Prince, and good of your
Country, so eminently obvious to the eye and admiration of the virtuous, has
imboldned me to the attempt, and must serve for excuse instead of a larger
apology.

I have not the will or skill to flatter, my thoughts aim at no base ends in
this presumption; and were I not certain your Honor were as much a lover of
goodness, as an enjoyer of greatness, and no less humble than honorable,
and would be rather a gracious interpreter, than strict censurer, my pen
should not have been so ambitious, or dared to rest under so noble patronage,
nor so inconsiderate to have exposed my own and others weakness to public
view.

And yet the honesty of the subject, whiles it directs the mind to the
consideration of spiritual, and necessary concernments for the souls welfare,
and a Christians profit, may thus far presume (as not unworthy the perusal
of the religious, of what degree soever, at times convenient) to bespeake
protection for the matter, and pardon for the author, be he what he is, and
his expressions otherwise never so mean, or deservings answerable.

Please it therefore your Lordship to bear with this challenge, which I have
not used in the way of my own right, nor to forestall your Lordships
judgment, (to which I humbly submit in both) but to intimate that by how much
the present is the more considerable for any worth or value to be found in it,
by so much the more it belongs, and is fit to such worthy patronage to be
presented.

But herein your Honor must accept the will for the deed, from him whose
desires in the height of their ambition soar no higher in that respect, than
to become effectual Orators for your Honors prosperity temporal and eternal,
and that he may be worthy

Of Your Lordships command in any service G. R.

Meditation 1. Of prosperity and adversity.
IN prosperity it may seem we love God, in adversity we fear God; for
prosperity does cause us to praise God, and adversity to pray unto him, and yet
in the end it does then appear, we neither love nor fear God. A strange
matter indeed, that God should not be beloved of us then, when he shows
himself a friend; or not feared, when as a Judge he calls us to account, and
therefore not to be believed without good proof. He that does truly love God,
loves him for himself; and he that does truly fear God, fears him for
himself; and finding in him always the same cause of fear, and love, does
never cease to fear or love; love is his possession, fear his Security: what
he has once gained by love, by fear he is willing to keep: and he does as
much fear not to lose, as love still to enjoy. May he then be said to love
God in prosperity, which in adversity does not love him; or to fear God in
adversity, which in prosperity does not so? If then we cannot endure the
change of a prosperous estate, but are so much disquieted that we take no
comfort in the favor of God, this is a sure token we loved not God in
prosperity, though then we praised him: for a little of this love abiding in
us, though at first it should not be able to free us from feeling and passion,
yet at last would it so calm and settle us, that not having the gifts, we
would much more rejoice in the giver, for whose sake only all things are worth
the having. Likewise if good success and better credit do but enable us to do
wrong, without looking to the will of God which awardeth right, this is a sure
token we feared not God in adversity: for a little of this fear would stay us
back from such attempts, though there were none in the world to control us. If
not God, what loved we then in prosperity? what feared we in adversity? We
loved the gift, not the giver; we feared the punishment, not the Judge: that
is, we neither loved with fear, nor feared with love. Oh unworthy love! which
does more respect the gift than the givers good will. Oh vain fear! which
observes the mighty but not the Almighty. If Gods gifts be better welcome to
us than himself, little is the love we bear to God: if we fear Gods
punishment more than the loss of his favor, such fear is not religious. But
will we give a true testimony of our love and fear toward God? Let us do
that in adversity, which even hypocrites do in prosperity: let us (I say)
praise God, and be content. Again, let us do that in prosperity, which even
hypocrites do in adversity. Let us I say pray heartily unto God, and commend
our selves and all our doings unto him. In a word, let us love him in
adversity, and fear him in prosperity: to this purpose look we in prosperity,
on the threats of Gods law, believing that none of them shall fall to the
ground. In adversity on the promises of God firmly trusting to receive comfort
and deliverance from him, though as yet we have no feeling thereof. Shall we
not fear such a God in our greatness, who has ever vengeance ready, and that
without respect of persons? Shall we not love such a God in our weakness, who
is so faithful and kind, that he will never neglect them in their greatest
distress which put their trust in him? Add this to make us fear in
prosperity, that God does but make us his Stewards; he may when he will, and
he will, when we think least on it, call us to reckoning: the more we take,
the more will be required; and negligence shall find a streighter judgment,
than ignorance. And we shall love God the better in adversity, if we consider
that evils are justly laid upon us, because of our sins, and yet from Gods
mercy; that chastising us as children we may repent and be saved, and that it
is sarre better that he should take our estate from us, than that our estate
should take us from him.

Meditation 2. Of Love.
Faith is the assurance of Gods love to a Christian, which faith breeds in
him a love answerable to his apprehension, though not comparable to the object;
and it is a borrowed fire, a drop taken out of the sea of Gods mercy. Love is a
brief of the Law, a legacy of Christ, the cognizance of a Christian, the life
of a good conscience, the assurance of prayer, the strength of devotion, the
prop of patience, and in a word, the band of perfection. The love that we owe
is unto God, but God will have the duty discharged to his image our neighbor,
to his members our brethren; specially where this duty may give most evident
token of love: as when we provide for the poor which can make no recompense,
or pray for our enemies which hate us. Indeed thou losest nothing by giving to
the poor, for it is put on his score to whom thou owe thy self, it is
repaied by him, who has given himself for thy redemption, and will give
himself unto thee for thine eternal salvation. Thou find no cause to love
thine enemy, neither did God to love thee. God loved thee without an example;
but has left it to thee for thy imitation; for so well he loves thee, that he
would have thee like himself. He loved thee freely for himself, thou must
love freely too, but for his sake, is not this cause enough? God bids thee;
shall the countenance of an enemy dismay thee? this is the way (pointed out by
God and blessed by him) to make thy foe thy friend: fall it out otherwise, he
is thy friend more than his own, he gives place to thee in goodness, strive not
thou with him, who shall be worst. After love has dispatched her duties abroad,
she returns home, and does privately converse with God, and this is an
entering into the chamber of her well beloved. Let me dye if the wealth of the
covetous, or the honors of the ambitious, or the delicates of the voluptuous,
be to be envyed, and not rather contemned in respect of this, if thou know it,
thou desire nothing else, if not, any thing.

Meditation 3. Of Passions.
Passions are original, and natural, they are bred with us, they are a part
of us, we can no more leave to be without them, then to be m^n, yet are they
the baser part of the mind, for their familiarity with the sanses, and hence
the Philosophers tho^ht did arise their disorder, but if the mind it self be
insected, how can there he clean? And if the eve be darkness, what light can
there be in the members? yet virtue is the government of Passions, and all
virtues whereby man does imitate Gods holiness or righteousness, are but well
governed Passions. Man's virtue is in the midst of much weakness, and
therefore his victory the more commendable. And of all victories it is the
best, when one overcomes himself. Many have been invincible abroad, which have
been overcome by their own weakness at home. I fear nothing so much as
treason within. I speak it without pride, through the gift of God I know more
than many, (though I know nothing as I should) and yet practice but little
according to my knowledge. I know what piety, what common duty does require,
yet stand I unresolved or slow. I have much bettered my judgment by hearing,
but am a very Infant in performing what I have heard. I am more sound alone,
than in company; more upright for strangers, than in my own or friends cause.
I am not so bad in intent, as in event. What I do not prevent, I would gladly
amend. I thought not on that which after makes me wonder how I could forget;
all this I impute to passion. Religion sanctifies passion by opposing a fit
object; as, love as much as you list, so you love God; hate as much as you list
so you hate sin; rejoice always, but rejoice in goodness; be sorry too, but
let it be the sorrow of repentance. We may be full of hope, but as pilgrims
bound for heaven. We ought to fear, so that it be to offend God. Will we
envy? it must be that others go not beyond us in well-doing: will we be
jealous? it must be that nothing defile our conscience. We have wherein to
trust if it be in Gods grace; and wherein to distrust if it be in our own
nature. Likewise there is a holy confidence, a holy despair; the one claims
Christ's merits, the other denies her own. That revenge also is just, whereby
we debar our selves of the occasions which led us into sin: Yea passions
here do pass into another nature, as anger, into zeal for Gods glory; love
into charity; sorrow into repentance; pity into almesdeeds; hope into patience;
fear into watching and prayer; mirth into thanksgiving; confidence into
per^everance. The inconstancy of the wind makes the Pil^t at sea watchful, and
the disorder of our affections ought to make us advised. As is a horse without
a bit, so are our affections without understanding; let reason rule the reins,
lest thou be overthrown. Have thou to deal with a cunning man which is like
to overtake thee? or a great man which will be too hard for thee? or a hasty
man which will offer to hurt thee? or with a lewd man which may corrupt thee?
look well about thee; there is more danger from thy own passions, then from
any, or all these. It is good to do nothing in passion, give time to reason,
and use the help of prayer, and thou shall anon espy the depth of some
temptation, which lies commonly hid under an ordinary passion. There are
tentations of all sorts, and for all sorts of passions; for merry men,
unlawful pleasures; for sad men, uncomfortable despaires; for presumptuous,
crying sins; for angry men, quarrels and brawles. Look to thy passions, and
thou may prevent many, though not all temptations.

Meditation 4. Of Providence.
Thou art not able to change the course of nature, it is only in the power of
God who made it. The second cause is tied to the first, but the first works
freely either with it, or without it. Has God taken order for one part of his
work and not for all? Thou have a free will, not to be constrained: true, yet
is this thy will subject to the highest and first will, which moving all our
wills, is moved of none. Thou must needs follow it, that will not follow thee.
God made me in the first man as in my cause, and he made the first man for
himself. Wherefore the fall of man did not cross his supreme counsel, for
then should not that have been, which notwithstanding he did most willingly
and justly suffer. Is it Gods will then that all men should be concluded under
sin, that he might have mercy on whom he would, and whom he would he might
justly forsake? so it follows. Yet is his will no cause of sin, but a rule
of all righteousness; so ought I to believe. Well, does God look on me in
the face of his well beloved? do I believe the Christian Faith? do I desire to
do all Christian duties? strive I against mine own corruptions? this is Gods
special favor unto me, it is his work in me for which I am bound to be
thankful unto him, in which I am to take comfort, this is my duty to follow
his calling, to be obedient to his government, herein stands my eternal
happiness: or be it that I do not believe or love God, or live in his fear,
yet is not this in my power to amend, or have I any just cause of excuse?
examine not Gods decrees by thine own reason, or those laws of justice which
we are bound to observe, fear his Majesty, humble thy self before his
presence, seek his mercy, receive not grace in vain; there is no way to
heaven but a holy life; and he that purposes thou should besaved: does
call thee to faith and repentance. If thou avoid the means to attain unto
either, thou ^est thy self out, and art an ^my to thine own Soul; if the
come unto God, he will not reject thee; wherefore ask for grace that thou
may come; without which thou shall never come: and it is necessary for thee
to know this, lest thou should trust to nature, and not seek grace; or
despair, when thou see thou can not attain unto it by thine own
strength: Ask not how he is merciful, which saves a few and condemns many;
how he is just, which by his will so brings it about, that we are all in the
cause of damnation, but believe it; ask not why God does not change the wills
of wicked men, with whom, and in whom he does not cease to work: but
reverence his decree, whose judgments are just, though unknown. But thou art
much troubled and vexed, to hear this doctrine and so are many others; this
trouble, this vexation (if thou belong to God) shall turn to thy good; for it
shall so humble and cast thee down, that thou shall wholly depend on God, and
give him his glory; but if thou belong not to him, thou shall complain, and
murmr more and more, and be nothing the better, nothing the near, for God
will not cease to be God, though we believe not; nor good, though we be
wicked: But who will care to believe? to amend his life? to strive against
sin, if it be not in us; if without us God have disposed of us? surely none
of himself can or will; they only do, whom God does vouchsafe to enable. The
word of God which is his revealed and conditional will, is unto some the savor
of life unto life, and unto others the savor of death unto death; to none the
savor of life, but to those that believe, to none the savor of death but to
those that believe not; he will have all men to be saved, if they will them
selves, and he forsakes none but they that forsake him: these things are for
us to mark, and observe; yet to believe, or not to believe, to will salvation,
or to will it not, do depend upon a higher will, whose law is unknown to us:
we must live by that which is revealed, and adore that which is hidden from
us, so shall we neither neglect our duty, nor deprive God of his glory and
majesty.

Meditation 5. Of Patience.
THere is none which can be merry, none rich, none well friended, none in
authority, none have ever good success more safely then a Christian: for in
all these he uses a good conscience, yet because such a stream of prosperity
is dangerous to man's frailty, he is not to look for his heaven here, but
elsewhere; because he is now in trial, not in triumph, a pilgrim, and not at
home, that many troubles must be suffered, either to purge him of vice, or for
his better exercise of virtue: and both to Gods glory. I see nothing more
necessary for him then Patience, a virtue which does harden him to follow
Christ willingly, and quickly, in bearing the Cross; and if we consider our
Saviors life, we may observe that he used no one virtue more then Patience,
not only in his Passion, but in the whole course of his life, which as it were
nothing but a Passion throughout; so was it but an exercise of his continual
patience: we must suffer many things of our adversaries, which will oppose
themselves to our vocation; it is not in our power to put them by; and take
them quietly we cannot, without patience. Yea which is worst of all, God will
seem sometimes to be against us, and taking from us inward consolation, will
leave us to sorrow and sadness of spirit, as if we were forsaken; these things
befell unto our Lord, who used Patience as the best remedy, teaching us not
only to bear his Cross, but how to bear it also, till it shall please God to
return again unto us with comfort. We must have patience to bear great
tentations, as well as small, and to bear them as long as it pleases God,
whether great or small, great troubles will need great Patience: and small
troubles enduring long no small Patience. Now the Christian is to be exercised
grievously, continually, because God means to make him partaker of a great
victory, a great reward. Faith is necessary for our entrance into the Church,
hope to nourish faith, and love is the fruit of faith, and brief of all the
Commandments; see here the sum of divinity. But without Patience we cannot
abide in the Church, for being once offended, we shall lose them except we
have Patience. Why is it said, Woe be to him that has lost patience? belike
it is the last loss. If a Master of a Ship lose his Anchor, or Mainemast, or a
Sail, those are great losses, yet to be repaired: but if it be said once he
has lost his Ship, we know he has lost all, and perhaps himself too: so if
we lose a time of Prayer, or the exercise of reading and meditation, an
occasion of doing good, if we stagger in faith, these are heavy losses indeed,
yet particular and recoverable; but if it be said we have lost Patience, what
means it but that we have lost all, and our selves too? Wherefore well is it
said, Woe be unto him that has lost Patience. Patience is as it were the
second concoction of all virtues; and draws from them whatsoever is for the
strength and nourishment of a Christian life: if this be weak in working, our
strength is small. From faith Patience draws confidence, from Hope
perseverance, from Love cheerfulness. They which are Saints in Heaven, are
said to have Palms in their hands, a resemblance of Patience, by which they
are victorious. Patience is a remedy in those causes which nothing else can
remedy. Show thy faith to the persecutor, he will not suffer thee to enjoy it,
except thou will lose liberty, goods, friends and life, what will become now of
thy faith except thou have Patience? show thy charity to thine enemy, he will
despise it, he will wrong thee still more and more, what then will become of
thy charity if thou have not Patience? let it be known that thou art an
upright man, the Devil will tempt thee outwardly and inwardly, and what will
become of thy uprightness if thou have not Patience? thou prayest, and God
hears not, thou ask, and he gives not; thou would have plenty, and
behold want; thou would have health and strength, and behold weakness; thou
would have peace and behold war; thou would have credit, and behold
slander; thou would be some, and art no body, and what will become of thy
prayers if thou have not Patience? To keep Patience we must be beholding to
experience. Try once how much profit Patience does bring thee, and thou shall
never be weary of it, thou shall sinde succor, feel comfort unexpected:
observe Gods providence, and forget not his love; this will direct to the end
where we shall find contentment, when nothing shall make us more happy then
that we have suffered with Patience; they that will not be patient shall
suffer more then we, but we only which are patient, shall receive the reward
of suffering.

Meditation 6. Of Liberty.
We love to take liberty, and fare all the worse; because our choice is of
such as is agreeable to a nature sick and not sound. God is necessarily good,
and yet does good most freely; man (since his fall) is necessarily evil, and
does evil most freely; but alas, what a freedom is this so to be overlookt
by sin, that we cannot do any thing to please God, or to ease our selves!
Christ by his Gospel calls us to a Liberty, not of the flesh, to live
according to the lusts thereof; not an outward liberty, to discharge us from
duties fit for our callings, or prescribed by laws not repugnant to the word
of God; but to a Liberty of the spirit: first, from the curse of the Moral
Law, by which we are subject to the wrath of God. And this Liberty comes from
the free remission of our sins in his blood who is become our Savior, so
that all the evils which befall us in this life even unto death it self,
turn unto our good, and are sent not from an angry Judge, but from a merciful
Father; as it is said, We are afflicted, but not convicted; we doubt, but we
despair not; we are persecuted, but not forsaken; we are cast down, but we
perish not. Secondly, from the tyranny of sin, so that we do not only begin
to strive, but do also prevail against it more and more, and shall at last
utterly overcome it, even to the breaking of the Serpents head. Thirdly, from
observation of ceremonies, and judicialls of Moses, as touch not, taste not,
handle not, and we may freely use the creatures of God with sobriety and
thanksgiving, which are given for meat, drink and apparel, and use likewise or
not use all things indifferent according to charity. Fourthly, from all Laws
and constitutions of men, that they bind not the conscience as matters of
salvation, though for outward order and policy we are in conscience bound to
observe them, if they be not contrary to Gods word, but agreeable to the
general rules thereof: this is true Liberty, agreeable to the state of our
first Creation, and abounding more in grace it we seek for it, for the which
we are continually to praise God the author thereof. It is great Liberty to be
out of bondage, but it a greater to be the freeman of Christ; it is a great
Liberty to be taken out of the hands of a Tyrant, but a greater to be rescued
out of the power of sin and Satan; it is a great Liberty which Nobility does
challenge, but a greater which a good conscience. What a Liberty is it to do
that which is good? to speak that which is wholesome, and for edification? to
wrong no man? not to wrong himselse? to live without shame? and to die without
fear? Let us detest the youths Liberty, to have no Tutor, the Theefes to
escape the halter, the fools to scoff at his Brother, the blasphemers to
swear, the wantons to be unseene, the drunkards to pledge healths and use
much quaffing, the malcontents to have no state, the unthrifts to turn
himself out of house and home.

Meditation 7. Humane frailty.
O Father Adam, thy Children are all too much like thee! would I were a Pillar
of Marble in the House of my God, that no tentation might shake me, no sin
displace me; or as the two Pillars of Solomon's Temple, Jatui and Boa, that
there might be certainty in my resolution, and constancy in my courses. A
Christian is a man, but I am more a man then a Christian, nay rather a child,
then a man. I weep for vanities and toies, and cast hehind me the Law of God
more worth then the Gold of Ophir. I would stand, but I fall down flat. I
would be better, but prove worse. I would sin no more, I did not to my
knowledge sin so much before. Oh hell in this world, to hate sin, yet to
entertain it, to bear the shame, the sorrow, the smart, of sin, and yet to
shake hands withit! Where shall I have tears enough to bewail my sins? my
heart is broken with sighing, and my brains dried up with weeping. Would to
God my head were a fountain of tears, and mine eyes rivers of waters, to
bewail the desolation that sin has wrought within me. If I be not able to
match sin in his strength, why give I it time, and not rather kill it while
it is young? If jealous thoughts and occasions not cut off do increase his
band, why do I suffer him to muster Soldiers in mine own dominions? Oh that
we could renew our fight, when we are put to flight (as I have read of some
people) and take our pursuers at a disadvantage; but when we begin once to
sly, nothing can stay us, and though no enemy follow, we run our selves out
of breath. The comforts we might lawfully use are ten thousand times more,
then the pleasures we unlawfully steal; the devotion which Gods law asks,
is free, noble, full of reward; the tax which sin imposes, base, slavish,
beggarly: yet how proud are we in such poverty? if we compare our selves,
then are we far more circumspect, more holy then others; if any duty
required of us, then (presuming of our own strength) we follow Christ to the
death, and a little after deny him. Peter did once, I would we did not often
for less cause. How necessary for us, then is humility and prayer? humility,
to value our selves as we are, (and we cannot indeed think worse of our
selves then we are, wandering, weak, unconstant, wilful, wicked) and prayer,
that we may find in God what we want in our selves: for surely he would never
have sent his son amongst us, had he not had care to redress our miseries;
and to ask of the Father in the name of the Son, is the way to be gracious
in obtaining our suits; Let not thy unworthiness discourage thee to come unto
God: nor let his mercy make thee forget thy vileness, that keeping a hard hand
on thy corruptions, thou may the better prevail with God as Jacob did.

Meditation 8. Of Vocations.
COme you into one of their shops whose wits are said to dwell in their
fingers, and you shall wonder to see the store and variety of tools, and how
it may be possible, that one hand should use them all, and yet not one but has
his use; likewise look you into the state of some greater society, and you
shall see a world of men, and yet not one idle, because every man is appointed
by the gifts natural or above nature, and called out as it were to apply
himself unto that kind of life for which he is most fit. It is strange, that
amongst so many sundry vocations, as there are, some high, some low, poor,
rich, noble, base, of body, of mind, there is notwithstanding such an excellent
harmony of them all, that as we say of the bodily members, that they serve
both for one another turn, and for the good of the whole body: so it may be
said of these. And as the taking away or adding of a member overthrows the
shape of the body: so is it in this case to a State, if necessary Vocations be
wanting, or unnecessary used. All men are not fit for all Vocations, and
therefore as there are diverse abilities in men, so are there diverse Vocations
about which they should be employed. Neither is it enough, that all Vocations
be in use, but by such for whom they are most fit. There is one most
necessary, general and honorable Vocation, and is the rule of all others,
which calls us out of the world to profess Christian Religion, and after
which we are called Christians. God grant we may well consider what this
calling requires of us, and we shall be the more forward in the duties of
other callings, for there are also callings special, and these must not only
be lawful in themselves, but lawfully used. We should become our callings, but
we think it enough if our callings become us; whereby there falls out so great
ods between both, that all men see how unfit we are for them, and they for
us. Some are not called but do call themselves, and that is, not for love of
the calling, but some circumstance, as credit or gain, and these do as little
good in a calling as any. If a man pass by a dignity or title, and put
himself into a place where he may do more good, this man no doubt loves his
calling, and may well be commended for his modesty.

In a calling there is both an office, and a maintenance; and I wonder that in
those callings which are the weightiest, the office is often times divided from
the maintenance, and men reckon not much of it, whereas in other callings of
less importance they must go together, and if there be a faulty neglect, men
sooner complain.

If one be appointed a Judge, he must sit himself in Court to hear Causes,
else has he not his allowance; if a Counselor, he must be present at the
Bar to plead for his Client, or else he has no Fee.

If Captain of a Castle, he must abide the assault, else he loses his
pension.

If I appoint one to keep my Sheep, and he look not unto them, I withdraw his
wages; yet one has the Benefice, and another has the cure, there is a Parson
but no Preacher, there is neither Parson nor Preacher, but there are their
Proctors.

There be two virtues which help a Calling, and there be two vices which pull
it down. It is an excellent rule when we have used our means, so to fear
God, as we depend on his blessing; this breeds comfort and cheerfulness:
again, to use patience though the success be otherwise, then we look for;
this will rid us of vexation. How ill do they provide for their business,
which deal falsely; a thing which God will not bless? or envy others so far,
that they lose their own content; whereas God has ordained all callings to
depend so on one another, that there is no gift or benefit which a man has, but
must turn to the good of his Neighbor; and instead of envying his prosperity,
we would rejoice at it, were our eye single.

If one were to be chosen for a calling, among a thousand who might seem more
fit then a busybody, for his readiness, to meddle where no man desires him;
for his diligence, to do more then ever he has thanks for; for his ability,
no matter seems too hard for him? and yet in truth he is the only unfit man of
all others, in his talk he is ever from the matter, and in his dealings knows
better how to begin then end, he is taken up with every tale he hears, and he
has business with every man he meets; his memory is as weak as his
apprehension is quick, and though in duty he will take much on him, yet in
curtesy you are to leave him at his liberty, and to look for nothing from him
till all his business be ended, and that will never be: fit a calling for
this man, and fit a fashion for this age.

But to return to our purpose, and descend more lower into those callings
amongst which some are public, others private. The public callings are
appointed for the order and safety of the private; and the private used for the
maintenance of the public. The public has more honor, but less
quietness; more wealth, but less content: the private has more contempt, but
less envy; more wrong, but less danger. Of all public functions none are
more worthy then those which pertain to the Church, (the Civil I deny not are
as necessary:) consider their subject and end, they deal with the Souls of
men to bring them to Heaven: in this the Church is subject to none but Christ,
though in respect of the persons that use them, she is subject to the
Magistrate, as the Magistrate in that he is a Christian is subject to the
Church. The world will say that the Commonwealth is before the Church, and that
there may be a Civil state though no Church; but the Church cannot be without
a Civil state. But what says Christ, Seek the Kingdom of God first, he
would have us build a Church before we erect a State, and our first Parents
Adam and Eve were a Church before there was a Commonwealth; and as a Church
had the blessing from God to erect a Commonwealth, saying unto them, Increase
and multiply; but then when the Commonwealth was increased, the Church was
neglected: and so is it ever. But I would not have the Church Guelphes, and the
Commonwealth Gibellines: Oh what an harmoniall hierarchy is it, when the Church
and Commonwealth do not only dwell and converse together, but so incorporate
themselves one into another, that they may seem but one body, yet without
confusion of their Vocations, and rights!

Therefore do I dislike the monastical life, which has been so much in
request as the next way to Heaven: all that they could say was that they prayed
for others; which is the common return of all idle rogues and wandering
beggars; but whereas others did both pray and labor for them, they withdrew
themselves from all conversing with men in any calling; they noted the Priests
which had cures with an odious epithete, calling them Seculars, and yet in
wealth and ease they themselves were far beyond, in pain behind them.
Solitarines for a time, to better those callings, that Scholars may return to
converse among men, with the greater profit, is that which our Savior used,
and is to be commended.

Meditation 9. Of Gods long suffering.
We find fearful examples of Gods anger against sin, as Adam cast out of
Paradise, Cain banished from the Lords presence, the old world drowned in the
Flood, Sodom and the Cities adjoining burnt with fire from Heaven, Pharaoh and
his Host choked up on the Red Sea, Corah and his companions swallowed up of
the Earth, seven Nations put to the Sword by the Israelites, the tweive Tribes
dispersed, the painful death of our Lord the son of God, suffering for the
sin of man; yet is God very patient toward sinners, first in that he calls
all men to repentance by the sound of his word, or the inward touch of their
own consciences; seconly, because it is long before he does punish offenders,
as the old world had a hundred years, the 7 Nations four hundred; thirdly,
because he does give warning before the stroke fall, by threatenings, signs
and wonders; and if men repent and call for mercy, he forgiveth, and holds his
hand as it fell out to Niniveh. Fourthly, when he does punish he remembers
mercy, and though he make some an example, yet saves he his people which
deserved all to perish: this fell out to Adam, and often times to the Isaelites,
notwithstanding that they more then once provoked him. Lastly, there are many
whom he never punishsheth in this life, though they daily offend him, but does
bestow upon them both peace and plenty, filling their hearts with joy and
gladness; whence it comes to pass that many dare vaunt there is no God,
promising unto themselves liberty of doing what they list, grow most loose and
licentious, and draw unto themselves whole multitudes of such as they have
corrupted: such a one was Nimrod after the sloud, a Captain of them which laid
the foundation of that never to be finished tower.

But this is a wicked abuse of the divine patience, which is as it were an
Arc, whereby the Church is saved, from the overflowings of ungodliness. The
godly understanding well the Lords patience, observe thereby how willing he is
that all men should repent and be saved: for being all as we are borne in
sin, and so frail ever after, that the best does often offend, what hope were
there of avoiding his displeasure, if he should not grant time to embrace those
means, whereby we might be again reconciled to him? And this he does not
once or twice, but often, as our Savior protested, How often would I have
gathered you? and behold great patience, wherefore from him which would not have
us tie our selves to seven times, but does enlarge it to seventy times seven
times, look for the like or greater measure from the length of his own
patience. And this is so far from breeding any dullness in Gods Children, as
though this patience were a slacknesse of the Lord in favor of sin, or a
weakness as unable presently to punish what he does not favor, that knowing
his purpose therein, they are the more earnestly enforced speedily to return
unto the Lord, and that with great sorrow, having offended him, which is so
patient in forbearing of them. And they labor so much the more diligently to
redeem what by negligence has been omitted often with thankfulness, calling
to mind this singular benefit, and stir up others to be partakers thereof.
and unto all those is Gods patience a sanctuary, from his wrath. For them only
shall it be turned into fury, which have despised it. If God be so patient, and
bear with us, should we be impatient and not bear with one another? God
dealt patiently with him which afterward took his brother by the throat.
There is nothing which more displeases the Lord, nothing wherein he desires
rather to be imitated, in so much as he barreth him from all access which
wants patience. Prayer is of such force with God that it wins any thing
from him, yet if thou be impatient, it avails nothing, for thou ask a good
turn of God, and bear no good mind to thy brother, and therefore he will not
hear thee. Will thou have God patient? abuse not thy brother as one wanting
patience. God who does all things patiently, does all things wisely; for
patience is quiet and patience takes leisure, so that in him follows not this
after-wit, I had not wist it. Impatient men are angry and hasty, which two
things pervert counsel. Oh vain man, thou know how patiently the Lord has
dealt with thee, and how impatient thou have been thy self for small matters,
do thou not wonder at both? how the Lord could bear with thee so long, or
thou thy self so little for Gods sake? The Lord would not have thee perish,
here is thy good intended: do thou that which may turn to thy brothers good,
that God may be glorified in thy patience. This made Jacob say unto his brother
Esau, I have seen thy face as if I had seen the face of God, and indeed a
patient man is no other then the very Image of God amongst men.

Meditation 10. Of Faith and Works.
AS the Sun rises in the East and sets in the West, so Religion rises in
Faith and sets in obedience of Works: and as there cannot be an East, but
there must be also a West, so is there no saving Faith without the obedience of
Faith: and as the Morning and Evening make one Day, so Faith and obedience the
life of a Christian. I have read of a people which wanting a King did agree on
this kind of election, they would go all together into a broad Field, near
the Town, and he that could epsy the rising of the Sun first, should be
taken as the worthiest man; so after midnight they went out, to observe the
rising of the Sun, and the whole multitude had their Eyes fixed on the East,
one only amongst them, wiser then the rest, looked toward the West, at whom
they all marvelled much; but when the day began to dawne, and all others were
intentive Eastward, to take notice of the Suns rising, this fellow which
stood Westward, before they wist of it, showed them the rising of the Sun, in
the tops of the Houses and Towers of the City: It is a common conceit of them,
which take notice of Religion in any, to look toward his Faith and
profession, because indeed Religion does begin, and as it were rise there; but
they which are wise will look toward obedience and Works, because Religion
does first appear there; it may be hid in Faith, and thou can not certainly
discern it, for there is ods between Faith and profession; but if his Works
be good and godly, thou may boldly presume, that the Sun of righteousness
is risen on him, and has with his beams of Religion enlightened him: wherefore
James says, Pure religion and undefiled before God, and the father, is this,
to visit the fatherless and widows in their adversities, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world: mark how he judges of Religion, not by Faith, but
obedience; and yet there is no Religion pure, but by Faith; because Faith is
also to be tried by obedience, in the sight of men, as obedience by Faith
before God; And Christ uses the same direction, Hereby shall all men know you
are my Disciples, if ye love one another; and love as ye know contains all
duties of the Law; and hence is Christ's answer in the Gospel, to such as shall
say at the day of judgment, Have not we taught, and preached, and done great
Works in thy name? Depart from me, I know you not, all ye workers of
iniquity: Christ looked not on their profession, but practice. There is a
knowledge of the truth, and that we have from Faith, believing in the Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ; and there is an experience of the truth,
when the virtue of these things believed, does work in our lives, as when by
the power of Christ's Death, we die unto sin; and by the power of his
Resurrection, we arise unto newness of life; and by the power of his
Ascension are heavenly minded. When we are come to knowledge, we pass on to
trust, and confidence, by applying to our selves the promises of the Gospel;
so when we are come to this trust, we must pass on to experience, and trial
in our lives, by imitating those things in our selves which Christ has done
for us; this is that which Saint Paul says, we all behold as in a mirror the
glory of the Lord, with open face, and are changed into the same Image: from
glory to glory: as by the spirit of God, God shows his face open to us in the
Gospel, we behold it by Faith, we are changed into the same by special
trust and confidence, that the things there promised, belong unto us, as
remission of sins, the righteousness of Christ, freedom from death, and the
gift of eternal life; and we pass from glory to glory, by the experience
spoken of, when the virtue of the things we believe, does work in our lives,
and make us holy, as he is holy; and we have both righteousness inherent and
imputed; and for this cause, Paul speaking of the same matter to the
Philippians, does not count himself perfect, or to have as yet attained the
full end of his calling, for though he had begun in the first degree to
believe, and gone forward to the second for application, yet had he much to do
in the last, as long as it should please God to lend him life. But you will
say, what does the virtue of Christ's Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension
belong to us? As the sap of the stock belongs to the graft, so we being
grafted into Christ by a lively Faith, that virtue of his, whereby he overcame
death, rose again and ascended, must needs grow up in us, to bring forth like
fruits; and to signify this union, he in other places is called the head, and
the faithful members of the same body; a vine, and the faithful branches of
the vine; and how this union is made between Christ and the faithful, the
Sacrament of Christ's blessed body and blood, does not only represent, but that
it is done also, as often as the faithful do rightly receive the same, it
does testify; and therefore there is not bare bread, or a sign only, but the
body and blood of Christ really, yet not grossly, as the Papists imagine, but
after a heavenly manner to the Soul, to Faith; neither is it necessary for
this union, and the benefit thereof, that it should be local, so as Christ's
body must enter into ours, but when Faith does embrace Christ, crucified for
us, that the Spirit, whose power is not tied to distance of places, make the
faithful man partaker of those gifts and graces of his redemption, which can
be no otherwise derived unto him, but from the humane nature of Christ which
suffered, and as he is a member of Christ.

Meditation 11. Of Merit.
THere is a great question between the Papists and us, what works please God
best, either such as are done to Merit, or of duty: they say works done of
duty have less zeal; but belike they separate duty from love: we say, works
done to Merit savor more of pride, and cannot please God of themselves, because
they want duty: and if we should join with them in an issue about zeal, it
might be proved that their zeal for the glory of God is not so great, which
work to Merit as the others. Saint Paul, as appears in his Epistle to the
Philippians, wrought not to Merit, but of duty and love: he which works to
Merit, must remember what is past, and examine all his works from the
beginning to the end, whether they be worhty that reward which he means to
challenge; but Saint Paul working of duty, forgot what was past as though he
had done nothing, and his mind was only on that which he might be able to do
farther as long as God would give him life, according to that of our Savior,
When ye have done all that you can, say, you are unprofitable servants: as if
he should say, think so meanly of what you have done, that you count it your
duty to do much more as long as you live, even as much as you can, and yet
shall you be unprofitable servants, both in respect of the grace used, and not
turned to the best advantage, and in respect of the glory to be received, for
which, you can give no worthy recompense, saving that it is the fathers will
for my sake to give it to you, and what he has promised, he will in justice
perform: Belike Christ when he spoke so much of duty, meant to take zeal from
works nothing at all; but to add the more love and willingness, which is the
cause of zeal, to the base and slavish mind, a benefit past is of no force,
whereas the free and gentle heart is disposed toward a good turn received;
but because both they and we agree thus far, that good works are necessary,
let us rather busy our selves about doing well, then disputing wittily. God
grant that I may remember. I am a Christian; if this bind me not to do good,
nothing will; if I do unfeignedly what I can, God will be merciful where I
fail, and Christ will rather want merits, then I shall want reward.

Meditation 12. Pastoral cure.
THey which know what belongs to a flock, are not ignorant of the care of a
Shepherd, or the necessities of Sheep; neither is it an unworthy
consideration, for out of Shepherds have been taken Kings, and Kings in time
past have not refused to be Shepherds, and they which at this day do rule in
the State, have this as no mean title of their authority, to be styled
Shepherds of the people; yea God himself does vouchsafe to express the
Government which he takes over his people, under the title of Shepherd; and
Christ Jesus our Lord who died for mankind, is called the great Shepherd of
our Souls. And indeed the charge over a flock or people are much like; we in
England, have a great desire to deal on Sheep; and it is one of the chiefest
commodities in the Country; they are so profitable, their Wool is in great
request at home, and with strangers, their bodies are good for meat or
medicine, yea their very excrement have their use; they are gentle of nature,
not dangerous to be handled as other beasts which are armed to defend or
offend, howbeit in this does not the resemblance hold so well; but if you
respect the weakness and necessities of Sheep, it may notably express the
care, the faithfulness, the diligence which God uses, in governing his
people, God is desirous to rule his servants as a flock of Sheep, not for any
great profit he can make of them, neither is it intended of him which needs it
not, or looked for there where it cannot be had, for though their bodies were of
excellent employment by creation, yet what are they of themselves since Adams
Fall, but cages of unclean Birds, nests of sin, grievously tainted with a
sickness that in Sheep makes carcass and Wool unprofitable? It is alone then
for our profit, that he will have us under government, the Laws which he
makes, are not for his own good, which is infinite goodness in himself; but
for ours: neither the courses which we undertake under his direction for his
happiness, who is eternal happiness himself, but for ours. True it is, that
he adds unto his Law authority, to make us the rather yield unto that, which
is for our benefit, and from his authority, does proceed reward or punishment,
that we may know he commands not in vain. Moreover the government of men
(as they best know, which know State matters) is the men themselves, being so
variable, full of discontent and malice, above all Creatures, if we will count
them tame, because of reason we shall find them wild and savage by evil
course and custom of life; notwithstanding, God does make them so his own,
whom he rules as his flock, that none shall be able to pull them out of his
hands, he will not lose one of the least of them, he leaves the ninety and
nine, to seek out the wandering and lost Sheep, and when he has found him,
lays him on his shoulders with joy, and returning home, makes merry with his
Neighbors for the Sheep that was lost, but is found; he knows his Sheep, and
is known of them, he will lay down his life for his Sheep, and will not
forsake them; he brings them into the sweet pastures of his holy Word, and
refreshes them with the cool Waters of his Spirit, he has a rod and a
staff, the rod keeps in his Sheep, and the staff keeps out the Wolf: by all
which it comes to pass, that no flock is in such state as his, they have a
comely order in their going forth, a provident provision of needful things,
and sure safety all about them: happy is he that can say, The Lord is my
Shepherd; he that is not of this fold, is of the Devils wast; Christ has many
promises of good to be done unto his flock, and for his flocks sake it is he
cannot abide the Wolf, of which one is no good Neigbour, and the other, a
deadly enemy to Sheep; I count him the Wolf which is the known adversary, and
the Goat is the loose Christian; the adversary has a bloody mind, and the
loose Christian is offensive by an ill life.

Meditation 13. Dullness of Spirit.
THere is no disease more dangerous to a religious Soul, then dullness or
heaviness of Spirit, which makes the ground of the heart so cold, that the
seed of grace lies for a time* as it were dead, and has no growth: it makes
the Christian either fearful or slow to do good, and lays him open to
tentations: it arises from the corruption of nature which is froward,
increases by diseases and discontentments, and grows to a head by particular
doubts and uncertainties: it has strange Symptoms, even in those which have
been well schooled and trained up in Christianity: it suggesteth and would
persuade them wellneare, that it is all as well with the godless as the godly,
that he is in as good cause, that swears as he that fears an oath, that an
upright conscience is but a ceremonious scrupulosity, formality and complement
may serve as well, that the world is not so unworthy a thing, as lightly to be
set by, and the joys of Heaven belong rather to Angels then men: it is
offended at hearing or reading Gods word, prayers, good works, holy meetings,
and has some exception against them all; it will persuade thee in particular,
that God does not regard or so much as respect thy service, and close with thee
this at last, if thy calling be so worthy as thou would make it; yet art
thou unworthy of thy calling, unfit, and so far from speeding in it, that it
were better for thee to do any other thing, or just nothing. I know not
whereunto I may better compare this disease, then to that which in women young
with child they call Longing, when the stomach stopped with ill humors, the
appetite is altered, and the Patient importunately desires strange meats; so
in this cause natural inbred corruptions striving against grace, and abounding
within, do alter the godly appetite, making Gods servant loath his ordinary
diet, and exercises, as being uncomfortable, unsavory, and to affect strange
things contrary to the health of the Soul. They which travel by Sea when they
see it once calm, and on a sudden to dance and shake, and know no cause why,
look for a tempest shortly after; so this dullness or heaviness which is so
unquiet and out of order, goes many times before some greater sin; let it be
considered whether such a kind of dullness came not on David before his
adultery, and numbering the people; on the Disciples, before they forsook their
master, and specially on Peter before he denied his Lord. I put a difference
between this heaviness or dullness of spirit, and that hardness of heart,
deadness or benumming, which is proper to the wicked: in cause; for that
proceeds from customs and habits in sin, from wilful stubbernesse; this
from the relics of corruption, yet abiding in Gods children: in degree; that
is without sense or feeling, Like a lethargy; this has some resistance, and
like the fit of an Ague, in event: that does make them worse, and in the end
overcome them; this the godly do overcome, and after grow the better advised.
The means to avoid this dullness, is to converse with God, and to keep our
hearts in ure with him, by calling to mind every day his benefits general,
particular, corporal, spiritual, what he has done for thy Soul already,
what he will do farther, then to examine thy self how thou have been
answerable that day for such kindness and love unto thee, then to fall to
prayer, asking pardon for thy sins, with a faithful and penitent heart, and
entering into a new league between God and thy Soul, to forsake sin more
earnestly, and to serve God more carefully then in times past.

Meditation 14. Of Joy.
IT is good to rejoice ever; and never to rejoice, I mean carnally: we must
not set up Joy as an Idol in our hearts, as though there were no higher matter;
if a man ask us why we are merry, we can say nothing, but because we love to
be merry, yet ought we to prefer God to our Joy, and the glory of God, the
good of our Neighbor, and the health of our Souls; we must so rejoice in
temporal things, that we bar not our selves from heavenly comforts; we
must be so familiar with outward things, that we grow nothing the more strange
with God: if otherwise, we sell our birthright for Esaus Broth, Canaan for the
fleshpots of Egypt, and as it is commonly said, We go out of Gods blessing
into a warm Sun. Take heed then to thy self, it is lawful for thee to use
the blessings of God for thy necessity, I say more, for thy comfort and
recreation, so far forth as does concern thy person, yea thy state and
calling; but if thou use them for thy recreation only, and have no farther or
better end, thou will quickly fall to the abuse, respecting rather what thy
appetite does crave, then God allows; God allows no such use of his
creatures, as makes thee the less able or willing to serve him, wherefore a
restraint at least in affectation touching these things, is better then by
loosing too much the reins to our unruly flesh, to suffer it to take the bridle
and run away; let the fear of God be the steward of our expenses, and it
shall make a good account for us; if it cause us to pass by many worldly
delights, yet will yield unto our consciences the sounder comfort, for God does
bring unto him the joys of the Holy Ghost, which willingly forsakes outward
pleasures; the later end of such joys is woe, but of this it is said, No man
shall take it from you; Will thou rejoice ever? (me thought I heard thee say
so) be sad ever to the world: if thou smile with it, let it be from the teeth
outward, engage not thy heart: A strange Paradox, that a man should be sorry
to make himself merry; and these as strange, we must stand in fear to make
our selves bold, we must be fools to be made wise, we must die, that we
may live.

Meditation 15. Humane reason.
IS not this our common answer, Have I not reason to do as I do? yet are we
not to live by reason, but by faith, whereas we should rather say, Does not Gods
word warrant me to do, as I do? If Religion were but the improvement of
Reason, how would men entertain it as their own, whereas now they suspect it
as a stranger? Many have thought that the Articles of Religion might win
credit from principles evident to the light of nature, and that Philosophy has
laid as good grounds as Divinity: Surely Humane learning can convince us well
enough of many things we do, but cannot bring us forward In that we ought to
do for salvation; it was a power in nature created, to obey and believe if it
would, but now in nature decayed, it is a want, and it is not in man's will to
believe and obey the truth; and the misery is, that it knows not how to find
what it has lost, nor so much as that it has lost any thing without a
borrowed light; the word of God is the powerful means whereby the Holy Ghost
which works inwardly in our hearts, does impart this light unto us; our
Reason is natural, Faith supernatural, Reason is the beginning of Knowledge,
but Faith of Religion. The Papists will say, they have more Reason for their
Religion then we, for Free will, Satisfaction, Merits, Purgatory, Prayers,
Latin Service, Images, Pilgrimages, Hierarchy, stand all upon good grounds of
Reason: Let us give them what they ask, we may the more boldly challenge
truth, without which there is no Religion, and to protest freely what we
maintain, and wherein we desire by Gods grace to die, we follow not Reason
in making choice of Religion, but Gods word searching to understand the harder
places and easy, keeping our selves within the proportion of Faith, refusing
not the help of Humane learning for the phrase or story, neither the testimony
of better times; by this word we learn, that man has no good will, nor has
his will power to return to God, until grace make the will willing, which of
it self is unwilling, and then, but not till then, does it work with grace.
What if Reason deny this, and teach the contrary? By the word of God we
learn, that there is no satisfaction for sins besides the death of Christ, no
merit to eternal life but his righteousness; that sins are all mortal by
nature, though not equal, that man's righteousness, though done in grace is
unperfect. What if Reason deny this and teach the contrary? By the word of God,
we learn that bread in the Sacrament is not turned into the very body of
Christ, nor wine into his blood, yet that it is his very body and blood to the
faithful communicant, who is made partaker of whole Christ, not by a gross
and fleshly incorporation, but a ghostly and effectual union. What if Reason
deny this, and teach the contrary? By Gods word we learn, that worshipping of
Images amongst Christians is but a setting up of Idols, as amongst the Heathen,
that Prayers in a strange tongue for the dead, are neither devotion nor
charity. What if Reason deny this, and teach the contrary? By Gods word we
learn, that Religion consists not in Popish shrift, Penance, difference of
Meats, Apparel, Fasting, Pilgrimage, Relics, Crossing, Holy-oile,
Holy Water, Holy-bread, Holybeades, Holy-bells. What if Reason deny this, and
teach the contrary, to the decay of Christian obedience, which consists in an
inward mortisication, and outwardly, in a patient bearing of Christ's cross? By
the word of God, we learn, that Christ is the only head of the Church, and
does still govern the same by his spirit and word, from which Gods Ministers
or Priests, fetch all their authority, and has not given over his place to
another, which should take authority above the word. What if Reason deny this,
and teach the contrary? By the word we learn that the Scriptures have
sufficient instruction to salvation. What if Reason deny it, and put us farther
over to traditions, revelations, miracles, to enforce doctrines contrary to the
word; is not Reason justly to be suspected in all these things, as thinking but
too well of her self, giving too much liberty to nature, and justifying her
own hypocrisies for Gods good service, of which it will not be said, as our
Savior of the lesser matters of the Law, the tything of Mint and Cummin, These
things ye should have done, but rather this, Who required these things at your
hands, for which ye have left my commandments? Now my Soul look to thy
self, how thou do make thy choice, regard not that antiquity, universality,
succession, pomp, authority, which is not grounded on the truth in the word,
all these will follow Humane Reason, regard the word of the Almighty and
unchangeable truth it self, which is alone sufficient without these, and they
without it nothing worth.

Meditation 16. Repentance deferred.
In Summer we can provide for Winter, in Youth we lay up for Age, but who in
health does prepare for sickness? As long as we do well, we will not live
well, but put it over to that time when we have much ado to live, then can
we not remedy what is past, neither have we leisure to do better: Repentance
indeed is never too late, and mercy may come on a sudden, but repentance in
health is the ordinary gift of God, in sickness extraordinary, because he does
not give it him which might, and would not; thou can tell me no cause why
thou should not repent when thou art well, and I can tell thee many why thou
can not repent when thou art sick, thy heart is a stranger to goodness, and
God to thee, hardly can thou hear good counsel, but it is the hardest of
all to settle thy self on it then when all things grow so troublesome and
uncertain. Many have said it is too late, would I could have followed it in
times past, neither have we leisure to do better; Repentance indeed is never
too late, but sickness is the time past, yet will thou not repent in health;
Do thou make but a pastime of repentance? take heed lest sickness be unto
thee the end of a bad life, which in health thou would not amend, and deliver
thee over to endless death. Oh my soul, remember thy own estate, thou did
put over repentance, and God did put thee over to sickness; What discomfort
was it to think on sins past, what little hope had thou of good to come?
how unable wast thou to recollect thy self? what means did thou want to be
raised up? if thou had any holy desire, any feeling at the last, thou were
more bound to thy Savior, which sought thee out a wandering sheep; Where art
thou now my soul, what do thou, that which thou did then promise to close
nearer with thy God, who has given life to thy desire, and years to thy life,
surely I have escaped a great harm and outlived my self, good Lord have mercy
on me, and grant that I forget not thy goodness, nor betray my self any
more into the hands of danger; thou know well enough what I am, the worse
for my abused health, and if any thing the better for my sickness, it is thy
favor; I like not my amendment half so well, as I heartily lament my
neglected time.

Meditation 17. Gifts of God and Men.
ALl blessings without that one, for whose sake they are bestowed, are but a
curse, other blessings are given for a good life, which is the chiefest
blessing; they are good, but this makes us good; they make us welcome to men,
as strength makes us welcome to the weak, learning to the simple, wealth to
them which want, authority to such as are oppressed, but this makes us welcome
to our own consciences, which entertain us with a continual feast, to God
which says, welcome good servant; for them we must make reckoning, but for
this we shall receive a crown of righteousness: yet see! that men altogether
admire and desire most the former kind of gifts, to them give they a style,
they come not without grace, excellency, majesty, holiness, they call those
that have them, rulers, benefactors, Lords, Princes, but a good man is in no
note, no request, and indeed he needs it not, for he has more then all the
world can give him, and his commendation is not from men, but God. Christ our
Savior the wisest steward, provided not for himself or us blessings of the
former kind, but of the latter; Judas had the bag and Peter the sword: but
Christ in his heart had righteousness, even to his lips outwardly; there was
no guile found in his mouth, and what he did by doctrine, miracles, passion for
us, tended to this end, that being delivered from the captivity of sin, we
might be made free men of righteousness, and show forth good works to Gods
glory. The greatest gifts to this purpose that ever were bestowed on mankind,
was on that glorious day, a white and happy day, the Lords day, a sunday, 50
days after the resurrection, when according to his promise like a Prince new
crowned, he showred down the gifts of the Holy Ghost on his Church, cloven and
fiery tongues, in terpretatio^ of tongues, knowledge to open the Scriptures,
and to apply them, prophecy, healing, discerning of spirits, and the like; by
which gifts Christ has subdued the world, and brought men from Idolatry and
wickedness, to true godliness and righteousness: amongst which do excel
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, more famous in christianity then the
demigods, which anciently in the ruder times of the world, have stored it with
the rare invention of diverse things profitable to the life of man. Oh my soul,
how have thou admired state greatness, authority, possession, train and
pomp, and if not to be one of them, yet to be near unto them, and though
farther of, yet that the beams of such glory might shine on thee? And now
observe whether in the mean while God has not offered thee, and thou by thy
neglect have lost better things, and so have proved to God unthankful,
unprofitable to thy self: Call to mind thy baptism, what intends it? that
thou following this most honorable profession into which thou have entered,
should be enabled and encouraged to live a new life after the spirit, and
become a good man to God: to this purpose coming to discretion, God instructed
thee in his word, there wast thou made acquainted with the royal law, his
statutes and ordinances, and with all the provisions, cautions, admonitions
drawn from the same by the Prophets; hence were thou led on to the Gospel,
which met thee with abundant and effectual grace, and for thy better assurance
that thou art received into the society and body of Christ, he fed thee often
in his blessed Sacrament with his own body and blood, and for thy better guide
in this course of salvation, he has afforded thee his own, and the examples
of his holy ones, which have shined as lights in a dark place. What does want
unto thee, that in the sight of God thou art above all that is great in the
world? think not then too highly of transitory things, nor too basely of thy
self, remember what thou have received, and whereunto God calls thee, and
thou shall have no cause to complain of thy lot.

Meditation 18. Suspicion.
I Know not wherefore Suspicion is good, except on just cause, and then it is
providence; but to make our idle conjectures the arrows, and other men the
butts, and to hit them which are not in our way, because we have a crooked
aim: this is for want of charity, and from too much love of our selves; we
love our selves so well, that we would have all men worse then our selves, and
so little do we love others, that we care not how bad we make them. If
Suspicion hunt like a young dog which knows not his game, it is taken often
with a lie, and falls soon into a dead fault; but if it work an experience
and trial, it gives soon over where it is not good, and never holds but where
it should. Vain fears and vain suspicions are much like, for fear makes us
suspect the helps which might do us good, and Suspicion makes us fear
friends, which mean us no hurt; and both betray their followers, fear to
danger, and Suspicion to shame, the one by refusing her own strength, the
other by discovering his own weakness. If Suspicion come of weakness it is
the more tolerable, but if for want of charity, and strengthened with malice, it
is intolerable, and to be hated, for it rangeth far, and runs riot, and
will be under no command, you shall never satisfy it though you would, neither
can it satisfy it self but by complaints. What poison lies hid under
Suspicion may appear, because it breeds jealousy between man and wife, for
what is jealousy, but the Suspicion of a stranger? In this cause the parties
are so disquieted, that the joy which they took by each other does decay, their
society becomes odious, and a cursed parting (the bane of holy wedlock)
follows. The suspicions man as he is no good husband, so is he a bad neighbor
and a worse friend, an unruly servant, and a crooked master, he mistakes more
then he takes in good part, he will not lend a good turn for fear of losing
his labor, and and yet has lost all judgment, because he will not lend so
much as a good opinion, he hears what men speak when they are silent, and
sees them doing something amiss when they are asleep, he does challenge the
fairest proceedings of a foul intent, he thinks all men naught and is the
worst himself, he trusts no man in private and is publicly noted, he has a
window in every man's breast, and an eye into every man's window; a clear mind
thinks of others as of himself at all times; he does pass over that which
may have any good construction, and many times takes no notice of ill or
offense, he consults not with tales and opinions, but out of discretion, and
observes both what humane society does require, and how far charity must bear
and may win a stranger.

Meditation 19. Of Gain.
A Desire of Gain, if we have a greater desire of Gods glory and the common
good, if it be limited within the bounds of nature and honesty, if it be our
own and not to gain by another loss, is not to be condemned, yet are we
scarsly to desire Gain by our Saviors rule: That which we may lawfully
desire, we may honestly seek, but Christ will not have us seek the things
belonging to Gain, but to the kingdom of God, and to accept the other as it
falls out; meaning that our whole purpose of living here, should be set on
our spiritual life with God, to make our advantage that way, and that our
natural and civil life should receive their convenient blessings from God,
without our cark or vexation, though not without our employment, without
gaining our affections, though commanding our means. There is sometimes a
fault in the desire when it is greedy, and in the Gain when it is filthy, and
commonly a greedy desire does not refuse filthy Gain, and when they go both
together it is the worse. Usury is not only a desire, but a greedy desire of
filthy Gain, yea unsatiable and cruel, a Gain and a stain to the Soul of
him that uses it, a Gain and a pain to the heart of him that pays it, a
Gain and a train of the Devil, by the love of money to bring men to
perdition: Yea but much good comes to the Commonwealth by usury; and the
like is said of witchcraft, men else will not lend, as much to say as they
will not be Christians; but will you be so bold as to condemn all usury? I
refer you to your conscience a little rectified, deal as you would be dealt
withal, abuse not thy neighbors want, use the honest means of some calling,
depend on Gods blessing, and tell me what course of usury is lawful, many
lend not for themselves but for Orphans. A special cause, and has special
rules of conscience; many pay use, the occasion of borrowing may accuse or
excuse; the greatest Gain, and the surest profit is God lives, for it has the
promises of this life and that which is to come, and joyneth piety with
prosperity; But what are promises worth (say some) who will stand on them?
promises are but debts, and debts are not willingly paid though promised by
forfeit under hand and seal. True between man and man, but between God and
man not so, because his promise is better then any man's performance; think not
small of the promise of his love. But I see no experience, I have no feeling of
this promise, David did when he said I never saw the righteous forsaken. David
many times believed without feeling, and so do thou, if thou find it hard,
pray that thou may, for it is full of reward. If thou be godly, I permit thee
to deal with the earth, or natural ready and ordinary Gain, she takes no
hurt, thou much advantage; thy diligence makes her bountiful, thou lendest a
little, and she pays thee home with great store; I know thou will as
willingly deal with the poor, an excellent usury, God is the play master, not
according to thy merit, but far above, of his own mercy; for the interest of
unrighteous Mammon, behold a crown of righteousness with Christ: for him,
forsake Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, House and what not else! and receive a
hundred fold, is not this Gain enough? will not such Gain content thy desire?
this or none. Two things have thou (oh my soul) to avoid about worldly Gain,
distrust, if it come not; security, if it do: Do thy means fail? thou have
a father careful of thee above all means; Art thou not rich to the world? it
is better (...) rich toward God; of a li^ give a little, God respects
according to that a man has, not according to that he has not, and loves a
cheerful rather then a costly giver; thou must learn to wait on God from day
to day, it is thy obedience, his glory; if thou be rich, thy account will be
the harder to make. Things themselves are not good to thee, but in their
lawful use, they serve not thy turn except thou serve God with them, make not
that a snare to entangle thee in vanity, which is given thee for the exercise
of virtue; Alas, why complainest thou when any cross interrupts thy worldly
proceedings, and do not feel the loss of spiritual grace, whiles thou art
thwarted in a good course by sin? why art thou so well pleased at good
success, and do not rejoice rather for the good seeds of thy regeneration,
for the fruits of thy faith, hope, love, zeal, patience, chastity, meekness,
temperance, sobriety and the rest, for that thou have found or art directed in
the way, to find the treasure of inestimable worth and value, to wit, the
keeping of a good conscience? this that thou do not, ought to make thee
mourn and lament, and thou should not take comfort in that wealth which
keeps thee from feeling thy daily want and enjoying sound prosperity.

Meditation 20. Of Giving.
GAining is good if it be to give, for Giving is better; God gains nothing by
any, yet gives all, that is his perfection; the light of the Sun and Moon, the
influence of the Planets, the sweetness of the air, the variety of seasons,
the fatness of the clouds, the fruitfulness of the earth, the fullness of
the Sea, the virtue of herbs, the beauty of flowers, the profit of beasts and
cattle, the price of Gold, Silver, and precious stones are nothing to him, nay
the redemption of mankind, the gathering of the Saints, the gifts of the
Church, the graces of men, our regeneration, sanctification, prayers,
sacrifices and services are nothing to him, for he is his own perfection; ours
it is to gain and give, receive and bestow, of all things besides God it may
be said, what have they which they have not received? yea the creatures which
have most, as Angels and men have received most, and are the more bound to the
giver, wherefore their first perfection is to receive, but because to give, to
bestow, is a farther extent of perfection, and more answerable to the
perfection of him which is the giver of all good, therefore is it a better
thing, and as our Savior said, by Paul's report, a more blessed, to give,
rather then to receive, a better good, the chief good; a better good, that is
virtue, the chief good, that is happiness; the life of every virtue is action,
and happiness the perfection of actions, and action of virtue is nothing else
but a giving of good in some kind, as the act of justice, to give every one his
own, of fortitude to give courage against death, of temperance to give a
measure to pleasures, of prudence to give order to affairs, of liberality to
give gifts where and when it is convenient, and therefore as we say, there is
a kind of justice in all virtues; so is there a kind of liberality, though one
kind of giving for his use and excellency be so specially called, for he which
gives of his own to relieve another, does it most freely without any
consideration to move him, besides the love of virtue, and for the good which
comes thereof is deemed a God amongst men, for which cause Princes are by a
special title termed Gods, because as their places require them to do all
virtuous actions more then others, so above all, they are enabled to give
liberally, and by giving to help many; he that does good unto his neighbor
according to the action of any virtue, gives him his help more worth then
goods, and therefore gives in the true nature of giving, and if his help be
for the soul and the life to come, the gift is greater then if it pertained to
this life only; and yet I know not how they which give out their goods freely
to the comfort of others, win a more deep affection and excellent reputation,
then they which do good according to any other virtue: yea a liberal man has
the commendation of all virtue, he is thought wise, because he knows the true
use of riches; valiant, because he can overcome the covetous desire which rules
too many; just, because he willingly makes that to be another, which is his
own; because he thinks it more due unto him for the good which may come
thereof; temperate, because he does withdraw much from superfluity and
excess, that he may have wherewith to do others good, and he will spend the
less to give the more. We must gain then that we may give, and we must
receive that we may bestow, and do good with that we have, the one is
blessed for the other, and therefore the latter rather blessed then the other;
but he which thinks that to keep in his gains is the only way to do
himself good, as if they were all lost, if others should occupy with him, has
as poor a trade as he which hid his talent in a napkin, of which came no
advantage for lack that it was not put out: every Christian must know himself
to be as it were the stomach, to digest, and disperse those gifts which he
receives, to the good of Christ's body; Christ emptied himself to fill us, he
being rich (says Paul) for your sakes became poor, that you through his
poverty might be made rich; What he got of his Father, by his holy life or
patient death, he bestows on us, and what he might justly claim at our
hands, for his gifts bestowed on us, he leaves to be disposed by us, to the
good of our mother, as the Tithes of our goods on the Ministers which watch not
for his, but our good; Alms of our goods, which the poor receive, and he
accepts and rewards, as if they were bestowed on himself; and if he bestow
a spiritual grace on me, he looks not for the return, but puts it over to
the brethren, as when he said, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith
fail not, strengthen thy brethren; and for the good instruction which we
receive in the Church to our souls health, he binds us to teach and exhort
one another. A Christian then has a life both active and passive, the one all
in receiving, the other all in giving: he does receive faith, hope, charity;
and all this while nature does nothing, grace does all: then after by grace he
lives in doing good, according to his faith, hope, and love; the first life
brings him into the favor of God, the second into the possession of his
kingdom; to do thy self most good is to depart with thy goods unto others,
and in this cause they are kept better to serve thy turn, then if they were in
thine own keeping, for if thy treasure be in the hand of the poor, Christ is
thy treasurer, who will make thee good account of all such expenses. I speak
strange things to the ears of men, addicted to this life, where plenty is
before want, and prosperity before poverty, to whom giving seems spending, and
receiving a fruitful harvest, but to the spiritual man whose life is in God,
it is plain as grounded upon a true contempt of the world, and is the right
exercise of charity which Christians must regard, and Christ at the last day
will confirm it to be true, by that final judgment, when he shall pronounce
them blessed which have given, and others cursed which have had more care to
gain, then give. Oh my soul think nothing thine, that charity bids thee
spare, or if it be thine, it is by the right of using it well to the good of
others, for the rest thou shall answer, as for things stolen.

Meditation 21. Say well and do well.
LEt every man speak as he means, but first let him mean well, for he which
uses to speak well and has no good meaning, does soon prove a dissembler: it
is simply good always to mean well, for that causes a man to speak well, and
to be the same in deed which he is in word; let every man speak as he list, so
he live well, says another, as though men could speak without affecting, as
many times they speak without truth. He that does use to speak ill will shortly
be the man he speaks of, transforming himself by little and little into the
Image of his own words; such a man indeed speaks plainly, but dangerously to
himself and others, for his meaning being no better then his speech, he
imboldens himself and corrupts others; and this is the rule, Custom of good
speech does not alter the meaning which is ill, but the use of ill speech does
alter the meaning which is good, and make it naught: whence it is, if I hear a
man speak well, I am still uncertain, but if I see him do well, then I
certainly know him, though he be silent, because his meaning is showed truly
in deed, which in words is dark or doubtful. It is the proverb, Say well is
good, but do well is better; How is it good if it make not a bad man the
better, or prove not one to be good? nay it is often times the vizard of a foul
face, the curtain of an unclean bed, the plaster of a festered soar, the
seeling of some rotten wall, and is first a countenance to sin, which lies
hid under it, and in the end a disgrace to goodness, as though it were nothing
else but verbal: Wherefore say well is good, not positively, or simply of it
self, but privatively, that is, less hurtful then doing or saying ill,
respectively as it is joined with a good meaning, so say well is good when it
shows a man as he is affected, but do well is better, for that is the fruit
of a good affection. The vessel does yield such liquor as it has, and as the
man's trade is, so is his talk: oh my soul conceive thy thoughts according to
the Idea of that divine goodness, which thy mind does behold, and when they
are borne into words, Jacobs lambs shall not be more like the party-colored
sticks, laid before the Ewes, in time of conception, then thy words and deeds
shall be unto that Idea; but if thou suffer thy self to talk without good
meaning, thy words shall be without feeling, and rather to condemn thy self
then to amend others. Another proverb is, that true meaning has no fellow;
there is none to whom thou may commit thy self more safely, and which will
do thee more good then true meaning; it will save thee from sin and shame,
and make thy word and deed both one, and it will cause thy friend safely to
commit himself unto thee, and to find as much good in thy words and deeds, as
thou do in thy own true meaning; by it thou shall free thy self from much
lip-labor, and study of cloquence, for true meaning shall teach thee to speak
in few words, and yet to be well understood, and shall add such grace and
force to thy words, as if persuasion her self did speak for thee: but who
speaks without true meaning has lost his voice, because he speaks from an
hollow heart which yields an uncertain sound, and if men hear any thing it is
the least part, and as an echo it is presently gone; A sound heart makes a
sound tongue, the tongue in nature cannot, and in reason should not move
without the heart, and therefore if the tongue move of it self, or before the
heart, order is broken, and it is ominous: to say as we mean, is to follow
God who is truth it self; but to do otherwise is to imitate the practice of
the Devil, who by this deceived our first parents.

Meditation 22. Of Obedience.
THere is an Obedience of the Law, and an Obedience of Faith; the Obedience of
the Law tells me what I ought to be, the Obedience of faith leads me unto it;
the Obedience of the law condemns me, for not being as I ought, the Obedience
of faith does quit me from the law; the Obedience of the law does bring me
into bondage of the curse, the Obedience of faith makes me an inheritor of the
blessing; in my mind I do allow the obedience of the law, but in my conscience
I trust to the Obedience of faith; I am content that my life be ordered by the
Obedience of the law, but look to be censured by the Obedience of faith; The
Obedience of the law has boasting and merits, repentance, pardon, acceptance,
desire unfaigned, belong not to the Obedience of the law, but of faith; I have
nothing to boast of, except I should boast of my own shame, and I have no
claim but mercy: Except God look on my repentance and forgive my sins in
Christ, except he do accept what is done in his fear, and pardon what is left
undone, except he regard my desire, more then my deserving, and measure my
desires rather by their sincerity, then their strength, what will become of me?

Meditation 23. Temptation.
SHake not hands with any Tentation, but turn quickly and fly speedily from
it, as Joseph did from his Mistress; it is a greater hap not to go down into
such a pit, then any sure hope to return out of it. Oh my soul thou know
what I mean, and thou feel the danger, thou can more truly dislike sin
then leave it, and hate it then be rid of it; yet he which commanded Lazarus
forth of the grave, can raise thee, and has he not done a like thing for thee?
Why do thou still love danger to fall into it? I neither love the danger nor
the fall, but sin pleades custom, and the more I yield, the less able am I
to resist. I am only strong in opinion, but weak in Tentation, and I find more
safety in flying then fighting; while I stand on my guard, my weapons to which
I ordinarily trust, are stricken out of my hands, the base town of my senses is
surprised, the castle of reason so battered and shaken, that consent who is
Captain of the place falls to a parley, and yeeldes on any conditions to my
loss: How far better had it been for me to have avoided the fury of Saul, by
wandering in the wilderness, barring my self of those betwitching vanities!

Meditation 24. Presumption and Despair.
PResumption and despair, the two extremities of faith; faith grounds it self
on the promise of God, presumption assumes unto it self Gods mercy without
promise, desperation takes no comfort by the promise; Presumption intrudes it
self into the promise, desperation excludes it self out of the promise, faith
holds the promise fast, as his proper right; Presumption is more bold with God
then wise, desperation puts a man more in fear then is safe, faith without
boldness or fear, is confident; Presumption hurts the conscience most, and
lays it open to sin, desperation wrongs God most, as though he would not or
could not be merciful to a sinner, faith does keep the conscience from sin
to come, and makes the way for Gods mercy, for the pardon of sins past;
Presumption has an eye only on the mercy of God, desperation on his justice,
and faith does behold in God both justice and mercy; Presumption is fed by
prosperity, impunity, Gods long sufferance, desperation strengthened by some
special cross and adversity, at what time sins appear greater, and more in
number then before, Faith stands on the death of Christ, and there does see
both the greatness and grievousnesse of sin, and finds a way to escape the
danger; Presumption does despise the justice of God, the fear whereof might
make him fit for mercy, desperation cannot apply unto it self the mercy of God
in time of need, the help whereof might cause him to avoid justice;
Presumption does cause a man to think well of himself, of his own wisdom,
righteousness, and to prefer himself before others, desperation does cause
a man to think ill of God, and no otherwise then of a tyrant; Presumption is a
Pharisee, despair a Devil, faith the penitent Publican; finally Presumption
is a steep cliffe without footing, desperation a deep pit without bottom, and
faith Jacobs ladder, by which God comes down to man, and man goes up to God.
Oh my soul thou best know thy own wandering, there lies danger on both
sides, the common ways are the worst, and that the safest which fewest find;
let thy guide be the word of God, walk by faith, purpose not to offend, though
pardon were granted thee before hand. Have thou offended? seek for mercy, not
considering so much how great thy sins are, but how great is his mercy to
them that truly repent. A good conscience may presume of mercy, when it has no
feeling, expecting Gods leisure with patience, and this is to hope above hope,
and despair of her own sufficiency when it does most good, so learning to
depend ever on God alone.

Meditation 25. Society with God.
MAn by nature is sociable, and of all Societies none better for him, if it may
be had, then that with God: for if we enter into a common right with them, of
whose Society we are, how much shall we by this Society be blessed above all
others, which possess God, who is the fullness of all good things, and are so
possessed of him, that nothing shall be able to part us from him? Now behold
how thou may attain to this near and inward society with God, he which
dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him, for God is love, a holy flame
burning with the love of goodness, the Father loves the Son eternally, and
the Son the Father, and the Holy Ghost is one and the same incomprehensible
love of the Father and the Son, three persons but one love, for God is love,
and this inferior love of the creature is but a beam, a stream of that love,
which if it be so necessary between the creatures themselves, that the course
of things may not be maintained without it, how much more between the
Creator, and the creature? for both the being and well-being of the creature,
does depend on the love of the Creator, and these creatures are the less
happy, how excellent so ever otherwise, as the Sun, Moon, and other glorious
bodies, which being loved of God, cannot love him again. Oh man, what cause
have thou to love God, which was not content only to make thee a creature, whom
he would love, but endued thee also with a nature to love him again, that so
thou might enjoy him the more: and certainly as the being of God is love, so
there can be no greater perfection in men, then to love God. God does give
most glorious signs of his presence in Heaven, but out of doubt the Heaven of
his delights, and where he is always present, is the soul of a true lover.
Love is a quiet thing, yet not idle, active as heat, and nourishing goodness
like a natural heat; it is much in giving, much in forgiving; in giving to God
his honor, to man convenient help and succor; in forgiving wrongs and
injuries. Loves kindred is not of flesh and blood, a Christian unto it is more
dear then a brother, and a brother the more dear, if a good Christian. Love
soars over all the pleasures, the riches, the honors of the world, and
stoopes down to none of these, because with the Eagle it finds nothing worth
the looking on, but Christ Jesus the son of righteousness. The privilege of
love is this, where there is love it is accepted, not according to the work,
but for the worker, according to that one has, and not according to that he
has not; many oversights are borne with, where there is love; and where there
is no love, the greatest diligence is rejected. Oh my soul, fail in any other
thing, rather then in love; though a small measure of knowledge must content
thee, yet love God out of measure, above thy self for himself; do good
unfaignedly, if not strongly; and let thy heart be ready, when it has made thy
hand empty.

Meditation 26. Of Peace.
I Would that all they which are of one opinion, were of one affection: How
well does it become them that profess one truth to maintain peace as one man,
because the author of their truth has commended peace unto them, as the fruit
of goodness, which springs up in them that love the truth? Now because they
which are one in opinion, are many times differing in affection, truth it self
which is but one, seems to be rent in parts, and is ill spoken of by
adversaries, which agree with true professors neither in opinion nor affection,
and shall I wish likewise, that they which are of one affection, as man and
wife, parents and children, brother and sister, master and servant were of one
opinion? How necessary is it that they which agree in the lesser matters of
life, should in the greater much more; and that they which have vowed to be
true to one another, should be both true to Christ? but now because they which
are of one affection do square in opinion, the knot of love is broken which
truth does commend, and it seems that truth is the author of confusion; what
then indeed is to be wished? that our opinions be ruled with truth, and our
affections tempered with love, and this will bring the diversities of men to a
world of university, wherein though there be differing parts, both for stuff
and use, yet they shall all tend to the good of one another, and so of the
whole chiefly, insomuch if that come in question once, every particular will
lose some part of his interest, rather then the whole shall labor; and this
shall be done more strongly by the guide of reason, then by the instinct of
nature, where for the same cause, sometimes heavy things climb upwards, and
light stoop down, contrary to both their proper rights; And were it this, then
must we all needs be of one opinion, of one affection, that is, Christians
both in name and in truth: for this is the thing which our Christian profession
does chaime of us, and a thing rather indeed to be wished then hoped for; and I
think God has of purpose placed us to live amongst such, which if they do
agree with us in affection, they shall disagree from us in opinion, so barring
us of this unity, either for the exercise of our virtue, or that we should be
out of love with the world, and long for the other to come, where we shall
perfectly enjoy it. Howsoever in the mean space, they which will nourish in
themselves any hope of coming to such happiness promised, must maintain this
band of unity, in the communion of Saints, and that is not only to love the
truth, but also in truth. Oh my soul, labor for truth, and suffer many things
for Peace, prefer the truth before all things, but use the truth to win thy
brother; thou know how much truth does belong to thee as a man, reason
searches truth; more as a Christian, faith receives truth; give thanks to
God, if thou meet with such as can teach thee, and be as ready to teach
others; this will be a stay from wandering opinions which have no end: but if
thou meet with such as love the truth with thee, and affect thee in the truth,
give God thanks for such a heavenly blessing, and let not thy oil be wanting
to keep such a lamp burning: Brethren indeed are they, which are of the same
profession and affection, Christ is the head of their society, it will never
want life, the spring of their affection, it will never want love; and what
soever spiritual comfort thou have in this life, remember the greater part is
behind, and therefore lift up thy self for that day, when thou shall be
present with the Lord.

Meditation 27. Of Love.
TO love the truth is the more worthy Love, and yet to love in truth more urged
and required, because that as in the first, there is more excellence in respect
of the object, so in the second more evidence, in respect of the subject; and
though by the order of teaching, we learn, first to love the truth, and then
to love in truth, yet according to the order of nature we can never profit
much in the first, till we have well practiced the other, for love is stirred
up by sight and he that loves not his brother whom he daily sees, how can he
love God whom he never saw? So God loves us first, after we love him, but
this love cannot reach to that height, except by certain degrees we climb up
thither, beginning the love of God in the love of our brother. Is not he worthy
of my love, whom God has made partaker of his? and if I form my self to love
all men as brethren, shall I not love God the more, which loves all those whom
I do love? As we know, so we love, but God would have us to know and
acknowledge himself, first in our brother, and to cast our eyes upon him as
his Image; and therefore if this may not move us to a due consideration of
love, for the Image sake, neither will we love him for his own sake, who is
yet more unknown unto us. In love it is a special point to observe the
disposition of the beloved, for this makes Love acceptable; now God is
specially pleased, when the duties which in Love we owe unto him, are for his
sake done unto our brother, and therefore when we resign up our hearts to
serve God, which is the chiefest of our Love, we must express it in striving
to do good one unto another in Love; and he that is thus affected, cannot be
careless of his brother, or comfortless unto him. Love like fire, it can
neither be idle when it has matter to work on, nor lie hid; water will not
quench it; cover it you cannot, but the flame will break forth: The true lover
of God does embrace him in his heart, his mind ever thinks on him, and his
will desires him; But this is raked up and hidden in the inner man, how breaks
it forth? by respecting and affecting all men for Gods sake, to his power,
above his power, bearing their necessities, for bearing their wrongs, feeling
with them in joy or grief, taking part of their harms, and imparting his owpe
advantages unto them. God has made all his creatures, that in them we might
know his power, reverence his greatness, admire his wisdom, and be thankful
unto him for his bounty, but the only use which we can make one of another is
this, that by mutual love for Gods sake, we love God, not as in his work
only, which may be said of the rest, but as in his likeness, which no work
else can yield us. Do thou then love the Olive because of his fatness, or
the Vine because of his strength, or the Fig Tree because of his sweetness?
do thou love the Sun because he is King of the day, or the Moon because
she is Queen of the night? do thou love the Fire because of his heat, or
the Water because of its moisture? do thou love the Air because it does
refresh* or the Earth because it does cherish thee? yet have thou a greater
cause then any of these to love thy brother, for the likeness of God which is
in him: love all the Creatures, for in them God has left the print of his
footsteps, but love thy brother more then all, for in him God has printed his
own face and fashion. Thou will say, that coin shall be current with me,
which bears my Princes Image, and shall not thy brothers love be current with
thee, who bears the Image of thy God? It seems when God made man, he resolved
on a likeness to himself, rather then any other pattern, that man should
love his God better, and be the better beloved of another man, who is no other
then a brother unto him, that is, another such. Oh my soul, thou know well
thy own backwardness in this duty, and when thou would do any thing, thy
great weakness, do thou not often think so I am well all is well, what a
hard charge is this to love my enemy? how unsuitable to policy? what a cross to
my life? thou do prefer thy reputation before common peace, thine own
advantages before thy brothers souls health, and do not consider, how that
thou may not be well, except thou do well, and do well thou do not, if
any thing in thee be wanting, why thy brother is not so too; more, thy
particular depends upon the common God: if it be hard to love thy enemy, yet
it is godly and for Gods cause, whose wisdom if we follow, let us be
counted fools; Thou know whose speech it is, Am I my brothers keeper? the
wicked crush one another with such thoughts, and specially are cruel to the
good, but they which are Christ's, quite and quiet one another with love, often
times man is a keeper of beasts; Why should not one man have care of each
other? if so, why not much more of a brother? if not of a brother, of whom? if
of none, he which keeps thy brother, will not keep thee.

Meditation 28. A good conscience.
GOd is possessed by love, and the profession of the truth maintained by
keeping a good conscience: A good belief must be strengthened by a godly life,
and a godly life seasoned with a good belief; they are as the two twins,
which did live together, and die together. The Christian is in this world as it
were in a broad Sea, his profession teaches him that his Heaven is Heaven, and
there is no Card or Compass can so well direct him in a good course unto it,
as a good conscience, whose direction if once he leave, he soon makes
shipwreck of his profession: for to use thy faith with a bad conscience is as
it were to meet with a rock or whirle-poole in thy course; and as it is said of
danger, they that love it shall fall into it, so they which love the danger of
an ill conscience fall by it, by the just judgment of God, into the gulf of
diverse errors contrary to their profession: Do thou desire to continue in
this holy profession, unto thy lives end? I know thou do; then look well unto
thy conscience: All men are sinners by propagation, that is original, and by
imitation, that is actual; and this is as true, that every one does best know
his own sin, and is less privy to other men's sins; wherefore the just man is
the first accuser of himself, for he presumes as well of others as possibly
he can, and assumeth nothing to himself of all his goodness, but freely
consesseth that sin is his own, for which he does daily ask pardon, with
the rest of Gods children, as, Forgive us our trespasses. A Christian ought to
be that toward his Conscience which a cleanly huswife is in her house, if
she see any filth in the floor, or cobwebs in the walls or roof, she takes
the beasome in hand and sweeps them out; so ought we still to have an eye on
our Conscience, and if there be any thing offensive, let us labor to remove
it, leaving nothing within, which is not pleasing to God, and comfortable to
our selves; then shall God delight to dwell in such a Conscience, and we shall
delight to dwell at home in our selves: the wicked, because they have no care
to keep clean their Consciences, when they return home to themselves, which
is very seldom, find all things out of order and unquiet, which forth with
makes them seek abroad for some outward comfort, to forget the strife at home,
as they which are chidden out a doors, by their cursed wives: these cannot
abide to look on their own faces, but cast away the glass which does discover
their deformity; they are like bad debtors which cannot abide to cast up their
accounts, and come to a reckoning; whereas the good man finds all his comfort
laid up in his own breast, and has there the light of clear beams, though
all the world else be benighted. Oh my soul, if thy Conscience be the Lords
house, how cleanly ought it to be kept above all other rooms? if his temple,
how ought thon to perfume it with the sweet odours of holy thoughts,
meditations, purposes, resolutions and prayers, the bells wherein should be
continual thanksgivings, to sound aloud the praises of thy God: And this shall
be thy warrant, that doing as thou professest, thou shall be still the more in
love with thy profession.

Meditation 29. Consideration.
ALI the learned commend Contemplation, Philosophers, Divines; but give me
Consideration. I find my self often in danger, for want not of knowledge, but
Conscience; not of apprehension, but reprehension: I know that contemplation is
a great help to consideration, as much as wisdom is to prudence; for that is
an act of the one, and this of the other, and they are both compared, one to
the Sun, the other to the Moon; one to the Well, the other to the stream;
for prudence does borrow her light from wisdom, and her fruitful streams
issue from that fountain: yet like I better for my necessity, the pipe which
conveyeth the stream unto me, then a conduit which holds the water whereof I
have no use. Contemplation is this conduit, filled up from the well of
wisdom; but Consideration is the pipe by which prudence in a true level does
bring this water home to my house and use; Contemplation is a beam of the
understanding cast directly forth, but Consideration a beam of the
understanding turned and reflected on it self; contemplation cleares my
understanding, Consideration orders my will; Contemplation makes me skillful
in the Theorick of goodness, but Consideration perfect in the Practique of it;
Contemplation gives me eyes, Consideration hands; Contemplation stays it
self within one bare proposition, This God is good, and here it beholds how
many ways God is good, of himself originally, in himself effentially; in his
work, in his word, statutes, judgments, punishments, corrections, promises,
every way, every where good, yea when he suffers us to be evil; but
Consideration proceeds farther, to an application, how this does concern
himself, that I ought to be good, and to seek that good which I want, in him,
who is goodness it self, and concludes with a resolution, to use the means
which may cause me to be good: Consideration is the exercise of conscience and
reason, mutually helping one another, or a conscience grounded on reason, which
has his own light, or is enlightened from above, or is by teaching, or by use
and experience directed; Consideration sets before me things past, makes
me provident for things to come, and plucks me by the ear, not to neglect
things present, which it does by comparing and matching all these together;
things past, with things to come, and conceiving a like form in both, does by
things already acted, enter into a right course of action: Contemplation has
general grounds of truth, from which many conclusions may more specially be
deduced, but the life of action lies in circumstances, the soul where of is
Consideration: wherefore contemplation reads me over a lesson, which
Consideration does make me perfect in, by observation, experience, correction:
Blessedness, which is the perfection of man has his beginning from
Contemplation, but his consummation in us by Consideration; for as by that I
know God who is the cause of causes, so by this I love God who is the last end.
The soul does perform some actions without discourse, so does it move the
body, receive, digest, bestow the meat for nourishment, and in those it so
falls out, because the end is as present, as the means, namely the life of the
body; but those actions which tend unto her own proper end, or rather of the
whole, she does not produce without discourse, because the means are nearer,
and the end farther of. Angels for the perfection of their nature, do all
their actions without discourse, but as the Angels herein are above men, so man
by the privilege of discourse, above all other Creatures; for as in a Mill the
stones know not what thing meal is, nor to what end, neither the wheels, nor
the Water which drives them about, but the Miller only, which sets the Mill to
work: so none of the Creatures of this world, know their own worth, or
employment, but only man which is Lord over them, and has not only the use of
particular objects, but of common notions also, and beholding causes in their
effects, and aiming at a farther, by the next does sort convenient means to
their proper ends, and all ends to the chief end. What a high art is
Consideration, which does effect such wonderful things? out of one good, it
multiplies many, and makes her advantage of evil; it takes on her the cure of
our weakest and worst parts, and adds both comeliness and grace to the best:
where Consideration is, all things are done orderly; but they which by chance
do a good without it, do lose the commendation of their work, for want of
it; yea of such force is it, that actions not speeding in the end, yet set a
foot by Consideration, retain still the praise of virtue; it has as it were
the true touch of that stone, whereby Gold is known from other metals, for so
by it we discern between that which is honest, profitable, and pleasing,
preferring honesty to the rest, as Gold to other metals: it does cause profit
and pleasure, to give place to honesty, and out of honesty requites us with
true profit and pleasure; but if profit and pleasure strive with honesty to
have their turns served first, or without it, then it shows them to be base
metal, and nothing worth, that such profit is but loss, such pleasure but
sorrow, and that indeed there is nothing either profitable or pleasant, which
agrees not with honesty. As they which behold other men's buildings, walk in
other men's Parkes, solace themselves in other men's Gardens, make a use to
themselves, though the possession belong to another: so do we neither hear
any thing spoken, or see any thing done, neither is there any object proposed
unto us, whereof by Consideration, we may not make some use unto our selves,
though the matter belong to others. And herein is the busy body faulty, which
meddling with all kind of matters, does desire to be a party in possession where
he has nothing to do, whereas if he had Consideration, he might take notice
of any man's dealing for his own use, and do no wrong, for he cannot be
accounted a busibody, which out of Consideration observes for his own use,
from those things which belong not unto him. Excess of anger or pleasure is
the greatest enemy to Consideration, and the promoter of all hasty and forward
attempts, which end in sorrowful events; but the fear of death, and other
miseries, are lessened by Consideration.

Meditation 30. Subjection.
BEtter well marked, then a whole ear, is the husbandmans Proverb, for the
beast which straies away is the sooner owned, and brought home again with a
mark, but without it lost; better to be under government, then to follow a
loose and lawless life; better to be trained up under the discipline of the
Church, then to range at liberty, as an Ethnic; It was the better for the
prodigal youth, that he went out a son, though he returned a sinner, and he
receives more liberty by his coming home, then he found abroad; his Father
knows him, the house receives him, the fat Calfe is provided for him, and all
make merry with him. The Church does exercise authority over them, which bear
the mark of Christ; and if there be cause why, it does correct them according
to the quality of their faults; sometimes by words chiding them, sometimes by
deeds suspending them from the Sacraments, or excommunicating them from the
society of the Church; and if the Church perceive that any has entered through
hypocrisy, and is now discovered by blaspheming the truth, which is a casting
off of Christ's mark, such a one it does remove by the eternal curse Atha
Maranatha; and for such a one indeed had it been better never to have received
that mark, and for those also which in the end do fall from the Church,
contemning the order thereof, though not cursed: but they which are the true
members of the Church take great profit by those censures, for though they fall
often times through humane frailty, yet the Church does not cease to acknowledge
them for her own, because they bear the mark of Christianity, and taking a
special care of them, does by this discipline bring them again to repentance,
and amendment of life, they are converted, they are received, they are
confirmed more then before, and the Church is glad of them, as a woman of the
child wherewith she has long travailed; howbeit with them which are without,
the Church medleth not, therefore run they on still in sin to their own
perdition, as they which are utterly lost in the waste of this world, because
they have not the mark of Christ; Count it thy greatest good in this life, that
Christ has marked thee for his own by baptism, that thou live under the
discipline of that Church whereof he is the head, and therefore suffer thy self
to be rebuked, privately, openly, and if any greater correction befall thee,
humble thy self, repent, amend, and this privilege that thou art marked by
Christ, shall restore thee again to thy former estate, and thou shall be his
more then before; only beware of hypocrisy, which one day shall be discovered,
and turn not back like a dog to his vomit, for such have their end worse
then their beginning, and it is better never to have known the way of
righteousness, then afterward to depart from the holy commandment, by a
wilful heart, into which extremity they are at last led, which use not their
most honorable profession with a good conscience; The fall of a star is
fearful, because high and eminent, and no candle has so ill a smack, as that
which has lost his light.

Meditation 31. Worlds vanity.
I See nothing in the world, but profane security, or base weakness, or
fruitless labors; profane security of them which are the worlds favorites,
base weakness of them which live in her disgrace, and fruitless labors of
them whose hopes and means do yet wait on the world, striving hardly to come
unto that which they think to attain; of which sort, the first hold themselves
so safe as men above the Moon, the second so miserable, that they wish no
longer to be, the third bound to do nothing, but that which they do, and
though they row against the stream, and be often put back by contrary tides, yet
had they rather be wearied out, then give over; behold, in the first too much
confidence in the matters of the world, which they make sure unto themselves,
and prove but vain; in the second an absolute decay of virtue and goodness;
in the third a wilful slavery to Vanity. Our Savior proposes the rich chuffe
in the Gospel, as a notable example of profane security, who says, Soul
thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and
take thy pastime; to who^ God said, Fool, (a shrewd term for great ones) this
night will they fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose shall these things
be which thou have provided? Here is one reason why men should not trust in
riches, because the owner may be taken from his wealth. A like example of this
security we have in Daniel of Nebuchadnezzar, who in the pride of his heart
thought his estate greater then that it could be weakened, and he says, Is
not this great Babel which I have built, for the house of the Kingdom, by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? and while he was thus
speaking, a voice came from Heaven? Oh King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee be it
spoken, Thy Kingdom is departed from thee: Yea also in Esther, how Haman comes
from the next to the Throne, to the highest at the Gallows: here is another
reason, why these worldly advantages should not cause men to be secure, because
they may be taken from the owner. Of base weakness, we have an example in
Achitophell, who, because he was disgraced at Court, and his counsel not
followed, went home and hanged himself; in Achab, who cast himself on his
bed, and would eat no bread, because Naboth denied to sell him his Vineyard. It
befalls out that they are ever thus affected about worldly losses, which have
first lost virtue and honesty: he that has unworthily lost a friend, can
comfort himself in his own fidelity; but these men, having ever been false
to their own good, when they are forsaken of worldly goods, have nothing
wherein to take comfort; a little of virtue would make them live content,
without the favor of the world, and though they might have rich store, yet to
desire rather a moderate use of things, then a large possession; but loving the
graces of the world only, they have not sought to make themselves acquainted
with Lady virtue, who makes her self known to such as esteem her. They which
give themselves to the wilful slavery which the world imposes on them, by
fruitless labors, daily to be taken for vain hopes, suffer that for their
humors sake, which they do that are amorous, and taken in some foolish love or
lust, rather they admire the person of the beloved, be she but an odd one
amongst the earthy dusty beauties of humane kind; this is the Idol which they
will daily adore, they put of their cap and salute her, as though she were
present, all their thoughts are spent to set forth her heavenly beauty, by
whatsoever nature has excellent; if she cast but a good look on them, it is
the highest favor that may be; if she frown, they are at deaths door, and use
all their poor services to win her again; no wrong can make them dislike,
no labor weary them in their suit; and to such a case is the silly wretch
brought, that to please his Mistress, he cares not how long he torments
himself: such a Mistress is the wealth, the glory, the pleasure of the world,
to those that are inamored on it, they stand at the Gate with Absolon, and take
every man by the hand, and kiss him, to gain the crown of their desires. But
oh my soul, seek not the world, but the kingdom of God in Christ; if it serve
thy turn trust it not; if it frown ou thee, know thou have a better master.

Meditation 32. The Heart Gods house.
We will not be contented, except we have elbow room enough in the world,
and perhaps the whole world scarce content many, a private man's wealth must
serve their turn that can go no farther, and yet in this estate, ordinary
things are in small request; but what is Italy or Europe to a victorious
spirit, but a step over into Africa, and from that into Asia; Are not ambition
and covetousness as large, and stretch they not their arms as far as the
Sea? yet God reckons not so much of the greater, but would dwell in the
little world, and content himself if he may take but one corner of it, even
the heart of man; men as they ask much of the world, so are they willing to
bestow all that they have on it; but they will not part with any thing to God,
whereas if they would not deny him this little, he would give them more then
all the world is worth: for why does he ask the heart, not to forsake it, when
he has won the love of it, as the world does, but to dwell in it for ever?
And no doubt so great a Lord will make his dwelling very beautiful: Consider
that if the Heaven of Heavens be so glorious and blessed a place, which yet is
but the mansion ordained for his elect, how much more glorious shall they be,
whom God does enter into as his own mansion; and which by reason that they are
his Image, do receive a greater glory from him, then the material Heaven? If
thy heart be Gods ancient inheritance, the world is but a disseisor; there be
many rivals for thy heart, and they seem all so fit, that thou know not to
which to give it first, but when God comes, thou art resolved to deny it, and
so he have it not, thou do not much pass who have it, whether it be
pleasure, profit, or ambition; and indeed much like a covetous owner, thou do
choose rather to have thy heart stolen from thee, then to bestow it freely on
him who is worthy of it: So got, so spent; if thou had presented thy heart to
God, he would use it as a gift with regard, but those as they have stolen it,
so they abuse it.

Meditation 33. Separation.
SOme professors which would seem to strive for great parity and perfection of
life, have been much offended at the blemishes and wants of those Churches
wherein they did live, and have gone so far in this humor, as not to hold
these assemblies for Churches, though otherwise having the word soundly
preached, and Sacraments rightly administered, wherein they saw so many
hypocrites, and loose livers, and in the end have made a Separation from their
Churches, and sought unto themselves new conventicles, as they thought pure and
holy; wherein as they did great wrong unto Christian charity and unity, which
was not in this cause to be broken, so found they not that which they sought
for; and surely it cannot be, that in this world there should be any visible
Church so pure, as they dream of it, that there should be in it Wheat without
Tares, Sheep without Goats; for it is compared to a draw Net, which gathers
Fishes of all kinds, and it is a society wherein are men of all sorts; and no
doubt it is the providence of God, which orders all things wisely, that the
good, and bad should not live asunder, parted with great Seas and Mountains,
but mingled one with the other in this life, which makes much for the
bettering of the good, in the exercise of virtue, and for the staying of the
wicked from all kind of vice; if all the good should live together, how should
their patience, charity, integrity of life, constancy in the truth, be
exercised, or appear to the glory of God? if the wicked should live all
together, what means might there be to reclaim them? but as they be now bad,
so they would daily grow worse, one encouraging another, and having none
amongst them, whose good examples might reprove them: And therefore the good
are to the bad like a piece of leaven, the leaven is the least part, yet it
has a powerful force to turn the whole lump into his own quality; so are
the good very few in respect of the bad, yet conversing amongst them daily,
they draw the world by little and little to their disposition, and make a great
alteration in their manners. For such is the power of virtue above vice, that
though vice cannot root out virtue, out of a mind well settled, nor do any hurt
at all save unto it self, yet virtue is of ability to drive vice out of that
mind, which has been long accustomed thereunto, and does good not only to it
self, but to many others, which walk as it were but in the show thereof. Be
men bad, the more need is there that good men should live among them; None have
so much need of the Physician as those that are sick: it is reserved for the
Angels in the last day, to make a separation betwixt the Sheep and Goats, and
not for men, who were redeemed from sin and Hell by Christ, uncharitably to
forsake their weak brethren. But perchance this Separation is, because those
which should execute good laws are corrupted, or that certain ceremonies are
retained in the Church, which at other times have been abused unto
superstitious uses, or in that where the doctrine is condemned as repugnant to
the truth, certain rites of indifferency, tolerated by authority, are not
therewithal abolished; But what partiality were this, to hate the good
conditions in any man, for the rest of his bad qualities? and what disorder
would this be in religion, to teach obedience unto Princes, and to reserve a
liberty to our selves, of infringing his equal laws? what breach of charity
is this, to offend the conscience of a weak brother, in denying habits and
ceremonies? Suppose they be used by Idolaters, yet was Asa and other Kings of
Israel commended for pious; neither did the Prophets forsake their Country, or
charges, although the high places were not taken away, with the abuses. Oh my
soul, disdain not the Church for her spots, neither be so offended at the
bad, as to forsake the fellowship of the good; look well into thy self, and
thou shall find more amiss there, then thou art aware of at first; wherefore
begin to amend thy own faults, as one of the worst, and after be as leaven
to season other: for such as think otherwise pity their weakness, and pray for
their amendment.

Meditation 34. Resolved constancy.
We may observe two men borne in one Town, brought up under one and the same
master, keeping like company, using the same diet, air, and exercise, to whom
all things are as like as may be, yet one of these two giving place to his own
appetite, following his own passions, led away by vice, and a loose kind of
life, to wax worse and worse, the other obeying reason, and framing himself
earnestly after the goodness of his education, to prove better and better,
whence is this difference? If from outward causes, as Gods providence, the
stars, evil spirits, or our own unhappy condition which is past all
recovery, why are they not both bad, seeing they are partakers of the same
nature, of the same affections, set forward in the same kind of education, and
continued in the same company: the wicked indeed rather then they will
acknowledge their own fault, will impute it to any thing, rather then to
themselves; notwithstanding, this does plainly appear, to be the maine
difference, that the one of them is idle, variable, inconstant, careless, and
so easily carried away with vanity; the other well settled, constant, resolute,
in his purpose and determination, industrious, laborious, and so overcomming
all difficulties, takes courage to go on in the course of virtue. The course
then which good men take, does depend on their own godly choice of mind,
purpose, resolution; and the ill grow worse and worse, because they do not wish
unto themselves the thing that is good, they do not purpose to be virtuous,
but are altogether careless, and uncertain in their carriage. Mark this yet
more plainly, for in this cause examples are more pregnant proofs, then
demonstration from reasons far fetched, Have you lived sometimes in any
populous City? there might you have observed a world of courses, which the
Citizens follow; some going about their own business, some attending their
neighbors occasions, some going to the Church to hear Sermons, or to be at
divine Service, and all these are well employed, if they deal honestly, pray
devoutly, and hear submissively; others again are there idly, walking about
the Streets, or dropping into a Tippling house, or frequenting the Theater, or
making fraies with them they meet, or drinking and carowsing in Tavernes, or
sporting away the time in gaming places, or soliciting their queanes in lewd
houses, and these are ill employed. Now if a man should ask, whence there is
such odds between the men that live within the same Walls, under the same Law,
and in the same time; what may be said more likely and agreeable to reason, but
this, that the better sort amoved by grace, out of the honest choice, purpose,
and resolution of their mind, to follow virtue with all diligence, do take
these commendable courses, and the worser sort addicted to their lusts, and
pleasures, carelessly and idly bestow themselves on all occasions of sin;
whence it is, that the good man, though he be many ways hardly tempted to
sin, by the Devil and wicked men, does always resist, and becomes the
better; but the bad man, having many fair occasions offered to amend, does
prove the worse, and lightly assaulted, does yield to vice: to wish our selves
such as we ought to be, to desire virtue and goodness, to purpose well, to
add to our purpose, care, and industry, is not only a beginning, but a going
forward, and procures constancy in goodness; If thou will not so much as wish
to thy self, the thing that good is, if thou make not special choice thereof
above Gold, and thine own appetite, how can thou labor for it? and if thou
wish the contrary, how can thou not choose but hate it? and in this cause, who
is in fault but thy self? do not ill, and say, I cannot do better, but
rather I will not change thy purpose; add thy endeavors, heartily beg and
desire for it, and he which commands will give thee grace to turn and obey.

Meditation 35. Self deceit.
TWo motives there are why men sin the more boldly; because it will be longer
as they think, before they be called to account, and when the account must be
made amongst so many, what hard matter is it for thee, or one to escape scot
free? Thus use they to dally with their own dangers, which have made sin
their inheritance, and seek shifts to avoid sounder causes, wherein they are the
less to be pitied, because they grossly deceive themselves; Be it that it is
long before we be called to account, yet the length takes it not away, but
makes it the more heavy when it comes; we abusing the mean time unto sin,
which God has granted for our repentance, so that we should rather fear to
sin, because we shall be called to account, then be bold, because of the
delay; for look how much scope the one gives to our sins, no less revenge
does the other take, when they are grown to ripeness; and it is indeed as
dangerous for the wilful sinner, that it is long before there be an account,
as that there is one. Now what if that time which men count long, be very
short, to omit that no sin is committed, but the conscience does call us
forthwith to a reckoning, though the act pass, yet the guilt is eternally
recorded in that book; as also, that the life of man is but short, after which
every one has his particular judgment: and put it over as far as may be, to
that general Inq^est, and the latter end of the world; what can be long which
has an end, and is always running to that end? when the end is once come,
what is all that worth, which past before, whether they be 1000. or 2000.
years? and what is that continuance worth, which is so full of ends, that
every part thereof passes away, whiles thou have it? minute after minute, and
hours after minutes, days after hours, months after days, and years after
months, and after some few years (which as they begin in a minute, so end
they in a minute) perchance not a year, not a month, not a day, not an hour,
in a moment comes death, when most unlooked for. Have thou spent 7 years in
sin? if thou be not a man past all shame, thou art by this time much the
sorier. Why then should the hope of living so much longer make bold again to
sin? will not thy sorrow be doubled, when thou come to fourteen? and what
use returns to thee of all these fourteen years? are they not quite lost by
following sin, and thou have now more to do, if ever thou think to be
saved, then when thou did first hegin to say then, I will sin, because the
time of account is far of, as if one would say, because I have much wealth, I
will spend all, as though prodigality could find no bottom; He that has a
long time by spending it in sin, does bar himself from all time; for if
thou continue at all times in thy sin, what time can there be between sin,
and the time of account? and if not at first, yet at last, by a continual
course of sin, (let the time of sinning be never so long) sin and judgment
will come together, and then thou will change thy voice, and say, Oh this long
time is past, and the account is at hand, now that there will be much to do at
this time, and where there are so many, it is not likely but that some may
escape without their trial; though God do teach us familiarly as men, by such
ordinary matters amongst us, as we may best understand his meaning, as when he
sets down unto us in his word the form of a judgment, yet must we not tie
him to these necessary circumstances whereunto man's judgment is subject, for he
executes his judgment as God, and not according unto man's weakness, he is not
bound to time or place, or examination of witnesses, all things are present
before him which shall be our Judge; as every man's conscience does condemn
him, so shall he feel and know the sentence of the Judge, neither shall one
prevent or interrupt the other. If thou can not run from thy own conseience,
how can thou escape his judgment, who is greater then thy conscience? A sheep
may stray from the flock amongst strangers, but he bears a mark which tries
him from the rest, and discovers him to the owner; in like manner the
conscience has its mark, which wheresoever thou run, or think to hide thy
self, will dog thee back to judgment, and there lay open thy most secret
crimes, sins and enormities. But these and the former surmises of thine proceed
not so much from ignorance, as infidelity and impiety, and do sound in their
true meaning this far. The day of account will never come, therefore we may
well say, it will be long in coming, it is impossible there should be such a
general judgment, therefore some must needs escape: This is that bitter root,
which springs up now and then amongst carnal professors; first to sin, and
then to deny God, against whose majesty we sin; for if there be a God (which
were the greatest blaspemy to think otherwise) there must needs be a judgment,
and his judgment cannot be just (which were most wicked to imagine) if he be
partial to any, or not able to punish all: and mark to this purpose the order
of Gods works; first, that is the creation, then there followed the fall of
man, after a general corruption of man, and last of all, the deluge and
desolation of sinners; the old world is a figure of succeeding ages; the law
was published by Moses, between God and the people, the covenants broken on
the peoples part, the punishment of the disobedient to the utter rooting our of
that people, and their Temple which was the visible sign of Gods presence
amongst them; the law had figures for the time of grace, the law came by Moses,
so grace and truth is come unto us by Jesus Christ, whose Gospel is Preached
in all the world, what divisions and strife are risen up about it, as was
foretold? how many enemies has it, which with open force resist it? how many
false brethren which undermine it? how many loose libertines which live under
the shadow, but will not be ruled by the power of it? how does faith waver, and
charity wax cold; the world sway, and the Church suffer; heresy prosper, and
truth pine? If all the works of God hitherto have had their just course and
time, will he fail, trow ye, in the last act? nay some part of this act is
begun already, by the coming of Christ into the flesh, for after this
coming of him, it is said, He that believes not in the Son of God, is
condemned already, but the second coming of Christ shall be a full
consummation; Is he come in humility to suffer and save, and will he not come
in glory to put down all his enemies? I will not say, oh foolish and slow of
heart, that were too mild for such mockers, but oh hard hearted and desperate
wretches, who, because they will not now believe the truth of a final
judgment, shall hereafter feel the terror and punishment of eternal
condemnation.

Meditation 36. Afflictions.
AFflictions are ever profitable to the godly, but there are very few of such,
and it is commonly seen that men, after a long and strong disease, are much
worse then before, so that the fire of naughtiness, which for a while lay
covered, under the embers of their disease, having gotten but a little vent,
breaks forth the more forcibly, and the flood of their corruption stopped for
a while, by the opposition of their pains, having gotten some small passage,
does recover his course, with the greater violence; It is very true, that in
our troubles we can call our selves to account, and pray to God with many
vows and promises of amendment, but no sooner does he remove his hand, then
we start aside from our new resolutions, and follow our old by as: and how
comes this to pass? because we were brought unto it by constraint; we did
complain and cry, but more for feeling of anguish and pain, like beasts, then
any inward remorse, or touch of conscience; we were not offended at our
sins, but we are sorry for the loss of our health and liberty; we humble
not our selves before the Lord, but it is grievous unto us, that his hand is
heavy on us; we long not after the health of our souls, but we enquire after
all means to remove the disease from our bodies; therefore as soon as we
have our will satisfied, in this respect, and seele our strength return, we
get cut as men shut up long in Prison, and forget all the good thoughts which
came to us in extremity; and as it fell out with the children of Israel, that
because they were near the good land, and might have entered into it by the
conduct of God, and would not, therefore returned they back again, and their
carcasses perished in the wilderness: so in this cause, because we were near
to amendment of life, and might have been partakers thereof, through the mercy
of God, and would not, therefore fall we back to our old sins, and in them
we perish. A godly mind may thrive well in trouble, but he that is not
prepared before hand, shall find little comfort in it; the sun which melts
the wax, hardneth the clay, spices, when they are beaten; smell the better, but
there are other things, which never smell so ill, as when they are most
handled: these sudden flashes terrify many, but they enlighten none, but such
as live in the inward light. Alas, what an interest has sin in us, when we
have once yielded unto it? we bear not only the guilt of what is past, but
we are ever after the more prone to do the like again; So that there is no
purgation so strong, no Affliction of such force to cleanse us of it, without
the special gift of his heavenly grace, which no sooner said, but Lazarus
comes forth; Therefore are we to look to our very beginnings, and if we have
made any entrance, to draw back with speed; for sins of custom are like an
old Gout, which knows no remedy; yet despair not at any time, rather resist
then give place; if the tempter suggest unto thee the greatness of thy sins,
let it serve this way to make thee humble thy self more, and to ask pardon;
if thou desire heartily to amend, and commit thy cause to him which died for
thee, thy sin cannot hurt thee, for he which gives the desire, will bring it
to effect; but herein beware of hypocrisy: if God point unto thee particularly
by any Affliction, take it as a medicine from thy heavenly Physician, for thy
souls health, and let it be more displeasing that thou have offended God, then
that the cross is offensive to thee; seek the health of thy soul, more then
the removing of outward crosses, and use all means to be such a one in health,
as thou did desire to be in sickness; in all Afflictions look not so much to
the rod, as to the ^miter, who if thou take it patitiently does correct thee in
love, if otherwise, in anger and indignation.

Meditation 37. Humane society.
MAn is by nature sociable, and framed thereunto by reason and speech,
whereunto he does the more willingly apply himself, though with some
particular disadvantage, because of the necessities of life, which seem to
require Society; for many commodities necessary to life, are had in a Society,
not otherwise to be obtained; this has drawn men from wandering up and down
to certain places of abode, from dens to houses, from Woods to Towns and
Cities, from barbarous manners to civility, and rather to commit themselves to
the authority of an orderly government by Laws for their safety, then to
languish in an idle and unprofitable loosnesse, without the use of one another
help, and Society: hence have been erected so many States and Commonweals,
the glory of all ages: But yet this Society, how agreeable soever to man's
nature, does not fully content it, neither does man find in man that which may
satisfy his desire, for man being made after the Image of his maker, does take
more delight to see himself in the pattern of his first beauty, then to see
his own face in the face of his brother; and though he need not for this
purpose the use of his eyes so much, yet does the soul more perfectly
discourse and understand, when it lifts it self up to God, then when it does
converse with man. Again, the happiness which we are to receive in a humane
Society, does proceed from the Society which we must first seek for with God,
and from the duty we owe unto him, we rightly learn how to frame ourselves
in all inferior duties; wherefore as the desire of Society between man and
man has erected States, and Weals public, so the desire of Society between
God and man, has caused Churches and holy Assemblies, for they are a number of
such men which not regarding the world, or the fashions of it, do desire the
acquaintance and familiarity of God, having a special care in all their
doings, that in nothing they offend his presence, which vouchsafes to be
amongst them as his own children and friends. Our blessed Savior knowing how
necessary it was for man to recover this Society with God, lost by the fall of
our first progenitor Adam, and desiring to be the author of so great a good
unto us all, did in his own person ratify the band or league of our
reconciliation with God; for being everlastingly God, as the Son the second
person in the Trinity, he took unto the same our humane nature, and so became
both God and man, and one true Immanuel, of which nature it is truly said, that
the fullness of the Godhead dwells in it bodily, and all we which be made
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, are also partakers of this
fellowship, not only to dwell with God, and God with us, but also for the
nearness thereof, to dwell in God and God in us: but we must remember this
still, for a chief point in this argument, that we have no communion nor
fellowship with God, but by Jesus Christ, and that this loving league and
sociable familiarity does proceed wholly from his incarnation, and in the use
of this most singular blessing, does consist all the happy content which man
may reap here in this life, or in that which is to come, I mean if we
converse and keep company with God, as he on the other side does most lovingly
offer himself unto us, for this only are we borne, and this is truly to live,
and without this, we are rather shadows then men, or very beasts in man's
shape. Oh man, how has the Lord ennobled thee, did thou not debase thy
self! he calls thee to be a favorite in his Court, and thou had rather shift
up and down, as a base peasant in the Devils country; he would make thee a
Lord over all things in his right, but thou choosest rather to be a slave to
the world, sure of nothing but misery. It is the chiefest commendation of good
men, that they walk with God, and the shame of the wicked, that they walk with
the world: they which converse with God, are not much addicted to this life,
not because they despise the commodities thereof, but seeing they are much
abused, they are wary how they meddle; or looking for better, they make the
less reckoning of them, wherein they take no loss, as is supposed, but
procure to themselves no small advantage: for when it so comes to pass, that
they must part with life, they do it with the greater quietness and comfort
of mind, and wheresoever it be that death wait for them, they are the readier
for it, which the worldly man is never; and in the mean while none use life
better then they, or make more account to spend it well, but it is rather to
draw toward God, then to seek any farther acquaintance with the world. But
some will say, the world offers it self unto us in every place, but God is
far from us, and so strange unto us, that we know not how to have any
acquaintance with him; A strange saying indeed of him, which is made after Gods
Image, and cannot live, or move, or have his being, but in him which is
compassed about, and closed in with his wonderful works and daily benefits,
so that if he would seek, he might by groping easily find him, which by reason
of these things, whereby he has made himself known, cannot be far from us:
but this principle of nature is often times darkened in men by evil custom or
wicked malice, and moreover not able of it self, to bring men forward to this
familiarity, or acquaintance with God, and therefore God offers himself, and
the godly walk with him, by other means, as by his word, where they find the
help of his Spirit, by the Sacraments, by prayer, meditation, a godly life*
for as by certain obsequious offices, we infinuate our selves into the favor
and familiarity of men, so these are the duties whereby we living here in this
world, are made near and dear unto God; the poorest wretch in the world that
walks with God, which is in his favor, and sets the Lord before his eyes in
all his doings, is happier for the present time then the greatest Monarch on
earth, which says as Pharaoh did, Who is the Lord? and shall hereafter find
more happiness then all the world could ever bestow. Most unworthy we which
envy the ordinary favors of a Prince unto our brethren, and would come
between them, and home, if possibly we might, whereas we might have access
unto God, and seek it not, and if we have it, we rely not so much on it, as
they do on the grace or countenance of a mortal man: What do not they
adventure which are so backed? and how many of them shrink away, unto whom God
does say, I am with thee, I will not fail thee, or forsake thee? I speak out
of my own feeling, let others take the matter as they list, I do specially
condemn my self in those two points, first for that I seek the Lords most
loving grace and sweet acquaintance, with no more heat and zeal: secondly,
because that when I find it, I am no more thankful unto God for it, neither am
so strengthened by it, and go on in Christian duties as I should; The Lord have
mercy on me, and grant me grace ever to see my errors, to confess and
repent for them, not pleasing my self in any known weakness, but always
striving to overcome and get out of it.

Meditation 38. Non-parity of sins.
AS an aptness to laugh or weep, is a property which necessarily follows the
nature or kind of man, and is affirmed of the whole always, and of his own
right: so guilt does follow sin, and makes the sinner subject to the guilt of
the Law, which is death. There is then no sin so light, which of his own
nature does not deserve death, or to which a pardon is due of course without an
infinite satisfaction; yet are not all sins equal, for neither do they
offend God alike, nor find the like punishment, howbeit by a consequent to the
true Christian all sins are venial, and to the unbeleever all mortal, as
they are ever of their own nature. And it is not amiss to observe a farther
difference, that there is sin which bears the whole sway in a man; such are
the sins of the wicked, and there is sin which does but remain and dwell
in man, because there is a resistance and head made against it by the better
part, and is at last expelled by grace; and thus are the godly and just subject
to sin. There is also sin so contrary to the conscience of the doer, and
joined with such stubbornness and wilfulness, that it does utterly wast and
decay the conscience, killing all seed of goodness or godliness, which sin
cannot stand with grace; and there is a sin of weakness or negligence, to
which the godly are subject, and by which they fall grievously; and there is
likewise sin in omitting duties required, as also in committing things
contrary to duty: Now if the question be demanded what sin may be admitted or
committed most safely; I answer, none, for all are by nature most deadly; and
if thou be drowned, what od^ to thee, whether in the deep Sea, or near the
shore? If again, whether some sins be not to be avoided more then others; I
answer, thou art to make conscience of all sins, the small to be hated as
much as the great, for the doing of one sin is but a downfall unto another,
because thou have still the less grace to resist, and find in thy self the
greater pronenesse to yield unto the next temptation; yet thou may use a
special caution against those wherein thou have been faulty, or which by
nature do sway most with thee, or which being little accounted of in the world,
are reserved to Gods judgment, as Saint Paul says of whoremongers and
adulterers, God will judge them, What will it profit me, though no mortal man
know my faults, or if they know them, take them for none or very small faults,
if God at the last condemn me for them? Again, whether sins of omission be
greater then sins of commission, as who sins more, he that suffers a man
to die for want of bread, which he could have given him, or he which kills a
man and takes money from him to serve his necessity? I hold the sins on both
sides so great, that for to save thy own life, and to gain a world besides,
thou should not venture to commit one of them: in evils of this nature,
there is no choice, the least is an infinite mischief, and God does not hate
evil more then he loves goodness, and therefore as thou turnest thy back
from the one, so must thou cheerfully embrace the other; neither can a man well
refrain from doing things contrary to duty, except he busy himself diligently
in the parts of his duty; for as nature cannot abide vacuum, so neither the
will of man not be working; and neuters are unto God hateful of all men. If
again it be demanded, what is to be done after one has sinned, if sin be
deadly? I answer thou must not despair, as a man utterly lost, neither give
place to sin, that it carry thee away, but thou must stir up thy self to a
just sorrow for sin, specially that thou can be no more sorry or touched
then thou art: and to this purpose it shall not be amiss to meditate of Gods
majesty, justice and severity against sin, of the grievousnesse of thy own
sin, and how foolishly for some vain trifle, in giving place to thine own
appetite, thou have offended him, and when thou feel thy self thus
confounded, it behooves thee to remember that God is merciful, and ready to
forgive them that repent, yet so that thou can not be reconciled unto him by
any of thy own merits or satisfaction, but only by the death and passion of
his son Christ, in whom thou must seek pardon and grace to rise again,

Meditation 39. Free confession.
ZOpyrus a great Philosopher, being new know every man's inclination at first
sight, one day he viewed Socrates much as he read, and they which sat by him
pressed him to tell what his opinion was of Socrates; he answered, I know well
that of all men he is the most wicked and vile: this tale was forth with
carried to Socrates by a Scholar of his, which mocked at the Philosopher, but
Socrates cried out, Oh most profound Philosopher, thou have found out indeed my
inclination, but I have been altogether drawn from it by Philosophy; Behold
the ingenuity of Socrates, he does not dissemble his bad disposition, but
confesses it. The word of God is that Philosophy which not looking on the
outward lineaments of the body, faith this or that man is ill inclined, but
which discerning and trying the heart and reins, judges all men naught, and
says of us, when it tells us what we are from Adam, that we are borne in
sin, that we are prone to all sin, and do nothing but sin greedily, and
continually from our cradle to our cossin: Now where is there that Socrates
amongst us Christians, that in such a cause does freely confess his
naughtiness? that we do not, it is manifest, because we seek not for grace,
which might heal the corruption that lies hid in us: Socrates knew his
naughty disposition before he was told of it, and provided forthwith a remedy
to alter it, but we have no respect of the one or the other; I had rather be
Socrates striving against my ill inclination, then a lewd Christian arrogating
goodness to my self, which I have not, or not seeking grace, which I want.

Meditation 40. Ignorant teachers, and ill hearers.
THe discourses of some Teachers are like a Labyrinth, they make their entry
plain, brief, easy; but after they have gotten their auditors in, they lead
them on through such by matters, as questions, doubts, resolutions,
conclusions, quotations, illustrations, digressions, transitions, that the
poor Auditor is quite lost, for neither knows he whence he came, nor where he
is, nor how he may get out again. I cannot blame any true University man for
this fault, but those which came thither to steal other men's labors, and fled
away by night; for hear you, such a one his clothes are not more suitable to
his profession, then his Sermon to his text, and if he find his auditor a
Sceptick, he makes him an Academick; if an Epicure, he makes him a Stoic; if
an Infant, he makes him a Man; so does God always bless good means, and they
thrive not so well which take the Plough in hand, and are not acquainted with
that kind of Husbandry; Such a man is the most necessary of all others for his
use, and ought to be the most excellent amongst men for his gifts, gravity,
sanctity, integrity, divinity, affability, discourse, that when men behold him,
they may see a second Samuel coming down from the Lords Mount; and they are
to be commended which provide for them honor and maintenance. I see that all
auditors popular, mixed or pure, desire to have a wise and eloquent speaker,
wherein they are so curious of their choice, that amongst many scarce any has
that happiness to please the major part: but as for the auditors themselves
they never reckon in what manner they hear, and though they bear away very
little, yet they think it enough if they can give this report, The man spoke
well, and to the purpose; whereas in the course and order of these things, it
is as necessary there should be a judicious and discreet hearer, as a wise and
learned speaker; for to what end is seed cast into the ground, if the soil be
not apt to receive it? weeds may choke, and a barren ground yields bad
increase; So to what end are words committed to those ears, which by reason of
troubles and other affections can make no use of them? It has been observed
of our time, that we have much Preaching and little knowledge, and yet more
knowledge then conscience; much teaching and little faith, and yet more faith
then charity: the fault perhaps is not in the matter or manner of Preaching,
but unsufficiency of hearing, whereas if we had every of us as great care to
be good hearers, as to meet with good Preachers, it would be sooner remedied;
for a well prepared hearer may profit by a teacher of mean gifts, and yet Paul
himself cannot profit a bad hearer; Let us not therefore think that the whole
efficacy of Preaching does depend on the ability of the Preacher, for besides
that God has his ordinary blessing going forth with his word, It is given unto
you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, they that come with true
hearts provide ears which are more fruitful then others by a hundred fold;
and as there is an art of speaking, so also is there an art of hearing,
wherefore take heed how you hear; and howsoever let Ministers be instant in
season, and out of season, which if they be dumb or idle, they cannot do.

Meditation 41. Greatness subject to flattery.
ALl praise the rich man to the skies, yet none of these praises are his own,
for either it is his Prince which does grace him, or his house which is
descended unto him; his stately buildings which others have plotted and
perfected for him; or his goodly furniture which money has procured; or his
long train and attendance which the world lends him; or his parkes, ponds,
pastures, manors, walks; all which though they be parcel of his riches, yet
are they no part of the man, neither abide they long with him without change:
but who almost dares praise a good man? yet all his praises are merely his own
and within him, and when thou praisest a man for his honesty, who can deny but
that thou praisest the man for himself? yet loath we are to praise a man for
honesty without the access of authority, wealth, honor, and rather these
without the other; therefore I say that rich men have about them more
flatterers then friends, yea in the abundance of all things they want some to
tell them the truth. When we hear praises, we should suspect them not to be
ours, but some matter of circumstance; when we hear reprehension, let us make
account of it, as our own, for either it is a fault or may be; and in this
cause it is better with the good, then with the rich, for the good have many
about them, which will rather slander, then want matter to lay against them;
they will rather spite them with deeds, then smooth them with glosing speches;
backbite, rather then bear with them; pick quarrels, rather then live at peace
with them; which crossing course of theirs, makes the good better, it causes
them all the while to look more warily to themselves; but the rich man is taken
in the flatterers net like a Lark, whiles he plays with the glass of vain
glory.

Meditation 42. Content.
ABsolute Content to which no degree of perfection can be added, is in God
only, who has it everlastingly in himself, of himself, for himself, and is
not any thing distinct from him, but his nature and essence: There is a Content
qualified according to the state and degree of the creature, as in Angels and
men, who have reason to know, and will to desire, and means to be possessed of
their good, whence this content does grow; so that this Content is not so in
the creature, but that he must seek it elsewhere, it is not so of him, but that
he must be beholding to a higher cause; it is not so for him, that he should
rest there, but be moved thereby to glorify God; it is not so one with him, but
that there is great ods between them. Content as it is in man may be said to
be true or false, the false is but a picture or counterseit of Content without
the thing, without life, proceeding from the enjoying of good which seems so,
but is not, either because it is abused, or is in his own nature evil: and
they which have this Content are always miserable, because of false opinions,
which blind reason, and unruly affections suggest unto them, and therewith so
pervert their will, that they are not long of one judgment or resolution, but
like a troubled and running stream, in which may be seen no constant image of
Content; and this notwithstanding is the only Content which most part of men
do find, and therefore at last when they think to be most at ease, they grow
weary of themselves, and all things else, showing well by their labors and
pains taking, that they did much desire the true Content, but took not a
right course for it. The true Content therefore, is a calmnesse or quietness
of the soul, resting and settling it self on true good, and is either begun or
increasing, as in good men, whiles they live; or consummate, and full, as when
they go hence to that other life: for men which receive Content, receive it
not all at one time, but by certain degrees of growth, and as is the spring of
virtue, so of Content. Neither have they it so, that this clearness and
calmnesse is always in them alike; for as long as they live they shall find
alteration; but in the other life, nothing shall trouble their Content as
evil, and offenses shall be taken away: for they shall receive the full
measure of every part of their Content, and that without mixture of any object
which might procure discontent: here there is sin remaining, and miseries
which follow the condition of sinners, but there they that come shall leave
sin, and misery behind them: here there are but few Sabbaths in respect of
the common days, there it is a continual Sabbath, in which freed from all
necessities which this life requires, we shall wholly bestow our selves on
our chief good and this chief good shall be bestowed on us, and hence will
spring out unto us living and overrunning streams of content: The content
which does begin and increase with good men while they live, may be said to be
particular, or general; the particular proceeds from the particular fruition
of diverse good things, as they are successively attained, and do every one tend
to general content, which is caused from the fruition of happiness it self,
such as may man obtain in this life; that is, when all the causes of content
meet, and are knit together, though in a meaner degree, and with imperfection,
whereas that which we call consummate in the life to come, is in his highest
degree, and without this imperfection. Content, as it proceeds from a
comfortable use of particular things, is either in respect of things, tending
to the being of life, or to the well: being, and they which tend to the being
of life, are of two sorts, some without which life cannot be, as dirt and
apparel; others, without which it cannot be else so liberally and worthily
maintained, as riches, friends, dignities, and degrees of life: and they which
tend to well being, are also of two sorts, some which are but mere helps, as
arts and sciences; some which are the well being it self of life, as wisdom,
prudence, moral virtues; for in all these things, as there is a good in
respect of the giver, and the end for which he gives them, so out of them
particularly there does arise a particular, and generally a more general
content, and therefore both these may be considered again as outward or inward
content; the outward is that which comes from external things, and yet no
false content, though they be common both to good men and bad. And though I
said before that false content is that which proceeds from things seeming
good, and are not, for they are indifferent, and have their name from the use;
to them that use them well they are good, but else not so: and as flowers, or
fruit, which otherwise would corrupt, are preserved in sugar, so those outward
things, which otherwise might prove to be evil, are preserved in goodness by
the sweetness, and strength of virtue. This then is the difference between
the content which grows from inward, and outward things, that outward things
are not content in it self, but as referred to the inward, and inward things
are content unto it self without the outward. There be two things which help
the good in the use of outward things; first, they have a right judgment of
them, to know that they are not simply good, or necessary, but indifferent: and
secondly, they are indifferently disposed toward them, to have them, or to be
without them; when they have them, they are content with them as they have
them, because of the good use which is to be made of them; and when they have
them not, they are contented to have used them well, and to be no more busied
with them, as setting their minds on the better things, and without this
equability of mind there is no content to be had in outward things: the inward
content is from the true knowledge of God, the feeling of his favor, and the
testimony of a good conscience, that we heartily desire in all our life to
obey him, and this works a wonderful content, when as the heart loving God,
and desiring him, does feel it self beloved again of God, yea loved first,
and before he himself did know how to love God, and whence all his love and
duty does grow. But here it may perhaps be said, that they which serve God have
the least content of all men, for the world is against them, and they against
the world; and as for these things, wherein does consist their chief content,
if we shall believe them, they complain they want much, and have very little
as the Prophet David, where he says, As the Heart pants for the rivers of
water, so pants my soul after thee O God. What content might that soul have
which was so emptied with need, and so stretched out in desire, and lived in
expectation of the good it had not? From that antipathy which is between the
world and Gods servants, does arise their chiefest content, for instead of the
world they have God to be their steward and provider; and the godly soul,
which having tasted of the sweetness of Gods mercy, finds unspeakeable
content therein, and thirsts to drink more yet without discontent, though
not without desire, and this humility and vehement appetite in the children of
God makes their content the greater. Think what a wretch thou art, and most
unworthy of that content, thou often feel that thy content is choked by
turning thy desires after vanity, or sin, which are the poison of content,
labor by obedience and patience in the end to attain full content, in the
mean space be not out of heart, if many times thou have it not, for God will
try thee by all means; seek content in the best things, else thou will lose
it in all.

Meditation 42. Malice, and Pride.
THe work of sin is an imitation of the devil, but there are two, which
practiced by men, do make them in a short time as cunning as their
crafts-master, and to turn as right after him, as any child can after his
father, they are Malice, and Pride: the devils malice is so great toward God,
though his Lord, that there can be nothing more hateful unto him, than to be
obedient to his will, whose service we count perfect freedom, and does for
this cause what in him lies, that the holy and just laws of God should be held
of no force, no authority, by breaking them himself, and causing others so to
do, and by maintaining laws of his own, repugnant to Gods, as Idolatry,
Magic, and the like: and so much does he please himself in this course,
that he counts himself, and his followers for this doing better and more
noble than other creatures, as Angels and men, which continue in obedience,
whom he esteems but as base slaves, for that as he says, they consent to
live in such a bondage, whereas living as he does under no command, they might
at least be Gods themselves in conceit: and therefore against all such (for the
malice he bears to God, and obedience to him) he bends all his force and
sleights; if he cannot win them, he will weary them: and he boasts that
he has more to follow his command, than God has. And there is nothing that
does vex him more, and indeed it is his hell, that when he has most deeply
plotted, and diligently practiced, to bring to pass a mischief to the
dishonor of God, or the hurt of his servants, he perceives himself in the
end to come short of his purposes, because the goodness of God, by infinite
wisdom, power, and mercy, does overreach the depth of his malice, using him
only to discover his own naughtiness, but turning the business to his own
glory, and the good of his servants, and leaving him at last unto his shame, as
in the fall of Adam, affliction of Job, and the passion of our Savior: this
makes him to eat, and tear himself, that he should be but an instrument,
which would be counted a master of the work, and in all these appears his
malice, his pride is so great, that though he know himself to be overruled
by Gods power, and cannot go beyond the length of his chain, though he suffer
extreme punishment for his rebellion; as separation from the divine presence,
and horror; and though he knows God is very merciful, yet disdaines he to
ask pardon for his offenses, or be beholding unto him for his mercy, but does
still repine, and grind the teeth against God, as though he did him great
wrong; Now how like unto him are men in these points, which loving the faults
they do commit, hate the laws which they break, and cannot abide any order or
state under God, which hinders their wicked designments, counting themselves
better, and more noble than others, because they despise lawful authority,
disgracing them that be good, and having no goodness do boast of strength,
that the sway of the world is on their side, which scorn to acknowledge their
faults, and think so well of themselves, as though they needed not to have any
favor, which are as resolute in their evil purposes, as though they had made
a covenant with death, and league with hell, saying they had rather go to hell
with good fellows, than live with such peevish professors as know not how to
laugh and be merry. Our blessed Savior, the eternal Word, which was in the
fullness of time made flesh, which dwelled amongst us, and we saw his glory,
as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth, as
he paid the price of our redemption by his death, so he left his life going
before as an example to reform us to the image of God decayed in us by sin:
and amongst all his excellent virtues, we are specially to imitate these two
which are opposite to the devils malice and pride, his charity and humility;
his charity so great toward his heavenly Father, and us men, that because his
Father would have it so, and our misery might by this means be done away, he
became obedient thus far, not only to live amongst us a mean man, and to
endure our necessities, but also to suffer a most painful and shameful death
for us, and to bear all our sorrows: and so much he loves obedience, that he
accounts all them his brethren, which live in it, and for them has prepared
his grace and glory; yea he rejoices in a little flock, which hears his
voice, and breaks the nations in pieces with a rod of iron like a potters
vessel, which break his bonds, and cast his cords from them: his humility so
great, that though there was never sin, or the least spot of uncleanness,
which did cleave to him, yet he became our surety, taking on himself our sins,
and in our person does acknowledge himself a grievous sinner, and does ask
pardon, and receive mercy for us to the forgiveness of all our sins,
teaching us evermore to confess our sins unto God, and to seek for grace,
and favor by him, who is both willing, and able to grant whatsoever we need,
and if we ask in faith, no good thing will he deny unto us; and let the
devil rage with his malice and pride, let him set all his devises and
instruments on work to confound us, if God be on our side, we care not who be
against us.

Meditation 43. Mortification.
OUr life must be a continual meditation of death, so the Philosopher; but the
Christians life is no other than a continual death, and that by the example of
his Lord, whose whole life was nothing else but a preparation to death; and all
they which are heirs of promise with Christ, have the title on this condition,
that their lives be made conformable unto his death, that whosoever looks on
them may see the image of Christ dying in them; neither may they look to come
otherwise unto his life, than by dying first, which is not either the first, or
second death, spoken of by Saint John in his Revelation, when a man lives in
this world without grace in sin, or else suffers elsewhere eternal
punishment for sin; but in a daily dying, as the Christian ought, we shall
avoid both these, and be made partakers of the first resurrection here, and of
the second in the life to come. The continual death of a Christian is that
which in the Scripture is called mortification, which makes us conformable in
all our life to the death of Christ; for as Christ died to deliver us from the
guilt of sin, and to bring us to God, so the Christian dies in himself as the
child of Adam, that sin may have no power over him, but that he may be led
by grace to do all things to the glory of God: and this death is first
inwardly, and is called a crucifying the old man, the flesh, with the
affections and lusts thereof, the law of the members, which rebel against the
spirit, the unregenerate part, this must we kill and sacrifice, and in this
respect a Christian must daily die; for though he do every day what he can to
destroy sin, he shall find new monsters spring up out of those heads, which
he has cut off, which will procure him more labor. Paul says, indeed they
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the lusts and affections
thereof, yet means he not that the flesh is utterly dead in any, but that
they keep it so under awe, and master it, that it dies in them daily:
likewise he says, they that live in the flesh cannot please God, for in this
part the Christian must be still dying, that the spirit may live in him; though
a man die, yet a constant man will be loath to deny himself: Ttherefore this
kind of mortification seems worse than death, we must deny our own will,
our own affections, our own reason, we must be no greater adversaries to any
than we are to our selves, we must rebuke our selves, we must bar our
selves; of many fair occasions of much liberty, we must punish our selves,
this crucifying consists in a search, and knowledge of our sins; we must
not smother our sins, or sooth up our selves, but call a spade a spade, we
must be also sorry for our sins, as sorry as ever we have been for
sickness, shame, or loss that ever lighted on us; so sorry, that nothing else
be so sorrowful unto us; lastly we must hate sin, and cast it out as it were
a serpent crept into our bosom, and spet on it, as we would spet on a foul
toade. The second kind of mortification is outward, is a submitting of our
selves to dangers, griefs, and losses, as poverty, pain, disgrace, wrong for
Christ's sake, and needs much patience, for we must have death still before our
eyes, and all deadly things: this has been the portion of the Church at all
times, We are killed all the day long, and are counted but sheep for the
slaughter, says the Psalmist: and Saint Paul tells the Corinthians that he dies
daily, I dye daily, he his own words; again in the Acts to the brethren, What
do ye weeping, and breaking my heart? for I am ready not only to be bound,
but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. And in another
place the same Apostle, I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in anguish for Christ's sake. Saint Paul is a
notable example unto us of this kind: and if thus we dye daily as Christians,
we shall never be afraid to dye as men, we shall be ever ready for death, and
so far from shrinking back, that we shall boldly meet it, it shall be no
loss, but gain unto us; no end of life, but the beginning of a better; while
we fly death we run into sin headlong, yet is there no death so bad. Oh
that we could once truly learn to dye, that we might live for ever! Many are
dead, which think themselves alive. Many to avoid a temporal death, do lose
those things without which life is nothing worth; the parting of the soul from
the body is no death, but the parting of God from the soul: if the body
without breath be but a carcass, what is a Christian without grace, but a
painted tomb? Our first birth is the death of that life which the infant
draws from his mother, and the body is borne into the world for sense and
growth: by our second birth, which is the death of the body, the soul is borne
into the kingdom of heaven to live a new life from the body, for there it
understands without fantasy or common sense, it sees without eyes, hears
without ears, makes it self understood without speech. And as the birth of
the body into the world is a better life, than that which the Infant had in his
mothers womb, so must the birth of the soul into heaven be a better life,
than that of the body, by how much the faculties of the soul are more
excellent, than the bodily senses. In our mothers womb we lived as plants, in
the world we lived as men, in heaven we shall live as the Angels; neither are
soul and body parted so as they shall never meet again, for the body no doubt
does naturally long for the soul, and the soul bears a love to the body.
Therefore by a holy ordinance of the Lord, they abide one another absence for
a while, that they may come together again as man and wife, with the greater
comfort; the body is gone down into the grave, to leave there his shame of
mortality, of weakness, of corruption, necessity, without all which, after
the resurrection it shall return to the soul, and the soul trimmed and
tricked up in glory, like a fresh spouse, shall receive the body into the same
glory, and both shall be received into God, and dwell with him for ever. Death
then is called so, only as it does appoare unto us, and others which live
here, but in very deed, and by the benefit of Christ, the state of the dead is
the very true life everlasting; neither is the birth of the child a greater
hope of life in the world, than is this of the soul, in the death of the body,
of the life both of body and soul, to be glorisied in the kingdom of heaven:
Many think on death to be more vicious, as Epicures, Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall dye: some will not think at all on death, and they
live neither the longer, nor the better, but are sure to die much the worse.
When we think on death which are Christians, it should make us live very
justly, and soberly, because we look for a Kingdom after death, where none
enter but the righteous. Oh my soul and body, if we must needs part, how
soon we know not, let us do it willingly, to overcome necessity resistance is
vain, obedience is profitable, let us provide for that which else will prevent
us; let us make use of death, as some do of money, which else lies dead, let us
die in the Lord, to the Lord, this is the best advantage.

Meditation 44. Last Judgment.
We cannot avoid either judgment or death, when sickness summous us to the
one, does not our conscience to the other? and in this life God has his
trials, judgments, executions, so that men of times are forced to cry out,
Justus es Domine, and just a sunt judicia tua: but because the wicked observe
them not, and God does desire to appear unto men rather as a merciful father,
than a severe Judge; therefore the Majesty, the Authority, the severity of his
judgment is hid unto us so far that we are bound to believe that he will
come to judge a thing which else we would never dream of. Though then we see no
examples of this judgment as yet, neither can conceive the form thereof, yet do
we believe it, and that there is a certain time appointed for it; they that
look not for it with joy, shall abide it with sorrow; that is, that last and
final judgment, wherein all causes shall be opened, all persons censured, all
works rewarded; what has hitherto been suspended, shall now be sentenced,
and never more altered: Mark the preparation unto it, the heavens shall pass
away with noise, the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the sea shall be
dried up, and the earth shall be burnt, with all her works; then a summoning
trumpet shall sound and awake up all those, that sleep in the silence of
death, and they together with the living shall be caught up; then shall the
Judge appear visibly above in flaming fire, compassed about with infinite
thousands of Angels, ready to do his will. A strange judgment toward, no
doubt, whether we respect the Judge, or the parties which are to make their
appearance, or the sentence it self: the wisdom of the Judge is such, that
he cannot be deceived, he knows all causes without information, things past
are to him present, and things to come, he made man's heart, and finds out
every corner, and turning thereof, he hears our words before we speak them,
and knows our thoughts before we act them, we do not will without his power,
though without his allowance, nor work without his privity, though without his
consent; nay, he knows our purposes, before we are fully resolved, and our
thoughts before we conceive them; and our works without producing any
witness: his justice is such, that he cannot pervert judgment for favor or
bribes: his will is the rule of all righteousness, and therefore he can
favor no cause, but that which is right, and if he could be unrighteous, what
bribe might win him which wants nothing? his power is such that all must
abide his decree; here lies no appeal, no prohibition can be granted
againstit, no pardon obtained: his jealousy shall take on harness, and he
shall arm the creature to be avenged of his enemies, he shall put on
righteousness for a breast plate, and take unfeigned judgment instead of an
helmet, equity shall be his shield, and his fierce wrath as a sharp sword, and
his troop are the whole compass of the world. Now what are the parties which
are to appear, and abide trial? Adam and his posterity from the first man to
the last that shall be borne; here shall they be judged which have been
heretofore Judges, and they shall receive right, which would not do right;
Princes, and Popes which none did dare to call in question, shall be here both
examined, and censured; and the more mighty men have been to do wrong, the
more mightily shall they be confounded. Lastly, the sentence is very short,
Come ye blessed: Go ye cursed: but of the greatest weight and strength that
ever was, for this does not pass on one man, or a family, or a Nation only,
but on all mankind at one time: neither is it touching goods and lands, or
credit, or limme, or life of the body, but it does concern bodies, and souls
too, for salvation, or damnation, and that not for a day or year to continue,
but for ever without any repealing: And are these things so, what manner of
persons ought we to be then in holy conversation, and godliness, looking for,
and hasting to the coming of the day of God? for these things must so come to
pass, not to fear, or trouble Gods children, but to take revenge on his
enemies: As when some mighty Prince comes toward a Castle of his besieged by
the enemy, and brings a great army with him to raise the siege, this puts
them in no fear which are within, but is to them a great comfort, and
therefore they look over the walls, and rejoice at it with shouts and cries,
but they which are without are perplexed with fear for the hurt which is near
unto them: know ye not that to the worlds end the Church is besieged by the
devil, the world, and the flesh? then God will come to raise this siege, and
bring all his enemies under his feet, and his coming is not to put them in
fear which are within his Church, but which assault it, and therefore Christ
said to his own, Lift up your beads for your salvation draws nigh: and in
another place he says, Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with m^e, to
give every man according to his work; Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that their right may be in the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the City; for without shall be dogs, and enchanters,
and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves or makes
lies.

Meditation 45. Hell.
A Thought of Hell is sad, not so sad as to feel the pain, and they shall
certainly feel it which think not often on it, and that sadly too; make thy
choice, if thou like mine, go forward with me, it is a punishment which shuts
us out from the presence of God, that is a loss of all good, it is a pain of
grief in all parts of man according as their dispostion is to take grief,
easlesse, that is the extremity; comfortless, it finds no pity; endless, it
has no remedy; it is called the second death, a worm of the conscience, a
bottomless pit, utter darkness, fire unquenchable, a river of brimstone which
is kindled by the breath of the Lord of Hoastes; there is no order but
confusion, weeping, and gnashing of teeth; Wilt know where it is, how spacious
the rage of the tormentors, the fury of the torments, the despair of the
tormented? God keep thee and me from this experience. But is God so
infinitely angry? will he so unmercifully forsake? so hardly handle these?
which might have known and loved him, had he so listed, and can never do him
hurt though they would. Dispute not vain clay, thou art in the Potters hand to
deal with thee as he pleases, his judgments are too high for thee, believe
his word, obey thy calling, follow him which descended into hell to fetch thy
condemnation thence, and thou shall find God merciful to thy soul, yea
nothing but mercy, and in this cause I put thee over for a conclusion of all to
the meditation of Heaven.

Meditation 46. Heaven, and the heavenly inheritance.
THis is not meat for all mouths; art thou truly humbled for thy sins,
persecuted for the truth, oppressed in thy right? do thou hate the world, and
art thou prepared for death, then art thou a Gomer fit to keep this Manna
without corrupting, but thou must believe, else shall thou not understand, for
most true is that which the Apostle says, We walk by faith, and not by sight,
the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal; and as Saint John says, Now are we the sons of God, but yet
it does not appear what we shall be, and we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. If a King can do
so much, what trow you will the King of Kings do for that man which he means
to honor? he has already given his Son for thee, and by him forgiven thy
sins; he has given unto thee the privilege of thy calling, the honor of thy
profession, the liberty of thy conscience, the helps of his Sacraments, the
use of his Word, the communion of Saints, the counsel of the wise, the
familiarity of the good, the beginnings of regeneration, the proceedings of
faith, hope, and love, the fruits of patience, peace, joy, and conscionable
dealing; last of all, that great prerogative, the intercession of Christ in all
thy prayers; if he have done so much for thee in this pilgrimage, what will he
do for thee in thy country? if thou have had such benefits in the wilderness,
what art thou to hope for in Canaan? The eye has not seen, the heart of man
is not able to conceive, how then can the tongue utter them? but believe thou
in thy soul, which loves God, the things which he has provided for them that
love him; this world was made without any provision, what a world will that be
which God does provide so long before hand? and he tells thee he has provided
it, that thou might know thou can not be deceived; before we have it, we
have the earnest of it, and when we have it, nothing can take it from us: so
that there is presently an immunity from evil, and a security never to return
to evil, and there is also plenty, and community; we enjoy all good, yea God
himself the well of goodness, therefore we live still, but what we were is
a shadow to what we are, yea the best we were is almost nothing to that we are;
we were in grace, we are in glory, we live still, but more in God than in
our selves, we rejoice as much for others as for our selves, we are not only
reformed in bodies, and souls, but also transformed into a divine nature, as
the Angels free from necessities, as Christ highly favored in Christ, as God
eternalnally blessed; such is the heavenly inheritance of the Saints, which
although it be common to many, yet every one of the family has his proper
right in it, and though it be divided, yet is not the propriety of any the
less, or the communion the weaker, for every one is fully content with his
part, and does rejoice as much in the good of others, as his own, and they do
all drink of the same well of eternal life. Landed men desire to have perfect
surveyes, and true plots of their States of inheritance, willing not only to
satisfy their minds touching the value, but also their eyes, beholding under
one aspect, the houses, courtelages, ways, walks, ponds, parkes, woods,
coppize, hills, bottomes, arable grounds, meadows, and pasture, and they would
have nothing lie hid as though they should seem to neglect any one jot of
their transitory happiness: Oh vain men are we which take so much pain about
the world wherein we live, not only with beasts which have a better part in
this kind of happiness, but also with wicked men worse than beasts: whence
come unto us, envy, malice, variance, deceit, violence, wrong; yea, murders,
massacres, and desolations! And this ourinheritance we stand so much on, what
serves it, but for our bodily necessities, and that for a very small time,
though we use to say to me, And to my heirs for ever, whereas oft-times the
third man does scarce enjoy a foot thereof? The soul is nothing the richer,
though thou leave it nothing the wiser, nothing the better, neither can it
claim any part of it to follow her, when it must depart hence to another
world, where such earthly provision stands in no stead. And if the earth it
self be but a point in respect of the firmament, every least star thereof
being eighteen times greater than the whole, what is thy goodly inheritance in
comparison of the highest heavens, but a shadow, or dream of nothing? But this
heavenly inheritance may be called so rightly in deed, and is worth the seeking
for, worth the having, though a man should sell all, and lose his life too, to
which comes nothing that ill is, and from which goodness never departs, an
excellent place of entertainment, where comfort has an everlasting spring, not
parched with heat, or nipped with cold, or beaten with violence of winds, what
can be spoken more gloriously? here is God in the height of his favor, here
are thousands of Angels and Saints, like so many Stars about this infinite
light, at whose presence the Sun is darkness, here is Christ that died for
us, and has life in his hands to bestow on us, Come, enter into thy Masters
joy. Can thou dislike this company? how ever thou do like it, thou can
not come to it by nature or art, it is not blood or birth that must prefer
thee, thou can not claim it by descent; and in truth so great did our Lord
esteem it, that he spared not one drop of his blood, but willingly shed it to
purchase this inheritance for thee; and if all the crosses or troubles of the
world were put together and weighed in the balance with this mass of glory?
they would not hold in weight so much as one grain of the insinite greatness
thereof: Holy men in times past have thought no labors too hard, no poverty
too deep, no death too sharp, if so enduring all their days, they might be
thought worthy to be made partakers of this grace; for true it is that no man
brings worthiness with him to claim such an unvaluable consideration, but as
it is grace, that makes us first to know our unworthiness, and then to embrace
Christ, who has purchased for us this inheritance, and has the right to
bestow it on us, so is it grace that leading us by the hands of obedience, and
humility, does bring us into the possession of glory; this is an inheritance
not for the body only, but for the soul also, not while we live here a few
years, but to live above with God for ever, this right is such as neither can
be taken from us, nor exclude us from taking benefit with others, which have an
inheritance as large as ours; What earthly inheritance has such privileges,
to be free from sin, and all punishment following it, as shame, and misery:
to see God face to face? This O man, is worthy thy survay, by what title it may
be possessed, what things they are which be spoken of this heavenly Jerusalem,
what mansions, and commodities it has, what freedom the dwellers enjoy which
there abide: that lightened by faith, and lifted up on the top of holy
meditation, thou may so clearly, and fully behold the plot of this
blessedness, as that from henceforth, it may wholly withdraw thy love from
this transitory, vain and vile world to an unsatiable desire of it self. Be
sober, therefore, O my soul, be thankful, and in thy ravishment remember thou
have not yet attained it, but this do forget that which is behind, and
endeavor thy self unto that which is before, and follow hard toward the
mark, for the high prise of the calling of God in Christ; and this is a point
so necessary, that Saint John says, Every one that has this hope purges
himself as he is pure. And here my pen stops, my meditations never.

Soli Deo Laus.
Contempt of the world.
THe worlds vanity which John reduces unto three heads; the lust of the flesh,
by which we may understand all kind of delicacy and wantonness; the lust of
the eye, which may well intend covetousness, and the pride of life, whereby
may be meant ambition about honor, are not from God which made the world, but
from man, who forsaking God has abused the world, and made both it and
himself, both vain miserable many out of the greatness of their minds have
despised the world, counting themselves too good for it, and the world too base
for their employment, they have rejected honors, as not worth the travel, or
taking up, pleasures as too beastlike riches as heavy and idle burdens, and
all this they did from the equity of nature, which is contented with a little,
and offended at excess, which bears necessary, and common harms, and is
only moved to avoid her own follies: Christians fetch their contempt from a
higher Principle, What is time to eternity, a candle to the Sun, a drop to
the Sea, a molehill to a mountain, this world to the World to come, the
creature to the Creator? and yet how few Christians grow to that contempt of
the world, for the love of God and godliness, which the Philosophers did in
time past for the love of natural knowledge, or moral virtue? Ye may see
indeed amongst Christians many contemn the World out of a careless contempt
what become of themselves, whether to sink or swim, because they are not
such as they have been, nor could never yet learn to be the men they should,
of whom the world is as weary, as they are of it; but how few see you contemn
it out of the true account which a Christian ought to have of his own value? I
am the member of Christ, shall I couple the body of Christ to such a Harlot as
pleasure is? I am Gods favorite, shall I by ambition hunt after that favor,
which comes from man? I am a Citizen of Heaven, shall I dig deep into the
earth for a treasure there? Many Christians do not so much as the Philosopher
did by the eye of reason, but look on things only with the eye of the sense,
how can they then be equal judges of these matters, which reason it self
could never reach unto? To the natural eye, this world does so interpose it
self, that it seems only great, and the world to come nothing at all; but
faith which lifts it self up, and beholds God, is made partaker of such a
heavenly vision, that this inferior world seems unto it to have neither
goodness to be desired, nor greatness to be admired, nor assurance to be
trusted unto, only it sees many seek it which perish by it, and they which
thrive in it, to part from it much the worse, for the only having it. Know my
soul, that this world is but a market, if thou be in it as a buyer or a
seller, thou shall be much distracted; if as a looker on, thou shall have
content, using it as though thou did not use it, thou may be acquainted
with the world, but beware of familiarity, open not thy self unto her, for the
day will come that you two will be at ods, and if thou love her, thou will say
then, I have gotten nothing by her, and perhaps it will cast thee in the teeth,
that it has bestowed too much on thee. How happy are they which keep even
reckoning with the world at all times, that as they call nothing of the world,
so the world can challenge nothing in them, but are ready still to depart out
of it with a saving hand, provided for a better.

Sit Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

