engraved title page

Atlas Maritimus, OR THE SEA-ATLAS, Being a Book of Maritime Cards.

Describing The Seacoasts, Capes, Headlands, Sands, Shoals, Rocks and Dangers.
The Bays, Roads, Harbors, Rivers and Ports, in most of the known Parts of the
WORLD, Collected from the latest and best Discoveries that have been made: by
diverse able and experienced Navigators.

At AMSTERDAM, Printed for Jacob Robijn, in the New Bridge street, in the
Stuureman, 168^

engraved title page

TO THE Right Noble and Right Honorable JOAN HUYDEKOOPER, Knight, Lord of
Maerseveen, Neerdijck etc. Ruling Burgermaster and Counselar of the city of
Amsterdam.
Right Noble and Right Honorable LORD,
SInce our worthy and loving Country know no fruitfuller tillage than to till
the Sea diligently; by which we see continualy our warehouses filled with all
sorts of the most needful and most precious Commodities in the world, which by
our Ships and sailers trading, are brought superfluously to us out of all
Countries and Kingdoms; diverse persons have endeavored from time to time, to
produce to that intent good and convenient Sea-books. By this the sailer is
guided and warned, to shun prudently all Rocks, Sands, Shelfs, Whirl-streams
and more such like dangers, whereas the Seas and whirl-winds in the meantime
threaten and sometimes overcome them yet with many other difficulties. The
experience (when Sailers and Pilots many ages have been forced to take care
continually with the plummet in hand) is come so far at last, that they have
discovered lurking deceits of grounds nearer and nearer, that a many before us
therefore have been able to set forth diverse good books: but being such books
can never be without some fault, we have been very willing to bestow our
endeavor, trouble, care and charges, to mend all the faults in such books, by
certain and true observations of diverse renowned Pilots exactly searched out.
Chiefly where the time and the streams often change the depthes and shelves, so
that one may not safely trust to the old books. We can assure all Gentlemen,
Merchants and Sailers, that this our present work is more exact and more
perfect than any yet extant, as it clearly will befound out by skilful Pilots.
Thus we take here the boldness to Dedicate this same very Reverently and
serviceably to your honor; where we see daily with great satisfaction and
thankfulness, what care you always take, for the Common welfare of our Country,
this very magnificent and pourful city the warehouse for the whole world is
come to such hight by the navigation traffic, and maintained in it yet by the
same with unfatigable deligence, and careful wise Contrivance of the very
laudable regency; being hope flattereth us with trusting that this work
(tending chiefly to the Common welfare) will be accepted of your honor with a
bountiful eye. If I may enjoy so much happiness, I will acknowledge me so much
the more obliged, to pray with all my heart continuely to the almighty, (as
your noble blood now almost hereditarily possesses the high and Burgermasterly
authority in this mighty city; and your honor enjoys for the present the
Burgermastership the sixth time with Renown and glory) that it may be his holy
pleasure, further in the future to let your honor enjoy the same worthy office
and great Authority, several times for many years in full health, luck and
satisfaction for the best of this city and estate, and that we may live merry,
long quiet and well satisfied under such a Government, since we take the honor
to call us selves

Right Noble and Right Honorable LORD, Your Honors, Most humble and must
dutiful Servant, JACOBUS ROBYN.
At Amsterdam, the 25th. of July, 1682.
A CHORT DECLARATION Of the division, situation and qualities of the EARTH.
IN the beginning did the Everlasting and almighty God, through his wisdom,
create the whole world out of nothing; and joined the Earth with the Sea
together (as being the heaviest) in one round form, in the manner of a ball,
and placed them in the center or middle point, as in the nethermost place; the
heaven, as a tent, is with an un measurable breadth extended, over and about
it, and adorned with many and glorious lights, as the Sun, Moon, Planets,
and other stars innumerable. And that the earth minght be a fit habitation or
dwelling for man and other terrestrial creatures, and through its plentiful
fruit nourish and sustain them, has God exalted it above the waters, and
ordained unto the Zea its place in the depths on such a manner, that she on
every side comprehending the earth with its crookednes, does distinguish and
devide the same in three several pars of great continents, that is firm lands;
over which the describers of the earth (as the Astronomers over heaven) place
vijf circkels; as the Aequinoctial, so called, because night and day are over
the whole earth of one lenght whenever the Son does come in this circle,
which happens about the 21th. of march and the 23th of September. This circle
is also called Equator, to which when the Sun comes, it makes the days
and the nights equal; the Mariners of the low countries do call it the
middle-line, because it does devide the face of the earth in two equal parts,
where of the one tends toward the north, and the other toward the south and
so it is the very middle betwixt the Northern, and southern lines, or Poles.
The other is called Tropicus Cancri, or the Sun turning of the Crab, because
the Sun when it comes to this circle about they 21 they of June, begins
to turn toward the Equator, and then it is the longest day to those who live
in the north, and the shortest to those who live in the south from the
Equator: this circle is situated 23 degrees 32* minutes north ward from the
middle-line. The third is termed Tropicus Capricorni, or a Sunne-turning of
the heaven called Capricorn, because the Sun, when it comes to this
circle, which is about the 23th of December, begins to turn and to climb
toward the Equator; and then it is, contrary as before, the shortest day to
those who live in the North, and the longest to those who live in the South of
the mid-line: and this sign is situated 23 degrees, 31 minuits in the South of
the Aequinoctial. The 4th is called Circulus Arcticus, the Northern circle, and
the 5th Circulus Antarcticus, the Southern circle: these are situated 23
degrees 31 minuits, the one from the Northern, and the other from the Southern
pole or diameter of the world, and are through tbe circumrotation off the
heaven described from the Pole of the Zodiak, or the course of the Sun. The
ancient and most skilful Astronomers understand by the Circulus Arcticus not
only this which is described; but such a circle whose half Diameter or line
which goes through the middle point, is even as much as the hight of the pole
from every place, comprehending al ways those stars which before the hight
of every land never go under; in which regard this circle in all countries
which differ in breath, does differ, as also from Antarcticus: but in the
aforesaid description we follow the common manner of the describers of
countries. The earth is also through the aforenamed 4 last circles divided in 5
great regions, by the Greek called Zonas, or girdels, because that they in the
form of girdels do compass the globe of the Earth. The first there of is
environed or enclosed within the northern circle, and bears the name of the
Northern cold region. The second is called the Southern cold region, running
round about the Southern Pole within the Southern circle. The third, being the
middlemost amongst them all, is called the barren and hot region, and is
situated between the Circles of the Cancer or Crab and the sign of
Capricornus. The 4h is situated betwixt the Northern Circle and the Circle of
the Crab, and is called the tempeted Northern Region. The last, called the
Southern temperate region, is situated betwixt the Circle of Capricornus and
the Southern Circle. The old-Philosophers and Describers of countries did
suppose that of these vive the two temperate alone where inhabited, and that of
the other three, the two cold ones could not be inhabited, in regard of the
great intolerable cold, and the barren hot region, in regard of the burning
heat of the Sun But time inconclusion has produced, the truth thereof: seeing
we have experienced about 150 years hence that they all are inhabited, but the
cold least of all, as Greenland, Iceland, Lapland, the utmost parts of Norway,
and such like countries. Experience likewise has taught us that in the barren,
hot region the heat is not untolerable, neither does it burn in such a manner
as the Ancient conceived: since there are found many excellent fruitful and
populous Kingdoms, as Genee, Aethiope, Arabia, East Indies, the famous Islands
Sumatra, Java, and Molucquen; as alsoo Bresil, Peru, New-Spain, and other such
like countries.

For to have the right understanding of the situation of countries, we must
know that the describers of the earth calculate the same according to the
degrees of length and breadth. The breadth of places (which is always alike at
the height of the Pole) is accounted from the middle line to be twofold,
Northward or Southward to the number of ninety. The length is accounted from te
Meridian-line, which runs over de Pico de Tayda in the Island Teneriffa,
along the midle-line toward the East, to the number of 360, as for example,
Amsterdam is situated 52 from the midle-line toward the North, which is the
breadth or the Poles higth of the fame city, and in the length 23 degrees,
because the same does agree with such a degree of the Aequinoctial, calculating
from the aforesaid Meridian. De Cabo de Bona Esperanca is situated on the
breath Southward from 34 degrees, and in the length from 42 degrees. The
countries or cities situated under the same length have always at one time and
moment alike midday, and alike hour of the day: as when it is noon at Amsterdam
then it is also noon at Bergen in Norway, at Lions in France, at Algiers in
Barbary, and such like places situated in one lenght. But those which are
situated under several degrees of length, differ likewise in the calculation
of hours; so that when it is midday in the forenamed places, then it is at
Bantam in the Island Java 7 hours and 12 minutes in the afternoon, because the
same city is situated 108 degrees in the length toward the East, for it differs
every 15 degrees one hour: but in the city Lima, laying in Peru, it is 6 hours
in the fore-noon, becausse the same city is situated in the length about 90
degrees toward the West, as Amsterdam. Those also which are situated under the
like breath or higth of the Pole, have always alike length of days and
nights: this is also to be understord, that those who live on the southside of
the midle-line have the shortest day, when we have the longest: as they have
the Winter when we have the Summer, and we the Winter, when they have the
Summer. But they which are situated under an unequal breadth or hight of the
Pole, have also unequal length of days and nights: for the frarther a place is
situated from the midleline, how the longest day is greater there, and the
shortest les. As for example they who live under the Aequinoctial line, have
day and night thorough the whole year alike long, without change. They who live
on the breadth of 30 degrees, have the longest day, almost of 14 hours: on the
breadth of 50 degrees, the longest day has stiffly 16 hours. Under the
Northern Circle, which we call Circules Arcticus, does not the Sun on the
longest day set or go under the Horizon. On the breadth of 70 degrees does not
the Sun set in 64 days: and so following the longed days encreasse till
under the Pole, where in the whole year not more is then one day and one night,
each continuing one half year.

Further more the Earth is divided at this day in two great firm lands and
parts, in Antiquam or old and Novam or new America, called the New World. The
first called the Old World, because it was only known to the Ancient, have the
ancient Describers of the Earth divided again in three parts, towit, in Europa;
Asia, and Africa.

EUROPE, has in length 1200, and in breadth 675 German miles.

ASIA, contains in lenght 1800, and in breadth 1275 German miles.

AFRICA extends in length 1200, and in breadth 1050 German miles.

AMERICA is in length 1950, and in Breadth 1200 German miles.

Now we are to show further what Kingdoms and countries there are in them, and
what manner of commodities may be carried from the one to the other.

Europe possesses these Realms, the state of the church, under the Pope of
Rome, and further whole Italy; High-Germany, under the Emperor at vienna;
Spain, France, England, Scotland, Ireland, Island, Norway, Denmark, Swethland,
Poland, and Moscovy, together with the Republic of venice, Swisserland, and
the Netherlands; as yet Hungary, Walachia, Moldavia, Bulgaria, Romania,
Dalmatia, Croatia, Greece, together with the Islands Majorca, Minorca, Ivica,
Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily, and Candia

Italy has the Republic of Genoua, the Dukedom Mantoua, the state of the
church, the Republic of venice, the Kingdom of Naples, with the Islands
Sicily, Corsica and Sardinia: and afford Silk, Camlet, Stammel, Fustian,
Gold-and Silver-wire, Arms, Rice, Alum, Gall-nuts, Oil, Glass, and
looking-glasses.

Germany, Comprehends first three parts; as, that of seven Prince Electours,
of Mentz, Treves, Collen, Brandenburg, Heidelburg, Saxony, Bavaria, besides the
Kingdom of Bohemia; secondly the Spiritual, and Worldly Princes, and thirdly
the free Imperial-touns of the H. Romish Empire: besides these three parts,
there are yet to Kreitsen. De City of Spira has the highest Court of justice.
The wares of this country are Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Alum,
Quicksilver, Dying stufs, Wine, Wool, Ribband, Fustian and several sorts of
Arms

Spain has these Kingdoms; viz. Castile, Portugal, Algarve, Andaluzia,
Granada, Murcia, Valentia, Catalogne, Arragon, Naverre, Biscaie, and Galicia;
and they yield Wine, Oil, Rice, Limons, Oranges, Pomegranates, Licorish, Silk,
Wool, Cork, Rosin, Steel, Iron and Arms. In Spain are several Archbishopricks,
Bishhopricks, and 22 universities.

France, contained these Countries; Britain, Normandy, Picardy, Champagne, la
France, Beauce, Berry, Blaisois, Vendosme, Perch, Hastinois, Senonois, Valois,
le Maine, Touraine, Anjou, Poictou, Xantonge, Pirogort, Limosin, Bourbonnois,
Lionnois, Forest, Beaujolois, Auvergne, Angoulesme, Auxerre, Nevers, Burgondy,
Quercy, Gascoin, Languedock, Province, Daulphine, Bern, Lorain, Orange,
Avignon, Savoy, etc. And there is abundance of wheat, Rye, Oxen, Hogs, Salt,
Oil, Wine, Chestnuts, Almonds, Plumbs, Beads, Hemp, and Hides. In the same are
several Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, seven Parliaments, and 21 Universities.

England consists in 39 Counties, to which come out of Wales 13 more to it;
viz. Northumberland, Cumberland, Durham, Westmorland, Lancaster, Chester,
Carnarvonshire, Dengibensershire, Filint, Merionethshire, Montgomeryshire,
Salop, Cardiganshire, Radnor, Vigorny, Cornwall, Devonshire, Somersethshire,
Dorseth, Wiltshire, Gloucester, Monmouth, Glamorgan, Carmarthen, Pembrook,
Brecknock Hereford, York, Lincoln, Darby, Stafford Nottingham, Leicester,
Rutland, Northfolk, Warnixshire, Northamtonshire, Huntinton, Cambridge,
Suffolk, Oxford, Buckingham, Bedfordshire Herefordshire, Essex, Berks,
Middlesex, Southamton, Surry and Sussex. It has clothes, Stammel, Wheat,
Saffran, Tin, Lead, Barley, Panick, Beer, Redharring and Coals.

Scotland is divided in South or high, and North or low Scotland, and separated
from England by the river Tweed; and there are two Archbishopricks, and eleven
Bishoprics: it yields Kersy, Perpetuanas, Wool, Barley, Panick and Hides.

Ireland consists in 5 Regions; viz. Langenia, Connacia, Ultonia, Mormonia,
and Media: it has 30 Earls, 4 Archbishops, and 29 Bishops, and yields Corn,
Hides, and Butter, etc.

Island is divided in Austlendiga Fiordung, Westlendiga Fiordung, Northlendiga
Fiordung, and Southlendiga Fiordung. This most Northerly Island has one
Governor, appointed by the King of Denmark, and exporteth Stockfish, Stockins,
Brimstone and Corn.

Norway is divided in Scandia and Scandinovia. The City Anslo in Norway is the
place of the Bishop; Bergen is a renouned mart-town. This Realm produces
Deal-boards, Sparres, Mastes, Wood for Fuel and Hides.

Denmark embraces, Jutland, Funen, Sealand and Schonen or Sconia, besides the
Islands laying here about; and it yields Oxen, Barley, French-wheat,
Stockfish, Tallow, Oker-nuts, Hides, Buck-skins, Mastes, Timber, Fir-wood,
Salt, Pitch, Tar, Brimstone, etc.

Swethland is properly divided in the Gothlands Provinces, viz. Fastgothia,
Westgothia, Southgothia, or Smaland, Tuiscia, verendia, Meringia and Oeland.
The other Swethish Provinces are upland Westmannia, Eastdalia, Solicisdalia,
Warmeland, Gestrica, Helsingia, Middle-padia, Nordangermannia, Nordbotnia,
Scrienfinia, Lapland, Biarmia, Finland, Carelia and Ingria: the Commodities of
it are Iron, Copper, Lead, Hides, Elks and Buck-skins, Tallow, Pitch,
French-wheat, Barley, etc.

Poland is distinguished in great and little Poland. The chief Cities in great
Poland are, Posna, Gnesna, Siradia, Uladislavia, Brescia, Crusphicia, Ploczso,
Dobrinia; in little Poland, Cracow, Sandomir, and Lublin It produced Rye,
Wheat, Wax, Honey, Metheglin, Hides, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Potashes, Timber,
Spruce-beer, etc.

Muscovy is divided in Black and white Russia; the head City of it is Musco:
there is abundance of Rye, Wheat, Wax, Honey, Tallow, Suet, Harts-skins,
Russia-leather, Flax, Hemp, etc.

The Commonwealth of Venice has 3 whole Countrits; viz. Marca Tarvi^na,
Friuli, Histrica, besides a part of Lombardia, laying on the river Po, viz.
Brescia, Bergomo, and verona, with the jurisdiction of Cremana. Their wares are
Silks, Corn, Wine, and Glass.

Switserland is divided in four parts, viz. Zurichgow, Wipflis, Burgergow,
Argergow, and Turgergow: The Country consists in three parts; the first
contains 13 Villages, Called Cantons, the second the confederated, viz. The
Abot with the City S. Gall; the Third the Majoralities, which the Switzers have
got. The fruits are Corn, Iron, and Wine.

All the Netherlands are divided in 10 Royal Provinces; viz. Artois, an
Earldom, has 10 Cities, and 754 Villages. 2 Hainalt, an Earldom, 24 Towns, and
950 Villages. 3. Namure, an Earldom, 4 Towns, 184 Villages. 4* Luxemburg, a
Dukedom, 23 Towns, and 1168 Villages. 5. Limburg, a Dukedom, 23 Towns, 123
Villages. 6. Flanders, an Earldom, 30 Towns, 1154 Villages. 7. Brabant, a
Dukedom, 26 Towns, 70^ Villages. 8. Gelderland, a Dukedom, 22 Towns, 300
Villages. 9. Mechlin, a Barony, 1 Town, 9 Villages. 10. Antwerp, a Marquisate,
has only one Town.

In the 7 Provinces under the States General, and his Highness the Prince of
Orange, are 1. Gelderland, a Dukedom, with the Earldom Zutphen, have Towns and
Villages as above.

2. The Earldom of Holland, has 29. Towns, and 400 Villages.

3. The Earldom of Sealand, has 9. Towns, and 105 Villages.

4. The Barony of Utrecht, has 5. Towns, and 70 Villages.

5. The Barony of Friesland, has 11. Towns, and 409 Villages.

6. The Barony of Over-yssel, has 11. Towns, and 101 Villages.

7. The Barony of Groaning, has 1. Town, and 145 Villages.

These Netherlands being the common Storehouse, receive all the said
Commodities out of the above mentioned Realms, and deliver the same again to
everyone by there renowned Navigation over the seas. Otherwise these countries
give many sorts of corn out of there Bosom, Butter, Cheese, Flax Hemp, and more
other wares.

As for Hungaria, Walachia, Moldavia, Bulgaria, Romania, Dalmatia, Greece, we
pass by for brevity.

ASIA Comprehends these following Realms: viz. Tartaria, Natolia, Syria,
Armenia, Arabia, Media, Assyria, Persia, Parthia, Sigistan, Corasan, Chirman,
India Gusaratte, China, Bengala, Malacco, etc. Besides these there are yet
innumerable Islands, of which the chifest are Japon, Sumatra, Java, Borneo,
Celebes, Gilolo, Mindanao, Luconia, Ceilon, and Formosa.

The Commodities which are transported out of Asia in other Countries, are
Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs. Mace, Balm-oil, Frankincense, Rhobarb, Musk,
Amber-grease, Bezar-stone, Silk, Porcelain, Pearls, Diamants, Rubies, Ciment or
Plaster, Sealing wax, and Rice.

These following Island produce ivery one by them self, as follows; Java much
Pepper; Banda Nutmegs and Mace, the nixt to them, viz. Motir, Machian, Bachian,
Tidor, Amboina, Nutmegs; there are also Paradise-birds.

AFRICA is now adays distinguished in four parts; viz. in Barbary, Numidia,
Lybia, and Aethiopia.

Under Barbary are these Realms; viz. Marocco, Fez. Telezin, and Tunis.

Uunder Numidia are comprehended, Gualata, Zanhaga, Zuenziga, Terga, Berdoa,
Googa, and Borno.

Under Lybia are Genehoa, Caniva, Tombuta, Agades, Ghur, Cono, Cassena,
Guangara, and Nubia.

Under Aethiopia are these Kingdoms, Milli, Maloguta, Mandinga, Caragotes,
Bengama, Dauma, Zegzeg, Benin Zanfara, Biafara, Medra, Tigrai, Ambian, Cantiva,
Vangue, Danute, Gojame, Congo, Agiscumba, Malemba, Matama, Bagame, Coveo,
Butua, Maitachasi, Canur, Mosambique, Gasabela, Quiloa, Quara, Melind, Olabi,
Magadoxa, Doara, Dangari, Lacca, Barnagasso, Dafilla, Ganfila, Cossin, Bello,
Guengari, Tigremahon, Angota, Beluguanze, Xoa, Cafates, and Fungi. Cape de Bona
Esperanza is the most southern point of Africa.

Out of all these Realms Comes forth Gold, Silver, Elephants-teeth, Wheat,
Plaster, Salt, Crocodiles.

AMERICA, the fourth and last part of the World, first known by Christoffel
Columbes since the year 1492. is divided of the West Indies in North-and
South-America.

The Realms or Countries in the Northern-America are, New-north-wales
New-south-wales, New-Britain, Terra Laborador, Terra Corteralis, Terraneuf,
Canada, New-France, New-Netherland, Verginia, Florida, Calicuas, Capaschi,
Cossa, Tagil, Marata, California, Astatlan, Mechi, Culiacona, New-Galitea,
Panuco, Tutepeque, Tabasco, Yucatan, Honduras and veragua; item the Islands,
Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto Rico, and Jamaica, besides the other little Islands
there about.

The realms and Countries in the Southern-America are, S. Martha,
New-Andalusia, Guajana, Caribana, Arowacas, Epuremei, Brasilia, Xarayes, Moxos,
Tucuman, China, Chili, Chicas, Valey de Xuxui, Peru, and the country of
Patagones.

The wares of America are, Gold, Silver, Gems, Bezoarstone, Sugar,
Brasily-wood, Salsa-parilla, Cement or Plaster, Bevers-skins Plums of feathers,
Apes, diverse Gums, Indian Balm, etc.

In these said four parts of the Earth are also many sorts of Birds, Beasts,
Trees, and Plants: and under the earth diverse Metals, Gems, Salt, Brimstone,
Salpeter, Funtain-waters, as also diverse Fires, through the Mountains vomited
out by nature.

Now we are to treat of the Seas, there names lengthes and bredthes and what in
their bowels and Grounds is to be got.

The German-or North-sea, laying next to us, contains in length from Dovers
and Cales (laying in the heads) to Hitland, 200, and its breadth 120 German
miles.

The Baltick-or east-sea, is long 300, and broad 135. German miles.

The Ice-sea, from Hitland to Greenland, is long 150. and broad 1200. German
miles.

The white sea between Labland and Moscovy, is long 150. and Broad 30. German
miles.

The Atlantick-sea, or Great north-sea Contains in its length from Island to
the un known Southland 1800. and in breadth 150. German miles.

The Mediterranean or Midland sea is in length 745. and in breadth 150 German
miles.

The Adriatic or Gulf of venice is long 120. and broad 35. Germam miles.

The Euxin or black sea by Constantinopol has in length 210. and in breadth 120
German miles.

The Persian sea is long 225. and broad 105. German miles.

The Indian sea from the cape of good Hope, to the Islands de las veles, is
long 1875. and broad from the city Ormus in Persia to the unknown Southland
1200. German miles.

The red sea is long 30. and broad 45. German miles.

The Persian Inham about Ormus is in length 240. and in breadth 90. German miles.

Mare del zur, or the Peaceable sea, (greatest of all) is long from the Islands
de las veles to the city Arica in Peru 2100. and broad from the cape Hondo in
the northern America to the Southlands 1500. German miles.

The Tartarian sea has in its length 750. and in its breadth 45 German miles.

The fruits of the seas are also many sorts, as one may see by the grounds of
the same, viz. Red, White, and black; Coral, Pearls, Oisters, Mossels,
Sea-scum, Little horns, Shells. In the sea they find all kind of fishes, and in
many parts like to the creatures, of the land.

Some folks were used to call for a fifth part of the World, Terra Australis,
or Magellanica, the countries Southward of the Strait Magellanes; but being the
navigation of the Hollanders is known but few years in those Countries, whereas
they have fond most Islands, and no Continent that deserves such a name, so
think it suficient only to hint at it, unless they would reckon for Terra
Australis, the countries at the south of Nova Guinea, most found in the year
1644. and are called in our Dutch Maps Hollandia, and Zelandia-Nova.

The Royal and Princely chief cities in the countries and Kingdoms, where the
soverains of the World have their seats, are these:

The chief city in Italy is Rome, there the Pope has his see.

Vienna or wien in Austria, above Germany, is the Keeper of the Imperial Crown
and Scepter.

The city Madrid in Spain, viz. in the old Kingdom of Castilia, has within its
walls the Palace of the King of Spain. Because the Kingdom of Portugal has
formerly revolted, and chosen a King for it self, and the court Keeping of it
is within the city Lissebon in Portugal, on the river Tagus.

The great city of Paris, in l'isle de France in the Kingdom of France, has
the Palace de Louvre for a dweling of the King.

London in England, laying in the Earldom of Middlesex, has also the Kings
Palace for his Court-keeping in Westminster.

Edenburg in Scotland has been also formerly the seat of the Scottish Kings.

Dublin in Ireland has the seat of the viceroy of that Kingdom.

Coppenhagen, a City in Denmark, laying on the Island Zeland, embraces also
the Royal Palace.

Stockholm in Swethland is exalted, by the Palace (of the same Kingdom) being
covered with Copper, laying in Upland.

Warsaw, a city in Poland, laying in the Dukedom Warsaw, is also exalted by the
court-keeping of the King.

The city Mosco has the mighty Palace and Courtkeeping of the Great-Lords or
caars of Moscovy, in the great Dukedom of Moscovy.

For to behold right in a Map of the World the Earth and the seas, we are to
observe, that the Middleline going right East and West, is called the
Aequinoctial Line, the crooked Circle going through the middle of it, the
Zodiac, or the way of the Bon, the other circles going all East and west are
called Parallel or even going circles, but the Circles going toward the north
and the south, Meridian-circles: by these they measure the breadth of the
Countries, and seas, as well at the north, as at the south of the Equinox, and
by those of the said Parallel-Circles the length of the countries and seas, all
which is to be seen in the Map of the world.

The Earth in its four parts reckoned together comes to 10350 German miles;
and the seas all together comprehends in 14 seas, come to 15695. German miles.

All this we have Jugded useful to show here to the good Reader, hoping to give
him here by yet some satisfaction, which we entreat that our zeal to serve him,
may be acceptablely taken. Farewell.

four circular maps: eastern and western hemispheres, north and south poles
Nova Totius TERRARUM ORBIS TABULA Ex officina J: Robijn AMSTELODAMJ
sea chart (map) of Europe with part of the coast of Africa (also including
Iceland and part of Greenland) Pascaart van EUROPA, Als mede even gedeelt vande
cust van Africa. Gedruckt en uytgegeven, tot Amsterdam Bij Pieter Goos.
chart (map) of Greenland, Iceland, the Davis Strait, and Jan Mayen Island, how
one can sail to them from Shetland and the north coasts of Scotland and Ireland
(also showing parts of the coast of Canada) Pascaerte van GROEN-LANDT, Yslandt,
Straet David's en Ian Mayen eylandt, hoe men de selvige van Hitlandt en de Noort
custen van Schotlandt en Yrlandt beseylen match.
Mercator chart (map) of the East Indies, including the east coast of Africa,
Madagascar, coasts of Arabia, India, southeast Asia, and China; Japan and
various Pacific islands, and part of Australia Nieuwe wassende graet kaert van
OOST INDIEN. van d. C. d. Bona Esperanca tot t'Lant Eso. T. Amsterdam. Gedruckt
by I. Robyn.
chart (map) of the sea coasts of Russia, Lapland, Finmark (Finland and
Scandinavia?), and Spitsbergen Pascaart Vande zeecusten van RVSLANT, Laplant,
Finmarcken, en Spitzbergen
chart (map) of the Baltic Sea from the islands Rugen and Bornholm to Wyborg
Pascaarte vande OOST-ZEE Van 't Eylandt Rugen, often Bornholm tot aen Wyborg.
T'AMSTERDAM. Bij Pieter Goos Plaetsnyder op't water in De Vergulde ZeeSpiegel.
Ao. 1669.
chart (map) of the North Sea from Calais to Dronten (Norway) and between Dover
and Shetland Pascaarte van de NOORT ZEE Vertenende van Caliz tot Dronten, als
oock tuschen Doeveren en Hitlandt. T'AMSTERDAM. Bij Pieter Goos Plaetsnijder op
't water in De Vergulde ZeeSpiegel. Ao. 1666
chart (map) of the English Channel, including the coasts of England, Wales,
Scotland and the Hebrides, Ireland, and part of France Pascaart vant CANAAL
Begrypende in sich Engelandt, Schotlandt, en jerlandt, als mede even gedeelt van
Francryck.
chart (map) from Heysant (Ouessant or Ushant?) to Cadiz: west coast of France,
Atlantic coasts of Portugal and Spain, straits of Gibraltar and parts of the
Alboran Sea (western Mediterranean) as far as Berja and Melilla PASCAERT van
HEYSANT tot CADIX Nuwelykx uyt Gegeven t'Amsterdam By Hendrick Goos.
Zeecaert-maker.
chart (map) of the western Mediterranean Sea, from the Straits of Gibraltar to
Corfu, including Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily, Italy, and North Africa; with a
list of names of 98 islands, corners (capes or headlands), and harbors lying in
the western part of the Mediterranean Sea PASKAERTE Van't Westelyckste Der
MIDDELANDSCHE ZEE. Gesneden gedruckt en uytgegeven t'Amsterdam by Pieter Goos,
op 't Water in de Vergulde Zee Spiegel.
Namen van de Eylanden Hoecken and Havens gelegen in 't Westelycke-deel van de
Middelandsche Zee

chart (map) of the eastern Mediterranean Sea, from Italy and Tunisia east to
the Levant, the Sea of Marmara and the Bosphorus Strait, with a list of names
of 129 islands, corners (capes or headlands), and harbors lying in the eastern
part of the Mediterranean Sea PASKAERTE Van't Oostelyckste Der MIDDELANDSCHE
ZEE Gesneden, Gedruckt, en Uytgegeven t'Amsterdam by Pieter Goos, op't Water
inde Vergulde Zee Spiegel
chart (map) of the Barbary Coast (West Africa) from Lisbon and Cape St.
Vincent to the Gambia and Cape Verde De Cust van BARBARIA, Gualata, Arguyn, en
Geneheo, van Capo S. Vincente tot Capo Verde
new chart (map) of the Flemish Islands (Azores) Nieuwe Pascaert Van de VLAEMSE
EYLANDEN Waer in oock te sien is Hoe haer de kusten in Zee Synde vertoone
T'AMSTERDAM Gedruckt Bey I. Robyn.
chart (map) of the Cape Verde islands Pascaert VANDE SOUTE EYLANDEN often Ilbas
de CABO VERDE Gedruckt bij J Robijn
Mercator chart (map) of central part of the Atlantic ocean, with parts of the
coasts of North and South America and Africa PASKAERT waer in de graden der
breedde over weder zyden vande middelyn wassende so vergrooten, dat die
geproportioneert syn tegen hunne nevenstaende graden der lengde. Vertonende
(behalven Europaes zuydelyckste) even gedeelte vande custen van Africa en
America, in it Octroy by de H.M.H. Staten Genl. der vereenichde Nederl. verleent
aende Genle. West Indische Comp. t'Amsterdam by Gerrit van Schagen boeck
verkooper en Kaartmaker by de N^uwe HaarlemmerSluys inde Stuur man.
chart (map) of Newfoundland, New France (Quebec, New Brunswick), Nova Scotia,
New England, and the Great River of Canada (St. Lawrence River) Pascaerte van
TERRA NOVA NOVA FRANCIA NIEVW ENGELAND En de Groote Revier van CANADA
general chart (map) of the West Indies from the Equator to Newfoundland
Generaele Kaert van WEST INDIEN Vande Linie Aequinoctiael tot Benoorde Terra
Neuf
chart (map) of the Caribbean islands, from the Grenadines to Anguilla
Pascaerte Vande Caribes Eijlanden, Van 't Eijlant Granadillos, tot 't Eijlant
Anguilla. Beschreven door Arent Roggeveen.
Mercator chart (map) of the sea coasts of Guinea and Brazil, from Cape Verde
to Cape of Good Hope and from the Amazon River to Rio de la Plata Pascaarte
Vande Zee custen van GUINEA: en BRASILIA van Cabo de Verde, tot C. de bona
Esperanca. en van R. de^ Amazona tot Rio de la Plata, alles op Wassende Graaden
gestelt. to Amsterdam (...) JACOBUS ROBYN, (...)
chart (map) of the Pacific showing the coast of North and South America, some
Pacific Islands, parts of New Zealand, Australia, New Guinea, and Japan
PASKAERTE Beschreven door ARENT ROGGEVEEN Met Octroy van de H. M. Staten
Generael over Zyn Geoctroyeerde Zuyt Zee t'Amsterdam By de Wed: Pieter Goos



