Sir WALTER RAWLEIGHS JUDICIOUS AND Select Essays AND OBSERVATIONS UPON The
first Invention of Shipping. Invasive War. The Navy Royal and Sea-Service.
WITH HIS Apology for his voyage to Guiana.

Virtus recludens immeritis mori
Caelum, negata tentat iter via.
Hor. LONDON, Printed for A. M. and are to be sold by Robert Boulter at the
Turks-head in Bishops-gate street, near the Great James. 1667.

To the Reader.
IT is apparent that nothing does more Eternize men upon Earth, then their
Writings. The Statues of the Roman Emperors time has moulderd to ashes, Juven.
quandoquidem data sunt ipsis quoque fata Sepulchris; and Tombs themselves the
Fates obey. But Caesar's Commentaries, the Dictates of Marcus Aurelius, the
Works and glories of those Men and Ages we see perpetuated to all posterity.
It is truly said, that Books show in a little time what Experience teaches
not but with the expense of many years; and how miserable had we been, had not
the industrious Pens of several Authors (famous in their times) buoyd up and
left us Traces to follow them in the paths of Virtue. In every Generation there
wanted not some, the flame of whose Torch is yet unextinguished: and I may with
modesty appeal, whether the Century of years in which this worthy Author
lived, may not equal (I would have said transcended) some Ages that wanted
such a Person to transmit it to Posterity as renowned Raleigh was. It cannot be
accounted either arrogance or ostentation in Augustus Caesar who dying, desired
of his friends that stood about his Bed, That when he expired they would give
him a Plaudite, as if he were conscient to himself he had played his part well
upon the Stage. Nor will it offend any I am sure to say, That this most worthy
Hero truly deserved the Plaudites and Encomiums of the Amphitheaters of the
whole Universe. It Was well observed by him that writ the lives of so many Noble
Greeks and Romans, Pluta(...)
They are wise that in Tragical Events do carry an invincible heart,
reasonably obeying Necessity and a more high Providence then that of Man. And
as well by another, The greatness of the mind never shows it self more
clearly then amongst the wounds of Fortune. How fitly appropriate these sayings
are to him, let them judge that knew his actions. But I come not here to give a
Character of our Author; that were but to hold a Candle in the Sun, or by
drawing shadows to hinder the clear beauty of the Picture. Reader, thou have
enough of him in his History of the World, which speaks him to Fame; only thou
may herein truly lament, That Fortune was so bitter to him and us to deprive
us of that happiness in snatching him hence before his perfecting that
glorious work: However it may prompt thee to value at a higher rate this his
Posthume Production. Now it is not unlikely, that Custom expects something
should be said in Commendation of these following Discourses, that would wrong
rather then add to their worth: No, Raleighs very Name is Proclamation enough
for the Stationers advantage who, prays thee to believe this to be (what the
Work it self will assure thee) the legitimate issue of so excellent a Father.
But to keep thee longer from the thing it self, were by deteyning thee in the
Porch to envy thee the delight of the Fabric.

A Discourse of the invention of Ships, Anchors, Compass, etc. The first
Natural war, the several, use, defects, and supplies of Shipping, the
strength, and defects of the Sea forces of England, France, Spain, and Venice,
Together with the five manifest causes of the sudden appearing of the
Hollanders, Written by Sir WALTER RAWLEIGH.
THat the Ark of Noah, was the first Ship, because the Invention of God
himself, although some men have believed, yet it is certain, That the world,
being planted before the Flood, the same could not be performed without some
transporting vessels; It is true, and the success proves it, That there was
not any so capacious nor so strong to defend it self against so violent, and so
continued a pouring down of rain, as the Arc Noah, the Invention of God
himself, or of what fashion or fabric soever, the rest withal mankind
perished, according to the Ordnance of God. And probable it is that the
Anchors, whereof Ovid made mention of, found on high Mountains: Et inventa est
in montibus Anchora Summis; were remaining of Ships wrackt at the general
flood.

After the Flood, it is said, that Minos, who lived two discents before the War
of Troy, set out Ships to free the Grecians Seas of Pirates, which shows, that
there had been either trade, or War, upon the Waters before his time also.

The expedition of the Argauants was after Minos, Pindar.
And so was the plantation of Tyrene in Africa, by Battus, who was one of
Iasons Companions, And that the Tyrians had Trade by Sea, before the War of
Troy, Homer tells us.

Others give the first Dominion upon the Waters to Neptune, D: Sic. Lib. 6.
who, for the great exploits he did in the service of Saburne, was, by after
ages, called the God of the Seas. But the Corinthians ascribe the invention of
Rowing vessels, to a Citizen of their own called Amaenocles, And that the
first Navall War, was made between the Samiens and Corcyriens. Lib Ger. 1.
Cap. 1.


Ithicus History changed into Latin by St. Hierome, affirms that Griphon the
Scythian, was the inventor of long Boats, or Galleys, in the Northern Seas;
And Strabo gives the advice of the Anchor, with two Hooks to the Scythian
Anacharsis, but the Greeks to Eupolemus.

It is also said, that Icarus invented the sail, and others other pieces, and
parts of the ships and Boats, whereof the certain knowledge is of no great
moment, This is certain, that the Sons, and Nephews of Noah, who peopled the
Isles of the Gentiles, and gave their own names to many of them, had vessels
to transport themselves, long before the days of Minos; And for my own
opinion, I do not think that any one Nation (the Syrian excepted) to whom the
knowledge of the Arc came, as the story of the creation did, soon after
Moses, did find out at once, the device either of ship or Boat, in which they
durst venture themselves upon the Seas: But being forced by necessity to pass
over Rivers, or Lakes, they first bound together certain Reeds or Canes, by
which they transported themselves: Calamorum falces (says D: Siculus) admodum
ingentes inter se conjungunt.

Others made Raffes of Wood, and other devised the Boat of one tree called the
Canoa, which the Gauls upon the River of Roan, used in assisting the
transportation of Hannibals Army in his enterprise of Italy: Primum Galli
inchoantes cavabant Arbores (says Livie) But Polydor Virgil, Livie 1. Lib.
Dec. Polidor Lib. 3.
gives the invention of those Canoas, to the Germains inhabiting about the
River of Danubius, which kind of Hollow trees, Isidor calls Carabes.

The Britains had Boats made of Willow Twigs and covered on the out side with
Bullock hydes, and so had the Venetians; of which Lucan primum cana salix, etc.
Malefacto, etc. And Julius Solinus Navigant autem Vimineis alveis quos
circundant ambitione tergorum Bubalorum: Isidor Orig. 9. de Navig. Cap: 1.
The same kind of Boats had the Germains (says Isidor) who in his time
committed many Robberies in them: But whosoever devised the Canoa among the
Danubians, or among the Gauls, sure I am, that the Indians of America, never
had any trade with either of these Nations, And yet from Fuobushers straits, to
the straits of Magalaine, those Boats are found, and in some parts of that
length, As I have seen them rowed with twenty Oars of a side.

The truth is, that all Nations how remote soever, being all reasonable
creatures, and enjoy one and the same Imagination and fantasy, having devised
according to their means and materials the same things.

The Eastern people, who have had from all Antiquity, the use of Iron, have
found out the Saw, And with the Saw, they have sundred Trees, in Boards and
Plancks, And have joined them together with Nails, and so made Boats and
Galleys safe and portable, So have they built Cities, and Towns of Timber and
the like in all else.

On the contrary, the West Indies and many Nations of the Africans, wanting
means and materials, have been taught by their own necessities to pass Rivers
in a Boat of one Tree, and to tie unsquared Poles together, on the top for
their houses, which they cover with large leaves, yea the same Boats, and the
same buildings, are found in Countries, two thousand miles distant, debarred
from all commerce, by unpassable Mountains, Lakes, and Deserts; Nature has
taught them all to choose Kings and Captains for their leaders, And Judges.
They all have lighted on the invention of Bows and Arrows, All have Targets
and wooden Swords: All have instruments to encourage them to fight: All that
have Corn beat it in Morters, and make Cakes, baking them upon Slatestones:
All devised Laws without any grounds had from the Scriptures, or from
Aristotle's Politiques, whereby they are governed: All that dwell near enemies
impale their villages to save themselves from surprise, yea besides the same
inventions, All have the same natural impulsions, They follow nature in the
choice of many wives, and there are every where among them, which out of a kind
of wolvish ferocitie, eat man's flesh; yea most of them believe in a second
life, and they are all of them Idolaters in one kind or other.

For the Northern parts of the world, It was long ere they grew to any
perfection in Shipping, For we read that Hingest, and Horsa, Came over into
this Land in long Boats, in which for the first being called in by the
Britains, they transported five thousand soldiers. And that after they came
with a supply of ten thousand more Shipped in thirty vessels, which the Saxons
call Keeles, And our old Historians Cogiones, And in Caesar's time, the French
Britains who were then esteemed the best Britain Sea men, had very untoward
Tubs in which they made War against him. For they took the winds in Sails
of Leather, heavy and unplyable, And they fastened their ships to the ground,
and rid at Anchor with Cables of Iron Chains, having neither Canvas, nor
Cordage. In so much as the best of them which were of Vannes, are described
with high heads raised up deformedly above the rest of the buildings, to which
kind of form that they were constrained, the reason is manifest. For had their
Cables of Iron chains held any great length, they had been unportable, And
being short, the Ships must have sunck at an Anchor, in any stream of weather
or Countertyde, And such was their simplicity in those days, As instead of
accommodating their furniture to their Ships, they formed their ships to their
furniture; Not unlike the Courtiers of this age who fit their Bodies and their
Feet to their Doublets and Shoes, and not their Doublets and Shoes to their
Bodies, and Feet.

The Pomerlanders inhabiting the South part of the Baltic, or Eastland Sea,
used a kind of Boat, with the prowe at both ends, so as they need not to wend
or hold water, But went on and returned indifferently, of which: Tacitus de
moribus German:
Tacitus Suionum hinc Civitates ipso in oreceano praeter viros armaque
Classibus valent; forma navium, eo differt, quod utrinque prora paratam semper
appulsui frontem agit: Nec velis ministrantur; nec remos in ordinem lateribus
adiungant. Solutum ut in quibusdam fluminum and mutabile ut res possit hinc vel
illinc remigium:

Next are the Cities of the Suionum which are mighty at Sea, not only in men
and arms, but in Fleet: The form of their vessels differ in this, That a
Prowe at each end enables them to row forward either way alike: Neither use
they Sails, nor place their oars in order upon the sides, but carrying the
oar loose, They shift it hither and thither at pleasure, as is the manner in
some Rivers, Yea at this time both the Turks and Christians use these kind of
Boats upon the River of Danubius, and call them Nacerne.

True it is, that before Caesar's Invading of this Land, we do find that the
Britains had not any shipping at all, other then their Boats of Twigs covered
with hydes as aforesaid.

The Saxons when they were drawn in by the Britains, came hither by Sea. And
after that time finding that without Shipping they could neither defend
themselves nor exercise any Trade, They began to make some provision for a
Navy, such as it was, which being first considered of by Egbert, Alfred, Edgar,
and Etheldred, augmented it, and how true it is, I know not, but it is written
of Edgar, that he increased the Fleet, he found, two thousand six hundred
sail: After whom Etheldred made a Law, That whosoever was Lord of three
hundred and ten hide Land, should build and furnish one ship for the defense of
their Country.

Notwithstanding all these provisions, the Danes invaded them, and having
better ships then they had, made their way for a new conquest.

The Normans grew better Shipwrights then either of both, and made the last
conquest of this Land, a Land which can never be conquered, whilst the Kings
thereof keep the Dominion of the Seas, which Dominion I do not find, that it
was ever absolute, till the time of Henry the Eight, But that we fought
sometime with good, sometime with ill success, as we shall show hereafter more
particularly.

But omitting the dispute of the first Navigators, Certain it is, that the
Invention of the compass was had from our Northern Nations, were it from the
Germans, Norvegians, Brittanes, or Danes, for even to this day, the old
Northern words are used for the division of winds upon the quarter of the
compass, not only by the Danes, Germans, Swedes, Brittanes, and all in the
Ocean, that understand the terms and names of the winds in their own
language: But the French and Spanish called the sun rising winds, East or East,
and the sun setting winds West, the rest North and South, and so by the same
terms, In all the Divisions of Southeast, Northeast, Southwest, Northwest, and
the rest.

And if we compare the marveilous great transportations of people by the
Saxons, Angles, Danes, Goths, Swedes, Norwegians, especially and other. And
how many Fleets for supplies, have been set out by them, with the swarms of
Danes as well in our Seas, as when they invaded and conquered Scicilie, together
with the Colonies, planted by the Tyrians in Africa, as else where, and of the
Carthaginians the Sons of the Tyrians in Spain.

Its hard to judge which of these Nations have most commanded the Seas, though
for priority Tribullus, and Ovid give it the Tyrians.

Prima ratam Ventis credere docta Tyros, Tribull Eleg: Strab: Lib: 16.
And Ovid, Magna minorque fere quarum Regis altera Gratias; altera Sydonias
uterque sicca rates.

And it is true, that the first good Ships were among the Tyrians, and they
good and great Ships, not long after the War of Troy, and in Solomon's time,
they were of that account as Solomon invited Hiram King of Tire, to join with
him in his Journey into the East Indies, for the Israelites till then, never
traded by Sea, and seldom if ever after it, and that the Tyrians were the
chief in that enterprise, It appears in that they were called Nautas peritos
maris, in the Hebrew (says Iunius) homines navium, Junius. 1. King. Cap. 9.
And in our English Mariners.

It is also written in the second of Chronicles the eight. That Hiram sent
Solomon Ships, Et servos peritos maris, And servants skillful of the Sea,
whereby it is probable, that the Tyrians had used the Trade of East India
before the days of Solomon, or before the Reign of David, when themselves
commanded the Ports of the Red Sea, But the Edumaeans being beaten by David,
and the Port of Ezion-Geber, now subject to Solomon, the Tyrians were forced to
make Solomon the chief of that expedition, and to join with him in the
enterprise. For the Tyrian had no pass to the Red Sea, but through the
territory of Solomon, and by his sufferance.

Whosoever were the inventers, we find that every age, had added somewhat to
ships, and to all things else. And in my own time the shape of our English
ships, has been greatly bettered. It is not long since the striking of the
Topmast (a wonderful great ease to great ships both at Sea and Harbor) has
been devised, together with the Chain pumpe, which takes up twice as much
water as the ordinary did, we have lately added the Bonnett, and the Drabler.
To the courses we have devised studding Sails, Top gallant Sails; Sprit
stayles, Top stayles, The weighing of Anchors by the Capstone is also new. We
have fallen into consideration of the length of Cables, and by it we resist the
malice of the greatest winds that can blow, Witness our small Milbrooke men of
Cornwall, that ride it out at Anchor, half Seas over between England and
Ireland, all the winter quarter, And witness the Hollanders that were wont to
ride before Dunkirke, with the wind at Northwest, making a Lee shore in all
weathers: For true it is, that the length of the Cable, is the life of the Ship
in all extreamities, and the reason is, because it makes so many bendings and
waves, as the Ship riding at that length it is not able to stretch it, and
nothing breaks that is not stretched. In extremity, we carry our Ordnance
better then we were wont, Because our Netheroverloops are raised commonly from
the water, to wit, between the lower part of the Port and the Sea.

In King Henry the eights time, and in this present, at Portsmouth the Marie
Rose, by a little sway of the Ship in casting about, her Ports being within
sixteen Inches of the waters, was overset and lost, and in her that worthy
Knight Sir George Carew, Cozen German to the Lord Carew, and with him
(besides many other Gentlemen) the Father of the late renowned, Sir Richard
Greenevile.

We have also raised our second Decks and given more vent thereby to our
Ordnance, tying on our Nether-overloope.

We have added cross pillars in our Royal ships to strengthen them, which be
fastened from the Kelson to the beams of the second Deck, keep them from
settling or from giving way in all distresses.

We have given longer Floares to our Ships, then in elder times, and better
bearing under water, whereby they never fall into the Sea, after the head and
shake the whole body, nor sinck stern, nor stoop upon a wind, by which the
breaking loose of our Ordnance or the not use of them, with many other
discommodities are avoided.

And to say the truth a miserable shame and dishonor it were for our
Shipwrights, if they did not exceed all other, in the setting up of our Royal
Ships, the Errors of other Nations being far more excusable then ours. For
the Kings of England have for many years been at the charge to build and
furnish a Navy of powerful Ships, for their own defense, and for the Wars
only.

Whereas the French, the Spaniards, the Portugalls, and the Hollanders (till of
late) have had no proper Fleet belonging to their Princes or States.

Only the Venetians for a long time have maintained their Arsenal of Gallyes,
and the Kings of Denmark, and Sweden, have had good Ships for these last Fifty
years, I say that the forenamed Kings, especially the Spaniards and Portugalls,
have ships of great bulk, but fitter for the Merchant then for the man of
War, for burden then for Battle: But as Popelinire well observes, the
forces of Princes by Sea, are Marquess de Grandeux d' Estate, Are marks of the
greatness of an Estate: For whosoever commands the Sea, Commands the Trade:
whosoever Commands the Trade of the world: Commands the Riches of the world and
consequently the world it self: yet can I not deny, but that the Spaniards
being afraid of their Indian Fleets, have built some few very good ships, but
he has no ships in Garrison, as his Majesty has, and to say the truth, no
sure place to keep them in; But in all Invasions he is driven to take up of
all Nations, which comes into his Ports for Trade.

The Venetians while they attended their Fleets, and employed themselves in
their Eastern Conquest, were great and powerful Princes, and Commanded the
Maritimate parts of Croatia, Dalmatia, Albania, and Epirus, were Lords of
Peloponesus, and the Islands adjoining, of Cyprus, Candia, and many other
places, but after they sought to greaten themselves in Italy it self, using
strangers for the Commanders of their armies; The Turks by degrees beat them
out of all their goodly Countries, and have now confined them ( Candia
excepted) to a few small Grecian Islands, which with great difficulty they
enjoy.

The first honor they obtained, was by making War upon the Istrii by Sea,
and had they been true to their spouse, to wit the Seas, which once a year
they marry, the Turks had never prevailed against them, nor ever been able to
be siege any place of theirs, to which he must have transported his armies by
his Galleys.

The Genowaies were also exceeding powerful by Sea, and held many places in
the East, and contended often with the Venetians for superiority, destroying
each other in a long continued Sea War, Yea the Genowaies were the most
famous Mercenaries of all Europe, both by Sea and Land for many years.

The French assisted themselves by Land with the Crosbowers of Genoa against
the English, namely at the Battle of Cressie, The French had 12000 Crosbowers
Genowaies by Sea. With their great ships called the Carrecks of Genoa, they
always strengthened their Fleets against the English, But after Mahomet the
second had taken Constantinople, they lost Caffa, and all Taurica, Chersonesus
with the whole Trade of the Euxine Sea, and although they sent many supplies by
the Hellespont, yet having often felt the smart of the Turks Cannon, they began
to slack their succors, and were soon after supplanted: yet do the Venetians
to this day, well mainetaine their estate by their Sea forces, and a great
loss it is to the Christian Commonweal in general, that they are less then
they were, And a precipitate Counsel it was of those Christian Kings their
Neighbors, when they joined in League against them, seeing they then were, and
they yet are, the strongest Rampires of Europe against the Turks.

But the Genowaies have now but a few Gallyes being altogether degenerate, and
become Merchants of money, and the Spanish Kings bankers.

But all the States and Kingdoms of the world have changed form and policy.

The Empire it self, which gave light to all principallities, like a Pharo's,
or high Tower to Seamen, is now sunck down to the level of the soil. The
greatness which it gave to the Church of Rome as before proved, was it which
made it self little in have, And therefore truly said; Imperium amore
Religionis seipsum, Exhausisse, The Empire being also elective and not
successive, The Emperors in being made profit of their own times, and sold
from the Empire many Signiories depending on it, and at so easy a rate, as
Lucca freed it self for ten thousand Crowns; and Florence for six thousand
Crowns; The rest, the Popes; then the Hauses, and lastly the Turks have in
effect ruined. And in which several Inundations many pieces have been
recovered by other Princes and States. As Basil, Zurick, and Bearne, by the
Switzers (omitting many others) Metz Toulouse, Verdum, by the French, Groigne
Aix la Chapple, Zuphen, Deuenter, Newengen, in Gilderland, Wesell, Antwerpe,
And many other places by the Spaniards; and by the States, Dantzick and other
towns of importance by the Polack. Insomuch as it is now become, the most
confused estate of the world, Consisting of an Empire in title with territory,
who can ordain nothing of importance but by a diet or assembly of the Estates
of many free Princes, Ecclesiastical and Temporal; in effect of equal force,
diverse in Religion and faction, and of free Cities and Hanstownes, whom the
Princes do not more desire to Command, then they scorn to obey,
Notwithstanding being by far less then they were in number and less in
force and Reputation, as they are not greatly able to offend others, so have
they enough to do (being seated far asunder) to defend themselves, of whom
hereafter more particularly.

The Cassilians, in the mean while are grown great, and by mistaking esteemed
the greatest, Having by Marriage, Conquest, practice, and purchase, devowred
all Kingdoms within Spain, with Naples, Sicilie, Millaine, and the
Netherlands, And many places belonging to the Empire and the Princes thereof.
Besides the Indies East and West, The Islands of the West Ocean, and many
places in Barbary Guiena, Congo and else where.

France has also enlarged it self by the one half, and reduced Normandy,
Britain, and Aquitaine, withal that the English had on that side the Sea,
together with Languedocke Foix, Armignac, Beerne, and Dolphine.

For this Kingdom of great Britain: it has had by his Majesty a strong
addition, The posterne by which we were so often heretofore entered and
surprised, is now made up; and we shall not hereafter need the double face of
Ianus to look North and South at once.

But there is no stare grown in have, but that of the united provinces, and
especially in their Sea forces, and by a contrary way to that of France, or
Spain, the latter by Invasion, the former by oppression; For I my self may
remember when one ship of her Majesty's, would have made forty Hollanders
strike sail, and to come to Anchor. They did not then dispute De mari libero,
but readily acknowledged the English to be Domini maris Brittanici: That we are
less powerful then we were, I do hardly believe it, For although we have not
at this time 135 ships, belonging to the subjects, of 500 tuns each ship, as it
is said we had in the 24. year of Queen Elizabeth, at which time also upon a
general view and muster, there were found in England of all men, fit to bear
arms, eleaven hundred and seaventy two thousand, yet are our Merchants ships,
now far more warlike and better appointed then they were, and the Navy Royal
double as strong as then it was, For these were the ships of her Majesty's Navy
at that time.

1. The Triumph. 2. The Eliz: Jonas. 3. The white Bear. 4. The Phill: and
Mary. 5. The Bonaventure. 6. The Golden Lion. 7. The Victory. 8. The Revenge.
9. The Hope. 10. The Mary Rose. 11. The Dreadnaught. 12. The Minion. 13. The
Swiftsure.
To which there has been added.
14. The Antelope. 15. The Foresight. 16. The Swallow. 17. The Handmaide. 18.
The Gennett. 19. The Barque of Bullen 20. The Aid. 21. The Achates. 22. The
Falcon. 23. The Tiger. 24. The Bull.
We have not therefore less force then we had, the fashion and furnishing of
our Ships Considered: For there are in England at this time 400. sail of
Merchants fit for the Wars, which the Spaniards would call Gallions; to which
we may add 200 sail of Crumsters, or hoyes of Newcastle, which each of them
will bear six Demiculverins, and four Sakers, needing no other addition of
building, then a slight spar Deck, fore and afte as the Seamen call it, which
is a slight Deck throughout, the 200, which may be chosen out of 400, by
reason of their ready staying and turning, by reason of their windwardnesse,
and by reason of their drawing of little water, And they are of extreme
vantage near the shore, And in all Bays and Rivers to turn in and out:
These, I say, alone, well manned, and well Conducted, would trouble the
greatest Prince of Europe to encounter in our Seas, For they stay and turn so
readily, As, ordering them into small squadrons, three of them at once, may
give their broad sides, upon any one great ship, or upon any Angle or side of
an enemies Fleet, They shall be able to continue a perpetual volley of
Demiculverins without intermission, And either sinck or slaughter the men, or
utterly disorder any Fleet of cross sails, with which they encounter.

I say then if a Vanguard be ordained of these hoyes, who will easily recover
the wind of any other ships, with a Battle of 400 other warlike ships, and a
Rear of thirty of his Majesty's ships to sustain, relieve and countenance the
rest (if God beat them not) I know not what strength can be gathered in all
Europe to beat them. And if it be objected, that the States can furnish a far
greater number, I answer that his Majesty's 40 ships, added to 600 before
named, are of Incomparable greater force, then all that Holland and Zeeland,
can furnish for the Wars. As also that a greater number would breed the same
confusion, that was found in Zerxes Land Army of seaventeene hundred thousand
soldiers: For there is a certain proportion both by Sea and Land, beyond
which, the excess brings nothing but disorders and amazement.

Of those hoyes, Carvills, or Crumsters, Call them what you will, there was a
notable experience made in the year, 1574. in the River of Antwerpe, near
Rummerswaell, where the Admiral Boysett with his Crumsters overthrew the
Spanish Fleet of great Ships Conducted by Julian Romero, So contrary to the
expectation of Don Lewis, the great Commander and Lieutenant of the Netherlands
for the King of Spain, as he came to the bancks of Bergen to behold the
slaughter of the Zelanders. But contrary to his expectation, he beheld his
Armado, some of them sunck, some of them thrust on the shore, and most of the
rest mastered and possessed by his enemies. Insomuch, as his great Captain
Romero, with great difficulty, some say in a skiffe, some say by swymming,
saved himself.

The like success had Captain Werst of Zeeland, against the Fleet which
transported the Duke of Medini Coeli, who was sent out of Spain by Sea, to
govern the Netherlands, in place of the Duke of Alva, For with twelve
Crumsters or Hoyes of the first troop of 21. sail, he took all but three,
and he forced the second (being twelve great ships filled with 2000.
soldiers,) to run under the Ramakins, being then in the Spaniards possession.

But whence comes this dispute? Not from the increase of numbers, Not because
our Neighbors breed more Mariners then we do, Nor from the greatness of
their Trade in all parts of the world, For the French creep into all corners
of America, and Africa, as they do, and the Spaniards, and Portugalls, employ
more ships by many (fishing trades excepted) then the Netherlands do. But it
comes from the detestable covetousness of such particular persons as have
gotten Licenses, and given way to the transporting of the English Ordnance.
Fuit haec Sapientia quondam, publica privatis secernere, Sacra profanis. And
that in so great abundance, as that not only our good friends the Hollanders,
and Zealanders, have furnished themselves, and have them lying on their Wharfes
to sell to others; but all other Nations have had from us, not only to furnish
their Fleets, but to Garnish all their Forts and other places, fortifying their
Coasts; without which the Spanish King durst not have dismounted so many pieces
of Brass in Naples and else where, therewith to Arm his great Fleet in 88.
But it was directly proved in the Lower House of Parliament Anno of Queen
Elizabeth. That there were landed in Naples above 140. Culverins English, since
which time also, and not long since, It is lamentable that so many have been
transported into Spain. But those that belike then determined it, and the
transporters, have now forsaken the Country, and though the procurers remain,
I am resolved that they also have forsaken the care of his Majesty's Estate,
And the honor of this Nation. I urge not this point as thinking it unfit, to
furnish his Majesty's good friends and Allies, who have had with us one common
enemy for many years; But all politic Estates have well observed this
precept: Ut sic tractarent amicum; tanquam inimicum futurum: For what are all
the Ships in the world to be valued at, other then a company of floating tubs,
were they not furnished with Ordnance, either to offend others, or defend
themselves? If a Ship of a thousand runs had in her a thousand Muskateers, and
never a great Gun; with one Crumster, carrying ten or thirteen Culverins, she
may be beaten to pieces, and her men slaughtered. Certainly the advantage which
the English had by their Bows and Arrows in former times, was never so great,
as we might now have had by our Iron Ordnance, if we had either kept it within
the Land, kept it from our enemies, or imparted it to our friends, moderately;
For as by the former we obtained many notable victories, and made our selves
masters of many parts of France, so by the latter we might have Commanded the
Seas, and thereby the Trade of the world it self. But we have now to our
future prejudice, and how far to our prejudice I know not, forged Hammers and
delivered them out of our hands, to break our own Bones withal.

For the conclusion of this dispute, there are five manifest causes of the
upgrowing of the Hollanders and Zelanders.

1. The first is, the favor and assistance of Queen Elizabeth, and the Kings
Majesty, which the late worthy and famous Prince of Orange, did always
acknowledge, and in the year 1582. when I took my leave of him at Antwerpe,
After the return of the Earl of Leicest: into England, And Monsieur's
arrival there, when he delivered me his Letters to her Majesty; He prayed me
to say to the Queen from him, Sub umbra alarm tuarum protegimur: for certainly
they had withered in the Bud, and sunck in the beginning of their Navigation,
had not her Majesty assisted them.

2. The second cause was, The employing of their own people in their Trades
and Fishings, and the entertaining of strangers, to serve them in their armies
by Land.

3. The third is, the fidelity of the house of Nassawe, and their services done
them, especially of that Renowned Prince Maurice, now living.

4. The fourth, the withdrawing of the Duke of Parma twice into France, while
in his absence he recovered those strong places of Zealand, and Frizland, as
Deventer Zuphen, etc.

5. And the fifth, the imbarging and confiscating of their Ships in Spain,
which constrained them and gave them courage to Trade by force into the East
and West Indies, and in Africa, in which they employ 180 Ships, and 8700
Mariners.

The success of a Counsel so contrary to their wisdom that gave it, as all
the wit, and all the force the Spaniards have, will hardly (if ever) recover
the damage thereby received.

For to repair that ruin of the Hollanders trade into both Indies the
Spaniards did not only labor the truce: But the King was content to quit the
Sovereigntie, of the united Provinces, and to acknowledge them for free States,
neither holding nor depending on the Crown of Spain. But be their estates
what it will, let not them deceive themselves in believing that they can make
themselves masters of the Sea, For certainly the shipping of England, with the
great squadron of his Majesty's Navy Royal, are able in despite of any Prince
or State in Europe, to Command the great and large Field of the Ocean. But as I
shall never think him a Lover of this Land, or of the King, that shall
persuade his Majesty from embracing the amity of the States of the united
Provinces: (For his Majesty is no less safe by them, then they invincible by
him:) So I would wish them, (Because after my duty to mine own Sovereign, and
the love of my Country, I honor them most) That they remember and consider it,
that seeing their passage and Repassage, lies through the British Seas, that
there is no Port in France, from Callice to Flushing, that can receive their
ships, that many times outward by Westerly winds, and ordinarily homewards, not
only from the East Indies, but from the Straits, and from Spain, all Southerly
winds (the Brises of our Clymate) thrust them of necessity into the Kings
ports, how much his Majesty's favor does concern them, for if (as themselves
confess in their last treaty of Truce with the Spaniards) They subsist by
their trades, the disturbance of their trades (which England can only disturb)
will also disturb their subsistence. The rest I will omit, because I can never
doubt, either their gratitudes or their wisdoms. For our New Castle trade,
(from which I have digressed) I refer the Reader to the Author of the trades
increase, a Gentleman to me unknown, But so far as I can judge, he has many
things very considerable, in that short treaty of his; yea both considerable
and praise worthy, and among the rest, the advice which he has given for the
maintenance of our Hoyes, and Carvills of Newcastle, which may serve us,
besides the breeding of Mariners for good ships of War, and of exceeding
advantage, and certainly I cannot but admire, why the Impositions of five
shillings should any way dishearten them, seeing there is but one Company in
England, upon whose trade any new payment are laid, But that they on whom it is
laid raise profit by it, The Silkemen, if they pay his Majesty twelve pence
upon a yard of Satin, they not only raise that twelve pence, but they impose
twelve pence or two shillings more upon the subject, so do they upon all they
sell of what kind soever: as all other Retaylers do, of what quality or
profession soever: And seeing all the Maritimate provinces of France, and
Flanders, all Holland and Zealand, Embden and Breame, etc. Cannot want our
New Castle, or our Welsh Coals, The Imposition cannot impoverish the
transporter; but that the buyer must make payment accordingly; And if the
Impositions laid on these things, whereof this Kingdom has no necessary use,
as upon Silks, Velvets, Gold and Silver Lace, and clothes of Gold, and Silver,
Cut works, Cambricks, and a world of other trumperyes, does in nothing hinder
their vent here: But that they are more used, then ever they were, to the utter
impoverishing of the Land in general, and of those Poppinjayes that value
themselves by their out sides, and by their Players coats, Certainly the
imposing upon Coals, which other Nations cannot want, can be no hinderance at
all to the Newcastlemen, but that they may raise it again upon the French and
other Nations, as those Nations themselves do, which fetch them from us with
their own shipping.

For conclusion of this Chapter, I say that it is exceeding lamentable, that
for any respect in the world, seeing the preservation of the State and
Monarchy, does surmount all other respects, that strangers should be permitted
to eat us out, by exporting and importing both our own Commodities, and those
of Foreign Nations: For it is no wonder we are overtopped in all the trades
we have abroad and far off, Seeing we have the grass cut from under our feet
in our fields and pastures.

FINIS.
A Discourse of the Original and fundamental cause of Natural, Customary,
Arbitrary, Voluntary, and necessary War, with the misery of invasive War.
That Ecclesiastical Prelates, have always been subject to Temporal Princes,
and that the Pope had never any lawful power in England, either in Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, business, after such time, as Britain was won from the
Roman Empire.
THe ordinary Theme and Argument of History is War, which may be defined the
exercise of violence under Sovereign Command, against withstanders force,
Authority and resistance, being the essential parts thereof, violence limited
by authority is sufficiently distinguished from Robbery and the like outrages:
yet consisting in relation toward others, It necessarily requires a
supposition of resistance, whereby the force of War becomes different from the
violence inflicted upon Slaves, or yiedling Malefactors; as for Arms,
Discipline, and whatsoever else belongs to the making of War prosperous, they
are only considerable in degree of perfection, since naked savages fighting
disorderly with stones, by appointment of their Commanders, may truly and
absolutely be said to War.

Nevertheless, it is true, that as the Beasts are armed with fierce teeth,
paws, horns, and other bodily instruments of much advantage against unweaponed
men, so has reason taught man to strengthen his hand with such offensive
Arms, as no creature else can well avoid or possibly resist. And it might
seem happy, if the sword, the Arrow, the Gun, with many terrible Engines of
death, could be wholly employed in the exercise of that Lordly rule, which the
Lord of all has given to mankind over the rest of living things. But since in
humane reason there has no means been found of holding all mankind at peace
within it self: It is needful that against the wit and subtilty of man, we
oppose not only the bruit force of our bodies, (wherein many Beasts exceed us,)
but helping our strength with art and wisdom, strive to excel our enemies in
those points wherein man is excellent over other Creatures.

The necessity of War, which among humane Actions is the most lawless, has
some kind of affinity, and near resemblances with the necessity of Law. For
there were no use at all, either of War or of Law; If every man had prudence to
conceive how much of right were due both to and from himself, and were withal
so punctually just, as to perform what he knew requisite, and to rest
contented with his own. But seeing that no conveyance of Land can be made so
strong, by any skill of Lawyers, with multiplicity of clauses, and provisoes,
That it may be secure from contentious Avarice, and the malice of false seeming
Justice: It is not to be wondered, that the great Charter, Genesis Cap. 1. ver.
28.
whereby God bestowed the whole earth upon Adam, And confirmed it unto the Sons
of Noah, being as breife in word, as large in effect, has bred much quarrel
of interpretation.

Surely howsoever the Letter of that Donation, may be unregarded by the most of
men, yet the sense thereof is so imprinted in their hearts, And so passionatly
embraced by their greedy desires, As if every one laid claim for himself unto
that, which was conferred upon all.

This appeared in the Gauls, who falling upon Italy under their Captain
Brennus, told the Roman Ambassadors plainly that prevalent arms were as good
as any title, and that valiant men might account to be their own as much as
they could get; That they wanting Land therewith to sustain their people, And
the Tuscanes, having more then enough, It was their meaning to take what they
needed by strong hand, if it were not yielded quietly. Now if it be well
affirmed by Lawyers, that there is no taking of possession more just, then In
vacuum venire, to enter upon Land unhabited, As our Countrymen have lately done
in the Summer Islands: Then may it be inferred, that this demand of the Gauls,
held more of reason then could be discerned at the first view.

For if the title of occupiers be good in a Land unpeopled, why should it be
bad accounted in a Country Peopled over thinly? should one family or one
thousand hold possession of all the Southern, undiscovered continent, because
they had seated themselves in Nova Guiana, or about the Straits of Magalane?
why might not the like be done in Africa, in Europe, or in Asia? If this were
most absurd to imagine, Let then any man's wisdom determine by lessening the
Territory, and increasing the number of Inhabitants, what proportion is
requisite to the peopling of a Region in such manner, That the Land shall be
neither too narrow for those whom it feeds, nor capable of a greater
multitude; Until this can be concluded and agreed upon, one maine and
fundamental cause of the most grievous War that can be imagined, is not like
to be taken from the Earth. It were perhaps enough in reason to succor with
victuals and other helps, a vast multitude compelled by necessity to seek a
new fear, or to direct them unto a Country able to receive them: But what
shall persuade a mighty Nation to travail so far by Land, or Sea, over
Mountains, Deserts, And great Rivers, with their Wives and Children, when they
are, or think themselves, powerful enough to serve themselves nearer hand,
and enforce others into the Labor of such a Journey? I have briefly showed in
an other work, General History Lib 2. Cap. 2.28. S. 4. T 3.
that the miseries accompaning this kind of War, are most extreme. For as much
as the Invaders cannot otherwise be satisfied then by rooting out or expelling
the Nation upon which they fall.

And although the uncertainty of tenure, by which all worldly things are held,
minister very unpleasant meditation; yet is it most certain that within 1200.
years last past, all or the most of Kingdoms to us known, have thoroughly
felt the calamities of such forcible trasplantations, being either over whelmed
by new Collonies that fell upon them, or driven, as one wave is driven by an
other, to seek new seats, having lost their own.

Our Western parts of Europe indeed have cause to rejoice, and give praise to
God, for that we have been free about 600 years, from such Inundations, As were
those of the Goths, Humes, and Vandalls, yea from such as were those of our
own Ancestors, the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, But howsoever we have together
with the feeling, lost the very memory of such wretchedness, as our
Forefathers endured by those Wars, of all other the most cruel. Yet are there
few Kingdoms in all Asia that have not been ruined by such overflowing
multitudes within the same space of these last six hundred years.

It were an endless labor to tell how the Turks, and Tartars falling like
Locusts upon that quarter of the world, having spoiled every where, and in most
places Eaten up all, as it were by the roots, Consuming together with the
Princes formerly Reigning and a world of people, the very names, language and
memory of former times. Suffice it that when any Country is overlaid by the
multitude which live upon it, there is a natural necessity compelling it to
disburthen it self and lay the Load upon others, by right or wrong. For (to
omit the danger of Pestilence often visitting those which live in a throng)
there is no misery that urges men so violently unto desperate courses, and
contempt of death, as the Torments or Threats of famine whereof the War that
is grounded upon this general rem^dilesse necessity, may be termed the
general, the Remediless, or the necessary War. First War.
Against which that our Country is better provided (as may be showed hereafter)
Then any civil Nation to us known, we ought to hold it a great blessing of
God, And carefully retain the advantages which he has given us now.

Besides this remediless or necessary War, which is frequent, There is a
War voluntary, Second War.
and Customeable, unto which the offering party is not compelled. And this
Customary War, which troubles all the world, gives little respite or
breathing time of peace, does usually borrow pretense from the necessary to
make it self appear more honest. For Covetous Ambition thinking all too little
which presently it has, supposes it self to stand in need of all which it
has not.

Wherefore if two bordering Princes have their Territory meeting on an open
Champaigne, the more mighty will continually seek occasion, to extend his
limits unto the further border thereof.

If they be divided by Mountains they will fight for the mastery of the
passages of the Tops, And finally for the Towns that stand upon the roots.

If Rivers run between them, they contend for the Bridges, And think
themselves not well assured until they have fortified the further banck.

Yea the Sea it self must be very broad, barren of fish, and void of little
Islands interjacent, else will it yield plentiful argument of quarrel to the
Kingdoms which it severeth.

All this proceeds from desire of having, and such desire from fear of want.

Hereunto may be added, That in these Arbitrary Wars, there is commonly to be
found, some small measure of necessity, though it seldom be observed, perhaps,
because it extends not so far, as to become public. For where many younger
sons of younger Brothers, have neither Lands nor means to uphold themselves,
and where many men of Trade or useful possessions, know not how to bestow
themselves for lack of Employments, there can it not be avoided that the whole
body of the State (howsoever otherwise healthfully disposed) should suffer
anguish by the greivance of those ill affected Members.

It suffices not that the Country has wherewith to sustain even more then
live upon it, if means be wanting, whereby to drive convenient participation of
the general store unto a great number of well deservers.

In such cases there will be complaining, Commiseration, and finally murmur (as
men are apt to lay the blame of those evils whereof they know the ground upon
public misgovernment) unless order be taken for some redress by the sword of
Injury, supposed to be done by Foreigners, whereto the discontented sort give
commonly a willing ear. And in this case I think it was, that the great
Cardinal Francis de Amiens who governed Spain in the minority of Charles the
fifth, hearing tell that 8000. Spaniards were lost in the enterprise of Algier,
under Don Diego de Vera, made light of the matter: Affirming, that Spain stood
in need of such evacuation, foreign War serving (as King Fardinard had been
wont to say) like a potion of Rubarbe, to wash away Choler from the body of the
Realm.

Certainly among all Kingdoms of the earth, we shall scarce find any that
stands in less need then Spain, of having the veins opened by an enemies
sword: The many Colonies which it sends abroad so well preserving it from
swelling humors.

Yet is not that Country thereby dispeopled, but mainteineth still growing upon
it (like a tree, from whose plants to fill a whole Orchard,) have bin taken as
many, as it can well nourish.

And to say what I think, if our King Edward the third, had prospered in his
French Wars and peopled with English the Towns which he won, As he began at
Calice driving out the French, the Kings his Successors, holding the same
course would by this time have filled all France, with our Nation, without any
notable emptying of this Island.

The like may be affirmed upon like suspicion of the French in Italy, or almost
of any others, as having been verified by the Saxons in England, and Arabians
in Barbary; What is then become of so huge a multitude as would have over
spread a great part of the Continent? surely they dyed not of old age, nor went
out of the world by the ordinary ways of nature. But famine and contagious
diseases, the sword, the halter, and a thousand mischiefs have Consumed them.

Yea many of them perhaps were never borne: for they that want means to nourish
Children will abstain from marriage, or (which is all one) they cast away
their bodies upon rich old women: or otherwise make unequal or unhealthy
Matches for gain, or because of poverty they think it a blessing, which in
nature is a curse, to have their wives barren.

Were it not thus, Arithmeticall progression might easily demonstrate, how fast
mankind would increase in multitude, overpassing as miraculous (though indeed
natural) that example of the Israelites, who were multiplied in 215. years,
from seaventie unto 600000. able men. Hence we may observe, that the very
propagation of our kind, has with it a strong insensive, even of those daily
Wars, which afflict the earth. And that Princes excusing their drawing the
sword by devised pretenses of necessity, speak often more truly then they are
aware, there being indeed a great necessity, though not apparent, as not
extending to the generality, but resting upon private heads.

Wherefore other cause of War merely natural there is none, then want of
room upon the earth, which pinching a whole nation, begets the remediless
War, vexing only some number of particulars, It draws on the Arbitrary: But
unto the kindling of Arbitrary War, there are many other motives. The most
honest of these is, fear of harm and prevention of danger. This is just and
taught by nature, which labors more strongly in removing evil, then in
pursuit of what is requisite unto her good. Nevertheless, because War
cannot be without mutual violence: It is manifest, that allegation of danger
and fear serv^s only to excuse the suffering part, the wrong doer being
carried by his own will. So the War thus caused proceeds from nature, not
altogether but in part.

A second motive is, Revenge of injury sustained; This might be avoided if all
men could be honest; otherwise not. For Princes must give protection to their
Subjects and adherents, when worthy occasion shall require it, else will they
be held unworthy, and unsufficient: then which there can be to them no greater
peril.

Wherefore Caesar in all deliberations where difficulties and dangers threatened
on the one side, and the opinion that there should be in him Parum Praesidii
little safeguard, for his friends, was doubted on the other side, always chose
rather to venture upon extreamities then to have it thought that he was a weak
protector. Yea by such maintenance of their dependants, Many Noblemen in all
forms of Government, and in every man's memory have kept themselves in
greatness with little help of any other virtue. Neither have mere Tyrants
been altogether careless to mainetaine free from oppression of strangers,
those Subjects of theirs, whom themselves have most basely esteemed and used,
as no better then slaves. For there is no master that can expect good service
from his bondslaves, if he suffer them to be beaten and daily ill entreated by
other men: To remedy this, it were needful that Justice should every where be
duly ministered as well to strangers as to Denizons. But contrariewise we find,
that in many Countries (as Muscovie and the like) the Laws or the
Administration of them are so far from giving satisfaction, as they fill the
general voice with complaint and exclamation.

Sir Thomas Moore said, (whether more pleasantly or truly I know not) that a
trick of Law had no less power then the wheel of fortune, to lift men up, or
cast them down.

Certainly with more patience men are wont to endure the losses that befell
them by mere casualty, then the damages which they sustain by means of
injustice, Because these are accompanied with sense of indignity, whereof the
other are free: when Robbers break open a man's house and spoil it, they tell
the owner plainly that money they want, and money they must have: But when a
Judge corrupted by reward, hatred, favor, or any other passion, takes both
house and Land from the rightful owner, And bestows them upon some friend of
his own, or of his favorite, He says, that the rules of Justice will have it
so, that it is the voice of the Law, the Ordinance of God himself. And what
else does he herein, then by a kind of Circumlocution tell his humble
suppliants that he holds themselves Idiots or base wretches not able to get
releife; must it not astonish and vex withal, any man of a free spirit when he
sees none other difference between the Judge and the Thief, then in the
manner of performing their exploits? as if the whole being of Justice consisted
in point of formality. In such case an honest Subject will either seek remedy
by ordinary courses, or awaite his time until God shall place better men in
office, and call the oppressors to account. But a stranger will not so, he has
nothing to do with the affairs of Barbary, neither concerns it him what officer
be placed or displaced in Taradante, or whether Mulisidian himself can contemn
the Kingdom, his Ship and goods are unjustly taken from him, and therefore he
will seek leave to right himself if he can, and return the injury ten fold,
upon the whole Nation from which he received it. Truth it is, that men are
sooner weary to dance attendance at the Gates of foreign Lords, then to tarry
the good leisure of their own Magistrates; Nor do they bear so quietly the
loss of some parcel confiscated abroad, as the greater detriment which they
suffer by some prowling Vice- Admiral, Customer, or public minister at their
return.

Whether this proceed from the Reverence which men yield unto their proper
Governor, I will not here define, or whether excess of trouble in following
their causes far from home, or whether from despair of such redress, as may
be expected in their own Country, in the hoped reformations of disorders, or
whether from their more unwillingnesse to disturb the Domestical then the
foreign quiet by loud exclamations, or whether perhaps their not daring to
mutter against the Injustice of their own Rulers, though it were shameful,
for fear of faring worse, and of being punished for Scandalum Magnatum: As
slanderers of men in authority, wheresoever it comes; As there can be but one
Allegiance, so men are apt to serve no more then they needs must. According to
that of the Slave in an old Comoedie: Non sum servus publicus, my Master bought
me for himself, and I am not every man's man.

And this opinion, there is no Prince unwilling to mainetaine in his own
Subjects. Yea such as are most Rigorous to their own, Do never find it safe
to be better unto strangers, because it were a matter of dangerous Consequence,
that the People should think all other Nations to be in better case then
themselves. The breife is, Oppression in many places wears the Robes of
Justice, which Domineering over the naturalls, may not spare strangers, And
strangers will not endure it, but cry out unto their own Lords for releife by
the Sword. Wherefore the Motive of Revenging Injuries is very strong, though it
merely consist in the will of man, without any inforcement of nature.

Yet the more to quicken it, there is usually concurrent therewith, A hopeful
expectation of gain. For of the amends recovered, Little or nothing returns to
those that had suffered the wrong, but commonly all runs into the Princes
Coffers. Such examples as was that of our late Queen Elizabeth of most famous
memory, are very rare. Her Majesty when the goods of our English Merchants
were attached by the Duke of Alva, Anno Domini 1569.
in the Netherlands, And by King Philip in Spain, arrested, Likewise the goods
of the Low dutch here in England, that amounted unto a greater value: Neither
was she contented that her Subjects should right themselves as well as they
could, upon the Spaniards by Sea, Anno. 1573.
But having brought King Philip within four or five years, to better reason,
though not so far as to Restitution; She satisfied her own Merchants to the
full, for all their losses out of the Dutchmens goods, and gave back to the
Duke what was remaining. This among many thousand of her Royal Actions, that
made her glorious in all Nations, though it caused even strangers in their
speech and writing to extol her Princely Justice, to the skies: yet served it
not as a President for others of less virtue to follow.

It were more costly to take pattern from those Acts, which gave Immortal
renown to that great Queen, then to imitate the thirsty dealing of that
Spanish Duke, in the self same business, who kept all to his own use, or his
Masters, Restoring to the poor Dutch Merchants not one penny. It falls out
many times indeed, that a Prince is driven to spend far more of his treasure in
punishing by War the wrongers of his people, Then the loss of his People did
amount unto. In such cases it is reason, that he satisfy himself, and let the
people (whereto commonly they are apt) rest contented with the sweetness of
revenge.

But when victory makes large amends for all, it Royally becomes a Prince, to
satisfy those for whose satisfaction he undertook the War. For besides the
purpose it were now, to teach how victory should be used, or the gains thereof
Communicated to the general content. This being only brought into show, that
the profit thereby gotten, is a stirring provocation to the redress of
Injuries by the sword. As for the redress of Injuries done unto Princes
themselves, it may conveniently (though not always, for it were miserable
injustice to deny leave to Princes of mainetaining their own honor) be
referred unto the third motive of Arbitrary Wars, which is mere Ambition.

This is and ever has been that true cause of more Wars, then have troubled
the world upon all other occasions whatsoever, though it least partake of
nature, or urgent necessity of State. I call not here alone by the name of
Ambition, that vain glorious humor which openly professes to be none other,
and vaunts it self as an imperial virtue (for the examples are not many of
that kind:) But where occasion of War is greedily sought, or being very
slight is gladly entertained, for that increase of Dominion is hoped thereby,
we should rather impute the War to the scope at which it aims: then to any
idle cause pretended.

The Romans feared lest they of of Carthage by winning Messana should soon get
the mastery over all Sicilie, And have a fair entrance at pleasure into Italy:
Which to prevent they made a War upon the Carthaginians; this fear I call
Ambition, Had they not trusted in their own Arms, hoping thereby to enlarge
their empire, but being weaker, and more afraid indeed, they would have feared
less.

For Color of this War they took the Mamertines, A Crewe of Thieves, and
cut throats into their protection; Whom being their associats they must needs
defend. But had not their Ambition been mightier then their Justice, they would
have endeavored to punish these Mamertines, and not to protect them.
Innumerable are the like examples: Know ye not (said Ahab) that Ramoth Gilead
is ours? He knew this before, and was quiet enough, till opinion of his forces,
made him look into his right. And of this nature (though some worse then other
in degree) are claims of old forgotten tribute or of some acknowledgements due
perhaps to the Ancestors of a vanquished King, And long after challenged by the
Heirs of the Conqueror, broken titles to Kingdoms or Provinces, Mainetenance
of friends, and Partisans, pretenced wrongs, and indeed, whatsoever it pleased
him to allege that thinks his own sword sharpest: But of old time (perhaps
before Helen of Greece, was borne) Women have been the common Argument of these
Tragedies. As of late Ages in our parts of the world, since the names of Guelf,
and Ghibeline, were heard, The right of St. Peter, that is the Popes Revenews
and Authority.

This last and other of the same kind I know not, how patiently they will
endure to be ranged among Ambitions quarrels: For the War that has such
foundation, will not only be reputed, free from worldly Ambition, Just, and
honorable, But holy, and meritorious: having thereto belonging Pardon of Sins,
Release from Purgatory, And the promises of the life to come, As may be seen in
the Popes Crociata.

The truth is, that the Saracenes, affirm no less of the Wars, which either
they make against Christians, or which arise between themselves from difference
of Sect. And if every man had his due, I think the honor of devising first
this Doctrine: That Religion ought to be enforced upon men by the sword, would
be found appertaining to Mahomet the false Prophet, sure, it is, that he and
the Caliphes following him obtained thereby in a short space a mighty Empire,
which was in fair way to have enlarged, until they fell out among themselves.
Not for the Kingdom of Heaven, But for Dominion upon Earth. And against these
did the Popes, when their authority grew powerful in the West, incite the
Princes of Germany, England, France, and Italy. Their chief enterprise was
the Recovery of the Holy Land. In which worthy, but extremely difficult
action, it is lamentable to Remember, what abundance of noble Blood has been
shed, with very small benefit unto the Christian State.

The Recovery of Spain (whereof the better part was then in Bondage of the
Saracens,) had been a work more availeable to the men of Europe, more easily
mainetained with supply, more aptly serving to advance any following enterprise
upon Kingdoms further removed, more free from hazard, and Requiring less
expense of Blood. But the honorable piety of the undertakers could not be
terrified by the face of danger, nor diverted from this to a more commodious
business, by any motives of profit or facility, for the Pulpits did sound in
every Parish Church with the praises of that voyage, as if it were a matter,
otherwise far less highly pleasing unto God, to bear Arms for defense of his
truth against prosecutors, or for the Deliverance of poor Christians oppressed
with slavery, then to fight for that self same Land, wherein our Blessed
Savior was borne and Dyed: By such persuasions a mavelous number were
excited to the Conquest of Palestina which with singular virtue they performed
(though not without exceeding great loss of men) and held that Kingdom some
few generations.

But the Climate of Syria, the far distance from the strength of Christendom,
And the near Neighborhood of those that were most puissant among the
Mahometans, caused that famous enterprise, after a long continuance of terrible
War, to be quite abandoned.

The care of Jerusalem being laid aside, it was many times thought needful to
repress the growing power of the Turk by the joint forces of all Christian
Kings and Commonwealths, And hereto the Popes have used much persuasion and
often published their Crociata with pardon of sins to all that would adventure
in a work so Religious. Yet have they effected little or nothing, and less
perhaps are ever like to do. For it has been their Custom so shamefully to
misuse the fervent zeal of men to Religious Arms by converting the Moneys,
that have been Leavyed for such Wars, to their own services, and by stirring
up Christians one against an other, yea against their own natural Princes,
under the like pretenses of serving God and the Church, that finally men waxed
weary of their turbulent spirits, And would not believe that God was careful
to mainetaine the Pope in his quarrels, or that Remission of sins past, was to
be obtained by Committing more and more grievous, at the instigation of his
suspected holiness.

Questionless there was great reason, why all discreet Princes should beware
of yiedling hasty belief to the Robes of Sanctimonie.

It was the Rule of our Blessed Savior, By their works you shall know them,
what the works of those that occupied the Papacy, have been since the days of
Pepin and Charlemaine who first enabled them with Temporal donation, The
Italian writers have testified at large. Yet were it needless to Cite
Machiavell, who has Recorded their doings, and is therefore the more hateful,
or Guicciardine, whose works they have gelded, as not enduring to hear all
that he has written, though he spoke enough in that which remains. What
History shall we Read (excepting the Annals of Caesar Baronius, And some books
of Friars, or Fryarly Parasites) which mentioning their Acts do not leave
witness of their ungodly dealing in all quarters.

How few Kingdoms are there (if any) wherein by dispensing with others,
transferring the right of Crowns, Absolving Subjects from allegiance, and
cursing or threatening to curse as long as their curses were regarded, they have
not wrought unprobable mischiefs?

The shameless denial hereof by some of their friends, And the more
shameless justification by their flatterers, makes it needful to exemplify,
which I had rather forbear, as not loving to deal in such contentious
arguments, were it not folly to be modest in uttering what is known to all
the world. Pity it is, that by such demeanor they have caused the Church (as
Hierome Savanarola, and before him Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln
prophesied) to be reformed by the sword. But God would have it so. How far
the Popes blessing therefore did sanctify the enterprise upon Jerusalem it
rests in every man's discretion to Judge.

As for the honorable Christians which undertook that conquest to justify
their War, they had not only the redress of injuries and protection of their
oppressed Brethren, But the repelling of danger from their own Land, threatened
by those misbeleivers when they invaded.

If the Popes extortions (which were not more forcible then those of Peter's the
Hermits) added spirit unto the action: yet altered they not the grounds of the
War, nor made it the more holy. Let the Indulgences of Pope Leo, the tenth,
bear witness of this, who out of politic fear of the Turks violence urged
a Religious contribution toward a War to be made upon them. The necessity of
that which he propounded was greater doubtless then any that had persuaded
the Conquest of Palestina.

But too foul and manifest was the unholinesse of obtruding upon men Remission
of sins for money, That the Sums which Pope Leo thereby raised and converted to
his own uses, have made his Successers loosers by the bargain even to this
day.

Pius the Second, formerly well known by the name of Aeneas Silvius, was
discernedly reckoned among the few good Popes of latter ages, who nevertheless
in a War of the same Religious nature, discovered the like (though not the
same) imperfection.

His purpose was to set upon Mahomet the great, who had newly won the Empire of
Constantinople and by carrying the War over into Greece, to prevent the
danger, threatening Italy.

In this action highly Commendable, he intended to hazard his own person, that
so the more easily he might win adventurers, who else were like to be less
forward, as not unacquainted with such Romish tricks; Yet was not his own
devotion, so zealous in pursuit of this holy business, but that he could stay
a while, and convert his forces, against Malatesti Lord of Rimini, letting,
Scanderbeg wait his Leisure, who had already set the War on foot in Greece.
For (said he) we first subdue the little Turk, before we meddle with the great,
He spoke reason if we regard policy. But attending one to Religion find we not,
that he held the Chastisement of one which molested the Sea of Rome, a like
pleasing to God, as would have been the holy War, against the Common Enemy of
our Christian Faith? So thought all the rest of those Bishops. And so much more
(upon their several occasions) declared themselves to think it, by how much
they were commonly worse men then this Aeneas Silvius. And good reason was
there that they should be of such belief, or Endeavor to make the Christian
world believe none otherwise. For the natural Constitution of their estate (I
mean since the age of Pepin and Charlmaine, or the times not long foregoing,
has urged them all hereto; though peradventure some few Popes may have been
overlewd, by their own private natures, and thereby have swa^^ved from the rule
of policy. To speak in general, whosoever has dominion absolute, over some,
and authority less absolute over many more, will seek to draw those that are
not whol^y his own into entire subjection.

It fares with politic bodies as with the physical; each would convert all
into their own proper substance, and cast forth as Excrement what will not so
be changed.

We need not Cite Philip the Father of Alexander, nor Philip the Father of
Perseus, Kings of Macedon for examples. Of which the former brought the
Thessalians, the latter would have brought the Acheans and many estates in
Greece from the condition of followers and dependants unto mere vassallage.

Philip the second of Spain is yet fresh in mind, who attempted the self same
upon the Netherlands.

Exceptions may be framed here against one, of the honest, quiet, or timorous
disposition of some Princes, yet that all, or the most are thus inclined, both
reason and experience teach: yea even our Cities and Corporations here in
England, such as need the protection of great Men, Complain otherwhiles of
their patrons overmuch diligence, either in searching into their private
estates, or behaving themselves master-like in point of government, But never
has authority better means to enlarge it self, then when it is founded upon
devotion. And yet never does authority of this kind, work to raise it self
unto mere dominion, until it fall into the hands of those whose piety is more
in seeming, then indeed.

The Leviticall Priests, in the old Law never arrogated unto themselves, any
Temporal or Coactive power Nor advanced their Miters against the Crown of
Israel. They well understood what authority God had committed unto them and
rested therewithal content. Some wrangling hereabout has been of late; The
Popes flatterers laboring to prove, That the high Priests of old were not
merely Subject unto the Kings of Judah, and men of better spirit and learning
having showed the contrary.

But whatsoever befell in those days, when there was no King in Israel, that
is, before the Reign of Saul, or after the Captivity of Babel, sure it is that
the sons of Aaron were always obedient unto the sons of David, And
acknowledged them their Lords. As for the race of the Maccabees, that held both
the Kingdom and the Priesthood at once, It falls not within this
Consideration; the first thereof (of whom I read) that used the advantage of
honor given to him in matter of Religion toward the getting of Temporal
possession, was (if nor Mahomet himself) Abubachar the Successor unto Mahomet,
This man having obtained by help of his friends, the miserable happiness of
being chosen heir unto that fool Impostor in his dignity of a Prophet, made
it one of his first works to dispoile poor Aliffe the Nephew of Mahomet, and
heir of his great riches, taking al from him by this pretense, That unto whom
belonged the Succession in wisdom, unto him also belonged the Succession in
wealth. And this grew presently to be a famous question among the Doctors of
the Saracen Law. But howsoever it were then decided, we see now the Muphti of
high Prelate, who is the only Oracle among the Turks in Spiritual matters,
lives and holds all that he has at the discretion of the great Sultan.

Nevertheless it should seem that the doctrine of Abubachar, has not lost
all force, for the examples are many in all Saracen Lands, of Prophets or
deceivers which got that name, that never rested until they became Kings.

The Seriph in Barbary, was one of the last: who having once acquired the
opinion of an holy Man, afterward found means to become a Captain, and Lord of
a small Territory; And finally increased his followers, and withal his bounds
so fast and so far, as having made himself King of Morocca, he had the grace to
tell the King of Fessy, (lately his Sovereign) that both Fesse and all
Kingdoms in those parts were belonging to his own holiness; and this he made
good by winning all sooner after.

Whether the claim which the Popes laid to a Supremacy over all Kingdoms and
estates, had not affinity with the principle of Abubachar, Let other men Judge
that their practices to mainetaine it, have been suitable to those of Seriffo,
all Historians do testify.

For when Pope Gregory the second, procured the City of Rome, and some other
places in Italy to Rebel against the Emperor Leo, the third, what other
color used he, then that himself had Excommunicated Leo, as an ungodly Prince,
for breaking down Images, that were worshipped in Churches, when for this
treason Paul the Exarch, Leiutenant unto the Emperor, besieged Rome with the
assistance of Lueitpraud King of the Lumbards, by what other art did the Pope
remove the siege, then by persuading the Lumbard with a Tale of Peter, and
Paul, that had consecrated the City of Rome with their precious blood. Thus
was devotion made the Cloak for treason? And thus did the Popes first slip
their necks out of the Emperors collar. Within very few years after this, by
the like Religious pretext were those Princes of France, Charles Martell,
Pepine, and Charlemaine, won to assist the Papacy, against the Lumbards, yea,
to give unto St. Peter, the most of those Lands which the Pope now holds in
Italy, And not restore them to the Emperor, from whom the Lumbards had gotten
them. And thereunto Pepine, was persuaded for his Souls health.

Yet had Pope Zachary through the opinion that went of his holiness, done a
notable good office for Pepine before, when he Released the Frenchmen of their
Oath to King Chilperick, And was the cause that Pepine was chosen in his stead,
by saying, That rather he should be King who did the Kings duty, then he that
did it not.

In like manner did Pope Leo recompense the benefits of Charlemaine, by setting
him up as Emperor in the West against those of Constantinople: But in these
mutual offices, the Popes did only help with graceful words to adorn that
might which Pepine and Charlemaine had before acquired. Whereas these Kings
used force of arms to erect the papacy in Principallity; That was held yet in
vassallage unto themselves. Now this could not satisfy the ambition of that
See, which gloried falsely to be the only See Apostolic.

For as the Reputation of the Roman Prelates grew up in those blind ages under
the Western Emperors, much faster then true piety could raise it, in former
times when better Learning had flourished; So grew up in them withal a desire,
of amplifying their power, that they might be as great in temporal forces as
men's opinion have formed them in spiritual matters. Immediately therefore upon
the death of Charlemaine, they began to neglect the Emperors consent in their
Elections. And finding in them that afterward reigned of the house of France,
either too much patience or too much weakness, they were bold, within
seaventy years to decree, That in the Creation of Popes, the Emperor should
have nothing at all to do. Having obtained this, It followed that they should
make themselves Lord over the whole Clergy in all Kingdoms.

But the work was great, and could not be accomplished in have, for they were
much disturbed at home by the People of Rome; who seeing about Fifty Popes or
rather (as mainetainers of the Papacy, would now have them called) Monsters to
succeed one another, and attain by the faction of Cutthroats, and Strumpets,
St. Peter's Chair, despised that hypocrisy, which the world abroad did
Reverence as holiness.

Likewise the Empire falling from the line of Charles, to the mighty house of
Saxony, was so strongly upheld by the first Princes of that race, as it
greatly curbed the ambition of those aspiring Prelates.

Yet no impediment could always be of force to withstand the violence of
seeming sanctity.

The Polonians, Hungarians, and some other far removed Nations, had yielded
themselves in subjection more then merely spiritual, even to those Popes whom
Italy knew to be detestable men.

As for the Roman Citizens they were chastised by the sword, and taught to
acknowledge the Pope their Lord, though they knew not by what right. Long it
was indeed ere they could with much ado be thoroughly tamed, Because they
knowing the Lewdness of their Prelate and his Court, their devotion, unto him
(the trade by which now they live) was very small. Because also they were the
Popes domestical forces, against which no Prince does happily contend. But
finally the Popes Arms prevailed, or when his own were too weak, the
Emperors and other friends were helping. Contrariwise against Emperors and
other Princes, the sword of the people even of their own Subjects has been
used by teaching all Christians in our Western world a false Lesson. That it
is lawful and meritorious to rebel against Kings excommunicated and deposed
by the Pope. This curse was first laid upon the Emperor, Henry the fourth by
Pope Hildebrand or Gregory the seventh. It is true (as I said before) that Leo
of Constantinople had felt the same though not in the same sort. For Leo being
excommunicated was not withal deposed; only he suffered a revolt of some
Italian Subjects. And one may say, That the Germane Empire deserved this
plague, Since the founder thereof had given countenance to the Popes Rebelling
against their Sovereigns the Emperors of Constantinople. Howsoever it were
when Hildebrand had accursed and cast down from his throne Henry the fourth,
there were none so hardy as to defend their Injured Lord, against the
Counterfeited name of St. Peter; Wherefore he was feign to humble himself
before Hildebrand, upon whom he waited three days bear footed in the Winter
ere he could be admitted into his presence, Neither yet could he otherwise get
absolution, then by submitting his estate unto the Popes good pleasure, what
was his fault? He had refused to yield up to the Pope, the investiture of
Bishops, and Collation of Ecclesiastical dignities within his dominions, a
right that had always belonged to Princes until that day.

It were superfluous to tell how grievously he was afflicted all his life
after; Notwithstanding this submission. In breife the unappeasable rage of
Hildebrand and his Successors, never left persecuting him, by raising one
Rebellion after an other; yea his own Children against him, till dispoyled of
his Crown, he was feign to beg food of the Bishop of Spyers, promising to
earne it in a Church of his own building, by doing there a Clarks duty, for he
could serve the Quire, And not obteining this, he pined away and dyed.

That Bishop of Spyers dealt herein perhaps rather fearfully, then cruelly, For
he had to terrify him, the example of Vteilo Archhishop of Mentz chief
Prelate among the Germans. Who was condemned of heresy, for having denied that
the Emperor might be deprived of his Crown by the Popes authority.

If Princes therefore be careful to exclude the doctrine of Hildebrand out of
their dominions, who can blame them of rigor?

This example of Henry though it would not be forgotten, might have been
omitted, had it not been seconded with many of the same nature.

But this was neither one Popes fault, nor one Princes destiny; He must write a
story of the Empire, that means to tell of all their dealings in this kind, As
how they wrought upon Henry the fifth, whom they had set up against his Father,
what horrible effusion of Blood they caused, by their often thundering upon
Frederick, And how they rested not until they had made the Empire stand
headless about seaventeene years.

These things moved Rodolph Earl of Habspurgh who was chosen Emperor after
that long vacation to refuse the Ceremony of being Crowned at Rome, though he
were therero urged by the Electors. For (said he) our Caesar's, have gone to
Rome, As the foolish Beasts in Aesops Fables went, to the Lions Den leaving
very goodly footsteps of their journey thitherward, but not the like of their
return.

The same opinion have most of the succeeding Emperors held, all of them, or
almost all neglecting that Coronation. Good cause why; Since the Popes (besides
many Extortions which they practiced about that Ceremony) Arrogated thence unto
themselves, that the Empire was held of them in Homage, And dealt they not
after the same fashion with other Kingdoms?

What right had St. Peter to the Crown of Sicily, and of Naples? The Roman
Princes won those Lands from the Saracens, who had formerly taken them from
the Empire of Constantinople; The same Romans had also been mighty defenders
of the Papacy in many dangers, yet when time served, the Pope took upon him,
as Lord Paramount of those Countries, to drive out one King, and set up
another, with a Bloody confusion of all Italy; retaining the Sovereignty to
himself.

In France, he had the daring to pronounce himself superior unto the King in
all matters both Spiritual and Temporal.

The Crown of Poland he forced to hold of his Miter by imposing a subjection
in way of penance. For that the Polish King had caused one St. Stanislaus to be
slain.

For the death of St. Thomas Beckett and (more strangely) for a Refusal of an
Archbishop of Canterbury whom his Holiness had appointed, he imposed the like
penance upon England.

Also when our King Edward the First, made War upon the Scots, word came from
Rome that he should surcease: for that the Kingdom of Scotland belonged unto
the Popes Chapel.

A great oversight it was of St. Peter, that he did not accurse Nero, and all
heathen Princes, whereby the Popes Chapel might have gotten all that the
Devil offered, and our Savior refused. Yet what need was there of such a
banne: Since Friar Vincent of Valnarda could tell Atatalipa King of Peru: That
all the Kingdoms of the Earth were the Popes, who had bestowed more then half
thereof upon the King of Spain. If the Pope will have it so, it must be so;
otherwise I should have interpreted that place in Genesis, Increase and
multiply and fill the Earth, As spoken to Noah, and his Children, not as
directed only to Tubal, Homer, and Phatto, the supposed Fathers of the old
Iberians, Goths, and Moors, of whom the Spanish blood is compounded. But of
such impudent presumption in disposing of countries far remote, And whereto
the sword must acquire a better title, the mischief is not presently discerned.

It were well if his Holiness had not loved to set the world in an uproare by
nourishing of War, among those that respected him as a Common Father.

His dispensing with oaths taken for agreement between one King and another, or
between Kings and Subjects, do speak no better of him. For by what right was
it, That Fardinand of Arragon won the Kingdom of Navar? why did not the
Confederacy, that was between Lewis the Twelfth of France, and the Venetians
hinder that King from warring upon Venice? why did not the like between
England, and France, hinder our King Henry the eighth for warring upon the same
King Lewis?

Was it not the Pope who did set on the French, to the end that himself might
get Ravenna from the Venetians? Why was it not the same Pope, who afterward
(upon desire to drive the French out of Italy) excommunicated Lewis, and his
adherents? By virtue of which Excommunication Fardinand of Arragon seized upon
Navarr.

And served not the same Warrant to set our Henry upon the back of France? But
this was not our Kings fault more then all the peoples. We might with shame
confess it, (if other Countries had not been as blindly superstitious as our
Fathers) That a Barque of Apples blessed by the Pope, and sent hither for
presents unto those that would be forward in the War upon France, made all our
English hasty to take Arms, in such sort as the Italians wondered, and laughed
to see our men, no less greedy of those Apples (then Eve, was of the forbidden
fruit) for which they were to hazard their lives in an unjust War. Few ages
have wanted such and more grievous examples of the Popes tumultuous
disposition, but these were amongst the last that fell out before his
unholinesse was detected. Now for his dispensing between Kings and their
Subjects, we need not seek instances far from home.

He absolved our King John of an oath, given to his Barons and people. The
Barons and people he afterward discharged of their allegiance to King John.

King Henry the third, had appeased this Land (how wisely I say not) by taking
such an oath, as his Father had done; swearing as he was a Knight, A Christian,
and a King. But in a Sermon at Paul's, People were taught how little was to be
reposed on such assurance, the Popes dispensation being there openly read,
which pronounced that Oath void. Good cause why. For that King had the
patience to live, like neither Knight, nor King, But as the Popes Tenant, and
Rent-gatherer of England. But when the same King adventured to murmr, the
Pope could threaten to teach him his duty with a vengeance. And make him know,
what it was to winch and play the Frederick.

Thus we see what has been his Custom to oppress Kings by their people, And
the people by their Kings, yet this was for serving his own turn.

Wherein had our King Henry the sixth offended him (which King Pope Julius would
after for a little money have made a Saint) Nevertheless, the Popes absolving
of Rich: Duke of York from that honest oath, which he had given by mediation
of all the Land to that good King occasioned both the Dukes and the Kings
ruin. And therewithal those long and cruel Wars between the Houses of
Lancaster, and York, and brought all England into an horrible Combustion. What
he meant by this, I know not, unless to verify the Proverb; Omnia Romae
venalia, I will not urge the dispensation, whereby the Pope released King
Philip, the second of Spain, from the solemn Oath by which he was bound to
maintain the privileges of the Netherlands, though this Papal indulgence,
has scarce as yet left working, And been the cause of so many hundred
thousands slain, for this last forty years in the Netherlands.

Neither will I urge the Pope encouraging of Henry the second, and his sons, to
the last of them against the French Protestants, the cause of the first three
Civil Wars, And lastly of the Leavyings of Byrons, in which there has
perished no less number, then in the Low-Countryes.

For our Country it affords an example of fresh memory, since we should have
had as furious War, as ever both upon us, and amongst us, in the days of our
late famous Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, if Pope Pius his Bull, Could have
gored, as well as it could Bellow.

Therefore it were not amiss to answer by a Herald, the next Pontifical
attempt of like nature, rather sending defiance (as to an enemy) then
publishing answers as to one that had here to do, though in deed he had never
here to do (by any lawful power) either in Civil or Ecclesiastical
business, after such time as Britain was won from the Roman Empire.

For howsoever it were ordered in some of the first holy general Councills,
that the Bishop of Rome, should be Patriarch over these quarters, yea; or it
were supposed that the forged Canons, by which he now challenges more then
precedence, and primacie, had also been made indeed: yet could this little help
his claim in Kingdoms, that hold not of the Empire. For those right holy
Fathers, as in matters of Faith, they did not make truth, But religiously
expounded it: so in matters of Ecclesiastical Government, they did not create
provinces for themselves; But ordered the Countries which they then had.

They were assemblies of all the Bishops in the Roman world, and with the
Roman dominion only they meddled. Requisite it is that the faith which they
taught should be embraced in all Countries, As it ought likewise to be
entertained, if the same had been in like sort illustrated, not by them, but by
a general Council of all Bishops in the great Kingdom of the Abissines,
which is thought to have been Christian even in those days.

But it was not requisite, nor is, that the Bishops of Abissines, or of India,
should live under direction of the Patriarch of Alexandria, and Antioch.

Questionless, those godly Fathers of the Nicene, And of the Calcedonian
Council so thought. For they took not upon them to order the Church
Government in India, where St. Thomas had preached, nor to range the Subjects
of Prester John (as we call him) under any of themselves; much less to frame
an Hierarchy upon earth, whereto men of all Nations whatsoever should be
subject in Spiritual obedience.

If Constantine or his Successors the Roman Emperors could have won all
Asia: like it is that in Councils following more Patriarchs would have been
ordained for the Ecclesiastical Government of that large continent, and not
all those vast Countries have been left unto him of Antioch or Constantinople.
But since contrariwise, the Empire became looser, the Patriarchs whose
Jurisdiction depended upon the Empire, become loosers also.

We grant, that even in the times of persecution, before Christian Bishops
durst hold open assemblies, there was given especial honor to the Bishops
that were over the chief Cities; That unity might the better be preserved and
heresy kept out of the Church; But this honor was no more, then a^
precedence, a dignity without Coactive power, extending no further then to
matter of Religion, And not having to do, save in the general way of
Christian love with any strangers.

We therefore, that are no dependants of the Empire, ought not to be troubled
with the authority (be in what it may be) with any assemblie^ of godly Fathers
(yet all Subjects o^ that Empire, ordained for their own better Government)
But rather should regard the Bishop of Rome, As the Islanders of Iersey, and
Garnsey, do him of Constance in Normandy, that is nothing at all: since by
that French Bishops refusal to swear unto our King, those Isles were annexed
to the Diocese of Winchester.

FINIS.
Excellent Observations and Notes, concerning the Royal Navy and Sea-service.
HAving formerly (most excellent Prince) discoursed of a Maritimall voyage, and
the passages and incidents therein, I think it not impertinent nor differing
from my purpose, to second the same with some necessary relations concerning
the Royal Navy, with the Services and Offices thereto belonging. For, as the
perfection and excellency of our Shipping is great and remarkable, so the
imperfections and defects of the same by use and experience of late years, have
been found to be diverse and inconvenient, as it falls out many times in the
circumstances of Land-service by the change of Arms, diversities of
Fortifications, and alteration of Discipline. And therefore for the due
reformation, many things are necessarily and particularly to be spoken and
considered of in their Order. In regard whereof, I will first begin with the
Officers, and therein crave pardon (if in speaking plainly and truly in a
matter of so great importance) I do set aside all private respects and
partiality. For in that which concerns the service and benefit of my Prince and
Country, I will say with Cicero, Nil mihi melius, nil mihi Charius. And
therefore not justly to be taxed with any presumption for meddling with matters
wherein I have no dealings nor charge. For that in the affairs of this nature,
every good Subject is deeply interessed, and bound in Conscience and duty both
to say and do his best.

Of the Officers of the Navy.
FIrst therefore, it were to be wished, that the Chief Officers under the Lord
Admiral (as Vice Admiral, Officers under the Lo: Admiral to be men of the
best experience in Sea-service.
Treasurer, Controller, Surveyor; and the rest) should be men of the best
experience in Sea-service, as well as of judgment and practice in the utinsells
and necessaries belonging to shipping, even from the Batts end to the very
Kilson of a Ship. And that no kind of people should be preferred to any of
these offices, but such as have been thoroughly practiced, and be very judicial
in either kind of the above named services; but we see it oftentimes to fall
out otherwise. For sometimes by the special favor of Princes, and many times
by the mediation of great men for the preferment of their servants, and now and
then by virtue of the purse, and such like means, some people very raw and
ignorant, are very unworthily and unfitly nominated to those places, when men
of desert and ability are held back and unpreferr'd, to the great hinderance of
his Majesty's service, to the prejudice of the Navy, and to the no little
discouragement of ancient and noble able servitors, when favor or partiality
shall eat out knowledge and sufficiency, in matters so nearly concerning the
service and safety of the Kingdom, wherein all private respects should be laid
apart, and virtue truly regarded for it self.

Of the building of Ships.
SEcondly, it were no less behoovefull for his Majesty's service, and for the
strength of the Navy, No Ships to be builded by the great.
that no Ships should be builded by the great, as diverse of them have been; For
by daily experience they are found be the most weak, imperfect, and
unserviceable Ships of all the rest. And it is not otherwise to be presumed,
But as the Officers would be thought to be very frugall for his Majesty in
driving a bargain by the great at a near rate with the Shipwright, So
likewise the Shipwright on his part will be as careful to gain by his labor,
or at least to save himself harmless, and therefore suite his work slightly
according to a slight price. Out of the which present sparing and untimely
thrift, there grows many future inconveniences and continual Charge in
repayring and reedifying such imperfect slight built Vessels. The proof and
experience whereof has been often found in new Ships built at those rates,
but so weakly, as that in their voyages, they have been ready to founder in the
Seas with every Extraordinary storm, and at their return been enforced to be
new built. But seeing the Officers of the Admiralty do hold (by the grace of
his Majesty) places of so good Credit and benefit, it is their parts therefore
(being well waged and rewarded for the same) exactly to look into the sound
building of Ships, Officer of the A^miraltie exactly look into the so^^
buildin^ of Ship etc.
and to employ their care and travel as well in the oversight thereof, as to
provide that all things else belonging to the Navy be good and well
conditioned: For the strong and true building of a Ship is not to be left
barely to the fidelity of a Marchanticall Artificer (the chief end of whose
work in his own Account is his profit and gain) but some Superior Officer
ought to have a further regard in that business, if he be such a one as has
more judgment in the building and conditioning of a Ship, then devotion to his
own ease and profit.

Moreover if any decayed Ship be intended to be new made, it is more fit and
profitable to make her a size less then she was, then bigger; For then her
beams which were laid over-thwart from side to side, will serve again, and
most of her Tymbers and other parts will say well to the building of a new
ship. But if she should be made a size bigger, the Timber of the old will be
unprofitable for that purpose; we find by experience, that the greatest ships
are least serviceable, The greatest Ships least serviceable.
go very deep to water and of mavelous Charge and fearful Cumber, our
Channells decaying every year. Besides, they are less nimble, less maineable,
and very seldom employed. Grande Navio grande fatica, The Spaniards phrase.
says the Spaniard, a ship of 600 Tuns will carry as good Ordnance, as a ship
of 1200. Tuns, and though the greater have double her number, the lesser will
turn her broad sides twice, before the greater can wend once, and so no
advantage in that overplus of Ordnance. And in the building of all ships, these
six things are principally required.

1. First, that she be strong built. 2. Secondly, that she be swift. 3.
Thirdly, that she be stout sided. 4. Fourthly, that she carry out her Guns all
weather. 5. Fifthly, that she hull and try well, which we call a good Sea-ship.
6. Sixthly, that she stay well, when bourding and turning on a wind is
required.
1. To make her strong consists in the truth of the Workman, and the care of
the Officers.

2. To make her sail well is to give a long run forward, and so afterward done
by Art and just proportion. For as in laying out of her bows before and
quarters behind, she neither sinck into, nor hang in the water, but lie clear
off and above it, (...) Shipwrights.
And that the Shipwrights be not deceived herein (as for the most part they
have ever been) they must be sure, that the Ship sinck no deeper into the
water, then they promise, for otherwise the bow and quarter will utterly spoil
her sailing.

3. That she be stout, the same is provided and performed by a long bearing
Floor, and by sharing off above water even from the lower edge of the Ports.

4. To carry out her Ordnance all weather, This long bearing Floor, and
sharing off from above the Ports is a chief Cause, Provided always, that your
lowest Tire of Ordnance must lie four foot clear above water when all loading
is in, or else those your best pieces will be of small use at the Sea in any
grown weather that makes the Billoe to rise, for then you shall be enforced to
take in all your lower Ports, or else hazard the Ship. Mary (...) in H. ^. time.
As befell to the Mary Rose (a goodly vessel) which in the days of King Hen.
8. being before the Isle of Wight with the rest of the Royal Navy, to
encounter the French Fleet, with a sudden puff of wind stooped her side, and
took in water at her Ports in such abundance, as that she instantly sunck
downeright and many gallant men in her. The Captain of her was Sir George
Carew Knight, who also perished among the rest.

5. To make her a good Seaship, that is to hull and try well, there are two
things specially to be observed, the one that she have a good draught of water,
the other that she be not overcharged, which commonly the Kings Ships are, and
therefore in them we are forced to lie at try with our maine Course and
Missen, which with a deep keel and standing streake she will perform.

6. The hinderance to stay well is the extreme length of a Ship, especially if
she be floaty and want sharpness of way forwards, and it is most true, that
those over long Ships are fitter for our Seas, then for the Ocean, but one
hundred Foot long and five and thirty Foot broad, is a good proportion for a
great ship.

It is a special Observation, Special observation.
that all ships sharp before, that want a long Floor, will fall roughly into
the Sea and take in water over head and Ears. The high charging of Ships a
principal cause that brings them all ill qualities.


So will all narrow quartered ships sinck after the Tail. The high charging of
ships is it that brings them all ill qualities, makes them extreme Leeward
makes them sinck deep into the water, makes them labor and makes them overset.

Men may not expect the ease of many Cabbins and safety at once in Sea-Service.
Ease of many Cabbins and safety at once in Sea-service not (...) be expected.
Two Decks and a half is sufficient to yield shelter and lodging for men and
Mariners and no more charging at all higher, but only one low Cabin for the
Master. But our Mariners will say, that a Ship will bear more charging aloft
for Cabbins, and that is true, if none but ordinary Marryners were to serve in
them, who are able to endure, and are used to the tumbling and rolling of ships
from side to side when the Sea is never so little grown. But men of better
sort and better breeding would be glad to find more steadiness and less
tottering Cadge work. And albeit the Mariners do covet store of Cabbins, yet
indeed they are but sluttish Dens that breed sickness in peace, serving to
cover stealths, and in Fight are dangerous to tear men with their splinters.

Of harboring and placing the Navy.
THere are also many and great reasons why all his Majesty's Navy should not in
such sort be penned up as they are in Rochester-water, His Majesty's Navy (in
such sort as they are) not to be pend up in Rochester-water, etc.
but only in respect of the ease and commodity of the Officers, which is
encountered with sundry Inconveniences for the Sea-service, the dificulty being
very great to bring them in or out at times of need through so many Flats and
sands, if wind and weather be not very favorable. Besides, they must have
sundry winds to bring them to the Lands end, and to put them to the Seas, which
oftentimes fails, and causes delay when have is most needful. For if any
service be to be done upon the South parts of England, Wight, Portsmouth,
Garnsey and Iersey, Devonshire Cornwall, Wales, or Ireland.
as the Wight, Portsmouth, the Islands of Garnsey and Iersey, or Westward
toward Devon-shire or Cornwall, or toward Wales or Ireland, It is so long ere
his Majesty's shipping can be brought about to recover any of these places, as
that much mischief may be done the while. For the same winds that bring in the
Enemy, binds in our shipping in such sort, as that oftentimes in a months space
they are not able to recover the nearest of any of these above named Coasts.
But how perilous a course it is, is easily discerned, and as easily remedyed,
seeing there are besides so many safe and good harbors to disperse and bestow
some of the Navy in, where they may ever lie fit for all services, As
Portsmouth; Portsmouth, Dartmouth, Plymouth, Falmouth, Milford and diverse
others, Harbors very capable and convenient for Shipping.
Dartmouth, Plymouth, Falmouth, Milford and diverse others, All of them being
harbors very capable and convenient for shipping. But perhaps it will be
alleged, that they cannot ride in any of these so safe from enemies as in
Rochester-water, because it reaches far within the Land, and is under the
protection of some Blockhouses. To which I answer this, That with very easy
care and provision, they may in most of these places ride sufficiently secure
from any foreign practices. And I do not mean that all the whole Navy should
be subdivided into all these Ports, but that some half dozen or eight of the
midling ships, Half a dozen or eight of midling Ships and some Pynnaces to lie
in the West, etc.
and some Pynnaces should lie in the West, and yet not in any Port so near the
Sea, as that in a dark night they may be endangered by enemies with fire or
otherwise, but in some such places as Ashwater is by Plymouth, Ash-water by
Plymouth.
where an Enemy must run up a fresh River, a dozen miles after he has passed
the Forts of the Island, and the Alarm given, before he can come where they
lie at Anchor. In which River the greatest Charack of Portugal may ride a
Float ten miles within the Forts. But if regard be only had of their safe
keeping, and not also of their readiness and fitness for service, then let
them never be sent abroad to be hazarded against the Enemies forces; for
therein they shall be more subject to casualitie and danger, then by lying in
any of these harbors above specified. But certain it is, that these Ships are
purposely to serve his Majesty, and to defend the Kingdom from danger, and not
to so be penned up from Casualitie, as that they should be the less able or
serviceable in times of need. And therefore that objection favors not of good
reason, but rather of self respect in the Officers, who are all for the most
part well seated near about Rochester. But the service of his Majesty, and the
safety of the Realm (in my poor opinion) ought to prevail beyond all other
respects whatsoever: and to him that casts those needless doubts, it may well
be said, pereat qui timet umbras.

Of the needful expense in manning the Navy and other inconveniences by
placing all the Fleet in Rochester-water.
Nota.
IF the service of the Shipping lying for any of these places above named, or
for Spain, or for the Islands, they are enforced of very necessity to press
the best and greatest part of their men out of the West Countries, which is no
small charge in bringing them so far as between that and Rochester, and then
when they are imbarqued at Rochester, their charge is again redoubled in their
pay and expense of victuals, before the Ships can recover so far as
Plymouth, which many times is long a doing, for they do ever usually touch at
Plymouth in all Southern voyages, for the furnishing many Sea-necessaries,
which that Country does afford. And therefore for so many Ships as should be
there resident, the Charges of Conduct Money for Marryners, Charges of Conduct
money for Mariners well saved, etc.
of wages and of victuals, would be well saved for all that time, which is
spent betwixt Rochester and Plymouth. Besides, it were to be presumed, that
Enemies would not be so troublesome to the Western Coasts, nor that Country it
self would be so often dismayed with Alarums as they have of late years been,
if some of his Majesty's good Ships were resident in those parts. If therefore
in his Majesty's wisdom it should appear fit, to bestow some of his Shipping
in any of these Harbors aforenamed, it shall be very needful likewise that
there be a Magazin of all manner of necessary provisions and Munitions in the
same places, A Magazin of all manner of necessary provisions, etc.
according to the proportion of the Shipping that there shall be resident,
whereby such defects as by accident may fall out, shall upon any occasion be
readily supplied without delays or hindrance of service: And that withal in
the same places, some Officers belonging to the Admiralty be there always
attendant, otherwise it would be found very inconvenient to be enforced ever to
attend such helps and supplies as must come so far off as London, when it may
more easily and with less charge be effected in places where they ride.

Of great Ordnance.
IT was also very behoovefull, His Majesty's ships not to be overcharged and
pestered with great Ordnance as they are.
that his Majesty's Ships were not so overpestred and clogged with great
Ordnance as they are, whereof there is such superfluity, as that much of it
serves to no better use, but only to labor and overcharge the Ships sides in
any grown Seas and foul weather. Besides many of the ships that are allowed
but twenty Gunners, have forty piece of brass pieces, whereas every piece at
least requires four Gunners to attend it, And so that proportion of Ordnance
to so few Gunners, very preposterous: For when a Ship seels or roules in foul
weather, the breaking loose of Ordnance is a thing very dangerous, which the
Gunners can hardly prevent or well look into, they being so few, the Gunnes so
many; withal we do see, that twenty or thirty good brass pieces, as Cannon,
Demicannon, Culverin, and Demiculverin, is a Royal Battery for a Prince to
bring before any Town or strong Fortress. Royal Battery for a Prince.
And why should not we as well think the same to be a very large proportion
for one Ship to batter another withal? which if it be, then may his Majesty
ratably save a great part of the Ordnance throughout every Ship, and make the
Navy the more sufficient and serviceable, and thereby also save a great deal
of needless expense in superfluous powder and shot, Needless expense of
superfluous powder and shot, etc.
that is now pretended to be delivered out according to this huge and excessive
proportion of Artillery, whereof if many had not been stricken down into Holt
in many voyages and (especially in this last journey to the Islands) diverse of
the Ships, weight, Heaft, and Charge thereof, would have foundered in the Sea:
wherein I report me to such as have served in them, and saw the proof thereof.
For this journey to the Islands, The journey to the Islands.
did most of all others, discover unto us these experiences and trials in the
Royal Navy, for that it was the longest Navigation that ever was made out of
our Realm, with so many of the Princes Ships, and tarrying out so late in the
year, whereby both the winds and Seas had power and time thoroughly to search
and examine them. Besides many times, there is no proportion of shot and powder
allowed rateably by that quantity of the great Ordnance, as was seen in the
Sea-Battaile with the Spaniards in the year 88. when it so nearly concerned
the defense and preservation of the Kingdom. Spaniards Armado in 88.
So as then many of those great Guns wanting powder and shot, stood but as
Ciphers and Scarcrowes, not unlike to the Easterling hulkes, Easterling Hulkes.
who were wont to plant great red Port-holes in their broad sides, where they
carried no Ordnance at all.

Of Calking and sheathing his Majesty's Ships.
THere is a great error committed in the manner of Calking his Majesty's Ships,
Great error committed in manner of Calking his Majesty's ships with rotten Ocum.
which being done with rotten Ocum, is the cause they are Leaky, and the reason
is this, for that they make their Ocum wherewith they Calke the seams of the
Ships, of old seere and weather-beaten ropes, when they are overspent and
grown so rotten, as they serve for no other use but to make rotten Ocum, which
moulders and washes away with every Sea, as the Ships labor and are tossed,
whereas indeed of all other things, the most special and best choice would be
made of that stuff to have it both new and good, for that sparing to employ
old rotten Ropes, is a great defect either in the building of new Ships, or in
the repairing of old, and is the cause why after every journey they must be new
Calked. And therefore it were much to be wished, as a thing fit for his
Majesty's service, profitable for the Navy, and happy for those that shall
serve in them, that the whole Navy throughout were all sheathed, as some of
them are. The benefit and good whereof for Sea-service is manifold, and no
less frugall for his Majesty in making his Ships as strong and lasting
thereby, as they are otherwise good of sail. And then shall they never need
(scarcely once in ten years) this new Calking and repayring which now almost
every year they have. Censure taken of the best Seamen of England.
And hereof let the censure be taken of the best Seamen of England, and they
will not vary from this opinion.

Of Victualling.
AS his Majesty's due allowance for Victualling of ships is very large and
honorable, His Majesty's allowance for victualling Ships very large and
honorable.
and would be greatly to the encouragement and strengthening of the Mariners
and Soldiers that serve in them, if it were faithfully distributed, the
Sea-service (indeed) being very miserable and painful, So again as it is
abused and purloyned, it is very scant and dishonorable to the great slander
of the Navy, to the discouragement of all them that are pressed thereunto, and to
the hinderance of his Majesty's service. For that many times they go with a
great grudging to serve in his Majesty's Ships, as if it were to be slaves in
the Gallyes. So much do they stand in fear of penury and hunger; The case
being clean contrary in all Merchants ships, and therefore the Purveyors and
Victuallers are much to be condemned, as not a little faulty in that behalf,
who make no little profit of those polings which is cause very lamentable, that
such as sit in ease at home, should so raise a benefit out of their hunger and
thirst, that serve their Prince and Country painfully abroad, whereof there
has a long time been great complaining, but small reformation.

Of Beer Caskes.
THere is also daily proof made, Great inconvenience by bad Caske used in his
Majesty's ships
what great inconveniences grows by the bad Caske which is used in his
Majesty's ships being commonly so ill seasoned and Conditioned, as that a great
part of the Beer is ever lost and cast away, or (if for necessity it be used)
it breeds Infection, and Corrupts all those that drink thereof. For the
Victuallers for cheapnesse will buy stale Caske that has been used for
Herring, Train Oil, Fish, and other such unsavory things, and thereinto fill
the beer that is provided for the Kings Ships. Besides the Caske is commonly
so ill hooped, as that there is wast and leaking made of the fourth part of all
the drink were it never so good, which is a great expense to his Majesty, a
hinderance of service, and a hazard of men's lives, when the provision fails so
much and answers not the Account. The which might easily be redressed, if the
Caske for his Majesty's Shipping, were purposely hooped in such sort as Wine
Caske is, or else hooped with Iron, which would ever serve and save that
continual provision of new Caske, which now falls out every voyage. But this
course were more profitable for his Majesty then for his Officers, and
therefore unpleasing to be spoken of, But yet such as serve in the Ships have
good cause to wish the reformation thereof.

Of the Cookroomes in his Majesty's Ships.
ANd whereas now the Cookroomes in all of his Majesty's Ships are made below in
hold in the wast, The great Inconveniences of the Cookrooms in all his
Majesty's Ships made below in hold in the wast.
the inconveniences thereof are found many ways by daily use and experience.
For first it is a great spoil and annoyance to all the drink and victuals
which are bestowed in the hold, by the heat that comes from the Cookroome.
Besides, it is very dangerous for fire, and very offensive with the smoke and
unsavory smells which it sends from thence. Moreover it is a great weakening to
a ship to have so much weight and charge at both the ends, and nothing in the
Mid-Ship, which causes them to warpe, and (in the Sea-phrase; Sea-phrase.
and with Mariners) is termed Camberkeeld: whereas if the Cookroomes were
made in the Forecastle (as very fitly they might be) all those Inconveniences
above specified, would be avoided, and then also would there be more room for
stowage of victuals, or any other necessary provisions, whereof there is now
daily found great want. And the Commodity of this new Cookroome the Merchants
have found to be so great, as that in all their Ships (for the most part) the
Cookroomes are built in their Fore-Castles, contrary to that which has been
anciently used. In which change notwithstanding, they have found no
inconvenience to their dressing of meat in foul weather, but rather a great
ease, howbeit their Ships go as long voyages as any, and are for their burdens
as well manned. For if any storms arise, or the Sea grow so high as that the
Kettle cannot Boil in the Forecastles, yet having with their Beer and Biscuit,
Butter and Cheese, and with their pickled Herrings, Oil, Vinegar and Onions,
or with their red Herrings and dry Sprats, Oil and Mustard, and other like
provisions that needs no fire, these supply and varieties of victuals, will
very sufficiently content and nourish men for a time, until the storm be over
blown that kept the Kettle from boiling.

Of Mustering and pressing able Mariners.
Musters and Presses for sufficient mariners to serve in his Majesty's Ships
the care therein very little, or the bribery very great.
AS concerning the Musters and Presses for sufficient Mariners to serve in his
Majesty's Ships, either the care therein is very little, or the bribery very
great, so that of all other shipping, his Majesty's are ever the worst manned,
and at such times as the Commissioners Commissions come out for the pressing of
Mariners, the Officers do set out the most needy and unable men, and (for
Considerations to themselves best known) do discharge the better sort, a
matter so commonly used, as that it is grown into a Proverb amongst the
Sailors, That the Mustermasters do carry the best and ablest men in their
Pockets, The Sailors Proverb.
a Custom very evil and dangerous, where the service and use of men should
come in trial. For many of those poor Fishermen and Idlers, that are commonly
presented to his Majesty's Ships, are so ignorant in Sea-service, as that they
know not the name of a Rope, and therefore insufficient for such labor. The
which might easily be redressed; if the Vice Admiral of the Shire where men
are mustered, and two Justices had directions given, to join with the
Muster-masters for the pressing of the best men whom they well know, and would
not suffer the service of their Prince and Country to be bought and sold, as a
private Muster-master would do. Besides, the Captains themselves of the Ships,
if they be bare and needy (though pity it were that men of such condition
should have such charge committed unto them) will oftentimes for Commodity Chop
and change away their good men, and therefore it were fitly provided to bridle
such odd Captains, that neither they themselves, nor any of their men, should
receive his Majesty's pay but by the pole, and according as they were set down
in the Officers books when they were delivered without changing of any names,
except to supply such men as are wanting by death or sickness, upon good
testimony under the hands of the Master, the Boat swayne, the Master Gunner,
the Purser and other Officers of the ship. For it nearly concerns them to look
well thereunto, having daily use of them.

Of Arms and Munition.
IT were a course very Comfortable, defensive and honorable, that there were
for all his Majesty's ships a proportion of Swords, A proportion of Swords
Targets of proof and the like allowed; and set down for every Ship according
to his burden, etc.
Targets of proof, Moryons, and Curatts of proof, allowed and set down for
every ship according to his burden, as a thing both Warlike, and used in the
King of Spains ships, the want whereof as it is a great discouragement to men
if they come to any near fight or landing, so would the use thereof be a great
annoyance and terrifying to the enemy. And herein should his Majesty need to be
at no extra-ordinary expense: For the abating of the superfluous great pieces
in every Ship, with their allowance for Powder, Match and Shot, would supply
the cost of this provision in very ample manner.

Of Captains to serve in his Majesty's Ships.
AT al such times as his Majest. ships are employed in service, it were very
convenient that such Gentlemen as are his Majesty's own sworn servants, His
Majesty's own sworn Servants to be preferred to the charge of his Majesty's
Ships.
should be preferred to the charge of his Majesty's Ships, Choice being made of
men of valor, and Capacity; rather then to employ other men's men, And that
other of his Majesty's servants should be dispersed privately in those services
to gain experience, and to make themselves able to take charge. By the which
means his Majesty should ever have Gentlemen of good account his own
servants, Captains of his own Ships, instead of petty Companions and other
men's servants, who are often employed, being (indeed) a great indignity to his
Majesty, to his shipping and to his own Gentlemen. For that in times past, it
has been reputed a great grace to any man of the best sort, to have the Charge
of the Princes ship committed unto him, and by this means there would ever be
true report made unto the Pr. what proceedings are used in the service, which
these meaner sort of Captains dare not do, for fear of displeasing the Lords
their Masters, by whom they are preferred, or being of an inferior quality,
have no good access to the Presence of the Prince, whereby to have fit
opportunity to make relation accordingly.

But now forasmuch as I doubt not, Objection.
but that some contrary spirits may or will object this as a sufficient reason
to infirm all those points that I have have formerly spoken of, and say unto
me, why should his Majesty and the State be troubled with this needless
Charge of keeping and maintaining so great a Navy in such exquisite perfection,
and readiness? the times being now peaceable, and little use of Arms or Ships
of War, either at home or abroad, but all safe and secure, as well by the
uniting of the two Nations, as by the peace which we hold with Spain, and all
other Christian Princes. To this I answer, that this (indeed) may stand (at the
first sight) for a pretty superficial argument to bleare our eyes, and lull us
asleep in security, and make us negligent and careless of those causes from
whence the effects of peace grows, and by the virtue whereof it must be
maintained. But we must not flatter and deceive our selves, to think that this
Calm and Concord proceeds either from a settled immutable tranquillity in the
world (which is full of alterations and various humors) or from the good
affections of our late enemies, who have tasted too many disgraces, repulses,
and losses, by our forces and shipping, to wish our State so much felicity as a
happy and peaceable government, if otherwise they had power to hinder it. And
therefore though the sword be put into the Sheath, we must not suffer it there
to rust, or stick so fast, as that we shall not be able to draw it readily when
need requires. For albeit our enemies have of late years sought peace with us,
yet yet has it proceeded out of the former trial of our forces in times of
war and Enmity. And therefore we may well say of them as Anneus ( Praetor of the
Latins) said of the Roman Ambassadors, who seemed curious and careful to
have the League maintained between them (which the Roman estate was not
accustomed to seek at their neighbors hands) and thereupon says this Anneus,
unde haec illis tanta modestia nisi ex cognitione virium and nostrarum and
suarum. For with the like consideration and respect have our late enemies
sought to renew the ancient friendship and peace with us. And well we may be
assured, that if those powerful means whereby we reduced them to that modesty
and courtesy as to seek us, were utterly laid aside and neglected, so as we
could not again upon occasion readily assume the use and benefit of them, as
we have done, those proud mastering spirits, finding us at such advantage,
would be more ready and willing to shake us by the ears as enemies, then to
take us by the hands as friends. And therefore far be it from our hearts to
trust more to that friendship of strangers, that is but dissembled upon policy
and necessity, then to the strength of our own forces, which has been
experienced with so happy success. I confess that peace is a great blessing
of God, and blessed are the Peacemakers, and therefore doubtless blessed are
those means whereby peace is gained and maintained. For well we know that God
works all things here amongst us mediatly by a secondary means, The which
means of our defense and safety being shipping, and Sea-Forces, are to be
esteemed as his gifts, and then only availeable and beneficial, when he
withal vouchsafes his grace to use them aright.

FINIS.
Sir Walter Rawleigh his Apology.
IF ill success of this Enterprise of mine had bin without Example, I should
have needed a large discourse and many arguments for my Justification, But if
the atempts of the greatest Princes of Europe, both among themselves and
against the great Turk, are in all modern Histories left to every eye to
peruse. It is not so strange that my self being but a private man, and drawing
after me the chains and Fetters whereunto I have been thirteen years tied in
the Tower, being unpardoned and in disgrace with my Sovereign Lord, have by
other men's errors failed in the attempt I undertook.

For if that Charles the Fifth returned with unexampled loss, I will not say
dishonor, from Algire in Africa: If King Sebastian lost himself and his Army
in Barbary: If the invincible Fleet and forces of Spain in Eighty Eight were
beaten home by the Lord Charles Howard Admiral of England: If Mr. Strozzi the
Count Brizack the Count of Vinnnoso and others, with the Fleet of fifty eight
sail and six thousand Soldiers, encountered with far less numbers could not
defend the Terceres. Leaving to speak of a world of other attempts furnished
by Kings and Princes. If Sir Francis Drake, Sir John Hawkins and Sir Thomas
Baskervile men for their experience and valor as Eminent as England had any,
strengthened with diverse of her Majesty's ships, and filled with Soldiers at
will, could not possess themselves of the Treasure they sought for, which in
their view was embarked in certain Frigotts at Puerto Rico, yet afterward they
were repulsed with fifty Negroes upon the Mountains of Vasques Numius, or
Sierra de Capira in their passage toward Panania: If Sir John Norris (though
not by any fault of his) failed in the attempts of Lysbone and returned with
the loss, by sickness and otherwise, of eight thousand men. What wonder is
it, but that mine (which is the last) being followed with a company of
Volunteers who for the most part had neither seen the Sea nor the Wars, who,
some forty Gentlemen excepted, had we the very scumme of the World: Drunkards,
Blasphemers and such others as their Fathers Brothers and friends thought it an
exceeding good gain to be discharged of them with the hazard of some thirty
forty or fifty pounds, knowing they could not have lived a whole year so
cheap at home: I say what wonder is it, if I have failed, where I could
neither be present my self, nor had any of the Commanders (whom I most
trusted) living, or in state to supply my place?

Now, where it was bruted, both before my departure out of England and by the
most men believed, that I meant nothing less then to go to Guiana: but that
being once at liberty and in mine own power, having made my way with some
Foreign Prince I would turn Pyratt and utterly forsake my Country. My being
at Guiana, my returning into England unpardoned, and my not taking the spoil
of the Subj. of any Christian Prince, has (I doubt not) detroyed that Opinion.

But this is not all: for it has been given out by an hypocritticall Theife
who was the first Master of my shipp: And by an ungrateful Youth which waited
upon me in my Cabin, though of honorable worthy Parents: and by others: That
I carried with me out of England twenty two thousand pieces of twenty two
shillings the piece, and thererefore needed not, or cared not to discover any
Mine in Guiana, nor make any other attempt elsewhere: Which Report being
carried secretly from one to an other in my ship, and so spread through all the
ships in the Fleet which staid with me at Trenidado while our Landforces were
in Guiana, had like to have been my utter overthrow in a most miserable
fashion; For it was consulted when I had taken my Barge and gone a shore
(either to discover or otherwise as I often did) That my ship should have set
sail and left me there, where either I must have suffered Famine, been eaten
with wild beasts, or have fallen into the hands of the Spaniards and been
flayed alive as others of the English, which came thither but to trade only,
had formerly been.

To this Report of Riches, I make this Protestation, That if it can be prooved,
either now or hereafter, that I had in the world, either in my keeping or in my
power, either directly or indirectly in trust or otherwise, above one hundred
pieces when I departed London, of which I had left forty five pieces with my
wife, and fifty five I carried with me: I acknowledge my self for a Reprobate,
a Villain, a Traitor to the King, and the most unworthy man that does live, or
ever has lived upon the earth.

Now where the Captains that left me in the Indies, and Captain Baily, that
ran away from me at Cancerota, have, to excuse themselves, objected for the
first, That I lingered at Plymouth when I might have gone thence, and lost a
fair Wind and time of the year, or to that effect. It is strange that men of
fashion and Gentlemen should so grossly belly their own knowledge: And that had
not I lived nor returned to have made answer to this Faction, yet all that know
us in Plymouth and all that we had to deal withal knew the contrary. For
after I had stayed at the Isle of Wight diverse days; the Thunder, Commanded by
Sir Warram St. Ledger by the negligence of her Master, was at Lee in the Thames;
and after I arrived at Plymouth, Captain Pennington was not come then to the
Isle of Wight, and being arrived there, and not able to redeem his Bread from
the Bakers, he rode back to LONDON to entreat help from my wife to pay for it,
who having not so much money to serve his turn, she wrote to Mr. Wood of
Portsmouth and gave him her word for thirty pounds, which she soon after paid
him, without which (as Pennington himself protested to my wife) he had not bin
able to have gone the journey: Sir John Fern I found there without all hope of
being able to proceed, having nor men nor money* and in great want of other
provision, insomuch as I furnished him by my Cozen Herbert with a hundred
pounds, having supplied himself in Wales with a hundred pounds before his
coming to Plymouth: and procured him a third hundred pound from the worthy and
honest Deane of Exeter Doctor Sutcliffe. Captain Whitney, whom I also stayed
for, had a third part of his victuals to provide, insomuch as having no money
to help him withal I sold my Plate in Plymouth to supply him. Baily I left at
the Isle of Wight, whose arrival I also attended here some ten or twelve days
as I remember, and what should move Baily only to leave me as he did at the
Canaries, from whence he might have departed with my love and leave, and at his
return to do me all the wrong he could devise, I cannot conceive; he seemed to
me from the beginning not to want any thing, he only desired of me some Ordnance
and some iron-bound Caske, and I gave it him; I never gave him ill language nor
offered him the least unkindnesse to my knowledge: It is true, that I refused
him a French Shallop which he took in the Bay of Portingall outward bound, and
yet after I had bought her of the French, and paid fifty Crowns ready money for
her if Baily had then desired her he might have had her; But to take any thing
from the French, or from any other nation, I meant it not.

True it is, that as many things succeeded both against Reason and our best
endeavors; So it is most commonly true, that men are the cause of their own
misery, as I was of mine, when I undertook my late enterprise without a pardon
for all my Company, having heard it avowed in England before they went, that
the Commission I had, was granted to a man who was Non Ens in law, so has the
want thereof taken from me both Arms and Actions: Which gives boldness to
every petty Companion to spread Rumors to my Defamation and the wounding of my
Reputation, in all places where I cannot be present to make them Knaves and
Liars.

It has been secondly objected, That I put into Ireland and spent much time
there, taking care to Revictuall my self and none of the rest.

Certainly I had no purpose to see Ireland when I left Plymouth, but being
encountered with a strong Storm some eight Leagues to the Westward of Scilly,
in which Captain Chudleyes Pinace was suncke, and Captain King thrust into
Bristoll: I held it the Office of a Commander of many ships, and those of
diverse Saylings and conditions, of which some could Hull and Try, and some of
them beat it up upon a Tack, and others neither able to do the one nor the
other, rather to take a Port and keep his Fleet together, then either to
endanger the loss of Masts and Yardes; or to have it severed far asunder,
and to be thrust into diverse places. For the attendance of meeting them again
at the next Randezvous, would consume more Time and Victual, and perchance the
weak ships might be set upon, taken, or disordered, then could be spent by
recovering a Harbor, and attending the next change of wind.

That the dissevering of Fleets has been the overthrow of many Actions, I
could give many Examples, were it not in every man's Knowledge. In the last
Enterprise of worth, undertaken by our English Nation with three Squadrons of
ships, Commanded by the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Suffolk and my self,
where was also present the Earl of Southampton, If we being storme-beaten in
the Bay of Alcashar or Biscaye had had a Port under our Lee, that we might have
kept our Transporting ships with our men of War, we had in all likelihood both
taken the Indian Fleet and the Asores.

That we staid long in Ireland it is true, but they must accuse the Clouds and
not me, for our stay there; for I lost not a day of a good Wind: and there was
not any Captain of the Fleet but had Credit or might have had for a great
deal of more victuals then we spent there, and yet they had of me fifty
Beeves among them and somewhat else.

For the third Accusation, That I landed in Hostile manner at Lancerota;
Certainly Captain Baily had great want of matter when he gave that for an
excuse of his turning back, for I referr my self to Mr. Barney, who I know
will ever justify a truth, to whom (when he came to me from Captain Baily to
know whether he should land his men with the rest) I made this answer, that he
might land them if it pleased him, or otherwise keep them aboard, for I had
agreed with the Governor for a proportion of victual which I hourly expected:
And it is true, that the Governor being desirous for to speak with me with one
Gentleman with him with their Rapiers only, which I accepting, and taking with
me Leivetenant Bradshaw, we agreed: that I should send up an English Factor
(whose ship did then ride in the Road) and that whatsoever the Island could
yield should be delivered at a reasonable rate; I sent the English Factor
according to our agreement, but the Governor put it off from one morning to an
other, and in the end sent me word, that except I would imbarque my men which
lay on the Sea side, Slanders were so jealous as they durst not sever
themselves to make our Provisions: I did so, but when the one half were gotten
aboard two of our Centinells forct, one slain and the English Factor sent to
tell me that he had nothing for us, whom he still believed to be a Fleet of
the Turks, who had lately taken and destroyed Puerto Sancto. Hereupon all the
Companies would have marched toward the Town and have sacked it, but I knew it
would not only dislike His Majesty, But that our Merchants having a continual
trade with those Islands, that their Goods would have bin stayed, and amongst
the rest, the poor English man riding in the Road having all that he brought
thither ashore, would have been utterly undone.

Hereof I complained to the Governor of the Grand Canaries, whom I also
desired that we might take water without any disturbance, but instead of
answer, when we landed some hundred men, far from any habitation, and in a
Desert place of the Island, where we found some fresh water, there Ambush was
laid, and one Fisher of Sir John Fernes ship wounded to death, and more had
been slain had not Captain Thornburst and Master Robert Hayman my sons
Lieutenant, two exceeding valiant Gentlemen, who first made head against them,
seconded by Sir Warham Sentleger and my Son with half a dozen more, made
forty of them run away. From hence because there was scarcity of water, we
sailed to Gomarrah, one of the strongest and well defenced places of all the
Islands and the best Port: The Town being seated upon the very Wash of the
Sea, at the first entrance of our ships, they shot at us, and ours at them, but
as soon as I my self recovered the Harbor, and had commanded that there
should be no more shooting, I sent a Spaniard a shore (taken in a Barque which
came from Cape Blanke) to tell the Governor that I had no purpose to make war
with any of the Spanish Kings Subjects, and if any harm were done by our great
Ordnance to the Town, it was his fault, which by shooting first gave the
occasion. He sent me for answer that he thought we had been the Turkish Fleet,
which destroyed Puerto Sancto, but being resolved by the Messenger that we were
Christians and English, and sought nothing but water, he would willingly afford
us as much as we pleased to take, if he might be assured that we would not
attempt his Towne-Houses, nor destroy the Gardens and fruits; I returned him
answer that I would give him my Faith, and the word of the King of Great
Brittaigne my Sovereign Lord, that the People of the Town and Island should
not loose so much as one Orange or a Grape without paying for it, I would hang
him up in the Market-street. Now that I kept my Faith with him, and how much he
held himself bound unto me: I have diverse of his Letters to show, for he wrote
unto me every day And the Countess being of an english Race a Stafford by
Mother, and of the house of Horn by the Father, sent me diverse presents of
fruits, Sugar, and Ruske: to whom I returned because I would not depart in her
debt) things of greater value; The old Earl at my departure wrote a Letter to
the Spanish Ambassador here in England how I had behaved my self in those
Islands. There I discharged a Bark of the grand Canaries taken by one of my
Pinnaces coming from Cape-Blank in Africa, and demanding of him what prejudice
he had recieved by being taken, he told me that my men had eaten of his fish to
the value of six Ducats, for which I gave him eight.

From the Canaries, it is said That I sailed to Cape de Verte knowing it to be
an infectious place, by reason whereof I lost so many of my men ere I recovered
the Indies; The truth is that I came no nerer to Cape de Vert then Bravo, which
is one hundred and sixty Leagues off; But had I taken it in my way, falling
upon the Coast or any other part of Guiana, after the Raines, there is as
little danger of infection as in any other part of the World, as our English
that trade in those parts every year do well know; There are few places in
England or in the world near great Rivers which run through low grounds or
near Moorish or Marsh grounds, but the People inhabiting near, are at some
time of the year subject to Fevers, witness Woollwich in Kent and all down the
Rivers on both sides, other Infection there is not found either in the Indies
or in Africa, Except it be when the Easterly wind or Breefes are kept off by
some High Mountains from the Valleys, whereby the air wanting motion does
become exceeding unhealthfull as at Number de Dios and elsewhere. But as good
success admitts no Examination, so the contrary allows of no excuse, how
reasonable or just soever. Sir Francis Drake, Mr. John Winter and John Tomas,
when they past the Streights of Malegan, meeting with a storm which drove
Winter back, which thrust John Thomas upon the Islands to the South where he
was cast away, and Sir Francis nere a small Island upon which the Spaniards
landed their cheins and murderers, from Baldivia, and he found there Phillip an
Indian who told him where he was and conducted him to Baldivia, where he took
his first prize of Treasure, and in that ship he found a Pylot called John
Grege who guided him all that Coast, in which he possessed himself of the rest,
which Pylot because he should not rob him of his Reputation and knowledge in
those parts (desisting the entreaties and tears of all his Company) he set him
a shore upon the Island of Altegulors to be by them devoured. After which
passing by the East Indies, he returned into England, and notwithstanding the
peace between Us and Spain, he enjoyed the Riches he brought, and was never so
much as called to account for cutting off Douly his head at Port St. Julian
having neither Marshall Law nor other Commission availeable. Mr. Candish having
past all the Coasts of Chyle and Peru, and not gotten a farthing, when he was
without hope, and ready to shape his course by the East homewards, met a ship
which came from the Phillippines at Calestorvia, a thousand pounds to a
Nutshell. These two in these two Voyages were the Children of Fortune, and much
honored; But when Sir Francis Drake in his last attempt might have landed at
Cruces, by the river of Chyagre within eight miles of Panama, he
notwithstanding set the Troops on land at Number de Dios and received the
repulse aforesaid, he dyed for sorrow. The same success had Candish in his
last Passage toward the Streights. I say that one and the same end they both
had, to wit Drake and Candish, when Chance had left them to the trial of their
own Virtues.

For the rest I leave to all worthy and indifferent men to judge, by what
neglect or error of mine, the Gold Mine in Guiana which I had formerly
discovered was not found and enjoyed, for after we had refreshed our selves in
Galleana, otherwise in the first discovery called Poet Howard, where we tarried
Captain Hastins, Captain Pigott, and Captain Snedall, and there recovered
the most part of our sick men. I did Imbarque six Companies of fifty to each
Company in five ships, to wit, the Encounter, Commanded by Captain Whitney,
in the Confidence by Captain Woollastone, into two Flyboats of my own,
Commanded by Captain Samuel King, and Captain Robert Smith, In a Carvill
which Companies had for their Leaders Captain Charles Parker, Captain North,
My Son, Captain Thornhurst, Captain Penjuglous Lieutenant, and Captain
Chudlyes Lieutenant Prideux.

At the Tryangle Islands I embarked the companies for Orrenoque between which
and Calliana I lay a ground twenty four hours, and if it had not been fair
weather we had never come off the Coast, having not above two Fathom and a
half of water: Eight Leagues off from whence, I directed them for the River of
Surniama, the best part of all that Tract of land between the river Amazones
and Orrenoque, there I gave them order to trim their Boats and Barges; and by
the Indians of that place to understand the state of the Spaniards in
Orrenoque, and whither they had replanted or strengthened themselves upon the
entrances or elsewhere; and if they found any Indians there, to send in the
little flyboate or the Carvill into the river of Dissebecke, where they should
not fail to find Pilots for Orrenoque, for with our great ships we durst not
aproach the Coast we having been all of us a ground, and in danger of leaving
our Bands upon the shoules before we recovered the Tryangle Islands as
aforesaid; The Biggest Shipp that could Enter the River was the Encounter, who
might be brought to eleven foot water upon the Bar, we could never understand
neither by Keymis, who was the first of any Nation that had entered the maine
mouth of Orrenoque nor by any of the Masters or Mariners of our Fleet, which
had traded there ten or twelve years for Tobaccho: For the Chudley when she
came nere the Entrance, drawing but twelve foot, found her self in danger and
bore up for Trinidado.

Now whereas some of my friends have been unsatifised why I my self had not
gone up with the Companies I sent, I desire hereby to give them satisfaction,
that besides my want of health and strength, and having not recovered my long
and dangerous sickness, but was again fallen into a Relapse, my ship Stoalde
and laid a ground at seaventeene foot water, 7 Leagues of the shore, so as the
Mr. nor any of my company durst adventure to come near it, much less to fall
between the shoules on the south side of the Rivers side, and sands on the
North side called Puncto Anegado, one of the most dangerous places in all the
Indies: It was therefore resolved by us all, that the five greater ships should
ride at Puncto Gallo in Trinidado, and the five lesser should enter the River,
For if Whitney and Woollaston at eleven foot lay a ground three days in
passing up, in what case had I been which drew seaventeene foot, a heavier
ship and charged with forty pieces of Ordnance, besides this impossibility,
neither would my Son nor the rest of the Captains and Gentlemen have
adventured themselves the River (having but one months Victuals and being
thrust together a hundred of them in a small Flyboate) had not I assured them
that I would stay for them at Trinidado, and that no Force should drive me
thence, except I were suncke in the Sea or set on Fire by the Spanish Gallions,
for that they would have adventured themselves upon any other man's word or
resolution, it were ridiculous to believe.

Having in this sort resolved upon our enterprise, and having given
instructions, how they should proceed before and after their entrance into
Orrenoque, Keymis having undertaken to discover the Mine with six or eight
persons in Sir John Fernes Shallop, I better bethinking my self and misliking
his determination gave him this order, viz.

Keymis, whereas you were resolved after your arrival into Orrenoque to pass
to the Mine with my Cosen Harbert and six musketteers, and to that end you
desired to have Sir John Fernes shallop, I do not allow of that course,
because you cannot Land so secretly but that some Indians on the River side may
discover you, who giving knowledge of your passage to the Spaniards you may be
cut off before you can recover your Boat, I do therefore advise you to suffer
the Captains and the Companies of the English ^o pass up to the Westwards of
the mountain Aio, from whence you have no less then three miles to the Mine,
and to lodge and encampe between the Spanish Town and you, if there be any
Town near it, that being so secured you may make trial what depth and breadth
the Mine holds, and whether or no it answer our hopes. And if you find it
Royal, and the Spaniards begin to War upon you, then let the Sergeant Major
repel them if it be in his power, and drive them as far as he can.

But if you find that the Mine be not so rich as it may persuade the holding of
it, and draw on a second supply, then shall you bring but a basket or two to
satisfy his Majesty, that my design was not Imaginatory but true, though not
answerable to his Majesty's expectation, for the quantity of which I never gave
assurance, nor could.

On the other side, if you shall find that any great number of Soldiers be
newly sent into Orrenoque, as the Cassique of Caliana told us that there were,
and that the Passages be already Forced so that without manifest Peril of my
son, your self, and other Captains, you cannot pass toward the Mine, then
be well advised how you land, for I know (that a few Gentlemen excepted) what a
Scumme of men you have, and I would not for all the world receive a blow from
the Spaniards to the dishonor of our Nation; I my self for my weakness cannot
be present, neither will the Company land, except I stay with the ships, the
Gallioones of Spain being daily expected. Pigott the Sergeant-Major is dead.
Sir Warrham my Leiftenant, without hope of life, and my Nephew your
Sergeant-Major now but a young man: It is therefore no your judgment that I
Rely whom I trust God will direct for the best.

Let me hear from you as soon as you can, you shall find me at Puncto Gallo
dead or alive, and if you find not my ships there, yet you shall find their
Ashes; For I will fire with the Gallioones if it come to extremity, But run
away I will never.

That these my Instructions were not followed, was not my fault, But it seems
that the Sergeant-Major, Keymis and the rest were by accident forced to change
their first resolution, and that finding a Spanish town or rather a village,
set up twenty mile distant from the place where Antonio Berro the first
Governor by me taken in my first discovery who had attepted to plant to meet
some two Leagues to the Westward of the Mine: They agreed to land and encamp
between the Mine and the Town, which they did not suspect to be so near them
as it was, and meaning to rest themselves on the Rivers side till the next day,
they were in the night set upon and charged by the Spaniards, which being
unlooked for, the Common sort of them were so amazed, as had not the Captains
and some other valiant Gentlemen made a Head and encouraged the rest, they had
all been broken and cut in pieces. To repel this force putting themselves in
order, they charged the Spaniards, and following them upon their retreat they
were ready to enter the Town, ere they knew where they were, and being then
charged again by the Governor, and four or five Captains which lead their
Companies; May Son not tarrying for my Musketeers run up in the head of a
company of Pikes, where he was first shot, and pressing upon a Spanish Captain
called Erinetta with his sword; Erinetta taking the small end of his Musket in
his hand struck him on the head with the stock and feld him, whom again John
Plesington, my Sons Sergeant, thrust through with his Halbert, at which time
also the Governor Diego Palmeque and the rest of the Spanish Captains being
slain, and their Companies divided, they betook themselves into a house, or
hold adjoining to the market place, where they slew and wounded the English at
their pleasure, so as we had no way to save our selves; but by firing those
houses adjoining, which done all the Spaniards ran into the bordering Woods,
and Hills, keeping the English still waking with perpetual Alarums.

The town such as it was being in this sort possessed. Keymis prepared to
discover the Mine, which at this time he was resolved to do, as appears by
his Letter to me of his own hand writing hereafter inserted; he took with him
Captain Thornhurst, Master William Herbert, Sir John Hambden, and others, but
at his first approach near the bank where he meant to Land, he received from
the wood a vollew of shot which slew two of his Company, hurt six others, and
wounded Captain Thornhurst in the head, of the which he languished three
months after.

Keymis his LETTER Dated the eight of January from Orrenoque.
ALL things that appertain to humane condition in that proper nature and
sense, that of fate and necessity belongs unto them, makes me choose rather
with grief to let you know from me this certain truth then uncertainties from
others; which is, viz. That had not this extraordinary valor and forwardness,
which with the constant vigor of mind being in the hands of death his last
breath expressed these words. (Lord have mercy upon me and prosper your
enterprise) lead them all on, when some began to pause and recoyle shamefully:
this action had neither been attempted as it was, nor performed as it is with
his surviving honor.

This Indian Pilot whom I have sent, if there be occasion to use his service in
any thing will prove sufficient and trusty: Peter Andrews whom I have sent
with him can better certify your Lordship of the state of the town, the
plenty, the condition of our men, etc. then I can write the same.

We have the Governors servant Prisoner that waited on him in his Bedchamber,
and knows all things that concerned his Master. We find there are four
Refiners Houses in the town; the best Houses of the town. I have not seen one
piece of Coin, or Bullyon, neither Gold or Silver; a small deal of Plate only
excepted.

Captain Whitney and Woollastone are but now come to us, and now I purpose (God
willing) without delay to visit the Mine, which is not eight miles from the
town, sooner I could not go by reason of the murmurings, the discords and
vexations, wherewith the Sergeant Major is perpetually tormented and tired,
having no man to assist him but my self only, things are now in some
reasonable order, and so soon as I have made trial of the Mine, I will seek
to come to your Lordship, by the way of the River. To go and to search the
Channels (that if it be possible) our Ships may shorten their course for
Trinidado, when time serves, by those passages; I have sent your Lordship a
parcel of scattered papers. (I reserve a Carte Load) one roll of Tobacco,
one Tortoyse, and some Oranges and Limmons, praying God to give you strength
and health of body, and a mind armed against all extreamities. I rest ever to
be commanded this 8. of January, 1617.

Your Lordships KEYMIS.


Now it seems that the death of my Son, fearing also (as he told me when he
came to Trinidado) that I was either dead of my first sickness, or that the
news of my Sons death would have hastened my end, made him resolve not to
open the Mine, to the which he added for excuse, and I think it was true, that
the Spaniards being gone off in a whole body, lay in the Woods between the
Mine and their passage, that it was impossible, except they had bin beaten out
of the Country, to pass up the Woody and Craggy Hills without the loss of
those Commanders which should have lead them, who had they been slain, the
rest, would easily enough have bin cut in pieces in their retreat; for being
in possession of the town, which they guarded with the greatest part of three
Companies, they had yet their handful to defend themselves from fireing, and
the daily and nightly Alarums, wherewith they were vexed. He also gave forth
the excuse that it was impossible to lodge any Companies at the Mine, for want
of Victual, which from the town they were not able to carry up the mountain
their Companies being divided; He therefore as he told me thought it a greater
error to discover it to the Spaniards, themselves neither being able to work
it, nor possess it then to excuse himself to the Company, said that he could
not find it; all which his fancies when I received, and before diverse of the
Gentlemen disavowed his ignorance, for I told him That a blind man might find
it, by the marks which himself had set down under his hand, and that I told him
that his care of loosing so many men in passing through the Woods, was but
fained, for after my Son was slain, I knew that he had no care at all of any
man surviving, and therefore had he brought to the King but one hundred weight
of the oar though with the loss of one hundred men, He had given his Majesty
satisfaction, preserved my reputation, and given our Nation encouragement to
have returned this next year, with greater force and to have held the Country
for his Majesty to whom it belonged, and of which himself had given the
testimony, that besides the excellent air, pleasantness, healthfulnesse, and
riches: it has plenty of Corn, Fruits, Fish, Foul, wild and tame, Beeves,
Horses, Sheep, Hogs, Deeres, Coneys, Hares, Tortoyses, Armadiles, Wanaes,
Oils, Honey, Wax, Potatoes, Sugar Canes, Medicaments, Balsamum, Simples, Gums,
and what not; but seeing he had followed his own advice, and not mine, I
should be forced to leave him arguments with the which if he could satisfy his
Majesty, and the State, I should be glad of it, though for my part he must
excuse me to justify it, that he, if it had pleased him, though with some loss
of men might have gone d^^ectly to the place: with that he seemed greatly
discontent, and so he continued diverse days; afterward he came to me in my
Cabin, and showed me a Letter which he had written to the Earl of Arundell, to
whom he excused himself, for not discovering of the Mine: using the same
arguments, and many others which he had done before, and prayed me to allow of
his Apology; but I told him that he had undone me by his obstinacy, and that I
would not favor or color in any sort his former folly. He then asked me,
whether that were my resolution, I answered, that it was: he then replied in
these words, I know not then Sir what course to take; and went out of my Cabin
into his own, in which he was no sooner entered, but I heard a Pistol go off.
I sent up (not suspecting any such thing as the killing of himself) to know
who shot a Pistol, Keymis himself made answer lying on his Bed, that he had
shot it off, because it had been long charged, with which I was satisfied; some
half hour after this, the Boy going into his Cabin, found him dead, having a
long knife thrust under his left pap through his heart, and his Pistol lying
by him, with which it appeared that he had shot himself, but the Bullet
lighting upon a rib, had but broken the rib and went no further. Now he that
knew Keymis, did also know that he was of that obstinate resolution, and a man
so far from caring to please or satisfy any man but my self, as no man's
opinion from the greatest to the least could have persuaded him to have laid
violent hands on himself, neither would he have done it, when he did it, could
he have said unto me, that he was ignorant of the Place, and knew no such Mine;
for what cause had I then to to have rejected his excuses, or to have laid his
obstinacy to his charge; thus much I have added, because there are some Puppies
which have given it out, that Keymis slew himself because he had seduced so
many Gentlemen and others with an imaginary Mine; but as his Letter to me the
8. of January proves that he was then resolved to open it, and to take off all
these kinds of objections; Let Captain Charles Parker, Captain George Ralegh
and Captain King all living and in England; be put to their oaths whether or
no Keymis did not confess to them coming down the River, at a place where
they cast anchor, that he could from that place have gone to the Mine in two
hours, I say then that if the opening of the Mine had bin at that time to any
purpose; or had they had had any victuals left then, to bring them away, or
had they not been hastened by seeing the King of Spaines Letters before they
came to my hands, which I am assured Keymis had seen who delivered them to me,
whereof one of them was dated at Madrill the 17 of March before I left the
River of Thames, and with it, three other dispatches with a Commission for the
strengthening of Orrenoque with 150 Soldiers, which should have come down the
River from the new Kingdom of Granada; and one other 150 from Puerto Rico with
ten pieces of Ordnance which should have come up the River from the entrance,
by which two Troops they might have bin enclosed, I say had not the rest seen
those dispatches; and that having stayed in the River above two months, they
feared the hourly arrival of those forces, why had they not constrained
Keymis to have brought them to the Mine, being as himself confesses within two
hours march. Again, had the Companies Commanders but pincht the Governors
man whom they had in their possession, he could have told them of two or three
Gold Mines and a Silver Mine not above four miles from the Town, and given
them the names of their possessors; with the reason why they forbear to work
them at that time, and when they left off from working them, which they did
as well because they wanted Negroes, as because they feared least the English,
French, or Dutch would have forced them from those being once thoroughly
opened, having not sufficient strength to defend themselves; But to this, I
have heard it said since my return, that the Governors man was by me
persuaded, being in my power, to say that such Mines there were, when indeed
there was no such thing, Certainly they were but silly fools, that discovered
this subtilty of Mine, who having not yet by the long Calenture that weakened
me, lost all my wits which I must have done, if I had left my reputation in
trust with a Malato, who for a pot or two of Wine, for a dozen of Hatchets, or
a gay suite of apparel would have confessed, that I had taught him to speak
of Mines, that were not in Rerum natura, No I protest before the Majesty of
God, that without any other agreements or promises of mine, then well usage, he
has discovered to me, the way to five or six of the richest Mines which the
Spaniards have, and from whence, all the Mass of Gold that comes into Spain
in effect is drawn.

Lastly, when the Ships were come down the River as far as Carapana's
Country (who was one of the natural Lords) and one that reserved that part of
Guiana to her Maje. hearing that the English had abandoned St. Thome, and left
no force in the Country, which he hoped they would have done, he sent a great
Canooe with store of fruits and Provisions to the Captains, and by one of his
men which spoke Spanish, having as it seemed bin long in their hands; he
offered them a rich Gold Mine in his own Country, knowing it to be the best
argument to persuade their stay, and if it please them to send up any one of
the English to view it, he would leave sufficient pledges for his safe return.
Master Leake, Master Moleneux and others offering themselves, which when the
greater part refused (I know nor by what reason lead) he sent again, leaving
one of his men still aboard to entreat them to carry but two days, and he
himself would come to them, and bring them a sample of the oar: for he was an
exceeding old man, when I was first in the Country some twenty four years
since, which being also neglected, and the Ships under sail; he
notwithstanding sent a Boat after them to the very mouth of the River in hope
to persuade them: that this is true, witness Captain Parker, Captain Leake,
Master Stresham, Master Maudict, Master Moleneux, Master Robert Hamon, Master
Nicholes, Captain King, Peter Andrews, and I know not how many others; but
besides his offer also, there has not been wanting an argument though a
foolish one; which was that the Spaniards, had employed the Indians with a
purpose to betray our men, but this treason had been easily prevented, if they
had stayed the old man's coming; who would have brought them the Gold oar
aboarde their Ships, and what purpose could there be of treason when the
Guianians offered to leave pledges six for one, yea one of the Indians which
the English had aboarde them, whom they found in fetters when they took the
town of St. Thome could have told them, that the Cassique which sent unto them
to show them the Gold Mine in his Country, was unconquered; and are enemies to
the Spaniard, and could also have assured them, that this Cassique had Gold
Mines in his Country.

I say then, that if they would neither force Keymis to go to the Mine, when
he was by his own confession, within two hours march of it; to examine from
whence these two Ingots of Gold which they brought me, were taken, which they
found laid by for Kings quinto or fifth part; or those small pieces of Silver,
which had the same marks and stamps; if they refused to send any one of the
Fleet into the Country to see the Mines which the Cassique Carapana offered
them; if they would not vouchsafe to stay two days for the coming of Carapana
himself, who would have brought them a sample of the Gold oar, I say, that,
there is no reason to lay it to my charge, that I carried them with a pretense
of Gold, when neither Keymis nor my self knew of any in those parts: if it had
bin to have gotten my liberty, why did I not keep my liberty when I had it, Nay
why did I put my life in manifest peril to forgo it? if I had had a purpose to
have turned Pyrate, why did I oppose my self against the greatest number of my
Company, and was there by in danger to be slain or cast into the Sea because I
refused it?

A strange fancy had it been in me to have persuaded my Son whom I have lost,
and to have persuaded my Wife to have adventured the 8000.l. which his Majesty
gave them for Sherbone, and when that was spent, to persuade my Wife to sell
her house at Micham, in hope of enriching them by the Mines of Guiana; if I my
self had not seen them with my own eyes; for being old and weakly, thirty
years in prison, and not used to the air to travel and to watching, it being
ten to one that I should ever have returned, and to which by reason of my
violent sickness, and the long continuance thereof, no man had any hope, what
madness could have made me undertake this journey but the assurance of the
Mine, thereby to have done his Majesty service, to have bettered my Country by
the trade, and to have restored my Wife and Children their Srates; they had
lost for that, I have refused all other ways or means, for that I had a purpose
to have changed my Master, and my Country, my return in the state I did
return may satisfy every honest and indifferent man.

An unfortunate man I am, and it is to me a greater loss then all I have lost,
that it pleases his Majesty to be offended for the burning of a Spanish town
in Guiana; of which these parts bordering the River Orrenoque, and to the South
as far as the Amazones does by the Law of Narions belong to the Crown of
England, as his Majesty was well resolved when I prepared to go thither,
otherwise his Majesty would not have given once leave to have landed there; for
I set it down under my hand that I intended that enterprise and nothing else,
and that I meant to enter the Country by the River of Orrenoque; It was not
held to be a breach of peace neither by the State here nor the Spanish
Ambassador who knew it as well as I, that I pretended the journey of Guiana
which he always held to be a pretense; for he said it to Master Secretary
Windode and to others of my Lords; that if I meant to sail to Guiana, and had
no intent to invade any part of his Majesty's West Indies nor his Fleets, I
should not need to strengthen my self as I did, for I should work any Mine
there, without any disturbance and in peace, to which I made answer, that I had
set it under my hand to his Majest. that I had no other purpose, nor meant to
undertake any thing else; but for the rest, that Sir John Haukins in his
journey, to St. John de Loa, notwithstanding that he had leave of the Spanish
King to trade in all parts of the West Indies, and having the Plate Fleet in
his power, did not take out of it one ounce of Silver, but kept his faith and
promise in all places, was set upon by Don Henrico de Martines whom he suffered
(to save him from perishing) to enter the Port; upon Martins faith, and
enterchanged pledges delivered, he had Jesus of Lubeck a Ship of her Majesty's
of a 1000 tun burnt; had his men slain which he left on the Land; lost his
Ordnance, and all the treasure which he had got by Trade; what reason had I to
go unarmed upon the Ambassadors promises, whose words and thoughts that they
were one, it has well appeared since then, as well by the forces which he
persuaded his Master to send to Guiana to encounter me, and cut me off there;
as by his persecuting of me since my return; who have neither invaded his
Masters Indies, nor his Fleet, whereof he stood in doubt.

True it is, that the Spaniards cannot endure that the English Nation should
look upon any part of America, being above a fourth part of the whole known
world; and the hundred part neither possessed by the Spaniards, nor to them
known, as Acosta the Jesuit in his description of the West Indies does
confess, and well know to be true: No though the King of Spain can pretend no
other title to all that he has not conquered, then the Popes donation; for
from the straits of Megellan to the river of Plate, being a greater territory
then all that the Spaniards possess in Peru or Chile, and from Cape St.
Augustines to Trinidado being a greater extent of Land then all which he
possesses in Nova Spain, or elsewhere, they have not one foot of ground in
their possession, neither for the greatest part of it so much as in their own
knowledge.

In Orrenoque they have lately set up a Wooden Town, and made a kind of a
Forte, but they have never been able either to Conquer the Guianians; nor to
reconcile them, but the Guianians before their planting, they did willingly
resign all that territory to her Majesty, who by me promised to receive them,
and defend them against the Spaniards; and though I were a Prisoner for this
last fourteen years, yet I was at the charge every year, or every second
year, to send unto them to keep them in hope of being relieved. And as I have
said before the greatest of the natural Lords, did offer us a rich Mine of
Gold in his own Country in hope to hold us there; And if this usurped
possession of the Spaniards be a sufficient bar to his Majesty's right; and
that thereby the King of Spain calls himself King of Guiana, why might he not
as well call himself Duke of Britain, because he took possession of
Blewett, and built a Forte there; and calls himself King of Ireland; because
he took possession at Smerike and built a Forte there.

If the Ambassador had protested to his Majesty that my going to Guiana before
I went would be a breach to the peace, I am persuaded that his Majesty if he
had not bin resolved that Guiana had been his would have stayed me, but if it
be not thought to be a breach of Peace not for the going thither (for that
cannot be) because I had no other intent, and went with leave; but for taking
and burning of a Spanish town in the Country, certainly, if the Country be the
King of Spains, it had been no less a breach of Peace to have wrought any Mine
of his, and to have robbed him of his Gold; then it is now cald'd a breach of
peace to take a town of his in Guiana and burn it, and with as good reason
might I have bin called a thief and a robber of the King of Spain, if the
Country be not his Majesty's, as I am now pursued for the Invasion; for either
the Country is the King of Spains or not the Kings; if it be the Kings, I have
not then offended; if it be not the Kings, I must have perished, if I had but
taken Gold out of the Mines there, though I had found no Spaniards in the
Country.

For conclusion, if we had had any peace with the Spaniards in those parts of
the world; why did even those Spaniards, which were now encountered in Guiana,
tie six and thirty English men out of Master Walls Ship of London and mine back
to back, and cut their throats, after they had traded with them a whole month,
and came to them a shore; having not so much as a sword, or any other weapon,
among them all, and if the Spaniards to our complaints made answer, that there
was nothing in the treat against our trading in the Indies, but that we might
trade at our peril; I trust in God that the word peril shall ever be
construed to be indifferent to both Nations; otherwise we must for ever abandon
the Indies, and loose all our knowledge, and our Pylotage of that part of the
world: if we have no other peace then this; how can there be a breach of peace,
which e're the Spaniards will all Nations, and all Nations with them may trade
upon their guard?

The readiest way that the Spaniards Ambassador could have taken, to have
stayed me from going to Guiana; had bin to have discovered the great practices
which I had with his Master against the King my Sovereign Lord in the first
year of his Majesty's Reign of Great Britain, for which I lost my estate
and lay thirteen years in the Tower of London, and not to urge my offenses in
Guiana; to which his Master has no title other then his sword, is with which
to this day, he has not conquered the least of these Nations, and against whom
contrary to the Catholic profession, his Captains have entertained, and do
entertain whole Nations of Canniballs; for in a Letter of the Governors to
the King of Spain of the eighth of July: he not only complains that the
Guianians are in Arms against him, but that ever those Indians which under
their noses live, do in despite of all the Kings edicts trade with Los
Flamnicos and Engleses, enemicos, With the Flemish, and English enemies, never
once naming the English Nations but with the Epitheton of an enemy.

But in truth the Spanish Ambassador has complained against me to no other
end, then to prevent my complaints against the Spaniards. Who landing my men in
a territory appertaining to the Crown of England; they were invaded and slain
before any violence offered to the Spaniards; and I hope that the Ambassador
does not esteem us for so wretched and miserable a people, as to offer our
throats to their swords without any manner of resistance; howsoever, I have
said it already, and I will say it again; that if Guiana be not his Majesty's,
the working of a Mine there; and the taking of a town there; had been equally
perilous, for by doing the one, I had robbed the King of Spain and bin a
thief; and by the other a disturber or breaker of the peace.

A Letter of Sir WALTER RAWLEIGH to my Lord Carevv touching Guiana.
BEcause I know not whether I shall live, to come before the Lords, I have for
his Majesty's satisfaction here set down as much as I can say, either for mine
own defense, or against my self, as things are now construed.

It is true, that though I acquainted his Majesty with my intent to Land in
Guiana, yet I never made it known to his Majesty that the Spaniards had any
footing there; neither had I any authority by Patent, to remove them from
thence, and therefore his Majesty had no interest in the attempt of Saint Thome
by any foreknowledge in his Majesty.

But knowing his Majesty's title to the Country to be best, and most Christian,
because the natural Lords did most willingly acknowledge Queen Elizabeth to
be their Sovereign, who by me promised to defend them from the Spanish
cruelty, I made no doubt but I might enter the Land by force, seeing the
Spaniards had no other title but force, (the Popes donation excepted)
considering also that they had got a possession there diverse years since my
possession for the Crown of England, for were not Guiana his Majesty's, then
might I as well have bin questioned for a thief, for taking the Gold out of the
King of Spains Mines, as the Spaniards do now call me a peace breaker; for,
from any territory that belongs to the King of Spain, it is no more lawful to
take Gold, then lawful for the Spaniards to take Tin out of Cornwall, were
this possession of theirs a sufficient Bar to his Majesty's Right, the Kings of
Spain may as well call themselves Dukes of Britain, because they held Blewet,
and fortified there; and Kings of Ireland because they possessed Smereck and
fortified there, and so in other places.

That his Majesty was well resolved of his right there, I make no kind of
doubt, because the English both under Master Charles Leigh and Master Harecourt
had leave to plant and inhabit the Country.

The Orrenoque it self, had long ere this had 5000. English in it, I assure my
self, had not my employment at Cales, the next year after my return from
Guiana, and after that our journey to the Islands hindered me, for those two
years after with Tirones Rebellion, made her Majesty unwilling that any great
number of Ships or men should be taken out of England, till that rebellion were
ended, and lastly, her Majesty's death, my long imprisonment gave time to the
Spaniards to set up a town of sticks covered with leaves of trees upon the
bank of Orronoque, which they call St. Thome, but they have neither reconciled
nor Conquered any of the Cassiques or natural Lords of the Country, which
Cassiques are still in arms against them, as by the Governors Letter to the
King of Spain, may appear: That by landing in Guiana there can be any breach
of peace, I think it (under favor) impossible, for to break peace where
there is no peace, it cannot be; that the Spaniards give us no peace there, it
does appear by the Kings Letters to the Governor, that they should put to
death all those Spaniards and Indians that trade, Con los Engleses Enemigos
with English enemies: yea those very Spaniards which we encountered at St.
Thome, did of late years murder six and thirty of Master Hales men of London,
and mine, who landed without weapon, upon the Spaniards faith to trade with
them, Master Thorn also in Tower-street in London besides many other English
were in like sort murdered in Orrenoque, the year before my deliverie out of
the Tower.

Now if this kind of trade be peaceable, there is then a peaceable trade in the
Indies, between us and the Spaniards, but if this be cruel War and hatred,
and no peace, then there is no peace broken by our attempt; Again, how does it
stand with the greatness of the King of Spain, first to call us enemies, when
he did hope to cut us in pieces, and then having failed, to call us peace
breakers: for to be an enemy and a peace breaker in one and the same action is
impossible.

But the King of Spain in his Letters to the Governor of Guiana, dated at
Madrill the 29 of March, before we left the Thames, calls us Engleses enemigos,
English enemies.

If it had pleased the King of Spain to have written to his Majest. in seven
months time, for we were so long in preparing, and have made his Majesty know,
that our landing in Guiana would draw after it a breach of peace, I presume to
think, that his Majesty would have stayed our enterprise for the present.

This he might have done with less charge, then to leavy three hundred
soldiers and transport ten pieces of Ordnance from Portarico, which soldiers
added to the Garrison of St. Thome: had they arrived before our coming, had
overthrown all our raw companies, and there would have followed no complaints.

For the maine point of landing near St. Thome, it is true, that we were of
opinion, that we must have driven the Spaniards out of the town, before we
could pass the thick woods upon the mountains of the Mine, which I confess I
did first resolve upon, but better bethinking my self, I reserved the taking
of the town, to the goodness of the Mine, which if they found to be so rich,
as it might persuade the leaving of the Garrison, then to drive the Spaniards
thence, but to have burnt was never my intent, neither could they give me any
reason why they did it, upon their return I examined the Serjeant-Major and
Keymis why they followed not my last directions for the trial of the Mine
before the taking of the town, and they answered me, that although they durst
hardly, go to the Mine leaving a Garrison of Spaniards, between them and their
Boats, yet they offended their latter directions, and did Land, between the
town and the Mine.

And that the Spaniards without any manner of parley set upon them unawares,
and charged them, calling them Perros Ingleses, and by Skirmishing with them,
they drew them on to the very entrance of the town before they knew where they
were, so that if any peace had bin in those parts, the Spaniards first brake
the peace, and made the first slaughter, for as the English could not but Land
to seek the Mine, being come thither to that end, so being first reviled, and
charged by the Spaniards, they could do no less then repel force by force,
lastly it is a matter of no small consequence to acknowledge that we have
offended the King of Spain by landing in Guiana.

For first it weakens his Majesty's title to the Country or quits it; Secondly,
there is no King that has ever given the least way to any other King or State
in the traffic of the lives or goods of his Subjects, to wit in our case, that
it shall be lawful for the Spaniards to murder us, either by force or
treason, and unlawful for us to defend our selves and pay them with their own
Coin, for this superiority and inferiority is a thing which no absolute
Monarch ever yielded to, or ever will.

Thirdly, it shows the English bears greater respect to the Spaniard, and is
more doubtful of his forces, then either the French or Dutch is, who daily
invade all parts of the Indies with not being questioned at their return, yea
at my own being at Plymouth, a French Gentleman called Flory went thence with
four sail, and three hundred Land men, with Commission to land and burn, and
to sack all places in the Indies that he could master, and yet the French King
has married the daughter of Spain.

This is all that I can say, other then that I have spent my poor estate, lost
my son, and my health, and endured as many sorts of miseries, as ever man
did, in hope to do his Majesty acceptable service; And have not to my
understanding committed any hostile act, other then entrance upon a territory
belonging rightly to the Crown of England, where the English were first set
upon and slain by the usurping Spaniards, I invaded no other parts of the
Indies, pretended by the Spaniards.

I returned into England with manifest peril of my life, with a purpose not to
hold my life, with any other then his Majesty's grace, and from which no man,
nor any peril could dissuade me; To that grace, and goodness, and Kinglynesse
I refer my self, which if it shall find that I have not yet suffered enough*
it yet may please to add more affliction to the remainder of a wretched life.

Sir Walter Rawleigh his Answer to some things at his Death.
I Did never receive any direction from my Lord Carew to make any escape, nor
did I ever tell Stukely any such thing. I did never name my Lord Hay and my
Lord Carew to Stukeley in other words or sense, then to my honorable friends,
among other Lords. I did never show unto Stukely any Letter, wherein there was
10000 named or any one pound, only I told him, that I hoped to procure the
payment of his debts in his absence. I never had Commission from the French
King, I never saw the French Kings hand or seal in my life. I never had any
plot or practice with the French directly or indirectly, nor with any other
Prince or State unknown to the King. My true intent was to go to a Mine of
Gold in Guiana, it was not fained, but it is true, that such a Mine there is
within three miles of St. Thome, I never had in my thought to go from
Trinidado, and leave my Companies to come after to the savage Island, as Hatby
Fearne has falsely reported. I did not carry with me an hundred pieces, I had
with me sixty, and brought back near the said number, I never spoke to the
French Manering any one disloyal word, or dishonorable speech of the King;
nay if I had not loved the King truly, and trusted in his goodness somewhat
too much, I know that I had not now suffered death.

These things are most true as there is a God, and as I am now to appear
before his tribunal seat, where I renounce all mercy, and salvation, if this
be not the truth. At my death

W.R.

FINIS.

