ENGLANDS SAFETY, IN TRADES INCREASE.

Most humbly Presented to the High Court of PARLIAMENT.

Mercaturasi tenuis, sordida; si magna, splendida.
-- Quaerenda pecunia primum.
BY HENRY ROBINSON. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne, at the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1641.

To the Courteous Reader.
MY first aim and pretense of penning this discourse, as you will find
perusing it, was, chiefly through brevitie to allure some one to cast an eye
on it, who duly considering of what consequence the subject is, might in his
own ripe judgment digest fully, and prevail for the home prosecution of it,
in this Honorable Court of Parliament; but perceiving it does extend it self
both beyond my expectation and the leisure most men have at present from each
days weighty employment, it fears me, I may need some Prospective, or
specious prologue to invite my Readers, and therefore to whet thy appetite I
will be bold to promise, no more than I Will perform, that Nunc tua res agitur,
if wealth or security of the State concern thee, and reading of this out thou
may not only find made good the Title, that Englands trade is Englands
safety, but means suddenly to encsease the Kingdoms stock as much again, for
what concerns trafficking therewith, besides the saving of his Majesty and
subjects in their several affairs no small sums yearly, and some other
advantages not a little considerable; the Platform of all which if thou see
not herein delineated, the Author will be bound to show it thee, or make
amends in reading twice as much of thine to as little purpose. Farewell.

A Table of all the chief heads and passages.
A
ASsignation or turning over bills of debt increases the Kingdoms stock so
much as all such bills amount to. Page 37.
B
Bank or Grand Cashe increases the Kingdones stock so much as the Capital
consists of. Page 34.35.36. Bank or Mount of charity to lend poor people upon
p^^nes. Page 43.44.
C
Ca^els, and Cordage to be made, and Hemp seed to be sowed in England. ^. 20.
Chari^y misled to give to beggars able to work, P. 13.43. Public H^uses as
Bridewell in London to ^et poor people a work* Page 13.43. Companies and
Corporations of Mar^hants, the benefit thereof. Page 45.46. Customs with what
consideration and choi^e to be imposed. P. 9.10.11.20.21.
D
Divines desired to consider the lawfulness of interest or usury. Page 41.42.
E
Englands advantage over other Nations for increase of ^rade. P. 2.3.8.11.21.
Exchanges with Foreign Parts: Marchandizing Exchange: Faires and money Marts.
Page 38.39.40.41.42.52.54 55.56.57. etc.
F
Fishing employment, the consequence of it, maintayning the Sov^raignetie of
the Sea, and keeping us predominant over other Nations. P. 1 13.14 15 16.17.
England able to prosecute better than other Nations, keeping Lent and two fish
days a week would exceedingly promote it. P. 16. Forces by Sea of greatest
power and advantage, P. 2.16.
G
Grand Duke of Florence most absolute Prince in Christendom, P. 35.36.
H
Hollanders their strength in Sea-forces. P. 1.2. Their cruelties toward our
Merchants at A^boin^. P. 22. Husbandry little improved in England in respect
of other Count^eies as barren. Page 44.45.
I
Insurance differences to be decided by the Law-Marchant, Page 33.34.
L
Law-suites their expense and hazard: Law-Marchant or Court of Mar^ha^ts to
decide all Marchantlike causes, P. 25.26.33. Londons populousnes,
inconveniences thereof, etc. P. 5.
M
Manufactures and new Fabrics to be increased, Page 3.10.18.19. Moneys of
England und^rvallewed, exported by Ambassadors, Travelers, and Merchant
strangers, how prevented, P. 51.52.53.54.55.56.57.58. 59.60.61. All silver and
gold which comes from the West Indies goes into the East, P. 62. Br^sse
moneys, the miserable effects thereof, P. 61. Marchandizing the sutlest
mystery, P. 25.26. wh^t commodities to be exported, what imported. P. 12.23.
Merchants advantage over other men; Deal more upon credit than ready money;
commonly of good Famelies, P. 46.47.48.
O
Overballancing of trade, the contrary opinion held, P. 49.50.
P
Plantations enlarge both our traffic and Dominions, P. 13. Princes affairs
advanced by Ministers that are punctual, P. 37.
S
Salt, the making and multiplying how necessary, P. 19.20. Shipping how
increased, the consequence of it, P. 1.2.15.
T
Trade of England how increased, by 17. means, P. 2.3.4.6.9.21. Trade the
measure of wealth and rich^s of this Kingdom, P. 10.24.49. East India trade,
the consequence of it, traffic cannot be enlarged without this be followed
etc. P. 21.22.23.24.25.62. Inland trade and Navigation, P. 42. A Commission or
standing Magistrate to consult the enlargement of it, etc. P. 47.48.
Transpo^tation and serving other Nations with foreign Commodities, the
benefit thereof, making us the Emporum or Magazine of other Nations, how
attained to, pa. 8.20.21.24.
U
Use or interest money, n^cessity of bringiug it down to 6. per 100 at least
p. 6.7. Good if strangers had no money at interest in London. P. 7. Usury,
d^fference about the diffinition, condemned by the Roman Church, not allowed by
any good Authors in Print, and yet practiced by whole Countries. P. 8 38 40.41.
Divines desired to cons^der and resolve of it. P. 41.42. Venice advantaged by
our Friendship. Pa. 11.
W.
Woollen goods, especially Cloth* etc. to be freed from customs, woollen
Staple decreases, where, and why, increases where, and how to be enlarged P. 10
11.14.17.18.23.
ENGLANDS SAFETY IN TRADES INCREASE.
THe principal advantage we have over all the world besides is thought to be
our shipping, which with our own materials as yet we build at home: but if
Timber continue still to decrease, we must not only be beholding to others
for it, but have no more ships than they will give us leave; And yet the
Hollanders who have no Timber at their own growth, do far surpass us in
number of ships, so that were it not for the courage of our Nation, under God,
and our expertnes in Sea Fights, other Nations perhaps upon trial might at
least be troublesome to us, and that the Hollanders have some hopes thereof
may be well conjectured by the great difficulty we find in prevailing with
them upon all occasions of their profit; as particularly in the fishing
business, the East India trade, and daily diminishing the Merchant Adventurers
ancient privileges in their jurisdiction to the great prejudice of this State:
And if the Hollanders eve^ in our memory thus sprung up not without our
assistance and welwishes, and the French of la^e so strong, both in the Ocean
and Mediterranean Sea, as that w^e can scarce set out such Fleetes as either,
how much more dangerous will their puissance be to our posterity? certainly
it is considerable for both of them, especially the Hollander is more likely,
and has better means still to advance himself continually more and more
hereafter, than he had at first to get to what he is at present: for it is not
the large territories in the Low Countries, but their traffic which does
enrich them, the first ground of all their strength and greatness; and yet
their trade consists only in fishing on our Coast, manufactures and
trafficking foreign commodities to and fro, which so much the more is by them
still pursued, as they daily increase in shipping and riches.

Thus does it too too well appear how other States and Princes will daily grow
more and more rich and powerful, and consequently after the same rate in a
short time of four sufficient to give Chackmate unto us: The only means I
find able to prevent this shame and misery are two.

One by endeavoring what is possible that our trade may be enlarged wherein
we have advantage over all the world, as I will show hereafter, and
particularly by setting our selves close to the fish employment.

The other, in procuring that other States and Princes rest contented to keep
only such a number of men of war as may not make us with just cause suspect
their strength and force; neither is this course dissonant to reason, or
without President or present practice, for if the levying an Army of men by a
neighboring Prince give just jealousy, how much more may a Fleet of ships
which cannot be without men enough to make an Army of at pleasure besides the
capacity of conducing an other where they please? And even in this matter of
shipping and maritime forces, the States of Italy are so precise and strict,
as that the Pope himself, Kingdoms of Naples and Sicilie, Grand Duke, State
of Genua and Grand Master of Malta keep only so many Galleys as are limited
to each by general consent amongst themselves.

But in regard the Hollanders may allege it necessary for them to have
continual Fleetes at Sea to defend themselves against the Spaniards, it may be
as necessary for us to importun^ the King of Spain to make an honorable
peace with them; or, if he refuse, to join with the Hollanders and share with
them in the booty, for if we sit still, and they go on conquering as is like
enough, the more they get, the less able (if they please) shall we be to keep
our selves from being conquered too at last, and living at others mercy, would
at best be but dishonorable, when if we fare well, we must conne them
thanks and not our selves: Let us not then run a farther hazard subjecting
our selves to remain betrayed in the end by our own flattery: did we but
consider the ods we had of other States in Sea-forces but half an age ago;
and now reflect upon the great Fleetes they make both in the Ocean and
Mediterranean Sea, we may find their power such at Present, as may render them
justly to be suspected of us hereafter, and unless we show our selves sole
Sovereign of the Sea, and with our Trident Scepter give laws (whilst we may)
to all Nations there, we must receive them from others, when we cannot help
it: Foreign Nations teach us the truth hereof already by fishing in our Seas
whether we will or no, and the French in disturbing our trade the last year
in the Mediterranean Sea, and enacting laws prejudicial both to it and our
Navigation, which of themselves are able to beat us out of trade in time, and
so much more, when Christendom shall be at peace, by which means the trade of
Spain will be free for other Nations which at present as it were we Monopolize
to our selves, and our Cloth^ers and other Manufactors in swarms flocking over
into Holland to enjoy their liberties, (which God knows how justly) but
whether it be true and due liberty, or only so suggested, it is equally
dammageable to this State, since it causes their departure, and the ill
consequences ensuing thereupon; it concerns us therefore (and that suddenly) to
prevent others by good usage, get those back again that are gone, or hinder
the progress of their art and manufacture, which else both may, and justly
too, be countermined.

And whereas it may be inferred by what I said before, that the enlarging of
our trade would keep us still predominant over all other States and Princes, I
will set down some few indigested Notions toward the producing and continuing
a flourishing State of commerce, which if we do not seriously apply our
selves unto, other States will questionless be too hard for us, and
whatsoever trade they beat us out of and engrosse into their own hands, will
feed us with a bit and a blow, making us pay for it what they please, which
will not only impoverish us, but ruin our Navigation, and subject us to become
a prey at pleasure.

Briefly then the traffic of England may be divided into Inland, and Maritime.

Inland is that which is practiced from one town or place unto an other within
the Country, and by

Maritime I mean such as is used from any part of England beyond the Seas,
which later is chiefly to be enlarged three manner of ways, by Exportation,
Importation, and Transportation.

1. By Exportation and venting our Native Commodities, as Lead, Tin, Wax, or
such others, as have little or no workmanship, but chiefly those that require
and set a work our Manufactures, as died and dressed Cloth, Perpetuana's,
Says, Serges, and the like. 2. By importation of foreign commodities which
we any wise stand in need of, as Wines, Sugars, linnens, wrought silks, but
especially such as employ the poor in manufactures, as Cotton Wools, raw
Silk, and all such sundry materials as advance our Navigation, Provisions of
all sorts, and Ammunition. 3. By Transporting foreign commodities, either
directly from one foreign Country to another, or bringing them first for any
part of England, and afterward carrying them out again for such Countries,
and at such times as occasion shall require.
In all which respects England may have advantage of all the World besides, by
reason of her situation surrounded by the Sea, her Inhabitants populous for
Manufactures, skillful in Navigation, and unparalleld for safeties, her
superfluity of sundry commodities to furnish most Nations that stand in need
of them, and lastly her Fishing, than which nothing is so peculiar to her, a
treasure equal to that of both Indies in the richness, consequence and
circumstances of it, in so much that if we be but sure to practice this, all
other trades will follow, as I may say, of their own accord, one, as it were,
begetting another; for our Fish, Cloth, and other Woollen goods, Tin, Lead,
Calfe-skins, Wax, etc. do not only furnish us with such foreign commodities
as we our selves want, but besides large returns in money, may store us with
quantities of all sorts to supply other Nations; And though as I said, if our
fishing and Clothing be but looked to, our trading both Inland and Maritime
will continually increase, yet it may likely be much furnished, and brought
sooner to perfection, if all these seventeene particulars be observed.

1. By granting privileges to sundry Towns and places, especially Sea-Townes
most commodiously situated for fishing Traffike and Navigation. 2. By bringing
interest down to 6. per 100. at most. 3. By lighting of the customs
especially of goods exported. 4. By cherishing and furthering our several
Plantations in Virginia, Bermudus, Saint Lawrence, Saint Christophers and
elsewhere, especially persuading to inhabit and fortify, so far as may be
requisite, the Bank of Newfound Land where we catch that fish. 5. By using
all possible means for prosecuting and advancing the Fishing employment in
general. 6. By settling stricter orders for overseeing and sealing cloth, and
all sorts of Woollen goods. 7. By encouraging new manufactures with immunities
and privileges. 8. By free exporting of foreign commodities with little or no
Custom, which will make England the Emporium of all other Countries: 9. By
his Majesty's protecting the East India Company, whereby they may regaine that
trade, and settle another in Persia if possible. 10. By constituting a Court of
Merchants, where all Merchants, and Marchantlike causes and differences may be
summarily dispeeded without appeal unless by his Majesty's especial grace in
case of palpable injustice. 11. By erecting of a Bank where payments may be
made by assignation. 12. That a course be taken for secure turning over bills
of debts from one man to another. 13. That a Fair or money Mart be settled like
that of Placentia in Italy or Lions in France, where moneys are drawn as by
exchange and returned back again every three months. 14. That Inland trade
and Navigation which is carriage of goods and Merchandise within the Country
be facilitated and promoted. 15. That all Merchants trading for one place and
Province be contracted into a Corporation. 16. That there be Commissioners as a
peculiar and select Magistrate of so many as shall be thought fitting to sit
weekly advising and consulting for the advancement of trade and Commerce. 17.
And lastly that all Merchants have certain immunities from being called to
inferior offices and services where they live, and other privileges of due
respect, whereby they may be encouraged to continue, and others to betake
themselves to so honorable a calling.
1. To the first then, which is the granting privileges to sundry Towns and
places, especially Sea Towns most commodiously situated for Fishing, traffic
and Navigation, since London is not only populous enough, but likely still to
be much more even till its own greatness prove a burden to it, for we see
both house rent, provisions for victualing of all sorts, firing and other grow
continually excessive dear, the consumption whereof being so great, in so
little a circuit, causes them to be fetched so far off, as the very portage
of some of them exceeds the first cost, whereas if such others as are likely
still to flock to London if not prevented, were won to settle themselves
about Marchandizing in some other place or Port, these provisions would be
near hand to them, and consequently better cheap: Besides it is no policy
for a Prince or Kingdom to have so great a multitude, or proportion of their
wealth and strength in one place, how strong soever, because if pestilence come
amongst them they infect one another; if dearth or scarcity of any thing
necessary, they are apt to mutiny; if wars they may be besieged, and then
so far from helping, as they help only to sterve one another, and what is
no less considerable, their overballancing number and riches, were it not
secured by the untainted loyalty of those Citizens, and as well ordered by
their good government (whereof we have often seen experience) might be a
temptation of ill consequence; Wherefore to prevent this, as also not to
venture all we have, or so great a part of it at one st^ke, and disperse and
multiply trade throughout the whole Kingdom, it may be requisite to endow some
Sea Towns, especially with sundry privileges, and immunities; but first they
must be si^uate where they may have all provisions cheap, and advance somewhat
thereby of what they would have spent in London; then they should be such as
have secure Ports and Roades capable to receive and harbor ships of all
burdens; next it is necessary they be fortified with strong walls and
ditches, if a Castle be not thought sufficient to protect the Inhabitants, and
people of all sorts encouraged to dwell there by such means as may ^est
prevail with them: as first by a free trade to pay little or no custom,
especially for goods outward, or such inward as are to be again exported;
then if need require they may be furnished with house-rent free for some
years, and hopeful men of good report, who living there so far off, will
perhaps find no credit, with moneyed men in London should be accommodated with
competent sums at a low interest of about 4. per 100. for where men have
moneys, they will continually be plodding how to employ them ^e^t, and so make
new discoveries in trade to the future enriching of Prince and Country
together with themselves. And whereas at present all England, at least Scotland
and Ireland for the most part are furnished with foreign commodities brought
first to London, then will these sundry new Towns and Staples of trade as they
increase, not only be able to provide themselves, but the Country also that
lies near them with the same at better rates, and yet prejudice London very
little, because, as I conceive, the greatest part of that Country, and such as
come to inhabit there, made shift before to live without them, most whereof
were more superfluous than necessary; and were it only to make these new
Towns of Staple Magazines and Warehouses of Corn, Wine, Salt, Fish, Flax,
Cotton Wool, Tobacco and other foreign commodities, to furnish our Northerly
neighboring Nations, we may compass it with the same advantage which others
do and better, if we use but the same policy, following our fishing, and
providing for our shipping.

2. The second way to enlarge trade is by bringing down interest to 6. per
100. at least, for Interest is the rule by which we buy, sell, and govern our
selves when we are to employ our moneys both in building, planting, trading,
etc. as thus: A Merchant buying a commodity to send abroad or bring for
England, calculates what it costs, and what it is likely afterward to sell
for, and finding it may produce 8. or 10 per 100. concludes this is more
profitable than interest, and therefore resolves not to put out his money at
use, but employ it in trade, and having no money of his own, is contented to
borrow, because he perceives he may likely advance by this employment to pay
the use, and reserve a convenient profit for his pains, which certainly would
not succeed so often if Interest ran higher, for if that be a more profitable
and secure way of thriving, such as have moneys will decline trade, and put it
out to use, and those that have none, either quite forbear to borrow, or undo
themselves with interest at so high a rate: Neither can any thing materially
be objected against this bringing down of interest, save that strangers will
not send their moneys hither to be put out at so low a rate and so abridge the
trade, but to this may well be answered, it were good they brought none at all,
being better to have a little trade with a greater profit to be divided
amongst our selves, than a larger trade with less benefit on it, and that
chiefly to go to strangers.

But for our own usurers, whereas it is ordinarily alleged how this course
would make them call in their moneys and buy lands, it is as easily answered,
how all the land in England is bought already, and if any one that has bought
resolve to sell again, surely it is not with intention to keep the money by
him in a chest without fructifying, so that let whose will buy or sell land, be
the interest brought down to what rate soever, our moneyed men will not long
be ^ullen, but so much money as is in England will be traded with by those
that owe it, or put out at interest at five or six per 100. when men must give
no more for it, since dulcis odor lu^ri, something has some savor.

But true it is that land will be the de^rer for it, and perhaps at first
Corn, Wools and all kind of victualing and manufactures the like, which if it
be granted, I hope we should in conclusion find no worse effect than that
Husb^ndmen would hereby be brought to a frugall diet, or stirred up to become
more industrious setting their wits and hands a work for improving of the
soil, wherein questionless they come short of other Nations, and might
thereby well advance in the great increase of yearly fruits whenever their
Farms come to be enhanc'd; And yet me thinks in saying if lands be improved
to thirty years purchase, Corn, Wools, etc. will rise accordingly, there is a
fallacy which captivates many men's understanding, for surely he cannot be
justly said to buy land at thirty years purchase, who racking the rent of what
it was before squeeses his Farmers after the rate of twenty years, which if
the Landlord do not, the Tenant will have no cause to demand de^rer for his
Corn, Wool etc. and impossible it is that Land should rise unless interest
money fall; for whereas it may be objected the scarcity or store of money
will raise or bring down Land, it is by no other means than raising, or
bringing down interest first: and besides the Farmers upon all occasion are
likelier to discharge a rackrent by multiplying the fruits thereof through
industry, tha^ raising of the price, for that would only teach us to be
furnished from abroad, which if we cannot do as well as other Nations it were
pity but we wanted; Spain, Portingall and Holland, have very little Corn of
their own sowing, and yet eat as much bread as we do; the Hollander ^ath no
Sheep to sheare, and yet makes cloth as good cheap as England, so that if
we cannot enjoy the advantages we have above them, let us at least be
contented to far as they do, and bring down interest to the same terms,
whereby trade may flourish as it does with them. And if trade be but encouraged
by giving privileges to our decayed fishing Towns, and practicing what is
proposed here following, I suppose it may appear there will not only be
suddenly found money enough to d^ive the present trade, but that we are
farther capable to become the wealthiest Nation in all the World. And whereas I
made transportation, which is the furnishing of other Nations with foreign
commodities, the third means of enlarging maritime trade, unless we can have
moneys here at interest as cheap as foreign Nations, or else advance some
other way what we pay more than they do for use money, they will keep us
from that trade and the benefit of it, for if they can undersell us three or
four per 100 which is a competent gain for a half years employment, we may
be sure not to thrive amongst them, but desert a project so advantageous as
the Hollanders have not such another to live upon; and to conclude this point,
since the lawfulness of putting money out at interest is so much controverted,
it might be no small motive to us at least to put the use of it at a lower rate.

3. The third consideration was lightning of our Customs, in imposing whereof
heretofore perhaps the chief aim and intention sometimes was to increase his
Majesty's revenues, but special care ought to be had therein by lightning our
native commodities which will cause a greater exportation of them, and charging
it on the foreign which will hinder their importation, and yet they too
selectively not all alike; and here it is worth remembrance that a great part
of foreign commodities brought for England are taken in barter of ours, and we
should not have vented ours in so great quantity without taking theirs, for we
must not expect to bring away all their moneys, and our commodities not much
more necessary to them than theirs to us: but Cotton woolls, Grograine yarne,
Gold and Silver-thrid or Wire, raw Silk and such others which with us are
employed in sundry Fabrickes and Manufactures setting our poor people a work
should be lightly charged, especially for such a quantity of those
manufactures as are again exported: But Sattins, Taffeties, Velvets and such
others as have their full workmanship abroad should be well charged, which
hindering them to be brought in in such abundance, would employ our own people
in making the same sorts at home, but this must be done with caution, and by
degrees insensibly, least it become countermined: And though this may seem, or
do lessen the Kings Customs for the present, it will after be recovered
again infallibly increasing trade, and a little Custom upon a great trade is
equivalent to a great custom on a little trade, and the people employed and
multiplied to boot which are both the strength and riches of a Kingdom, and
yet other means (if need be) may be thought upon to countervaile this
lessening the Kings revenues in the interim. Provisions of victuals,
especially corn, Butter, Cheese, which are the poor man's food, who hardly
advances more than will cloth and feed him at ordinary rates, should be free
of all such charges; Wine perhaps may deservedly pay good custom, since we
may be without it, at least the abuse is great in so great consumption of it,
and a heavy custom may hinder the importation thereof in part, but the
Subject will still be the more deceived in it, unless it be severely
prohibited for Vintners or others to mingle and sophisticate it, or sell one
sort for another, by which mea^es notwithstanding the greater customs, they
may put a lower price on it to entice their Customers.

To charge Jewels as Diamonds, Pearls, Rubies and such like superfluous
ornaments with great customs, would scarce hinder the importation, for since
the custom may be stolen with so much ease, many would be tempted thereunto,
desiring to advance no more than the stolen custom, and to search men's pockets
and their breeches exactly (for otherwise as good no search at all) may perhaps
be thought against the liberties of this Nation, I am sure much contrary to
their humor. Besides Jewels are wealth and riches in a Kingdom and
consequently good credit to it, which though, if they were so much money, might
be employed better and improved, yet certainly they are a treasure, and in case
of necessity may sted a Kingdom, and will only abound after that a Kingdom
abounds with wealth and money, the superfluity whereof is only converted
into Jewels, and such other riotous expenses.

And whereas sundry Statutes have formerly been alleged for rating both
native and foreign commodities, now that we are in time of Parliament which
has power to make new or repeal the old, me thinks we need not so much
oblige our selves to what passed heretofore in this behalf, as to examine
whether there be the same reason for rating this or that commodity, and
increase or pull down: the customs accordingly: wherein two things may well
be aimed at; first the raising a revenue to the King, and secondly to produce
a flourishing state of traffike to the Kingdom, and as the former must not be
forgot, so may the latter be found of such necessity as that without it both
King and Kingdom ere long will come far short of the revenues and abundance
which hitherto they enjoyed; wherefore our dri^t must primarily be to enlarge
trade.

Since then two Nations carrying cloth or any other wares unto a market, the
best cheap will out of doubt sell soonest and thereby eat the other out of
trade; and in regard a necessity lies upon us to find out vent and issue for
our several manufactures and commodities whereby the poor people may
continually be kept a work, if this be not to be compassed by selling cheaper
than hitherto we have done, and that Merchants cannot possibly sell cheaper
unless they be eased in the customs, certainly there may arise not only a
conveniencie, but a peremptory necessity that it be so for preventing
greater mischief.

Wherefore when settling the book of rates be seriously considered of and
weighed, it may in all likelihood appear that some native commodities and
manufactures will justly require the freedom of all customs and such like
charges, and others especially foreign for as good reason to be charged
double, whereof if one balance the other, the revenue will be the same as
formerly, besides the increase in general which will undoubtedly attend a well
ordered State and Government of trade; but if by this means the wonted revenue
should for the present be impaired, that may be raised by multiplicitie of
other, means, each whereof would be less burdensome or dammageable to the
Body Politic, than any course how plausible soever, which proves an obstacle
to trades enlargement: wherefore I must crave leave to press this farther, and
say I suppose there will be found upon due inquiry, necessity of freeing
broad cloth and some other Woollen manufactures from all or the greatest part
of customs unless we can keep other Nations from making the same sorts, or
be contented the vent of ours should continually decrease, until we be quite
beaten out of it by foreign Nations, who could not thrive so well therein,
unless they had been able to undersell us, I wish therefore it may be
thoroughly thought on and in due time prevented.

Yet for the decay of our Woollen Staple in some Countries we cannot remedy
it by withdrawing our customs and other charges, unless we prevail with
those states that they not only not impose new duties, but pull off such as are
of latter times imposed contrary to our ancient privileges in their
jurisdiction, and the Royal treaties and capitulations on Our States behalf
with Theirs respectively, wherein if I should particularize, it would appear
very notorious how in some Countries our cloth and other commodities have
exceedingly been burdened, purposely to keep us from bringing them thither,
and increasing the manufacture thereof amongst themselves, which succeedes so
well with them, as if we be but a little longer contented with it, for what
concerns redress, we may for ever after hold our peace.

Yet if such advantages may be laid hold of between States and Princes in
amity and alliance, and we as ready to practice them as they, perhaps others
might be glad to begin a Palinodia.

Would the Hollanders take it kindly that we forbid them fishing on our Coast
and drying their netts on our shore? would those of Brabant, Flanders, etc. to
whom reciprocal trade and intercourse is of greater consequence like well it
were withdrawn? can France drink all the wine she makes, or hear willingly a
bill of banishment against her babies and such like toys for exporting no
little sums of gold and silver yearly? If we prohibit the importation of
Currance but a year only which costs us 70 m. pounds Starling ready money,
would not the State of Venice see we can better live without them, that their
subjects of Zante and Zafalonia without bread, or eat currance in lieu of
bread? and yet, poor people! they have no other shift; surely then if we knew
our own strength, they might well be induced to let us have them upon moderate
conditions without multiplying the custom and other duties in such prodigious
manner as now they come to exceed the very cost and principal it self: We
have not five thousand pounds worth of trade with them in a year besides these
currance so dammageable to our selves, and for our friendship, however they
regard it, it is of good consequence to them* in that the greatest part of
their woolls from Spain, and the rest from Constantinople is most commonly
brought in English shipping, which if they come short of, our own cloth may
find so much more vent in Barbary and Turkey; I purposely forbear to enter
upon others, these few will evidently demonstrate our abilities to play with
other Nations at their own weapons, if we be provoked thereto.

But some commodities there are which should not be reported neither with, nor
without Customs saving upon mature deliberation, as Ammunition of all sorts,
Timber, cordage, Pitch, and all other materials of shipping and Navigation,
which may in time offend our selves; yet when we have advance, and it is
probable our Neighbors, (nay very enemies) will have them from other parts,
then had we best serve them, and get the benefit thereof, whereas otherwise
they will through necessity seek out and be able to provide themselves
elsewhere, we loosing what we might securely have advanced, and perhaps be
farther prejudiced in the consequences thereof: As in the transportation of
Iron Ordnance whereof we might have furnished all the world, but holding them
at so high a rate taught the Germans, Danes, and Swedes, to find means and
make them better cheap at home to this Kingdoms damage above 20 m. l' per
annum besides the employment of so many people. And certainly there are Offices
which in Christianity we owe to our very enemies, much more our Christian
neighbors, and Protestants most of all (which makes me wish even with zeal
and servencie the Hollanders proceedings and carriage toward us were such as
might not make them jealous of us in this or any other respect) the omission
whereof in us God Almighty knows how to punish even with Lex talionis if he
please; yet I think we are not the only sinners in this kind conceaving that
Nation uses their utmost art against us and all the world besides in this
respect, the French having likewise of late years much encroach'd herein: And
it is remarkable how our Tin not long since being raised from Ducats 16. to
Ducats 26. in Legorne, and other foreign parts proportionably, a mine of Tin
is lately found in Barbary from whence quantity being brought for Italy has
pulled the price of ours back-againe to about Ducats 16. as it was heretofore,
and may perhaps find the way to France, Turkey, and other Countries too,
hereafter.

And in furnishing our enemies with provisions and ammunition defensive or
offensive me thinks there is a policy not a little considerable, in that they
being fitted from time to time by us at a moderate price makes them live
securely and seek no farther, expecting to have it brought unto them according
to their custom, in which case if for our advantage at any time we have just
cause to deny it them, it is very likely we may supprize them on a sudden
before others not being used thereto can bring it them* or they perhaps be
able to provide themselves elsewhere.

4 The fourth means is by increasing and improving our new Plantations in the
Western Islands and encouraging to others; this is a matter of exceeding great
moment enlarging both our Dominions and our Traffike; if people of good report
and rank could be prevailed upon by immunities and privileges to be the
first Inhabitants in any new discovery, certainly the business through their
orderly and good government might succeed more prosperously, but for want of
such it were far better there were power and authority given to take up all
beggars both men and women throughout these Kingdoms and send them for some of
the new Plantations, all delinquents for matters which deserve not hanging,
might be served so too without sparing one of them, and all such persons in
the mean time be kept in houses for the same purpose, and forced to work or
starve, until the time of the year and ships were ready to carry them away;
and as these might likely do better there, betaking themselves to get a
living, so should we not only free the streets and country of such rascals
and vagrant people that swarm up and down at present; but prevent many
others, some, whereof are successively borne and bred so, the rest brought to
the same begging lasie life by their ill example, and a great sum of money
saved, which uses yearly to be given to such vagabonds to no purpose but to
make them worse through the encouragement they have to continue so by our
misled charity and daily alms.

But of all other Plantations that of New found Land may deserve to be
furthered, not only in regard of the fertility of the Island reported to be
great, but also for the more secure and commodious prosecution of our fishing
trade on those banks, in which employment a dozen of men only in a few months
time are able to improve their labor to far greater advantage, than by a
whole years toil in tilling of the ground or any handicrafts mystery
whatsoever: and this leads me to

5. The Fishing trade upon our own Coasts the fifth means of enlarging
commerce, and of such great importance as that upon due consideration it may
chance be found not only the Grand, but (...) means of our future commerce
and propriety: for however of late ages, and even at present, we are of
considerable strength and credit to all the world for clothing so many of them
with our Woollen commodities, yet if we consider seriously thereof, and see we
cannot at present vent in Germany and the Low Countries, one third part of
what we used in former times, being beaten out of it by their subtilty and
industry in making the same themselves, we may perhaps deservedly have cause
to fear that our Woollen Staple, and Manufacture especially, will by degrees
wheel away from us in that vicissitude whereto we find all other sublunarie
States and things obnoxious: And though as it were to recompense those losses
and encourage our farther endeavors, Divine Providence has discovered us how
to utter a considerable quantity of cloth (though not answerable to the decay
in Germany and the Low Countries) for Turkey and Muscovia, yet for the latter
we are scarce likely to enjoy it long, the Hollanders serving the same market
with our own Cloth carried thither from Hambrough upon better terms than we
can, which might perhaps be prevented by putting a greater charge and custom
on such sorts of Cloth sent for those parts, which are not spent there, but
carried for Muscovia or Barbary, were it not that hereafter they will likely
be able to make the Cloth themselves, and so debar us totally; But for
Turkey, whereas some few latter years we have sent above 20 m. Clothes died
and dressed, it is certain we cannot continue the trade in the future with any
profit for above half that quantity, especially since we must likely forbear
those Country Cotton-Woolls which used to furnish us for returns, being now
served with better cheap of our own plantation in the Western Islands.

But for my part, I shall not think our selves secure of any trade or ought
we have, which the craft or power of Neighboring Nations shall any ways be
able to beguile us of, and therefore most earnestly do wish, we may, whilst
that we may, endeavor to establish our security and trade upon our own
foundation, and that must be our fish employment, able to beget and draw after
it all trade besides, being the School and Nurserie of Mariners and
Navigation, and briefly a Treasure more rich, and in sundry respects to be
preferred before the Spaniards in the West Indies, whose store with Gods
blessing will continually increase as often as the Moon, whose influence so
much predominats those Creatures, and though another Kingdom of fish should
be discovered, such Nations as are situated near us, will be necessitated to
feed on ours: What pity is it then that so many fishing Towns along our
Coast should be decayed, nay what ignominy and bad government to pay and
maintain Strangers for taking of our own fish? Certainly if ever wilfulness
or negligence of not improving a Talent in this World be punished hereafter,
ours will be inexcusable; My purpose is not to enlarge since others are better
able, and I cannot so much as think seriously thereof without a profound
disturbance and vexation to my self, whilst I revolve in my mind the greatest
carelessness that ever men committed, saving that some of our Predecessors did
the like, and our successors will do no less, for all that I can do; and
therefore had best desist to torment my self in raising spirits, unless I
could again alay them.

Wherefore I will only say, if we do not get into our own managing the
greatest proportion of the fishing trade, our traffic will not only decline,
because it cannot otherwise be the greatest, and that (as the greater fish the
lesser) has capacity to eat out and devour the rest, but the very sinues and
strength of the whole Kingdom, the only ground work whereof is trade and
commerce, will be shaken and quite ruined in the end, at least whatsoever
State else shall enjoy it, will keep us at their mercy; and therefore if we
either want moneys, men, knowledge to catch and cure the fish, or ought else to
establish this only Pillar of our future wealth and safety, let us either
prevail with other Nations by waiges and fair means for their assistants, or
not suffer any of them to fish on our Coast, save such as will come and
inhabit in our Sea-Townes with their wives and families, making themselves
free Denizens and depositing such a portion of each voyages profit in a secure
Bank for that purpose which shall punctually pay them and their children if
need be the interest, and restore the Principal unto their Grandchildren,
who may then be thought quite naturalized and not likely to depart the
Kingdom, or else such Boats whose men unwilling to dwell amongst us may be
permitted to fish, so they take half English mariners and Adventurers in the
voyage of whose return for England we are also to be secured.

And since our Soveraingnty on the Seas is so evident, and the policy of
State for our security permits us not longer to neglect it, me thinks our
neighboring States and Princes should not interpret amiss, if they refusing
these or the like offers (without which hereafter we shall not possibly be able
to continue and maintain our jurisdiction) we do with utmost rigor totally
forbid them fishing; for even in this extremity it will most evidently appear
unto an equal Judge, that what we do is only to secure our selves and
Kingdoms; For as upon the Continent the Army that commands the Field rove^
where it pleases forcing the whole Country to contributions; so does a Fleet
at Sea and Seacoast much more speedily and powerfully offending and commanding
those Kingdoms by Sea in one month, which the most puissant Army is not able
to march through in a whole year: and that the fishing trade (since it
increases shipping mariners and brings home in return to them that follow it,
money and all sort of wares for a greater valley than all the trade of England
does besides) will estate whosoever follows it in this Prerogative, is
undeniable amongst such as know the wealth and consequents of it: Besides
although both French and Hollanders so long as they are countenanced by us, may
in likelihood prevail against the Spaniard, his forces being so much dispersed
amongst his other enemies, yet what they get is so much advantage as may be
used against our selves in time, and if the latter chance but to loose an Army
and we either unprepared or unwilling to assist them, then is their whole
Country endangered, which being narrow will be run over and plundered
whilst they stand amazed at their Armies overthrow, and their multitude of
people increasing only so much more one another distraction, will but further
their own confusion, which in their shipping will afterward be brought home
to us, unless we do prevent it by enabling our selves to contrast with all
the world besides at Sea, in which sovereignty the fishing of Herrings King of
(men as well as) fish, is only powerful to maintain us.

And yet before I leave this point I will be bold to add there is no course so
easily to be taken without offending of our Neighbors that will infallibly in
some proportion secure us of the fishing as by exactly requiring (not by halves
as hitherto) the strict keeping Lent and two fish days a week at least
throughout all three Kingdoms, and besides increase our Cattle no little
policy, especially at present to be practiced, for multiplying (Fishermen I
would willingly) as the case stands, receive this penance from Popery, and
think to merit more of the whole state, than by all their works of
supererogation.

And for such as object the unwholesomnesse of a fish diet, if this were the
greatest disorder they committed, I believe they would have more health and
Physicians fewer fees, there being (although more delicacie yet) less
gluttony and surfeiting in fish than flesh, and I hope it will not be found
injustice in the State upon occasion of such consequence to regulate our
appetites, which we our selves neglect to the prejudice of our health in
particular, and endammaging the commonwealth in general.

The decay of trade is in every bodies mouth from the Sheepe-shearer to the
Merchant, and even a weak Statist, without Gallileoes prospective glass, may
see both our wealth and safety therewith declining, and if this greatest
mischief no less than the ruin of a Kingdom may as easily be prevented, 2
Kin. 5.11, 12, 13.
shall we with Naaman over-slip the benefit because the means are facile? And
not regard one crying out to Englang, Fish and be rich and powerful, because
fishing is so frequent a recreation? I know full well this fishing employment
has sundry times been attempted not without great loss, and yet am
altogether as confident the ill success succeeded from the managing and bad
government thereof to be made appear upon due inquiry: First, because our men
are as good Mariners, altogether as well able to brook the Sea, endure the
toil, fare as hardly, and capeable of attaining to the knowledge as any Nation
whatsoever: Secondly, We may have boats and all sorts of vessels, Nets and
other instruments as cheap and fit for the purpose as any can be made:
Thirdly, our Sea-townes are situated more commodious and near unto the places
where the fish is taken, so that whereas other Nations spend time and charge to
go toward the fry, that may be said to come to us; for all which respects,
or some of them we may infallibly be enabled after a while to take and sell
fish better cheap than other Nations, and if all ways else do fail to
prosecute this design, I shall be ready (when commanded) to propound one that
will not.

6. The sixth is the restoring of our Woollen Staple, and this must be by
seeking to export the greatest quantity we can of Woollen goods dyed and
dressed in their full manufacture, as also by settling such a course as the
Officers who are only to seal the cloth if it hold in length, breadth, good
spinning etc. may not pass it over so carelessly more regarding their fees than
the care belonging to their Office.

For the first, I know the enterprise was made many years since in seeking to
send nothing but dyed and dressed Cloth into Germany and the Low-Countreyes,
and how prejudicial it proved to us in teaching them to make cloth of their
own, rather than be so stinted by us, and since chiefly in Holland by
imposing daily new taxes and customs upon all our Cloth spent there both white
and cullour'd, but if at that time in a quiet way we had only taken the
Custom and charge off from the Cullour'd and by degrees put it upon the white
still raising it insensibly, it might in all probability have done the feate,
the cheap colored beating the dear white Cloth quite out of service, and
for present we can only make this use of it, that unless we give our Cloth
both white and colored at cheaper rates than they make theirs of the same
goodness, we must look quite to loose the trade.

But for the searchers of the Cloth that it be complete in all the
perquisites, me thinks it might well be compassed; and it is of great
consequence, for the Merchants here in England who deal for great sums and
quantities cannot look so precisely on every Cloth, examining of it end for
end, and when it comes beyond sea he that buys it can only see the muster and
the outside, receiving the greatest part of it upon trust and public faith
which Merchants deal more in than for ready money, and afterward perhaps it
may be sent hundreds of miles farther before it be opened, or the defects
known until it come to be measured out; Wherefore this charge and care of
searching and sealing all Woollen goods may very well be entrusted to the next
town where the cloth is made, and they employing whom they please to receive
the benefit, for their behoose, may be obliged to utmost damages and
penalties upon every oversight therein committed.

And for Fullers-earth, Woolls or any other materials which conduce to
clothing we must not only forbear to carry them our selves, but hinder
others what we can from doing so.

7. The seventh is the encouragement of all manufactures at present practiced
in England, and bringing in of new, which is of wonderful consequence and
benefit especially to a populous commonwealth, in regard it sets multitudes of
poor people a work, who thereby maintain their wives and families in good
order, which otherwise might be burdensome, and perhaps starve. These
manufactures are one maine cause has made the Hollanders so numerous and
brought them to this greatness, wherefore in imitation of them we^ ought to
cherish all those that are already settled, as Weavers of Woollen and Silk
stuffes, Weavers and Knitters of Silk and Woollen stockins, with which latter
a pretty trade has formerly been driven but almost quite declined since our
last war with Spain, during which time through want of ours, they began to
make them in the Country improving it ever since and thereby with the great
customs upon ours at home bereaved us of that trade; so as when we loose one,
if we be not ingenious to get another instead thereof, we shall be stripped
of all at last: The very varying and new fangling of manufactures is
considerable, causing them to find vent both at home and abroad as they happen
to please the fancy of those Nations to which we send them; and if such as
set their wits a work herein were taken notice of, and rewarded by such a
commission or peculiar standing Magistrate who should have the superintendencie
over all trade and traffic many would likely be encouraged by the credit of
it, but gain would provoke all; And the same Magistrate to punish all abuses
in manufactures of what sort soever either in personal or penal mulcts
whereof to go unto the King* unto the Magistrate and to the Informer, who if he
so desire, is to be concealed.

Weavers then of all sorts of linen both fine and course are to be invited
out of France, and the Low-Countreyes, and Walloones and other French, both for
making of lighter and finer sorts of Woollen stuffes, and are generally far
more ingenious for inventing of Laces, Buttons, and what else is deemed
requisite to the accomplished apparelling (so thought at present) a la mode,
wherein all Europe speak true French though not the same Dialect, for where
all use not the self same fashion, yet they vary theirs as much as French:
but these Laces and Buttons may perhaps only help to increase our own
expenses at home, and are scarce likely to grow exportable into foreign
Countries, where out Woollen commodities are chiefe^y requested because good
cheap.

The multiplying of salt, but chiefly making it with salt water deserves
likewise particularly to be continued and cherished, not so much for employing
many people, but that we cannot well pass without it, being as necessary to
us in a manner as is our meat; Our fish employment cannot subsist without it,
and the preserving both of fish and flesh the chief sustenance of our long
voyages and Navigation, so that if possibly it may be compassed, and made in
England to be afforded hereafter when brought to full perfection at the same
or somewhat a higher price, than we used to be served at from abroad,
questionless it will be good policy rather than expect it from others who
will deny it us in greatest need, and we found both unskilful and
unprovided of most of the materials to furnish us therewith; yet somewhat we
may pay more for this, since as it is said the flesh and fish cured with this
salt eats more pleasant, and besides making it our selves we shall not only
have it at a constant price which before did much vary, rising and falling
exorbitantly as more or less store came from abroad, which was so much the
more hazardous, in regard many ships brought it only when they could get no
other employment, thereby telling us there was no gain in it, and we cannot
expect men will bring it us to loss: But the importation thereof being
continually prohibited, and freedom for all to make it in the Kingdom, where
and when it may be most for their advantage, I conceive they may have
Warehouses and Magazins up and down the Country, to conserve it in, and
afford it all year long at such a rate as may be for our common good and
benefit. And surely it may serve us for a Maxim of direction in all such like
cases, that whatsoever is necessary or so useful, as probably we cannot be
well without it, we should by all means possible seek to secure our selves
of it within our own jurisdiction without being subject to the mercy and
relief of others in our greatest misery and distress and thus standing upon
our own foundation what ere befall other parts o^ Countries of the world, we
may not only still remain the same amongst our selves, but be Arbitrators of
their welfare also.

The making of Cabells and all manner of cordage is likewise considerable, for
which cause the grows of Hemp in our Kingdoms might be encouraged and may
well hereafter be more practiced because it sets many a work, and being so
inseparable to navigation with many others, which are all to be furthered by
privileges and immunities to the workmen, especially the new Inventors and
Promotors, and the materials which are thus employed in manufactures to be
imported with little charge and custom, to the end the Merchants and
Manufactors may find a competent gain and make a trade of it.

By this means the Hollanders who have little of their own growth to feed
upon, cloth, or promote Navigation save butter and cheese, have yet such store
and provision of corn, wine, fish, shipping, ammunition, and all other things
necessary and delicious, as their own natural wants are not only abundantly
supplied, but several other Provinces of larger circuit than their own
replenished with their store to the great wonder of the world, in that they
having no materials conduceable to shipping can build, sell ships, and let
them out to freight, cheeper than any other Nation.

8. The eight is making England the Emporium or Warehouse from whence other
Nations may be furnished with foreign commodities of all sorts, and this may
likely have effect, if such foreign wares be not only exported free of
charge, but most of the duties which were paid at their importation be
restored again, especially if a Denizen brought them in, and carries them out
again, wherein the chief rule to govern our selves must be by ordering it in
such manner as that we may furnish other Nations with them full as cheap as
they can have them el^ewhere, for this is a maine engine wherewith some people
advance themselves and hinder others.

This transportation and serving other Nations with foreign commodities is of
greater benefit and cons^quence to some States than the exportation of their
own, and yet in this we are equally with them capable of the same employment
by reason of our situation, nay some of our Sea-Townes where these Magazines
may be raised, and Merchants invited to inhabit, lie more near several
Neighboring Provinces than they, and whereas some Countries during the Winter
season have their ships often kept in by ice some months together, we may from
hence put out all winds and weather, and a ship at Sea seldom but advances
somewhat toward her Port: Besides the Hollanders having no native commodities
to follow the Turkey trade, and by reason of the Algier Pirates so much
infesting, and the Spaniards no little awing them at entering in and out the
straights, they are quite driven out of it, so that were it well ordered we
might serve them, and the French too (bought out of the turkey trade by us in
cheape-selling of our cloth to our own loss) with all manner of Turkey
commodities, Cotton-Wools and such others as come from our Western
Plantations, and upon dearth of Corn, or scarcity of any other thing, we
providing to furnish other Nations, and keeping their Warehouses as I may say
in our Kingdom, shall not only not want our selves, but be furnished far
better cheap than they and necessitate them to have continual dependency upon
us.

9. The ninth is the promoting of the East India Trade, which however hitherto
dammageable to those that followed it in particular, yet upon due search and
estimation will be found wounderfully considerable, the rather because those
Territories being so vast, farther discoveries of new trades might be expected
daily, as well for venting of our own commodities as importing others at
cheaper rates, if that society were better countenanced at home and not so
grievously disturbed abroad, the Hollanders in policy of State have reason to
desire nothing so much as to weary out and constrain them to abandon it, which
unless it be prevented, we may justly fear will take effect, being to be
observed and collected by the proceeding of the Amboina business that nothing
will be left unattempted, for full accomplishing whatsoever may farther
advance their strength and profit.

And although at present the Flemmings carry little of their spices into the
Straights, because they sell them better nearer hand, as also in regard the
Pirates of Algier do oftentimes make prey of them, and so much raise the
insurance as they thrive not in the trade, yet if we suffer them to beat us
quite out of the East Indies, we must not only loose the trade we drive in
other parts with the advance of India Commodities, and pay dear for what we
spend our selves, but when ere this come to pass, being then stored with
spices, Callicoes, and other East India wares, enough to serve all Italy,
Turkey, and Barbary, which so soon as they begin to practice, the rest of our
trade in the Mediterranean Sea will then as fast decline, the Hollanders cheap
freight being able of it self to eat us out in time without any other
Stratagem or plot.

Wherefore there is no longer time for dallying, we must whilst we are able
make our own laws and conditions, still keeping our selves so mucst more
stronger, as no Nation may ever have power or ability to spurn against us: and
for to warrant and encourage us in executing of it, we have not only the maine
ground and policy of the State to keep Neighboring Nations from growing over
powerful, especially such as above others are more subtle and forward to
offend us, when craftily and securely to be compassed; but too too just cause
of revenge have we against the Hollanders for their unheard of cruelties and
injuries done us in the Indies, whereof we have required justice and
restitution in so mild a manner, as taught them hitherto only to slight and
put us off, by which proceedings though the East india Company being wearied
out for want of the States protection and assistance should be prevailed upon
to receive an inconsiderable despicable allowance holding no proportion with
their wrongs, because they can get no more at present, yet I hope his Majesty
will never pass it over in such manner, as may enbolden them to attempt the
like again: None admires their industry more then may self, or desires their
good success, but with the same charity reflecting on our selves at some,
desire withal we may rather be always able and willing to aid them, than
ever need, or have necessity to be aided by them.

But vain it is for us to think or study the enlarging trade, unless we
prosecute the East Indian with all might and maine; for if trade must chiefly
be advanced by Exportation, Importation, and Transportion as I said at first;
That of Importation we generally exclaim against our selves, and justly too
for being so great and overballancing our Exportation as is objected that
brings us so far in debt, as nothing but our moneys the blood of traffike
will satisfy; and of Exportation what can we farther hope from it hereafter?
has not all the Cloth we vented from North to East of late years been sold
to loss? Certainly our Merchants will make it plainly appear they cannot
live by the trade at present, nor yet hope to sell at better rates in the
future, unless we send out less; so that both Exportation and Importation
must be lessened that trade may be enlarged, although it seem a Paradox:
This you will say is a deplorable Estate and yet it is ours, and we must make the
best of it, or fare the worse our selves.

We must not only be contented but really lessen our Importation and
consumption of foreign goods at home, nor rest there neither, but resolve to
do the like for Exportation sending out loss Cloth hereafter, and this is not
all neither, but we must lade it as little as may be with customs and other
charges, else all other Nations almost who have already begun to make Cloth,
will be able to undersell and beat us quite out, so that a Masterpiece it
would be, it possible, to give them so good cheap abroad, as others might not
make to live by it, and then both our Wollen-Weavers and other manufactors that
so unkindly left us, may happily return again, and such as have been taught
by them do the like, through discontinuance become unapt, or at least in time
both one and other spin out their own third too; when, and not sooner, may we
expect to sell more quantities of cloth at better prices, which then, and not
till then, may safely be inhanc'd, nor without due policy and discretion to
prevent the like several disasters into which through our inconsiderate
proceedings we find our selves plunged at present: But if I (like a
hard-hearted Chi^urgion that unmercifully torments a Patient in searching and
lancing of his wound, and afterward uncharitably leaves him without applying a
sovereign balsome for to cure it) do here conclude, I should not only fail
of my intention and pretention in this foregoing discourse, which was both to
demonstrate a Possibility and means of trades enlargement, but be justly
censurable for anticipating our miseries, representing them all at once to the
public view in their most direful and malign aspect, whereas their natural
motion will only overtake us by degrees.

Since therefore the exportation of Cloth our most staple commodity, and
importation and consumption of foreign wares must be diminished, to make good
what I intended toward the enlarging our traffic notwithstanding, the
remainder of our Stock, People, and Labors, which of late heve been employed
in making more Cloth, and bringing in more superfluities than we could well
digest, must necessarily be set a work some other way, and this may not only
have effect by practicing new manufactures, Fabrickes, and the fishing
employment, but also by transportation to our far greater benefit and
advantage: Now nothing can be imagined so much to further transportation as
the prosperity of the East India trade, wherefore as it is not safe for us to
part with any Country trade how small soever, because the wealth and welfare
of this Kingdom may justly be measured by the Kingdoms traffic, so least of
all may we forgo this of the East Indies, which though at present in vents not
our native commodities in such quantities as Germany and Turkey, yet the money
we save by furnishing our selves with Spices, Callicoes and other India wares
at moderate rates in great abundance, and yet send larger store out again to
other Nations, and the good hopes and likelihood we have to multiply this
trade in all dimensions, may render it so considerable, as that if Merchants by
their former ill success, through the Hollanders unbrotherly proceedings,
should not be found to prosecute it, his Majesty and whole State have just
cause to keep it up though it were to loss at first, and if all means else
fail, moneys levied for maintayning it, cannot be so grievous and
prejudicial to these Kingdoms, as the loss of it would likely bring poverty
and ruin on them in the end.

For though the present Company being dissolved, it is like enough that many
particular Merchants will adventure by themselves, for what will they not
adventure? yet if the Hollanders can counterminde a whole society, that had so
great a stock, so well settled, so well governed abroad, and full likely to be
countenanced at home, what may then be expected from ordinary private
Merchants who have no succession, perishing one by one in their Individuals?
but that the Hollanders will have so much more advantage over them, and they
not being otherwise able to make a voyage, at length turn Pirates and prey
upon one another: A Corporation it must be and a powerful one too, that
follows this trade, able to plant Colonies by degrees and make head in the
Indies if need be against the Hollanders incroaching and proving there too
weak may here be righted by his Majesty than which, nothing certainly will
more keep the Hollanders from atte^pting their utter extirpation; they must
have factories established up and down where their ships may be sure of
victuals and relief in their distress; they must be such as have stock
enough to contract and deal with States and Princes for great matters as well
as small, which though a private man do undertake for, yet shall be not be
credited: These few amongst infinite other reasons may necessarily infer that
none can manage this weighty business to the just improvement save a joint and
well governed stock and Company which will yet afford another notable
advantage, that now presents it self to my memory, for the future benefit and
safety of this State, in that (whith yet will be much more when they begin to
flourish as is expected) being accustomed to have sundry Warehouses and
Magazins full of Biscuit, Fish, Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Wine and Vinegar to make
beverage of, Caske, Anchores, Sal^s, all provisions of Navigation bought by
them at times and seasons to most advantage, and Mariners that tarry at home
expecting their employment, when ere the King or Sta^e should have occasion of
a sudden expedition, this provident Society without damage to their peculiar
affairs, might lend or sell them of all sorts to the great advancement of the
interprize, which sometimes not only delay makes hazardous, but utterly
disapoints, as at present, is thought, about a Fleet of twenty ships only to
be sent against the Pirates of Algier at Sea, and cannot be got soon enough
in readiness for want of Mariners and provisions.

10. The tenth is the erecting of a new Court, or Magistrate consisting of
Merchants where all March^nts and Marchantlike causes and differences should
be summarily decided without appeal, saving through his Majesty's special
grace in case of palpable injustice, and this Court to condemn in Principal,
Interest, charges, damages, and fines too, if the cause in their judgments
might have seemed plain to most men of ordinary apprehension, to the end that
knaves and litigious persons may be deterred from moving suites without good
ground, or withholding any thing, that belongs unto another.

These Courts are settled in Italy, France, and many other Countries with good
success, being grounded upon reason, and practice of Merchants dispersed
throughout the world, for most part, without respect to the Municipall laws
and privileges of any particular place or Kingdom, for if it should not be
one and the same, but vary according to several Dominions and Jurisdiction, a
Merchant adventuring himself, or his Estate abroad, in a case of one and the
same nature might be cast both ways in several Countries without a
possibility of relief.

This Court then ought for very good reason to consist of Merchants, in regard
a Merchant of good natural endowments bread at least a competent Grammar
Scholar, having lived abroad, experienced in customs and affairs of sundry
Countries, may questionless be a generally more knowing man than any other of
what profession soever, and so better qualified for decyphring the intr^ca^e
and various difficulties (which seem to many as dark obscure Hi^roglyphicks)
arising from this profession: For, as the Mystery of Merchants is more subtle
and active suddenly multiplying contracts infinitely beyond all others; so do
spring from thence more knottie and abstruse differences and disputes, far
better understood, and consequently to be judged and en^ed by understan^ing
M^rch^nts, yet happily the assistance of a skillful Civilian with name of
Chancellor or such like, I conceive, may not do amiss to be subordinate to
the Merchants, for otherwise he may likely too much sway, and with his more
volubil tongue overtalke the Merchants and run away with the cause according to
his singular opinion: yet must he not be meal mouthed neither, for then will
he be overaw'd much more by the Merchants who have such odds in number.

But a special care this Court must have to dispatch each cause with all
possible expedition^ for these of all other can worst admit demurers; because
either the commodities which Merchants strive about are perishable, or ships
must go on their voyages, Mariners may not tarry behind and loose their
service, and the very time eats out eight in the hundred from him that suffers
on whatsoever sums in controversy; and though (as I conceive) next to
unhealthines, law suites may justly be thought the greatest misery in this
world to all in general, yet Merchants of all others are less able to attend
them; for law suites, as the case stood, were grown as hazardous as playing at
dice, and reckoning the butlers box too boot, the Lawyers fees and charges
have much the odds, only in this the Gamster has advantage, that though he
loose, each cast still puts him out of pain: whereas sometimes a man's suite at
Law outlives himself, and perhaps the cause lost afterward because, he could
live no longer to defend it; and yet if he had not dyed, should never have
been ended: but my meaning is this, that whosoever goes to Law, must hoc
agere; and a Merchants affairs require totum virum; now since a Merchant ought
only, and can be all but in one of these, this Court will be the more bound
in equity and justice to free him from the other.

And since this Law is so troublesome, and chargeable to all sorts of people
and conditions, if in a particular office so appointed, all judgments,
morgages, contracts, and bargains, and encumbrances whatsoever, of Lands,
Houses, Offices, etc. (the just Title whereof we cannot, by looking in his
face, know to whom belongs) were necessarily to be registered, and the party
that owes them in a book compendiously to be made Creditor and Debtor when he
sells them, his title only being to be preferred in case of controversy, who
had his contract registered in this Office, and Credit in the said Book, unless
omitted through default of the said Office, which in such case must appear by
Coppie of the Contract under-writ by this Officer, remaining with the true
proprietor of those Lands, houses, etc. it would certainly prevent the greatest
part of Lawsuits in England, since going to that office, a man intending to
make a purchase, and paying a small matter for the search, as he may see (and
have Copy of it if he please) to whom the goods belonged, were morgaged, or
interiourly engaged, and so be sure the Title's good.

The same Court of Merchants, if thought requisite, may likewise end all
differences about insurance, obliging the insurer to run all hazard
imaginable or not imaginable, or that may, and do happen to fall out of all
kinds and natures, and to pay whatsoever loss that happens on goods assured
in such words: for the intention of the insured being to secure themselves from
all casualties that possibly could happen in this world, ought therefore to
have each sinister, though difficult accident interpreted in their favor: In
case of loss, the Insurers should be constrained to pay without the least
abatement, and be paid the Praemium when they subscribe the policies, whereby
the insured would have better opportunity to pick and chose the rarest men to
under-write his policy, and the Insurer to be freed from all losses: the news
whereof was heard before the Praemum was paid, which must appear in writing by
a particular receipt, besides that of the policy, where they say to have
received it at that instant of subscribing; and sometimes cannot get it
notwithstanding in many years after: the Insured likewise might be bound to
run adventure of 1/^ part himself on every ship, which will not only hinder
much deceit, that might be practiced, but cause him to endeavor the safety
of all the rest: much more may likely appear justly to be reformed in due
place and season.

The tenth is the erecting of a Bank or Grand Cash on such foundation and
security, as all men may think their moneys more sure there, than in their
houses, whereby they may be induced to bring them in, and receive a certain
moderate interest of about 5. per 100. or keep them there, till they shall have
occasion to dispose of them, or pay them to another: and these payments, when
the Bank has once got credit, may be done by assignation, or turning them over
from one man to another, without any real assuring of moneys: which besides
saving trouble to tell so much money, becomes exceeding beneficial to a
Commonwealth, increasing the trade and traffic so much more as all the moneys
this Bank has gained credit for does import: as for example thus;

Suppose I be cash-keeper to ten wealthy men, that amongst them al for the most
part have 10000 li. still lying dead, expecting a good opportunity and advantage
to purchase Land, or otherwise: I that am Cash-keeper, knowing there can be no
occasion of these ten thousand pounds till such a time; or if there should be
sooner, know where to have as much to put in the place of it, and withal having
the owners consent, do put these ten thousand pounds out at interest, or
employ it in one commodity or other for my own account and benefit, to the
increase of Trade, which is equally done as well with credit as ready money.

Thus a Bank is no more than a Grand Cash-keeper of this whole Kingdom, or so
many as do bring in their moneys, whereof few or none will make any scruple,
when cue security be given, and this security at present perhaps will be
desired, no less than the High Court of Parliament; which, if they please out
of their deep wisdoms to resolve upon, and the moneys which shall lie idle to
be made use of, for their benefit and behoof, to take account thereof in their
Trienniall Parliament, and dispose it to the good of the Commonwealth, with
their gracious permittance, I should in all humility be bold to say, there
never passed Act of Parliament so capable to advance the trade and welfare of
this Kingdom, with such facility and speed as this, as I doubt not but to
make better apparent when e're I be commanded.

And whereas it may be thought, that few will bring their moneys into this
Bank, conceiving it not so safe for them to lie thu^ deposited in a Monarchy,
as if it were a free state, especially since the moneys in the Tower were so
lately seized upon without regard of violating the public faith, which in
States and Princes affairs ought to be kept so much more sacred, as Princes
are exalted above Subjects and termed Gods. I will crave leave to present unto
their consideration the state of Tuscanie, well known to have continually
flourished in peace and plenty, ever since the politic and sage family of
Medici had rule and government thereof, and it may justly have been observed
unto this day, that no Prince makes use of a larger prerogative, and proceeds
in some cases more arbitrarily than these who yet end and sentence according to
the Laws in full force of equity and justice.

This Prince in what part of his state so ever he be, gives audience twice a
week to all that come, though very beggars, (O that our gracious Sovereigns
more large affairs could but permit him to grant his loving and loyal
Subjects the like but once a month, whereby we might not only have been
sooner eased of many just grievances, but his Majesty perhaps both tiuer and
speedier informd of the causes, and so better enabled through his profound
judgment to prevent these great distractions, which have and do still at
present so much perplexe these Kingdoms) and no man delivers a Petition, but
within three days at farthest, shall be certain of a reference, so that his
prerogative and arbitrarie proceedingss are so far from being injust, as they
serve only in casualties, which the Laws have not provided for, certain
conjunctions which may not expect, or thou regard, the Ceremonial Rites, and
slow or overhasty footsteps of a Court of Justice (may it upon this occasion
be so termed without offense) and to prevent the summum jus, which even by
Proverb we have learnd to term but Summa injuria: In this state I say, whose
Prince is so absolute and Sovereign as none in Christendom so much
(notwithstanding the Popes supremacy, which in his own understanding is of
unlimited extent) there is such course took for due administratiou of justice,
distinguishing betwixt meum and tuum, and preserving each man's propriety in his
goods, as not only those Natives, but others, strangers, think not their
estates securer, then depositing them in the Floreutine Bank, which is by them
called Monte di Pieta, where they have five per 100. interest per annum, and
may receive out the principal at pleasure: In the same Bank are infinite
sums left by particulars for the like interest, entailed upon their
posterity, which cannot be removed, or al enated: And that you may guess how
vast a Capital this Mount or Bank consists of, it lends likewise upon Pawnes
at 5 per 100, and to a landed man upon security of such another, which is
equal to a Morgage, because their Lands being registered in an office for that
purpose, the true title thereof is seen in an instant, and as his Majesty
here in England, so the Bank there is to be first satisfied in case of
Bankrupt, and what is thus lent, by the best information I could get, was
thought to be above a million sterling. Besides, there is another kind of Bank
in Florence, which is called Il giro; as thus, Every three months the
Merchants of Florence choose one amongst themselves of best credit, who is to be
(as it were) the general Cash-keeper of all moneys delivered, or taken by
exchange, for that present Fair; the manner whereof you will find explaned at
large hereafter, so that what moneys be delivered, or drawn by any man
during this Fair, the said general Cash-keeper makes him Debtour or
Creditour, turning the slyd sums over from one to the other, provided he be
such a man as has money in his Cash, and at three months end he makes up his
Cash, pays every man his own, and the Merchants choose another for the next
Fair, or three months following.

Now if the benefit and conveniencie of these Banks are thus enjoyed in
Tuscany, where the Prince is so absolute; but withal, his Treasurer and other
Ministers so punctual in payments and other dealings for the Princes peculiar
service, as no Merchant can be more; for which cause Merchants hold it more
secure, and seek rather to deal with them, than with the best mere Merchants
like themselves: Why may not we, under so pious and gracious a Sovereign, in a
Kingdom founded and established upon such wholesome Laws, expect the like
good success from a Bank in England? For being so exceedingly beneficial
both to King and Country, as would daily still more and more appear, we may
easily believe it should be furthered and cherished by both; the rather since
it may be settled and credited by Act of Parliament, with command that neither
principal nor profit shall be stirred or employed, save for their account,
according to express order and direction of the Trienniall Parliament, whereto
only such as oversee and manage it, may be made accountable, if so thought
fitting.

And as it may be observed amongst Merchants and prodigal Spend-thrifts, that
such as are bad Pay-masters, or of little credit, can neither buy, sell, or be
entrusted to such advantage as others are: So is it doubtless with Princes and
their Ministers that are not punctual in their dealings; for in delaying
payments, the very time unto a Merchant eats out eight per centum in a year,
besides the inconveniences which may befall him by being disappoynted, and
this very justly too, is so fearful unto most Merchants, that those few as
are more adventurous, will not deal with such Ministers of Princes as are bad
Pay-masters, but upon such odds as must needs be an excessive damage to the
affairs of those Princes; and yet this cannot well be remedied, until the
cause be first removed; for since gain is that which all, especeally
Merchants, do chiefly aim at, it might be justly thought indiscretion for any
one in buying, selling, or any business of like nature, to refuse the more
punctual Play Master, and take the less at the same price: and how much his
Majesty's affairs have suffered in this kind, such as were employed in them
do best know. But for my part, I may be bold to wish they be managed hereafter
with such credit and punctualitie, that which formerly was lost for want
thereof, may be hereby regained: more may, though net well so publicly, be
said on this subject, and the consequence of it, both for the private benefit
and public welfare of his Majesty and Kingdoms; and part thereof will be
obvious to such as have the managing of it, as will infallibly appear when it
once comes to be put in practice.

The twelfth is the secure turning over bills of debt from one to another,
against moneys or wares, as thus: A Merchant sels an hundred pounds worth of
silks unto a Mercer, to pay at 12 months, and desirous to buy an hundred
pounds worth of Perpetuana's; but having neither ready money to disburse for
the present, nor credit to be trusted at time gives this Mercers bond of an
hundred pounds unto whom he sold his silks, in payment of the Perpetuana's, and
so is still doing something, whereas otherwise having no other estate but this
hundred pounds, he could not have traded again, until those twelve months,
were expired, and the Mercer paid him his 100 pounds: but if this course be
once made secure and current, it will in the same manner as the Bank before
spoken of, add livelihood unto Trade, and increase the stock of the Kingdom*
for what concerns traffiquing with it, so much as these Bills turned over
amount to: when a man that has neither money, nor credit to be trusted at
time, may yet follow trading with the debts that others owe him: In this case a
b^ll of debt (which likewise may be in print) must be made by every one that
buys commodities paiable to such a one, or his Assigns, or Bearer thereof, and
so often as bills happen to be turned over unto others; to prevent differences
it may not be amiss to have some notice taken of them, and registered, the
parties being present before the Chancellor in the forementioned Court of
Merchants, paying a small consideration for the officers, making record of them
in a public Book for such purpose; and these Bills being once due, to carry
present execution with them.

The thirteenth, that some course be agreed upon in the nature of a Fair, or
money Mart practiced much in France, as that of Lions, and Placentia in Italy;
by which means a man of credit may be furnished with what sums of money he
pleases at an instant, and pay them in again the week following, or when he
will; which accommodation costs such as make use of it in those parts where
it is ordinary somewhat more than downright interest.

The original of these Faires, as also the unnatural use of Exchanges grew
thus: Divines in former times continually exclaiming against Usury, which
those of the Roman Church do still to this day, voting it a mortal sin, to
take whatsoever the least benefit or increase, by express agreement for the
use of money, pressing it uncessantly upon the consciences of their
Penitentiaries, such as having store of moneys, though they found no more
beneficial, certain, and easy way of employing them than downright
interest, which they could not get absolution for from their Ghostly Fathers,
were forced to set their heads a work, and so invented, or rather adulterated
the true and most laudable use of Royal Exchanges in two respects: one was,
that Usurers observing how in all Exchanges, as namely betwixt London and
Venice, and vice versa, he that was the deliver had most commonly the
advantage, which was caused in regard, that (as in all things else so) a sum
of present money (may justly be, and) is thought something better worth than
the like sum or quantity being absent, and not to be received till after a
term expired, be it more or less; in which interim the taker may make use of
the said sum of money, employing it in Merchandise or otherwise, as he please
to his best advantage: whereupon the Usurers of Venice, although they h^d no
occasion or just need to have* their estates in London, on which was first
grounded the truly genuine and legitimate use of money-Exchanges, to prevent
the inconvenience, trouble, change, and cumbrance of transporting moneys in
specie from one Country to another* understanding of Merchants, that desired to
take up moneys in Venice, and pay the value of them in London, told them they
had occasion to deliver moneys in Venice, and so agreed with them; as for
example: A. B. a Usurer delivers in Venice a Ducat to C. D. a Merchant, taking
his Bill of Exchange upon E. F. to pay unto A. B. or his assigns, fifty pence
a piece sterling in London, three months after Date. A. B. makes the same
party E. F. Assigns, to get acceptance of the Bill, and payment of the fifty
pence in due time, and having received it to return it him back again by
Exchange to his most advantage. At three months end, E. F. delivers in London
this fifty pence unto G. H. and takes his Bill of Exchange upon L. M. to pay
unto A. B. the Usurer in Venice, or his Assigns, the value of it three months
after Date, which is by them agreed to be after the rate of four pence
sterling for a Ducat: So that A. B. the Usurer for delivering a Ducat by
Exchange in Venice, after six months is possessed of his Ducat returned back
again, with the value of three pence sterling more, which after the same rate
is 12. per 100. on whatsoever sum or sums he had thus deliverd by Exchange,

The second way which the Usurers found out, not so much to salve their tender
Consciences, as to benefit themselves more by than down right Interest, was, by
framing an imaginary Exchange between two places, as Florens and Placentia in
Italy, betwixt with there is no just cause of correspondence, Exchanging,
Traffic, or sending moneys from either place unto the other, and agreed
amongst themselves in Florens, that whosoever (to be understood of good credit
and repute) would take moneys by Exchange, for Placentia might do it in this
manner: that is, whosoever will take up money from the beginning of June at
such rates as shall be agreed on, may, but that unless he give order for the
payment of it in the mean time in Placentia, by a correspondent of his own,
or another with this Usurer, will help him to (who draws provision of per
100. on all sums charged upon him, or returned by him) it must be recharg'd
and necessarily satisfied in Florens the beginning of September following, and
this is by them called La fiera di san Gio. Baptista. The second, (for they have
four of these faires, or Money-Marts in a year) is called La fiera di san
Carlo, from the beginning of September to the beginning of December. The third,
La fiera di Purificatione, from the beginning of December to the beginning of
March. The fourth, La fiera di san Marco, from the beginning of March to the
beginning of June: in all which three last, what moneys are drawn in the
beginning must be extinguished in Placentia in the interim, or will return
necessarily to be satisfied in Florence, at end of the third month current
following, as in the first Fair is declared: And this is the state of their
Money-Faires, or Marts before mentioned; whereby, although it be usura
palliata, those indulgent and overcharitable Romanists suffer themselves to be
led blindfold, for saving both souls and purses of their Clients: For though
they put a difference betwixt it and plain Interest, or Usury, because in the
former there is not only no certain gain agreed on, but a possibility of
loss, yet the loss to him that makes use of money thus by exchange, is so far
certain, as he had better be content to pay eight per centum, sure all year
long, than run the hazard of this uncertainty: But that which undeniably
concludes this course to be altogether as bad as usury is, that these Usurers
deliver moneys in Flo^e^ce by exchange, to receive the value in Placentia, and
having received the val^e of it in Placentia, have no use for it there, nor
know what to do with it, but retnrne it back again for Florence, which no man
in his perfect senses would trouble himself about, and run the hazard of bad
debts, were it not for great hopes and probability of gain to countervaile the
whole. Whereas the command or precept at last was, Luke 6.35. Date mutuum,
nihil inde speran^es; So that these money-Faires, and taking up moneys by
exchange, to enjoy the time and use of money only, is just the same with taking
up at interest or usury, neither better nor worse, and how lawful usury is I
will not take upon me to determine, the rather, because that only Protestant
and Papists, Doctors, Divines and Lawyers, do disagree about the definition of
Usury; but both one and other have fur^ished us with sundry definitions of it,
much varying amongst themselves; but that on both sides nearest agreed on is
this, Vsura est lucrum receptum a Creditore pro usu rei mutuo datae: and yet
this only reaches to actual usury, and not mutual also and intentionall,
which rests equally condemned in foro conscientiae: neither does this hold in
every actual receipt of profit, benefit, or advantage, in consideration of what
is lent; for we may take for lending of an house, and then it is house-rent;
for lending of an Horse, and th^n it is hire; for lending a Slave, or an
Apprentice to work for others, and then it is wag^s; with sundry others which
might be alleged, and neither of them thought unlawful, or sceneratitious:
But if instead of rei there were put pecuniae into the definition, as thus,
Vsura est lucrum receptum a Creditore pro usu rei mutuo datae: And this agreed
upon to be the true definition: for my part, I should think the taking of one,
or ten, per cent. were both equally usurie, and not in our power to qualify
one more than the other, and of this opinion are all Roman Divines and Lawyers.

But certainly, if it be but free to argue it, the precept or command of Date
mutuum nihil inde sperantes, being interpreted according to the aforesaid
definition might not only seem somewhat repugnant unto reason, but unto
Scripture it self Deuteronomy. 23.20. (extraneo isti dabis in usuram, fratri autem
tuo ne; for if Usury were absolutely unlawful, as murder, adultery, etc. God
would not have permitted it to Wards, Aliens, or Strangers, then in regard
there may be an occasion of borrowing, as in a rich man that cannot be sa^d to
do it for need: for which cause I am not bound to lend him, but because he
sees certainty of profit, and rather than I will be his hindrance of such a
profit, me thinks I find my self in a manner obliged to lend him what I could,
and intended otherwise to employ my self not without good hopes of benefit:
and may not I in this care of certain profit to my neighbor in borrowing, and
certain damage, (for the employing it is always valued at somewhat) to my
self by lending, take interest for my money, and so he get more by borrowing,
and I by lending? (such a certainty, which though less I wa^ contented with,
than to run hazard of a greater) which if it be granted, I only infer, that
we know not the precise adaequate definition of usurie, and so believe the
rather, in that the most common received one cuts not off all lending, only
even upon hopes of profit, if for missing of our hopes we do forbear to lend,
but would be found to vitiate most contracts, bargains, and sales, so commonly
practiced by all nations to the multiplying of trade, and relief of whole
Kingdoms, and cannot be reformed without the ruin of of all commerce
throughout the Universe.

But, as I said, presumption 'twould be in me to determine a matter of such
great controversy, yet I am so tender of it, as that I do most earnestly
desire and pray it were by our Divines taken into serious consideration, and by
them declared how far our interest money, and sundry so much practiced
contracts were obnoxious to it: the rather in regard, though I never met with
Author that did positively declare, the taking 8. or 10. per 100. not to be
usurie, or lawful, yet whole Countries practice it with little or no scruple;
so sweetly and powerfully does gain and lucre benumbe the conscience, which
many notwithstanding have sought to awake by writing and loud preaching,
terming it to be flat usurie, forbid throughout the Scripture, and utterly
si^full and unlawful; but at this study and consultation of our Divines I
crave leave to be bold, and entreat them not to disdain that light which
expert Merchants might give them in th^s point, or otherwise conceive I shall
always be able to furnish them with new cases, which they before never
thought on, and acknowledge to need new decisions: But if lending money at a
moderate interest be as lawful as politickly useful to the Commonweal,
the^ is it likewise much more commodi^us to take up moneys by Exchange to trade
withal, and most of all in the manner of a money Mart, or Fair, as above
declared (provided it may be ordered in such sort, as the interest or usance
import no more than what is allowed by statute in downeright intere^t) because
in this fair a Merchant may take up money at ^n instant to furnish his
occasions more speedily, and if he please extingu^sh or pay it the week
following; By this means may men be punctual in their paymen^s, and having
no moneys in Cash, supply themselves by this fair for payment of their debts,
until their own come in, and this punctualitie will be so much more
requisite and necessary, when turning over of Bills comes in request, and
those Bills have present execution, all which will add incredible activitie
and livelihood unto our trade which otherwise might languish.

The fourteenth is that inland Trad and Navigation, which is the carriage of
goods within the Land be facilitated and promoted, and th^s done by making
Rivers Navigable, cutting artificial ditches of such depth as that the water
may stand still in a level, or be kept in by sluices or flud-gates, and boats
laden with all commodities drawn by man or beast: Highways should likewise
be kept clean of Robers, in good order and repatation; and if conveniently, be
gravel'd, which would render them more passable. So great care hereof is had in
Germany, Italy, and some other Christian Countries, nay by those Barbarous
people of the great Turks Dominions, as most part of their goods are carried to
and fro twenty or forty days journey out right, and at present besides many
others, the chief Trade betwixt Venice and Constantinople is drove by Land; I
mean from Spalato to Constantinople; and many not over-fine, but bulkie goods,
as Venetian Cloth, Turkey Grograines, Mohaires, Cordovans, Wax and others are
thus conducted at easier rates. It Is likewise much conducing to increase of
trade, to have posts settled in such other parts of England where they are
wanting, and the portage of inland Letters to be lessened about one half: for
the Inland trade being yet but young in the infancy, cannot well be at so
great a charge for Letter carrying, which in Italy, France, Germany, Holland,
and other Countries stands not in half of what we pay: and although it is
certain, that Merchants and others omitting to write weekly Letters unto their
correspondents, does much prejudice their business, and consequently the
general trade and benefit: yet I verily believe, and not altogether without
experience, that many a man ^oth run the hazard of his business, rather than
write, and pay six pence to read his Letter: it is true that the
Schoolmasters of England, being paid their standing and extraordinary wages
^ut of this office do cause postage of Letters to be so high: but far better
would it be, that they were satisfied some other way less hurtful unto
trade, whose hindrance brings the greatest hurt of all.

And whereas before I have given my consent for all vagabonds, Beggars, and
delinquents, not bad enough for hanging, to be sent for the new Plantations,
yet if that be not approved, or besides that course, it may be very requisite
that public houses were built, where such as are willing to take pains, but
find no employment, may be set a work to beat hemp, or other toil learned
at first sight for a moderate hire, until they have earn't somewhat toward
employing them in their own callings; and the same houses to keep at work
those other v^grant and idle people, until it be thought fitter to ship them
quite away: The building and stocking of these houses, especially in London,
and other great Cities, would be a matter of no great charge, but certainly of
wonderful charity, and a means to reclaim many ill disposed wretches, and
make them, will they nil they, in some sort become serviceable to the
Commonweal.

There is also another work of chariti^, which I am very zealous to make
mention of, in hopes this City so famous for deeds of mercy, or some well
disposed person will soon put in practice, which is the erecting of a Mount of
charity, and lending it such moneys, (no great sum 'twould be) as might
furnish all comers as far as forty shillings a piece, at ten per cent. upon
pawnes worth or more than is borrowed for twelve months; which being expired,
the pawn unredeem'd to be sold at out cry: This may well seem a secure and
gainsome business to be embraced by a particular rich man for profits sake,
and like enough to prove so: but sure I am, it would be an exceeding great
relief to many hundred poor people about the City of London only, that are
glad to pay, because they can hav't no cheaper above thirty per centum, nay
after the rate of double the Money for a years interest, and leave a pawn to
boot sometimes.

Did I not conceive these works of darkness to be kept from ears and eyes of
th^se whose au^hority might hinder such extortions in pu^ishing them, or their
purses and alms prevent them by erecting a Mount of Charity to prevent them,
I should be fearful they had much to answer for: Believe me there are
thousands in this City whose faces are thus g^inded, yet live, whose succor
would be of so much greater consequence to the whole mass of Inland commerce,
being stirring people, whom need has made industrious, and taught to ^urne
their penny as you hear, or else could never live under such extortion, which
notwi^hstanding at last must grind them quite to powder before their time, for
scarce being able in their youth, by reason of these blood-suckers, heavy
burdens to sav^ so much for themselves as will keep life and soul together,
age coming on though few of them do live so long, when they cannot tindge up
and down so fast, shift so well for themselves, nor fare so har^ly, must
quickly break both back and heart: wherefore if private bount^e provide not for
their redemption, the public cannot be better imployd.

The improvement of our Lands and hu^bandrie my justly here be thought upon,
the rather because I fear me we come short herein of most Christian Nations:
for in what Country so populous lies there so much ground wast? or being
manured to produce so small a crop? It Is certain, that both in hot and cold
Countries, more marshie Lands, more dry, more sandy, more clayie are tilled
and improved to far greater advantage, and yet have not such a store of Dung,
Chalk, Marle, and others to qualify their great defects, so that it may
appear, ^ur laziness and want of industry to be the only cause of
barrenness.

But I have known a policy practiced elsewhere amongst people over-slothfull,
that would not work above half the week, if they could get money enough to
feed them for the whole, and that was by clapping excises and taxes upon what
they eat and drank, so that a weeks labor with this sauce, whet their
stomachs, as they were well able to eat out what they earned afterward in a
whole week by Sunday night. A very fit salve for such a sore, for cure whereof
all experiments are few enough to put in practice; yet I wish we may begin
with more mild at first, and consider what means, and encouraging the Husband
man to be more industrious, might present themselves; for certainly he is too
dull and careless of his own profit in particular, which is a parcel of the
general, in that it may be observed, how many of them have not so much as a
fruit-tree, or pot-herb about their houses or cottages: the barrenness of the
soil cannot excuse this totally, there being none found so cursed by nature;
but if the time they beak in the Sun, and liquor themselves at Alehouse in
the shade, were spent about improving it, would by degrees compel it to
produce some sort of roots, herbs, and fruit, as are both profitable, pleasant,
and wholesome for their nourishment, far more sometimes, than solid massy food
of flesh, cheese, and pudding, by reason of their practice, being where ere
they come, or what ere they eat* to cram themselves to the throat, which since
they will, is yet less dangerous in diet of light digestion than the other,
that nothing but a whole days plowing or delving can put over, and clear
their brains from fumes.

The fourteenth is* that all Merchants trading into one place and Province be
contracte^ into a Corporation, the want whereof, or the non-observance of their
Charters and Privileges, both at home and abroad, has no little prejudiced
the trade of all parts in gen^rall; for by this means they could not agree,
nor keep themselves from under-selling one another in our native commodities,
nor over-valuing of the foreign. both which we have just cause to complain
of, could we as easily find a remedy to redress them.

Besides, if they were so many Corporations, they would be better respected
and regarded by Princes and States, where it conc^rnes them to reside, and
might better, and with more credit and advantage, capitulate with them for
diverse privileges and immunities.

I know there are many that cry out, to have merchandising left open and free
for any one to trade, where, when, and how he will; which I may confess would
much increase it for the present, not without advantage perhaps of some
particular men, and this, may be, might last some years too, this Kingdom
being so populous, and altogether as adventurous, though one half were undone,
the rest, too greedy of g^ine, would scarce believe them, but make trial al^o,
and so run on headlong unto our utter ruin, which must needs be the conclusion
of all affairs managed by such as observe no good order, no^ un^erstand well
what they go about.

For preventing whereof, the first and best step may be by this Honorable
Parliaments confirmation of their several Charters, or if need be, by granting
new, with larger privileges and power, in force whereof such several
Societies understanding their own mysteries best, may have full authority to
order and govern them accordingly. What was before said concerning the
necessity of a Corporation, for the better managing of the East India trade,
though in that especially most necessary, yet it is in all others of exceeding
great importance for the very self some respects, though not in so large a
manner; for where no government is, disorders must ne^ds spring up, and no
possibility of a redress, but from experience of such as brought them in,
which they only measure and attain to by their own ruin: yet one Item, and
that no slight one, I will give more, which is, that of all other Nations, the
English have most need of this superintendencie and government, because no
Merchants so young as they, neither at home nor abroad, are entrusted by
others, nor deal for themselves in such great sums of money as English do.

The sixteenth, that there be a Commission, or a peculiar and select Magistrate
of so many as shall be thought fitting, to sit weekly, advising and consulting
all advantages of commerce, amongst which some understanding Merchants will be
necessary, and the same Merchants to be as often, and as much as possible, of
the Court of Merchants before mentioned, where hearing the state and decision
of a^l differences betwixt Merchants, would be much for their own information,
and instructing their Associates of this other Magistrate which now I speak
of, and not only enable them with some course to remedy and prevent them for
the future, but thereby also to advance traffic.

The seventeenth and last means is, that Merchants have certain immunities
from being called to inferior offices and services where they live, and other
privileges of due respect and repute given them, whereby they may be
encouraged to continue, and others to betake themselves to so worthy and
honorable a calling.

Of Merchants breeding, abilities, and advantage they have above all others, if
they but employ it well, and that Merchandise is the grand colu^ne and
foundation of this Kingdoms wealth and safety, I have given a touch before,
knowing withal full well the saying of, Faber quisque fortunae suae: And that
a man, what ere he be by inward worth and value, shall only be to others what
he can make himself known to be* yet something every Merchant should fare
the better, in being so necessary an Instrument of the Weals welfare; and
although it may chance be truly observed, how such Merchants for the most part
thrive best, that regard not the superficial complement and ceremonies of
Gentilitie, more attending their business at Exchange than Court; yet it might
be no ill policy to cherish and respect them* bearing with such of them as
do less regard the quainter and more courtly proceedings of the times, the
rather in that slighting and despising them, as some great Courtiers have been
thought to do, was but a means to thrust them into a sinister conceit of
Court, teaching them to avoid and shun all kinds of appearance, negotiation and
treaty, (even when it concerned themselves and publ^que good sometimes) with
such as perhaps in Merchant-like affairs are well near, not seldom as far
from understanding them* as to be understood by them in others. And whereas I
have heard it objected by some of good rank too, that it was not so necessary
such great respect were given to Merchants, in regard they sought only their
own benefit and profit, and that if one were discouraged from trading, another
would be encouraged to follow it; with their leave I should be bold to answer,
that this argument holds not, for that all encouragement is little enough,
because the more the better for the State in general, and one Merchant to be
valued as hundreds of ordinary men, because many hundreds of men are employed
and maintained by one Merchant. And if some of their weaknesses were not taken
notice of with such Emphasis, and they (which in all other Mysteries and
Sciences is approved requisite) were but patiently permitted to speak, using
their own language and terms of Art, (wherein his Majesty's superabounding
graciousnesse toward them on all occasions was President sufficient) they
would be found well able to express themselves, and justify their
proceedings, and King and Court keeping touch in contracts and agreements, not
only be willing to deal with them for their own just gains sake, but as they
might likely, learn somewhat a more courtly manner and behavior (less
necessary in them) from Courtiers; so could Merchants advise them much more
for the good government and husbanding their estates, a thing not dishonorable
for any to be well versed in his own business, which caused the Italian
proverb, Mais' imbratta le mani confari fatti sua, A man never fowls h^s hands
with doing his own business: and every one, whether he will or no, is a
Merchant for what he buys or sels, be it lands houses, or whatsoever else, and
more gentile it is to sell Cloth, Silk, Sattins, Jewels, etc. as mere
Merchants do, than Cattle, Hay, Hides, Wool, Butter, C^eese, as Country
Gentlemen, and others of best note and worth.

And besides it may be observed, that Merchants for most part are of the same
stock and Family for Gentry, though the younger branch, and many perhaps
wanti^g means to blazon it in due equipage and colors to the world became in a
short time very unable to give any account of it at all, which disasters many
younger brothers of England have been subject to, till advancing by
Merchandising their estate and fortunes above the elder brothers the H^raids
made them beholding to them for their own birthright, and if as in Italy
especially the States of Florence, Sienna, Pisa, Genua, and Lucca, where they
continue Merchants from one generation to an other, we should do the like in
England, the greatest part of the whole Kingdom and riches would quickly
belong to Merchants; and although by this course the feate of Merchandising
would questionless be much improved by long experimented observations conve^d
unto posterity from Father to Son successively, which would not only enable
them to deal and better countermine the craft and subtilties of foreign
Nations, but hinder in a great part such often failings and bankrupts; yet
since as I conceive the greatest cause which makes many noble families in Italy
so to continue Merch^nts, is, that countries being so populous abounding with
moneys and little land to purchase, near one half of the whole Territory
belonging to Monasteries, Covents, and other Ecclesiastical Fraternities,
which may in no wise be alienated; so I conceive it more laudable and agreeing
to make a flourishing Kingdom and Commonwealth, for a Merchant being blessed
with a competent estate to retire himself from the cares and troubles of the
world (which certainly a Merchant of great dealings is of all others most
subject to) the better to spend the remainder of his days in thankfulness to
that God who even then had an eye over him, when perhaps little thought on,
undoubtedly not so much as should have bin, as also that young Merchants, I
mean younger brothers or such as have little or no means may come forward,
which cannot possibly be, if the whole trade be engrossed only by men of
wealth and their posterity.

And now having run over these particulars, which prove more then I expected,
and somewhat further prosecuted then I at first intended, though not well to
be omitted, in regard they may for this cause oppress the memory, give me
leave to add those few words as it were for burden of the whole.

That unless the fishing employment and East India traffic be followed and
enlarged, other Nations will gain upon us, our trade infallibly decline daily,
and the whole State with the same speed and paces post on to poverty and utter
ruin. Thus then though I knew well, sundry had writ more largely and worthily
of this subject, yet was I moved to give a touch in brief, as you have se^ne,
persuading my self though there were nothing new herein (which yet cannot be
justly said by what I ever met with either in manuscript or Print,) some few
might turn it over being short, that could, nor would not be troubled with a
volume, and hereby be prevailed upon to move this High Assembly for employing
some du^ proportion of their grave wisdom in consultation, establishing, and
enlarging trade, which next to the business of Religion and our Laws well
hoped to be by them both religiously and legally provided for, may perh^ps
justly claim the third place, whereby not only the Kings revenues will be
increased, but in time his Majesty come to need no other revenues, nor the
Kingdom other security or Bulwark.

Here I would have put a period, but perceiving there are many well acquainted
with these affairs who attribute the decay of trade to the overballancing of
it, and the Merchandising exchange, give me leave to pass a word thereon.

By overballancing of trade is meant, that we bring into, and consume in
England foreign commodities for a greater valow, then we send and sell of our
Native Commodities abroad, by which means we come indebted to foreign Nations,
and have no other way to pay or exting^ish it, but by transporting of our
moneys, which will utterly ruin a trade and Kingdom in the end;

For answer whereunto it may be said, that though greater quantities of
foreign wares toe be brought in, then we send out of Native, yet it does not
follow necessari^y that our gold and silver must go to pay for them, in regard
that Italian, Spania^d, French, and Dutch do many times freight English ships,
whereby good soms of money are yearly raised by our Nation abroad, and may
serve to pay for the advance of foreign commodities that we^ bring in, at least
for such a proportion as this freight money impo^ts, which is to a
consisiderable vallew.

But for my part, though in this point I have not declared my self throughout
this short d^scourse, my opinion is, that our trade of Native commodities is
not overballanced by the foreign, nor gold and silver conveyed out, (unless
first b^ought in,) in so large manner as is supposed, for there being no Mines
in England that produce any store, and we having likely at present though
conceald as much ready money as ever, at lest before our intestine broils
dispersed them, and never more riches in plate, if a^y coin, either gold or
silver has been carried out, as questionless there has, being to be seen
apparently both in France and the Low Countries, yet that silver and gold was
first brought into England, for it grows not here, and then though some
proportion be exported: yet if a greater be first imported (which has
certtainly been so, for otherwise we should have none at all left by this
time) the ri^hes of the Commonwealth will not decline, though they might
flou^ish more if the exportation could totally be hindered; and howsoever this
will be found a task most difficult, yet it is the course which we are
likeliest to prevail with.

For since the Chaos and whole body of trade is not managed jointly, but by the
particular Merchants and members of it, one whereof sends out native
Commodities, and brings his returns home in Bullion, or by Exchange; another
brings in foreign commodities, making over moneys by Exchange to pay for them;
and a third exports native commodities, and imports foreign too; if when there
should be a balance made hereof, and our importation of wares found to exceed
our exportation, which in such case must needs be paid for, one way or other,
and so invite our moneys over, what remedy can be taken without disturbance of
the whole trade? If flatly you prohibit the bringing in of foreign goods,
foreign Nations will do the like with ours, and at last both be reduced to
receive from one another such only as are necessary, or most useful:
wherefore a better course to moderate this balance, would be with dexterity to
lighten or lade either scale in the custom and other charges, which may
insensibly make one dear, and the other cheap, as is before declared, with
sundry such other means, all tending to enlarge traffic. And although other
Princes might likewise do the same in their dominions; yet many of them are so
necessitous at present as will perhaps rather suffer some inconvenience, and
run the hazard of a greater, but absent, and fu^ure damage, than lessen
their revenues.

For if the trade were balanced, we are less able to reduce that first, and
therein prevent the exportation of moneys, then first by hindering moneys
through strictest diligence, and severe penalties, from being exported, and so
in consequence secure the over-ballancing of trade; for to use this diligence
rests in our selves, and being independent we may practice it without
exceptions to other Nations; and if onc^ effected, though no more Bullion
should be brought in, which yet will always come more or less, nothing could
prejudice us, or breed scarcity her^after.

But before the exportation of moneys can be prevented thoroughly, it is
necessary we know who are those that may likely transport them, and the
causes that move, and enable them so to do.

Such then as transport moneys are either Merchants or Travelers, and both
moved thereunto, either because there is more to be gotten by transporting them
in specie, than delivering by Exchange, or else because they have no experience
or acquaintance with Merchants here or abroad, or desire not to trust them, but
think it securest to adventure their moneys with their persons, which in such
case they have always ready about them where ere they go; but delivering by
Exchange cannot many times receive the value where they will, if they resolve
to go any other way, but where their Merchants has credit, and promised to
pay them: and these later are chiefly either such as go away to enjoy the
liberty of Amsterdam; and for most part they go privately, and will not be
known by delivering their moneys by Exchange; and therefore carry them in
specie, or else are Ambassadors, or private Gentlemen that go abroad to
travel, but in such number, and each carrying wi^h him for the most part
fifty or one hundred pound: nay many times double as much, which at years end
draines the Kingdom of a very considerable sum; and therefore perhaps it
might not be found amiss, that a Banker or Exchanger were established at
Dov^r, Rye, or some other Port (where all Travelers especially should be
obliged to imbanke) that of himself were enabled with credit, and obliged to
give Bills of Exchange, and Letters of credit for most places of France,
Holland, Italy, Germany, and Spain, unto all Travelers, they delivering him
first such moneys as they had there present to carry along with them, or
afterward to deliver other Bills for other moneys, brought and delivered them
in like manner, and all at the true and just value of the Exchange; for herein
Trave^lers to my k^owledge have suffered much; which being prevented by settling
the course afo^esaid, every Passenger, Mariner, or other of what sort soever
may well ^ee prohibited upon strictest penalties of life and goods, to carry
aboard either Boat or Ship above twenty shillings ste^ling at the most.

And for Merchants, (unless some podling French Merchants) they commonly
understand themselves, and seeking their own advantage, may either deliver
their moneys by Exchange, or send or carry them over in specie, according as
one or other seems most beneficial to them.

Now it may not be amiss to take notice, that it has never or very seldom
been observed, more advantageous to carry moneys over in specie for what
foreign parts soever* than deliver them by Exchange, and therefore probable
that Merchants who understand their profit, and so much aim at it, have
delivered their moneys by Exchange from time to time, and not sent them over in
specie, as is supposed: yet I must tell you, there was perhaps a time (which I
well believe) and may too often be so again hereafter, that strangers shall
have so great quantities of moneys by them; all which if they should resolve to
deliver by Exchange, the Exchange would fall so low in their own disadvantage,
(for more or less deliverers or takers raise or bring down the Exchange,
which will more plainly appear hereafter) as it might cause the transportation
in specie to be more beneficial than the Exchange, and certainly we had
need provide for such a time; for if Merchants have exceeding great sums to
deliver, and find no Takers save at extravagant low rates, nor Wares to employ
them in, to profit, they will run the hazard of conveying them away privately
in specie, to prevent a greater damage and loss of time, by keeping them dead
in England.

And these Merchants questionless for most part are strangers, and furnished
with these moneys three manner of ways.

First, by great sums of moneys made over to them by Exchange from foreign
parts, in regard the Exchange of London has used to be so advantageous to the
deliverer abroad, through the under-valu^ng of our moneys in respect of other
Countries, occasioned, because there are, or would be, more deliverers of them
than takers.

Secondly, by sale, and proceed of goods that strangers bring in, which they
do in great quantity, because they pay bu^ little customs, only 2 per cent.
more than Dennizens, and export none of our Native commodities, because they
pay greater customs, on some I think as much again as we do; and that which
is the greatest shame, the Herring, and other sorts of fish taken by them in
our Seas nay very Ports, and sold to us for a very round sum yearly; a
great part whereof received in the Port Towns where we buy the fish, cannot
easily be prevented without stricter diligence, and execution is carried away,
never to return again.

Thirdly, by their infallible half years incomes, and Revenewes of such vast
sums of money as they keep continually at interest in London; and if you
demand the summa totalis, which all these make, I can only answer you,
Pauperis est numerare pecus: but howsoever indefinite, that it is immense, will
hereby appear.

Consider the great quantities of goods of all sorts we export hence for
foreign parts, the greatest part whereof is sold for money, and many hundred
thousand pounds sterling thereof made over hither by Exchange; and yet
strangers have more moneys to send out of England, than we have to bring into
England, which is most evident in that the Exchange from foreign parts
(according to the intrinsecall value of the several species respectively) to
England is more advantageous, than to England from foreign parts; for even as
the scarcity of any commodity makes it to be more valued, and held at a dearer
price; so there being few deliverers abroad of moneys for London which are
English, in respect of the Takers, which are strangers, and many Deliverers in
London, which are strangers in comparison of the Takers which are English, the
few English Deliverers abroad, and Takers at home stand upon their terms,
bringing the Exchange in their favor, and this is called the Merchandising
Exchange, because quite opposite to the nature of Exchange, which was found out
to prevent carriage of moneys up and down: this invites the exportation of
them in specie, and therefore a table of Rates is propounded which should stint
the Exchanging our several Coyns with those of other Nations, according to the
paritie and purity both in weight and goodness of allay, and so settle the
price of Exchanges for all Countries, which Merchants might not exceed in
delivering or taking moneys by Exchange.

For answer hereto, I con^eive it may be granted, that in delivering moneys by
Exchange in England for foreign parts we receive not the true value or par
according to the intrinsecall goodness of the Coin; but this is our
advantage, and only dammageable to strangers, because they (and not English)
are the Deliverers in England; neither will this Merchandising Exchange likely
carry away our moneys, so long as the Exchange produces as good profit, as the
money it self, if it were transported, would yield in specie, which for the
most part may hitherto have been observed; but hereon, as also about the said
Table of Rates, I hope it may give a little light to enlarge somewhat more,
though not altogether so Methodically.

Granted it is then (by me at least) that our moneys are undervalued by
Exchange with strangers, and that though we may commonly make as much of them
by Exchange, as carrying them in Specie, to spend in ordinary payments, yet
the Mint in foreign Countries may give more for them, (otherwise they are not
undervalued) and this profit from the Mint may doubtless entice them over: but
whether a Table of Rates can prevent this or no; or if it could, whether such a
Table might not prove more prejudicall in another respect, will be the question.

For though our moneys be under-valued, it is our advantage, in regard we
English do buy our own moneys thus under-valued, so often as we take
moneys by exchange in England, or deliver them by Exchange abroad, and
strangers are they that sell us our own moneys thus cheap, or under-valued, so
that this is but buying and selling good cheap, whilst strangers sell good
cheap, and we buy it: and this profit we have questionless upon all our
moneys delivered for England, out of the proceed and sale of our goods abroad.
Neither is this all, for since we advance in delivering our moneys abroad by
exchange for England, we are enabled to sell our cloth and other commodities
the cheaper; for if for 35 shillings Flemish delivered abroad, I can have 20
shillings sterling in England, I may sell my cloth for one eighth part less in
Flemmish money, than if I were to give 40 shillings Flemmish to have 20
shillings sterling in England, being all one to a Merchant that sels for money,
and delivers it afterward by exchange, to sell his wares at a bad price, and
have a good exchange for his moneys, or sell his wares at a good price, and
have a bad exchange for his moneys.

This stinting then, as it will bring the Exchange in favor of the English
coin, and consequently beat down the price of what commodities Forrainers
sell in England, thereby increasing the vent of them; so will it raise the
price of our commodities sold abroad, and diminish their vent, which being well
considered, may perhaps prove a damage to us, at least for such a portion as
is sold for money to be made over hither by exchange, for though we seem to get
so much the more as we sell our commodities the dearer, yet when we remit the
provenue by exchange, by reason of this stint, we lose by exchange a part of
what we advanced on our commodities; and what we lose by exchange, only a few
Merchants strangers make benefit of; and what we get more in the price of our
cloth, comes out of all their purses that wear our cloth, which proving dear
to them, will make them leave wearing it, and hinder so large a vent as
formerly.

And I believe it will be thought more beneficial for a Commonwealth to vent
store of their native commodities, at such lower, but moderate rates, as both
Manufactors and Merchants may live thereby, though with less profit, than to
sell a less quantity at greater rates, the profit of the greater parcel in
the whole exceeding that of the lesser, especially so many men more being set a
work until we have other employment for them; and the rather it concerns us
to sell good cheap, in that all other Nations now almost make cloth of their
own, or other clothing* which may serve near as well: So though it be
granted that our moneys being under-valued by exchange hinders importation and
invites exportation, which notwithstanding through severitie may be in part
prevented; yet since under-v^luing our coin, we get in making our moneys
home by exchange, and by that means can afford our cloth the cheaper, and so
vent greater quantity, the most beneficial state is to be wi^hed for, which
perhaps upon due scrutinie, may appear to be this low exchange, in respect of
the intrinsecall value of our moneys, the rather for that though they were
raised but to the pretended just paritie and pur^tie; yet that would likely
bring in very little Bullion more, which besides the loss of time in
expecting a ship to bring it hither, carries the charge of Insurance with it,
and when it is here, I can have but the just value at the Mint, and so much I
should have had for it by exchange, according to the table of rates, besides
usance which is use or interest from the date of the bill of exchange, till it
be paid in England; so then the benefit which I might have made by exchange,
being taken from me through this table of rates, and no profit to be got by
Bullion, the money which would otherwise have been made hither by exchange,
will likely be employed in foreign commodities, whereof there comes too great
quantity already.

Besides stinting the Exchange may seem less need full through this following
consideration, which is, that as there was anciently no exchange at all by
bills, so may we presuppose the like case at present, and find that an English
Merchant abroad may buy foreign commodities for money, or take them in barter
against English commodities, without so much as a thought or consideration of
the exchange; as thu^:

An English Merchant carries abroad with him an hundreed pieces of yard-broad
Perpetuana's, which cost with all charges forty shillings per piece, is 200
pound starling: At Ligorne he sels these hundred pieces of Perpetuana's at
dollers 11 Spanish Reals of ^/8 per piece, which make dollers 1100 in all* and
knowing that Florence black Sattins are a vendible commodity in England, and
may likely yield him about 11 shillings per yard, buys of a Florentine
Merchants 183. li. of Florence black Satins (for plain Sattins are sold in
Florence per pound) at ^ollers 6, of 8/8 per pound, which amounts to Dollers
1100. the full provenue of his 100 pieces Perpetuanaes, and the 183 li.
contain about braces 5 per pound, which is braces 1008, whereof braces 4. make
yeards 2 are in all years 630. which sold at 11 -- s. per yard, as was
supposed, yields 346. li. -- 10 s. -- 0 sterling; out of which he knew likewise
the custom and charges of the Sattins were to be deducted: And in like manner
he might have put off his 100. pieces of yard broad Perpetuanaes at Dollers 11.
per piece in Barter or Truck to be paid in Florence black Sattins at Dollers 6.
per pound, which will produce the same reckoning about 300. li. for his 200.
li. carried out in Perpetuanaes, so that it appears a Merchant may buy or
sell* and bartar for foreign commodities to this benefit, and be altogether
ignorant of the Exchange; which ignorance it is true might have prejudiced him,
as also his not knowing the intrinsecall value of those Dollers 1100 of 8/8,
and so have brought them for England in specie in case of gain, or that the
Exchange would have produced better profit than the Satins: But thus much I
conceive may follow hereupon* that we need not stand so peremptorily upon
rating or stinting the Exchange, for what concerns all foreign commodities to
be bought or bartered for by us abroad, and for what moneys we make home from
thence hither by Exchange, it is our advantage that the Exchange be low, and
the Kingdom advances more upon the whole proportion of moneys made home now,
the Exchange being low, than it would get by a part of it, being brought home
in Bullion or specie, if the Exchange were higher: And we cannot expect that
all should come home in Bullion: for that (presupposing the possibility) would
utterly impoverish other countries, and cause those Princes, to prohibit the
exportation of it, and the very scarcity it self, through our exporting it,
would make it in a short time so hard to come by, and our commodities for the
same cause so much beaten down in price, as the trade without doubt would be
quite abandoned at last; for it is our benefit that moneys be plentiful also
in such Countries where we carry our commodities to sell; and shall otherwise
have little encouragement to continue it, so that a moderation is to be
desired, and must be observed in all proceedings, lest we fare as Alexander the
great, who having near conquered the whole world, wept because there was no
more left for him to conquer.

And yet I will farther add in favor of this Table of rates for stinting the
Exchange, that since the statute permits us not to take above eight per cent.
for use or interest money, which is hoped (for the further quieting of
Consciences and public good) may yet be brought to 6 per 100. in regard as we
sell our commodities cheaper or dearer, according to the long or short time we
give with them, or the party to whom we sell, being of great or less credit
and esteem, and many desiring to put their money out at interest, somewhat
under the statute, to a surer man, than at a higher rate, to one whose credit
or estate is not thought so good; evenn so is it in Exchanges, and I know not
well how it can be helped, yet as the rate of intere^t is stinted to all alike,
in such manner as none may take above the statute; so were it to be wished,
that for usance single, double, or treble, they should not require of any above
the rate of statute interest, which the Bankers or Exchangers will yet be able
to counterminde by putting the price of the Exchange so much more in their
favor, unless that be stinted too: And this might seem very facile, if
there were nothing in it save the prevention of transportating moneys to and
fro, and just as many Takers as Del^verers; for then he that desires nothing
but his moneys in another place, if he can have as is likely, the just value
according to the intrinsecall worth by Exchange receives a great accommudation,
and the price being once settled to remain constant, needs only look after the
surest men to Exchange withal; and a Merchant may likewise for same reason
know sooner what he gets or loses by sale of his commodities, wherers now he
cannot until his money be likewise made over through the uncertaintie of the
Exchhange, which falling or rising still varies somewhat. But put the case I
had urgent occasion to use 100 l. in Paris, and find no body that will take it
by Exchange, if it be free for one to export it, or prohibited, but the danger
or penalty not answerable to my expected profit, no doubt I may likely be
moved to export it in specie: but if there be another who has the value of 100
l. in Paris, and equally desires his 100 l. pound here as I do mine in Paris,
both of us alike understanding the true intrinsecall value of the several
species, it is probable we two shall quickly agree to exchange with one
another, according to the real par: But if there be sundry Takers and
Deliverers, though equal on both sides, some whereof being overhasty either
in deliveting or taking, out of fear their turns would not otherwise be
served; this may cause the Exchange to rise or fall above or beneath the par on
one side or other. But if there be more Deliverers than Takers; that is, more
moneys to be delivered by Exchange from London, then returned by Exchange to
London, and that all year long, and for many years together, as has been
most certain in respect of England, with foreign parts, doubtless the few
Takers will have more opportunitye to stand upon their terms, in bringing the
Exchange down in their advantage by so much undervalutng of our moneys: And
though this be very obvious to any man's apprehention, yet it may be made
further appear so; thus:

It Is then first presupposed upon good ground as you have heard, that the
undervalving of our moneys by Exchange is prejudicial to such as are
deliverers of money by Exchange in London, and takes by Exchange abroad.

Secondly, that these Takets abroad, and Deliverers here at home are strangers,
is likewise presumed; and

Thirdly, that out of the sale and provenue of our goods exported there are
great sums of mocey returned hither weekly from abroad will as easily be
granted.

Now since this undervaluuing our moneys by Exchange is only dammagable to
the Deliverers at home, and Takers abroad, and both these are strangers, why
do strangers deliver here in England, and take abroad by exchange thus to
their loss? certainly nothing but necessity can force them to contiuue losers
all year long for sundry years together: nor can there be any necessity, had
they not such store of moneys, which they must necessarily deliver here, and
that in far greater quantity than we have returned us from abroad by sale of
our goods exported.

So then if it be granted, as well it may, that strangers have more moneys to
send away, than we have to bring into the Kingdom, though a Table of Rates
were established as is propounded, yet strangers would have the same or greater
encouragement some times to export moneys in specie; for whereas at present the
Exchange being favorable to the Takers at home, and Deliverers abroad which
are Euglish, the English are moved through gain to take a good proportion of
those mo^ies which the strangers must necessarily make over by Exchange, or
send away in specie, for they have occasion to use them in other Countries: But
this Table being settled in damage and prejudice of the Takers at home, and
Deliverers abroad being English, the English will forbear to take at home, or
deliver by Exchange abroad, so that whereas strangers did form^rly export only
a part of their moneys, they will now be constrained to convey away the whole:
wherefore I will only add, that though this Table be settled for Exchanging,
yet since there may, and that likely enough, as great necessity befall
strang^rs to export moneys notwithstanding, it will be altogether as requisite
to practice exactest diligence along the Coast, and strictest penalties for
preventing exportation of them; and if it prove by this means to be secured,
then may this stinting Table be very well forborne, in that the sting lies in
the exportation of our moneys, and the undervaluing them is the benefit of the
English, who are the Takers at home, and Deliverers abroad, and by the low
Exchange at home, and high Exchange abroad enabled to sell their Cloth so much
better cheap, and consequently, venting the greater quantity, at last win the
whole trade from other Nations.

Since then as the scarcity of every commodity makes it more to be esteemed,
and yet money through want or plenty raises or deminishes the price of all
things; in same manner does it predominate the Exchange; for as the Takers and
Deliverers of money by Exchange do overbalance one another, so does the
Exchange rise or fall accordingly, as is demo^strated by daily exp^rience; and
strangers being found thus replenished with moneys to cause the undervaluing of
our species by Exchange, if to ripe judgments and understandings it appear so
prejudicial to the State o^ is alleged, which for my part I do not as yet
apprehend, (though I confess it invite the exporthtion of our moneys, since
diligence may reclaim it in the greatest part) certa^nly the only remedy must
be to take away the cause, which furnishes them with such store of moneys, and
that is by preventing the great Revenues they make of interest moneys in
England, which continually they draw from hence to furnish their occasions, no
otherwise than every man does for receiving of his Rents in one Country which
he intends to spend in another: and secondly, by raising the customs of
strangers goods, especially inwards, both Spaniards, Germans, Italians, and
those of the Low Countries, all so much as may keep the^ from boinging in such
quantities as formerly.

Others are of opinion, the exportation of our moneys might be hindered by
raising them in Denomination, or embasing the allay; but if other Princes do
the like, we are still where we were: besides, this would encourage many
private Mint-Masters in England, and Strangers to bring it from abroad, though
not altogether so much as brass money, yet poverty and ruin would be the end
of it; but had this latter motion taken effect, and greater Species been once
made current, what through counterfeiting at home, and importing from abroad,
it would in probability so exorbitantly have increased, until brass kettles
had been more worth than brass money, by how much the workmanship of kettles
is more costly.

Then would a full period have been put to trading, and no dealing or
exchanging heard of, save barely to suffice nature, and so remained until the
brass money had ceene called in again, which then must needs be gr^wne so
common, as not esteemed or accounted a reward worth working for.

But if this over-ballancing of trade were granted, and merchandiz^ng exchange
found to be so dammageable to the Commonwealth as is alleged* since
certainly they cannot be well prevented otherwise, it will serve exceeding
appositely to enforce the burden of this discourse, which is: That unless the
fishing employment and East India traffic be followed and enlarged, other
Nations will gain upon us, our trade infallibly decline daily, and the whole
State with the same speed and paces post on to poverty and utter ruin.

What greater encouragement can possibly be expected? The treasure of the fish
employment is known to yield millions yearly (by our permission) unto others;
and from the East Indies, besides the venting of our own commodities, bringing
in their Spices and others hither, and the trading up and down in the
Country, to exceeding great benefit, we may in time hope for all silver and
gold that ever came out of the West, or any other parts; for into Turkey we
have seen it carried daily, thence for Persia, and other Eastern Quarters,
but never return back again. And for my part, however they are said to
esteem these of Europe one eyed, and all other Nations else quite blind, in
comparison of themselves, I cannot think them so beatified in this world, but
that we might through industry find out somewhat which they want, and so be
able to furnish them; or that they be only covetous, and so reprobately
admirers of the God Mammon, as they might not in time be prevailed upon to
exchange him for the only Deity.

All these particulars, some whereof deserve large tracts and volumes of
Encmiums and encouragements, I have only pointed at, though longer than I
intended, to the end this supreme Assembly might reflect thereon, and enforming
themselves more at large, from such as can exactly give directions, in due time
provide for all, to the honor of his Majesty, wealth and safety of these
Kingdoms, and perpetual renown of their deep wisdoms, to which Posterity
will attribute so flourishing an estate, next unto God Almighty, whose
infinite goodness I shall continually implore for their prosperous
proceedings, until He please to bless them with a thrice happy conclusion to
King and State, and Both in One, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line but two, for four* read force, for Chackmate, read Checkmate* p,
4. l. 2. f. safeties, r. sea fights. p 4. l. 14 f. furnished, r. furthered. p.
10. l. 21. f. compassed by selling, r. compassed but by selling. p. 12. l. 7.
f. reported, r. exported. p 14. l. 1. f. propriety, r. prosperity. p. 16. l
8. f. valley, r. vallew* p. 19. l. 15. f. whac, r. what. p. 22. l. 23. f.
mucst, r. much. l. 26. f. of the state, r. of state. p. 24. l. 8. f. heve. r.
have. p. 33. l. 36 f. rarest, r. surest. p. 34. l. 13. f. assuring, r. issuing.
p. 35. l. 27. f. thou, r. then. p. 36. l. 18. f. slid, r. said. p. 37. l. 17.
f. which, r. what. p. 39. l. 4. f. pence a piece, r. pence. p ib. l. 12. f.
four, r. forty seven. p. ib. l. 30. f. with, r. which. p. 20. l. 25. f. that
only, r. that not only. p. ib. l. 40. f. rei, r. pecuuiae, p 41. l. 10. f. to
Wards, r. toward. p. ib. l. 17. f. care, r. case. p. ib. l. 29. f. than* r.
rather than. p. 43. l. 12. f. read, r. send. p. ib. l. 13. f. Schoolmasters,
r. Post-masters. p. 44. l. 12. f. prevent, r. redeem, p. 50. l. 9. f. that, r.
the. p. 51. l. 17. f. balanced, r. over-ballanc'd.


