Oliver and Old Nick judging the case of John Barleycorn THE Arraigning and
Indicting OF Sir John Barley-Corn.


THE Arraigning and Indicting OF Sir John Barley-Corn.

A man of a noble blood, and well beloved in England, and has been a great
maintainer of all England, both rich and poor, yet now is found guilty of many
a sinful act and bloody crime, and therefore he is arraigned and condemned, and
stands to the mercy of the Jury, and if any man have any thing to his charge,
let them appear at the sign of the three Loggerheads in Bacchus Court, and
there they shall be heard by the two noble judges, Oliver and old Nick his holy
father. Given under the hands and seals of these 2 above written, at the sign
of the three merry companions in Bedlam, that is to say, poor Tom, merry Robin,
and Jack Lackwit.

Newly composed by a well wisher to sir John, and all that loves him.

By poor Tom for the King, a lover of mirth, but a hater of Traitors and
Mischief.

Thomas Robins the Author.

Printed for T. Passinger, at the three Bibles on the middle of London Bridge.
1675.

The Tune is, Old Sir John Barley-corn: Or, Tom of all Trades.
ALL you that be good fellows,
come listen unto me:
If that you keep the Alehouse*
and merry company;
Attend unto my story,
which is I fear too true:
It makes my heart full sorry,
and many does it rue.
It Is of a Gallant noble Squire,
which many know full well,
An honest man I witness can,
if I the truth may tell*
His Name is Sir John Barley-corn,
which makes both Ale and Bread:
What should all do which how are born,
if Barley-corn were dead?
For as I abroad did walk,
I heard a pitious cry,
And many a man did talk,
that Barley-corn must die;
His enemies increase so fast,
at board and eke at bed,
I fear their malice will not cease,
till they cut off his bead.
For Smug the honest Blacksmith,
does make a piteous cry,
And Nick the nimble Tailor,
does vow that he shall die:
And Will the Weaver does complain,
with many Tradesmen more,
I hope their labor is in vain,
therefore they may give over*
Yet now a little while give ear,
you that are standers by,
And you presently shall hear
Sir John condemned to dye.
All you that love poor Barley-corn,
a good word for him give,
And he that speaks against him,
I wish he may not live.
Gentlemen, if you please but to give so much attention, as to spare a little
time, you shall presently hear Sir John Barley-Corn called to the Bar, and all
his accusers appear, giving in their Bills against him: and also his friends
which comes and gives Evidences on his side, and saves his life after ^e was
Contemned to dye.

The arraigning and indicting of Sir JOHN BARLEY-CORN.
O Yes, O Yes, O Yes, if any Man or woman, in Country, Town, or City, have any
suits or bills of indictments against Sir John Barley-corn, let them appear
this day, and they shall either hear or be heard.

Vulcan the Blacksmith appears, and gives in his bill. Be it known to you all
Gentlemen, that this Sir john barley-corn has been a sore Enemy to me, and too
many of my Fellows: for many a time when I have been busy at my Work, not
thinking any harm to any Man, but having a fiery spark in my throat I one time
going over to the sign of the Cup and Can for one Pennyworth of Ale, there I
found Sir john: I thinking no Hurt to any Man, sat me down to spend my Honest
twopence; but in the end Sir John began to pick a quarrel with me, and then I
started up, thinking to go my way, but then Sir John had got me by the top of
the head, that I had no power to help my self: and so by his strength and power
he threw me down, broke my head, broke my face, and almost all my bones, that I
was not able to work of three days, I was so sorely tormented in my head and
other parts of my body; nay, more then this, he picked my purse, and left me
never a penny, and therefore he does deserve to die.


Will the Weaver. Now Gentlemen, I do beseech you to hear me speak; I am but a
poor Man, and have a Wife and a Charge of children, and a poor Weaver by my
trade, yet this in-knowing Companion will never let me alone, but he is always
enticing me from my Work, and will not be quiet till he has got me to the
Alehouse, and then he quarrels with me, and abuses me most basely, and
sometimes he binds me hand and foot, and throws me in the ditch, and there
stays with me all Night, and the next Morning leaves me, but not with one Penny
in my Pocket, and therefore if you hang him, I will never grieve.


The Tailor comes in. And I shall never grieve if you either hang him or head
him: for I am sure he has been a great Enemy to me these many years: for as I
never loved him, I never cared for his Company: for I always Loved Master
Wheat far better then Barley: Yet one time as I was coming home from my Work,
I espyrd Sir John and two or three good Fellows was a quarreling, so I skipped
amongst them, thinking to make them good Friends: but as soon as Sir John saw
me take my neighbors part, he straight way began to quarrel with me, and gave
me such a mump on the teeth, that I fell backward* and all to be wrayed me,
broke both my Elbows, broke my Yard-wand: nay, worse then that: the very same
day my Wife met with him, and he like an ill-conditioned Knave abused her,
which made her learn so much Mischief, that she comes home as Drunk as she
could not stand, and beats Back and sides: Nay, she has got the way so perfect,
that I am persuaded she will never leave it: and therefore by my consent, you
shall put him to the same Death that I have put many of my enemies too, and
that is to snap off his head.


Mr. VVheatly. Head him, I hang him too, if you Please, you shall have my
consent: for I am sure he does deserve it, for I am certain he does daily and
hourly abuse me. I am sure I have been a Man that has been very highly esteemed
both with Lords, Knights and with Squires, and none could please them so well,
as james Wheatly the Baker, but now the case is altered, Sir john barley-corn
is the Man that is highly esteemed in every place: I am now plain james
Wheatly, and he is Sir john barley at every Word: and that word has undone
many an Honest Man in England. For the company of Sir john barleycorn, I can
prove it to be true, has caused many an honest Man to wast and consume all that
ever he has, and more as he can get it: Nay, he has caused many a Man to sell
House and Land, and all that ever he can to maintain Sir john barley-corn: Nay,
when Men hoth done all that ever they can, sold all, spent all. and left
nothing: yet the Fancy they bear to jack barley-corn, makes them to rob and
steal for money for to maintain themselves in his Company: Nay, rob and steal
will not serve sometimes, but kill and slay, Murdering one another for Money to
keep Sir john barley Company, till at the last the Hangman gets a great part
of them, and this Sir john Barley-corn is the grand Foundation of all this
mischief, and therefore he deserves to lose his head.


Old Noll, and old Nick the judges. Well, What answer can you make for your
self Sir John: You hear the Complaints made against you: harein you are sound
Guilty both of Felony and Murder.


Sir john. I beseech you Gentlemen to let me have the benefit of the Law to
Speak for myself, if it shall Please you to hear me, I hope that I shall clear
my self. You do all know, Gentlemen, that every Man will strive to make his
case as good as he can: although be himself be in the most Fault: And as the
Old Proverb goes, Some bad better steal a Sheep then some look over the hedge:
And so it is by me in this Condition, not as I am accused by one of these
Persons, but by them all, so I intend to make answer against them all, and
Speak nothing but the Truth. These Men complains that Sir John Barley-corn has
undone them all, which is false, as I shall make it appear.

I confess my Name is Barley-corn, it is true: but you never knew Barley-Corn do
any harm, if they do not abuse him, but always did good, and has relieved as
many poor, as any Man: and will do still, if they do not abuse me and my Name,
as they have done before time, and does still, and in a malicious way they take
my right Name from me, and after much abuse takes my good name from me: and
instead of calling me Sir John Barley-corn, they call me Master Malt, and so I
come to be abused and basely belyed on: for it is Master Malt that has done all
this wrong, which they say I have done.


Mr. Malt. Who I, Brother John? indeed but that thou art my Brother, and I love
thee well, I would hit thee one slap in the teeth: but no time past, thou and I
shall meet again.

Gentlemen, As for my part I will put my matter to the Bench. First, I. pray
you insider with your selves, all Tradesmen ^ould Live: and although I Master
Malt ^o make sometimes a Cup of good Liquor, and many Men come to taste it, yet
the Fault is neither in me nor in my Brother ^ohn. No, no, the Fault is in such
as these which make this complaint against us, as I shall make it appear to you
all.

As in the first place, Which of you all ^an say but Master Malt can make a Cup
of good Liquor, with the help of a good Brewer: and when it is made it must be
sold. I pray which of you all can Live without it. I but when such Men as
these, which ^omplains of us, and finds it to be good, ^hen they have such a
greedy mind that they ^hink they shall never have enough for their Money, and
so will over-runs wit, and then ^hey begin to quarrel with me and my brother
John, till at the end we are forced to take them by the top of the Head, and
lay them ^own fast asleep, then I pray you judge whether we or they be in the
fault.


The Judges. Truly we cannot see that ^ou are in the Fault: but as for Sir John
Barley-corn, we will show you so much Favor, that you shall have three days to
turn you in, to see if you can find Bayl for your good Behavior: and as for
you Master Malt, you must bring in Bayl too against the next Sessions: and so
Farewell for this time.


Now Sir John Barley-corn and his Brother Malt is marching together, and for
joy that they got so fairly off, they went singing this Song.

The Tune is, Sir John Barley-corn.
ALL you that be good fellows,
come listen unto me,
If that you love the Alehouse,
and merry company.
My name is Sir John Barley-corn,
which many know full well,
My brothers name is master Malt,
as many one can tell.
Though Smug the honest Blacksmith,
on me does sore complain:
Ere long I know I shall not miss,
to shoot him through the brain*
And honest Will the Weaver
for all he is so stout,
I know he will do his deaver
to have the other bout.
And Nick the nimble Tailor;
will venture his best shears,
Till Barley-corn and Master Malt
do take him by the ears.
Though Master Wheat the Baker
he be my younger brother,
He Will not deny a bout to try
with me or any other.
There Is not a Tradesman in this Land,
that ever yet was horn,
But will take a touch, sometimes too much
of Sir John Barley-corn.
Therefore all honest Tradesmen,
a good word for me give,
And pray that Sir John Barley-corn,
may always with you live.
Master Malt. I, but hear you brother John, now you put me in mind, you know
you are to appear again to make answer for your self; therefore I would have
you to provide some honest Man to speak for you, else you will be in great
danger to lose your head, and then we are all undone. O brother Malt, take you
no care for me: for as for my part I do not fear but I shall have enough to Speak
for me: therefore welcome luck. Live or dye, I fear nothing, and so farewell for
this time: for I think I hear them call John Barley-corn.


I am here, I am here, I am here. What is the Man mad?


The Judges. Sir John Barley-corn, appear, and answer to what is here laid unto
your charge. Here you stand arraigned and condemned to lose your head.


A very sharp piece of bussness Gentlemen: truly, I am afraid that it will
overlay my stomach: I hope Gentlemen you will take a part with me, or at the
least hear my witnesses speak: for I am falsely accused.


The judges. Thou shall have any favor that can be had therefore bring in thy
Evidence, and let us hear what they can say in thy behalf.


The Plowman enters. Gentleman, I pray may a Man Speak without offense, that
does intend to speak nothing but the truth, and no more?


The Judges. Yes, thou may be bold to speak the very truth and no more: for
that is the cause we sit here for: therefore speak boldly that we may
understand thee.


The Plowman. Gentlemen, in the first place let me hear what bold, impudent
Rogue dare speak one Word against Sir John Barley-corn? who ever he is, he is
no better then a Rogue, a Thief, a Vagabond, a Traitor to the Brown Loaf, a
Thief to the Brass Pot, the Oven, and the Spit: Nay, he is a Traitor to the
whole World, that would take away the life of so noble a man as Sir John
Barley-corn: For he is a man of an ancient House, and is come of a Royal Race;
There is neither Lord, Knight, nor Squire, but they Love his company, and he
theirs: so long as they do not abuse him, he will abuse no Man, but does a
great deal of Good, I can make it appear in many kind of Ways: And in the first
place: Few Plow-men can Live without him: For if it were not for him we could
not pay our Landlords their Rents: and then I pray what would such men as you
do for money and clothes: nay, your gay Ladies would care but little for you,
if you had not your Rents coming in to maintain them: and we could never pay
you, but that Sir John Barley-corn feeds us with money, and yet would you seek
to take his Life; For shame let your malice cease, and pardon his Life, or else
we are all undone.


Enter in Bunch the Brewer. Gentlemen, I beseech you hear me speak, my name is
Bunch a Brewer, and I do believe few of you can Live without a^ a cup of good
Liquor, no more can I tell how to Live without the help of Sir John
Barley-Corn; As for my own part, I maintain a great charge, and keep a great
many men at work, I pay Taxes, forty pound a year to the King, God bless him,
and all this is maintained by the help of Sir John: then how can any man for
shame seek to take his Life?


Enter in Mistress Hostiss. Take his Life, I pray who is that which they would
take his Life?


It is Sir John Barley-corn, Mistess Hostess, they say they would take off his
head?


How, take off his head! then they shall take off mine too: what impudent
Rogues be they that say so? I am persuaded that they be none that loves the
poor Commonalty: surely they be none but some miserable Rogues that makes their
Bags their God, heaping up their chests with Money to stop the Devils Mouth
when he comes to fetch them away; such as these would have no body to Live but
themselves. Indeed such as these do not care to take off the head of any man,
if they could but enrich themselves by it: away vagabonds, away vagabonds, away
you blood-sucking rogues, away you muckworms of the World, you would have no
body Live but your selves, I hope Sir John will yet stay amongst us, when Old
Nick will fetch such as you away by ten at a burden. Gentlemen, I do beseech
you not to take notice what such Fellows says, for they care not what blood
they shed: As for Sir John, I know him to be an honest man* and never abused
any Man, if they abuse not him: First, in so doing they abuse themselves, for
all they say he abuses them, I do protest to you Gentelmen, before you take his
life, you shall take mine, nay, I beseech you give me leave to speak to you; if
you put him to Death, all England is undone: for there is not such another in
the Land that can do as he can do, and has done; For he can make a Criple to
go, be can make a Coward to fight with a good Soldier; Nay, he can make a good
Soldier to feel neither hunger nor cold; and besides, for Valor in himself,
there is few can encounter with him, for he can pull down the strongest Man in
the World, and lay him fast asleep, therefore I beseech you Gentlemen, let him
Live, or else we are all undone.


Enter in Exciseman. Gentlemen, all this is true which the woman speaks; for if
you put Sir John Barley-corn to death I and my Family are all undone; for I pay
a great Rent for my farm, and I have a great many Servants under me, which lies
me in great charges, and if you put sir John to Death I and mine are all
undone, and therefore I pray let him Live if you love the Commonwealth.


The Judges. Well, we see no cause of Death in this man, therefore he shall not
Dye; Sir John your life is pardoned, henceforth and for evermore; therefore
down on thy knees and pray for King Charles the second:


I will sir, and a curse on his heart that will not say Amen to our prayer.


Sir John's prayer.
O Heavens protect our Gracious King, his Royal Queen also, Lord grant them
long time to be seen in spite of cruel foes, from Traitors bold that seek the
King and Queen for to destroy, defend them Lord with one accord unto their
subjects joy; that while the Sun and Moon does last, we may enjoy a King, and
when death does come, provide them a room, with Angels for to sing. And he or
she, what ere you be, that will not say Amen, sir John does pray, both night
and day, you may never speak again.

Written by Tho Robins.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Passinger on London Bridge.
THe pleasant History of Cleocreton and Cloriana.
The jovial Garland, or sundry new Songs and Sonnets, never printed before.
The Garland of Loyalty, containing sundry new Songs of these late times.
The pleasant History of Parismus, Prince of Bohemia, in three sheets.
The Garland of Love and Good Will.
The Lovers Academy, or loves new School, containing sundry Complements of
loveletters.
The Trial of wit, being a new book of merry Riddles.
The Man in the Moon, discovering a world of Knavery under the Sun.
FINIS.
Oliver and Old Nick judging the case of John Barleycorn


