A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from PATRICK ROCH A Romish Priest in Ireland, to
Doctor Washington, provost of the College of Dublin, and to the whole Society.

Wherein may plainly appear their further Machinations, and Plot-workes
toward the subversion of protestanisme, if God permit.

Likewise a short Description of the Rebels proceedings, as it was sent in a
posscript of the same Letter.

Sent in a Letter from Mr. William Reymond, Student and fellow of the College
to Mr. Charles Frank, Mintster of Gods Word in Suffolk, in former times his
Chamberfellew in the University of Cambridge.

First printed at Dublin and now reprinted at London for Richard Cooper, 1641

THE COPY Of a Letter sent from Patricke Roch, a Romish priest in Ireland, to
Doctor Washington, provost of the College of Dublin, and to the whole Society.
SIR,
I Am confident that you, and the rest of your society are not insensible of
the insolent affronts, the true Catholics of late years have endured, and
these, since your predominance in the University, have bin aggravated several
ways: I am sorry that your frustating the expectations of your real
well-wishers (I mean the Roman Catholics) have forced me to brand you with
the title of an ill disposed Governor, and enemy to that true Church, whereof
you ought to be a prime Member.

It is strange that you should be guided by the giddy brains, and illiterate
persuasions of puny fellows, whose Learning has bin admired, and discretion
unparalled in the University of Oxford.

It is not to be denied, but that this College was sounded, and consecreted to
the studies of religions men, whose good works here on earth might merit
happiness, and in the world to come make them shine forth as the Sun in the
kingdom of their Father.

But your society have made it a den of Thieves by robbing the Natives of this
kingdom of their privileges (yea their Birth-rites) and extirpating those,
whose lights would so shine forth to this Kingdom, that all the world might
see their good works, and the blessed Saints by their servent prayers
intercede for the welfare of all the Inhabitants to Almighty God.

You may, I am sure, will curse the time that you arrived safe in Ireland, if
you do not speedily curb the arrogance of your Associats, who daily prate
against our Catholic Religion, and in their pulpits abbrobe the authority of
our Church, and holy Father the Pope.

But what needs there more: had we not conceived better hopes, this
warning-piece had not gone off. Be wise and charitable to your selves at
length; if not to us (for it begins at home) we need it not. The God of
charity hatd heard our prayers, and has not stopped his ears to his
distressed Militants here on earth: his battle we sight, we fear no bad event
the cause being his own.

He cannot forsake us, because he cannot leave himself.

Et si Deus pro nobis, quis contaa nos. But I will keep no longer from you,
what in my duty I must impart: prevent now a course, if not too late, from your
forsaken Mother the Church of Rome. It is already gone forth I fear, if our
last letters have not prevailed: but his Holiness, who if without offense I ma
speak, being as merciful as his Father of Heaven is merciful, has in his
last good Letters enclosed this, which accept, and consider of.

If they will embrace the truth they may: if not proceed. Sir, This needs no
interpretation, his holy meaning (who as yet I am sure never erred) is already
deciphered in characters of blood. A poor beginning of Christ's revenge,
unless according to all Christians desire the issue prove more successful;
for we heartily wish, and endeavor if you persist, as I may use that accussed
Heretics word in the Scottish cause, to extirpate you both root and branch;
dream not of other Assistants, although policy may persivade you: your cause
in your own consciences is wrong, witness our happy proceedings so
prosperously, so succesfully atcheived.

There are not a few wise men assembled in England to whom these affairs are
open.

Were they as truly pious, as wise, making the Palace of Westmihster a true old
Roman, not a Christian Senate, they would not Heathen-like so hastily contrive
their, and your own ruins; and as the true Copies of those former Tyrants joy
in the bloodshed of so many Catholics whose separation from the body cannot
please, unless their miserable, and never too much to be lamented Car'Kasses
be on their public Gates exalted, and exposed a ridiculous object to their
posterity.

This alone is a sufficient warrant for all our unjust miscalled cruelty: and
he that hitherto has furnished us with 30000. will treble the number, since
he has promised never to fail those who really call upon him.

For we appeal unto his Almighty Throne, that neither poverty, sickness, or
calamity true Mothers of Rebellion, together with unequal Taxations, or
impositions, those first fruits of murmuring. have caused our resistance, but
only the cause of Christ, and his vilisied Church, as before the dreadful
seat of Judgment we hope one day to answer, is, an ever shall be an occasion,
now, and at all times, of the hazarding of our goods, lives, and fortunes,
toward the confusion of Gods perfect Enemies.

So with only this, I leave you. Fear not him that can destroy the body, but
him that can destroy both soul and body eternally,

Your yet not desparing Well-wisher, and true Servant of the Catholic Church,
Patrick Roch.
Tredagh, Shortly in the shortest day of our year, December. 11. 1641.
REader, this is the true and perfect Copy of that Letter, which was privately
sent by Master William Reymond one of the fellows of the college in Dublin, to
Mr. Charles Francke, a Minister of Gods Word in Suffolk.

FINIS.

