THE COPY OF TWO LETTERS FROM Sr. THOMAS ROW, Lord Ambassador Extraordinary
for His Majesty in Germany.

One to the Earl of Holland.

The other to Mr. Edward Waller, one of the Members of the House of Commons.

Concerning the French Ambassadors Accusation against him in the House of
Peers.



Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, August 4. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter from Sir Thomas Row Lord Ambassador Extraordinary for
His Majesty in Germany, to the Earl of Holland, etc.
My Lord,
I Have heard that the French Ambassador has by your Lordships mediation
preferred a Complaint against me in the House of Peers: That I have offered to
the King of Hungary, in the Name of His Majesty my Master a League Offensive
and Defensive against all Men, upon condition of restitution and reintegration
of the Prince Elector Palatine to his Lands and Dignities: which being in
contravention of the League between His Majesty, the French King, and the
United States, was offensively taken. In which he desired reparation.

I could have wished so much moderation in the French Ambassador (if the
jealousy proceed from himself) that he had first been well grounded to have
proved his Accusation: If by Order from the King his Master, that he would have
been pleased, to have asked this Question of His Majesty, before he brought it
into public, to whom, he cannot doubt, that I have given account of my
Actions?

But seeing he has presented me before the Lords, I am not sorry nor unwilling
to purge my self before so Honorable Judges: nor that I am fallen into your
Lordships Hands, who I presume will do me equal Justice (which I beseech of
you) to represent my Answer before their Lordship, which is,

With all Reverence to the thrice Christian King, and due respect to his
Ambassador, as his representant, and without relation to the command of the
one, or obedience to the other: the whole Accusation in Form and Matter, in
Substance and Circumstances, is unjust, and in the first Inventor false, and
against Innocence, Truth, and Faithful service, Scandalous.

I never received any such Power, nor Instruction, from his Majesty, my Master,
nor had the boldness, infidelity, or indiscretion, to presume to do it of my
self; but so far the contrary, that I have often openly, authentically, and
seriously professed against any motion or overture of any confederation
directly or consequently against the Crowns of France and Swede, and the
United Provinces, his Majesty's Friends and Allies, which is Registered in many
Public Acts, which I could produce, testify by all the Ambassadors, Mediators
in this Treaty, but that I value my own Witness equal, and sufficient
against my Accuser.

Your Lordship and many of the honorable Peers, have long known me: I am not
ignorant, either of my Duty, or the present conjuncture of Europe, and shall
end with this Profession: that as I am a faithful Servant to my Master, so I
am a good and true Englishman, neither French, Spanish, Austrian, nor Dutch,
nor for any respects shall ever be: which I wish were the true Character of all
my Countrymen, of which, when I shall have the honor to render an Account (if I
be called unto it) to the high Court of Parliament, I am confident that I shall
not only justify all my Actions, but make it appear to my own Advantage,
That in a business of so much perplexity, and of so many Relations, wherein I
have stood alone; That I have both understood my employment and the present
condition of Public Affairs; and principally directed all my scope to the
honor of his Majesty, the safety and advantage of his Kingdoms, and the
preservation of true Religion in those places, where it has pleased God, both
to plant and purge it, by his Chastisements. And thus much, out of your innate
Cander and ingenuity, and for a Testimony of your Lordships Favor to me, I
beseech you humbly to present, in my Name, to the house of Peers: That they
may be pleased to Register, and Publish my Protestation, for the Vindication of
my honesty and reputation, wherein you shall infinitely Oblige.

Vienna. 3. June, 1642.
The Copy of another Letter from Sir Thomas Row, to Master Edward Waller, one
of the Members of the House of Commons, concerning the French Ambassadors
Accusation against him, in the House of Peers.
Sir,
I Was confident that the whole course of my Life, and the wariness I have
learnt by long experience, would have prevented my necessity of making an
Apology, especially to the Honorable House of Commons (whereof I am an humble
Member) either of my intentions or Actions. But having understood that I have
been Accused by the French Ambassador, To have offered to the King of Hungary,
in the Name of His Majesty, my Master, a League Offensive and Defensive against
all men, upon condition of restitution and reintegration of the Prince Elector
Palatine to his Lands and dignities, which being in contravention of the League
between His Majesty, the French King, and the United States, was offensively
taken, and therefore reparation required. I have thought it my Duty, both to
His Majesty, and for the Justification of my fidelity, and the tender care of
my reputation, wounded in the high Court of Parliament, to desire this Office
of Friendship from you, to represent my Answer.

First, That I never received any such Power nor Instructions from His Majesty,
my Master, nor that any respect could so far decline me from my Duty, to
undertake of my self to transgress both my Order and against my own
judgment. Therefore I must protest, with all reverence to the thrice Christian
King, and due respect to his Ambassador as his representant, and without
Relation to the command of the one, or obedience of the other; the whole
Accusation in form and matter, in substance and circumstance, is unjust, and
in the first Inventer false, and against Innocence, Truth, and Faithful
service, Scandalons.

It is very easy to Blot and Stain the purest Innocence; but I am confident,
in the equity and Wisdom of the house of Commons, that they will not only
give credit to my assertion, but that they will so far regard the reputation of
one of their Members, as to Blot out and expunge all Record or Memory of this
Imputation; and that they will please to believe, that I both understand my
Duty, and the present State of the troubled World, and that all my Negotiations
have principally respected the honor and convenience of my King and Country:
of which I shall render such an Account as every Accusation shall turn to my
advantage.

I will not reflect upon the scope of this Complaint against me, knowing well
their Wisdoms will easily penetrate, that there may lie hid other designs,
then to disgrace a private Man: but humbly desireing, they will be pleased, as
far, and wide to publish my integrity, as it has been defamed: I will no
further trouble them, nor you, but rest.

Vienna 8. June, 1642.
FINIS.

