(...) Ohel or Beth-shemesh. A Tabernacle for the Sun: OR IRENICVM EVANGELICVM.

An IDEA of Church Discipline, In the THEORICK and PRACTICK Parts; Which come
forth first into the World as Bridegroom and Bride, hand in hand; by whom you
will have the totum essentiale of a true Gospel Church state, according to
Christ's Rules and Order, left us when he Ascended.

In which you may find the Hidden Mystery of whole Christ, in Head, Neck, and
Body. Hidden in former Ages from the Sons of Men. Ephesians. 3.4, 5.

Published for the benefit of all Gathered Churches, more especially in
England, Ireland, and Scotland.

By JOHN ROGERS An unfeined Friend and Servant of the Bridegrooms and Brides,
and Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, late at Purleigh in Essex, now at
Tho. Apostles, Land. Declared for the most part in Christ-Church, Dublin in
Ireland.

Imprimatur Joseph Caryl.

Psalm. 19.4, 5. Their line (...) (or rule and structure) is gone out thorough
all the earth; in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, etc. (...) or Heb.
To the Sun in altissimo gradu.

In that day I will raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and build it
as of old,

Amos 9.11. LONDON: Printed for R. I. and G. and H. Eversden, to be sold at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

(...) Channuccah. A TABERNACLE For the SUN.
The first BOOK.
CHAP. I. That there is a visible Discipline, or Polity of the Church under
the Gospel, ordained by Christ; and what it is: and how it differs from carnal
Policy.
NOthing is more clear out of the word of God, then that there is a
Gospel-Discipline, Wisdoms Polity,
or Church State for Saints of divine Institution, and by divine instruction;
Prove. 1.3. To receive the instruction of (Christ) Wisdom, Justice, Judgment,
and Equity; (...)
for Solomon (who was a type of Christ) teaches his Discipline in this Book of
Proverbs, which you have some call his Ethics, as relating to moral Precepts;
for Divinity is like some great Lady that is every day in a new dress; and
Morality like to a handmaid that waits on her; Sim.
Christ [the typified Solomon] intends hereby to tell us of his Order, Divinity
and Morality.
and of the Discipline of Wisdoms house (viz. his Church) Prove. 8.1, 2, 3. and
Chap. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. he begins with this exhortation, Prove. 1.8. My son hear
the instruction (or Discipline, as many read it) of thy Father, Expos.
viz. his spiritual documents, and teachings, From Father and Mother.
and forsake not the Law of thy Mother, that is, of the Church, Gal. 4.26. who
bears, and brings forth children to the Lord. So that it seems Christ's
Discipline (which is of the Father, and of the Mother) consists in the Spirit,
Spirit and Truth.
and in the truth, Joh. 4.23, 24. not only inwardly, but it is also outwardly;
as to outward Orders, Laws, and Ordinances of the Church. Thus the Lord opens
the ear to Discipline, Expos.
says Elihu to Job chap. 36.10. and commands them from iniquity; that is,
says Calvin, he instructs them in his ways, Gods design in setting up
Gospel-Discipline.
and teaches them to amend. This shows, that Gods design in giving us so good
a Gospel-Discipline, is, thereby to make us good and Gospel Disciples, both in
knowledge and in practice, and is therefore of great concernment to us in
teaching us these three things, To make us Gospel Disciples.
1 Subess^; 2 Coesse; 3 Praeesse.

First, to be obedient to his Laws, and Ordinances, ut discipuli, 1 For order.
living together in Order: Secondly, to love one another, 2 For un^ty
and all Saints living together in unity, ut socii, Psalm. 133.1, 2. 3 For
edification of one another.
Thirdly, to instruct one another, and to strive together, to excel in
exhorting, comforting, and teaching to the edifying of one another, 1 Cor.
14.12. ut Magistri, as Masters of knowledge, Psalm. 119.98, 99. and therefore it
is, that there is so great a need, and notable a use of this good order, and
Gospel-Discipline amongst us, which God has of his goodness, and in his
wisdom provided for us. Hereby appe^rs Gods great love to us.
So says old Bernard, super Cant. Sermon. 23. What abundant cause have we to
bless the Lord (who was no ways bound to us) that of his free love should let
down a Discipline out of his own bosom (as it was brought by Christ to us
from the Father for us to dwell in? because the Schoolmen could say, Th. Aqu.
22. Q. 80.1.3. Expos. And his great care over us.
Disciplina non debetur ex debito, quia inferiori non est aliquis obligatus, in
quantum est inferior; Man is the inferior, therefore it is man that is obliged
to the Lord his Superior, for making so much, and so excellent soul-provision
(hence religio a religando) Man. 24 45. (...), Who is a faithful and wise
servant, Expos.
whom his Lord has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due
season? So we see the Lord takes care for us, and makes provision for poor
souls, for he has appointed, (constituit being a compound word, is as much as
to say, cum aliis statuit, whom the Lord has appointed (jointly with others)
as an Overseer, (super familitium suum,) over a remnant of his family.

Now, The necessity of it is undeniable.
woe be to them that reject this Discipline of Gospel-institution, Psalm.
50.16, 17. a mere Moralist will tell you there is a necessity of Discipline.
(See but Tull* in's Offices lib. 8. and 9. de invent. ante finem libri) and a
mere Formalist will tell you, that there is a necessity of Church Discipline,
which is a principle owned by all for a truth (except Atheists) be they no
more then mere pretenders, or professors. As for this Church Discipline we
shall find it in the word, and fetch it from the Fountain freely flowing
forth through many more Scriptures, then I shall mention both out of Old and
New Testament.

First, in the Old Testament, we find many Prophesies, This Discipline is
proved, 1 cut of Old Testament.
and Promises filled with this, as Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness, which must be meant of
this visible Gospel-Church-state, Expos.
wherein Saints (having communion with Christ, and one with another) do worship
the Lord, as appears Psa. 29.2. It is the beauty of holiness.
Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness; this is the Lords house, here is
his worship due unto his name; out of this Sion goes forth the Law, and it is
beautiful for situation. So in Isa. 2.2, 3. It shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the
top, Expos.
etc. which foresees the singular fellowship of Saints in these last days
wherein we live (largely) exalting Gods own way of worship, which he will
bring forth with shoutings, and withal an attractivum bonum, a winning
excellency will show it self to the ravishing of the Saints, and the
re-edifying of their souls as (in statu quo prius) of old; so that the very
outcasts of Israel shall ( more fluminis) by a spiritual instinct, and from
occult qualities flow freely (and be fully satisfied) unto it, yea up to it,
which is a greater wonder.

The glory of this latter house shall be abundantly greater then the former,
The glory of the latter house greatest.
which notwithstanding was filled with his glory. This house the Prophet also
premonstrates in Ezekiel. 43.10, 11, 12. which looks to the Gospel-time and Temple.

Secondly, in the New Testament, this truth triumphantly appears, Proved in New
Testament by Christ
for our Savior testifies himself unto it, in Mat. 16.18, 19, and upon this
rock will I build my Church (in the Heb. (...) but, is not a copulate) but
Christ himself is this rock that is pointed at for the Churches foundation,
Expos.
1 Cor. 3.11. or else is will fall: And as the verb metaphorically concludes
this Doctrine of Church Discipline (being taken from a building consisting of
many particular parcels made up into one, It is a building fitly compacted.
(...).
also of such a Society which are of near relation and sweet consanguinity
(spiritually taken) including the order of the house, which is thus built up an
habitation to the Lord through the Spirit; It is not an (openly) mix^d
congregation.
) So also the person and tense do signally declare, Christ is yet about this
building (who alone is the Carpenters Son, the Son of Mary) as afterward we
shall show.

For further proof, see Mat. 18.17, 18. the Church is not there meant a mixed
company (says Cameron in loc. Expos.
) nor a mixed worship, Ecclesiam esse misc^llaneam falsum often dicere Came. in
loc. quia confusis* cultibus confunditur v^rus Deus cum Idolis.

Vrsin in secundo praecepto.

Proved by the Apostles, and primitive Saints.


says Vrsin: but you have here commanded and commended unto you by Christ, the
good Gospel Order and Discipline thereof. This the Apostles practiced, Act.
2.42. and 46* 47. And in all the Epistles of Paul, it is apparent, Phil. 3.17.
1 Thessalonians. 1.7. 2 Thessalonians. 3.9. Cum multis aliis, etc. This the Apostle preached,
Act. 8.12. instructing others in it, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 14.12. and
commending others for it, 1 Cor. 11.2. Coloss. 2.5. 1 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. besides
abundance of examples of all the Churches of Corinth, Rome, Phillippi,
Macedonia, Antioch, Samaria, and the seven Churches of Asia* So that we are
encompassed about with a broad cloud of witnesses, Examples.
and cannot but concur with all in this received Axiom, or undeniable truth,
that there is a Gospel-Discipline for the Saints to submit unto, and to walk
under, together in order and unity.

This many call Ecclesiastic Polity, as Cartwright, Hooker, Christ's Church
Discipline, or Polity, why, and how called so.
with many others, because that so much skill and judgment is required for the
ordering of the affairs of the true Church of Christ, which we are here to
treat of, 1 Timothy 3.15. this same is by others called the Church visible
consisting of believers in body together, and under outward forms, order,
Coloss. 2.5. and government, and under the power of Christ (King, and Lawgiver)
committed to him by his Father, Matthew. 28.18. Joh. 5.22. Joh. 13.3. and
delegated unto him, Visibly, and invisibly all one Church.
and executed by him visibly and invisibly; invisibly by his Spirit and word
within, which are as the Ruling Elders and Officers, Joh. 14.16, 17. Joh. 16.7,
8. Sim.
But visibly by his Ordinances, and Officers in the Church without, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. yet none ought to be a visible Officer (no nor
member) but such a one as is ruled, directed, enabled, and qualified by Christ,
and his Spirit, ordering within in their hearts; So that the formal and
spiritual, outward and inward, visible, and invisible make but one Church: But
more of these things hereafter.

Only this at present, before I proceed, How it differs from carnal worldly
Polit^e.
I must acquaint you that there is a most dimense difference between this
Discipline and Polity in several particulars, of which some I shall name, and
so haste.

First, 1 One and the some in all places.
Polity of Nations (or rather Policy whereby states are ruled) is not one and
the same in all places, but as Physic is administered according to the
constitution and complexion of the body; so is Policy, and not in all places
alike, but according to the constitution and complexion of the people, Sim.
and place; one Nation is ruled this way, another that way, but Christ's
Discipline of his Church is one and the same in all places, to all people, 1
Cor. 7.17.

Secondly, Polity also differs according to the times, but this
Gospel-Church-state does not, 2 In all ages. Cuncta temporum cursu mutantur.
but is the same (by rule) in all ages, and at all times, be they what they
will, Ephesians. 3.21. and Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Media cultus sunt immutabilia, till the
coming of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. 1 Cor. 11.26. Isa. 9.6, 7.

Thirdly, Polity always drives on a Selfe-interest, and seeks no further; 3.
In the interest it drives.
but this Discipline of Christ drives on an interest above self (which is, as
having the Moon under her feet) and is not therefore of this world, Joh. 5.30.
Joh. 7.16, 17, 18. Heb. 2.12.

Fourthly, Polity is ordered by certain outward Laws, and rules left (as a
Gnomon) or laid down for the tranquillity of the State; 4. In the Laws
outward, and inward.
but this Church of Christ is governed by the Word without, and the Spirit
within (as will appear hereafter) in power; and hence it is that Directories
are out of date, Directories or Cannons are of no use therein.
the Cannons discharged and broken in pieces, and Platformes of men no more
minded then as they are the Word of God, and till further light be given from
above, and till the Spirit lead us further into the truth.

Fifthly, Polity, and the Kingdoms of the world have many Kings, Emperors,
and Rulers; but the Church of Christ over all the world has but one and the
same head, 5. In the King and Governor.
Ephesians 1.22. and Ephesians. 4.15. and Ephesians. 5.23. 1 Cor. 11.3. Coloss. 1.18. who
is to rule them by Spiritual influences, and outward Ordinances.

Sixthly, Polity requires outward obedience, and no more (be the heart never
so bad) but this Church Way of Christ calls for spiritual worship, 6. In
obedience.
Joh. 4.23, 24. and the heart, Psalm. 27.8. Prove. 3.1. Psalm. 66.18. Psalm. 51.17.
Acts 4.32. Act. 8.21. and Act. 11.23.

Seventhly, In Polity men have power of pulling down, or setting up new Laws
by the Supreme authority of that Nation or State, 7. In altering or adding to
Laws.
and their Laws and Acts (as those of the Parliament) are binding, and of
force: But in this Church of Christ there is no setting up new, or pulling
down old and true; Christ's Laws and word must stand without adding,
diminishing, or altering, Rev. 22.18. this Discipline is not a nose of wax,
When^e came Pope, Prelates Hierarchy.
nor (as honest Cartwright says) taken out of Cannons, Laws, Decrees of men,
Popes, Prelates, or the like; from which pit came all the Locusts, and
Scorpions, the Romish Hierarchy, the Archbishops and Bishops, and their
Servants, Surrogates, Officials, Commissaries, and the rest of that trash and
rubbish.

Eighthly, Polity has no higher principle then reason, 8. In principle*
but this way of Christ is abundantly above, and yet in nothing against pure
reason.

Ninthly, Polity is a great Fautor, and abettor of Customs, of long
continuance, whereby the people are embondaged; 9. About customs of long
continuance.
but this way of Christ is very much an enemy to all customs and traditions of
men (that are not of the Word of God) though of ever so long continuance and
use: Vide Vrsin de 2 praecepto.

Tenthly, Polity has Corporal punishments, and power against opposers,
enemies, offenders, or the like, 10. In power of making obedient, and punishing
Offenders.
Et ist^s vi coercere, ac ferro punire potest; but the Church Power is from
above, the weapons of her warfare are spiritual, Non ferro sed verbo, non vi
and armis, sed vi and efficacia; she uses the two-edged-sword of the Spirit,
and Word, against all her opposers and offenders, neither are men compelled (as
by Political powers) to obey, but they are drawn of God, and the Spirit
constrains them, Job 32.18. 2 Cor. 5.14.

Eleventhly, Polity is full of Tricks, Arts, Quilits, and Aequivocations, and
lies ready at the catch, 11. In the nature of it.
according to a Judges (or great man's) interpretation, or construction: but
this Gospel-way is full of plainness, truth, and simplicity, 2 Cor. 1.12. and
2.17. and is not according to man's interpretation, but the spirits, Romans 12.8.
1 Cor. 5.8. Romans 16.19.

Twelfthly, Polity consists most in the Form, and lives most in the out-ward
show, pomp, and appearance, 12. In the pomp and beauty of it.
but this way of Christ consists most of inward beauty, pomp, and excellency, 2
Cor. 5.12. and 2 Cor. 10.7. Joh. 7.24. and lives most in the spirit, and least
in the form.

Thirteenthly, In Polity is the greatest respect of persons, one higher then
another, making some Slaves, and others Lords; 13. In respecting* persons or
opinions.
but in this Church State of Christ it is an intolerable Tyranny, and has not
the least allowance, Mark 10.42, 43. lest thereby we should have men's persons
or opinions in admiration, Jam. 2.1.3, 1 Pet. 5.3.

Fourteenthly, Polity preferres men according to their outward parts, 14. In
respect of gifts and abilities.
fleshly habits, of learning, wit, or prudence; but Christ's Church State sets
up Christ, and his Spirit for Officers in chief, and such who are ruled and
filled with the Spirit of Christ under them, so that not men, but Christ rules;
Judas that had not this Spirit proved a Traitor, so will others.

Fifteenthly, Polity grows every day more and more rusty, and the longer it
lives, 15. In the Consequence of it.
the more it will be out of date, and loathed at last, and like a Potsheard be
dashed a pieces; but this way of Christ grows every day more and more
glorious, and will be the beauty of the whole earth; Piety shall stand, whilst
Policy shall fall, and the Church of Christ, that little stone (cut without
hands) shall crowd Policy out of doors, and fill the whole earth, Dan. 2.35.
Rev. 11.15. Psalm. 48.1, 2. Isa. 62.4.7. In all these respects and many more
(might I not be too tedious) I might easily demonstrate to all men the vast
disproportion between this Gospel-Church-state and Policy, It differs from
Ecclesiastical Polity in a sense.
whither in Church (where it has been set up instead of Piety) or State, so
that I mean not in any such sense that there is an Ecclesiastical Polity, but
as I have hinted before, and in order to visibles.

Now who has been more politic and subtle then that Beast, that has for so
long usurped Christ's Seat? and what a many Romish Ornaments (like unto the
Egyptian Jewels) do many men and Ministers yet retain? Who more Politic,
then the Beast seven-headed, most subtill-pated in his Ecclesiastical
Discipline.
fitter for a Golden Calfe, (which is to be grownd to powder) then to adorn
the Temple, or Tabernacles of God; O that they were sent away from whence they
came! and that we would come in sincerity to the Lords work before us! which
is, the building of his house for his honor to dwell in.

But thus I have proved that there is a Gospel, orderly Church Discipline, and
how far it differs from Policy, whether called Ecclesiastical (as some make
it to consist altogether in forms, and things carnal) or civil.

Now the Lord lead us into his own Spiritual Temple, and Gospel-Church-state
by his own light: for how sad a thing is it to see his flock so scattered
among Wolves, and the Saints in a confused dark, corrupt, Disciplinary way of
walking without order, rule, and ordinances? which so many Souls do sit
moaning for, and in the want of them in this their Wildernesse-estate, wherein
they have been lost for many ages together; Saints susp^^ring (yet aspiring) in
a strange Land.
and whilst they are sighing and sobbing in a strange Land, they that have led
them into this Babylonian Captivity, do call upon them to sing the Songs of
Sion; but alas, their Harps are hung up upon the willowes, and they as in a
strange Land are silent, which is the next thing I come unto.

(...) or, (...). Gnaraphel. CHAP. II. We have had our abode a long time under
Antichristian darkness and Discipline, and the Church was driven by the
Dragon, and drawn by the Beast into a Wilderness for many hundred years, and
ever since how miserably Souls have been blinded by bottomless smoke in a
Popish Hierarchy, and so have continued to these days.
IN the next place we are to show how for many Ages together we have fallen
foulely short of this holy and wholesome Discipline of Christ's Church, and have
been abominably cheated with the rotten figgs, and choked with the thick
Romish foggs, and filthy infectious mists of Popish inventions, so that thereby
the Sun and the Air have been abundantly darkened. The (poor) Church, Revel.
9.2. Rev. 12.1.
she was before clothed with the Sun, encompassed round with purity of
Religion, Expos.
with brightness of Discipline, and in the clear light of Christ, What a happy
condition the Church was in in the Apostles days both for Doctrine and
Discipline.
and Scriptures which were her rich ornaments in the twelve Apostles days; yea
and after that till Constantines time she wore this Crown of the twelve
Stars, those glistring lights. And not only were the Saints (such as then
lived) above the Moon, and all sublunary enjoyments, but they had this
borrowed light of the Word, means, and ordinances, to guide them in their
paths, and to direct them in their Discipline and Church state; Mat 10.16, 17,
18.
but alas! (as our Savior foretold what would follow) it fell out afterward
that the red Dragon raged and watched to persecute the Church) which was done
very sorely in Domitians days (and in Nero's) at which time the Church was
pure notwithstanding, Anno 110. vid. Eusebius. lib. 3. chap. 29. 2 Cor. 11.2.
and (as yet) presented for a chaste Virgin to Christ, though tormented, because
she would not be deflowred, and although then (the Apostles being all dead)
fierce wolves met together by Flocks, and false Teachers, The D^agon
persecutes her.
and Pseudo-Apostles rose up apace, to oppose openly true Doctrine and
Discipline.

Rev. 12.4. Anno 179. Anno 204. Anno 256.
This continued under the Emperors, Verus, and Severus, and Valerianus; O then!
how this red Dragon (this bloody Abaddon followed the Church, foaming with
floods of indignation, and yet for all that, the poor, and (almost)
breathless Saints had a little respite under Galienus, Anno 262. and till that
time I find the Church continued yet very chaste, Anno 162. Eusebius. lib. 7, c.
17. Images and Idols. Cent. 2 cap. 7. Anno 267.
but then, presently after began Images to be set up, and Monuments to be
erected in Caesarea Philippi, and other places, and in Dionysius his days
Bishop of Rome, Anno 267. the Church began abominably to be deflowred and
defiled; so that the true Saints and Churches could not escape a most sad
persecution under Dioclesian, Anno 306. Eusebius. lib. 8. and 9.
and most hot and heavy under Maximinus, that matchless Tyrant, till torments
in his bowels moved his bowels (against his will) to mitigate the violence of
the persecution; this continued to the time of Constantine and Licinius; Rev.
12.3.
and although the red Dragon could not have his will (do what he could) with
these his heads and horns, with which he used to push at, She was brought into
the Wilderness.

When? and how?

Pareus. in Apoc. 12. v. 6. By loosing her Discipline.


and (if he could) to have pushed out the memory of the Saints, that the name
of a Christian might not be left, yet the Church lived and thrived till she was
in those days driven into the Wilderness, which was worse then all the
Persecutions of the Dragon before, and this was (not mulatione loci, sed
amissione ornatus) by loosing her former light, life, liberty, excellency,
purity, and loveliness; her bright Discipline for darkness of devotion, and
devotion of darkness; her truths for traditions, and Doctrines of Christ for
inventions of men, and all this by her pretended friends at home; for now the
Dragon had dragged the third part of the Stars after him, viz. Meteors and
wandering Stars, And how?
made up of earthy matter, but not fixed in the Globe of Heaven, them he has
cast down with his tail, i. e. by his Serpentine subtilties, insinuations,
strength, policy, and poisonous infections; Oh sad! what Superstitions,
Idola^ry, and will worship began in those days to be enthroned, and owned, yea
in such a manner as is to be lamented at this day! for then started up the
solemn celebration, upsetting, dedication, Eusebius. l. 10. cap. 3. Socrates,
lib. i. cap 6.
and adoring of Houses of Brick and Clay, Lime and Stone, and Consecrating
such kind of places for the Temples of the Lord, calling them Catholic, and
Christning them Churches; When meeting-places were made Churches. When
Crucifixes, Relics of Saints, etc. came up.
yea then the superstitious Mother of Constantine (viz. Helena) went a
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to find out Relics, and Monuments, and then began
Crosses to be set up, and Consecrated, and Christ's Nails and Relics to be
kept and adored, and Miracles (pretended to be) wrought by them, (as they that
loved Superstition and Idolatry did (and do) report to this day. Thus, and
many other ways, Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 1^ cap. 9. c. 17.
was (the poor woman) the Church, forced into a fruitless, comfortless,
dangerous, barren Desart-like condition, whilst Monks and Popish Priests
sprung up apace, Monks, Priests.
and whilst the glistring glory of the former (true) Discipline, Doctrine, and
Ordinances did dye apace, and began to lie buried, and unregarded in the dust.
But, ah blessed Lord, how excellently does her deliverance draw nigh! and that
it is hard by will appear in the following Chapters. In the mean time, let
all discerning men judge (to whom I appeal) what a miserable state has the
poor Church (visible) been in (to this day) for many hundred years? and how
thick and threefold her miseries grew in upon her in the absence of that
bright Discipline and Doctrine which she had in the Primitive times; and also
by the pride and presence of a cunning (and curious) counterfeit thereof, which
has (crowded out the true, and) continued amongst us to this day? The proud
Popish, and Prelatick Discipline quickly grew drunk, Popish Discipline.
and was soon swallowed up, and swimming in the blood of the precious Saints.
The Moon was indeed (then) turned to blood (as well as the Sun to darkness)
and most Romanizing outrageous Massacres of Saints, Swum in blood
and bloody unsupportable Butch^^ies of Gods people were made, to maintain the
Doctrine and Discipline of those days, so that the Saints were accounted as
sheep for the Shambles, and were killed all the day long; yet a little respite
was allowed them, There were hopes of the recovery of Gospel-Di^cipline in King
Henry 8. and in Edw. 6.
and liberty given to them (through God's goodness) in King Henry the eights
time, and then the true Discipline, which seemed to lie for lost and dead a
long time) which Christ has left us in his Church, would feign have lived and
breathed a little; and so in Edward the sixth's days, and viriditie, very
great hopes there was of her recovery, and she began to wax warm, and to
sneeze out some good signe^ toward it, but alas, they were soon lost again;
and how lamentably did she lie again at the Graves brinke in cruel and
accursed Queen Mary's days, Little hopes left again in Q. Mary's days.
and then she was given over (indeed) even by her Physicians for lost, and past
recovery; until it pleased the Lord to raise her up again, and (almost)
miraculously in Queen Elizabeth's days, Great hopes of her restoration were in
Q. Elizabeth's days.
and then we did verily expect her full recovery and restoration, according to
the Primitive pattern and practice; but well-a-day! how were we deceived! for
what by the ((...)) crafty cunning of the seducing Serpent which deceived Eve,
and what by the insinuating subtilties of the Popish Prelates, and
Mitre-mongers in those days, Cant. 1.6.
her Mothers Children were angry with her, and under pretense of Treasons,
Rebellions, and robbing of the Magistrates of their right, But what hindered it?
and the like wrongful accusations, those (her enemies) inveighed against this
Discipline of Christ's Institution, (accusing it to the Queen) they called it a
Schism, a Faction, Sedition, and Heresy, and with this they charged the true
Children of the Church, and impeached the precious ones; Prelates falsely
accused it to the Queen.
as the Presidents did, that conspired against Daniel, Chap. 6. accusing him
for the breach of the Kings command, because he kept his conscience, upright;
and as the Adversaries that would have hindered the building up of Gods house in
Ezra's days chap. 4.13.16. they charged them for rebellious, and for such as
would rob the Magistrate of his right and revenews; so did these in Q. Eliz.
days, most cruelly do the Accuser of the brethren's office against the
Saints, branding and abusing them for seditious factious persons, and charging
them for Innovators, Heretics, erroneous ones, calling them Puritans,
Brownists, Donatists, They falsely accused and abused the Saints that called
for Discipline.
Anabaptists, Sectaries, and such like; saying, they would be the Destroyers of
the Nation, and what not? so that by this means the Church did seem black and
odious to the world, being Sunburned, and set to be the keeper of other
(Antichristian) strange vineyards whiles her own was neglected, Cant. 1.6. For
it is in, and by the name of Christ's own Church and Discipline, that such a
Popish Hierarchy and Prelacy was canonized and consecrated, which carried a
fair face, but a foul heart, and which was taken out of humane traditions,
and inventions of the Papists coin, and (...) Conclave and Canons, as will
amply appear by the beams of the Sun in this ensuing Tract. And certainly the
Prelates and Papists did agree, and look very like one another in their
Discpline, and in their opposing the Saints, and Christ's true Church and
Discipline. We might have said of them, as Aristotle once said of the
Milesians, that the Milesians were not fools, Papists and Prelates alike in
Discipline, and in opposing the truth. Prelates Mungrels.
yet they did just the same things that fools do; so these Protestants and
Prelates were not Papists, (no by no means) and yet they did just as Papists
do, but they were indeed Mungrels, and mere Hermaphrodites in Religion, Nec
vere viros, nec vere, mulieres, sed vere Histriones, neither Papists, nor
Protestants, but both, or neither, or either, or any thing for their own ends.
Sim.
A Roman Cardinal caused his Painter to draw out K. Solomon half in heaven,
and half in hell, for which he was justly to be blamed; but without any just
blame might those Prelates be pictured out so, half way in heaven, for what
they pretended, and for the good they did, but half in hell for what they
intended, and for the evil they did in afflicting the Saints, accusing the
brethren, persecuting the Church, and rendering the true Discipline of
Gospel-fellowship odious, and despicable to Magistrates, Ministers, people, and
all.

But furthermore, the Antichristian Hierarchy and Discipline was so indulgently
fostered up by Monarchy, that King James could make it a maxim (in which he
proved a true Prophet) No Bishop, K. James, No Bishop, No King.

Both alike have been from, and for the be^st, and shall be punished with the
beast.


no King; and it is clear to me out of many Scriptures, Dan. 2.34, 35. Rev.
17.12. and 18.3. that they both live and dye together (like Hippocrates twins)
receiving both alike, and at the same time power from, and punishment with the
Beast. Wherefore let not the Prelates, nor Papists think to hold long in any
place, for the day of the Lord his controversy for Zion shall find them out;
neither need they to think their fall is by fortune, for it is appointed of
old, and in these days wherein we are at suit with them; let them not wonder
if they all lose the day of us (yea and the hot spirits, violent Presbyterians
too (so called) who agree too much with Popery, and Prelacy as (appears Chapter 9.
lib. 2. at large) and must meet with the like lamentable destiny and fate with
you; Presbyterians too must lose their Discipline in these days.
for (as M^. Hooker says in his Preface before his Survey of Discipline.)
There is no such thing as a Presbyteriall Church, i.e. a Church made up of the
Elders of many Congregations Classic-wise to govern, Sim.
etc. in the New Testament; wherefore let them not wonder, if they also fall in
the heat of this Suit) seeing the Law and the Testimony is for us this
Termetime, Isa. 8.20. The Law is for us, the day will be ours.
and therefore the Judge must be for us too, and the day will be ours in
despite of all the world, because that ye have trusted to forged titles that
will hold no water. The Camel seeking horns, Sim.
lost his ears, and so have these Disciplinarians, they will not hear what
belongs to their peace. In this Summers day of the Lord Jesus, the Sun will
shine hot, and scorch, yea mel^ (violento aestu) the waxen wings of all
false-discipline, The heat of their Sun melt^ their waxen wings.
and thereby throw down that Icarus-like loftiness of High-Presbytery, Popery
and Prelacy in all Nations, and then the whole bulk and massy body of
Antichrist must beat his heels in the air, and be found in the deeps, and
drowned in the Ocean of everlasting misery, Sim.
Rev. 19.19. they are already under the burnings of that day in the torrid
(horrid) Zone, and must shortly tumble into the tomb, where the worm dies
not. This must be for that they cannot be converted into any other use for
safety. As the black cloth that will take no other Dye, but must hold so,
Simile.
and is most rotten, useless, and unserviceable for wear; Black Discipline
will not be better, but bitter till it tumble.
but the whit: will take any other Dye, so indeed will our Discipline of
Gospel-institution, which is in these latter days to be restored into its
Primitive purity, as white, precious, spiritual, Lilly-like, and lovely, this
shall be capable of any Dye, or administration, and Dispensation to the end of
the world, any Dye it will take whereinto it is dipped by the hand of the Lord;
but the black, base, sooty, and dark Discipline of Antichrist, shall be but
as a rotten ragge, and good for nothing, being in nothing capable of these
latter days dies, which will be of diverse sorts, from one to another, year
after year, and the best at last. But furthermore, the Dragon (till these late
days) has made use of earthly powers to oppose the Saints (having no more
place found for him in heaven) but now it is that we hear the loud Voice in
heaven, (viz. his Church) saying, Now is come salvation, Church Discipline is
best at last.
strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, for the
Accuser of our Brethren is cast down. Rev. 12.8.13.
And now shall the earth (viz. earthly powers) help the Woman, and swallow up
the Dragons indignation, though the remnant of her Seed must yet meet with
Wars, Conflicts, and oppositions for a time.

It remains now, O England! Ireland! and Scotland, Exhortation to England,
Ireland, and Scotland.
that ye kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish, Psalm. 2.12. and
that ye cast away your Popish and foppish trash and trumperies, and those
wicked traditions, forms, and ordinances of men, which have made ye Captives,
and for many hundred years have inbondaged, and endungeoned ye up in darkness
and deceit; for as we can cosen little ignorant Children, by giving them
Counters, and taking away Gold, and those Counters too are only to quiet them;
Sim.
so how easily can Antichrist cheat you, We have been cheated in our Childhood
with Copper, and counterfeit Coin.
which he has done in our ignorance and infancy, by giving us Copper for Gold,
and counterfeit (Brazen-faced) ordinances, and took away Christ's, telling us,
that they were better which he gave us, and so quieting us for a long time; but
now alas! we are older, and we must be wiser, and not be so basely cheated
out of our Ordinances, Orders, Doctrine, and Discipline, which Christ has left
us, when he went from us, but let us hold our own, and keep our Gold; and to
encourage us, he has promised us ere long to make another change in the
Churches, and to give them gold for brass, Isa. 60.17. the precious for the
vile, etc. Wherefore it is, O Friends, that this true Religion, Discipline, and
Gospel Worship of Christ's own Coin, and Mint, having his own Image of his
most precious Gold, But Christ's true Discipline is offered in these days with
the crown of twelve Stars, and clothed with the Sun, i. e. Christ, the
Churches Light, and Lord.
is offered you again, and (once) again; which has often (before) been
rigidly repulst, and put off with disdain, and direful reproach; yet
notwithstanding it is presented to you the third time, and comes crowned with
the twelve Stars, and clothed with the Sun, I mean with Christ the
Super-intendent, and sole Independent Lord, and Lawgiver, yea and alone
Light-giver to the Church and Saints. This is especially the Honor and
Ornament of this Discipline, or Gospel-Politie, viz. to be clothed with light,
having Christ alone the Lord. Indeed, hitherto has many a sad soul sat and
sighed, yea and the Church in the Wilderness too bewayl'd with Mary, weeping,
Joh. 20.13. Oh! They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid him.

Alexander used to say of his two Friends, viz. Craterus and Hephestion, that
Hephestion loved Alexander, but Craterus loved the King, and yet the King and
Alexander were both but one man; and so Certes I may say of some in these
days, who profess to be Christ's friends, Sim.
they all love him as Christ Jesus our Savior, for his sweetness, and
excellency, and loveliness, and love, which is better then wine, and for his
usefulness, etc. but how few of them that love him as the King? to be
commanded by him? that are obedient to his Laws, Sim.
and Ordinances? unless they be in the Congregationall orderly Courches, and
there indeed Christ has a few Friends, and tried Subjects, but such Craterus's
are rare too; wherefore let all the faithful friends of Christ (of what
judgment soever) that are under his Command and Lordship, come and enter into
these Gospel-wayes of Worship, into Christ's order and path, ordinance, and
Discipline (for the Lord of the Manor, I mean the God of this world, will
take up all wefts and straies that are out of this way, The Devil takes up
straies
and empound them) wherefore for shame friends make haste! Hye out of Babylon,
fly into Sion, into the Fellowship and Church Way of the Gospel, wherein
Christ is King, and Lord; and where this Sun is highest, brightest, and
swiftest in his ascendent motions, wherein Christ appears in his richest
perfection and fullness. For as Nature, Sim.
who has drawn with her Pencill a perfect Grasse-greene in the Emerald, (as
Pliny says) a skie-colour in the Sapphire, a fire color in the Carbuncle, a
sanguine in the Rubie, and a starry in the Diamond, has also drawn all these
together in one, viz. the Ophal: so has Christ by his Spirit in his Church,
Christ in the Churches their fullness.
for there is one gift and grace in one Saint, another gift in another, and
other graces in others, and blessings in the Gospel, and power in the Word,
and sweetness in the Ordinances, and all in one, viz. the Church. Some excel
in one thing, some in another, but the Church is the summary of all, all
excellencies are there in one, viz. in one Christ, who is in every Church, the
fullness and perfection of all; Christ (says Bernard, De advent. sermon. 2. Sim.
) is the Be which flew into the City of Nazareth (which is interpreted Flower)
and there he alighted on the sweetest flower of Virginity that ever the earth
bore; and so does Christ now in the Churches find sweet flowers, who has,
There Law of Love.
Et mel and aculeum (says Doctor Rawlinjon on's Mercy to a Beast, p. 13.) both
Mercy and Judgment, yea he is both Love and Law in all his Churches, yea the
Law of Love, and the Lord grant we may find it so in these days.

Hear, O Ireland! hear the Lord! run into his Courts, A word and a warning to
Ireland.
live in his Sanctuary! for in a special manner I speak to you from the Lord,
for whose sake I dare not bury these truths as dead, or in silence, which do
so much concern you; and seeing I am now with you, I wish from my soul, that
most of your Professors prove not Moone-sicke, I mean Lunaticks, that
sometimes fall (or plunge) into the water, and sometimes into the fire, Sim.
(of persecuting the Saints that will not over head and ears with them in the
waters, Of Persecutors for form, or judgment*
ye know what I mean) for I shrewdly fear this; wherefore I say, forsake not
Egypt to fall into Babylon, nor Babylon to fall into the form again, and to
make a Church of form merely, and to drive in, or draw in poor hearts
(through ignorance and folly) into a formal Discipline, by urging the form,
or tying others to such a judgment with you; for this is clearly against God's
design, and Christ's Gospel-Discipline, which is to be in the Spirit, and in
truth: and therefore I have many precious and pregnant truths to hand forth,
and handle to you, as they are hearted in me from the Fathers bosom of light,
in this ensuing Treatise, especially in Lib. 2. but in the mean time, make
haste into Sion, into a pure, orderly, Gospel, Spiritual way of Worship, and
the Lord be with you, and speed you. But if before I have done, some do say,
Why then we shall be persecuted by Presbyterians, or some (called)
Independants, or the bitter ones of the Anabaptists, or the like, as well as by
Malignants and open enemies; Sim.
I say, that they shall be but like Sampsons Foxes, who were themselves burnt
amongst the Corn which they fired, Proph.
but the Land brought Corn again, Persecutors, Sampsons Foxes that burn up
themselves, and benefit us.
and the ground was made the better by it, and the fruitfull^r, but the Foxes
came up no more; so be ye sure, that such will by their persecutions, burn up
themselves, but better the true Churches; though it may be some members may
suffer in the fire first; yet take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, says the
Lord, Cant. 1. he will not suffer them to escape scot-free, Phil. 1.28. for it
is to them a token of perdition (says Paul) but to you of salvation, the true
Churches shall (maugre all their might and malice) appear again, and triumph
the more, and be yet the more glorious and fruitful, but these persecuting
Foxes can never come up again, but must lie buried in the field which they
have fired, and so be the Authors of their own end. Wherefore fear not, my
Friends, their frowns, nor crowns; but as Alexander was wont to say to his
Soldiers when they were in danger, Christ in you, and with you.
Sim.
or went on any design, Sed habebis Alexandrum; my brave Blades, you shall
have Alexander with you; Fear not.
so say I, you shall have Christ with you, in the midst of you, and engaged for
you; fear not! and then you shall no more be termed desolate, Isa. 43.3.
or forsaken, but be called the Lord's Hephzibah and Beulah; but thus for the
second chapter.

(...) Midbar. CHAP. III. That the Churches full deliverance draws nigh, and
is upon entrance, at first gradually, her Discipline shall be restored as at
first. First proved by parallel from the Wilderness, wherein she has been
long lost, as to true Discipline and Doctrine.
TO proceed, the Call continues to have us out of Babylon. It is Historied of
Darius's General, that when he had Orders from Darius (his King) to revenge
the wrongs done him by the Athenians, Sim.
that he commanded his Servants every day, at every dish of meat they brought
in to the Table, to say, Sir, remember the Athenians. Now Christ has sent to
us, and calls upon us every foot, to Remember the ruin of Babylon, and the
rising of Sion; for Babylon must fall, and Sion must fill, and grow up apace to
perfection-ward; but although this is graduall at first, yet the restoration
shall be universal at last.

In the interim, we hear how long, and how lamentably the poor despised
Church has been in the Wilderness, Proph.
woefully bewayling; Expos.
but now follows what hopes we find of her deliverance; When the Church was
Promised to be delivered out of the Wilderness.
now Mr. Brightman (the brightest man of his age, that I have met with) lends
his Light to this Age, out of Revel. 12.14. where we read, the Church was to
continue in the Wilderness for a time, times, and half a time; besides the
thousand two hundred and threescore days, in ver. 6. which is all one with
that in Rev. 11.2. of forty and two months, The time.
for at thirty days to the month, it comes to one thousand two hundred and
sixty days, Iunius Parcus, in ^a.
which if we account from Christ's time, was to begin one thousand six hundred
and ten days, (viz. three hundred and fifty, and one thousand two hundred and
sixty) and the thirty three years that Christ lived, makes it one thousand six
hundred forty three, 1643. The Authors judgment.
about which time her Deliverance and Freedom came running in, and the
Congregationall Churches got upon their feet, and began to look forth as the
morning, Cant. 6.10. though many black Clouds and Mists were cast upon them
some ten years ago, to grieve them, and to fear them with the threats of a
foul day following, and to render them unlovely, Of her graduall deliverance.
and unlikely to hold; so that for my own part I am possessed with this
opinion, as to the year of her Deliverance, beginning ( gradually) and as to
us, about ten years ago. But Master Brightmans judgment is, Expos.
to have it begin one thousand six hundred and fifty, Mr. Brightmans Judgment,
1650.
from that also of Dan. 12.7. it shall be for time, times, and half a time,
with verse. 12. Blessed is he that waits, and comes to one thousand three
hundred thirty five days, a day being often in Scripture for a year, as Numb.
14.34. Ezekiel. 4.5, 6. and a time he takes for an hundred years, and so times
for two hundred, and half a time for half a hundred, or fifty; that is, three
hundred and fifty years, which with one thousand three hundred makes one
thousand six hundred and fifty, One thousand six hundred and fifty, as to us in
England, Ireland, and Scotland, begins her graduall recovery.
in which year he foretold the true Discipline of the Church should begin to
be restored unto her primitive face and fairness; and how truly he has
foretold this, let the times we live in testify for him; for indeed the
eminent passages, and evident appearances of Gods presence with us, and power
for us, for the liberty and deliverance of true Discipline, will easily allow
of his Exposition, as passing authentic and Orthodox. But whereas it may be
objected out of Dan. 12.12. thirty five remain. I answer; It Is true indeed,
The Authors judgment of her universal deliverance thirty five years hence to
begin.
and there is great need of thirty five years for wars and troubles against
the Lamb and's followers; Christ and's Churches, whose Deliverance, and
brightness of Discipline is but by little and little, and arises gradually,
and lives most gloriously in these parts of Europe for thirty and five years;
and after that follows her full deliverance, and recovery out of the
Wilderness universally in all Nations; but for thirty five years she comes
only gradually out of the Wilnesse, leaning on her Beloved, but especially in
these parts of the earth, where the work is already begun, and mountains made
plains, which shall within these thirty five years be all levelled, and laid
in the dust before Zerubbabel, Zach 4.6, 7.
who has (already) laid the foundation of (that work) the Lords house, which
his hands shall (after thirty five years) finish, when all the enemies of God
and his Gospel, shall by his glorious outgoings, and the brightness of his
coming, be nothing'd into nothing. Thus you have his, and my (poor) judgment
offered under correction. But I meet with two more computations of times, which
are set for the Churches rising, and Christ's reigning, Two times more set for
her deliverance.
out of the same Chapter of Dan. 12.11. From the time that the daily sacrifice
shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate set up, there
shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety days, ver. 12, 13. Expos.
Blessed is he that waits, and comes to one thousand three hundred thirty
five days; but go thou thy way till the end be, for thou shall rest, and
stand in the lot at the end of the days. Some compute this from the time of
Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, Proph.
converted to the Faith about the three hundred and twelfth year after Christ;
From Constantine.
now the ten hot Persecutions (by the Dragon) as I told you in the chapter
before) were ended, and the Church was now clothed with enough of outward
beauty; riches, greatness, and ornaments, were in abundance, which bewitched
many from the Truth, and which proved the most irresistible temptations that
could be, to corrupt Magistrates, Ministers, People, Ordinances, and all her
worship (as I told you in the former Chapter) and to bewildernesse her: then
was there a voice heard out of Heaven, to say, This day is poison poured forth
into the Church, and then indeed was the daily sacrifice taken away, (as some
say) viz. the death of Christ (our only Sacrifice) became void, and neither
regarded nor remembered; but the abomination, (viz. Superstition, Idolatry,
Will Worship, etc.) that makes desolate was set up. So we hear how the Church
was in the Wilderness as before, but now after these two notes of the time,
viz. 1. Toe taking away the daily Sacrifice, and then 2. The setting up the
abomination that makes desolate; it follows, there shall be one thousand two
hundred and ninety days, i. e. years (as we proved before) from Constantines
time, to which add the three hundred and twelve years from Christ's time to
Constantine's, and then it amounts to one thousand six hundred and two, and in
this year came King James to the Crown of England. But in verse. 12, 13. the
blessedness of all is to such as wait till one thousand three hundred thirty
five days, that is, forty five days, i. e. years, longer then the former
number (of one thousand two hundred and ninety) and then it seems the
reckoning reaches to one thousand six hundred forty seven, To begin at Anno
1647.
for the time of the Churches blessedness to begin more visibly then ever
before; for then the abomination (of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Idolatry,
and Formality) which has made desolate, and brought the Church into the
Wilderness, is to be unsettled, sorely shaken, and broken down, that the
Kingdom of Christ, which shall never be shaken, may remain, in Heb. 12.27,
28. that Christ's Church may be delivered, his Discipline restored, and his
Kingdom exalted above all the mountains of prey.

The second time reckoned from Julian the Apostate.
The second computation of time (out of the same Scripture) is taken from Julian
the Apostate, in whose days the Temple (which he caused to be re-edified at
Jerusalem, as all the Learned know) the Seat of the daily Sacrifice was rent
up, Proph.
and tore apeeces, even the earth, place, foundation, and all, by a most
terrible Tempest from heaven; for that Julian the most malicious Apostate
pretended Christ a false Prophet, and in contradiction to Christ's prediction
in Matthew. 24.2. he would have had the Temple built up again, but God would
not suffer it: but now (as God would have it) the Prophecy was more fully
fulfilled hereby, for not one stone was left upon another, but foundation and
all was turned, torn, and taken away, and Judaisme rent up by the very roots.
But this made a concave for the Conclave of Rome, that Antichrist might come in
with his abomination, which makes desolate, and this came to pass about Anno
three hundred sixty two, and from thence, Anno 362.
reckoning the one thousand two hundred and ninety, as in Dan. 12.11. the
number comes out the last year, and this Deliverance is to begin by 1652. for
then is Christ to begin his glory, To begin An. 1652.
and to reign in the Temple, viz. his Churches, more eminently then ever
before; and then the Gospel-Discipline is to begin to be restored, and the
Abomination to be eradicated root and branch, and then Christ, and him
crucified, must be set up for the daily Sacrifice. Then is the blessedness to
begin, Gradually to go on till 45. years longer.
and gradually to go on till one thousand three hundred and thirty days, i.
e. for five and forty years longer (say some) these days will hold so, five
and forty years; at the expiration of which ( viz. five and forty years hence)
the Kingdom of Christ shall be glorious indeed, both by Jew and Gentile,
Babylon shall be fallen, Rome ruined, Rev. 14.8. Sion repaired, and Christ's
excellent Discipline and Ordinances fully restored, and the Church shall be
again clothed with the Sun in greater glory then ever; but in the mean time
there is a graduall restoration of Discipline, and reparation of Sion (as we
said before) but then the New Jerusalem shall be more apparent and glorious, as
Rev. chap. 21. chap. 22. How Antichrist is to be destroyed.
In the mean time we must meet with troubles and wars without, yet in spirit
we shall exult, and triumph within: which Spirit of Christ in his Saints and
Churches, will be the fall of Babylon, Not by worldly weapons,
and Antichrists ruin, who must be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's
coming i. e. in a spiritual manner, and by spiritual means, not by Policies,
or Powers, or Armies of men, or Wars, or the like, But by the spirit, killed
and*
(though they may be preparatives thereto) Not by might, nor by power, but by
my Spirit, says the Lord. By the Spirit of the Lord it is, that Antichrist
must be killed.

I remember Mr. Sterry, (in a Sermon of his before the Parliament Nov. 2. 1649.
p. 12.) says the like of the fall of Antichrist, and of the Abominations
(which we have mentioned) that it is a spiritual and extraordinary manner,
miraculously by his Angels, Ministerially by his Saints, Torment^d.
that they shall be tormented and put to death, Rev. 14.10. and 19, Our
troubles begin to be over, An. 1656.
19. but yet our troubles will be over as to us (and I think shortly too) for
An. 1656. (which is now near us) the Flood came on all the world (and so I
think the Fire will) and when it had lasted forty days (so may the Fire be for
forty years) till five and forty years hence (as we said before) then they were
dried up, Sim.
and Noah came forth out of the Arc and planted a vineyard, Yet forty years on
the world, whiles we are safe in the Ark, viz. Ch^ists Churches.
and eat the fruits thereof: and so for certain, though the Churches may be (as
the Arc) for forty years yet on the waters, yet then, I say, about forty years
(or little more) hence, shall Christ come forth; out of his Arc (as I may say)
I mean his Churches, and plant him one vineyard of all, and eat the fruits
thereof, this will be the day of Christ's reign indeed; and then all shall be
peace, and quiet, and Christ, and his Saints shall be visibly together,
dwelling in the New Jerusalem. I will not meddle with the manner of his
Appearance, Forty years hence Christ comes to reign visibly.
whether personal, as some affirm, or no, but this I am sure it shall be
visible, and I know (with Job) that I shall see my Redeemer with my eyes, and
after that, Christ's next appearance is with his Saints to judge the world. But
for the computation of the times, I have produced diverse, and shall leave them
to your light and judgment, to leave or take what best likes you; but withal,
Then the universal Restitution 45. years hence at furthest.
note, how near they all agree, and are one to another, and the furthest time
set for our full happiness, and for the universal restitution, is but forty
five years hence: And let me tell you, that we live on the brinke of these
times promised, yea they are upon us, the work is begun, God is about it, The
Church is coming out of the Wilderness, and Babylon is falling, and Zion is
rising and repairing, and Gospel Order, Ordinances, and Discipline (lost in the
wilderness) restoring as at first; although this is at the first but gradually
in these Nations, and so will continue till the times are a little higher; for
which the Lord fit us, and all his Churches.

Proph.
In order to the fulfilling of these Prophesies of her full Restoration, In
order to this God is making Mountains plains.
we had need to be wise in the work (the strange work) that God is at present
upon; For the mightiest, the strongest, the highest, the visiblest, and
barrennest (or bruitishest) Powers, Policies, Princes, Potentates, or Monarchs
on the earth (which are called the Mighty Mountains that must be made plain)
that oppose Christ's Reign, Who are the Mountains?
Antichrists ruin, Isa. 41.15, 16.21.23. Hag. 2.6.21, 22
or Sions rising in these latter days, God is laying low in the dust, and most
pitifully flinging them into the Pit from whence they came at first. This work
is also graduall for these few years* God goes forward within these European
Nations firstly; Expos.
for these ten Toes of the Image mentioned in Dan. 2.32, Rev. 12.17, 18 Rev
18.^. P^al. 83.11.12,
33. or ten Kings (of Europe) that war against the Lamb, with the Beast, Rev.
17. and 19. these that have given up their power to the Beast, must be broken,
by him who is more excellent then all these Mountains of prey, Th^s work is
also graduall at first.
Psalm. 76.4. This little stone cut without hands, has begun this work in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and has been a burdensome stone to their
enemies, and grown'd them to powder: yea this little stone has fallen upon the
late King, and his family, and dashed this Toe to fitters, and so he will all
the nine Toes beside, till the Image tumble; so that as yet this work is
graduall, which will also be universal, and filling the whole earth, And will
be universal.
Job 9.4, 5. Job 28.9. Isa. 10.32. in all Nations ere long, for the Lord has
so ordained it, Dan. 8.19. Dan. 11.27.32. and Isa. 26.11, 12. Hab. 1.11, 12,
13. and Hab. 2, 3. and has given Christ his Commission for it, Esa. 63.1, 2,
3, 4. Psalm. 8.2. Zach. 12, 3, 6.
Psalm. 2.9. Matthew. 28.19. Heb. 10.13. 1 Cor. 15.25. Rev. 6.1, 2. till all be
made his footstool, who then can hinder it? or say what do thou? Job 9.12.
Dan. 4.35. Isa. 14.6. Ezekiel. 38.20. for this end is Christ (that must Reign)
now marching in his might, with his sword girt about his thigh, neither
Mountains, nor Mole-hils that now stand in his way, shall be able to abide the
heat of his coming, for he will be greatest, and Reign alone, Psalm. 58.12. Rev.
11.17.18, 19. Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, 16, Woe to the enemies.
17. etc. who has done much in order to this his Design in these days, Ps.
50.2.3. Woe, woe! be then to every one whose heart is lifted up against Christ,
or the Churches! for they must be all grownd to powder: And in that day (which
is hard by) shall they say to the Rocks and Mountains fall on us, and hide us
from the day of the Lamb, Rev. 6.15, 16. Isa. 34.2, 3. and Isa. 64.1, 2, 3.
Ezekiel. 7.7. Psalm. 68.1, 2. Psalm. 132.8, 9, 13, etc. Wherefore have a care, Sirs,
that Ye say not a confederacy with them that say a confederacy, Isa. 8, 9, 10,
12. Psalm. 58.9. For the day of the Lord is as an oven to such, who as Briars
and thorns are to be prepared for it, Mal. 4.1.2. whilst the very same day is
as the Sun of righteousness to the Saints. Wherefore fear not, Joy to Christ's
and the Churches friends.
O ye Saints! be not afraid! for your Deliverance is at hand, which as it was
foretold by many Prophets, Mat. 24.
so in especial manner by him who is our only Prophet, Luke 21.25, 26, 27,
Expos.
28. and the Signs are already come (in part) for the Mountains are removing,
(...).
the Pillars of the earth falling, the powers of the heavens shaking, yea men's
hearts failing them for fear; (...).
yet lift up your heads ((...)) like a bird that lifts up his beak every time
he drinks sweetnesses, as such who drink in comforts and refreshings, Sim.
and soope in solaces and refreshing streams, (Psalm. 46.3, 4.) for now your
redemption draws nigh. (...). Psalm. 97.12.6. and 67.3, 4.
Now may we see the Son of man coming in the clouds (viz. in many dark,
dismal, and cloudy dispensations) which do hide him from the world, and from
the sight of his enemies till he come upon them as a thief in the Right, or a
Noah's flood (ex insperato) unwatched for, and unwelcome to them) to their cost.

But hark!-Hark!-now! The Trumpet of the Jubilee is blowing! and the day of the
Saints Deliverance and Discipline is proclaimed! The gates of salvation, shall
be opened to every one that has the word, Isa. 26.1, 2. and is a friend to the
Kingdom, Isa. 9.7. Zion is building, Psalm. 102.15, 16. and shall be beautiful
to all people, Isa. 22.22, 23. Dan. 4.34.
Psalm. 48.2, 3, 4. Isa. 52.1.7. and the Saints are to be refreshed with full
streams, and fat things, Isa. 33.21. Isa. 25.9. and 48.18.

The Lord is at work hard in th^se days.
Thus, is the Lord at work in our days (whilst we live in Tabernacles) to
build us a Temple, and in order to the Churches happiness, he has promised to
make the Wilderness flourish as the Rose, Isa. 35.1, 2, 3. for he will give
the glory of Lebanon (Chap. 5.) and Carmel, and of Sharon (in Chap. 6. and chapter
7.) to his Church (Calvin in loc.) in these latter days.

The Scriptures are so full, the Promises so pregnant, the blessings so rich,
The richest blessings reserved for these days.

Like a Kid in Hebr. Rakad. Rev. 18.4.


that are reserved for these latter days for us, and our offspring, that we
may even leap for joy, Ps^. 114.4. and with shoutings and songs, come singing
to Sion, Isa. 35. ult. and run out of Babylon (which else is falling on our
heads) Ah, how big-bellied the Prophesies are, which do groan for our
Deliverances, and for the Churches Discipline as of old, viz. in the Apostles
days; this does lie to the occulous very obvious, for they are in travel to
bring forth in our days (the birth will be visible within very few years, by
five or six) the beginning is now come, yea the set time to favor Sion is
come, Psalm. 102.13, 14.

It is not very difficult to any (that discern the times and seasons) to
foretell the futurity of those rich and choicest blessings (both for Church and
State (as we say) that are laid up for these very latter days, How to
Prophecy as to foretell what is to come.
and to foresee (for these years that are to come) the glorious light and
liberty of the Saints, which they shall inherit (I mean never to lose more)
though they be bought and brought in by the destruction of the firstborn of
Egypt. And this may be easy, out of the abundance of those Scriptures which
tell of these days, and relate to these fulfilled, and what of them are not
fulfilled together, and then (like the Mathematical rule of Demonstration,
which is made perfect (in aliquo tertio) by bringing them both up, to the
things which are now in fulfilling before our eyes, and thereby they will
wonderfully well demonstrate by undeniable rules and reasons (out of the
Scriptures) what things are to come to pass, and which first, and which are
hard by, and upon us to be performed.

And besides this, my Experience tells me how to prophecy by the Spirit of the
Lord, when the Spirit brings me into a fruitive discovery of the latter days,
by leading me into the belly of the Prophesies and the Promises which are to
come to pass, as if they were already present and come to pass; thus Heb.
11.13. The Saints received the promises afar off, and also when the latter
days promises (which we expect) have hot and glowing influences upon my heart,
that I feel (beforehand) the heat of them, and of the day that is entering; I
say, by both these together (for there is the Word and the Spirit agreeing in
one) I am able to foretell, and testify to the approach of Christ, and his
promises.

Besides, (as appears in the Epistle to the honorable Commissioners) by the
movings and stirrings of the waters in the bottom of our Well.

And also by comparing of Providence and Prophesies together, Gods Works, with
Gods Words in these latter days, light (I say, not infallible) to foretell
what is to come. Times of restitution.
All these Rules I fetch out of my own heart, and from mine own experiences,
which meeting together, make me sure, That the times of restitution come
tumbling in, and the refreshings for the Saints from the presence of the Lord,
Act. 3.19.21. For already things begin to have a new face, Spring time is
entered.
form, and appearance, in order to the Primitive purity and practice. The
Meadows (me thinks) begin to look green, the chirping of birds, and the
Turtle-dove is heard in our land, the young Figs that are (but) green, and
tender grapes give a good smell, and much sweetness, etc. Cant. 2.11, 12. So
that I am persuaded, the Winter is over, and gone, though I deny not, Winter
time is over.

Yet storms. Vid* ch 9. lib. 2


but a storm or two, or a stinging tempest, and blustering blasts may now and
then arise, with rage too, for an hour (as I offer proof for in Chapter 9. lib.
2.) yet the Promise must be minded as concerning Saints, Isa. 51.1, 2, 3, 4.
for whose sake, Sion is to be restored, and the Wilderness to be like an
Eden, or Garden of the Lord, and joy, and gladness shall be found in the
midst of them. Exceeding great, and precious Promises are provided for us to be
as cordials in the Wilderness to comfort us, Most precious Cordials.
and to keep us from fainting; and indeed, what wise men will be without some
of these in their Cabinets to keep up their spirits with, Sim.
especially against a time of trouble and temptation. To comfort us ^n the
wilderness.


And as ( Chrysostom says) As no men were able to sail at Sea, Sim.
were there not havens and harbors to cast Anchor at, in time of a storm; So
(says Smith on the Creed, p. 58.) the Saints condition would be unsupportable
indeed, Promises to anchor at in God.
had they not havens and helps in times of tempests. So certainly the tossed
Arc, or Ship of the Church does in all ages, as storms arise, put in for
harbor at the next Promise, and cast anchor in the next Prophecy, which is
nighest accomplishment and performance.

And in these days we may see fair land, even the Land of Canaan to cast
Anchor at; I say, exceeding rich and precious promises, which flow with milk
and honey hard by us, the promised Jerusalem, the rich and excellent Canaan, we
are now come nigh unto; The good Lord help us to put in well for it (if it be
his holy will) and that before a storm arise, and hide it from us, or cause us
to complain or comply with a tack-about; wherefore, it will do well, and be
good wisdom, for the Churches (whom it most concerns) to cast in their
Plummers, and to fathom the waters, which we are now in and ^n. A word to the
Churches to fathom.
And O bless the Lord that we see Land! and are so nigh i^! else we might sit,
sorrow, and suspire, as all our Fathers did (in the Prelates days) when they
were all in the deeps, and in dangers, and had not sight of the Land, as we now
see it; but the Lord has given us to see it, and has beforehand shown, us
the Churches harbor, A good harbor
which is to be in a rich and blessed soil, and the Lord lets us know this to
warm Saints, and to warn sinners; For as (a very vile) Jezabel could not be
content to intend evil to the Prophet Elijah, Sim.
but she must before hand horribly thunder and threaten it out, 1 King. 19.
much less will or can (a very good) God war, before he warn his enemies;
wherefore it is that he thunders it out, and threatens Christ's and his Churches
unexorable enemies in these days with unavoidable destruction. And above all,
to raise and refresh our spirits (in spite of Satan and his Surrogates) he
gives us first a sight of this sweet and goodly land which he has provided for
us in these latter days, before he brings us into it to enjoy it, he cannot be
content to promise and purpose to do us good (as Mr. Robinson says in's
Essays, Our harbor in these days. i. e gathered Churches.
p. 16.) but he must make it known to's servants before hand. Thus the Lord
has shown us our harbor in these days, viz. in gathered Churches, and has
given us to reckon not from what we have, but from what we hope. For as a man
reckons his wealth not so much by his money in his house, Sim.
as by his money in his bills and bonds; So do we reckon in our Churches, our
privileges, riches, happiness, not so much by what we now enjoy (as Gathered
Churches, Members, Orders, How we reckon one estate, and make our accounts.
Ordinances, Gifts, Graces, Teachers, Pastors, Prophesies, and fat things) as
by what we are to enjoy, which we are sure off, and have in Bills and bonds, i.
e. in Scriptures, Prophesies, and special Promises which are sealed to us, and
witnessed in us, by his Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Joh. 8.18. Joh. 3.32. 1 John 1.5.
which are as good to us as ready money, for the day of payment is now near us,
and no one of these shall fail, Isa. 34.16. Heb. 10.23. for he is faithful
that has promised. Wherefore we are resolved to wait, and we will not give
over till the day, and set time comes, Ps. 119.49, 50. But as the Soldier that
held the ship by his teeth after his hands are cut off; Sim.
so will we the Promises till they be performed to us, Genesis 15.14. Josh. 21.42.
and therefore with confidence we wait, Hab. 2.3. for they cannot sail us, and
we will be bold to say it, that if we be deceived, God has deceived us: but
God cannot deceive us: yet to deal ingenuously, I deny not but the performance
of these Promises, may be but graduall (as I declared before) at first, and to
be clear, I shall produce some of the flowering Promises which are about
fulfilling in these blessed days, The blossoms and flowery promises that are
upon us.
which are (even now) in approach, and under dispensation and dealing out to
the Church, that has been so long, and so lamentably in the Wilderness; and
these we shall prove by parallel: First, from the Wilderness; And secondly,
from the Garden of the Lord. From the Wilderness.

1 By parallel from the wilderness. Job 12.24. Genesis 21.14.
First, it is an untilled place, where wild nature is most seen most eminently,
and evidently (if not wholly) and indeed which Art and Industry has not ^amed:
in Hebr. Midbar is as much as to say, without order, and in such a wilderness
was the Church for many years together, 1 The Church discipline over grown with
tradit^ons and trumperies.
wherein the (supererogatory) bows, and superfluous branches of that evil
root of carnal concupiscence and corruption, did spread and sprout out with
lawless lusts; her bottom of her (then) discipline was so abominably, and
abundantly overgrowne, and grown over with thorns and thistles (fit for
accursed ground) that a Saint could not walk with safety, so long as they were
neither stubbed out, Vitiis and divitiis.
nor cut off: For the brambles of ambition and traditions grew thick and
thronging out at both ends, and abundance of briars and bushes at every step
were ready to snatch at, and ensnare a poor Pilgrim-Saint or Professor. Oh
the deplorable estate of the poor people of God then! in a place! Ezekiel. 36.9,
10.
Nation! Church State! so filled over, and over, with humane traditions and
natural inventions! with Will-worships! 1 The promise is to till her as his
husbandry.
Creature-institutions! and ordinances of men; with Monkery and Mass, and with
a mass of Monkery, and with a world of trumpery and filthy trash! not fit for
any, but the feet of disdain, and dogs to trample upon. But the blessed days
(under promise, and in approach) are, that God will husband his people
himself, and till them, as Hos. 10, 12. and break up the fallow ground, and
Judah shall plow, Pareus in loc.
and Jacob shall break his clods; the brambles and bushes, inventions and
traditions shall be rent up by the roots, and what runs up by nature shall no
more be suffered to cumber the ground, Ier. 4.3* 4.
and the loose branches, and unserviceable bows shall be lopped off. Id^ls
shall be pulled down, superstition subverted, Antichrist turned out of doors
with his bag and baggage, Rev. 15.2.
and then the Lord will rain righteousness upon his people. So in Ezekiel.
36.34, 35. The desolate land shall be tilled, and shall become like the Garden
of Eden, fenced, and enclosed, and inhabited with holy flocks, and they shall
know the Lord, and be, as Paul says, Ezekiel 36.38. 1 Cor. 3.8, 9* Beza in loc.
the Lords husbandry, (...); the word signifies whatsoever appertains unto a
Husbandman: so they are, and are to be viz. Gods arable, Gods vineyard, Gods
Garden, Expos.
etc. i. e. the Lord will be as watchful, laborious, solicitous, prudent, and
provident day and night of his peoples welfairs, Sim.
and for his peoples advantages, as an Husbandman is of his arable, vineyard or
the like, he will walk about them, overlook them, The Churches are the Lord
husbandry.
and keep them day by day from danger and spoil, and with his own hands, he
will dress them, and prune, and provide, and reap of what he sowes, so that in
this sense, the Church shall no more be driven into such a Desert or
Wilderness again; But*

Secondly, a Wilderness is a withered, dry, 2 Wilderness a fruitless, barren
place.
empty and barren place, which brings forth no fruits, or but sour at the
best: there be no crops of Corn, nor grapes that grow there (of thorns or
thistles) a dry desolate place, Zeph. 2.13* where the trees are burnt up, and
the pastures most pitifully scorched up, and made scarce by the hottest beams.
So a loud lamentation is made in Isa. 64.10. The holy Cities are a wilderness,
S^ has Sion been.
Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a wilderness; and thus has the Lord laid
his complaint against his people for their fruitlessenesse formerly; and what
could he have said more grievous or sad? But see! O what sweet days do enter
in, and on us! Gods precious ones shall be abundantly (and now daily) more
blessed from above, But now shall, be blooming and branching, and
fruit-bearing, and flourishing.
to make us blossoming, bearing, and branching; yea his Saints shall so
flourish, in Isa. 35.2. by seeing the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of
their God. The Church is barren and fruitless, when ignorant and sightlesse of
that fructifying presence which shall be in the midst of her, Amos 9.13, 14, 15.
(and then, Florens florebit and exaltans exaltabit) so in Isa. 55.12, 13. All
the trees of righteousness shall clap for joy, and instead of the thorn shall
come up the firre-tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the mirtle-tree,
(as in chap. 5.) and it shall be to the Lord for a name, and for an everlasting
sign that shall not be cut off: Good shall be in the room of the bad, and
sweet of the sour; Cedars for shrubs, serviceable, and seed-bearing-trees for
barren brambles, and useless fruitless bushes; and then the barren and
desolate shall bring forth more children then she which has an husband, Gal.
4.27.

These Promises are putting out, and springing forth their bud as the Garden,
Cant. 4.12. Isa. 61.11.
that causes the things that are sown to spring forth, even so the Lord our
God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all Nations,
Sim.
and in Zach. 9.17. Corn shall make the young men cheerful (and fruitful to
grow) and new wine the Maids; thus shall the wilderness be like the fruitful
valleys full of Lillies, and of the loveliest Roses of Sharon and Carmel.

Thirdly, a wilderness without a way.
Thirdly, a Wilderness has no ready road, nor beaten path, nor noted mark,
but a man may be soon lost, let him look on this side, or that side, backward
or forward, he knows not what to do, nor whither to go, for he can get no
Guide. Now in such a Wilderness was the Church too, she was at a loss, and
has been above a thousand years, the Saints (poor Souls! The Church was so
in it.
) seeking up and down, hither and thither, this way or that way, but yet in a
Wilderness; yea, many Professors formerly have, as the Lord has said, Jer.
14.10. They have loved to wander, and they have not refrained their feet, but
have walked after the imaginations of their own hearts, Ier. 9.13, 14.
and after the Baalim which their Fathers have taught them. Oh! so! so were we
lost most miserably in men's imaginations and devices, and Doctrines, too too
much, I say, to this day, for matter of true Doctrine, and true Discipline.
Well, but what will the Lord now do for her deliverance out of all these false
ways? and Wildernesse-worship? Joh 14. Cant. 8.5.
why he will send his Spirit to be her guide into his holy truth, as he has
promised; Promise is to bring her into the way.

The Lord will be her guide.


and he himself, Isa. 58.10, 11. Will be her light in obscurity, and her
noonday in darkness; and will guide her continually, and satisfy her soul
in drought, and make fat her bones, and make her like a watered garden, and
springs of water never dry: and in Isa. 30.21* the Saints shall bear the word,
saying, This is the way, Io. 4.
walk in it; and then they will cast away all false ways, and worships, etc.
as a menstruous cloth, saying, get thee hence, as to an excrement, Expos.
(the word signifies) Now the Father seeks for Spiritual worshippers, Isa.
30.22.
to whom he will make out his mind in order to the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Gospel, Spiritual worshippers in Doctrine and Discipline, 2 Cor. 4.3 Most
in the form, least in the Spirit.
which is hid to them that are lost, and such as are most in the wilderness
least see it, or seek it; but now the way is discovered to the Saints, who
desire (of all others) to walk therein. For it is with a natural man, as it is
with every thing else that desires naturally to go to its own center or
place, but regards not the way; as the stone that falls naturally, Sim.
regards not which way, and the fire that ascends naturally, ascends any way,
and so all men naturally do; Sim.
but God has promised us his Spirit to lead us, The Spirit guides into the way.
and his Grace to teach us the way wherein we must walk, which is one and the
same for all Saints, though others regard it not. But,

Fourthly, a Wilderness is a most dangerous place, 4. A Wild^rnesse most
dangerous.
where a man is (almost) every moment like to be made a prey to the widest
mouths of the wildest, merciless, and bloody Beasts, that seek to satisfy
their never-satisfied hungers, Psalm. 55.23 Psalm. 26.9.
with such strangers. In such a condition has the Church been, The Church in
such danger.
ready to be torn a pieces (every day) by such unexorable enraged wild Beasts,
and bloud-suckers, feeding upon the flesh of the Saints, such as have inhabited
in the dens of Darkness, and cruelty, (the Villages of Kedar) they are
called in Scripture Language barbarous, cruel, merciless, Bears, Lions,
Tigers, Mat. 3.7 Psalm. 104.21 Psalm. 58.4 Mat. 1^.16 Prove. 29.10 Psalm. 11.2.
Leopards, Adders, Serpents, and what not, to delineate their dispositions
against Gods people and innocent ones, their feet are swife to shed blood, and
they have hunted after the holy and upright ones, and have lain in secret to
set upon them, see Psalm. 74.19, 20. O deliver not thy turtle Dove unto the
multitude of the wicked, for the dark places of the earth are full of the
habitations of cruelty! O let not the oppressed return with shame, let the
poor and needy praise thy name, etc. The Church is this Turtle Dove, in daily
danger of being destroyed, Expos.
whilst she is in the Wilderness, amongst the multitudes of merciless and
matchless Beasts of prey, Prove. 12.10
whose mercies are cruelties; yea their tenderest gripes are terrible griefs
unto the Saints, whilst such say in their hearts, ver. 11. Come, let us destroy
them together; the Saints are such harmless Doves, weak, poor, timorous, and
mournful; How persecuted up and down.
but innocent, loyal, chaste, and faithful to Christ their Mate; and poor
souls, sadly oppressed, and persecuted up and down, from Country to Country, by
an accursed crew of cruel Kites, etc. Birds and Beasts of prey have so hated,
and hunted them up and down, that they durst not appear openly (till now of
late) but lie lamenting in some by-holes and corners from the cruelties and
crafts of those Cannibals; Promises of her deliverance.
but the Promises which are pregnant, and big-bellied for deliverance in these
days are many, and they are ready to be Midwived for the Churches freedom
from this comfortless condition, as in Isa. 11.5.6, 7. for first, the loins
of Christ, Isa. 65.23
and his lovely Body the Church, shall be girded about by a girdle of
righteousness and faithfulness, the Saints are an ingirded, Wild Beasts shall
have no power to hurt us.
and an enclosed company (as after will appear:) then the Wolves, Leopards,
Lions, Bears, Aspes, Cockatrices, etc. (though they be such) they shall have
no power to hurt us, but shall be glad to lie as still as a stone, as in Exodus
15.16. So that we shall be safe out of the Wilderness upon the Mount, Jer.
32.41.44. for the Lord will watch over us with his whole heart and soul, and
we may build houses, and buy lands without danger; the Lord will be to us a
wall of fire round about us, Wild Beasts afraid of the wall of fire.
which the Wilderness ones will be afraid to come nigh, Zach. 2.5.^. There
shall be no more a pricking brier to the house of Israel, nor a grieving thorn
of all them that have hated us, Ezekiel. 28.24.26. with abundance of more proofs;
but,

Mat. 4.
Fifthly, A Wilderness is a place of greatest want, even of necessaries: 5.
Wilderness of want.
there is no bread, unless made of Stones, nor Grapes, unless growing on
Thistles; no Corn comes up among their bushes and brambles; and Esa. 34.11.
There be the stones of emptiness; a man may eat his fingers that is lost in a
Wilderness, unless he has bread about him, Expos.
(there is much want) and such a Wilderness has the Church been in also; The
Church in such woeful wants of necessaries.
where she has wanted even necessaries for Souls, bread of life, and food
convenient for her; for as in Amos 8.11, 12. They did wander from Sea to Sea,
from North to East, to and fro, to seek the Word of the Lord, and yet went
without it; Expos.
often finding (at best) but Cankers, trash and trumpery which grow upon every
wild briar and bramble; Verse. 13.
so that the very Virgins and young men have fainted for thirst; but blessed be
the Lord, who has laid it out otherwise in these days for his Saints. For as
the sharp winter makes the Spring sweet, Sim.
and the dark night the light lovely; O how sweet are the days that approach!
so the times past do help to set forth our happiness in these times present,
wherein we have plenty of Mannah falling down from the windows of heaven. How
sweet does Honey relish after Aloes and Gall? O how sweet is health after a
sore sickness? wealth after poverty? pleasure after pain? and bread enough
after infinite want? A great Courtier complaining to the Harbinger, Sim.
for that he was laid in so homely and filthy a room, was answered; O Sir, You
will take delight in it when you are out of it! and so may we say to think of
the Dungeon, and bondage, full of darkness and filthiness, wherein we were
barricadoed up in former years; and as Darius said of Puddle-water, Sim.
when he was in great extremity of thirst, O sweet! so now may we that have
been in a Wilderness say of the worst preaching (almost) and Ordinance we meet
with, from the Gospel and the Spirit; O sweet! Ah, how did Hagar cry when her
bottle was dry, that now she and her child must dye in the Wilderness? Sim.
she wayles wonderfully (poor soul) till she saw a fountain near enough;
and so did we, till the fountain (which is now set open,) was found, out of
whose fullness flows streams, which make us glad, Psalm. 46.4. and as the glory
of God appeared to Israel even when they wanted bread, Exodus 16.7. So (as
Ainsworth says) is God with us, and has appeared in the Assemblies of his
Saints, when they were in the greatest wilderness of want, wanting bread for
their souls; but since I say the Lord has rained Mannah amongst us, Good
store of Manna.
even Angels food, and has begun to feast us with fatness, and fill us with
gladness; and in these last days he has promised that the Saints shall be
swallowed up, Isa. 11.9. Isa. 35.2
over head and ears in the knowledge of God, as deep as the bottom of the Sea
under the waters, yea with the knowledge of the glory of God, Habac. 2.14.
filled by knowing him, in the Hebr. and then shall Corn make the young men
cheerful, and new wine the maids, Zach. 9.17. for he has promised to call
for the Corn (which grows in no soil but Heaven) and to increase it, Ezekiel.
36.29. and the fruits of every tree (of righteousness) shall be multiplied,
Psalm. 63.5. Isa. 25.6, 7 Psalm. 65.4.
and we shall be no more a reproach for famine among the Heathen. The Saints
shall have bread enough and to spare, Saints shall have enough, and no more
want.
and shall be fed with fatness and marrow abundantly; yea whilst others are
ready to starve, they shall have enough, and eat, Isa. 65.13, 14. yea, whilst
others have their tongues cloven to the roof of their mouths, they shall
drink full draughts, and rejoice whilst others shall be ashamed.

6. With wilderness creatures and companies.
Sixthly, in a wilderness a man must be a companion with wildernesse-Creatures,
and companies of Wolves, Bears, Foxes, Serpents, etc. such a comfortless
condition the Church was in even till now, among the multitude of such as the
Beasts of Ephesus, wanting religion, yea and reason; Oh sad condition! Ezekiel.
22.26 2 Cor. 6, 16, 17
when as no difference was put between the clean and unclean, but believers
with unbeleevers, light with darkness, men with beasts, and brutish ones were
unequally yoaked, So the Church was in the wilderness to this day.
and are at this day in Parish-Congregations or Churches (so called) so that
whereas formerly God might have said of the Churches that bore his Image,
behold, they are as one of us; Sim.
now the Beasts may say of Parish-Churches and constitutions which belong to
the Beast; Behold they are as one of us. For as the Arc (at first) was carried
on men's shoulders, but after that (in the corruption of times) it was carried
on a Cart, and by Beasts, till they quite over-turned it; even so the
Church Discipline, Sim.
that (at first) in Primitive times consisted of Saints, and which was bore up
by Christ, and carried out by the Apostles, was afterward corrupted into a
Discipline, carried out by the power of the Beast, and bore up by Antichrist,
And quite overturned into a stie of Beasts.
consisting of Beasts as well as men, I mean of visible brutish sinners,
making the Church a Wilderness for Wildernesse-Creatures, till they had quite
overturned the true Church, (as to appearance) and turned it into a stinking
stall and stye. But now let us bless our God, Precious promises of her
deliverance.
who has brought us into the entrance of those blessed days promised in Isa.
35.8, 9, 10. An high way shall there be, and a way called the way of holiness,
the unclean shall not pass over it, no Lion shall be there, nor ravenous
beast shall go up (for it is high) thereon, but the redeemed shall walk
there, and the ransomed of the Lord, etc. And the vile and the precious shall
be separate, for God is gathering up his jewels, Mal. 3.16, Ier. 15.19
17, 18. so that a difference shall be put between them that serve him, and
them that serve him not, with many other Prophesies to this purpose, which I
pass by, having produced sufficient (I hope) to satisfy either the rationally
religious, or the religiously rational ones in this point, and of the Churches
Wildernesse-state, and of her recovery, which is coming apace upon us;
although this I know, that there be more then many neither religious, nor
rational, How many bewail the fall of Babylon.
that do deplore the falling of Babylon, and men that mourn for Tammuz, who
say as Agrippina Neroe's Mother did, Sim.
when she was told by Astrologers that her son should be Emperor indeed,
Sueton, in Ner. And would have the Strumpet rule though she ruin us.
but he should slay her in the time of his Empire) well says she, Occidat,
modo imperet. So say many of the Beast, and of Babylon, let them reign though
they ruin, for they cannot abide to hear of their fate. Some old Jades there
be, that if they be put out of their shuffling pace they will do just nothing,
neither amble nor trot; Sim.
so some old Souls there be that are but shufflers in Religion, and their
duties very unevenly, brokenly, and imperfectly, unsetledly, and
superstitiously performed; but take them off of their old pace, They will not
be got out of the old pace.
and customary courses, and think to put them into a well-ordered way and
Discipline, they cannot endure to be so checked, but will either stand still,
and leave off all, or else will go on, and in again, in their old wonted way,
and confused order, without rule or reason. Such as these are terribly
prejudicial against the work which our God is going on with, and in that;
Characters of Wildernesse-ones are:
I shall show you a little of their temper, that they may be known. As first,
these Wildernesse-spirits have their dens and habitations in the Wilderness,
but Strangers (I mean the Saints) think it strange to stay there, 1 Their
habitation and* abode.
though it be but a little, they cannot endure the thoughts of continuance in
such a condition; No content to us.
they take no joy, nor content, nor comfort as long as they are in such a
Wildernesse-state, and Wildernesse-ones do feed and fill themselves with what
they find growing in a Wilderness, 2 Their food is wild f^uit.
which others cannot do, nor endure; So, O how greedily do some men swallow
down the Doctrines and devices of men! Ceremonies, and Superstitions! Enough to
choke us.
Traditions, with abundance of such old trumpery and trash, Jer. 14.9, 10.
enough to choke us. Further, as for your Wildernesse-ones, they never
complain that they are lost in the Wilderness, 3 Never lost.
for as long as they are there, they are never out of the way, come what will;
come this or that, this religion or that, this worship or that, so it be in the
Wilderness, where they may run and range about at liberty, and as they list;
We are soon lost, and sensible of it.
whilst the Saints, (alas) are soon sensible that they are not in the way, but
that they are out of the way, ( Psalm. 38.3.5.) they know not where; they call,
and cry, and sadly complain all the day long, Psalm. 94 17 Psalm. 55.22 Psalm.
12.4
and go about lamenting for deliverance, and every step they take they tread
with tears and sighs, Psalm. 85.9. and full of cares, ( Ephesians. 5.15.) with
tears and prayers, Hosea 14.8. Psalm. 80.3.7.19. Jer. 17.14.16. etc. yea, and
the rather, for that they see such company is not according to their
principles, but that there is an apparent and vast difference between them and
such wild Beasts and bruits abroad.

4 They agree together to seize on a stranger to their ways.
Again, the Wildernesse-ones will agree well enough among themselves, although
they ( all) set upon a poor Soul, a bewildernessed stranger, and will not
agree with him, unless to ruin him. But lastly, this mark never misses, that
the Wilderness-creatures are best content with darkness, 5 Best pleased with
darkness.
and do most heartily affect, and welcome the night of darkness, for then are
they in their element, then they appear most, and meet oftenest, and prog, and
pry, and run, and rant about most busily for their prey, etc. as the text
says; They love darkness, because their deeds are evil, Joh. 3.19. they hate
light, and hide themselves from it; And hate the light.
no wonder then they cannot abide the Gospel, and that the approaches of Christ
perplex them, and the appearances of Christ torment them, who cry out, as
Matthew. 8. Why come thou to torment us before the time? These hate the true
Son, and all light that shines immediately from him (unless it be the Moon,
the light of nature, the Candle of the Lord) they will not allow of that light
(the Sun) of the Lord, wherein he appears most excellently and eminently; nay
the very Ordinances (that are most special, and refined) they are offended at,
and under the notion of new light, they loudly exclaim against true light, and
Ordinances, and explode all Gospel-doctrine and Discipline, the way and worship
of Christ (as preciseness, novelty, and what not?) for indeed they cannot
endure an element so near them wherein the Sun moves, or whence he shines,
But those that have a right to these latter days promises, love, and rejoice
at the light.
whilst the Saints (who have sat, sobb'd and suspir'd their hearts out (almost)
in the former days of darkness, whilst they were in the wilderness, and
durst not stir for fear of stumbling in the dark) they are glad at the heart
the Sun is up, and that that light which has been long sown for the
righteous, they are now about to reap off.

But as to the vulgar people, the Apostle says for me, in Gal. 3.1. O foolish
people! Expos.
who has bewitched you from the truth? (...), what Basilisk has looked upon
you? (...) Cashaph.
what has cast a mist before your eyes, as if ye were bewitched? what makes
you so grossly mistake? as to call good evil, and evil good? light
darkness, and darkness light? Antichrist for Christ, and Christ for
Antichrist? what makes ye think you see what you see not? and take the flames
of fire, People are bewitched: why, and how.
(even of Hell) for the beams of the Sun (even as your heaven?) and the true
beams of the Sun, (the Ordinances, Doctrine, and Discipline of Christ) as
flames of fire (your torment and hell.)

O miserable wretches! what Sorceries and Witchcrafts has the Devil used thus
to delude you? who has bewitched you, that you yet love the Wilderness?
Darkness? Barrenness? and Bruitishnesse? to be without Gospel-government, or
Order? Many are so in love with the Beast, that no other company can content
them? Sim.
And as Xerzes was so zealously affected to the Plane-tree, They give all up to
Babel, till they themselves be made a Babel, or confusion.
that he would needs adorn it with most precious Jewels, so are they with
Babylon, that they give up all their Crowns, and Comforts, and Credit, and
Riches, and Liberties, and all to adorn Babel. But are yet ye so foolish
says the Text, verse. 3. or mad? or wild wildernesse-headed? ((...)) have ye
lost your wits? are ye so senseless, to run ruine-ward? to keep in Babylon?
to wait for the plagues of Babylon, or to tarry in the wilderness till the
Sun appears, and the Hunter pursues you into inevitable destiny?
distraction, and destruction? The Lord give ye light in the love of his holy
truth, to see at last, what belongs to your peace; but, But we are called our.
blessed shall be God (and that for ever) who has called his Saints with an
holy calling, to separate from such wildernesse-creatures (as distinct from
them etc.) and not to be reckoned among them, Numb. 23.9. and that they may
become a curious Garden for the beloved to live in.

A call from the Spirit, and the Bride to come.
Wherefore to conclude, the Spirit and the Bride says Come, and whosoever will,
let him come! Oh obey the call of Christ, and come running, and rolling,
Bowl-like, well biased for Christ into his Churches (his Gardens enclosed)
though it may be, ye may meet with many rubs and lets in the way: Neither let
it be self-love that swayes you; for as there is a difference betwixt a child
and a horse in following of a man, Sim.
the child follows his father for love, but the horse for hay, But not for
self-ends^
lay down the hay or oats, and the horse stays, but the child goes (says
Mr. Harris) So indeed is the Saints following of Christ into his Churches, and
Hypocrites very different, Saints and hypocrites different entrance into
Church Fellowship.
for the Saints follow, and obey him for love, but Hypocrites for the loaves.

Wherefore, Take heed to thy foot when thou enterest in, and yet be encouraged
all that can be into these Gardens, to get out of the wilderness, and desolate
place, and that without delay, considering the days we live in (for as Dr.
Williams says in Elijahs-wish, Why make haste into Church Fellowship.
page 2.) It is reported of the Birds of Norway that they fly faster then the
Fowls of any other Country, and that by an instinct which they have, whereby
they know the days of that Climate to be very short, Sim.
and not above three hours long, and therefore they hasten with double flight
and wings; So let it be reported of us in this Commonwealth, Haste! haste!
haste! in England, Ireland, and Scotland, more then all the world beside.
that we of all other Nations in the World do discern the times and seasons,
and to find this day do be shortened for the Elects sake: And that now (as it
is high time) we make haste into the Lords house, and with double-winged faith
and affections we enter into his Gardens. O let us not delay the time! Hag.
1.4. or delude our selves! but above all other, let us make haste! Many there
be who cry like nimble-tongued Tapsters, Anon, Anon, Sir; Sim.
but ( modo and modo non habet modum) make haste then! I have read that after
the Grecians had won the City of Sardis, that Darius, or Zerzes (who were Kings
of Persia) gave a charge that every day at Dinner one should speak aloud, Sim.
Every day remember the Church in Wilderness till she be recovered.
and remember him that Sardis was taken and captivated, he intending not to be
quiet till he had recovered it: So should we every day remember the Church in
the the wilderness, resolving never to be quiet day nor night, with God, nor
men, till she be recovered, and restored into the Garden of the Lord.

(...) Pardes. CHAP. IV. The Church is to be called out of the Wilderness into
an Eden, or Garden enclosed, in what respects particular Churches are
particular Gardens, and our duty to wait for this Restoration.
WHat Fruits have we had of all those things whereof we are now (or at least
shall be) ashamed? For unto such as are ashamed of their former abomination,
Romans 6.21. Ezekiel. 43.10, 11*
does the Lord bid us to show the pattern of his house, which is to be built
up in these days, as we shall show hereafter. In the mean time, now the
winter is past, our days of light will be days of delight, and our
wildernesse-sorrows altered seasonably into Garden-solaces, and our humane
traditions for heavenly truths, The happy change.
our wildernesse-company, and mixed multitudes, for the society of the
firstborn, God in Christ, Angels, and Saints; our darkness for light, 1 Ioh.
1.3.
our deadness for life; from being wild to be wise, and our barrenness for
fruitfulness, our want for plenty, our dangers for safety, our coldness for
zeal, our flesh for spirit, our creatures for Christ, our earth for heaven,
etc. Now what shall we lose by such an exchange? Veniente perfecto evacuatur
imperfectum.
ye that are yet for the old Administrations, Will-worships, and ordinances of
men's creation? whilst Ephraim (whose name notes fruitfulness) shall say, Col.
2.22, 23.
What have I to do any more with Idols? for why? I have heard the Lord, and
observed the Lord; I am like a green Fir Tree, Hos. 14.8.
from me is thy fruit found: Who is wise, and he shall understand these things
etc?

Christ's Church is called the Garden of the Lord, an Eden, a Paradise, Christ's
Garden, Isa. 51.3. Isa 35.2. Isa. 5.1. Mat. 21.23. Ier. 2.21.
etc. In the places forenamed, and in Cant. 8.13. there Christ is said to dwell
with the Saints (his brethren) and companions in a most eminent manner. But why
is the Church called his Garden?

First, because by Christ they are (as a Garden) taken out of the fields, 1
Taken out and separate distinct from the commons.
commons, or highways abroad, and separate from them (as a piece of ground by
its self) distinct and independent (with relation to the rest round about) So
in Joh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the world, etc. Ephesians. 5.11. therefore
have no fellowship with workers of darkness, unfruitful ones, Number. 23.9.
(...).
and those not fit for a Garden of Christ.

Secondly, Saints are by him an enclosed people from them without, 2 Enclosed
in themselves.
they are hedged in by Christ's own hands, Isa. 5.2. he has fenced it in, and
gathered out the stones, etc. So in Mark. 12.1. (...) Matthew. 21. he has round
about it raised his hedge. Mat. 21.33.
In the time of the Law the (then) hedge was full of sharp thorns, Expos.
and now by a Gospel-fence (as we shall see afterward) we are kept in, By
Gospel-fences and hedges.
and others out, that are not Christ's Disciples; for by his own rules he has
paled his people into a communion of love, Vide Sibs in Cant 4.12.
light, life, and liberty; and thus his Church is a Garden enclosed, Cant.
4.12. as a people by themselves, Expos.
and separate from them, that are without.

Thirdly, He has planted this his Garden (as he did Paradise, Genesis 28. with
his own hand, 3 Christ's own planting.
and has by his own labors and industry, ordered his Church, he casts out
the stones, Vide lib. 2. chapter 9
he cuts up the brambles, he (who whipped out the buyers and sellers) sets and
sowes with singular heed (to his Fathers will) whatsoever he sees for his
Garden-use, Mat. 15.13.
and every other plant he pulls up by the roots. See it in Isa. 5.2. Matthew.
4.33. he has planted ((...)) with great pains; whatsoever is of his Garden, he
will have his own handy-worke in, that the beauty thereof may be the greater,
etc. and above all the world beside. Expos.


Fourthly, this is his Garden for fruitfulness which he is the cause of; 4
For fruitfulness.
when a Gardener sees one of his Grafts bud and bear, he is glad, and boasts
of it; Sim.
so is Christ to see any one to take well: Vide Paul Hobsons Garden enclosed.

All trees in his Garden are for fruits.


but yet in this Christ excels all other Gardiners (as Joh. 20.15.) that he
sets no Tree but for Fruits; As Lucian fained, the gods sat in Parliament to
choose their Trees, one chose the Oak for strength, another chose the Bay Tree
for greenness, another the Cedar for tallness; but Minerva to the shame of all
the rest, Sim.
chose the Olive for fatness: So Christ to the shame of all others, chooses
Trees for fruitfulness, not for strength, tallness, or the like, 1 Cor. 1.28.
Not wise, not noble, etc. Christ's Church is like Canaan, 1 Cor. 1.28.
Sim.
a land full of Brooks, Springs, Deuteronomy. 8.7. Vines, Figs, Surpassing all others
for magnitude, multitude, and plenitude.
Spices, Apples, and all fruits that ripen by degrees, as the Sun grows
hotter, they are to be the choicest, these Gardens are to surpass all others
without, both for abundance and the goodness of the fruits: As far exceeding
such as the choysest Orchard, or Garden-fruits excel common hedge-crabs, or
highway fruits; So says he, Matthew. 5.27. 2 Cor. 7.11. Ephesians. 3.19.
What do ye more then others? else it is a burning blushing shame to be of
the Garden, and yet to let others bring forth as good fruits, Cant. 4.13.14.
thus says Paul, 1 Cor. 3.3. etc. Are ye yet carnal (as ye were before when
ye were without) Do ye yet walk as men? Expos.
O fic! what not now to live at a higher and holier rate then others! when your
heels ought to be above their heads that are without. Such Garden-Saints by
Christ are to become so fruitful above others, Cant. 4.12.
by having from him fuller and freer influences then others. For he is the
Fountain of Gardens and streams from Lebanon. Thus says he, I will cause them
that come out of Jacob, to take root, Isa. 27.6. Israel shall blossom and bud,
and fill the face of the world with fruits: Expos.
So in Hos. 14.5, 6. I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the
Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, i. e. in abundance of streams, and
sweetest sap-roots to receive the soul of their soil, and the heart of their
dewes, to reach out, and run far; for his branches shall spread, Expos.
and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon then. Thus
they fructify from Christ, as in Joh. 15.4, 5. Without him they can do
nothing, and are but as withered branches, saplesse, and fruitless; wherefore
blessed be they that blossom in the Spring (now) and are not nipped off again
by Borean blasts, but be well set for growing and ripening; for in this
Autumne-harvest (which is now nigh us) as the Sun grows hot and high, they
shall be gathered (full ripe) into the Fathers floor or Garner: Sim.
So be it.

Fifthly, He has them in his care constantly, as a man has his Garden, 5 The
Lords special care.
and that most of all, for that he will not suffer Swine to set footing there
(but keeps them without amongst their brutish brood) So the Lord has built a
watchtower to overlook all the Church; So Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it,
Mat. 21.33.
and I will water it every moment, lest any should hurt it, I will keep it
night and day; By day and by night upon all her glory I will be her defense,
Expos.
Isa. 4.5. He will not suffer one Saint to be hurt by the wild Boars of the
wood, Of least of his Garden plants.
or the Foxes of the field, for he sets traps to take them, Cant. 2.15.

Sixthly, such a society of Saints are his Garden-delights, his
Darling-delights, 6 His choysest delights are his Gardens.
and he dearly loves to live and lodge there, Cant. 7.11, 12. to eat and drink
there, Cant. 5.1. of his pleasantest fruits, and sweetest Spices, Cant. 4.16.
of his beautiful beds, and to gather fair Lillies, Cant. 6.2. and there his
presence is most eminent, excellent, free, and frequent in the midst of his
companions, (viz. the Saints) Cant. 8.13. to the ravishing of their souls with
his sweetest loves, 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 2.1.
Cant. 7.12. there he loves to walk alife, Psalm. 132.13, 14. and to show to
his Saints his beauty, Isa. 33.17. Thus is the Church of Christ his choysest
Garden, Here is the Suns orb to move in, and to give light to others.
and therein especially is his presence most excellent, as the proper sphere
and orb wherein the Sun moves to give his light to the world. We know that
nothing which is not what it is by nature, can longer be so then the cause
continues, and the working of the cause which effects it to be so, as water
which is not by nature hot, Sim.
will not be hot longer then the fire makes it so, but little by little it
returns to its natural coldness again; so the air which is naturally
dark, is no longer lightsome then the Sun makes it so, but the Sun
with-drawne, Sim.
it will turn again to darkness; and indeed Christ (this Sun) as long as
he shines we are light, and shall be light, but no longer. How long we are
light.
Now he has promised in special manner to be a light in the midst of us (his
Churches) for there he delights most to be: O that it may be said of all
Churches now, as once Caesar Augustus said of Rome, That though he found them
brick, yet he left them Marble! So though Christ has found us a wilderness,
Sim.
yet he has made us an Eden! or Gardens-inclosed! fruitful and fair!
pleasant and profitable! to God and men!

But thus you may see in all, and in more then all these respects, that the
Lord is now raising up the Saints, and rearing up his Sion, as he has
promised; This blessing is begun in our days.
This blessing is already begun, and in these days, Christ calls us aloud, as
Cant. 4.8. Come with me from Lebanon (i. e. out of the Forest in the North, 2
King. 14.9. Isa. 29.17. where wild beasts were; A loud call from Christ to come.
so out of mixed congregations, and from wildernesse-companions, etc. O my
Spouse come with me, look from the top of Amana (i. e. interpretatur
^urbulentus, that is, from all wicked and turbulent spirits, Expos.
that oppose the truth, yea a mount of Tyrants, void of all goodness, and
great Persecutors of Gods people look from them all) and from the top of
Shenir and Hermon (Shenir interpretatur faetor) from the Lions dens from the
mountains of Leopards. And separate* from them without.
This is the call of Christ to us in these days, to have us look, learn, and
live beyond this wildernesse-condition, and all them without, that are enemies
to the Gospel and Garden-way of Christ's Worship; for now the Lord (in order to
the restoration of Doctrine and Discipline) declares new things, Isa. 42.9.
before they spring forth, he tells us of them, Wherefore sing a new Song. Expos.
verse 11. Let the wilderness rejoice, and all the Villages of Kedar
(Darkness) Let the inhabitants of the Rock (Christ) and all that dwell in the
clefts of the Rock) shout out from the tops of the Mountains. Cant. 2.14.
Amen.

The last days best days.
Find no fault with these days then! but wait! Isa. 25.9. for the wine will be
best at last, and in the evening it shall be light; Isa 64.4. Isa. 2.2. Zach.
14.7. Proph. Rev. 12.1.
richest promises are reserved for us, therefore called the most precious, 2
Pet. 1.4. In these days shall the Branch of righteousness grow up, Jer.
33.14.15. and our blessed Ahashuerus shall take in Esther. The face of
Church Discipline shall shine again, Prophesies of the Churches restoration
in these latter days.
and the King shall delight in her beauty, Psalm. 45.10, 11. Besides the
abundance of Scripture-prophesies prooving of this; I have seen many remarkable
Prophesies of late, largely foretelling these glorious times. As of one
Methodius in the year two hundred and fifty, in a Treatise de Novissimis
temporibus, Methodius.
he tells us how the Kingdom of Christ, in these last days shall be lifted
up above all mountains; but first, he says, That many mighty Ishmaelites must
fall, and then shall follow peace and joy to the Saints. I have also met with
Hermas whom we read of Romans 16.14. (and Jerome calls him Paul's disciple) in a
book of his entitled, Hermes vision of the Churches restoration gradually 1
An old woman in a chair. 2 An old woman with the face of a young woman. 3 A
young woman with old woman's hairs in Q Eliz. and to these days. 4 A fair Bride
coming out to meet the Bridegroom; so she is now.



Ecclesia, he mentions a vision which he had given him of the Church from that
time, to the last age, what several conditions she should be in: First, he
saw her like an Old woman sitting in a chair; The next alteration he foresaw
in a second vision (he says) of an Old woman, only having the countenance
and face of a Young woman; In the third, she had the shape of a Young woman,
but she had the hairs of an Old woman, and undecent* But in the fourth, which
is reserved for us, and ready to be revealed these latter days, she was
lively resembled in the form of a Virgin, and in the beauty of a Bride coming
forth out of her Bride-chamber in great glory, and setting forward to meet her
beloved Bridegroom, as being already set out, and coming forward also in his
great Majesty, might, and glory.

Many more I might produce that Prophecy of these days, but doubtless the
Scripture has said enough (had they said nothing) to satisfy our souls, and
to set us forward (afresh) in this latter-dayes-disposition, The latter days
disposition is to wait, Isa. 25.9. Dan. 12.13.
and grace of waiting, yea though the vision stay, yet to wait, because it is
for an appointed time, Hab. 2.2. God does always, and in every age stir up
in his Saints this disposition of waiting suitable to the blessings he has to
give out, and bestow upon the Saints. So in this age wait! in believing! and
believe in waiting! for the time which they are to be performed in, Micah.
7.7. Iam. 5.7.
is hard upon us; Although alas! how most men live most by sense? what they see
that they will believe, but nothing without they see some signs, (as to their
sense and reason) of such days as are foretold of: hence is there so much
crying out of Taxes, and complaining of troubles, and of the times in the very
streets; tell them of blessed days, it is to no purpose, for they want faith
to foresee them, and (poor creatures! they cannot see that the Lords time is,
Few can get beyond sense.
and his day comes, when they least look for him, and before they be aware of
it; even then when men think he has forgot his promises, then is his time to
come at the pinch, to blow at the last spark, 2 Pet. 3.8, 9. as when Abraham's
hand was ready up to cut Isaaks throat, at that moment of time, Sim.
the Lord made him stay, and appeared to make good his promise, then (as that
in Isaak all Nations should be blessed etc.) yea then even then when Zion
(even the Saints) may say the Lord has forgotten me, Isa. 49.14. then, I say,
God appears to perform his promise at the last pinch.
the Lord appears even in the Mount; when they are at the last, and at the
very top, height, pinch, and point of all, then the Lord appears! and then are
they fittest for the enjoyments of those Promises. Psalm. 3.1.12, 13.14.
O how welcome will they then be to them! Besides how many poor souls are
lost in this, because they cannot see light through darkness, good through
evil, Prove. 22.18. Romans 9.22.23.
peace through wars, and blessings through combustions and confusions. Nor
do they understand how God does infatuate the wisdom of the world, Gods
strange ways.
by working out greatest mercies through contrariest means, and even then to
be (most of all) making good of his Promises when he appears (most of all) to
work and walk in a point-blanke, quite contrary-way: He works by contraries.
When he promises happiness, he sends us most unhappiness; when most truth
is promised, he sends in most errors; when the Kingdom of Christ is to be
most exalted, For his Churches.
he lets most enemies, and oppositions to appear against it; so in all other
maine mercies, as when he promises most light, for the accomplishing of the
Promise, he lets in most darkness, Zach. 14.7. So it may be in a poor soul,
when he is about the ruin of a lust, For poor souls.
he may suffer that lust the more to rage, and even then, when thou think
there is nothing more contrary to it, it is in order to do it: Wherefore (my
dear friends!) believe and wait in hope! even against hope! though in your
sense, reason, or wisdom you should see but small ground for it; Believe and
wait.
yet (blessed be God!) there is abundance of sound ground for faith (safely) to
foot it upon; but were it not so as to your sense, Romans 4.18, 19.
yet God has laid the earth upon nothing, Sim.
but the very air, and yet makes the weak air a foundation and ground strong
enough to support and bear the whole universe and globe. When little grounds
for faith and hope appears.
And can he not? nay will he not? raise up, and lay the foundation of our
hopes and happiness in weak means? in ( the day of small things) poor and
nothing beginnings? that appear to men no more then air, and (it may be)
such as will vanish away? Nay in, and by contrary means that (in men's wisdom)
will seem impossible to effect, or to be a good foundation for such a frabricke
of hopes, or be a suitable means for such a delight, as seems to be set in a
Diameter thereto, and against the means; although the means may produce that
day and discovery, yea and recovery of Zion which not only seem contrary to
that work, Contrary means effect that work which will destroy the means.
but which (also) the work is contrary unto, and will destroy. Wherefore when
the Son of man comes shall he find faith on the earth? to instance as clay
and spittle (are contrary means) which opened the eyes of him that had faith?
Find but faith, Sim.
and fire shall consume the waters (and all contrary quenching means) 1 King.
18.38. and the waters shall not be able to hinder the flaming of the fire.
Many acts of Providence like Hebrew must be read backward.
So many Acts of Providence (like Hebrew characters) are to be read backward,
or else they cannot be read aright: And so you may read many of Gods remarkable
works which he is about by contraries. As the Fly on the wheel, Sim.
she goes on; though the wheel goes contrary; so do Gods works go on, Sim.
though the times and troubles, wars and oppositions seem to go contrary,
wherefore by faith, let us firmly expect the irresistible recovery of the
primitive purity, and piety in Doctrine and Discipline; Do Men or Devils what
they can to hinder the brightness and beauty of Christ's Churches in these
latter days, yet they will but set up the sign of the Labor in vain, to
toule people in to them; For Christ shall reign, though the Nations are angry
at it, and wrath shall come upon his enemies; But the Temple of the Lord shall
be set open for the Saints, and the Arc of his Testament shall be seen
therein; yet I say not, but lightnings and thunders, earthquakes, and great
hailstones we may yet meet with, Rev. 11.17, 18, 19. But before I conclude this
Chapter: Let all the Churches remember, A word to the Churches.
that God will have his Gardens well-weeded, and his houses well swept,
wherefore the Lord bless you, as (the good old man) Jacob did tangendo manu
approbationis, and osculando instinctu inspirationis, by his approbation and
inspiration.

(...) Erez. CHAP. V. Christ's Garden, or Gospel-Church-State, which is to be
defended, is to be defined; first from the material cause, or persons (who
are visible Saints) that are fitly qualified for members.
HAving (hitherto demonstrated) by some proofs, and sure Prophesies, the sad
condition and wildernesse-estate of Christs-Church in the want of true Doctrine
and Discipline to this day, and what in these days we are to expect of her
recovery, and restitution, etc. It follows that we fetch out what has lay so
long hid (all the time of our Babylonian captivity) as the fire that was hid in
an hollow place of old, 2 Maccab. 1.20, 21.22.
the Servants of God after they had their liberty given them to build up the
Lords Temple, sent to fetch it from thence, We are to fetch out what has been
hid many hundreds of years.
where it lay so long hid. (Even so are we sent at this day for this purpose,
to bring forth what we can find, though hid for so many hundred years) but in
case we cannot do what we would, we will do what we can in this case (as
Neemias did) to gather what as yet lies in the dust, and in darkness, and so
to endeavor to discover unto you (in what is discovered to us, and what I say
we can) of Christ's own Discipline and Gospel Order, which ought to be in the
Church of Christ. First we must gather the wood together.
Wherefore first I shall begin to gather the wood together, or the matter that
the Church is to be made up of, and after that (the water being sprinkled) I
hope the Sun (that has been for so many Ages set, or hid in a Cloud) will so
break out, and brightly shine in, and upon us with his luster and life, heat
and light, as that we shall become a great fire kindled; so that all men may
marvel at it, Latimer.
and make much of this holy fire for future Ages, which shall never more be
quite out, The Authors prayer is that like a light he may be spent to give
others light.
or extinguished. For as honest old Latimer said to Ridley, as they were going
to suffer; Come Brother, this day we shall give a light, and warm all England!
so feign would I be one that might enlighten others, now I am litt by fire from
heaven, and be as a Torch in the entry to such as are in the dark, Ainsw. in
loc. 3.9.
Et claritate and paritate, and hilaritate, the Lord grant it, in whose light
as I see light, I shall show it, Expos.
and so I come to tell you what is the matter.

What the Church is, viz. The typified Chariot of Salamon, how and why? It is a
bed, a Throne a Palace, a Chamber of presence, a secret Chamber. A Couch.
To begin with the Materials, we lay down this Position, that no persons are
fit for such a purpose but visible Saints, or right matter to make up this
typified Chariot of Solomon but the wood of Lebanon, Cant. 3.9. this Chariot is
his public seat, where he is to be seen of all, in Hebrew Apirion, and in
Greek Phoreion, a Throne say some, a Bed say others, a Palace say others, and a
Chamber of presence say most; but that this Church is all these to Christ and
his Saints say I, and so all; yea, and as ( Sol. Jarchi says beside) the
secret Chamber (here on this floor, and under this roof) for the Bride and
Bridegroom to meet in, and to make much of each other in; but I had rather read
and render it from the word, a place much like a Couch, carried about and
abroad, being open above, exceeding fair, glorious, and richly beset with
beauty within, and in the which Solomon sat with much ease, and in much honor
and state, from whence he delivered his Laws for his Subjects; and thus Christ
does answer the Type to his Saints, whilst he sits in great grace and Majesty
in this his Chariot, and in great glory and triumph he governs, and gives out
his Laws to his Subjects. Now for the matter that this his Chariot is made up
of, The matter of this Gospel-Chariot.
it must be of Lebanon, elect trees, Deuteronomy. 20.19. Ezekiel. 47.12. Isa. 60.13, 14.
The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, Expos.
I mean such trees as are the tallest (heavenward) such Cedars as are the
soundest, Psalm. 1.3. and 52.8. and 92.12 Ier. 17.8. Such as are sound, fair,
tall, fat, upright, strong, and well rooted, are fit for Church Fellowship.
and will not rot, such Cypresses as are the fairest, Eccles. 8.1. Psalm.
119.80. 2 Timothy 1.7. Jer. 5.28. and such Olives as are the fattest, Psalm. 52.8.
and 128.3. and such trees as are the most upright, and the least crooked, or
crabbed, the best and most beauteous ones, Psalm. 7.10. Psalm. 64.10. and 112.4.
Cant. 1.4. Psalm. 15.2. and for strength, such as nothing can overthrow, being
well rooted and united, Psalm. 73.2.6. Zach. 10.12. Isa. 8.8.10, 11. but which
will stand steady in all storms, and against all plots and practices, and
powers which no force can conquer, which no Age can decay, (but they are
renewed like an Eagle) which no fire can burn up (but purify) which no worms
can eat, or enter into, Such are to be always a sweet savor.
but who are all ways, and at all times, and in all places, a sweet savor, 2
Cor. 2.15. to them within, and to them without. These are the Saints indeed,
and none but the visible Saints, and that are so judged upon pregnant proofs,
and strong presumptions) are ( De Jure) of right to be Members of this Church
of Christ; hence are they called, Visible Saints only matter of the Church to
be made up of.
the Churches of Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. and Saints called, 2 Cor. 11. and
sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1, 2. otherwise the types of the Mystical
Temple, (viz. of the Body of Christ, the temple of his Godhead to this day)
Jo. 2.21. would not be answered, (which ought to be) by the typified, Types of
it. 1 King. 6.^
for rough unhewen stones were not laid up into the building of the
Old Testament Temple (till they first were fitted, Sim.
polished, and prepared for the builders use) much less may this Spiritual
house of the Lord be built up of any other then holy and hewn, The Stones of
the Temple hewn.

2 Chronicles. 23.19 None entr^d into the Temple that were known unholy, or unclean.
All the utensils and materials holy.

2 Chro. cha. 4. and chap. 5. So now in the Gospel-temple.


the liveliest and loveliest stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. besides, all that entered into
the Temple of old were to be holy and clean, and all the vessels within holy,
1 Chronicles. 22.19. and all the treasures dedicated unto God, 2 Chro. 5.1. etc. and
all the materials were the most choice and pure; so ought it to be in this
Temple (for a greater then Salomons is here) and the glory of this house must
be greater then the former; wherefore it must be made up of the most choice and
precious materials, and of such as are dedicated and given up unto the Lord by
his Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. Moreover, (Mr: Cotton In his holiness of
Church Members, read that Book, p. 88. The Porters that kept out the unclean.
Unclean and uncircumcised ones do pollute the Temple of the Lord, And are not
to be suffered.
notes,) that the vigilant and laborious attendance of the Porters was typical
too, in 2 Chronicles. 23.19. who were to suffer none that were unclean to enter
into the Temple, which says he, does typifie the duty of the Church Officers,
to prevent and keep out (as much as they can) vicious, vile, known, unclean
persons from polluting the Temple of the Lord, which would be by their
admittance into the midst of us, etc. yet if I may not be so strict and
curious, I am content to say (this reaches to the thing now in hand) viz. That
the Porters (and the people by informing the Porters) are bound in duty to put
by (as much as they may) persons sinful, and uncircumcised, which were not to
be suffered so as the true Israelites were, Ezekiel. 22.26. So in Ezekiel. 44 6, 7,
etc. for amongst other abominations is this brought in, that they suffered such
as were uncircumcised to be in his Sanctuary to pollute it, etc. but Object out
of Jerem. 7.9. There were Adulterers, Thieves, Obj.
and wicked ones, etc.

Rutherford, Bailey.
Answ. This is answered already by many eminent men, yet to add a word, Answ.
you see before in Ezekiel. 44. there were strangers that had crept in through the
negligence, Expos.
or crowded in through the ignorance of the Keepers, Cotton, Hooker, etc.
but they are condemned, and highly complained of, as such who have profaned
the Sanctuary, and defiled his Ordinances, and despised his Laws, and made his
house a very den of Thieves, whereupon the Lord threatens them, for that they
would suffer such to burn Incense amongst them; but (besides the abundance
more of Scriptures which I might use to prove it) I shall produce undeniable
reasons to ratify this truth, Zach. 9.9. Rev. 15.3. Isa. 33.22. Iam. 4.12.
that it may run in triumph, yea in whole bundles of them (that our Beloved may
be to us a bundle of Myrrh, to lodge all night betwixt our breasts;) and the
first sort of reasons run from Christ our King, and the Lord our Lawgiver.

Reas. 1. Is taken out of Mat. 16.16, 17, 18. where Christ our Lord and
Lawgiver has promised himself to be the Churches foundation for ever, and
such as are built up by him, Reasons.
Expos.
and upon him (as all true Church Members must be, 1 Christ is the Churches
foundation, none are true Church Members, but are built up by him, and on him.
that would stand out, and out-stand all storms) must be such Professors of
this Christ as Peter here was, and that is by such a profession as flesh and
blood revealed not, but his heavenly Father. Now none but Saints are such
Professors (at least they must be Saints in appearance) who are able to hold
forth the work of the Fathers upon their souls, which consists not in bare
words, or a verbal acknowledging of Christ; What sort of Professors and
Professions requisite?

Ans. affirm.

Ans. negat. not mere verbal.


for words are but Ciphers, which signify nothing without other Figures; And
as it was said of Epicurus, that he had the habit of a Philosopher, but was
none indeed; so many have the habits and words of Christians that are not so
indeed; and the Church that is built upon the sand, may and must consist of
such, Mat. 7.24, 25, 26, 27. But if the Grapes painted by Zeuxes allured the
Birds to peck at them, Sim.
would they not much more have flowen at them had they been true Grapes indeed?
Many Professors not Christians.
So if such as seem to be Saints, and appear visibly (as to our eye) godly,
are so good, Sim.
and attractive matter for the Church of Christ, much more then are real
Saints so. Obj. Real Saints most attractive matter.
The Apostles admitted all sorts of Professors, three thousand in one day.

Ans. First, it is granted, that they were Professors then before they were
admitted. Obj.


Secondly, It does contradict the text, Answ.
to say all sorts of Professors; if ye mean thereby, Expos.
all that profess Christ with their mouths merely, for the text tells us,
What sort of Professors were taken in primitive times.
Acts 2.37. they were pricked in their hearts, and at the heart, for the word
signifies ((...)) a most sad and sore rent to the very soul, a punctual wound
in every part of their hearts, as if Daggers were fastened at their depth in
them, Sim.
and this word will show their compunction was sound, Not only puncti and
repuncti, but also compuncti, a sound work.

Wounded for sin, crying out for Christ.

(...), repenting, embracing the Gospel greedily.


for it was not (as now it is with some, Acts 7.54.) to kick against Christ,
but to cry out for Christ (him whom they had crucified, for which they were so
wounded;) besides, they were sensible that they were undone without Christ,
wherefore with wide mouths say they to the Apostles, Oh, What shall we do?
Besides, they repented, and heard, and obeyed, and gladly received the Gospel,
ver. 41. yea with greedy stomachs, (though many now have hot Livers, and cold
Stomachs) and strong affections, yea and embraced it (and (as it were) kissed
it, for so far the word will have it) with affectionate acceptance (Gratis
animis) and from their souls; yea and therein they continued steadfast, ((...))
i. e. strong in the faith, Strong in the faith.

In midst of trials.


without staggering, wavering, or shrinking from their Professions and
practice; yea and in the midst of the greatest trials, troubles, persecutions,
perplexities, they were yet most zealous and faithful, by an impregnable
assistance, and an invincible constancy. And are not these the chariest
Characters of true conversion? Can ye so under-value this great work of Gods
Word? surely all sorts of Professors could not do thus: so that I say, such
were all Saints (in appearance) and such, and none but such are by Christ's Law
allowable Members of Christ's Church, although that afterward some will appear
Hypocrites, who crept in, as Judas, Demas, Ananias and Saphira, with diverse
others. But,

2 Christ's countermand, Mat. 21.
Secondly, The King of Saints has given orders to attach such as have
(unawares) got in, and have appeared ungodly, when he whipped out buyers and
sellers; he signified thereby not only his Law against such as were not sound
in holiness, Expos.
after their unsoundnesse appeared, but also to keep them without, that they
might not enter in, now the Gospel-Temple was to be built; no mixed
Congregations were to be continued, but Christ by his Scourge and Whip of Truth
will have us to cast them, and to keep them out. Thus Christ commands, Matthew.
7.6. not to throw Pearls to Swine, Christ's command.
nor to give holy things to Dogs, Expos.
etc. wicked ones are so called in sundry Scriptures, for Phil. 3.2. Beware of
Dogs, beware of evil-workers; so it is in Revel. 22.15. Blessed are they that
may enter in, for without are Dogs and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers and
Idolaters, etc. Violent violations of Christ's Law to take in any but Saints in
appearance, and so far as we can judge of them.
They that are known to be such, must be kept without, or else there will be a
violent violation of Christ's Law: Hence it is the Churches have rule to proceed
with such profane ones and sinners as have crept and crowded in, Matthew. 18.17,
18. etc. Hence it is also the professing-friend (at the feast, Matthew. 22.12. in
Church Fellowship yet wanting the wedding garment, was called into question,
Expos.
but the Text says the servants went out to gather all. Object.


Ans. It is true, All were said to be called by a public call, but before
they entered in, their high-way-rags, their hedge-religion, Answ.
All called by an outward converting cal^
and rayments, were to be laid aside, else the Lord would never have laid it in
his dish, What do thou here without it? nor would he have been put to a
Nonplus, and not have had a word to say; nor should he have been for the want
of that (had it not been necessary) cast out and punished, But they are not to
enter in till fitted.
but by all these (and abundance more I might produce) to prove this first
reason.

2 Are bundled up together out of several Prophetical Scriptures, for in Isa.
60.21. The people also shall be all righteous, All the Prophesies are ^ull to
foretell, that the Church in the latter days shall consist of Saints and such
as so appear.
the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. So in Isa. 35.8, 9, 10. It
shall be called the way of holiness, no Lion shall be there, nor ravenous
beast go thereon (meaning unclean and openly known sinners) but the redeemed
shall walk there: And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion
with songs, etc. So in Isa. 52.1. From henceforth shall come into thee no more
the uncircumcised and unclean. So in Zach. 14.21. In that day there shall be
no more the Canaanite in the Lords house. So in Joel. 3.17. Such are in the
Lambs book of life.
Ye shall know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in Zion my holy Mountain,
then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her
any more. So in Isa. 33.24. and in Rev. 21.27. In no wise shall enter into it
any thing that defiles, or that works abomination, or that makes a lie, but
they which are written in the Lambs Book of life. It is not denied, Sim.
but there is sin in a Church, but not a Church in sin (as one may be said to
have drink in him, and yet not to be in drink) I mean sin so seen, and
known, and yet allowed of, or (at least) not duly proceeded against, by
censure and reproof. Now in this sense nothing that defiles does enter;
Accounted necessary in the Law times, and the Baptists time.
the best Church may have spots on her, but not in her (i. e. tolerated as
before) no not in her worst estate. Besides, in all that was before mentioned
as in the Law-time typical (and so Prophetical) in the Baptists days, August.
in Mat 3. Act. 19 4.
there was even then an apparent repentance and visible profession accounted
necessary before admission, as to baptism. Mat. 3.6. Luke 3.3. how much more
must this be so before admission into Gospel-fellowship for (as Aug. says in
Tom. 4. de fide and operibus) the Pharisees, The Baptist admitted not of
scandalous, nor of bare professors.
and Sadduces that came to his Baptism, were forced to swallow a refusal, and
a bitter reproof to boot, Matthew. 3.7. for a generation of vipers, he neither
admitted of scandalous persons, nor must we into Christs-Church, till there
appears a repentance, and reformation; But,

familiar relation which is between Christ and his Church, Ierom 31, 32.
God and his Saints in such a fellowship. The sweet and unseparable relation
that is betwixt God and his Saints, Christ and his Church, Christ our Husband.
He is their Husband Ephesians. 5.23. Isa. 54.5. and married unto them, Jer. 3.14.
Rev. 19.7. Hos. 2.19, 20. and they are presented unto him as a chaste Virgin to
these Espousals. 2 Cor. 11.2. Now he is not thus related to profane and
scandalous persons (though the Ranters do call him the friend of Publicans and
Sinners) such, with whom Christ has so inseparable, and insuperable communion
which are Saints called; and such must the Church consist of ( i. e. of such,
and only such as far as may be judged) whose husband he is: But some will
object.

Object.
Say not the Scriptures otherwise; as that tares are amongst the wheat until
the harvest, Christ is Husband of mixed Congregations too.
Matthew. 13.25.38, 39. and have you any Church in the Scripture all of Saints?
not having one Judas, Ananias, Demas, Hymeneus, Philetus, nor Diotriphes, nor
others? our own experience is otherwise in all Churches, where there be good
and bad, Lambs and Rams, wheat and chafe, sound and unsound, and yet Christ is
called their Husband.

Answ
First, for the Scripture alleged, it is allowed of, if we give it its own
weight, Expos.
without any other grain, or the least addition to it; for see v. 38. the field
in which they are, is the world, and so we say to the end of the world, in the
world will grow good and bad together; but yet grant it (with most) to be meant
the field of the Church visible (which is rather a Garden) yet this is not an
Injunction, but rather a Prediction of what will be, for without doubt, In the
Church none members but such as appeared fit, so in all ages, in the true
Church of Christ*
wicked men will be in the Church in all ages; but that is not the point; for
this it is that we say, and say again, that such as are known openly to be
such sinners or hypocrites, are neither to be taken in, nor tolerated in the
Church of Christ, of which he is the Husband. And although our present
experiences (besides the primitive and past) express much of this nature, viz.
that naughty, corrupt, and sinful men have been, and yet are in every Church;
yet we will believe such were not openly known to be such, when they were
admitted members of any true Church of Christ, whether past, present, or to
come; yes say some.

Judas was known by Christ to be an hypocrite, Object.
when admitted. in Judas.


1 But he was not so known unto the Church, Answ.
for all the rest of the Disciples did not so much as suspect him (Ecclesia n^n
judicat de occultis) therefore they could not take cognizance thereof, 1 Not
known openly to the Church to be an hypocrite when admitted.
for he seemed a very holy Disciple to the rest.

2 The knowledge Christ had of him as one, 2 Christ knew him so by an
extraordinary Spirit.
(before he appeared such a one) was extraordinary, but we are speaking of an
ordinary way of discovery, as when sin breaks out, and hypocrisy appears;
Besides,

3 There was a special reason in it, that he was received, 3 Great reason for
Judas admission.
viz. to answer the will of God given out in Psalm. 41.8 etc. yet this is
certain, neither he nor any else appeared hypocrites or wicked ones openly,
and so known to be, when admitted either into that, or any other society of
Saints; although there was, is, and will be in every particular Church of
Christ some that ought not to be; Christ's fellowship is the pattern, yet (...)
Judas was in it.
For if this fellowship of which Christ himself was Pastor, and is for a
Pattern, and had but twelve (a small number for the most are not always the
best) had a Judas; much more may others. Even as David's house which is set for
a Pattern for future ages, Sim.
Zach. 12.10. was not without an Amnon, an Absolon, and others; 2 King. 15.25.
even Gods own Arc may nourish Monsters, as Noah's Arc did Cham; Sim.
yea, and as some filthy Toad^ might be found to lie under the stones of the
Temple; Gods own Ark may have beasts and toads in it.
so may some wicked dissembling Hypocrites (says Dr. Hall) and yet the Temple
be the Lords for all that.

Sim.
Furthermore, the visible Church is called his Holy Temple 1 Cor. 3.16, 2 Samuel*
23.4, 5, 6.
17. which ought not to be defiled, 2 Cor. 6.16. and therefore is made up of
living stones, 2 Pet. 2.5. that is, of visible Saints. 2 Christ's Church is Gods
holy Temple.


Also it is called the Lords house and habitation, Heb. 3.6. Ephesians. 2.22, 23. 1
Pet. 2.5. wherein he walks and lives, and takes his rest, 3 It is the Lords
house.
which holiness becomes, Psalm. 93.5. for ever; therefore the holiest are the
fittest matter.

The Church is called his household, Ephesians. 2.19. Now if David could not endure a
wicked person within his doors, 4 His Household.
Psalm. 101.3, 4.5. Much less will the Lord allow it. But to be brief.

5 It is Christ's Body.
Lastly, the Church is Christ's body, 1 Cor. 12.26, 27. and Christ is the head of
every particular Church gathered, Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 5, 23. etc. Now such as are
united to Jesus Christ by his Spirit, All these relations teach us what manner
of persons Church Members ought to be.
1 John 1.3 7. and have special communion with him as their Head (as to
receive virtue and vitality from him) are to be received as members of his
Church, whereof he is Head: And none else, but such as the Church is persuaded
of (upon Testimony given in) to have such a relation to the Lord Christ, and
whom in the charity of her judgment, and in the judgment of her charity, she
freely accepts of for such, and in whom they find the graces of Christ, The
Church must judge of them according to orthodox rules of charity.
and the gifts of his Spirit in some measure, and from whom they have some
answerable fruits, whereby they may be able to judge charitably: for to receive
a member which has not virtuall power, Vid. Hooker 1 lib. 2 chapter
and operation from the Head, is against reason, yea and that reference and
correspondence of members with the head.

Object.
But hence it is that many hypocrites are taken in, who seem to have high
enjoyments, and large gifts, to wit, Ranters and such like, Answ.
etc.

No! It is not hence, but thence (I mean by running from these rules) that so
many Hypocrites creep in, Jude v 4.
as Gal. 2.4. for it is not enough to have heightened conceptions, Not gifts,
or parts, to pray, preach, etc. that do fit or qualify us for Church members.
quick apprehensions, admirable gifts, excellent parts, and thereby to plead
union with Christ (our Head) from the influence of common graces, and enjoyment
of great gifts (as Ranters may have very ravishingly) to make a man fit for
such fellowship of Saints; no not though he prays, preaches, discourses, etc.
like an Angel, if the Church conceive him not a Saint-called, by some evidence
given in, or other, whereby the Church does judge (him in union with his Head
(Christ) according to the Influences of soule-sanctifying and soule-saving
graces. Simon Magus, But union with Christ the Head by saving and sanctifying
graces (so called.)
I make no doubt but had many common-gifts and graces (which had a holy face)
by which he passed by Philip and crept in: but yet had his hypocrisy appeared,
and that they were but counterfeit Coin, I am confident Philip would have dealt
with him home, and have given him his own as well as afterward Peter did, Acts
8.20, 21, 22. And so (as Tertullian says) even Judas was honest and eminent at
first to see to; Sim.
so here be many Blazing-stars, and dangerous Comets which do shine brightest
as to sight (as Ranters, Hypocrites, etc.) but evermore portend and presage
eminent and imminent evils to the Church they are in, unless much mercy
prevent: Others are but blazing Deceivers, who must, and will fall of
themselves.
a many such meteors may seem fixed stars for some time, so long as they are
aloof off, and high, and so cozen us, till they come to fall, and then we
find they were but Deceivers, made of earthly, slimy, fleshly matter.

Thus have I offered the third bundle of Reasons, and reach to the

4 Reason, which is taken from the ends, for the which Gospel Order and
Church Fellowship is instituted, None but Saints can answer the ends of the
Institution of Gospel-Discipline.
the which none but Saints (at least so visibly) are able to answer, which are
of sundry sorts; some few of them I shall instance in, but not insist on; for I
fear I am too large, and then ten to one but some will say, my Pen is
long-winged, and my preaching is long-winded, which is accounted an
ill-favored, and an impardonable fault (in Dublin) I am sure; but to be brief.

1 The honor and glory of God, which none but Saints can.

Others cannot.


1 The maine end of this Gospel-Discipline is to set forth the honor and
praises of God as a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Heb. 2.12. Ephesians. 3.21. now
none but visible Saints are fit to answer such an end. Others indeed would be a
chosen and peculiar people to dishonor God, to rob him of his glory, to
Crucify Christ afresh, to bring a reproach upon the truth, and to scandalize
the Gospel, but for nothing else in Christ's Church.

2 Another end of this Gospel-practise is to promote the true light, 2. The
promotion of the true light and knowledge of God.
and to let in more of that knowledge of Christ, which it is eternal life to
know; now none but the Saints are said to reach this end, Ephesians. 5.8. and in 1.
Jo. 1.6, 7. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we
lie, and do not the truth. But if we walk in the light, as he is the light,
we have fellowship one with another. Others cannot answer this end.
Now profane ones, as Atheists, scandalous persons, and such like, are fit for
the promotion of darkness, and for the putting out of the true light, but are
not at all fit for fellowship upon this account.

3. Edifying one another.
A third thing to be shot at in Gospel-fellowship, is the mutual edification of
one another, and the building up of the body in Christ, 1 These. 5.11. Ephesians.
4.29. 1 Cor. 14.26. now none but Saints do hit this mark, for wicked ones
would serve to pull down and destroy, Others cannot.
but not to build up in the most holy faith, Jude 20.

4. Saint-like love*
4 Furthermore, a maine thing we must not omit, is an open-hearted Saint-like
love, by the same Spirit of love which Christ bare to us, Joh. 15.12. Ephesians.
5.2. 1 These. 3.12. 1 Jo. 3.22. etc. now none but the Saints sit close to this
duty,
(and they hardly too in these days) or that can live up to this end, for
indeed sinners, so known, will serve for nothing more (and for little l^sse)
then to set at variance, Others cannot learn this lesson.
make breaches, and rend the body, being filled with unexorable (yea
unexuperable) hatred, and malice against the Saints, by the same spirit which
their Father the Devil was filled with against Christ. Many other ends might
be mentioned, for the which Saints are enchurched together according to the
Gospel which I shall show herafter in the last Book; but neither to those, Nor
answer other ends of Church Fellowship.
nor these ends can any others but the Saints (at least so visibly) be said to
live up. This is no work for them (therefore) there is no way in
Christs-Church for Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, Blasphemers,
Persecutors of Saints, Scoffers, or scandalous, or such as may cause a Curse to
pursue us, and Gods wrath to be revealed against us, by the with-drawment of
his presence from us; but for nothing more as I know of; thus by all these
reasons I have (and by many more I might impregnably) proved, that only Saints
visible (so judged of by sufficient evidences given in to be such) are
competent Members of a true Church of Christ, None but visible Saints suitable
matter.
which (ought to be) a company of Saints called to be Christ's Spouse, and
Temple of the Lord.

Obj. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Some may say with Master Rutherfurd (as Cotton and Hooker notes) but such
terms are given to the Church of Christ as invisible. Object.


Ans. 1. There is no such distinction in Scripture, Ans.
but Christ's Church is so called, whether visible or invisible. No Scripture
distinction of visible and invisible, but all one Church, 1 Timothy 3.^5.2. So
Ainsworth against Bernard, p^g 174. and Robi^so^s Justif* of separ. p* 112.


2 Paul styles them such (as a visible body, if they will have it so) 1 Cor.
3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. 2 Cor. 11.2. saying, Ye are the temple of God, and what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? and I will walk in the midst of
you; but who will be further informed in this subject may see Mr. Hooker's
Survey, 1 Lib. 2 Chap. where they have the term opened, the question stated,
and the conclusion proved. Well, a word of use, which is;

Use 1. To reprove (whilst I prove) Parochial Churches (which I shall show in
all the essentials of it) for in this first we find how foulely they fall
short of being fit matter; for the veriest ranting, revelling, and reviling
Swines, Parish Churches, as Churches Antichristian.
that swill upon the earth, the most notorious Drunkards, and vicious wretches
that are, are Members of such Churches, and so held ( De jure) but this is from
beneath of their Father (the Devil) and of his bottomlesse-pit-smoak, the
constitution of which comes from the busy brains of men: for about
Constantines time this corruption began to be great, and was brought on, as it
was in Dionysius his days (before him) Bishop of Rome, who sent out his Edicts
(not to emparadise, but to emparish the people) which I have spoke to in Chap.
2. and in England, Honorius Canterburiensis was the first that I find,
pragmaticall to promote this confused, this corrupt, and Christ-crucifying,
Christ-slighting, and Christ-destroying Church State: When Parish-Churches
began in England.
who desire to be more satisfied herein, may be pleased to peruse either Seldom
de Decimis, or Polydor. Virgil. lib. 4. c. 9. or else Mr. Hookers Polity, or
Mr. Jacobs Attestation, or honest Paul Baines Diocesan Trial, or else Mr.
Burtons Vindication of the Independent Churches, and they may receive it in
full, and write it in folio. But a burning shame it is, so much of the Whores
forehead should be still in some men, as to maintain them to be Churches (and
to call them such) and Saint them to boot) but blessed be the Lord, that
Christ's Church of his own institution can be built up amongst us here in
Ireland, and that the Honorable Commissioners of Parliament are careful to
keep up Christ's, and to keep down Antichrists Institutions.

Obj. Many Saints in our Parish.
Object. But, say some, All are not such in our Parish as you speak of, viz.
scandalous persons, but we have many precious Christians, and Saints.

Answ.
Ans. 1. Are there any Scandalous, and not Members of your Parish Church? Do
not your Minister give the Sacrament, and both Seals to all? without putting
difference between the holy and profane? this is contrary to Christ's rules and
order, and most dangerous and detestable.

Obj. Our Minister godly.
Obj. But our Minister is an honest man, and does not so, but puts a difference?

Answ.
Ans. 2. Why does he not then call them that are godly out of that condition
and Church State, which he seems to separate them from, in making the
difference, which till then is but mocking God, and Christ, etc.

2 He gives (as some do) the Lords Supper as a right Ordinance, but in a wrong
order; but to answer,

Answ.
2 Yet ye are not therefore a Church of Christ's own order, because ye have
some, many, though they should be most, (which is scarce in any Parish)
precious to God (which should consist of none else) for a little leven levens
the whole lump; so does not a little sweet meal sweeten the whole of our lump)
and what taste has a little spoonful of honey in a vessel of vinegar? Sim.
) Nay were there as much honey as vinegar, yet the worst would taste most. Here
I know, they would feign bring in the former objections, which are fruitless,
and frustrate.

In the best Churches have been as bad men, Object.
as in Corinth, etc. Answ.


This before in page, 52. etc. but they were not known such, when they were
taken in, nor were they tolerated when so known, for they must all be true
Professors, and not profane ones, or such as have cut a Covenant with hell
and death, Expos.
as the word signifies in Isa. 28.15. which is taken from a Simile of such as
were wont of old to cut asunder the beasts they sacrificed: (...)
Sim.
So do Hypocrites and profane ones their hearts, for they divide their hearts
into two (...) and so sacrifice them in part to the service of sin, Satan,
and their own lusts, Genesis 15.17. Jer. 34.18. These have cut a Covenant with
hell and death, though sometimes they seem to cut a part for God, and to allow
him, a (small) portion of their hearts.

Most of our Parish are great Puritans, and old Professors. Object.


Yet it is not enough so to be, Answ.
which was proved page 62. and which appears, 2 Timothy 3.5. although it is enough
so to be, for Parish-constitutions and National Churches, Sim.
yet not for Gospel-ordered Congregationall-Churches: For although a mudwall
may be made up of any thing, Churches as Christ's Palaces must be made of the
best materials;
seeing it consists of all kinds of stuff and trash, though ere so mixed and
base; yet Palaces must be built up with better materials, and so must the true
Churches of Christ, which are his Palaces.

But these come all to hear Gods word, Object.
they keep his Sabbaths, and have Christ's Ordinances dispensed amongst them,
etc.

What of all that? Christ's Ordinances were amongst the Jews, and they heard
Christ, and his Disciples gladly; Answ.
and so 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. Heathens, and unbeleevers, hear the word; Herod
heard John gladly, and now in New England, Hearing of the word without the
Church.
the Indians do diligently hear the word, but alas! alas! it is living the
Word, and doing the Word, is requisite in every member of Christs-Church. But
let us lay aside those, and all other objections, and all Parish-Churches too,
and put on apace for Sion, let us face about, and bid fair for
Church Communion according to Christ's own Discipline and Doctrine; for the
which none are fit matter, and allowable, but living Saints (so in appearance
as to us) and whom we have no clear cause otherwise to judge of; which brings
me to the second Use.

Depart ye, Depart ye, says the Lord, Esa. 52.11. for as Mr. Hooker
concludes (in his Survey, lib. 1. chap. 2.) Parish Precincts give not a man
right, Depart ye out of Babylonian bondage, and Parochial captivity.
nor make him fit matter for the true Church of Christ; but this we shall
press by unanswerable argument afterward: in the interim, this does very much
vindicate the Churches that are Christ's for matter from the wide-mouthed malice
of wicked-mouthed men, though Hypocrites perhaps have crept in: A vindication
of the Churches.
for as the Giant in Gath, 2 Samuel 21.20. was a true man, though deformed with
superfluous fingers and toes: And as Naaman was a true man, though a Leaper; so
may the Church be a true Church that has such as do deforme her in her, Sim.
and such may be in her that are not of her; but an Hypocrite is like a we^ in
the body, Sim.
which seems to belong to the whole, but indeed does take away the credit,
and steal away (as a thief) the comfort of the whole, Hypocrites in them,
that are not of them.
though it be skinned over with the same outside, which the true members of
the body have: Sim.
So I say, Hypocrites, who pretend and appear outwardly, one with the Church as
submissive, reverent, and worshippers of God as any, but within they are
corrupt, hard, and swelling against the truth and Gospel; Sim.
these do more hurt then good, although as the Ivy about the Tree, which
seems to embrace it with much affection, whilst (indeed) it takes away and
steals from it, Hypocrites hinder the Churches growth.
and does but starve it, and hinders its growth, so they do seem to cling
close to the Church as if they were of it, when indeed they are not, and do
wrong and rob from the Church, and are the greatest hindrances of the Churches
growth that can be: We in Dublin had this by woeful experience.
We in Dublin have had this experience at a dear rate, by reason of some
painted Pictures, who crept in, and indeed, Wolfe-like (as it is well known)
who looked toward heaven, Sim.
and howled, but it was to eat the flesh of others, Some like wolves looked
upward, when they howled for lambs to be their prey.
and to make the brethren their prey, which some of us felt sorely, and found
them Kite-like flying aloft, but yet looking low, and keeping their eye on some
of the innocent ones for their prey, wherefore let the Churches be wary in
their admission of members; for many times the emptiest vessels make the
greatest noise, and sound most, and readiest, but it is because they are hollow
hypocrites, Sim.
and have their retrograde motions. They have retrograde motions.
And so we may say we found them at Dublin, like those wandering stars, which
(though they be carried about with the rest in the orb, Sim.
and so must be moved the same way with the rest, yet they) have their silent
and secret motions whilst they creep back another contrary way, which is indeed
their own proper motion: And to warn the Churches they must know it, that we
have found them that had such motions, Caution to the Churches have from our
woeful experience
and clandestine counsels and courses, until their secret contrivings and
conventiclings appeared openly, and broke out into an open inundation of
mischiefs, malice and menacings, against the Church to destroy her, and then
like the Fecedula (that Pliny speaks of) they faced about, and fell off of a
sudden, and changed their color, form, visage, and song, Sim.
and all at once as appears in the second Book, Chap. 5. I remember the
Riddle, which was propounded to Athenaeus; How a man, and no man; with a stone,
and no stone, could kill a Bird, A Riddle.
and no Bird, upon a Tree, and no Tree: He resolved it thus, That the man was
an Eunuch, the stone a Pumice, the Bird a Bat, Sim.
and the Tree Fennel: But such as we are speaking of, The Riddle opened in,
and by hypocrites.
and have met with, do make a resolve to this Riddle, viz. seeming Saints, but
yet no Saints, only Eunuch-Christians at the best, having a zeal, but not
true zeal, being Pumice-like, hollow, 1 Eunuchs.
empty, rough, and rash, and not according to true knowledge, their Profession
being but a Bat-like professing, 2 Pumices.
mixed with carnality, and forbidden uncleanness; and like Bats, 3 Bats.
neither birds nor beasts, but participant of both: Their faith and conscience
being but a straw-like faith, 4 Fennels.
and Fennel-like conscience, soon falling, and failing, and as deceitful as a
broken reed. But it may be like Dyars with Logwood, they may set fair glosses,
Sim.
and varnishing appearances, pretenses, and reports upon their sudden change,
They had need to see on a good color.
and subtle colors (for'c) but if they do, they cannot hold: For when a
shower comes, their gloss will be gone, and they shall stand for a Sea-marke
to all Saints, and Churches, like an Adverb (quasi) with the Verb cave to
posterity; Sim.
though as yet like decayed Merchants they must (and do) study tricks to keep
up their credit of being honest and rich, And to study tricks to keep their
credit.
wealthy and wise; and the m^re they decay, the more show they will make of
sufficiency and of all well on their side. I am sorry to say this, the Lord
knows, Sim.
but that I see them (of whom I speak) in profession like white-chapple, but
in possession as foul, and corrupt as the common Sewer, Like a fair white
house, within a house of Office.
and unsavory in the nostrils of all sort of men, so that they had need to
wear Musk and Pomander enough to conceal their ill sent. The Lord lay it
upon them for their good, Sim.
that have given such (known) offense to the Saints of God. For as Joseph's
brethren held up their Brothers coat to Jacob, saying, see here! is not this
thy Sons coat which is defiled with blood? Sim.
So surely will Satan take this advantage one day against them for their
rigorous usages of some of the harmless ones to hurt them, A heavy action
against them at the last day.
and grind them, when he shall say, See here these hypocrites! these
Professors! what have they done to thy Church? have they not wounded her? have
they not broken her a pieces? have they not bruised her limbs? racked her
members? and put her bones out of joint? have they not betrayed their Brethren?
threatened them? consulted against them? and sought out by false witnesses to
ruin them? see here! are not these thy Sons garments? With a Judas kiss they
betrayed us, and gave us up to the cross.
thy Childrens coat? yea, even Christ's seamlesse coat that they have defiled?
rent, and torn, and wronged? These kind of Professors like Simon of Cyrene
seemed for a time to carry the Cross with us, but it proved to be for us: And
(indeed) when it was set up, they were not nailed to it, but they nailed us
unto it, Our experience (the mistress of fools) is to ^each other Churches.
and (I am sure) I may say Christ (in his Church, and in their persecuting of
the Saints) unto it; But I must spare them, though they spare none that are not
of the same temper with them; yet this is to warn the Churches of such, yea
and to vindicate the Churches from malicious men and minds, Hypocrites must
be, that the sound may be manifested.
whose mouths are open at such advantages, and on such occasions; for 1 John
2.19. They were not of us, and indeed, such Ciphers are of good use to us when
they are in, for they make the true figures of more value and validity.

But to proceed, we see then who are most suitable matter, True matter must be
of the Lords own adding, and ordering; Hence in Act. 2.41* 5.14. this manner
of being made a disciple, is expressed by the word (...) added to, or
incorporated.
and how much it concerns the Churches to be serious in their accepting and
receiving members; for as it is Acts 2.47. The Lord added daily to the Church
such as should be saved; and only such are allowable matter and lawful
members whom the Lord adds, that is to say (by way of Ordinance) none else, but
such as (we are persuaded) shall be saved, and whom the Lord has received,
Romans 14.3. to whom the Lord has given saving grace, and sound faith, and also
unsained hearts to give themselves up to God in Gospel-fellowship that are to
be received (of right.) Such as are in a visible state of Salvation are to be
received into Christ's visible Church; But

Secondly, Hypocrites hold off! 2 Hypocrites hold off.
here is no room for your company! for as by the Law Swans are f^rbidden, who
have white feathers, but black flesh; so are you by the Gospel, who seem to
be what you are not; Sim.
The beautifullest feathers have not always under them the sweetest flesh, For
they are forbidden in Law and Gospel.
no^ the finest outsides the fairest in. The Devil is black, but he can
appear the white Angel, or Angel of light: So can hypocrites, they are also
forbidden in Levit. 11. where the Bats and Sea-Mewes are to be accounted
unclean, Sim.
Fit matter are sound and sincere.
because they are Mongrels, and so are ye: How dare ye then to enter into such
a temple as the Communion of Saints is? seeing none but upright souls,
single-hearts, sincere Saints, and unfeigned Professors, Sim.
The house is in the builders hands.
are (of right) to be received. The Oak that is rotten at the heart, will
never be good for the building, wherefore stand by! stand by! or you shall be
thrown by! (until you are better and fitter for the builders use.) The stones
that are for the building must be picked out by Christ, the builders hand,
although (perhaps) at present, they are in the heaps abroad, which are in
preparation to the building, as Builders use to have, in one place heaps of
Lime, in another place heaps of stone, in another rubbish, As yet in heaps in
most places.
rude (at present) and undigested materials, and a tumultuary noise of hammers
and axes abroad, which are very busy to set up the fallen Tabernacles of
David; but ere long every thing shall be set in order, But must be a fair
structu^e.
and a beautiful structure laid, whilst others (without) shall gather up the
Chips, They without gather up the ch^ps.
which we leave behind us to warm them with; but for this more in the next
Chapter, yet in this, I must tell you that the stones which are appointed for
this glorious Fabric must (first) pass under the saw and hammer* For it is
dangerous to put in a rotten, The matter before fitted, must be tried by saw
and hammer.
unsound stone, which will quickly fall out* and make way for many others to
follow, enfeebling thereby the whole Edifice, as in 1* Joh. 2.19, 20. They went
out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would
(no doubt) have continued with us, but they went out, that it might be manifest
they were not of us, Hypocrites will fall from the building ere long. As D^mas.
i.e. us, what us? why us that have unction, and are sincere real Saints; for
ye have the unction from the holy One; Bu^ they were hypocrites, and therefore
fell away, as Demas did, 2 Timothy 4.10. who was but a little before Paul's
fellow laborer, Phil. 1.19. as well as Marcus and Aristarchus, Judas.
but he did discover himself after, and so did Judas, though a long time he
was well thought off amongst his brethren and fellow-disciples, insomuch as he
was made the Deacon: So no doubt (Sirs) but your hypocrisy will be as soon
discovered if ye dare to enter with unsound, Their hypocrisy will soon appear
to all.
unsettled, and unsincere hearts, as others have been; for the weeds in the
Gardens are sooner discovered, and rooted out again then they are in the
fields or common high ways; Sim.
but consider then, O what a scandal you will bring upon the Gospel! (as they
did at Dublin) when your wickedness will appear to all the world! To the
scandal of the Gospel.
O what reproaches to Religion! dishonours to Christ! Sim.
discredit to the Gospel! and tramplings upon the the truth! Church Members
miscarriag^s are mind^d by all, and in every mou^h
will be laid in your dish at the last day! ye being the cause of it! For as
it is with the Sun, and S^arres, if a thousand stars be eclipsed, none
takes notice of it, nor minds it; but for the Sun to be eclipsed it is sad,
and so accounted, then every one talks of it and looks at it: and so it is
when Church Members do the deeds of darkness that (of al men) should be lights
to others (as Christ says in Matthew. 4.15.) a little aberration makes every one
to mind them, and mark them, and report of them abroad, when many a thousand
of others (without) or of wicked ones may be guilty of the like, and not be
looked upon, (as Par. says on Romans 11. New Ranters naught. Old Protestants not
enough. But aspiring growing Saints are suitable matter.
) It is not a formal Religion, an old Profession, or a high conception, that
either felicitates or facilitates your admission, but you must have truth in
the inward parts, and have grace in your hearts, for ye may have it in your
heads, and yet prove but a new Ranter, or an old Protestant at the most; None
but the (indeed) holy must enter into these beauties of holiness, the more
holy we are, the more like our Head, and the fitter for Church Members, without
which we shall not see the Lord, but we shall (rather) pollute the Sanctuary
of the Lord. Thus much for the matter, and the fifth Chapter.

(...) Pillegesh. (...) CHAP. VI. This Gospel^Garden, or Church State of
Christ's Institution, and Order, is further defined from the ( second
essential) Formal cause, which is First, a visible Segregation; and Secondly,
Aggregation. To the first, First, in this Chapter wherein it appears how all
Saints are, and ought to be separates.
THis Kingdom of Christ is not of the world* though in the world, Genus cum
formae constituit speciem.
for the Saints embodied by Gospel-rules in unity (which makes the Form of a
true Church of Christ) must of necessity be first called out, before called in;
out of the world before into the Kingdom of Christ, out of Babylon before into
Sion; for it is an infallible rule, that a visible separation from the world,
The fo^me has two parts.

1. Separation. 2. Conjunction: vide Mr. Owens Eshcoll, or rules to the Reader.

and all false ways, worships, etc. and a visible application to Christ Jesus,
his ways, worships, etc. is of absolute necessity in Church-union, and
communion, wherein consists the full essence of the form thereof. Wherefore to
keep still to the comparison, this Gospel-fellowship is fitly called the Lords
temple, 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor 3.17. made up of living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. A
Spiritual Temple, consisting of particular Saints, taken out of the multitudes
without, here one, and there one, and united together into one body; 2 Chronicles.
ch* 2. ch* 3.
and like as the stones and materials for Salomon's Temple, were picked out of
the heaps, that lay abroad here and there, Sim.
The first part of the form, is their separation from them without doors, viz.
the multitudes and heaps abroad. 1 Proved by Prophesies that Saints must be
Separates. (...)
to make up one building, so are the Saints into one body. Now the first part
of the form to be considered is, viz. the calling, and culling out of the
world, and from the heaps without those Saints which are select Members of
Christs-Church, according to the order of the Gospel, which we shall prove also
from Prophecy, precept, and practice.

First, It is foretold that such a separation must be, for even a Balaam was
brought (against his will) to foresee from the top of the rocks, and from the
height of the hills, that Israel should be a people dwelling alone (separated
from, and) not reckoned among the Nations, without, Numb. 23.9. So in Isa. 52
12. Awake, awake, put on thy strength O Zion! put on thy beautiful garments O
holy City! Niphal. And s^t loose to bonds and bondages without.
shake thy self from the dust! arise, and sit down O Jerusalem! loose thy
self from the bonds of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. So in ver. 11.
Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch ye no unclean thing,
go ye out of the midst of her, etc. So Isa. 62.10. Go through, go through the
Gates, prepare the way, cast up, cast up the highway, and gather out the
stones, etc. So is the precious to be taken from the vile, in Jer. 15.19* and
the clean from the unclean, Precious separate from the vile, clean from the
unclean.
the holy from the profane, Ezekiel. 22.26. See Exodus 33.16, 17. For wherein
shall it be known, that I and thy people have grace in thy sight? Is it not in
that thou go with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people from all
people; and in the latter days especially, Expos.
the Lord promises to make up his precious jewels, Mal. 3.17, 18. and to gather
them up together, not only from the ^rosse, and out of the vile rubbish, but
also into one bundle by themselves; and then (says he) shall ye discover,
Good from the bad.
(and see an apparent and an undeniable difference) or discern between the
righteous and the wicked, him that serves God, and him that serves him not.
Furthermore, in Hosea 4.15. Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah
offend; come not ye to Gilgal, nor go ye up to Beth-aven. So in ver. 17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols; let him alone, their drink is sour, etc. This
kind of withdrawing, and gathering from, is also mentioned in many other
eminent Prophesies, as in Ezekiel. 28.24, 25, 26. There shall be no more a
pricking brier to Israel, nor a grieving thorn of all that are round about
them, that despised them; but when shall this be? see the next verse 25. As
Israel was gathered out from others, as a people by themselves, so are the
Saints now to be.
) When I have gathered Israel out from the people among whom they are (yet)
scattered, and shall be sanctified in them (in their Churches and Societies) in
the sight of the Heathen (in the sight of all them without, called Heathens
often, whilst the Saints under the Gospel are called, (and so in these
Prophesies) by the name of Israel, Jacob, Zion, Jerusalem, etc.) So Ezekiel. 34.
the whole chapter, and in verse. 12, 13. I will seek out my flock, I will
deliver my sheep out of all places, where they have been scattered in the dark
and cloudy day, Delivered and brought out (by the Spirit of the Lord)
I will bring them out from the (other) peoples, and gather them out from the
Countries, and will feed them on the mountains of Israel by the rivers, verse
16. And I will seek them that were lost, and I will judge between cattle and
cattle, verse 17. and as for my flock, verse 19. They eat that which is
trodden with your feet, and they drink that which is fouled with your feet, I,
even I will judge, God will judge for our former injuries. And he will save us
for future.
verse. 20. between the fat cattle and the lean: And they, verse. 28. shall no
more be a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the beasts of the Land devour
them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid, neither
shall they bear the shame of the Heathen any more, verse. 29. So in Ezekiel.
36.24. For I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of all
Countries, And separate us from them without.

And gather us into our own Land of Canaan.


and will bring you into your own Land: then will I sprinckle clean water
upon you from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
Also, Ezekiel. 37.21. Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the
Heathen, and will gather them on every side, and bring them out into their own
Land, verse 27. My Tabernacle also shall be with them, yea, I will be their
God, And then be our God, and we his people. And his Sanctuary shall then be in
the midst of us.
and they shall be my people. And verse 28. The Heathen shall know that I the
Lord do sanctify Israel, when my Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them
for evermore; but before the Lords Tabernacle (a Type of Gospel Order, and
Church State) and his Sanctuary be set up, in the midst of them, they are
first, a people called out, and separate from them without, who are called
Heathens abroad, as other Nations were in opposition to the Jews; so is that
in Micha 4.6, 7. In that day (says the Lord) I will assemble her that halteth,
The Lord shall reign over them especially that are thus gathered out.
and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted. And
the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion, from henceforth and for ever,
over them that are thus gathered out. Hence also is that in Revel. 18.4. Come
out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sin, and that ye
receive not of her plagues, etc. By all these Prophetical Scriptures (and by
many more) this truth triumphs, and has apparent testimony for it, viz. That
the Saints are a select number of Separates from the world, and from all false
ways, worships, Doctrines, and Discipline whatsoever.

Proved by positive prec^pts that Saints must be separates.

Wisdom calls for it.


Secondly, Let us see what Precept there is for it; in the first place, he who
is the wisdom of his Father, would have us to separate from the company of
fools, in Prove. 14.7. Prove. 9.6. Prove. 4.14. And in Ephesians. 5.11. (...) Have no
fellowship (no commerce together, nor concurrent communication, or compliance
to trade with) with the fruitless works of darkness; Expos.
and in the Leviticall Law, Levit. 20.25, 26. a separation is required.
Required in the Leviticall Law.
So in 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. for what ((...)) fellowship, or communion, or what
((...)) sweet consent, Expos.
or harmony, can light have with darkness, or believers with unbeleevers?
Saints with Sinners? or Gods Temple (whom ye are) with Idols? Separate says
the Lord.
wherefore come out from the midst of them ((...)) that are such, and be ye
separate says the Lord ((...)) i. e. separate apart from them, as such who are
excellent, and elect organs (unto the Lord) and touch no unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, And then I will be a father to
you.
and ye shall be my Sons, and my Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. So 2 Timothy 3.5. such as have the form (though large Professors, Expos.
aged, and of long standing) yet denying the power, from such turn away,
(...), or Turn off, draw off, not only to shun them that we may not show
them, or be like them, but also so as to labor with them, and to win them
into the sound and good old way of Christ, which is of longest standing (for
truth is older then error.) So in Acts 2.39, 40. is there the like call, with
the promise annexed, which is to as many as the Lord shall call (the word (...)
signifies both advocate, avocare, and evocare, Expos.
to* call out, and separate from) so that in verse 40 it follows, with many
other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save your selves from (i. e.
(...), do ye set your selves free from, get away, and forsake, or separate
from) this untoward generation, Them without are a generation of frowardness
and crossenesse.
or this generation of frowardness ((...)) from their abominable aberrations,
carnal customs, depraved manners, and from the crookedness of this
generation of perverse people, which you are yet amongst. Make haste out, to
save and separate your selves from them.

Now we find it follows, those that believed, did so, and were a people
separate from the rest, Believers did separate from such.
Act. 19.9. by entering into fellowship with the Saints. Verse 41, 42. and verse
47. it appears without the least exception; For they that were thus called out
from them (without) continued steadfastly in the fellowship, (and then were
called the Church) in breaking of bread from house to house, praising God, and
having favor with all the people, that is, with them without; that they did
separate from, Then cal^ed a Church, and not before.
so sweet, so good, and Gospel-like was their conversations, that they without
could not condemn them, but commend them at least, if not be convinced by them,
a^ 1 Pet. 2.12. and 1 Pet. 3.1. Mat. 5.16. But for further proof that Saints
are to be such Separates, see Romans 1.6, Hence Ecclesia the Church is called.
7. 1 Cor. 1.2.9. where they are called, (...) from whence ecclesia comes) such
are called out, and separate from the world, and false ways. So (...), 1 Cor.
1.9.
they are said to be called out into the fellowship of Christ; so that first
there is a calling out, a coming out, a separating from. Besides you see
positive ^ precepts for it, Psalm. 45.10, 11. Rev. 18.4. with many other places;
but to the third sort of proofs.

3 By the practice of all the primitive Saints in Church-societies in Christ's
and his Apostles days, 3 Proved by the practice of Christ's Prophets, Apostles
and all Saints in Primitive times.

Jeremy separated. Calvin in loc.


and many years after; It appears the Saints were Separates (such as I speak
of) wherefore we know no cause either that we should complain against it, or
question it; Jeremy (although a Prophet) yet he separates from Jerusalem, Jer.
37.12. Then Jeremy went forth out of Jerusalem to go unto the land of
Benjamin, to separate himself from them in the midst of the people, for they
would not obey the word of the Lord, and therefore the Lords wrath was now
ready to be revealed against them, and Jeremy would withdraw (seeing them so
refractory) from them in their sight; so says he in Jer. 9.2. Oh! O that I had
in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men! that I might leave my
people, and go from them! for they be all Adulterers, an assembly of
treacherous men! But besides, we know the Jews that were the people of God, in
a peculiar manner, were first called out of Egypt, and so were separate from
other Nations, and so looked upon as a people by themselves in Exodus 19.5.
Deuteronomy* 7.6. Israel a separate people.
So is it said, Israel shall dwell alone, in Deuteronomy. 33 28, 29. and not be
suffered to be mixed among them without, as in Number. 33.52. to the end. So Exodus
24.12.15. etc. and it was a judgment that Jerusalem should be mixed, Jer.
9.11. Now every Saint is a spiritual Jew, So every Saint is a spiritual Jew.
as appears in Zach. 8.23. Romans 2.28. or one inwardly, and Saints are his
peculiar people, and chosen ones, 1 Pet. 2.9. the true children of Abraham,
Gal. 3.7. called out of Egypt the house of slavery into Zion, as dwelling alone
from them that are without. Thus in Joh. 15.19. Ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. So are the
Disciples of Christ.
As soon as the people of Israel passed out of Egypt, the Egyptians pursued
them, upon hot spur, with Armies and hoasts of threatenings and injuries; even
so deals the world with the Saints called out and separate from them, Sim.
therefore no wonder we must learn to take up the cross, and follow him,
before we can be Christ's disciples; for Christ called them first out of the
world, Who are therefore ha^^d.
before he called them into the Church: And in the Acts of the Apostles, Act.
19.7, 8, 9. etc. And in all the Epistles of the Apostles to the Churches, the
Saints are saluted as Separates, or called out. Now is there not a cause?

1 For has not the Lord laid it as a command upon Christians Ch^ists commands.
how then dare we delight in a condition which he countermands? besides, Dear
Sirs! what comfort can you have in Babylons streets?

2 If you are guilty of her sins, 2 Those that partake of her sins, partake
of her sorrows.
ye are guilty of her sentence, if that be true in Rev. 18.4. to partake of
her courses is the way to partake of her curses: So not to separate from any
sinful unwarranted ways of worship, or the like, is but to run the haz^rd of
her ruin, and neither to seek preservation from her wickedness, nor
protection from her woes.

3 Besides to have yet such fellowship with fools; society, 3 It publishes
disobedience not to be such, and a corrupt heart, plenis faucibus.
or converse with unsavory, carnal, or disorderly persons publishes a loud
and lamentable spirit of disobedience, and proclaims (exclaimingly) a corrupt
heart, not half (enough) endeared to Jesus Christ; for Christ is for his
Ordinances in his own order, and does delight in the purity of them who walks
amongst the best metals, in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, with
the seven stars in his band, Rev. 2.1. the Saints separated are the golden
Candlesticks Christ walks so sweetly among, or in the midst of.

How far reaches this Separation which you speak of? Quest.


First, Negative. Not from our duties in our Callings, which none what ever
ought to be without, Answ.
or to neglect our work, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 1 None ought to be
without Callings.
11. (which some slothful Ranters would have.)

2 Nor yet from the duties of our Relations, 2 None must separate from their
duties.
whether as Husband or Wife, Ephesians. 5.22.25. 1 Cor. 7 13. Parents and Children,
Ephesians. 6 1.4. Col. 3.20, 21. Masters and servants, Ephesians. 6.5.6.9. Col. 3.22. Col.
4.1. or Rulers and Subjects, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. Tit. 2.9.3.1. But to own them in
their respective relations for the Lords sake.

3 Nor yet so to separate from them without, as not to have civil converse
with them, 1 Cor. 5.10. in buying, and selling, or such necessary trading; 3
Nor to separate from civil ^onverse.
much less so as not to love them, and lay out to do them good, and to seek
their souls welfare, 1 Timothy 2.1. Gal. 6.10. to be at peace with them, Romans
12.18. Heb. 12.14. and pious before them, 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.1. Now in none
of these senses are the Saints called Separates, although they (without) may be
separates from the Saints (thus separating) in their affections; But

Affirmatively, 1 To separate from all sinful ways and worship, What it is to
separate.
etc. so as not to walk in them, or with them, after the manner of them that
are without Christs^Church, Ephesians. 4.17. 1 From all false ways and worship.
1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Romans 12.2. Hos. 14.8. Isa. 30.21, 22. etc. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. 2
Cor. 5.16. Gal. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.2. etc.

2 From familiarity with the adversaries of the truth.
2 It is, not to be too familiar, pleasant, and delightful with any that are
at enmity and variance with the truth. A man may pass through Aethiopia
unchanged, but he cannot dwell there but be discolored; so there may be civil
commerce (as we said before) with the wicked and yet Saints keep their
integrity, Sim.
Sim.
but this cannot be, if we have too much familiarity with them (says Hal.) Men
are, Sim.
as the Astronomers say of the star Mercury, good, or malignant, according to
their conjunction with others; wherefore as Moses separated Israel from Corah,
saying, Number. 16.26. Depart from the tents of those wicked men, and touch
nothing of theirs; so must we separate from them that do oppose Christ's way,
Have nothing to do with them.
or upbraid the Saints, and so as to discover themselves ill-affected to
Christ's Kingdom, or jurisdiction, and be so far from familiarizing with them,
that we^ must bring them hither, says Luke 19.27. and abhor them, Psalm.
26.5. Psalm. 119.115. For this is the Lords Law, to be at a distance from evil
doers; Gods anger is against such as do keep company with them.
so says* David, Psalm. 139, 21, 22. so Ephesians. 5.3, 4.13. 1 Cor. 5.12. Matthew.
^4.49.50. Gods anger is against them that do but company with drunkards, etc.
for they are a shame to their father Prove. 28 7. and themselves Prove. 29.3. A
very Plutarch could laugh at such as would have been counted as wise as Plato,
and yet in Alexanders company be drunk; and indeed Nebuchadnezars judgment is
some men's joy, viz. to have fellowship with beasts; But we must beware; Sim.
for who can sleep with dogs and not be full of fleas, Sim.
and so with sinners in continual communion, and not be full of sin.

3 It is to avoid the vices of their best Orders, and Ordinances, and to have
no fellowship therein, 3 No fellowship with them in their orders and ordinances
out of Christ's way.
although they seem full of reason and Religion too, Col. 2.20, 21. Thus Rev.
18.4. Gal. 4 9. Away, away, with them now! that are but poor ((...)) beggarly
at best, and no more able to support a soul, then one Beggar is to relieve
another; thus, says Paul, Gal. 1.14. who was so hot? Expos.
so high for the Jews Religion as I? (says he) who traded so zealously in, As
Paul separated from Jewish Churches, Discipline orders and ordinances.
and for our Fathers traditions? until -- what? until verse 15.16. Christ was
revealed in me (and so unvailed to me) and then I consulted no longer, that is
((...)) I asked no more counsel of, nor comfort from these frothy, fruitless
things, whereof we are now ashamed) with flesh and blood; Use.
but I bid farewell (or fare-ill rather) to all those Trumperies and Traditions
which I doted on before; Parishes have not this part of the Form. Which is
twisted up of a threefold cord to draw us out of Parishes into Churches,
and thus the Saints are the precisest Separatists.

By all which, as it plainly appears, that Parishes want this part of
Church-forme for the constituting of them true Churches, so also might I by
what appears, press the practical part of this point, from the pregnancy of
the proofs produced, being twisted together from the Prophesies, Precepts, and
practice, into a threefold cord, not to be broken, All men are separates from
Christ, or separates for Christ and which is best?
but (if the Lord will bless you) of ability to bring you into Christ's way of
separation from Parishes and Traditions; For you that will not separate from
such false ways, worships, and the world, must be separates from Christ,
says Mr. Owen (my honored friend) in his Esh^Col, or Cluster. But me thinks
some will say?

Sir! as you always have been in all things (so in this) you are too strict
and precise, for such Separates are Schismatics, Object.
and so many learned Ministers call them that leave off their coming to
Church, and following our Ministers, etc.

1 Such Separates (as I have here given you an account of) are not
Schismatics, unless to Antichrist; What Separatists are Schismatics, and
what not.
but on the contrary, such as do not thus separate are Schismatics to their
own souls. A causeless separation from a true established Church of Christ,
walking according to Gospel Order (although it may be guilty of some slight
errors in Extra-essentials and Circumstantials, or things of easy
concernment) is in Gospel-account a sad sin,! 2 Timothy 4.16. Heb. 10.23.25.39.
but a causeless continuance in a false way, Antichristian worship, A sin not
to separate from false Antichristian Church-States, And parishes, as Churches
are such.
and disorderly discipline, is no less (at least) as appears before) being
contrary to so much positive Precept: for such a separation from Parochial
constitutions (which I have proved to be at best but as civil, and at worst a
Christ-wronging, Christ-rending, and Antichristian Church State) and from such
unwarrantable ways of worship, and unruly Religion, is but to obey the Precept
of not partaking in other men's sins. And thus the Saints are, and ought to be
Separates, and not Schismatics; which Papists and Prelates have ever branded
and stigmatized the dear Saints for, in their separatings from them: vide
Zanche, on Hos. 2.8. and which Popish trick trades with many yet, who make
merchandise of it.

learned men be of that mind; so were they learned that accounted Christ a
Blasphemer, Learned men many times most enemies to Christ and his true Churches.
and a fellow not fit to live, Joh. 9.29. and that branded the Saints for
Sectaries, Acts 28.22. and seditious, Act. 24.5. and Heretics Act. 24.14. and
in every age have such been Christ's enemies in the grain; and many for the
tree of knowledge, lose the tree of Life, vide chap 9. lib. 2. are not the
Jesuits learned too? and who do more mischief? For as Dr. Sutton said in's
Sermon for Magistrates page 11. as the Ape that saw a Chestnut in the fire, Sim.
and not knowing how to get it out, spied a Spaniel by the fire side, and
snatched his foot to take out the Nut; even so does the Devil many times make
use of learned ones, to fetch his food cut of the fire, though they scorch for
it, whom he makes to serve him in it.

Parish-Churches as Parish-Churches, Parish-Churches, no Churches.
yet it has been proved, and will be more abundantly, that they are no
Churches, and therefore they ought to do it, or they sin in not doing it;
and besides thereby they also wrong us, that say we gather Churches out of
Churches, for it is no such matter; Churches gathered out of Churches*
yet were it so, (as Mr. Burton tells Mr. Prin, page 27. of his Vindication)
there is example for it, both by John Baptist, our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles, Matthew. 3.5.7. John 4.1. Parish churches are Satan's Synagogues. No
Parish-rule conveyes a Church-right.
Act. 2.40. who did (all of them) gather Christian Congregationall Churches out
of the Jewish National Church; and so it may be (yea and must be) in these
semblable times of Reformation; but we say they are no Churches for matter and
form, and so shall prove them all along to be but Synagogues of Satan: And
to say more (with Mr. Hooker) such are not of right matter (because
Parishioners) for no civil rule can (properly) convey a Church-right to any
man, Sim.
Parishioners opposite to Churches.
because they are ( in specie) specifically distinct each from other, therefore
cannot meet, no more then two direct Mathematical lines (not in the least
oblique but) that are distant and distinct from each other can meet, though
drawn out ad infinitum. Besides most Parishioners oppose all that is in order
to inchurch them, and (as Heart has it in's Char. p. 15. Sim.
) they converse with godly Gospel Ministers about Religion, as if they were in
Spain; and a searching Ministry is as bad to them as the Spanish Inquisition;
and all the questions we can ask them are suspected for Examinations, and they
are afraid: of some secret that will, be picked out of them, and that they shall
be discovered; such a bondage are the poor blind people under, and so kept by
some (pretending) Ministers, whereby the blind lead the blind into the ditch.

But we have the word of God well preached, Object.
and the Sacraments dispensed in our Parish-Churches.

This was answered in the former Chapter, that the word preached makes not a
true visible Church: Answ.
for then might the Natives-Irish here be called, A true Church, Word preached
is no indelible, nor undeceivable note of a tru^^ Church.
and the Heathens in the East or West Indies; but there must be a yielding due
obedience thereunto, and a visible subjection to Jesus Christ, before they be
fit for his Church. The reason is, because preaching the word is an adjunct
separable, and not a note essential and inseparable: for certainly as sensitiva
facul^as is in a man, yet not the true note of a man, Sim.
because it is but a common adjunct, and not proprium in quarto modo, as we
say: So preaching of the Gospel is in the Church, But a commen adjunct.
but not the note of the Church (as all the Popish and Antichristian
Antagonists would have it) because it is a common adjunct, and others have it
also. But for the Sacraments, as I said before, they must be administered in due
order, Sacraments must be (of right) dispensed as Christ's Ordinances in Christ's
order i. e. no where but in the true Church.
and to due persons, and in a due way of worship and Discipline; otherwise,
without doubt, Saints may and must remove and separate for Gods greater glory,
and their better, and more spiritual edification, as Psalm. 55.6. And I said, O
that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest, I
would hasten v. 8. my escape: Why so? would David separate so? what is the
reason? see verse 11. Wickedness is in the midst thereof, Deceit and guile
depart not from her streets. Expos.
Wherefore (dearest Friends) read with a resolution to submit, and that ye may
no more be separates from Christ, nor Schismatics to your own poor souls,
the Father of our Lord Jesus fill your hearts with that Spirit which writes
these things unto you. A word to all friends to submit to Christ.
Little Children! Fathers! and young men look about you! for we live in these
last days, wherein we expect most ( Joel 2.) plentiful outpowrings of that
blessed Spirit,
which convinces the world of Truth, Righteousness, and Judgment, Joh. 16.8.


And to conclude, think it not enough to have outward Ordinances in
Parish-Churches (though (God knows) they be but as Pharaohs lean kine eating up
the Fat) as the preaching the word, the holy Sacraments, etc. why Sirs! to let
them loose and run ranging about without bit or bridle, may be to your cost,
and it may be they may dash your brains out at last; but it is Christ must
curb and correct, Sim.
and direct them, that they may be administered in due order to you within his
line and limitation, Outward Ordinances out of Christ's order may do more hurt
then good.
and then they will be blessings. It is upon record of Austin, that he would
not say his mother gave him milk, but God by his mother; so will God by these
means and Ordinances feed, and fatten your souls in Sion, and in his
particular Churches, Sim.
and Assemblies. But alas a day* how lamentably men live as to Christ's order
and Ordinances! Carnal reason keeps many off Church Fellowship.
so they be but rich, and bear a religious outside, as K. John once said of a
Buck when he had opened it, O it is fat, and yet it never heard Mass! So
because many thrive, Sim.
and live in credit, rich, and accounted religious that are not of the
Churches, many make little of it; but I hope the Lord will convince them by his
light. And so much for the first part of the Form.

(...) Zaba. Chap. 7. (...) or Aguddah. This shows the second part of the
second part of the Form of Church Fellowship; First, that the Saints separate
(as before) are to be knit, gathered, and united together into one Body.
THe first part of the Form is well proved, but it is likely not so well
approved, Secondly, 2. Part of the form is after separation from the false, and
conjunction in the true way. Forth with have into the Churches. Else we shall
be lost in the wilderness.
without the second do second it, viz. That the Saints separated from the
worlds false-wayes, and worships, and from all Parochial Churches,
unwarrantable Discipline and Directories, do forthwith set upon Christ's own
way and worship, Discipline and Doctrine delivered to the Saints; for after
they come out of Babylon, they must have away into Zion, or else they will be
lost in the Wilderness. For what is the cause of so much complaint all men
(with the Ministers) make up and down? and deplorable outcries of many that
are mixed? and loud lamentations are heard out of the Wilderness of many
wooded, wilder'd, and wandering? and at a most miserable loss? And what is the
reason of all this I pray? One reason many Professors formerly strict turn
Familists, Seekers, Ranters, and such like.
that so many Professors that have been (abundantly) precise and strict in
their practices, and curious in their conversation, and such (free) frequenters
of the means? daily and diligent followers of their Ministers, and so
exceedingly holy in times past, have since their separating from Parishes and
Popish Institutions, and Injunctions, forsaken all public Dispensations,
denied Ordinances, followed Familisme, and run on even to Rantisme.

In the Answer, godly eminent Ministers so accounted, must be reproved in the
Countries.
And what is the reason of all this? Indeed I am ready now to reprove those
Ministers (whom most imagine without reproof) though able and (otherwise)
accounted (eminently) godly, yet too too slack and remiss in setting forward
the building of the Lords house, that say, it is time enough, and what needs
such have? whilst they (themselves) dwell in their seiled houses, the Lords
lies waste, and worn out of mind; Hag. 1.2.4.
O sad! Consider your ways, says the Lord of Hoasts! The Lord expostulates
with them.
How can ye be content to sit at ease? to hold good Livings? and to feed upon
the fat of the flock? and yet so (easily) to neglect them, as to let them stray
in the Wilderness? Oh! are not such, (who make the sorest and saddest
complaints of them they call Anabaptists, Seekers, Familists, Ministers most
complain, who are most the cause of their own complains.
Ranters, etc.) are not such very much the cause of their miscarriage? For
seeing Saints must separate from such false ways and worships, why do they
not lead them then into Christ's own ways, and worship, according to
Gospel Order, but suffer the poor souls (and out of honest zeal I am
persuaded at first) to be lost, in strange, and straying, untrue, and untrodden
paths. Truly, truly, in all my applications to some very learned, godly, and
most eminent Preachers, with all the pregnant and pressing Arguments I could
provide for this purpose, that I might prevail with them for, and persuade
them unto this work of the Lord as Fellow Laborers with me therein; What
answers some of them have given the Author, when he has pressed upon them
Gospel practice.

Why many Ministers are against Independency, as they call it.


I found their Answers they made me (me thoughts) ever to smell too much of the
grease of great Livings, or else of man-pleasing, or else (and for the most
part) of Tyth-oppressions; they may thank themselves that so many run into
erroneous ways. For besides, a Segregation, a visible aggregation to the Lord
Christ, in his ways and worship (with the Saints separate, making up one body
of Believers) i^ of an absolute, and undeniable necessity, and follows next;
which I now come to.

Such Saints as are separate from Parish-wayes, and Popish worships, etc. being
ashamed of them, and of all the follies of those false Church-states, are
forthwith to see the form and fashion of the Lords house, and not before are
they to enter in, Expos.
Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. and this is the Lords Law, ver. 12. now to such I shall show
the form which follows, Whom the form is to be shown to? What it is?

1. One Body. 2. One body Independent.

for in the formation of this new Creation, Christian Believers are to become
first one body; secondly, a body Independent (as it is termed by most) But to
the first in this Chapter, viz. That Saints separate as before from the
multitude, (as Acts 19.9. it is said,) when diverse were hardened and believed
not, but spoke evil of the way before the multitude, that the Disciples
separated; so I say, such Saints are to make up one body together ( distinct
from them without, and all others) and this is obvious to every eye, out of the
abundance of Scriptures and texts.

To begin with the Simile of a Body, 1. Christ's Church is his Body, how, and
why? All Members make up one, and but one body.
for Saints enchurched are so called the Body of Christ, Romans 14.4, 5. 1 Cor.
12. ver. 13.27. Ephesians. 5.30.32. Col. 1.20, 21. though members in particular, 1
Cor. 12.14.20. now all the members are to make up one, and but one body; and so
are the Saints (every member of Christ) 1 Cor. 6.15. to be united together into
one body. Hence it is (as Mr. Bartlet observes in his Model, cap. 6. (as I
think) for I have not his Book) that the blessed Spirit speaks so often of
injoynting, and putting Saints into joint Gal. 6.1.2. If a Brother (a Member)
be slipped out of joint,) or be overtaken in a fault, (either before he was
aware of it, Expos.
) or else read it with the Septuagint, (...) although he be easily caught by a
corruptiun, Sim.
and taken (with too much delight) in the Action (for the Simile runs from the
receiving and entertaining a friend with free affection, If one member be
amiss it must be restored into use and order again, for the good of the whole
body, which cannot miss that one member.
and readiness (in delight welcoming him, and with joy) although he thus fall
by a foul stumble, as I rather read it (from (...) Polye. Lyser. or (...) (now
(...) minuit rem) for a fault, is a fall, yet ye which are Spiritual, restore
such a one; that is, ((...)) set such a one in joint again, as Chirurgions
deal with a broken bone, or one out of joint, by handling the same sweetly,
lovingly, tenderly, so that thereby it may become as sure in, as well-set and
strong as ever it was; Sim.
so is it here, put him into his proper place again, That is, heartily with
all sweetness of brotherly-like spirit, and christianity.
by which the Church is compared to a Body, and a Brother to a Member. Thus
also in Ephesians. 4.11. Christ left here (behind) Pastors, and Teachers, and why?
for the perfecting the Saints, ver. 12. the word is ((...)) for the
well-ordering, (Tit. 1.5) establishing and constituting of them according to
order, in a symmetry and suitable proportion of place and power, Romans 12.4. as
is in a humane body. Every member is to be in an apt place, etc of the body.
There is a comely, apt, commensurate, and mavelous wise, and well appointed
Location, for every member, joint, artery, sinews, and veins, and every one
is to be content with his own proper (and therefore the only profitable)
place: Sim.
1 Cor. 12.21.22 and to be content therewith.
now if any one be out of his place, the whole body is thereby put to pain; so
that the Simile holds here also; for this is the beauty and perfection of the
body, when no member is amiss, Vide Zanch. de Eccles.
etc. wherefore some read the text, Ephesians. 4 12. for injoynting of the Saints,
the work of the Ministry, etc. but to the next Metaphor. 2. Christ his Church
is his building.
Christ's Church is compared to a Building, so says he in Mat. 16.18. Upon
this rock I will build my Church; to build, that is ( in unum corpus
congregare) to gather together many particular parcels, Expos.
out of the heaps without, The form of his building. What it is.
and rightly to order and dispose of them into one structure; it is an apt and
a convenient collection of the several and sundry essential parts which make
up the Integrum, Sim.
or of the which the whole is built up. Now in this there must be a wise, a
suitable, and proper ordering, and disposing of every particular of which the
whole consists; so as that all may serve (as I said before of the Body) for the
time, Rightly ordered to make all one.

The Lords house fitly framed together.


use, and place most answerable thereunto, and fittest for the whole building.
Thus the Saints are called the Lords house, Heb. 3.6. 1 Timothy 3.15. fitly framed
together, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. or completely, orderly, and in congruity ((...))
built up together, Expos.
an habitation to the Lord through the Spirit. So, 1 Pet. 2.5. That is, the
Saints are so knit, All one in another, and every one on, and in Christ the
foundation. v. chap. 14.
pinned, united, nailed, and glewed one to another, and all (every one) to the
foundation Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.19. 1 Cor. 3.11. that one would think they
were no more many parcells, but all one substance, and out of one; and so as
they will not be parted asunder (nor can they) without the hazard of the whole.
Thus when Saul assayed to join himself to the Disciples, Acts 9.26. is meant
not only to injoynt, alluding to that above of body, but also ((...)) to
adjoyne, Expos.
cleave, and be glued unto them, relating to this Metaphor of the building,
where many things are carved, (as all things are cut) framed, and glewed
together, which were ( before) at a distance, and which then are not easily
disjoined, but are faster then ever before. But,

3. The Church of Christ is compared to a City, 3. Christ's Church is a City
compact.
compacted together, up to which the tribes of Israel go, Psalm. 122.3, 4. So
Psalm. 46.4. yea the holy City, Rev. 21.2. and thence the Saints are called
Fellow-Citizens, in Ephesians. 2.19. now as all the houses, Sim.
streets, trades, corporations, and societies, persons, All streets, houses,
peoples, etc. make but one City. Saints Citizens.
and peoples (though many in particulars) yet make all but one City compact: So
is it in the Church of Christ; all Saints, Sexes, Children, Fathers, and
Young Men, Callings and conditions make up one Body, and are to make up but one
holy City. Besides, there be sweet immunities, enfranchisements, promises, Sim.
and Privileges, Laws and Ordinances, which none have propriety unto, The
immunities, Privileges, laws of this City, which belong to the Freemen
thereof. None admitted freemen of this City, but by the Citizens consent.
or (half so much) profit from them, as the Saint-Citizens have (which shall
be shown if the Lord give leave hereafter) and none are admitted to be
Freemen of such a City but by their consent, vote, and acceptance: and so much
is made out in Zach. 2.11. Many shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and
shall be my people; joined, that is, they shall mutually give up themselves to
God, i. e. that is, with the concurrent knowledge and consent of each other, in
the Hebr. vid. Buxtorf. so also is that in Jer. 50.5. Come let us join our
selves to the Lord, etc. all this fairly delineates the Form of
Christs-Church-state, Expos.
Buxtorph and Sh^indler.
and Gospel-Discipline.

4* Furthermore, his Church is called an Army with banners, Cant. 6.4.10. and
why? but because all men, bands, 4 This Church is his Army. All men, companies,
colors, Captains, make up one Army.
companies, regiments, colors, and Captains are but to make up one Army;
though there may be many men to one Company, and many Companies to one
Regiment; so all the Saints are but to make up one Church and Body together,
being united to make up the form; and then are they fair as the Moon, clear
as the Sun, and not before. But besides, the Church is*

5 Compared to a Kingdom, Joh. 18.36. Heb. 12.28. etc. Man. 21.43. to show, as
all Families, Villages, Towns, Cities, 5 Christ's Church is his Kingdom.
Countries, Shires, do make up but one Kingdom, and are all under one rule,
law, and power; so all the Saints, together gathered and embodied, For all
Cities, Shires, countries etc. make up but one Kingdom.
do make up one Church of Christ, or Kingdom of God, Luke 10.11. Matthew.
13.19. The Church is,

6 Compared to Heaven also, Matthew. 13.11.24.31.33.44, 45, 47. 6 Christ's Church
called heaven. And why?
Matthew. 3.2. Matthew. 11.11, 12. Now the Saints, which are to be high, above the
earth, and the Throne of God, and filled with his glory, and decked up and
enamelled with shining lights, Stars of grace, and spangles of glory most sweet
and lovely; All Elements, Firmaments, Orbs, Stars, etc make but one heaven.
the Sun (Christ) moving in them, and ( circularly) round them, and such as
are seen plainly to be what they are by a kind of Vbiquity, who ever they
are in the Horizon, or this Hemisphere; I say, such Saints united together, in
a body to make up one Church, are one Kingdom of Heaven, even as all the
Firmaments, All Saints in one are so.
Elements, Stars, Planets, and Constellations together, etc. do make up one
visible Orbicular Heaven. Mr. Jacob in his Treatise says, A true Church is one
Congregation: Mr Jacob. Mr. Ursin.
so says Vrsin, and others.

But thus much may serve to prove the Form of Christs-Church, which is to be
all one, one body, one building, one City, Sim.
one Army, one Kingdom, one Heaven: O how sweet is such a communion! this
Form is the (forma) beauty of all. As the sweet cluster of grapes, which gave
taste of the Land of Canaan was bore betwixt two; Because they have All one
Father.

All one original Law.

All in one Covenant.

All hewn from one Rock.

All bear one Image.

All lay in one womb.

All of one Seed.

All lead by one Spirit.

All called into one hope.

All one joy. All one glory.


so in such communion, we may find and feed upon the fruits of Canaan. But now
to the Reasons.

First, Why this is so requisite that Saints do associate into one body of
Believers, is gathered from the Oneness of all Saints; For all have one
Father, Mal. 2.10. Jo. 8.41. all, elect in one original love, Ephesians. 2.5. All
are in one Covenant, Hebr. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. All have one Christ and Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. and All hewn from one and the same Rock, Isa. 51.1. All bear one
Image, Rev. 15.1. Rev. 7.3. All lay in one womb, and have the same mother,
Gal. 4.26. All borne by the same seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 John 3.9. All are lead by
one Spirit, Romans 8.14. Joh. 14.26. Ephesians. 4.4. 1 Cor. 14.12.26. All called into
one hope, Ephesians. 4.4. All have of one joy, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. Phil. 4.4. Joh.
15.11. and 16.22. and All eye and enjoy one and the same glory, Ephesians. 3.21. 1
Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor. 10.31. 2 Timothy 4.8. Hence it is that Christ prays so earnestly
to his Father for this Oneness to his Saints (in communion) in, and with him,
Christ prayed for this oneness.
Joh. 17.11. both for them that were present, and to come, to the worlds end in
verse 20, 21. Apostles took great pains to preach it.
Hence it is the Apostles took so much pains in all places to preach up this
Church Way for Saints, to live (as in one Family) together in unity, 1 Cor.
1.9, 10. etc. And otherwise they will much degenerate from the principles of
Saints, Psalm. 16.3. Besides, Unity and Entity convertibles
for that unity and entity are convertibles, and this is the means to keep up
both, in the bond of peace, and love, and perfection, Col. 3.14. and Ephesians. 4.3*
4. Act. 4.32. But

Secondly, Saints not separate from the multitude, lose much of their luster,
light, and glory; for the Form makes fair as the Moon, The beauty and
loveliness of Saints embodyed.
Cant. 6.10. but when the Saints are in one body, then their beauty dazles the
eyes of others, as many beams of light together, gathered into one; or as many
streams met into one, run with force, and fiercely. David says, O how
amiable are thy Tabernacles, etc. Psalm. 84.1. Sim.
So Christ, Cant. 2.10. Rise up my love, my fair one, His Tabernacles amiable
His Spouse fair
and come away! So in verse 13. So Cant. 4.1. Behold thou art fair my love,
behold thou art fair. So in verse 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no
spot in thee (but there may be on thee) So in verse 8. Christ calls her to
separate from the mountains of the Leopards, opened before in page 45 and then
it follows, Thou have ravished my heart my sister, my Spouse, thou have
ravished my heart: and how fair is thy love, etc. My garden enclosed, etc. So
in Cant. 6.9. My dear! my undefiled is one (Saints so in one body united) and
then follows, She is the only one, she is the choice one, the Daughters
(Professors) saw her, and blessed her, and the Queens (Sarahs true Churches)
and the Concubines (Hagars, (...)
false Churches) admired at her comeliness and beauty, and praised her,
saying, Who is this that looks forth as the (Aurora, Such emb^d^ed excel in
beauty.

Informitas materiae duplex vel exclude^s formam vel formositatem, Th. Aq.
1.66.1.^.


the Damask red) morning? fair as the Moon? clear as the Sun? terrible as
an Army with banners? Saints then thus embodied, are embroidered with beauty;
but if they be not, no wonder if the world (nay good men many times) will not
own them for excellent ones, which otherwise they shall, or be ashamed: for
the Form is (in a sense) the life and loveliness of every thing? Sim.
what were a man without his Form? and if the Form be misplaced that makes
him a Monster. Without form deforme.
What beauty do ye behold in a Picture (though the colors be laid on) before
the Form be drawn? Suppose pieces of Timber should be carved curiously, and
guilt gloriously, for the builders use, and also stones most artificially
polished painted, Sim.
cut, and carved; yet they lose their loveliness with lying among the
multitudes and heaps abroad, and about; but when they come to be put up, and
orderly to be placed in the building, there is a great deal of beauty in them,
and pleasant grace from them. But in one body their excellency appears.
Thus will it be, and is it with Saints builded up, and in body together
according to Gospel Order, and quanto forma est nobilior, tanto magis dominatur
materiae, say the Schoolmen.

Thirdly, Till thus in body they are but in confusion, and disorders without,
and trod on by every foul, and fools foot, In great confusion, and disorder
till then.
and as much wronged, defaced, and defiled as may be; As polished stones, that
lie among the filhy rubbish, so they will ask much pains to pick and cleanse
again before they can be fitted for the Lords house; Sim.
but when they are embodied together (as before) they are in their order, which
others joy to behold, Col. 2.5. and so, as the members that are fitly placed in
the body, But in body in order and proper place.
and properly employed, do appear always orderly, decent, and comely to the
whole body, and are helpful one to another thereunto, Sim.
Romans 15.2. 1 Cor. 12.25. For as the Philosophers observe that there is a
twofold motion in all natural things, one whereby they move to preserve
themselves, and the other to preserve the whole universe: So must all
Church Members have their twofold motion, Sim.
viz. 1. For themselves. 2. For the whole.

Fourthly, Saints, unless thus in society, fall fearfully doing their duties
to one another in love, unity, peace, admonition, Till thus embodied, they do
not their duties one to another. Mr. Bartlet. The Author abused for him in
Dublin.
exhortation, tenderness, patience, watching, participating, comforting,
edifying, or brotherly reproving of one another. So if a Brother offend to tell
it to the Church, and to strive to excel to the edifying of the Church, etc.
Now how can these rules (requiring obedience) be practiced, but by such Saints
as are embodied into a Church of Christ? but this Mr. Bartlet, I remember, in
his Model mentions (a man I have made much use of, and for whose sake I have
sufficiently suffered from some in Dublin, (whom I fear) fuller of heat then
of Heaven, having no more of his book (which the Lord will one day witness
(to their faces) then I bear in my breast, omnia mecum, etc. Sim.
But to pass by such blows and buffetings of Satan. I say, the Saints so
embodied, are best provided for their duties one to another: And as in a bundle
of sticks one kindles another, so do they. Comes facundus in via pro vehiculo
est, and as one help another, so all together like Bees labor to bring in
honey (all) into one hive. So every one has the Spirit (...) 1 Cor. 12.6. to
bring into the stock, or common bank, or to profit withal. Expos.
O then how sweet are they to God and men? who are as so many flowers bound
together in one nose-gay. But

Fifthly, The sweet soule-ravishing and enamouring issues, which are the
infallible sequel of Saints so embodied: The soule-sweet issues of such a
Gospel Order.

Privileges, Promises. The Lords delight there above all.


O the excellent privileges! Cant. 2, 3* 4, 5. Cant. 5.1. Cant. 6.2, 3. Cant.
7.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 92.12, 13.14. their precious promises, Hos. 14.6. Isa.
59.22. the singular delights which the Lord takes amongst Saints so embodied!
Rev. 2.1. Psalm. 132.13, 14. Psalm. 26.8. 2 Cor. 6.16.18. Cant. 8.13. above all
others, Ps. 87.2. The Lord loves the gates of Zion more then all the (other)
dwellings of Jacob: More then all. Now such as are not in body together, are
deprived of the life and excellency of these, as I shall show hereafter (I
hope) convinceingly, if the Lord please, but only this I add, That the
special benefits which believers so embodied, do enjoy, are laid like Tiles
one over another, every day, Sim.
till the whole roof be covered, and the rain kept out.

Sixthly, Which I would not omit (though I might more The united strength of
Saints in such Gospel society
hereby the Saints are abundantly better fortified both to defend, and (
occasionally) to offend* for to instance against Enemies, they have an united
force, and they need not to fear an Adversary, no not an Army if they be but
in one, for they are indeed terrible (then) as an Army with Banners displayed,
Drums beating, Trumpets blowing, Vis ^nita forti^^
Guns playing and discharging, and all in good order, keeping Rank and File.
Why they need not to fear for their enemies then must fall before them, Such
Saints are the surest, and the most successful Soldiers.
in Joel 2.7.8.10. They shall run like mighty men, they shall climb the wall
like men of war, and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall
not break their ranks, neither shall one thrust against another; the earth
shall quake before them, the Heavens shall tremble, the Sun and the Moon
shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining; A terror to the
world.
thus are the Saints in their united strength a terror to the world. Well
might the Queen of Scots say, She feared more the prayers of that one man
John Knox, then she did an Army of thirty thousand men. For when Gog and Magog
do gather together to battle, in Revel. 20.8, 9. as the sand of the Sea, Expos.
they compass the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City. But what
success have they? Why fire comes down from God out of heaven and destroys
them, (...). Fire proceeds out of the mouths of Churches to destroy Gog and
Magog.
or eats them up; that is, out of the Churches, according to Rev. 11.5. If any
man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths and devoureth him. If
any man dare to wrong them ((...)) or to deal injuriously or unjustly with
them, he must in this manner be killed. Now all the Saints (and so the
Churches) are such witnesses, Expos.
and out of their mouths, by their prayers, and powerful breathings, By the
Spirit of the Lord.
which will admit of no denial, they can conquer and consume their greatest
adversaries. Besides, the enemy has not that like advantage against us, when
we are linked, Sim.
as when we are alone. As it is said, that Siculus (being on his Deathbed) bid
his Sons bring a Quiver of Arrows, Unity unconquerable. Sed informitas
infirmitas.
and being brought, would have them break them altogether in the Quiver, but
they could not conquer them, though they all tried; then he bids them break
them asunder one by one, Sim.
which was soon done. So (says he) my Sons, if yee'le break asunder, yee'le
be broken easily, and thrown aside; but if ye unite, none can conquer you; as
long as ye live together in one, ye will be too hard for every one. Sim.
So also in a Faggot of Wood, there is no breaking the whole together; but to
take out stick after stick, that will make it easy to get the mastery of the
whole.

Saints united in one, too hard for the whole world.
Thus the Saints united together into one, will be too hard for all the world,
but otherwise the world will have the advantage, and they may be easily broken,
and scattered about with storms; so when they carry on Gods cause with one
shoulder, and by one consent, Sim.
according to Zeph. 3.9. it goes on in post, and against all oppositions. For
as Mathematicians say, the strait line is always weakest, but the circle is
the strongest, and holds; so the Saints in Fellowship are strongest, and hold
best, because one is injoynted into another; Their joint powers, and joint
prayers able to conqu^r heaven and earth.
and thus the Saints ought unanimously and jointly to contest together for the
truth, Jude ver. 3. and jointly to labor together in, and for the Gospel, 2
Cor. 6.1. and jointly to put forth together, for the purity, privileges,
orders, and ordinances of Jesus Christ, Gal. 5.1. and jointly to receive
together reproaches and wrongs, Heb. 10.33. Gal. 6.2. 2 Cor. 12.26. 2 Timothy
1.16. and jointly to refuse subjection to any persons, principles, or
practices, contrary to the word of truth; and thus by their joint powers,
opposers will be repulsed to their shame, and loss; And joynt-praises fill
heaven and earth.
and by their joynt-prayers heaven is taken by violence, and the Lord is
overcome, Acts 12.5. by their joynt-praises, and shoutings of joy, Sim.
the Heavens and Earth filled with ravishing melody and Music, Rev 14.2. One
member can act by his own power, and by the (virtuall) power and influence of
the whole body. Use. Parishes no Churches of Christ in this point of form. For
we proved before with the School^men, Ubi parts non habent rationem materiae,
ibi totum non habet rationem formae. So that they are neither matter nor form*
As the many beams of the Sun contracted into a little Burning-glasse do
glow, and burn with abundance more light, life, and strength; so Saints united
do; Yea moreover, as one Member, or the Arm can act not only by its own, but
also by the strength of the whole body, to which it is united, (according to
the bodies ability;) even so a Saint embodied may wrestle with God, and against
a sin, etc. by the strength of the whole, besides his own, as hereafter will
appear. But thus much for the reasons, though I might have added more.

Use. By all that has been penned upon this point it appears plainly, that
Parish-Churches have not the form, nor the face of a true Church of Christ,
according to Gospel Order; for they have none of this union, fellowship, or
injoynting into one. The Devil has set his black and foul cloven-foot of
divisions and dissensions in every Parish upon the earth; yet the God of this
world, the Prince of Parishes has blinded their eyes, and they will not
believe, 2 Cor. 4.4. O what persecutions of the Saints, oppositions of Christ's
ordinances! Menaces against his Ministers! what desperate Oaths! devilish
cursing! The Devils black cloven foot is set in the midst of them* all over
England.

Why Parishes so devoyd of matter and form, and so full of sin?


horrible lying! detestable libelling! monstrous malice! palpable cheating! and
unsufferable slanders! yea and what not is in every Parish? and what is the
reason? read what Christ says, Joh. 8.23. Ye are from beneath, but I am (and
my ways are, and worship is) from above, ye are of this world, but I am not
of this world. And as Rev. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. out of the bottomless pit arose
smoke, as the smoke of a great furnace, the Sun and Air were darkened by
reason of the smoke, and out of the smoke came Locusts, and unto them was
given power as the Scorpions of the earth have power; and it was commanded them
that they should not hurt any green thing (a Saint in his viridity full of sap,
and in the spring) neither any tree (a flourishing Saint in his virility and
well grown, Expos.
) Psalm. 1.3. Psalm. 52.8. Psalm. 92.12. Jer. 17.8. but only such men as have not
the seal of God in their foreheads. These Locusts of Hell, these Egyptian
plagues (which have Scorpion-stings in their tails, ver. 10. whilst the
fairest outside and faces of men, In Parishes what plagues arose from their
constitution.

The worse, wicked, ill-favored Kine eat up and destroy the others of the
Neighbors that are better.


ver. 7. yet are ever running and ready for battle, ver. 7. ver. 9.) have
seized upon the spirits of many men more ridged then religious, and they do
eat them up. See but what hot contentions, Suits at Law, Plots to do
mischief, desires to persecute the people of God, devices to make them odious
among men, Jer. 18.18. and what not? came along with this Soule-comfortlesse,
bottomlesse-pit smoke, when your Parishes were constituted? and tell me then,
if Pharoahs lean ill-favored Kine do not eat up the fat! Genesis 41. and if
the withered wild blasted ears do not devour the full and fair ears! See
if (as yet) amongst many the Magicians rods do not turn Serpents, and seek to
eat up Aarons, though Aarons shall devour theirs ere long, Exodus 7.12. and
errors and sins do swallow up truths.
and Truth shall triumph over errors, Christ over Antichrist, Faith over
fallacies, maugre all their malicious and mischievous dispositions and
oppositions; and their water shall be turned into blood speedily, and all their
Fish shall dye, that swim now in their Elements, Proph.
and croaking Froggs shall cry in every place, Egyptian Plagues must come upon
them* as in Isa. 10.24, 26.
I mean them that give now and then a little leap (and that is all upward,
and such (will) also dye, and then their dust shall be turned into Lice, and
their pleasures to plagues; then boyles and blaines, their contagion and
corruption shall appear to all, whilst the Lords own Israel, and Saints shall
be safe and free. This shall be shortly: but in the interim how Parishes
swarm with Egyptian flies, let wise men judge, whilst Serpents lie by the
way-side, Although as yet many like Dan do bite us behind* or backbite.
Genesis 49.17. and bite us, or rather (backbite us) before we are aware, not
openly (in our sight) but crookedly, and craftily, treacherously, and behind
us. Dublin has the most of this Tribe of Dan that ever I met with.

Moreover many an Adullamite, Genesis 38.20. might we find here in this City,
for if their occupations were but printed upon their foreheads (as some of them
have full foreheads) we should hear and see their trading and delight is to
serve an ill-master, and to run upon ill arrands, to cog, Many an Adullamite
we meet with in Parishes.
to carry tales, to dissemble, lie, and flatter, and to have fair faces (as of
men) but to sting as Serpents and Scorpions, being bound to hurt the Innocent,
and harmless ones.

But I say no more, only that such Parishes fall infinitely short of the true
Form of true Churches of Christ; and I can confidently assert, such
Synagogues, as I said, matter-lesse and form-lesse; or if some fit matter may
be found amongst them, yet they are but as the Philosophers say (of the earth,
Parishes a Chaos.
when it was a Chaos, Sim.
and without form) materia (prima) informis, sine forma and norma, the first
matter, which is without form and order; and which is ( semper passiva, says
Tho. Aquin. 1.54.3.3.) to suffer another nature and workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
till then, Sim.
we may say of them as in Zeph. 2.15. How are they become a desolation,
Materia informis.
and a place for beasts to lie down in? And why so? (as Mayer says) but
because no difference is put betwixt the righteous and the wicked, therefore it
follows, every one that passes by, Expos.
shall hiss and wag his hand; and Zeph. 3.1. Woe to her that is filthy,
Parishes are stalls for beasts to lie down in.
etc. which is (...) or provoking and disobedient; such are your
Parish-Churches? And they put me in mind of that place in the hot sands of
Africa, Sim.
where wild beasts of all sorts meet together to drink, and there are the
strangest monsters got; whence the Proverb is, Africa aliquid apportat novi.
And so in Parish Churches, all sorts meet, and many monsters are made, by
reason of such who are not fit for civil society, much less for Saints. And a
Heathen said, Qui aequo animo malis immiscetur, malus est; he must needs be bad
that likes and allows of such a mixture: Sim.
And I might also mention the saying of one, That as often as he had been among
such men, he returned home less a man then he was before: Sim.
Wherefore common rules of reason may dictate this doctrine to us.
Parish-Churches have their fatal blow.
The Lacedaemonians would enquire of the carriage of their children, by the
condition of their Play-fellowes; And as Socrates said to Alcibiades (the
Parragon of beauty) I fear not thee, Ezekiel. 16.36, 37 Judge 9.15.
The Bramble shall be burnt up in the day that burns like an oven, Mal. 4.1.
but thy companions; so may we say to some honest men. And indeed it is a sad
thing: for will the loyal wife still keep that company which her husband
dislikes? sheep lose wool, that will keep in the wilderness among the bushes;
so do men (be they ever so good) lose much that will continue in
Parish-Churches, Sim.
which are upon their destiny, being too old to live longer: Babylon falling.

Th^se that traded with her bewail her.


for the Lord will discover their filthiness, their whoredoms, their
Idolatries, and abominations, even unto their Lovers, and they shall loath
them. But the Bramble of Rome, which has brought so many unto obedience, Use
shall be burnt up, and a strong voice shall say, Rev. 18.2. Babylon is fallen,
A call into Zion into the Churches of Christ.

Out of Babylon and Parish Churches. Christ beckens to thee.


is fallen, and is become an habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul
spirit, and a cage of every unclean (and hateful) bird: and verse 9.11.16.18.
And then the Kings and people, and Merchants and Ship-masters that have traded
with her from time to time, and have had of her commodities to carry to other
Nations, and have brought away of her Trumperies and Traditions, will h^wle and
lament, and yet stand a far off for fear of her torments, verse 15.


Wherefore come out of her my people, Come out of her, and verse. 4. which is
the last word I have to speak upon this part of the Form, In his Tabernacles
and Churches are beauty, power, his presence* safety, deliverance, pleasure and
joys, plenty, peace, blessedness, and salvation, all powerful motives.
to entreat you all for the Lords sake, and for your souls sake, to separate
from (as before) all Parochial and Popish worship, and ways of Babylon, and
come hither: -- hark -- how Christ beckens thee (poor soul!) into Zion to
dwell with him there in his Discipline, and Tabernacles, Psalm. 67.2. there is
beauty, Isa. 52.1, 2. there is power, Isa. 40.29. there is his presence, Isa.
4.5. there is deliverance, Isa. 54.17. there is pleasure and joy, Psalm. 46.3,
4. there is plenty, Isa. 25.6. and peace, Isa. 48.18. and blessedness, Psalm.
56.4. and salvation, Great hurt to the godly to continue in Parish Churches.
Isa. 46.13. What can ye ask for more? How can ye then acquiesce in such a
carnal corrupt Church State? mingled with more visibly ungodly, then visibly
godly? If we mingle bright and rusty metal together, the rusty will not
become bright, but the bright rusty; and thus a rusty companion (says Seneca)
rubbeth some of his rust upon a man that is honest, and faire-conditioned,
civil, and well-given; but the honest man cannot make the other any better, or
brighter. Sim.
As a weak eye is not strengthened by looking on a strong eye, but on the
contrary, Sim.
a strong may water by looking on a watery eye; the sound man may lose his
health by lying with the sick; So I say, it is dangerous, Sim.
and (doubtless) a provocation to the Lord, and a tempting him in the
Wilderness, Sim.
to continue yet in communion with such mixed multitudes in Parish Churches,
whereby we grow worse and worse; As a good horse put into the Teame among a
company of Jades, does but learn to shuttle, and become heady and untoward;
Sim.
and so such as will have communion with the multitudes, learn many
ill-favored tricks, and are made the more obstinate and untoward; Happiness
of such that are in Christ's Churches.
but for shame let us haste in to the Lords Sanctuary, and enter into the
communion of Saints. The least small coal raked up in ashes will live long,
and so will the least Saint, and the least grace be kept up, and nourished in
the true Churches of Christ; which will be (it is likely) extinguished, whilst
they are out of them, and not wrapped up, and kept warm in them. Wherefore it
will be our continual comfort to enter into such communion; for I can name
some that have been in abundance of doubts, troubles, suspense and uncertainty,
till they were well informed and fully satisfied of this way by the word and
spirit, and ever since their souls have been swallowed up in divine solace.
Sim.
As Archimedes that matchless Mathematician, after he had hammered his brains
about a difficult conclusion, leaped, and danced, and cried (...), In Sermon. 4.
p. 38.
I have found it, I have found it; (so as Mr. Hoskins has it) the Saints cry
out, We have found him, We have found him; We have found Christ in his
Ordinances, Christ in his Spirit, Christ in his graces, Christ in his Churches,
Christ in his Doctrine, Christ in his Discipline; We have found him, We have
found him (but yet nothing to what is to come.) Thus far for the seventh
Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. (...) Cisse. The third part of the second part of the Form, viz.
Saints separate, and gathered into one body as before, are a true Church of
Christ for matter and form; and every such particular Church has as full
complete power as any, without the least subordination, power, or authority of
any Church whatsoever.
A description of the Church in her most conspicuous parts. Cant* 4.1, 2, 3,
etc.
THrough the grace of Christ (the Head and Husband of his Spouse his Church) we
have handled the Fair Form of the true Church of Christ, being very
beautiful and fair, having Doves eyes (i. e. such as are the able discerning
and directing members of the Church, fair, full, clear, as Number. 10.31. and
chaste, and ever (as it were) glazed with tears) and having comely hair,
Exposit.
i. e. the ornament of her head (who is Christ) thus are all the Saints, 1
Doves eyes. The most discerning members that are light to the body.
and sincere believers to their Lord Christ, an ornament (and a glory to him,
Isa* 43.7.) such as hang (dependingly) upon him, their Head (not else, Col.
2.19.) being nourished by him, and growing from him, and very smooth, neat, not
rough, rugged, etc. that appear from Mount Gilead, 2 Comely, hair, Saints
That hang and live on Christ the Head. Mount Gilead.
that is a pleasant and plenteous place, Jer. 22.6. and signifies a witness or
testimony, and so I take it, for then Saints appear loveliest, liveliest,
longest, smoothest, and sweetest, from Mount Gilead, i. e. the Testimony of
Christ, the witness of the Spirit, and the Word, and Scriptures truth, and
Ordinances which do bear the Testimony of Christ, when their souls are
satisfied as in pleasant and plenteous places. 3 Her Teeth are the Ministers of
the Gospel that chew, divide the word aright, or members qualified with the
gifts of prophecy, and interpretation. Even.
Gilead is mine, Psalm. 60.7. and Manasseh is mine, etc. Furthermore, her Teeth
are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which came up from the washing
bearing Twins, etc. Cant. 4.2. Cant. 6.6. in the Chaldee it is, thy Priests and
Levites. For Teeth are such as the Church eats with, chews, digests, and
divides by, and receives for the use of the whole body; and I believe her
Ministers must be such, who receive, eat, chew, feed, digest, and divide the
word of God; and all that is hardest of digestion, for the the rest of the
people and Saints service, to the capacities, and for the concoction of all the
body. But they are even, i. e. not one longer, nor one shorter, They are not to
be one longer, and one shorter, one higher, and one lower, but all equal. Iam.
2.1, 2, 3. Very white and lovely. Mal. 3.3. Many Ministers have been, and must
be rubbed hard, before white.

They are to be very fruitful. And very orderly.


which would be both uncomely and hurtful, but they must be all even, and
equal, and Brethren, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27. not one higher, nor one lower then
another, which would also be an hindrance to the bodies welfare, for then they
would be wanting, or at least hindering in the use of feeding and chewing for
the Church. Away with Rabbis, for ye are all brethren, there is no
superiority nor subordination to be suffered in Christ's Church by way of
Dominion, which is the point I am now upon; For they must be all equal, and
even-shorne, as come up from the washing, that is, white and lovely, comely,
and clean purged, and purified, and fairly washed (never more need then now
that the Sons of Levi be purged with Fullers Soap) so that as some (already)
have been rubbed hard, over and over, and are at last shorn, and come up out
of the washing bearing Twins, being fruitful, and bringing forth (as Ewes)
though with hazard and hardship; and as Teeth even set in the gums do give a
good decorum, 4 Her lips. Her excellent word and doctrine.
and both ranks in each jaw full and fair, are of excellent use, and
exceeding comely, so ought they to be in, and to the Church of Christ, that
others beholding their good orders may rejoice, Col. 2.5. of all men (also)
they must not be harren, For matter.
but bearing-twins. Besides her lips are like a thread of Scarlet; Metonymically
excellency of the Doctrine of Christ, which comes from her lips unto others,
Zeph. 3.9. which is described first, from the matter most excellent, first
deeply dyed in the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.17. Secondly, being most pure and
high-prized, Lev. 14.14. Thirdly, Lively and lovely, Cant. 5.16. Temples use.

Secondly, from the Form like a thread that is well woven, strongly twisted,
and finely, and freely spun out by the Spirit of God, 2 For Form well woven,
twisted, etc. The Churches haire-lace to bind up the Hair (that we spoke of
before) together in one.
1 Cor. 2.4.12. being very fine, thin, subtle, pure, and of a most divine
substance, and also (as the Churches haire-lace) being to bind up the people
of God, to, and about their Head, viz. Jesus Christ: And her speech is comely,
i. e. lovely, gracious, sweet, and desirable, as in Eccles. 12.9, 10, 11. Prove.
16.23, 24. therefore in Hebrew Navah, is, being very amiable; so are the
Scriptures full of lovely mysteries, lively histories, triumphing truths,
comforting counsels, and counselling comforts. Her temples are like a piece of
Pomegrannet. 5 Her speech sweet.
The Temples are those between the eyes and ears, which the Chaldee calls the
Kings Governors, 6 Her Temples full.
and Keepers of Israel; but I mean, such as are high in Christ their Head;
Such are high in Christ the Head.

Overseers, Elders.


through which run many vital veins, for, and into the body, and such ought
all over-seeing, and directing, governing, and guiding-Elders, to be like a
piece of Pomegrannet (i. e. frustum, or fragmen) a crust, or fragment broken
off, which is over- full and flowing over with juice, sirrup, and sweetness,
etc. in the sight of all; and besides, this shows the benefit of this
Church Discipline, and more then (mere) Ecclesiastical polity that I speak
of, Full of sweetness, and savor.
being abounding in ju^cie sirrups, and sweet savours to the meanest and most
despised Saint; for although there may be an outward sharpness to the flesh,
yet there is an unspeakable inward sweetness, and spiritual solaces to the
soul to be had here, and to be got in this Government, as will appear
hereafter: but besides, like the Pomegrannet which is full of sweet seed,
odoriferous grains, well united together, and gathered into one body, every
one in order pointing up to the Crown; so is this Gospel-government full of
sweet juice, All pointing at the Crown, and pressing after perfection in
Christ.
and sappy seeds (or Saints) well-colored, and all in order pressing after the
same perfection, and vertical point of glory, being gathered together into one
distinct body. But to delineate her beauty more at large. Her neck is like the
Tower of David (says the Text) builded for an A^mory, 7 Her Neck.
wherein hang the bucklers and shields of mighty men. Expos.
The Neck is that part between the head and body, and united to both, and is of
necessity, through which passes, and repasses whatsoever is useful for both to
the nourishment of both, and each in, and by other.

Now I am of opinion the Ordinances do thus, The Ordinances which as means
unite Christ and people, head and body together by the Spirit.
and are (as the neck between the Head and body) between Christ and people to
bring both into union, and into (unseparable) fellowship, as Heb. 8.10. by the
Spirit; so that both the head and body may be nourished through them, they as
conveyances of the vitals to the Animals, and of the Animals to the vitals,
that the one may be refreshed by the other, and all be by a mutual and
redaman^ine love (which is the life of union) so that through this Neck the
body is abundantly nourished by the vital spirits from the Head, I mean by the
sanctifying and saving (so called) graces of the same Spirit in Christ our
Head; Who be-hea^ the Church. The neck (in Heb. Thauvaar)
those then that despise Christ's Ordinances do (as much as in them lies)
behead the Church of Christ; A cruel Act! Have a care! But then like the Tower
(Migdall, great and strong) of David, Nehem 3.19.25. Expos.
2 Samuel 5.8, 9. an Armory (the word is Thalpiioh of Thalah to hang, and Piioh,
An Armory for swords. The two edged sword of the Spirit in her Ordinances. The
Soldier of Christ of any size or stature is fitted in this Armory f^r his
warfare.

8 Her two breasts.

For Ornament and for use* Old and New Testament. Julian the Apostate called
the Bible a Bawble.


sharp two edged weapons) to hang swords in, the two edged sword of the Spirit
hangs there often, and the souls bucklers and shields of Defense are
(ordinarily) found in this Armory of the Churches, and Helmets, and
Head-peeces, and Breast-plates, and what not, for every Soldier of Christ's
under his Banner, and Command; for the Church is to be in a bitter warfare
continually; and let a Saint but come hither, be he of what size soever, he
may be armed out of this Armory of the Churches; yea the stoutest Champions
that march against Christ's enemies.

Furthermore, for her two breasts, they are like two young Roes twins, which
feed among the Lillies. Her Breasts are both an Ornament, as Ezekiel. 16.7. and
for use necessary, Isa. 66.11. and indeed to take the two Testaments, so
called, they are both an Ornament, and of necessary use to all the Churches of
Christ, though some (for whom my heart aches) I fear run the folly and
madness of that malicious Apostate, who called the Bible a Bawble, but he
proved a Babel. The truth is, these Breasts swell with sweet milk, and
consolations do drop out again even for the Babes (that are weak) Isa.
66.11. 1 Pet. 2.2. they are full in deed of what is absolutely cherishing to
the Churches Children, These breasts be full of milk for babes.
and therein are many precious promises, and sweet truths (easily) to be
digested by such babes as do eagerly hunger, call and cry for them, laying
full hold on them, drawing and sucking much sweetness out of them, which are
as Twins, being both borne of one, out of one spirit, The Authors judgment is,
the Word and Spirit are the Churches two Breasts, which are always so full and
fair, and freshly flowing and feeding.
and for one end, and from one God. 2 Timothy 3.16. but I had rather read them the
Word and Spirit, feeding among Lillies. For so are Saints white, pure,
pleasant, lovely, living best in low valleys, and well moystned at their root,
and such are fond (to suck from them as before, and) to entertain them; and
as Moulin once said, that in the times of Persecutions, whilst they burnt us
for reading of the Scriptures, we burnt to be reading of them.

But thus I have (beyond my intention) examined this Epithalmion which is sung
in specie, Moulin.
and paints out ( Prophetically) the picture of a true Church called into
Gospel government, The picture of the true Church. All fair.
and that upon the breaking of the morning Sun, and the day springing from on
high, ver. 6. for then it follows, thou art all fair my Love. Now in this
description her beauty being discovered so eminently, from her most visible
Members, it needs not to speak of more then such as are most conspicuous to
the eyes of all at this present. Second part of the Form. Every Church is
equally Independent.


But to proceed to the second part of this part of the Form, which is; That
every particular Church of Christ, gathered together into one Body, according
to Gospel Order (as before) has as free, as full, and as complete a
Church Power; and Authority, to order all affairs within her own body, as any
Church whatsoever, excluding all sorts of Superiority, that may be (possibly)
claimed in point of Church Power; and that par in parem non habet imperium,
equal Sisters have equal powers and privileges, will be proved an undeniable
truth.

Proofs of particular Churches equal, and alike power in seven Churches of
Asia.
In the progress of which I believe I shall (much) use Mr. Bartlets method (as
my memory will admit me (for I have no other Book of his then my breast at
present) see in Rev. chap. 2. and chap. 3. the seven Churches of Asia; and we
find a full and an alike power in every particular Church of Christ; therefore
in chap. 2.2. to the Church of Ephesus, the Spirit says, Thou can not bear
them which are evil, Expos.
and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and thou
have found them liars, etc. To admit or keep out, examine or cast out, or the
like.
To this Church of Ephesus (says Perkins in loc.) God gave a full Juridicall
power either to admit, or keep out, examine, or cast out; suspend, or what not?
that was needful in any true Church of Christ. So in ver. 14. To the Church of
Pergamus, I have a few things against thee, for suffering them that hold the
Doctrine of Balaam. So in ver. 15. And that thou have them that hold the
Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate; and thus in ver. 20. to the
Church of Thyatira for suffering that woman Jezebell, which calls her self a
Prophetess to teach, and seduce, etc. Now, Expos.
why should God lay these sins to their charge? were it not in their power
(within themselves) to reform, and remedy? and how could they have power to
take in some, or to cast out any; to excommunicate such seducers and sinners as
these, Nor one Church blamed for another, but every one for her own sins,
being absolutely Independent (as to others) and distinct. Independency O^thodox
in those days. Without any subordination. Proofs in the Apostles Epistles to
Churches, as distinct Churches each from others.

All alike one Head.

All alike Queens. All alike Sisters.


were it not Gods last Will and Testament? and to clear this further, ye may
mark this, that Christ blames not any one Church for the sins suffered in
another, not the Church of Sardis, for the sins of Laodicea, nor of Laodicea
for the sins of Pergamus, nor Pergamus for the sins of Thyatira, etc. but every
one for their own sins, because God gave each of them so plenary a power
(and all alike) for suppressing sin, suspending persons, excluding offenders,
and keeping of good and Gospel Order. And there is great reason for it, for
without this authority no Church could continue a Church, and all the reasons
alleged to the contrary are disallowed and invalid; which being so observeable
in these seven Churches, it seems evidently Independency was then Orthodox;
that is, such a sort of Independent Discipline as is here handled; to wit, that
one Church has no dependency upon another, but has as absolute a power as any
other whatsoever, without subjection, or subordination. Besides, in all the
Epistles of the Apostles written to Churches; they write to Churches, as
distinct Churches, without dependency upon any but Jesus Christ, their head,
King, and Lawgiver, Acts 15.22. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Cor. 14.33. Romans 16.1. Col.
1.2. being all (equally) the Body of Christ, Col. 1.24. the Spouse of Christ,
Ephesians. 5.24, 25. all being (equally) Queens, All alike Candlesticks, and
branches of the same Candlesticks, streams of the same Foun^aine, and beams of
the same Sun, and branches of the same Vine, all alike opening and shutting,
admitting, examining, choosing officers, administering censures, readmitting.
Church Officers are but Servants. Doctor Whitaker.
and Sarahs (as Mr. Cotton says) none Hagars or Concubines, Gal. 4.26.31. all
being alike Sisters of one Mother, and none Servants, or Slaves, Cant. 8.8. all
of them being Candlesticks of the same make and Metals, amongst whom Christ
equally walks, Revel. 1.12. Revel. 2.1. or alike branches of the same one
Candlestick, and beams of the same Sun, and streams of the same Fountain,
and branches of the same Vine, and so they are equal in all things, all having
equal and like power of opening and shutting, binding and loosing, Mat. 16.16.
admitting of Members, Acts 9.26. Deuteronomy. 1.13. Acts 6.23. Acts 14.23. trying the
suspected, Revel. 2.2. choosing their own Officers, Act. 1.15.26. and Deuteronomy.
1.13. Acts 6.2.3. Acts 14.23, etc. and of administering Censures, Mat. 18.17,
18. 1 Cor. 5.4.5. or re-admitting, or rather receiving, 2 Cor. 2.5.6. and in
case the Elders be appointed by the Church to execute their Decree, yet it is
(in ordine ad ecclesiam) with reference to the Body, the power being theirs; so
as that eminent man Doctor Whitaker (De contig. quest. 5. page 178, etc.)
affirms, all Church Power principally to appertain to the whole Body; and to
her Officers, but accidentally, and as occasion serves (as cum aliqua virtus
duobus inest, uni essentialiter, alteri accidentaliter) by many faithful
arguments; and he instances in the heat in water, Sim.
or iron, which is in the fire first, and essentially, and then comes into the
water or iron, or the like. Doctor Fulk. Musculus, Calvin, Zanchy.
And in Fulk, contr. Rhemist. in 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. we find him full for this,
Sect. 3. and he quotes Musculus, Calvin, Zanchy, and others to bear witness
with him, that the whole power is the Churches, which she can give out, and
take in, though she may (if need be) refer the execution of it to her
Officers, they doing it faithfully, not in their own power, and according to
their own wills, but hers. Pareus.
Pareus I remember in the same place says plainly, that it is a current piece
of Popery, Popery to take away the power of the Church, and give it to
Ministers or other Officers.
to apply the power of the whole to one or other, as their own; which is an
old usurpation of the Popes, and therefore says he, 1 Cor. 5.4. with the power
of our Lord Jesus, etc. power, which is (...), does there intend the execution
of Church Power, as well as the power and authority it self, Expos.
which is absolutely the Churches, although Paul was the mouth of the Church to
declare it; and sadly does he lament the Churches neglect of her Office in this
kind, fearing lest thereby she should be abused (as she has been abundantly)
and become a mixed company, which he complains of highly. Dudley Fenner
Thus Dudley Fenner in his Treatise De sacra Theologia (a pretty piece) lib. 7.
says, etc. Thus that honest old Cartwright in his reply to Whitgift,
Cartwright.
page 184. says, Paul knew the rule of Christ well enough, in Mat. 18. when he
commanded and communicated the power of excommunication, and Church Censures to
the whole body, 1 Cor. 5.2. 2 Cor. 2. it being the Churches, and not in the
Ministers or Officers power, which he proves out of Cyprian, Cyprian.
etc.

But I should not here needed to have heaped up such Testimonies of great,
grave and learned Writers, were it not to stop the mouths of that spirit of
malice, and spite of men which belches out bug-beare words against the way of
Christ and order of the Gospel, and who please to be confirmed in this point
may peruse, Mr. Cottons Keys, Mr. Bartlets Model, Mr. Cot. Keys. Bartlets
Model. Hookers Survey And the Testimony of learned famous men for many
generations.
Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline, with many others that may carry more
authority with them then I can, to convince others, by whom (through Gods
grace) I received special satisfaction, who have gathered out the Testimony of
the most learned, eminent, able, and famous men of many generations to be of
this judgment of Churches equality or fullness of power within their own
bodies; so that it is not a new, singular, and upstart opinion, as our
Adversaries say.

Besides, it is all the reason that can be, they be all alike, Reason.
having all alike but one Head, Because all have alike one and the same Head.
Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.23. as will appear hereafter, and he being a Head (alike)
unto all, and being alike unto every Church of Christ, King and Lawgiver, Jam.
4.12. there being no other, all which might (methinks besides all the
Prophesies, the Precepts, the Primitive Practices, and equal Privileges of
all Churches) be enough to pull down all topping power, to justle aside
superiority, and that Popish usurpation of subordination, and throw it into the
dust or smoking pit from whence it came; And call up for a Coordinate and
equal power to stand in the stead. The great difference between Presbyterians
and Independents.
But because this is the mainest Doctrine of difference, between the
Presbyterian Discipline, and ours, I speak the more amply upon it, and shall
take my liberty in the ensuing Uses; but must say in the mean time that God
abhors that haughtiness and ambition of spirit, which mounts up like a
Prelate, whether in one or other: And indeed it has appeared in Popery,
Episcopacy, Presbytery, and so will; that all Prelaticall Discipline is
condemned of old, Prelacy condemned, and ready to be turned off.
and the higher it gets up the Ladder, the nigher it is to its end, and the
likelier to be turned off, and into the dark world. How many worthless men
like Apes and Monkies will not be quiet till they have got up to the top of
the house, Sim.
Sim.
and when they are there, what do they but make mowes, Prelaticke proud
Pastors in Independent Churches as bad as any.
and faces at Passengers, fling off the Tiles, and play such like ridiculous
and mischievous feats? And indeed, I do not know how to excuse them that are
so covetous and ambitious to be Pastors and Teachers in the Independent
Churches, and when they get in, they are like little Lords, and not as servants
to all; and I sadly fear it, that more have sought for it then can perform
it, or then know what a Cure belongs to it. How many have Caesar's heart of
pride (and may have his end) who said he had rather be first in the least
Village, then second in the greatest: and how many like Psap^on teach the Birds
(that are at their beck) to call them (as they did him,
Magnus Deus) rather Gods then Men, and to have their persons in admiration,
and to make them follow them, Much mischief done by such.
as Dogs follow their Masters, for fear of being cast out of doors upon their
anger. O sad! Sed altitudo non est valida, says Chrysostom. 20. in Epist. ad
Romans This cannot last long. How many Towns, Houses, Cities have been burnt to
ashes by such sooty exalted Chimnies? Sim.
Cornw. Essays.
(wherein all the soot of the house may be found for the most part) who like
Lords must over-looke all the rest? How many are they that like the Wormwood
stalk (and Star) grow the bigger, the bitterer? I speak of such as would be
highest, and be like a Counter, that (in account) lies for a hundred at least,
when alas, we should study to be lowest, as the best Corn in the Fan, God
abhors such spirits of pride.
and the soundest lies next the bosom, and in the bottom, but the Chafe will
be above; But the Lord abhorres them; and in the Law his Sacrifices were no^
Lions, but Lambs, not Eagles, Parishes no Churches in this part of the Form.
For they have dependency upon Diocesan, National Churches. Zuing. Artic. 34.
p. 254, 255. Keckerman. Ar^tius's Problem. None but Antichrist so saucy.
Presbyterians too bold in this.

Prelacy and Popery termini convertibiles. Presbyterians and all Prelatick ones
keep up the Pope, vide chapter 8.9. l. 2. Papists have Rome the Mother Church to
call others to account, and to whom others were to make their appeal.

Prelates and Bishops had their High Commission Courts of the same nature for
the same ends.

The violent ones of the Presbyterians too will have their Classes too of the
same nature (though the name changed) and for the same end.


but Doves, and in the Gospel, the first shall be last. I remember the Cynick
coming into the Kings Chamber of presence gloriously hung, looking where to
spit, at last spit in the Kings face, saying, It was fit he should spit in the
foulest place; so will God one day spit on the face of Prided Presbytery and
Prelacy.

Use 1. But in the first place, it is plain then that your Parishes are
false-Churches in this part of the Form; for their constitution consists in a
dependency upon other Churches Cathedral to them, and they are (by their
Cannons and Institutions) to be in subjection to an universal, visible,
National, and Diocesan Church, which blunt Zuinglius calls devilish, proud,
and Popish arrogance, for any to claim any right, rule, power, or superiority
over any Church of Christ whatsoever. Thus Keckerman, and Aretius both cry out
upon it, and the latter in his Problemes produces Christ's prohibition of upper
or superior power to his Disciples and Apostles, Mar. 10 86. Luke 22.25, etc.
and says, none but Antichrist dares be so saucy to usurp it, it being the
Throne which is set up for Christ's self in his Church. O then how dares the
rigid Presbyterian be so red-hot for a Discipline! as dangerous and destructive
to Gospel Order as the other! seeing Popery and Prelacie are ( termini
convertibiles) so nearly related to each other, that if Prelacy thus live, the
Pope cannot dye; and if nothing else, yet such kinds of Church Discipline would
keep him up in his Chair. For grant the Pope to be but (holy) Father, and Rome
the holy Mother Church, that may call her Daughter-Churches to account, and
give them Orders, and Commands; and will not this Doctrine keep up the Pope?
then let the wise judge; and the selfsame spirit of Prelacy had the Bishops,
to Lord it over their Brethren, and to Canonize high Commission-Courts, thereby
to call others to account, to lay their Commands and Laws upon them, or else
to punish them, being of the same nature (though the name changed) with the
Popes power. And now such a proud Prelacy would the bitter Presbyterians
promote tooth and nail, by setting up Classes, that thither peoples might make
their appeals, and from them receive rules and orders, or else plagues,
punishments, fines, or imprisonments; and several sorts of Classes they would
set up, that men might appeal from one, and apply to another, from the
particular to the Provincial, from the Provincial to the National Classes,
which are (also) of the same nature with the others, though their name be
changed. But all are an abomination to the Lord, and what do they but play
petty Popes in their Convocations, Synods, Classes, etc. over Consciences by
their tyrannies? All abominable in the sight of God.
Antichrist thus exalts and boasts himself as God, 2 These. 2.4. to take
authority, to rule, to govern, and have dominion over the Churches of Christ
in his high and traitorous usurpation; wherefore I say again, as long as this
lives, Vide chap. 13. lib. 1.
Popery cannot dye. But this is sufficiently condemned and disproved, by all
the rules that relate to Gospel Order in Gods Book, being abundantly to be
abominated by all Gospel-spirits; Mr. Buroughs.
for as good Master Buroughs against Edwards his Gangrena says (a little
before he dyed) we are freed from Jewish Paedagogies, and National
Church-wayes, and there is no National Church, Officers, Offices, ways, and
worships, Mr. Jacob. Cottons keys. What a height ambition brought the Bishops
unto* To be Civil Magistrates they bec^me uncivil Ministers.

Justices of Peace. Judges.

Order of the Garter called grace honorable Lords.


as the Jews had; neither is it enough to be Members of the Church, because
borne of this, or that Nation. So Mr. Jacob in his reasons for Reformation,
page 6.7. and Cottons Keys, p. 31. makes it appear to be altogether without a
warrant from the Word. But to what a monstrous height does Ambition bring men
unto? shall we but see the eagerness of Bishops? (before the Presbyterians (so
called) though in a Scripture-sence we allow it) how (to be Civil Magistrates)
they waxed wanton and uncivil Ministers? neglecting their duties? and desirous
of rule and power? to be Justices of Peace? to cast poor people into Prison,
to put them into Pillories, and to kill them, to be Judges of Courts, to get
the vain Orders of the Garter, to be honored by men, some of them titled most
Honorable, Princely, and holy Grace, (when God knows they had only the name of
it) and all of them saluted for Lords, Barons.
and would sit as Barons in Civil Courts, which they know is contrary to their
own old Canons which they accounted more of then the Scriptures; Cannon 18, 19,
20. council. Carthag. 3.
but if it be unlawful to alter, or change the bounds our Fathers have set,
Prove. 22.28. I am sure it is, to alter the limits the Lord has set them, and
to serve the Tables of Devils. Now what can be clearer then the rule set in
such a case, Against all Gospel*

Christ would not suffer his Disciples to discourse of it.


Mat. 20.26. Luke 22.25. Mark 10.41. and how often Christ reproved, and
repressed the rising desires of the Disciples, in but asking after, and
disputing about greatness, who shall be greatest? which he would not admit of
by any means, it being after the manner of Gentiles? O then, how Christ
detested (and I am sure yet does) this Lording dominion in himself, Christ the
Disciples Servant and Minister.
or in his Saints? he himself being their Servant, and Minister, washed their
feet; besides, the Apostle abhors it, in 2 Cor. 1. ult. and yet, O what a proud
domineering spirit of Prelacy reigned in these! Prelates in pomp. Eusebius. Hist.
lib. 7.
Did not some Bishops go with a great Guard in pomp to the Pulpit, with their
Officers before them, and a great Mace carried in state, making Room for my
Lord to preach in his Rochet, and square Cap, leaning upon a Cushion of cloth
of Gold? but their pride has a fall: Ah! Their pride fallen.

Another Prelatick spirit succeeded in the Presbyterians.

This appeared in their acts of Treason against the State.

Short lived too.

Proverb.


but had it not been happy if another Generation had not (next) succeeded in
usurping such Lording power! I mean the Prelaticall Presbyterians. Those
Olives, and Vines, and Fig Trees (before very fat, sweet, and fruitful) have
lost their loveliness, and former excellencies, and that merely out of desire
to Lord it too, as well as the Brambles did, Judge. 9.8, 9, 10, 11. although in
a Classical way (as they call it) but this being so near a kin unto the
other, has met with the like destiny and destruction, and that Discipline
proved but short-lived, according to the Proverb of Fraud and Frost, etc. for
it never thrived, and began to be too proud at the first, as soon as ever it
stepped into the Chair.

Besides, as their Lording Classes are not Classical, Ruling Synods are
unwarrantable.
or warrantable in the Word, neither are their Synods, or (commanding)
Convocations, to order and make Directories for Christ's Churches, of Divine
right, what assemblies are more mischievous (as they have been hitherto) to the
Saints of Christ? Most mischievous they are so to Christ, ( proprio corpore) in
the flesh, and they are so to Christ in the Church ( in corpore mystico.)
Cruel to tender consciences.
especially when they would exercise Lordship and Dominion, Sovereignty and
authority over their Brethren, or over any Church of Christ as they have done?
most cruelly confining men to their judgments against their consciences, or
else crushing them for their consciences; much like the Bed in Isa. 28.20.
which is shorter then a man can stretch himself on. Now if a man lie not even
with them, and but ever so outreaches their reason, judgments, or opinions, he
must (presently) be punished, and cut shorter; as the Giant, that in the
Highway seized upon all Passengers, and carried them home to his Bed, Expos.
and those that were not long enough to lie even with his own length, Sim.
and the length of his Bed, he by some most bitter and fatal engines or
wracks, would rend them out, and draw so one joint from another, that by most
lamentable tortures he would tear them out to that length; but in case any
were too long for his Bed, and his length, he would cut off their legs till he
had made them fit for his humor and fancy. But this is a most monstrous
tyranny in men, To put them upon the wrack.
to wrack and torture consciences, and say too it is for Christ's sake, either
to rend or wrack them out, or else to command and cut them off; (if beyond
them) to make them even with their own length and height in their opinions and
practices.) But these Mothers children that are angry with us, and would set us
to keep strange Vineyards, Cant. 1.6.
and these Brethren that have hated us, and cast us out for Christ his sake (as
they say) and said, let the Lord be glorified, shall be ashamed when the Lord
shall appear to be our joy. See Isa. 66.5. for the Lord 's design in these
days is to pull down such as are incensed against the Saints, The Lord is
about delivering his Saints from such oppressors.
Isa. 41.11. and thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 35.21, 22. Because ye have thrust
them with side and with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased with your horns,
till ye have scattered them abroad; therefore will I save my flock, and they
shall be no more a prey. So in Jer. 30.16. All that devour them shall be
devoured, and all thy adversaries shall be captives, Proph.
and they that spoiled thee shall be made a spoil, and all that prey upon thee
will I give for a prey; for I will restore health unto thee, and heal thee of
thy wounds, because they called thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion whom no
man seeks after, etc. For it must be, that every plant which the Father has
not (...) Mat. 15.13. Jo. 15.2. shall be rooted out ((...)) or pulled up by the
roots) so shall Synods down, Expos.
Synods must down, that usurp dominion over consciences.

What assemblies are allowed of, vid. chapter 9. lib. 2.

Mr. Parker in's Eccles. Polity, lib. 3. cap. 12. etc. 22. Omne determin^tum
habet causam efficient^m and omne efficiens habet determinatum. Mr. Borough
his heart divisions.


for so much as they usurp Dominion; but in some case (as we consider
hereafter) that the Elders appointed by their Churches do meet together, to
confer, to assist, and counsel (not to command) we can consent unto, and are
confident that it is very warrantable by the Word; and Mr. Parker I remember in
his Church-polity proves by many pregnant Arguments from undeniable Scriptures
and Writers (Orthodox so called) and unanswerable reasons, how every Church
has an equal and absolute power without appealing; and that Synods, Courts,
(or Commissionated Classes) have not the least power over any Church of Christ,
to command or rule; only (at most) to admonish, counsel, and advise; and it is
without a warrant, and but a barren branch, an ill plant, and beyond the bounds
of Christ to exercise any such authority; we shall be more large in this
afterward; but yet see honest Mr. Buroughs in his Heart-divisions, cap. 22.
who cleares it up to any capacity under several considerations, as that the
extent of Juridicall power must be by institution as well as the power it
self, and that all power receives its limits and extents (in Church or State
Discipline) from the same Authority, whence it first had its original
institution; which is undeniable, undoubted, and infallible truth. Now let our
Brethren but show their Magna Charta, or proof out of Gods Word, for that
power they would usurp over the Saints or Churches by Synods, or over any
Church of Christ by any Classes whatsoever, and we will freely bear it; or
else let none presume so to oppress the Saints by Convocations, to command and
control any Church of Christ, No warrant out of the Word for them.
or to wrack any conscientious Christians, or to persecute them by reproaches,
wrongs, punishments, or the like, as cannot crouch to their Cross, or cruel
Judgments, which is, to put a yoke upon their necks, which neither we, nor
our fathers were able to bear, Acts 15.10.

Obj. Yea, we can quickly prove it by Scripture, Obj.
but turn to Acts 15. and you shall find that appeals were made to the
Church of Jerusalem.

Answ.
Answ. This is the Master-objection that can be brought against this Doctrine
of Gospel Order, Vide Hooker in's Survey. Cottons way for the Congregation
cleared, cum multis aliis. etc.
which is so often and ablely answered (I think) by all that have penned on
this subject, as that I need not to answer any thing unto it: yet seeing it is
so propounded, I pray you mark in that Chapter, Appeals are not made to the
Church of Jerusalem, as if they had command over any Church to rule them, or
set them a Directory of Church Government, Expos.
how they should practice, No Appeals, to Jerusalem, for Canons or as having a
supreme Power.
etc. no, but only to advise and counsel them as a Sister-Church, and as one
of a sounder judgment, and of longer and riper, and safer experiences.

Secondly, Besides, the application made to Jerusalem was not about
Church Government; or for instructions from them on that account, 2 It was not
about Church Government, but to ask their advice and judgment of a matter in
controversy.
but it was about a difference, that arose among some who were set for
Circumcision after the manner of Moses, whether that might be, or no? what they
(who were of more established, and better-setled judgments) thought of that
matter, which some held so needful, verse 1, 2, 4, 5.

Thirdly, It appears in verse 2. in that they determined, (...), 3 No necessity
of sending, but it was thought fit to send to Jerusalem.
that is, chose and approved of Paul and Barnabas upon that arrand, it was not
( jure divine) of absolute necessity to appeal, or rather apply thither, nor
yet did they do it, as to an higher power (as was answered in the first) as if
they had any Dominion over their faith, but only as helpers of their joy, 4
Should it be granted, appeals were made thither. Yet where be Apostles now? or
such to sit as are infallibly gifted, graced, and spirited.
2 Cor. 1. ult.

Fourthly, But should we grant it (which we will not as long as our Buckler
holds whole) but should we, they would be but little the better for it; for
consider who they were, were they not the Apostles? men? extraordinarily
enabled? and can any (now) say so? and with such confidence? as verse 28. for
it seems good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, etc. without high presumption?
But,

Fifthly, This helps not one jot the Presbyterian, or Prelacy, 5 The whole
Church* brethren, sisters, all joined.
nor adds an hairs breadth to their Discipline, or Doctrine: for we find in
verse 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church to send,
etc. the whole Church had the knowledge of it, and their voting in it; and the
Apostles and Elders did not answer on their own heads, Not Apostles nor
Elders, on their own heads, as the Presbyterian would infer. This spoils
officers, and makes them to Lord i^.
but the Church consented to it, and concluded it; which is contrary to the
Presbyterian judgment and practices, who will have the Elders alone to be a
power and authority enough, without the rest of the Church, which is contrary
to rule; besides the ill consequences of it, which I shall speak unto
hereafter in the third Book, and which is a giving of an absolute power to
such (which makes them Lord it) who are to have but a derivative power, and are
but servants at best. But thus that objection is (I hope) sufficiently
answered. Another.

Object. But is it so! has no one Church, Object.
power over another? why then? how can a Church be reformed, that erres in
doctrine or practice?

Answ. There must be spiritual helps against spiritual evils, Answ.
and the weapons of our warfare are not carnal; Spiritual remedies, to
spiritual evils. li. 1. Chapter 13. Chapter 2. Lib. 2.
here is no need of the worlds powers, which I shall show hereafter; but we
must make use of Christs-rules, which are clear in this case. Consider in an
erring Church either a part or the whole is corrupt and adulterate, if only a
part, then the sound part must admonish, convince and reform their erring
brethren if they be able; How to deal with an erring-Church.

One Sister-Church may deal with another Sister-Church, as one brother in a
Church may deal with another.

Churches coordinate.


but in case they cannot do it, then they may send for the assistance of a
Sister-Church, as Antioch did, Act. 15.2. But if so be it be the whole Church
erres, then look how an (equal) brother in one body is to deal with another,
according to the same rule of Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. and by proportion is an
equal Sister-Church to deal with another, for although one Church is not
subject, or subordinate unto another (neither is one brother to another) yet
one Church is coordinate, and has a like power with another (and so has one
Brother with another) so that as in brotherly-love and communion, one brother
admonishes, reproves, exhorts, convinces another; and if there be no help for
it, declares the brothers offense in public, and may in time and order
according to rule withdraw from him, as in 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. thus may, and must one
Church (in sisterly love and communion) deal with another; And may admonish,
advice, Inquire.
as to enquire into the nature of the errors or offense given by an erring
Church unto her, to know the Truth, Deuteronomy. 13, 14. and not to proceed upon bare
reports, Examine.
Exodus 23.1, 2. which ye shall not raise, or not receive; for it may be read
both ways; Expos.
then may the Church send Letters or Messengers to that erring-Church to
admonish, exhort, reprove, and convince, if she hears they have gained their
Sister-Church; Exhort.
but if she refuses to be reformed, then that Church may take one or two
Churches more to assist her. Convince. If the erring Church will not hear, then
one or two Churches more join together to admonish her.
But if she resist admonition, and all means that be used by prayers,
fastings, intreatings, persuasions, reproves, and all, then all the Churches
about appoint to meet, and by the word of God reprove the errors, and if they
find her obstinate, then all other Churches are to withdraw from her, 2 Timothy
16, 17. Tit. 3.10, 11. and declare against those errors, and no longer to hold
them a Communion of Saints, but to take away all right-hands of fellowship
until their repentance appear to the satisfaction of the aforesaid offended
Churches, If nothing will prevail, then all Churches join together.
and a visible reformation, and a public renunciation of the aforesaid errors
and sins. Now if they be conscientious and gracious, this punishment (for so
it is called, 2 Cor. 2.6.) will pierce to the very hearts of them, and this
will work more upon them, upon their consciences, then all the prisons, To
withdraw from her, and declare against and excommunicate her.
or punishments of the world. For if the declaring against such a Church, the
withdrawing of all others from her, their open protesting against her, and
abhorrence of her detestable errors and sins, if they be so, and the
disowning of her for a communion of Saints, and their continually appeals unto
God against her, This will be greater punishment then prisons to the
conscientious among them.
if these do not deeply enter into her heart, and strike their consciences
that are in her, and afflict their spirits, what will? For Joh. 5.22. All
judgment is committed to the Son; and I am sure if Christ's ways, and the
weapons of his make, cannot prevail, then a formal jurisdiction, Courts and
commands of men's make, will not.

If Christ's judgment prevails not with them, men's cannot. The best way to
bring in an erring Church.
But thus I have answered the objections of weight against this Point, which
has been abundantly proved and pressed: For ( pares omnes inter se juris
essent, says Whitaker) all Power is alike in all Churches, whether in Ephesus,
Corinth, Rome, Philippi, or the like; one not being one iota subject to
another; Wherefore to the second Use.

Use 2. Then we see, such as are honored (though some naucified) by the name
of Independents, I mean the Members of the Congregationall Churches,
Independents have the word for their warrant.
and Presbytery (which we hold with, although the Prelaticall be too
presumptuous and usurping for us) I say, such are not without the Word for
their warrant; nor are they without Christ's rule for their refusing the
commands of men, or their proud precepts, tending to embondage the Saints by
their usurping power; One Church having as plenary power as any other.
Independents long before now.

Paul Baines, his Diocesan trial Pleads for Independents. Doctor Sib's his
breathing after God.

Uses the word Independents also.


Master Paul Baines (that precious holy man, and light of his age) in his
Treatise printed, 1621. page 13. says plainly, We affirm it, that no such
Headship of, or in any Church, was ordained by Christ (our only Head over us)
either actually or virtually, but that all Churches are equally INDEPENDENT
(being his own word) without any kind of subjection one to any other. Sweet
Sibbs in his breathing, etc. page 94. speaking how amiable the Tabernacles
were, applies them (as Types) to particular Churches of Christ, having equal
beauty and glory (and the said Sibbs in his said Treatise, lib. 2. chap. 9.
uses the very word also Independents. Robinson in his Reasons discussed, is
large upon this point, Robinson. Bullinger.
and Bullinger in the 5. Decad. Sermon. 1. says it at large also, That the power
of governing and ordering all affairs and Church Matters, belonging to the
body is within the body, whither with relation to the calling, or choosing
Church Officers, Pastors, Teachers, Elders, All power is in the body.
Deacons, and Ministers, Act. 6. Act. 14. and 15. or for binding and loosing,
and Censures, and Sacraments, examining of Doctrines, admitting of Members, and
in all other Church Matters, and that they have besides, power to call Synods,
Doctor Ames in's Medul. Theol.

Power over any particular Church is usurped.

Dr. Reynolds. Ainsworth. Willet's Synop^^^. Cotton, Bartlet, Tailor.


to consult upon weighty occasion^. Ames in his Medul. Theol. lib. 1. chap. 37.
sect. 6. says, All power of Discipline (De jure) according to Christ's
Institution is the Churches in Common, and none ought to usurp power over any
such particular Church. A many more Witnesses and eminent men's Certificates
under their own hands, (in their Writings) might be produced to prove these
truths; as Reynolds in his Conference with Heart; Ainsworth in his Guide to
Zion; Willets Synopsis; Cottons Keys; Bartlets Model; Tailor on Titus; Cum
multis aliis, etc. But by this you may see how unseemly it is for, and how
little it does become our unbrotherly and unkind Kinsmen of the Presbyterians
to be so bitter against us, As Prynne, Bastick, Baily, and Edwards, etc.
as to say only a few simple upstart fanatics, and giddy-headed illiterate
fools are of this opinion. Why produce your cause, bring forth your strong
reasons, says the King of Jacob, In all Ages the most eminent men Independents.
Isa. 41.21. it is no upstart Novelty, but a truth of equal standing with the
Kingdom of Christ; and in all Ages the most eminent Lights were of this
opinion, though they had not the like liberty to put it into practice.

Besides, should we not be worse then mad men to expose our selves? poor
Wives? with little Children? to the contempt of all? to be reproached by all?
our persons to be hated of all? and to be abused in the open streets, our names
to be all be spotted with the foulest filth and du^t which can be cast upon
them? our Families and Friends to the ill will of all (almost) and we our
selves continually to feed upon afflictions? and palpable injuries? whilst none
dare, or do appear on our behalf? this was, and yet is in many places in the
Countries, where we are in daily dangers and troubles. Now I say, what a
madness were it, we should enter into so strait a gate, and run into the rage
of all (almost?) whether profane,
or Professors? were not the testimony of a good Conscience our continual
feast? and refreshing and rejoicing? if a mere headstrong will should hurry
us on, to such a way of thorns and briars. Our Consciences carry us on.
But believe it, and the Lord is our witness, it is our Consciences that
carry us on. Now Conscience (being a conjunct Science, and a knowing of the
Act with the Rule) does render us happy in this; What is Conscience.
That we most faithfully and unfeignedly seek the satisfying our Souls in the
revealed Will, and declared mind of God to that which we know. But thus we must
(and will if the Lord please) walk according to our light, and as we are fully
persuaded in our breasts, that we may have peace at home, though perils abroad,
and wars without continually. See Romans 14.5. Phil. 3.16. and let not the
Saints be in the least discouraged at our sufferings, which are a token to us
of Salvation, and that we are of God, in Phil. 1.27, 28, 29. For we shall come
shining out of the fire, and in glistering glory, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. although
indeed so subtle is he, that can transform himself into an Angel of Light,
that Spiritual wickednesses are set up in holy places; Formal Professors
time-servers.
wickednesses that seem Spiritual, and carry a face and form of holiness;
For in every age have your formal Professors run posting to that Religion,
and worship which has been in most request, and highest esteem; and hence it
is, whilst their Presbytery was best accepted of, most of your Prelaticall ones
proved Presbyterians; and now Independency is in date, and has the day of it,
your Presbyterians turn Independents (omnia pro tempore and nihil pro
veritate, says one) or at least they gather together in the name of
Independent Churches, and such as are so called, Many take up the name of
Independents, and Independent-Churches that are not so.
who are commonly the cruellest Persecutors and Petty-Popes over the poor
Saints, and over the Independents indeed, Veram Ecclesiam non sequens, sed
persequens, these being (in their Judgments) as rigid, and enraged against the
true Churches of Christ, as the Presbyterians or Prelates; And as one who has
the name of another great man, therefore hopes to be the heir, and have the
day, is in hot pursuit for the estate, and will not compound for peace, unless
upon some unequal terms, although he has no right thereunto; so they; Sim.
and by their party they prevail, to justle aside the just and true Heir
indeed, and to set him a begging for his livelihood: And yet it is possible a
true Church of Christ shall be prosecuted under another name too, and that
which is most odious, it may be. But yet we will say as Isa. 63.16. Doubtless
thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not.
Whilst our Cause is good, our confidence is great, our interest will hold, when
others forged Titles will not be worth two pence; yet how impudent are some,
that like Praxiteles, Our faith and fortitude.
(who made the poor people worship his Strumpet instead of Venus, and under
her name; so they) gull poor souls with a form, appearance, and painted
Picture. These worshippers of the Form, are enemies to the Spirit and Power;
but let us not fear their frowns, menaces, nor malice, but let us go on, Sim.
though the bawling Curs run railing after the gallopping Passenger, yet let us
ride post, in a Victory of Patience, and in the Triumph of Innocence. And as
Anaxarchus said to the Tyrant, Tundis vasculum Anaxarchi, sed non Anaxarchum;
So they may hurt us, but not hinder us; trouble us, but not triumph over us.

CHAP. IX. (...) Zebi. A further Demonstration of the Discipline of the Church
of Christ, objective, or upon the account of the Churches object, and what that
is.
WE have handled, through the grace and goodness of our God, the Form (I
hope) fully of Church Discipline and Gospel-fellowship, wherein I trust, the
Lovers of the truth will not take me to be too tedious, although in the
following-chapters, I wish I could promise to be compendious, especially in
this first Lib. seeing what is to come (as I take it) is less controversal;
The beautiful object of Christ's Church.
I shall next insist upon the object of this Church State, whereby it becomes
so amiable unto the Saints, viz. the Presence of God, giving out of himself
more in grace, and glory to such Saints then to any others, according to Psalm.
87.23. which point lies apparent, Psalm. 84.1, 2, 7, 10, 11. What it is? Proved
by Scriptures.
So Psalm. 63.1, 2. O God thou art my God, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh
longs for thee, etc. to see thy power, and thy glory, so as I have seen thee
in thy Sanctuary, verse 5. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow, His
power and glory there.
etc. that is abundantly more then in other places, which thing is promised us,
as in Exodus 20.24. His name and best blessings there.

His presence by his Word and Spirit, there.


In all places where I record my name, I will come and bless, etc. i. e. I
will come in a special manner, and bless them with special blessings of
grace; so is the type, Exodus 25.8. so in Isa. 4.5, 6. He is upon all the
assemblies of Zion (not elsewhere) a cloud and smoke by day, and a flame of
fire by night, and upon all the glory a defense, etc. Isa. 25.6. there the
Saints (in the Lords house, this mountain of holiness) shall be feasted with
fat things, Psalm. 36.8. and shall say as in verse 9. Fat things and feasts
there.
Lo this is our God we have waited for him, this is the Lord we have waited for
him, we will rejoice and be glad in his salvation, etc. that is, we have waited
for these appearances, and this his presence in grace, and of glory, etc. Thus
in Isa. 33.17. there thy eye shall see the King in his beauty (an amiable
object indeed) and in verse 21. there the glorious Lord will be a place of
broad Rivers and streams, etc. There is the loveliest, heart-ravishing, There
is the King in his beauty.

And place of broad rivers. The most soul-ravishing object there. Wh^te and
ru^dy.

To the end of the world.


and soule-enamouring object that the Saint can set his organ or eye upon; here
is the beloved, white, and ruddy, and more then all other beloveds, Cant. 5.10.
etc besides this soule-enamouring presence is promised to the end of the world
among Saints in such communion, Matthew. 18.20. Joh. 14.22, 23, 26. Matthew. 28.20.
Joel 2.27. Zeph. 3.16.17. This lovely object (beyond all others) Saints
embodied as before have had the happiness to see and enjoy, or to have the
fruitive discovery of, which all the true Churches of Christ have experienced
to the purpose, and their profit in all ages, Act. 2.28. Act. 4.33. So 2 Cor
3.18. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the Lord, as God has said, Saints and
Churches in all ages have experienced this point.
I will dwell in them, i. e. (...) I will (in the nighest communion of love and
grace) be present; and so as he has promised, ye who are his Temples have
experienced, Ephesians. 2.19.20, 21. Hebr. 2.12. and in such societies the Saints
have found him to delight to be, and to walk there, Rev. 2.1. 2 Cor. 6.6.
Psalm. 132.13, 14. and to take his repose, Psalm. 72.2. and 26.8. and repast
there, Cant. 1.7. and 6.2. and 4.16. and to impart his most intimate loves in
the midst of them, as Cant. 7.12. etc. by all which, lies apparently before us
the beauty of the object.

Use. On which account, how eagerly Saints should be set upon such a work
will (obviously) appear out of Psalm. 84.1, 2. for if beauty, blessedness,
love, life, light, grace, glory, Use.
The object invites and incites us into the Churches. This made David even dote
in love on them.
or any good thing be object enough to win upon a people, all, and more then
all, may be had here, in Psalm. 27.4* One thing have I desired of the Lord, etc.
what is that? that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life: why so? to behold the beauty of the Lord. O there! there is the
excellency of the Lord! the loveliness of his countenance! the comeliness of
his favor! the beauty of his face! above all places! in the midst of the
assemblies of the Saints thus united into a body. And in these Assemblies of
Sion God appears most glorious and gladsome.

Parishes have not this object.




Now Parishes have not this amiable and peculiar presence of the Lord, they
want the beauty of this object, and this object of beauty abundantly; For but
little of God is to be seen in their constitutions and Churches. Now, where
most of Gods presence of love, light, grace, and glory, etc. is promised, and
appears, there is the Church of Christ; but that most of this sweet presence
appears in, and is promised to the Saints associated as before, I refer you to
the pregnant Scriptures produced for proof. Wherefore dear friends! how
forward would you be for this Discipline, Forma formae.
did you but discern the excellency and beauty of these his amiable
Tabernacles? This made that eminent man Dr. Ames (Professor of Friezeland)
leave all his honors, estate, esteem, etc. and all to become a member of such
a Church at Rotterdam, Those that are not longing after these ways of Sion,
see not this object in them. Dr. Ames left his Professorship of Friezland for
Church fellowship.

Vid. Peter's Report of Eng. wars.


choosing rather to sit on the Threshold in the Lords house, Psalm. 84.10. then
to enjoy all the world without it, and pleasures for a season, blessing God
upon his deathbed, that he had lived so long as to be (first) of such a body
of Christ before he dyed, and when he was ready with good old Simeon to depart
in peace; he beseeched Mr. Peter's, the (then) Pastor, and others, not to be
discouraged or daunted, though they must suffer much, saying, If there were a
visible way of worship in the world that God did own, honor, and manifest his
Excellencies, and himself in, that it was this of the Congregationall (now
called Independent) Discipline. The ignorance of the object indeed makes men no
more in love with it, then they are; ignoti nulla cupido; but if the beauty of
it be but in the Frontispeece, then every eye is upon it. His dying words.
O how does beauty shine in goodness? like the Sun in a clear Sky? O
glorious! It is a Tradition that Noah being in the Arc, and having closed up
all the windows, Ignorance of the object hinders the affection.
had a most excellent Carbuncle, or precious stone, which gave them light all
within. But it is a truth that Christ gives a most orient, radient luster,
light, and beauty to the object of every eye in the Churches of Christ: Sim.
So that the beauty of his Tabernacles is most amiable, whilst beauty and
naughtiness blended together, do show like a Leprosy, the whiter the fouler.
But thus far for the Object.

CHAP. X. (...) or (...) Chhok. Every Church of Christ has his Rule to be
ordered, fitted, formed, and squared by; and how all the matter must be
measured by Christ's Rule, and what that is?
IN this beautiful building, we have heard the matter, and the form, and
have found out the Churches fairness, Christ's Rule to build the Church by.
objective i. e. from the presence of God in the midst of her. But now it
remains that the rule be brought out to square by. For is not this the
Carpenters Son? the Son of Mary? or will this Carpenter? or rather the
Builder of this Temple of the Lord, work without his Rule? no surely;
therefore, Rev. 11.1. There was given me a reed, and the Angel said, Proved
necessary,
rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship
therein, etc. This Reed is the Rule, whereby the Platform of the Lords Temple
is measured out, and laid before us; thus the valley of Succoth is measured
out, Psalm. 60.6. So is it in Ezekiel. 43.10. 1 By Sc^ipture.
Let them measure the pattern of the Lords house. This work will not be well
done without Rule, and that Rule must be Christ's too, which measures it out;
Expos.
as might appear by other Scriptures, Isa. 11.1. Zach. 6.12.13. Matthew. 16.16.

So you may see in the Precept for it, Matthew. 28.20. What I have commanded.
Christ's commands are our rules; 2 By Precept. Christ's Commands and Rules.
Wisdom (that is, Christ) calls. Prove. 7.1. Keep my words, and hear my
Commandments: Keep them, that i^, so as diligently to observe them, as (...)
tells us. So Prove. 8.1, 2. Does not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her
voice? she cries at the gates* etc. So my beloved spoke, and said, Rise up my
love, my fair one, and come away, Cant. 2.10. It is the voice of my beloved,
verse. 8. So in Psalm. 45.10. 3. Proved by practice. (...).
Besides, this has been the practice of all true Churches, as in 1 These. 4.1,
2. We beseech you as ye have received of us, so walk. How? According to the
Commandments we delivered to you, by the Lord Jesus Christ. For this is the
will of God, etc. So 1 Cor. 11.2. Expos.
I praise you, that you keep (or observe, remember, and obey) the Ordinances,
The Apostle urges the Rule.

Not as a head, but as a helper.


(...), Doctrines, Traditions, Precepts, etc. as I have delivered them unto
you. Now how was that? Paul did this not as a Head, or Lawgiver, delivering
his own Canons or Conclusions; for in Verse. 3. I would have you know Christ is
the Head. Now Verse. 23. as I have received of the Lord, so delivered I them
unto you; or, I have given them up unto you, ((...)) as appointed for that
purpose. Now no others does Paul press upon them; for as in 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. If
any man teach otherwise, Expos.
and consent not to the wholesome words ((...)) (or words sound (sine vitio) and
healthful for the soul, which are the words of Christ, etc.) withdraw from him,
Verse. 5. Have nothing to do with such a one; and why?

Reason 1. Is because it is not in the power, or policy of men, though they be
never so wise, Man's unfitness.

Mad Church-work made by men's rules.


learned, or lofty, to lay down precepts for the Saints practice; or to set the
way to worship God in, and by; all this being beyond him, and too high for him.
A Balaam could say, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, Numb. 22.18.
Should the Lord have left this to the wills and wits of men, what a most
miserable Church-work should we have had? For every man would have had his
mind, and set fancy.

Gods strict command. Moses durst do nothing on h^s own head.

Nor David, nor Solomon.


Reason 2. Wherefore, see how precisely it lies, in Exodus 25.40. That they look
to it, that all be made according to the pattern showed upon the Mount. So that
Moses must do nothing on his own head, in the Government of the Church, or by
his own private authority, about the Tabernacle, but as the Lord Commanded; Nor
durst David, or Solomon do any thing in the Lords Temple, 2 Chro. 8.14. 2 Kings
6.38.
either in the building* or ordering, or officers, or singers, etc. but all by
direction from above, and according to the Laws of the Lord, who has laid all,
and lined all out by his own rules, and according to his own will, 2 Chronicles.
3.3. Much less durst any (whether Apostles, Nor Apostles, nor any, Without
Christ's Rule.
or others) have undertaken it without direction from the Lord, and Christ's
line, and rule; this glorious building of the Gospel, so far exceeds the former.

Reason 3. Wherefore the voice out of Heaven bid, hear him; For he has brought
down from his Fathers bosom the pattern (new) Jerusalem; Christ's Commission.
which is coming down from God out of Heaven. Hence, Acts 3.22. Rev. 21.2, 3.
Christ is called the Prophet like unto Moses, Expos.
commissionated from the Lord to delineate unto us, and lay before us by plain
and perfect rule, and line, To rule, order, and take the whole Government.
whatsoever appertains to the true discipline, and worship of God. So in Isai.
9.7. Of the increase of his Government shall be no end, to order it, and
establish it, etc. Isai. 22.21. I will commit his Government into his hand,
etc. And he shall reign in righteousness, and rule in judgment, Isai. 32.1. So
in Zach. 6.13. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear
the glory, and he shall sit and rule upon his Throne, etc. Hence says Christ,
Matthew. 28.18. All ((...)) authoritative power is given me in Heaven and Earth.
Go, therefore and teach them to observe all things that I have commanded you,
and I will be with you to the end of the world. Wherefore God has revealed his
mind made forth by Christ in the Gospel, and that must be minded by all men,
and Ministers, in this work; that all that be laid upon the building, be first
^ewn fit, ordered, squared, All the Church matter, and the form, is to be
fitted by his Rule.
and qualified, for this worship of Christ, (both matter and manner) by Christ
his own rule. All other rules of the best, ablest, and wisest men will make but
( mud-walls) mad work, unequal and uneven, being all too long, or too short,
but Christ's own.

Use 1. We find by this, that Parishes are no Churches of Christ's building;
Parish-Churches never according to Christ's Rule. Acts of the Apostles, the
Churches best Directory.
never built according to Christ's rule or directory, largely delivered in the
Acts of the Apostles. For I have already proved, they are without warrant out
of Gods Word, and that the Rule and Pattern of their Discipline is
Antichristian, and drawn out of the whimsical doctrines, fanatic and
fantastic Ordinances and Directories of men's brains. Wherefore come out, etc.
For 2 John 9. whosoever abides not in, but transgresses from the doctrine of
Christ, has not God, etc. Wherefore V. 10. receive him not into your house,
nor bid him God speed; for whosoever bids him God speed, is partaker of his
evil deeds. Neither are ye to own, or say, God speed to Parochial
Constitutions, which are transgressions to the rules and laws of Christ,
according to all the Scriptures I have produced, and hereafter shall.

Use 2. Let none say then, we walk without rule, seeing the pattern of our
house is measured by this Reed, We walk by Rule.
as has been proved, and will be more.

Use 3. Let all Saints set themselves to observe Christ's rule directly,
Independent Churches according to Christ's Rule.
without adding to it, or diminishing from it, Revel. 22.18, 19. so far as they
see, even to a pin. For in this Moses was accounted faithful, Heb. 3.2. for
that he had so exact a care according to the pattern in the building of the
Tabernacle, Heb. 8.5. I remember sweet Sibbs, Dr. Sibbs.
in his breathing after God, Page 91. speaking of Gods house, says, House is
taken for the persons, orders, and enjoyments in it, and government of it (all
gods) which is all to be according to Christ's rule. Neither must we make rules,
nor slight Christ's Rules.
Let every Church of Christ keep close to the Revealed will. Far be it from the
Saints to run the riot, with some refractory and unruly rugged ones; so as to
slight Christ's rules, and to account it a bondage to be measured thereby, and
ordered thereafter; but I shall speak to them, Mr. Brightman.
in the Third Book. Yet Brightman on Rev. 12.1. says, The Saints of Christ
called into a Church, Expos.
must, according to the Primitive pattern, be clothed with the Sun (Christ)
crowned with the light of the Twelve Apostles (Twelve S^ars) and having the
Moon, i. e. the light borrowed from the Sun (Christ) to shine in her paths; to
direct her feet in her discipline, Then her paths shall glister and shine.
and worship. It will never be well with the Church, until gathered and ordered
according to Christ's rule, and then her paths shall glister by the Beams of the
Sun. Let us therefore be thus minded, etc. as the Apostle says, Phil. 2.15. and
whereto we have attained, in Ver. 16. Walk by the same rule. The Lord Jesus
Christ direct our way, 1 These. 3.11. And as many as walk according to his rule,
peace be on them, and mercy, and all the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. Amen.

Thus we hear how requisite Christ's Rule is: and indeed, In many gathered
Churches, Ordinances prisoners, as in Babylon. Trap. Exodus

Unskilful builders nor yet so spirited for the work as they will be.


till then as the House will be built but ill-favoredly, and unskilfully: So
the Ordinances of Christ will be there, but as the Ark was among the
Philistims, rather prisoners, then privileges (as Trap says;) And indeed, I
do fear they are so amongst some of your Formal Church-fellowships gathered,
and Houses built up by unskilful workmen; who were not so spirited for the
work, as some will be shortly. But as the House, after it is built, stands firm
without the builder, because he gives the artificial order only, and not the
substantial being to the building; so indeed, such Churches, Sim.
as are built by Gospel rule and order, will stand firm, though the Pastors,
Sim.
or such (whose Ministry was the means of making them so) be no longer about
them: But the good order and rule of Christ will continue and keep them up;
whilst such as go to gather a people, or to build without Christ's Rule, do but
lay the brands together without tongs, and are sure to burn their own fingers
at least, at last.

CHAP. XI. (...) Ammi-Nadib. Every man or woman that enters into
Church Fellowship, must have a full, free, and clear consent, and be thoroughly
satisfied, having a voluntary submission to all the Ordinances, and Orders of
Christ in that Church, whereinto he or she is entering.
THus as we do absolutely disclaim such as fall short of, All that join in this
way, must do it by free and uncompelled consent.
and such as run beyond Christ's Rule in this Church State on all sides, and
that do de novo take up any practice without precept from Christ: So also we
must see by what means Saints so qualified as before, are to be embodied
together, Lib. 2. c. 2.
which I shall more particularly pitch upon in Book 2. Chap. 2. But at present
we shall prove, none, but such as are thoroughly satisfied of the way, and (as
being convinced) can freely and voluntarily consent, 1. Proved by Prophecies.
(...)
are to enter into it. For we shall find the Prophecies clear in this, Psalm.
110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power; so in Isai. 2.2, 3.
they shall flow (i. e. freely, unconstrained, by an instinct, as the tides do,
Expos.
and of their own accord) to the house of the Lord, and say, More fluminis. All
flow freely.
Come; which signifies a freeness thereunto without compulsion. So Jer. 50.4,
5, etc. wherein their willingness shall appear; in that they go, weep, and run,
and seek, and enquire, and ask for the ways of Zion, Jer. 31.33, etc.
and say, Come let us join our selves in a perpetual Covenant, All mutually and
concurrently give themselves up with one consent.
etc. By all which, it is clear all they do ( in ordine ad communionem
Evangel.) is done by a voluntary consent and concurrence. So Micah 4.12. so
Zach. 2.11. so joining themselves, is in the Hebrew, A mutually giving up
themselves together with the knowledge and consent one of another; And thus in
the third Chapter of Zephaniah verse nine, 2. Proved by Precepts.
They shall all call upon the Name of the Lord, Acts 11.23. (...).
and shall serve him with one consent. Besides all these, Wisdom (Christ) calls
for this in Prove. 23.26. My son give me thy heart: And thus it is intended in
Barnabas's exhortation, Calls to come freely,
That with purpose of heart, (that is, the decree of the will) they should
cleave unto the Lord. In this sense is mentioned so many comings of poor souls
unto Christ, Expos.
and so many calls in Scriptures to come, Christ's call to come freely, and
fervently. Chephetz in Hebrew.

Vide Beza in loc. Et Hugo Grotius.


Matthew. 11.27. Joh. 6.35, 37. unto him; and in Luke 9.23. If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, take up the Cross, etc. (...), Is as much as to
say, such as will come according to Christ's call and command, must come freely,
affectionately, and with fervency of desire, ( Importat simul affectionem,
affectationem and acceptationem) therefore they must deny themselves, See
Buroughs on the Excellency of a gracious Spirit, p. 281.
((...), etc.) that is, Let him not have ends to come for, nor principles to
come from off his own; but let him have (as it were) no reason of his own, for,
or from himself to induce him thereunto, 3. Proved by continual Practice of
Christ's Twelve Disciples.
which is an hard saying to some. For the word is an accurate compound, noting
more then an ordinary or single self-denial, ( Abnege^, i. e. Omnino nege^:)
Now none others come to Christ to follow him, in fellowship with him, according
to his call and commands, but such as were freely carried forth, even from
their own reasons (if need require) into a voluntary consent, and coming into
union and communion with the Saints: And Churches in all ages. Proved by Types.

None else fit for the setting up of Gods Sanctuary.


Which also in all ages is proved by the Churches practice. Shall we look a
little into the Typical Tabernacles, and it is a truth therein; viz. All that
then offered, were to be free, and to do it voluntarily, (i. e. not violently,
or constrained thereunto) therefore Exodus 25.2. O! every man that gives it
willingly with his heart, ye shall take my offerings. And Verse. 8, 9. Let them
make me a Sanctuary that I may dwell among them, according to all that I showed
after the pattern, etc. This is also a good Gospel-rule, and it is a moral,
reasonable service I shall show; but so in Exodus 35.5. All were to be free and
willing, else not to be accepted.
Whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring his offering. Verse. 22. They
came both men and women, as many as were willing-hearted, (none else came
warrantably) and Verse. 29. The children of Israel brought a willing offering
unto the Lord, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing; which the
Lord had commanded. And in 2 Chronicles. 29.5. Who then is willing to consecrate his
service this day unto the Lord? Verse. 6, 7. They offered willingly for the
service of the Lords house; but need I be so long? In Nehemiahs days, chap.
4.6. So built they the wall, etc. For the people had a mind to work;
notwithstanding the oppositions and great enemies, and discouraging
difficulties, were enough to daunt them. So (I say in all ages) Saints did
freely and willingly (without the least compulsion) to unite and embody
together, Saints in all ages such free-willers.
and enter into fellowship; as it is said, Jo. 6.21. they willingly received
him into the ship. So when Christ called his Disciples into this Church State,
they came willingly, and by a free-consent, Matthew. 4.20, 22. presently, and
without lingering, or delay, Expos.
or asking counsel of their Father or Friends. In primitivo times so.
So Matthew. 19.27. so Gal. 1.15, 16. and such as were pricked at their hearts,
with the word of grace, in Acts 2.37. did so in Verse. 41. gladly, (...) (i. e.
willingly) receive the word, and being baptized, entered into fellowship. So in
Acts 8. and 11. and 13. and 14, etc. Expos.
And thus the Church of Corinth were gathered, and thus the Churches of
Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.3, 5. who were willing of themselves; and they did (says
Paul) give up their selves to the Lord, and then unto us by the will of God
(...), that is freely, and cheerfully, Expos.
and willingly.

Thus the Church of Thessalonica were examples to all Believers in Macedonia
and Achaia, for their readiness and willingness; Examples. 1 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7.
we might instance all along, and confirm this abundantly by examples and
reasons, but that I shall be too tedious; yet the truth is, should we not,
with a free, and by a voluntary consent serve the Lord in this his worship, and
enter into the beauties of holiness;

Worshippers, even of false gods, Otherwise we were short of the very Heathens.
and the very Heathens would rise up against us: For nature it self teaches us
to worship God willingly, and the Scripture teaches us much more willingness
in the true worship of the true God, Joh 4.23.

Worship would be as a bandage to us; Else in bondage.
for when it is tedious to men, Mal. 3.14. then they are soon weary with
well-doing.

And besides, thirdly, they be Hypocrites, and will never fall off fearfully,
that enter not in freely and fully satisfied, Else soon fall off.
1 John 2.9, 10. and persuaded in their own souls by the Spirit of the Lord,
Monendo, movendo, and removendo, instructing, moving, and removing all the lets.

Use.
Use 1 Then the weapons of our warfare are not then ((...)) carnal, Parish
Churches upheld by carnal weapons.

Whilst the Spirit, it is that convinces us of the truth, constrains us to the
truth, and makes us worshippers in the truth.

Compulsive powers do more hurt then good.


fleshly, worldly, or the like; Not by might, not by power, but by my Spirit,
says the Lord, Zach. 4.6. wherefore we find no need of compulsive Powers,
whereby Parochial constitutions were kept alive so long, viz. by Powers to
compel men by stocks, prisons, fines, pillories, and punishments, and whether
they will or no to make them keep their Parish-Churches, and Ecclesiastical
Canons, whilst alas! it is the Spirit convinces us of the truth, Joh. 16.8.9.
and constraines us to the truth, Job. 32.18. and makes men worshippers in the
truth, Joh. 4.32. Uphold me with thy free Spirit, says David, Psalm. 51.12. and
that the Spirit makes men free in the truth, and the truth in them, see Joh.
8.32, 33.36. 2 Cor. 3.17. It is not all the beating, or bruising, whipping, or
punishing in the world, will persuade the conscience, convince the heart, or
convert the sinner. Thus men may be made Hypocrites, And makes many hypocrites,
but few true Proselites.
and play the devils out of fear of torment, but not Saints or true
worshippers till the Spirit makes them willing; therefore give to Caesar what
is Caesar's, and to Christ what is Christ's. Cartwright.
As honest old Cartwright said to Whitgift, You would bring in the Magistrates
to break and change the orders which Christ our King and Lawgiver has left in
his Church; Christ's government and civil Magistrates are distinct in specie
and ge^ore.
For as Christ came not to meddle with, or overthrow the Civill-government,
neither must your Civil Magistrates or Civil Governors meddle with the
matters or affairs of Christ's Church, Christ alone being Lawgiver therein; so
that such would alter and overthrow Church Order, and Government: for which
Christ will give them but little thanks at last, Psalm* 2. Civil Rulers within
civil Rules and Precincts.

Romans 13.1, 2. A Word and a warning to Rulers.

K. Vzziah, And Perez-Vzziah.

Not to meddle with the matters of Religion.


and will requite it to them by the overthrowing of theirs; and for this end
the Rod is in his hand at this day.

Now who knows not, that the office of the Magistrate consists in those
things that belong to our life and goods, and is to be kept within the
compass of a Civil jurisdiction: Hence it is that Azariah cast out Vzziah out
of the holy place, and that because it was not proper for a Prince, but for the
High Priest, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. Lev. 13.46. Let Rulers in their relations, and
Church Officers in theirs, be found faithful. Vzziahs pride is expressly
noted, 2 Chro. 26.16. for usurping the Priesthood in the Temple of God, but he
escaped not scotfree, for he was suddenly smitten with the Leprosy, and laid
out for an example to after ages. On the other side, Example. Christ would not
meddle with civil Magistracy.
our Savior refused to meddle with Civil Magistracy, or with matters of that
kind, a Kingdom being offered him, Jo. 6.8. he could not accept of it, nor
would he handle Civill-matters so much as to divide the heritage between the
brethren, it being not his office, Luke 12. Now let none usurp, The Spiritual
and Eccles. is above the civil, which the civil power is to serve.
but let the Civil keep within his Civill-precinct, and the Spiritual within
his compass and sphere. And yet the Civil is to submit to the Spiritual (and
in a spiritual sense the Ecclesiastical) Discipline being above it. As Philip
the Emperor, whom we read of in Eusebius. 4. lib. Eccles. Hist. being commanded
to abstain from breaking of bread, and suspended until his repentance were
seen (being guilty of some sins) willingly obeyed, and lay low before the Lord,
and did not dare to partake of it, until his sins were answered by sorrows
sutably in the sight of all,
and till he had both openly delivered his grief, and evidently declared his
faith before all.

Besides Theodosius Emperor (in 5. lib. Eccles. Hist. of Eusebius) is eminent
for his most ready and religious obedience to Ambrose his exhortations and
reproof, Theodosius an example. All to teach Magistrates to be under Christ's
Discipline, and not that Christ is under theirs.
which brought him prostrate upon his knees, and flat upon his face before the
Lord with tears, and prayers. I own nothing of Superstition observed in those
days, only this is that I aim at, that all our Magistrates may know they are
under Christ's Discipline and Jurisdiction, and not Christ under theirs. Yet
this may our Magistrates (whom we honor) ever know, that it is their duty and
proper to them to make provision for the Church of Christ (principally) and to
improve their Authority for the preserving of Christ's Kingdom and Gods Church
and service: But what Magistrates and Rulers may do as to matters of Religion.
And for this David, Solomon, Josiah, Ezekiah, and others of the Rulers of
Israel were registered famous; Not that they are (in the least) to force men's
consciences into a consent and compliance with their own ways or worships, or
to rack them into a Religion: God forbid! For Luke 9.5.4.55, 56. Christ came
not to destroy men's lives, How far they may go.

Vide chapter 13. Examples. Not to force consciences.


but to save them. And we must with all meekness instruct them that oppose,
if peradventure (though it be much in question) that God will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and to be recovered out of the
snares of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. even as the word ((...)) is, Expos.
the hottest adversaries of the truth; even such are deliberately to be dealt
with, But with gentleness to win them in to the truth.
and gently entreated, unless* the Laws should seize upon them on Civil
accounts for transgressions, and as (Civil) disturbers of the peace, or the
like; but I meet with a stop by some sturdy stickler for Coercive Power.

Object.
Object. Luke 14.23. The Lord says, Compel them to come in, Expos.
that my house may be filled.

Answ.
Ans. Who does the Lord speak to? They are the Lords servants who are
commanded to it, 1 Negatively (...).
i. e. not Civil Magistrates, but the Messengers of the Gospel, sent out to
gather Guests into the Kings house; now this is not meant by prisons,
punishments, or the like; But,

2 The word is, ((...)) i. e. show them a necessity (vi and efficacia rationum,
2 Ans* Affirmatively show them a n^c^ssity of Christ and his Church Way.
Grotius in loc.) of coming into my house. Win them with arguments, that as
they that want bread see a necessity, or are compelled to go to Market, so may
these. And thus is it, in Matthew. 22.9. Bid them, that is, invite them ((...))
call them, with undeniable winning words, and with forcing arguments; Grotius.
in which sense we are to compel them as much as we may, with the weapon of
the word, Sim.
and strength of truth.

But before I finish this Chapter, True Magistrates in their respective places
much owned and honored by all the Churches. Vide chapter 13. Adversaries of old
accused us as enemies to the Magistrates Vid chapter 2.
let not the Civil Magistrates imagine in the least, that this Discipline of
the Church does derogate a tittle from their just rights which is the false
suggestion of our Adversaries of old against us, as Ezra 4.7, 8. and verse 16.
they said to the King, if these men go on, then thou will lose thy right and
portion. Thus the Presidents conspired against Daniel, Dan. 6.6.7. and accused
him for a Rebel, verse 12. But as we have, we shall and will (and dare not
do otherwise then) be subject unto them, even for conscience sake, Romans 13.1.
But we shall meet with more of this hereafter; In the mean time Saints are
compelled.

Secondly, By the sweet insinuations and powerful persuasions of the Spirit of
Christ; they are constrained into the house of God, The Spirit compels us, and
yet we are volunteers.
and they are voluntarily knit together into one; which Sibs sweetly shows
necessary, in his Treatise before named, page 91. Now when the Spirit
prevails, they are to enter into practice, and then they do it with abundance
of sweetness, satisfaction, freeness, and readiness; Dr. Sibs.
and this is requisite in all that would be gathered according to the Gospel:
It is God which works in you both to will, God works in us the will first.
Vide l. 2. c. 2.
and to do, Phil. 2.13. And he persuades Japhet to dwell in the Tents of
Shem, not otherwise forcing them; so that we grant such a kind of compulsive
powers: But as all Controversies are about meum and teum, even so it is as to
this: Sim.
And a little thing will make the Magistrate challenge it, because he is (for
the most part) inclined to it; A little clap with the hand sets on an eager
Mastive, but the force of staves cannot loosen him; Take heed of setting on
Magistrates.
wherefore I advise men to be wise, how they set on Secular powers to
interpose, or imp^se in matters of Religion, as to tender Consciences; some are
busy herein, Sim.
who are like the Bustard in a fallow field, that cannot rise high, sine vi
turbinis, without the Whirlewind of such a Tempest; Some busy to do it.
(for so I account it will be to the Church) and then like squibs in a throng,
they fly out on all sides. But I hope our Magistrates will be more wise then
to run the hazard of so imminent wrath of God. Sim.
For as I have read of the Tyrians in Alexanders time, when he had besieged
them, that the iron they put into the Forge (for to use against the enemy) even
whilst it was in the fire, It will run Rulers the hazard of ruin. Vide chapter 13.
was seen full of drops of blood (says Quintus Curtius) and so have been, and
will be the weapons that are used against consciences. It is sad! when ungodly
great ones must sit as Judges of the greatly godly ones. Many men are like the
Lawyer that pleaded strongly for his Client, Sim.
but before the day of hearing, he was advanced to the Be^^ch, and made the
Judge; but then he adjudged it to the other side; Sim.
saying before he was an Advocate, and pleaded for his Client, but now he was
his Judge. Thus Politicians do, who like A^^alus have planted many herbs, to
poison (true spiritual) piety, but to practice policy; And like curious Cooks
build up with their hands high, Sim.
but with their teeth tear low. These like the Wolf answer the Lamb, that
pleaded her innocence. It is true, thy cause is better then mine, but my teeth
are harder then thine. But God is engaged against such Powers, and Policies*
vide chap. 13. Thus much for this Chapter.

CHAP. XII. (...) or (...) Halal and Hodh. The End of Saints so embodied
together as before, being a true Church of Christ, for Matter and Form,
Object, and Rule, as before, is the Glory of God, and to set forth his praises
in Christ, and his Churches.
THe rightest-line is the shortest; The final cause the first in the eye*
though the last in the act.
I would have mine both short and right, wherefore I fear lest my too much
haste make me run awry. Every wise man proposes to himself an End in all
things, and the more wise he is in this point, the more he imitates and
resembles the Lord; hence said the Psalmist, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect and
up right, for his end is peace. And verse 38. The end of the wicked is to be
cut off, therefore mark him. The End is the first and principal thing to be
minded, and looked after; not so much the present motion, station, or action;
as what the end of this, The End is first, and most minded.
or that, will be, or what it is, is aimed at, and intended; For there is a Way
that promises peace and prosperity to a man, and all w^ll, but the end is
death, Prove. 16.25. And why? All things in the first and second Creation have
one and the same Head. Col. 1.18.20. and one and the same end.
So a thing may be but hastily begun, and the end of it be bitter, and not
blessed, Prove. 20, 21. All things in the Creation, as well as in the
Re-creation, have one and the same ultimate end, which all Saints should have
in all their practices, purposes and proposals to themselves.

The end, though last in the execution, yet is first in the intention (in
omnibus agendis, etc.) and this is an undoubted truth: Now ( agere prudenter)
to do wisely, is ( adhibito certo fine) to have before us fixed an honorable
end, and answerable to the business we are about. Now our end in all things
must be the same with Gods end in all, The glory of God, the one and the same
End of all.
viz. The glory of God; no other end is honorable enough for us to aim at:
Hence it is said, He created every one for his glory, Isa. 43.7. and in Prove.
16.4. The Lord made all for himself, yea, the wicked, etc. i. e. The final
cause of the Creation was his praise and glory, so is it of his gubernation,
our redemption, and salvation, and whatsoever we can say, Creation,
Gubernation, Redemption, Salvation, and all has one and the same End.
has all the same end, which we are to aim at; viz. The setting forth the
praises of God.

Hence in so many Psalms, especially in Psalm one hundred forty eight, David
does invoke all things, and all Creatures in heaven and earth to praise the
Lord, but above all he calls on the Saints, which is as much as to say, in
especial manner it must be their end in all, and by all, and to do all to his
praise and glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. so that Gods Angels, Saints, and all men, and
all Creatures humane or heavenly, (as they are God's) all have the same end,
and that end is the honor and glory of God. This End most of all moves Saints
into Church Fellowship.

That this must be the End. 1. Proved by Prophecy.


Now Saints have (most especially) this final cause commanding them unto, and
commending them into this Gospel-Church-state, this being their maine end, and
mighty design, to set forth the praise and glory of God. This truth triumphs
in armor of proof out of Prophecies, Precepts, and practices with others. For
first, in Isa. 35.10. The ransomed of the Lord shall come to Zion with songs,
and everlasting joy, Isa. 51.11. and ver. 3. joy and gladness shall be found
therein, thankes-giving, and the voice of melody, and they shall mention the
Lords loving kindnesses, and the praises of the Lord, etc. Isa. 63.7. thus in
Cant. 8.2. the Church gives her Beloved to drink of her spiced cup, Expos.
The Churches spiced Cup.
i. e. praise composed of the spices or graces of his own Spirit; and here is
also juice of the Pomegranats running out like little Rivers, most sweet and
acceptable unto the Lord. So Cant. 7.12, 13. and Cant. 4.16. the end of her
request is for the spices to flow out, and that the Beloved may eat of his
pleasant fruits. This promise is also in that Prophecy of Jeremy 15.19. to
comfort the cast-downe Prophet in his affliction, the Lord promises, when the
precious are taken from the vile, they shall be as his mouth, Expos.
i. e. filled with Hallelujahs of praises and honors, and glory unto God. So
in Jer. 30.17, 19. This is Zion, whom no man seeks after, shall set forth his
praises, ver. 19. And out of them shall proceed thankesgiving, and the voice of
them that make merry; thus Zeph. 3.9. Expos.
I will turn to the people a pure Language (a lip) and what then? they shall
call upon the name of the Lord (often read they shall praise the Lord) with one
consent. This is foretold in many chapters of the Revelations, chap. 11.15.17.
chap. 14.2.3. and in Revel. 21.11. This new Jerusalem which is (now) coming
down, has the glory of God to fill her, and ver. 23, etc. you shall find the
Types both of the Arc, Tabernacle, and Temple to foretell this was to be the
end of every Church under the Gospel, Types.
in 2 Chronicles. 5.13, 14. wherein they had Music and Melodies, Trumpets and
Singers, Musicks and singers.
all as one shouting out one sound of praises and thankesgiving to the Lord,
and then the house of the Lord was filled with his glory. For the filling his
house with praise and glory.
Now much more is this new Jerusalem, and so are these Gospel-temples for the
praises and glory of God; Praise waits for thee in Zion, Psalm. 65.1. and to
thee shall the vows be performed, i. e. to thee in Zion, as if Zion only were
for the same purpose; Expos.
and in Psalm. 67.2, 3. Let thy way be known upon earth, 2. Precepts.
and then follows, Let the people praise thee, O God. So Psalm. 70.4. Psalm.
140.13.
Let all those that seek the Lord rejoice, and be glad in thee, and let such
as love thy salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified. Thus is that in 2
These. 1.11, 12. We pray for you, that the name of our Lord Jesus may be
glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ; 3. Proofs by practice of all Saints in fellowship.
by all which it appears, Praises are expected, and required from all the
Saints in Zion. So Hebr. 13.15. Let us offer praises continually, with all the
cohabitants in the Gates of Zion, which has been in all Ages, being it is for
that purpose they are enchurched, as in 1 Pet. 2.9. ye are a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar (purchased) people; and why? for
what end? That ye should show forth the praises of him, Expos.
who has called you out of darkness, into his mavelous light, etc. So in
Isai. 64.10, 11. Zion our holy and beautiful house, where our fathers praised
thee, etc. So Matthew. 11, 25. Heb. 2.12. says Christ, I will sing praise unto
thee in the midst of the Church. Christ in the Churches sings praises.
Ephesians. 3.21. Unto him be glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all
ages, world without end, Amen. So that by all these Scriptures, appears the
final cause of Gods calling out of darkness into light, out of the world, into
the Kingdom of Christ; out from them without, to Saints so embodied (as before)
within. I say the supreme and ultimate end, is to the setting forth of the
praises and glory of God, as a peculiar people, in a peculiar manner. Although
I deny not, but we are to aim at the edifying one another in Christ, furthering
of one another in the things of salvation, watching over, comforting and
counselling of, delighting and rejoicing in one another; and having fellowship
with the Father and the Son, All other ends are subordinate to this End, which
is the supreme.
1 John 1.3. enjoying his presence there more especially, 1 Cor. 6.26. and
provoking one another to love, and good lives, Heb. 10.24. 1 Cor. 1 9. Yet this
of glorifying of God is the main, most, and moving end; and all other things we
aim at, are but in subordination unto this (in ordine ad gloriam Dei,) and good
reason for it, as will hereafter appear; for they have most cause for it, being
the Redeemed Ransomed ones, Isai. 51 9, 10. Psalm. 49.15. The redeemed.
as in Revel. 5.9. And they are most capable of it too, Psalm. 33.1, 3. and
53.6. being they have most understanding, Psalm. 47.7. and are most unfeigned
without flatteries, Isai. 35.10. Most capable.
Revel. 14.5. having no guile, or as the word (...) is, no Hypocrisy,
falsehood, (for mentiri is contra mentem ire) defect of that nature, Hebrew,
Mum, Greek (...) is found in their mouths; No hypocrisy.
but it is found so in the multitudes. Besides, Virgins that follow the Lamb,
Rev. 14.4. Virgins have the fin^st and sweetest voices, Virgins.
and tunes, and songs, Expos.
((...) hid, and unknown to them, without, that are but men; Have sweetest
voices, best songs.

In fittest tunes.


so Saints are hidden ones, or as in Hebrew Porah, the fruitfullest, and
followers of Christ (...) into all conditions.) Now they know best the notes of
high and low conditions, and dispensations; and they only keep the tune best,
according times they live in. Besides, they have grace in their hearts, They
make melody with grace in their hearts.
and have Christ dwelling in them richly and abundantly, Col. 3.16. Now such in
their praises to God (which is their hardest and highest duty of a Christian)
do return of his own fullness, (and commodities in kind) grace for grace,
Whilst mixed Congregations rob him of his praise and glory.
Joh. 1.16. and glorify God, Psalm. 50.23. Whilst mixed Congregations
(abundantly) abase God, and rob him of his honor; and in their best services
and sacrifices, bringing him rather the ratlings (or what they can spare) then
the fatlings of their lives every day; or the calves of their lips, lives, and
loves.

Use 1. It appears then by the bright beams of our Sun Scripture-Elements in
this Hemisphere of his Church here below; Parish Churches fail in the Final
Cause.
That Parishes in this point are far from true Churches; They fall short of the
final cause, not considering what conduces most to Gods glory; Their End is to
good penyworths, to have their tithes at an easy rate, and to make their own
end^*
but what is most for their advantage and gain (this is the godliness of most
Parochially opinionated;) In your Parishes profane ones all sorts of sinners,
swearers, drunkards, whoremasters, etc. are all suffered, as of their Churches
(which ought not to keep in, or (if they creep in) ought to be cast out of
Christs-Church, wherein God is most to be glorified. I say in such a Church as
consists of Saints separated as before, and that will not (willingly or
knowingly) admit of, or keep in carnal, and openly sinful men, etc. Or thus,
The Members of Christ's Church are the fittest to set forth the praises of God;
but the Members of that Church, which consists of Saints separated and
qualified (as before) are the fittest to set forth his praises: Ergo, etc.
Parishes excommunicated if ever they were Churches.
Parishes are excommunicated for such a rabblerout, as have, and yet do rob God
of his due honor, and praise, and glory. But,

Use 2. Better is the End of a thing, then the beginning, Eccl. A word to
Saints in fellowship. Make Gods honor and glory all in your End, and your End
in All.
Wherefore come forth ye that fear the Lord from those Dungeons of darkness,
those Babylons of unbelievers, and lewd livers, and Synagogues of Satan; what
is the fruit of those things whereof we are now ashamed? And dearest hearts!
whom I bear in my bosom, before my Father! are any of you fond of Zion? see
that your End be good, and then that the means be conducing and answerable
thereunto.

The End, though first and principal in your intention, yet is the last and
ultimate in the execution; yea, this End, viz. the glory and praise of God, is
to be the Alpha and Omega, the first and last of all, or else our best will be
but (frustra agere) bad in our building. Wherefore Friend consider, what is it
we promise or propose to our selves? says our Savior Christ, Luke 14.28, 30,
etc. Which of you, intending to build a Tower, Expos.
sits not down first to count the cost? If he can finish it? Least he be
mocked, and it be said, he began to build, but could not finish it. An ordinary
Rule of wisdom to weigh the End. Vide cap. 5^
This is but ordinary wisdom to weigh the End first; and whither you can
accomplish it, or not; or are fit to go through stitch with it, or not; or
else, what a scandal will you bring to the Gospel? and dishonor to him whose
name you profess? Consider the End of your conversation, Expos.
Heb. 13.7. that is, Look wishfully upon it, ((...)) consider, what is the end
of your ways, walking, etc. is all for Gods honor and glory. 2. This must be
the principal End of your entering into the Church of Christ, to honor him, with
the same honor, wherewith the Son honored the Father, Joh. 8.
and you shall receive the end of your faith, viz. salvation, 1 Pet. 1.9.

Sing praises.
To conclude, Sing praises! sing praises! like the Nightingale, Sim.
who spends whole nights (in her kind) to sing forth the praises of God, All
for Gods glory.
as if the day were too short; every Man must be a Preacher, every Creature a
Text, every Occasion a Doctrine, every Blessing a Reason, every Providence a
Proof, every Thanksgiving an Use, Men and Angels the Auditors, and the whole
Sermon is Gods honor and glory. And yet how many like unwise Archers shoot,
Some mind it not.
and know not at what mark: And others, vile wretches! praise with their
mouths; Sim.
but they are like Samsons honey out of the mouth of a Beast; Sim.
or like the Quarester that sung Gloria Patri in the Church, and Carmina B^ccho
in the Tavern; others there be that would blazon our Christ's Arms, Some unfit
to do it.
(Herald like) but it must be their own device. But the best flower in these
Gardens enclosed to make God a Garland with, is the Coronation flower, Some
desire it.
to lay all our crown and glory at his feet. When Thales had learnt Mandrita
the Philosopher an admirable invention of the motion of the Heavens, Oh Sir,
says Mandrita, how shall I requite you? No way, says Thales Milesius, All are
to give God the glory of all.
but by acknowledging, you learnt it of me. So the Lord requires of us, to give
him the glory of all; we learn in his Churches, by his Spirit, of the motions
of the Heavens.

CHAP. XIII. (...) Alluph (...). Of the true Church rightly defined; that
Christ alone is the Master, Builder, Ruler, Repairer, Head of Gold, Lord,
Lawgiver, without any other Partner, Paramount, Competitor, or Corrival
whatsoever.
THen the Reed, which has measured both the true and false Church state,
presents unto us as vaste a disproportion and difference, in all particulars
(essential) as is possible, between Parishes and true Churches. Proved from the
essential, material, formal, objective* organical and final causes; and so
defined. The definition of Christ's Church.
For from the Essential, Material, Formal, Objective, Organical, and Final
causes; we find the Church of Christ lies thus defined, from the false
Antichristian Church (which also we shall define by the rule of contraries) The
true Church of Christ then is*

1. A society of Believers sanctified in Christ Jesus; 2. Separate from the
world, false-ways, and worships, united together into one Body, Independent; or
having a plenary power within its self, without the least subordination, to any
but Christ; 3. having the special presence of God, in the midst of her; 4. and
being gathered and ordered by Christ's rule alone; 5. all her Members freely,
and voluntarily, embodying without the least compulsion (having communion with
the Father and the Son,) 6. all seeking the same End, viz. The honor and glory
of God in his worship.

Herein, though at length, yet in strength, have we as full a definition of
Christ's Church as I can collect, and it is a compendium of what I have hitherto
delivered in these Leaves: Now on the other side.

The definition of Anrichrists Church.
An Antichristian Church is a mixed number of the multitudes of the world, not
allowing the difference between the holy and profane, being subordinate to a
Prelatick power, without the most spiritual presence of God; being gathered
and ordered by the Rules and Directories of men, Arrogans sibi titulum
Ecclesiae; at eam non sequens sed persequens.

Christ alone Head and Lawgiver. Proved


and maintained by Civil and Coercive powers, not seeking the setting forth
the praises of God as a peculiar people, with one consent. Now as Antichrist
has his Throne therein, and sits and swayes, as Lord and Lawgiver; so in the
Assembly of Saints Christ has set his Throne, and he alone is Lord, Head, and
Lawgiver of his Church, which is the point I am now upon: And all this (and
more then this) I shall prove too by Prophesies, 1 By Prophesies. (...)
Precepts, and Practices in all Churches. To begin with Isa. 9.6. And the
government shall be upon his shoulders, his name shall be called Wounderfull,
Counselor, the mighty God, etc. Verse 7. Of the increase of Government shall
be no end, he shall sit upon his Throne, and Kingdom to order it, and to
establish it, etc. Isa. 22.21, 22. I will commit thy Government into his hand,
and he shall be a Father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Key of the
house of David will I lay upon his shoulders, What the Key is that is laid on
his shoulder.
so he shall open, and none shall shut, and he shut, and none open. The Key to
let into the Kingdom of Christ is the Spirit, Rev. 3.7, 8. and where the
Spirit is, Expos.
there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.16.18. and the Son makes free indeed, The Spirit
is to let us in.
Joh. 8. from hence it is, Saints are all let into one body, by one Spirit, 1
Cor. 11.13. and through the Spirit are become an habitation to the Lord, Expos.
Ephesians. 2.22. so the Keys mentioned in Matthew. 16* 19. to open and shut are
declared, This Key opens and shuts, binds and looses.
Joh. 20.22. to be the Holy Ghost, and thereupon whose sins they remit (or
the Church forgives) are forgiven, but whom ye do not, are not; that is, by
the Holy Ghost, being the Key; the meaning is, during the direction of the
Spirit, ye (the Church) have the Key to open and shut; bind and loose, which
is laid upon the shoulder of Christ, and acted by his Authority; For he is the
Ruler and Instituter thereof. Hence also in Zach. 6.12.13. And he shall build
the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule
upon his Throne, etc.

None but Christ has this Commission from the Father to rule here, 2 Precepts.
All power given him and all judgment committed to him. Ioh. 5.21.
Matthew. 11.27. Matthew. 28.18. all ((...)) authoritative power is his. Hence it
is we are called continually upon in order to positive Precept, to submit to
his Scepter, acknowledge his Sovereignty, and Zach. 9.9. Cant. chap. 3.11.
Psalm. 2.12. and royal Prerogative, 1 Timothy 6.15. James 2.1. and only Headship,
Col. 1.1.18. and 2.19. Ephesians. 1.22. and 5.23. which has been the zeal of true
Churches against all Opposers. As the Apostles said, 3 Practice proves this.
Acts 5.29.31. to the Priests and others, that commanded them to preach no more
Christ, We ought to obey God rather then men, who has exalted Christ to be a
Prince and Savior; and we are his witnesses. But this will appear by and by:
In the interim, Reason.


It is in all reason (as well as in Religion) that Christ alone rule as Head,
and Lawgiver, Because none but Christ could institute, therefore none else can
order it.

Why none but Christ could undert^ke it.


seeing none but Christ was able to institute this Gospel-Church-state;
therefore none but he, is to order it; both which appears in the proofs
above. Now there is not a Man alive, neither Moses, David, nor S^lomon, had
understanding enough, to undertake such a task; no nor Christ himself, as man
merely in abstracto, no nor all the Angels in heaven, only the Son of God,
that fetched it from the Fathers bosom. 1 Because he has his spirit above
measure.


First, This typified Solomon his own self (as I may say) with his own hands)
Cant. 3.9. as with his own head, builds this Chariot of Lebanon, for were it
left to men's wisdom or wills, what a Chimaera, or Monster, must of necessity
be set up in the sight of all. 2 Man would make all Idols. And torment such as
did not bow down to them.


Secondly, And surely every man would abuse and beat his Brother, and bring him
into the hottest furnace, that did not fall down to his Image, and bow down to
that Babel which is in his breast.

Thirdly, 3 Man notable to remove the Rubbish. A hard work* and why?
Besides ability would be deficient in the best of men about such a work; so
much rubbish is to be removed, that men might break their backs, but do no
good of it; for as in a house fallen to the ground, before the foundation of it
(though it be good) be found out for another superstructure, or to build upon
it a new, Sim.
the old heaps and confusions that hinder the coming at the foundation to
build upon, must be removed, and carried out of the way, which will cost
continual labors, and perplexable pains too; and the longer these heaps have
lay, the more settled, and the greater the toil, and the time will be to bring
them off Now there is no building until this, for then the foundation, and the
building will be dis-united,
and the building being laid upon the rubbish cannot continue, without Christ
carry away the ruins and rubbish (which have lay so long for above a thousand
years) of this fallen Church Estate of Christ (I mean so to men) we must say
as Nehem. 4.10. We are not able to build. O what abundance of false
conceptions! sinister thoughts! harsh censures! resolute carriages! carnal
reasons! and what loud and large (...) 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and corrupt
imaginations! Much to be done before men be built clear upon (Christ) the
Foundation.
in most men must be removed, before they can be built clear upon (Christ) the
Foundation! Now it is not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the
Lord; unless the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that would
build it, Psalm. 127.1.2. None but Christ by his Spirit can remove these ruinous
Masses and strong holds of carnal reasonings, Expos.
Zach. 4 6. None but Christ can remove th^s gross rubbi^sh.

Christ is Lord and Master Builder, how?


and corrupt resolutions against his Church Way, which is according to the
order and Discipline of the Gospel: whence it is (as before) I am free to
affirm, that none else is fit to rule, rectify, and order in his Church, he
being Lord and Master, and only Head thereof; he is owned as the Master, Joh.
13.13, 14. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. Matthew. 10.24. Mat. 23.18. For

1 We have all but one Master
First, Masters may, and must have the commands of, or rather over their
servants, and will not suffer them to be their own Masters; or to Lord it
over others, or to have more Masters in his service. Thus the Saints have but
one Lord, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. that is, Jesus Christ, who can command them (as having
the Royal Prerogative) and they owe him all equal obedience in their places,
and to their powers.

Secondly, Masters set servants their work, and appoint them their places, 2
This Master has set us our work both what* and where.
so does Christ our Master tells us where we must work, Mat. 21.28. and what
work we must do, Mark 13.34. for though we have all but one calling, Ephesians. 4.4.
and are called all into one hope, yet some walk, and work in one place of the
vineyard, and some in another, as he has appointed, and according to the gift
and graces of Christ, Romans 12.6, 7. Ephesians. 4.7. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.11.

Thirdly, Masters make provision for their servants, 3 This Master makes us all
good provision for our selves, and our service.
to give them good raiment, tools to work with, and all things convenient for
them; thus Christ makes provision for his servants, Isa. 65.13, 14. Psalm.
132.15. he gives them their daily bread, Joh. 6.48.50. Spiritual food, and
Spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.4. Water of life, Joh. 4.14. Fatlings, Mat. 22.
yea and feasts them with fat things, Isa. 25.9. and Wines fresh, Cant. 2.4.6.
Prove. 31 6. and well refined; he clothes them with finest robes, and richest
fashions, Isa. 61 10. Mat. 22.12. and finds instruments and tools fit for the
work he sets them about in his building, especially Faith, without which they
can do nothing to hold, Cant. 3.7, 8. 2 Cor. 10.4. and his rule which they
work by is his Word.

Fourthly, As a Master, 4 This Master paies us honestly, and well and beforehand.
Christ pays his servants honestly to a penny, Mat. 20.9. Luke 10.7. Christ
will not keep back the least reward, crown, honor, or glory from them when
they have done their work, yea, he always gives them some beforehand too,
out of his Treasury and fullness, Joh. 1.14. etc.

Fifthly, As a Master, he has the honor, 5 This Master has the honor, and
name of all the work.
name and credit of their work, all runs in his name, and for his honor,
Mal. 1.6. Joh. 5.23. Joh. 12.26. as a Master Builder, that receives the money
for all, that is wrought, though by his servants labors also, so ought we to
ascribe all to Christ in praises and graces, prizing him in all things, and for
all things that his servants do.

Sixthly, As a Master, he walks round his servants, and is a wall about them,
to keep them, and defend them, 6 This Master defends his servants from such as
would hurt them or hinder the work.
from those that would offend them, and wrong them; and he keeps them off them
that would hinder them in the doing the work of the Lord which is in building,
Zach. 6.4. Psalm. 121.5. Isa. 27.3. Cant. 2.15. he will suffer none to do them
the least wrong, Ps. 105.14. lest his work should lie still, or be done
negligently, Jer. 48. Lastly, this Masters word is of focce to make us work
against all gainsayers*


Seventhly, and lastly, As a Master, one word from his mouth is of more force
then all the Masters in heaven and earth besides, therefore Christ's servants
would know his mind, and do not mind what others (as reason, world, carnal
wisdom, parts, or policy of men (which are strangers to the Saints) do say, 1
Cor. 7.23. Matthew. 25.9. Col. 2.20, 21. Whither shall we go from thee? says
Peter, Joh. 6.68. we would hear thee, and not to listen to the Laws and
Commandments of men, Hosea 5.11. Isai. 29.13. or any other in thy work,
worship, and service.

Thus we see him the Master of the work, and why he is so; wherefore his order
and direction must be taken, So that his order and direction must be served.
and only his, Isa. 61.8. If we would have the building stand, and the work
according to his will.

But Objection. Paul's says, 1 Cor. 3 10. as a Wise master builder, Obj.
I have laid the foundation.

Answ.
Answ. Negat. Paul says not, I am the Master of this building laid; but
Affirmat: says, as a Master Builder does, so have I done; Expos.
Paul calls not himself the Master Builder, but as a Master Builder.

1. In laying the foundation, well, and deep.

2. In that the foundation laid, is of sound substance.

3. In laying the foundation first of all, and from thence building upon.
Ranters fly aloft first into the air, and are without foundation.

4. Having skill, sound judgment, and experience.


so that he draws only a simile from the Master Builder, Sim.
and calls not himself the Master Builder; but as a Wise master builder does;
1. with much pains (and removals of much dung, dross, filth, and rubbish, to
make way) lay the foundation, well, deep, and sure, before he builds; so have I
done: And as he will be sure, the foundation be of sound substance that will
not rot, decay, sink, or endanger the building that is upon it; so am I sure:
And as he that is a wise builder begins at the foundation, and so from thence
builds upwards, and onward; and does not begin at a wall, or window, or side,
or top; so says Paul, I build from ( Christ) the foundation, upward, and
onward, which, first, I have laid ((...)) or put into your hearts, the ( prima
initia fidei) fundamentals of truth, for others to have after to build upon; So
that I began (says he) at the foundation, not at the roof, as now many ranting
Ministers do; and so do what they can, in their high and lofty strains of
building; they must build downward, unless they could lay a foundation in the
air; which some fancy (foolishly) to themselves. And then fourthly, As a wise
Master Builder, that is, one of much (if not most) experience and judgment,
and of abilities; so, says he, I do not only lay down directions, (as I have
received from Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23.) and reasons, demonstrations, and rules for
others; but improve also all my experiences, skill, and labor also, and take
pains my self; with tears and prayers, day and night; And taking pains himself
too, to build up.
I lay out my strength with sweat, and swink; by practice, as well as by
preaching to build you up, in the ways of godliness, and truth. And lastly, I
am as a Master Builder, 5. An Overseer over the rest.
an Overseer of the Churches of Christ, that they be in order, and be built up
according to the Rules of Christ, and that they mend what is amiss, as a
steward in trust for that end, and purpose, 1 Cor. 4.1.

Whence you see in what sense Paul is said to be as a wise Master Builder, in
and about the house of God: Christ only the Master of the building.
But none unless Christ Jesus can be said to be the Master of the building; and
we are his Servants, as I said before: wherefore Romans 14.18. he that in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Next, Christ
is Lord, Acts. 2.

Christ is not only the Master Builder, Christ the Lord over all.
but the Lord over his Church and people; which is much more, Acts 2.36. Ephesians.
4.5. Col. 3.24. 1 Cor. 2.8. and 6.14. I shall tell you, first, how he is Lord;
and then secondly, 1. How he is Lord; or by what means.
what manner of Lord he is? and then thirdly, what we should be under him in
that relation?

1. He is Lord by power; Lordship is properly jus in rebus, 1. By power. Th.
Aquin. 1.33.7.^.
and personis; a right in things and persons: Now this right is by power,
principally; which ( potestas est fundamentum relationis Dominii) is the
fundamental of Dominion or Rule, in Psalm. 66.7. and that Christ has this
power, appears, Matthew. 28.18. Joh. 17.2. and 5.22.

2. He is the Lord by purchase, 2. By Purchase* His deeds do show it written
with his blood, sealed by his Spirit, etc.
and has bought us at a dear rate indeed, see it Acts 20.28. we were sold
(before) under sin. Romans 7.20. and are now bought again; so that Christ has
the deeds to show; drawn up and written, and sealed with his own blood, (whilst
the old was cancelled, Col. 2.14.) and his Lordship is good by Law* Romans 14.9.

3. He is Lord by conquest too, 3. By Conquest. We are his prize-goods.
Heb. 2.9, 10, 14. he has won us out of our enemies hands, Joh. 16.30. Revel.
17.14. from world, sin, death, law, hell, devil; all of us are his prize goods,
by the best, and justest martial law; for he has led captivity captive, Ephesians.
4.8. and we are freed.

4* He is Lord by gift, Psalm. 2.8. Joh. 17.2, 6, 7, 8, 9. 4. By gift, and
inheritance.
Thus has his Father made him Heir, and given him possession of all in Heaven
and Earth. This gift as from God, is a gift that takes in the bounty, bonity,
justice, and mercy of God; manifested in giving us to Christ, as his rightful
possession.

5. He is Lord too by election and choice, Psa. 78.70. Isa. 22.20, 21, etc.
with reference to God; 5. By free choice.
the anointed and chosen one above all, 1. So God has chosen him the Lord.
Hag. 2.23.
Matthew. 12.18. Luke 23.35. 1 Pet. 2.4. So in Christ he has chosen us to
Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.9. And he is chosen with reference to us too, Isai.
26.13. Cant. 5.10, 16. John 20.13, 28. so Matthew. 22.44. 2. We have chosen him
our Lord.
My Lord! which particular appropriation implies the choice which is made of
Christ for their Lord; so do all the Saints, as Col. 2.6, 7. receive Christ for
their Lord; Expos.
i. e. A ruling Christ, as well as a Saving Christ, Jesus the Lord, Christ to
rule as well as Christ to save. What it is to choose him. Aliquid ex part
cogniti^vae virtutis, and aliquid ex part appotitivae.
2 Cor. 4.5. Now election is the proper act of free will, whereby we would
choose one above all others, Cant. 6.3. to which there must be a concurrence of
knowledge, and desire; by the first, we judge him to be fit, preferred above
all, and in himself to excel all; and by the latter, we are made to long after
him above all; and to choose him before all, both these are expressed by Paul,
Phil. 3.8. saying, Jesus my Lord; though we grant that the principal point of
this choice lies in the appetite and thirsting faculty of the soul: Expos.
But all these ways Christ is Lord. 2. Christ is the Lord, but what manner of
Lord.


2. In what manner is Christ called Lord? what kind of Lord is he?

First, He is an Independent Lord; for he depends upon none, depend on him,
Psalm* 89.27. Dan. 2.21. He is Lord Paramount over all, He is an Independent
Lord.
and above all, Phil. 2 9. Ephesians. 4.6.

2. A Spiritual Lord.
Secondly, He is a Spiri^ual Lord, reigns within as well as without, in the
hearts and consciences of men, 1 Cor. 12.3. 2 Cor. 3.17. Matthew. 22.43.

3. A most excellent Lord.
Thirdly, He is a most excellent Lord; excelling all in their own excellencies
of wisdom, power, prowess, prudence, valor, virtue, beauty, righteousness, Jer.
23.6. Heb. 1.8. And in whatsoever a Lord should have, or be. Psalm 148.13.

4. An universal Lord, and yet peculiar.
Fourthly, He is an universal Lord over all the world, Dan. 7.14. Matthew. 21.3.
living and dead, Romans 14.9. Over all his Church, Ephesians. 4 5. And yet a peculiar
Lord to every Church and Soul, as appears before by choice.

Fifthly, He is an alone Lord, 5. A sole Lord and Sovereign*
Mat. 23 8.10. Psalm. 148.13. Isa. 63.3. and Isa. 2.11.17. without any other
Viceroy or Lord-deputy, and he will not allow any to usurp his place, or
power; or to arrogate this over any of his Saints in his Church, Lord Chief
Justice in his Churches.
Mat. 23.10. James 3.4. for he alone is Lord Chiefe-Justice, Joh. 5.27. and
his Lordship is Royall-Prerogative, for brethren are all equal; it is the
evil servant that lords it over his fellow, Christ's warrants with a Habeas
Corpus.
and beats him, and takes hold on his throat, but Christ will issue out his
warrants against him with a Habeas Corpus, etc.

Sixthly, He is an Eternal Lord, 6 The Everlasting Lord. All troubles and
alterations ratify him.
and cannot be displaced or degraded, Isa. 9.7. Heb. 12.27. yea all changes,
alterations, and downfals of other Lords do rather ratify and set him up
surer, then damnifie or weaken his Dominion, he shall reign for ever. And
thus we see what manner of Lord he is.

Use 1 Well then, if this Lord be thus Lord, Then let us see the Churches and
Saints happiness, they have not many, Saints happiness in the Lordship of
Christ.

We have but one Lord, and one Law.

Happy are his subjects and servants.

Whilst oth^^ are most unhappy.


but one only Lord; so all Saints are fellow^subjects to this one Lord: Had
we many Lords* we could not miss many miseries, and slaveries, for diverse
Lords have diverse Laws, and diverse Lusts, diverse Minds, diverse Wills, and diverse
Ends; and all would breed divisions, and distraction, and destruction, but this
one Lord has but one Law, which is a Law of love, the new Command (as we
shall show in the third Lib.) which breeds, peace, joy, grace, and union. O
happy are the servants of this typified Solomon; 1 King. 10.8. 2 Chronicles. 9.7.
who are at peace in liberty and joy; whilst all others (poor souls!) have hard
Lords to serve in a most miserable Babylonish bondage, and Antichristian
slavery. 2. Saints singular honor to have him their Lord.


Use 2 The honor of the Saints and glory of the Church is, Ephesians. 5.27. to have
Christ their Lord and Ruler; What honor is?

More then a praise and a glory, and yet Christ is all these to his Churches*


if it were an honor to be servants to Solomon, 1 King. 10. then a greater
then Solomon is here. See Isa. 43.4. Acts 13*40. John 5.44. they have their
honor from above, which is ( ad se ab aliis) more then a praise (which
consists in words) yea, more then a Glory (which consists in the good opinion
of them) and yet Christ's is a praise and a glory to them, but he is more; and
yet he is our honor Joh. 12.26. and advances us, and all his Saints and
servants to the dignity of Kings, and Princes, and Crowns, No want of
preferment to them that are in Christ's cause.
Glory, Rev. 1.6. he cannot want preferment that serves in Christs-Court and
Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.17. Whilst it is most ignoble, and basely dishonorable to
serve the Beast.

Thirdly, By this Lordship of Christ, Saints are let out (at large) in their
duties to God and men (so far are they from being embondaged, 3 Saints liberty,
and duties under Christ as Lord.
that) they are loose and at Liberty within the Kingdom of Christ (but not
beyond those bounds) hereby what a bond of unity is this? (as appears, Ephesians
4.3.5.) to make the Saints one (though they be of several measures, How much
this makes for unity in all Christian duties.
statures, judgments, heights, enjoyments, etc. yet) when they remember they
have all but one Lord, equally, and the same: How does this whet their zeal?
and strengthen their hands and hearts for the truth? when they come to contest
together, Jude 3. and against opposers to be unanimous? One to another to
counsel, comfort, encourage, vindicate.
Phil. 1.27. considering they all serve one Lord and Master; what delight will
they have in one another? how they will encourage one another to be faithful?
and industrious in serving of their Lord? how ready will they be to vindicate
one another? and honestly and justly to take one another part against
Opposers? Reprove admonish, invite, and persuade.

This advantages us much against sin.


remembering they be all fellow servants; how earnestly will they set upon a
fellow servants with arguments and reasons? Scripture-proofes? and reproves?
and in the power of the Spirit speak home to such, as are ready to be lead away
with lusts? and enter into the service of other Lords? whether of Pope,
Prelate, Expos.
Councels, Class^s, or whatsoever, that would rob Christ of his right? yea how
seriously and assiduously do they demonstrate to others (that are not yet in
this service) ^he singular soule-advantages which are to be had hereby? The
souls Soliloquy under the sense of Christ^ Scepter.
yea what a Bar is this to bolt sin and Satan out of doors (as Hos. 14.8.)
when we consider who it is we serve, and whom we are under? then say we, what
have we to do with Idols! lust? pride? drunkenness? malice? vanities?
traditions? or any such trumperies? For has not the Lord (or Ruler) forbid us
these? are we not under his command: Come, Lord Jesus do thy office! other
Lords would feign rule and ride over us, but come! thou King! Away Satan!
avaunt, thou vile lust! down with these proud Lording Prelates, for I am under
Christ! I am in his Church and Kingdom; I am under grace! and redeemed by the
blood of Christ from all false ways! worships and vain conversation?
Therefore I will obey him, and hearken to him what he says, who is the
(alone) Lord of his Church and people, and who is the best, truest, 3 Christ,
and none else the Head of his Church (which is more then Master o^ Lord.)
and most absolute Independent. He has the most reason to rule me, and
therefore it must needs follow, that I have most reason to obey him, Vbi est
propria and specialis ratio Dominii, ibi est propria and specialis ratio
servitutis.

Lastly, Christ is the (alone) Head of his Church and people, without any
other, 1 Why the head.
Col. 1.18. and 2.19. Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.15. and 5.23. neither is any joined as
Partner with him in this ruling or meddling with the order of his own, A whole
Christ, Head and Body united. Who Head? Who Neck? Who Body? Al together make
up Christ complete.

A mystery to most.

The work of former ages. To know him in part, viz. as Head.

Of this age to know the Body his Church.

Of the next to know whole Christ. Vide chapter 3.


or his Fathers Kingdom. But first why he is called the head, and the Church
his body.

First, Because the Head and Body (being united together by the neck) make up
the whole person, so that Christ as the Head makes not up the whole Christ; but
he as Head, his Ordinances and spiritual administrations as the Neck, and his
Church and Saints embodyed together as before, and united to the Head by the
neck, as his Body; all these together make up a whole Christ, which is yet
(doubtless) a great mystery, and few there be that find it out, Epes. 5.32.
The work of former ages (since the Mystery of iniquity began to cover the
earth, and be in the full) has been to know Christ in part, viz. Christ as the
Head, which has lay long obscure, and is not yet revealed to many (even of
the) religious, and learned men; much more obscure and undiscovered is this
whole Christ, the Head and Body, who will ere long appear as himself in the
riches of his glory, and brightness of his Gospel, and the Saints shall know
him completely, as Head, Neck, and Body, by one Spirit: And not covet to know
him in part, as Head, or as Body (viz. his Churches) the work of this age, but
altogether. Is taken from the similitude of the Head of a humane body.


Secondly, The Church of Christ is called the Body of Christ, by similitude
taken from the natural body of man, which according to the diversity of members
has diversity of actions in Romans 12. and 1 Cor. 12. So is Christ called (as
he is in himself without the Saints) the Head of his Church by similitude
taken from the Head of a man, in which we have several considerations set
before us; As,

1 In order the head is highest, yet but a member.
First, In ordine. The Head is the highest, and the primest part of the Body,
and yet for the use of the body is but a member, though most eminent, and above
all the rest. Hence is it that every Principium, or beginning, is called the
Head of a thing, as Ezekiel. 16.25. Isa. 18.4. and 51.20. Thus Christ is (secundum
propinquitatem ad Deum) exalted above all others, and is the Wellhead to
supply others with the streams of Life, and with the flowings of grace, Head
and brother.
Romans 8.29. he is become the Head of the corner, the top of all, Coloss. 1.18.
and yet (though the Head of his Church) for the use and advantage of the body,
he is, I say, but a member and a brother, Heb. 2.12. though the firstborn,
highest, and above all.

2 The head in excellency and perfection.
Secondly, In perfectione. The Head is the seat of the senses, the beauty of the
body, the grace of the man, and the most honorable of all, Isa. 9.8. Christ is
such a Head (quantum ad plenitudinem omnium gratiarum) in whom all fullness
dwells, as Col. 1.18. and 2.9. he is the Head of the Body the Church, Expos.
verse. 19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell,
((...)) So Joh. 1.14. Col. 2.9. The fullness, honor, grace, glory, of his body.

Christ alone the head of gold.


Christ is the seat of all excellencies and senses of the body, viz. his
Church, he is (as the Head) the honor, and grace of his Body, as a Husband is
the glory and grace of his Wife, Ephesians. 5.23. He is the King in his beauty,
Isa. 33. the beauty of his Body, their crown and glory; therefore this Head is
of Gold Cant. 5.11. yea (in Heb. Cethem) of the finest, and fairest gold. There
may be other Heads, brazen-heads, but none of gold, but Christ in whom all
amiablenesse and perfection dwells.

3 In the virtues and influences of the head.
3. In virtute. The head has an influence upon the whole body; every Member is
beholding to the head; for our sense, motion, life, and influences, are all
from the vital spirits, and powers seated in the head; A headless body is
lightlesse, lifelesse, and senseless.
and from thence are communicated to the body. For were the body headless, it
would be senceless, motionless, and lifeless; such a head is Christ ( virtute
influendi, vel intrinseco influxu) to the Church (his Body) and to every Saint
his Member; whom he feeds with divine influences and spiritual incomes (those
very vital spirits) which are seated in Christ are communicated to the Saints.
Romans 8.11. For of his fullness. Joh 1.16. We receive; All our vital Spirits from
our Head Christ.
and the whole body is filled by him, as Ephesians. 1.23. Whereby we become
spiritually sensible, moving, and living. And without him for our head, we have
not this life, sense, or motion; so that the Church is maintained and preserved
by sweet influences and virtues from Christ her head; and so is every Saint and
Member. It is this head that gives grace, This Head gives all grace, life,
motion, judgment, wisdom, etc.
life, strength, light, righteousness, love, wisdom, judgment, divine reason,
and understanding, and whatsoever is in the head; we receive all from him, and
without him can do nothing, Joh. 15.5, 7.

4. In gubernatione. The head is the governor of the body, 4 Head in Government.
and Governors are commonly called the head of the people, Josh. 11.10. Judge.
11.8. Deuteronomy. 28.13. Psalm. 18.43. So Saul was called the head of Israel, 1 Samuel
15.17. And thus is Christ the head of his Church, Col. 2.10. Gubernare est
movere aliquos in debitum finem^
To rule and govern her, Isa. 9.7. and 22.21, 22. A Governor is one that
orders, acts, and moves those whom he governs into their proper use, and end:
Thus does Christ govern his Church, and every particular Member, making them
act to the end, and in that use they are appointed for; as Romans 12.5, 6. 1 Cor.
12.11, 12, 18. And as it pleases him, Sim.
the Mariner that is Master and Head of the Ship steers and rules it to what
Haven, and in what rode he pleases; For in this Head, Vid Zuinglium, Artic. 2.
de Eccles.

Et Bullinger. Decad. 5. Sermon. 2. de unitate ecclesiae.


wisdom is seated, which is ( cognoscitiva and directiva) executed both by a
knowing and directing property, and ability, whereunto the Members are become
subject.

5. In sympathia. The head has a fellow-feeling with the rest of the Members
of the Body, 5. In Sympathy with the least, and lowest member of the body.
and is a fellow-sufferer with them in their afflictions: If the finger but
ache, and the toe be but trod on, the head is sensible of it, sadded for it,
feels it, complains of it, and looks after it; such an Head is Christ; and to
hurt the least of his little ones, the meanest member, is to hurt him, and to
make him complain; to slight, and slander, cast off, or contemn them, is to do
so to him, Luke 10.16. Matthew. 25.45. For, as much as ye did not help the least
of these, you did not help me (says he) and for as much as you persecute
these, you persecute me, Acts 9.4, 5. Christ takes all to himself, and is
partner with the least of the Saints in all their sufferings, Isa. 63.9.
Therefore said Gadius Martyr, Abate nothing of my torments, for it will be to
my loss* Gadius Martyr. Our eyes, ears, tongue, all in our Head Christ.
go on! Christ is my partner, etc. Our eyes are in this head, he has ears to
hear for us, and tongue to speak for us, ( he is our advocate with the Father,
etc.)

6. In sanitate. The head being well and sound, the body is safe, 6. In health,
and sanity.
and out of danger, as long as the head is above water, the body cannot be
drowned; as long as the head is well settled, When head is well, all is out of
danger; but when the head is ill, all is ill, and out of order.
the body is so too. But if the head be lost, the body is lost; if the head be
unsettled, disturbed or distracted, no wonder the body is so too; and every
Member acts distractedly and disorderly, and runs at random; for the Governor
is not at home, when reason is exiled: Hence men become mad, and unsound, and
unsettled; ( insania dicitur per corruptionem sanitatis.) Christ the head is in
good health (though many Members may be sick and weak) and so long the body
will live, Many turn mad, and why? Zuing. Artic. 11. de Christo capite.
and without danger; we are safe in Christ, and sound in him our head: Hence he
is, Cant. 5.11. the head of gold, (in Hebrew, Paz,) i. e. solid gold: Saints
have a solid head; Expos.
but the reason why many run a madding after monstrous errors, traditions,
unsound opinions, and fopperies is, Expos.
Col. 2.19. ((...)) i. e. not holding Christ fast, and keeping him close with
all their strength. Capitis est incolumitatem dare corpori, etc. Bull. de
civit. eccles. Decad. 5. Sermon. 2.
For it signifies, a strong and steadfast retention and apprehension of Christ,
against all opposers whatsoever, their loosing or laying aside, this head, and
living in, taking from, and acting by an unsound Head, a toxicated brain, a
Creature-principle and ruler. (Hosea 5.21. Ephraim was broken) I say, this is
the reason many are lost, that do they know not what, and worship they know not
whom; and go they know not whither, but run into all manner of madness: This
the Saints do not, that hold fast Christ, their Head.

7. Lastly, As hairs grow upon, and from, 7. Saints as hairs, grow and hang on
Christ their head.
and in the head, and are nourished by, and hang upon the head, and are an
ornament to the head; even so are the Saints, (as the hair) and Christ as the
head, Cant. 4.1. and 5.11. By much more I might amplify it; and I shall now
apply it.

First, Learn the unlimited and everlasting advantage the head; Saints
privilege that Christ is their head.
A little help to which lesson has been already offered to you, and laid
before you: How from Christ (as he is head) she derives all her excellencies
and enjoyments, which I shall not insist on now; but,

Secondly, The Church and Saints have but one head: Church, I mean all Saints,
The Church has but one head.

What I mean by Church? Viz. All Saints in all ages, under all forms.


under all Forms and Administrations whatsoever, past, present, or to come
(which are all but one body) Ephesians. 4.4. Romans 12.45. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Therefore
must have all but one head; that body which has more heads then one, is a
Monster; nothing is clearer in Scripture, then to prohibit the plural, 1 Pet.
5.3. and to preach up the singular, Psalm. 45.11. Ephesians. 1.22. and single head,
viz. Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.23. Col. 1.18, etc. Sim.
How dare men make choice of any other head? or (which is to set up, the
Creature in the room of Christ? Brazen-hearted and faced men that set up the
head of brass for the head of gold: And so iron-hearted to tender Saints, that
set up the iron head.
) A head of brass, in stead of the head of gold? Have not these men hearts of
brass, and foreheads of brass? They will needs have men to play the part of
Lords over Gods heritage, to lay down Directories and Rules of their own make,
and Cannons (very dangerous, charged full, and rammed home and hard, to the
very mouth) of their own constitutions, and in their own construction. How loath
are Lord-like Ministers, Magistrates, (or Prelatick tempers) to admit Christ,
the absolute Lord, Christ is, and shall be the alone Judge (do men what they
can) in matters of Religion.
and Sovereign (without any Viceroy) in matters of Religion? who is so, (and
will and shall be so, whether they will, or no) by decree from above, Psalm.
26.7. passed in the council of Heaven, for all eternity, Dan. 4.34* 35. Isai.
9.6, 7.

This lesson has been above a thousand years in learning; A lesson long a
learning, and yet not learnt.
and yet how many are marvellously (and I fear, I may say wilfully) ignorant
of it; always learning, 2 Timothy 3.7, 8. yet never learn it, They resist Christ,
and this stone will crush them.
in the sound knowledge of the truth; but as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do these resist Jesus Christ; as if he took too much upon him (but
they shall know they take too much upon them*) It goes to their gall to get
this by heart, that Christ is head, yea, and only head, without any other
primary, or secundary Vicar, or Viceroy. In this particular you may obviously
eye and spy out a difference betwixt Christ's Church and Antichrists, A
difference betwixt true and false Churches in this.
who stand out at a distance in this: For

First, Antichrists has men to be their Governors, and are led by the laws of
men, but Christ is the Head, Ruler, and alone Leader of his Church, by his Word
and Spirit.

Secondly, The false Church has its government on the Creatures shoulders; as
on Pope, Archbishops, Prelates, Classes, or Synods, etc. But the true; only on
Christ, Isa. 9. Zach. 9.12. To bear up this Ark, and others are forbid.

Thirdly, The false Antichristian brazen-faced Church has even a head of
brass; The false ha^h the Head of brass.

The properties of the Head of brass, different from the Head of gold.


but the true has only a head of gold, Cant. 5.11. And

First, This head of brass brings into his false Church State by force and
fraud (non verbo sed ferro,) but this head of gold wins into his, by his Word
and Spirit, in love and sweetness, making them a willing people in the day of
his power.

1. The Head of brass compels by force.
Secondly, This head of brass brings in iron signs, and fatal instruments to
keep men under him; and seeks secular power, 2. The Head of brass seeks secular
powers to stand by his side, and to support him. Mark 7.7. Isai. 29.13.
to keep up, hoise up, and authorize his beaten and iron precepts, and
commands; but the head of gold by his own golden authority prevails, without
asking leave of any other Civil or Ecclesiastical powers whatsoever.

Thirdly, This head of brass is of a mixed principle, Jer. 6.28. and is best
pleased, with a mixed company: Hence are so many godless, hardened sinners,
subjects in his dominion; but the head of gold is of such a principle, 3. The
Head of brass is made of mixed principles.
that none will serve him, nor will he that any should worship him; but the
precious separate from the vile, the pure from impure, and visibly unholy, Jer.
15.19. Isa. 60.21.

Fourthly, This head of brass (which is black within, 4. The Head of Brass
approves of the outside appearance, as sufficient to be a member with him.
though it shines without) accepts of a mere outside appearance, and verbal
confession of Christ; let him be as black as Hell within, so his words be good,
and he look like Heaven without, it is enough to answer his principle. But this
head of gold (who is better within, then without) would have all his like
himself; all glorious within, Psalm. 45. as the curtains of Solomon, Cant. 1.5.
being born of God; for what is of flesh is flesh, and what is of Spirit is
Spirit, Joh. 3.

Fifthly, 5. His Officers and Members are all of the same metal with himself.
This head of brass has members and officers of metal like himself; and of no
better principle, if so good, (for some are iron and clay) who act according to
their own natural principles, or points, etc. But the head of gold has members
and officers qualified with his own Spirit, and excellencies, and filled with
his own fullness, Ephesians. 1.23. and partaking of his own divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Christ and his Spirit are the Officers in Christ's Church, and none other, any
further then Christ and his Spirit dwells in them, and acts them; so that then
it is not they, but Christ rules, orders, directs, disposes, or dispenses, etc.

Sixthly, This head of brass has an ill-savor, 6. The Head of Brass has, and
gives an ill savor.
Joel 2.20. and all his doctrines, traditions, and discipline, sent strongly of
himself; so that whosoever handles them, their hands will smell of the brazen
head; therefore beware of their leaven, etc. But this head of gold, and all his
ordinances, doctrines, laws, and discipline, are of a most sweet and precious
savor, Cant. 1.3. 2 Cor. 2.14* 15. Ephesians. 5.2, etc. As ointment poured out.

Seventhly, This head of brass, 7. Head of Brass looks bravely and brightly,
before a better comes, whereby many souls have been deceived.
seen and observed by himself, makes a rich, rare, and amiable show to most
men; but when he comes to be compared to the head of gold, he falls, and then
looks like himself, viz. dull, dead, black, earthly, filthy, and unfit for to
be a head (or foot) in Christ's Church.

Thus in these days, his doctrine, and devices, traditions, and trumperies,
being brought into the light, and compared with the truth, can no longer
triumph, but must fall before this head of gold; who excels him as far, as
light darkness, good evil, and as Heaven excels Earth; although before this he
fetched in many to him, from far, and sat in glory and majesty, exalting himself
above all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4. But now he is to be destroyed by the
bright appearance of this head of gold, 2 These. 2.8. that is, he is to be
rendered useless and uneffectual, as before in the Septuag. (...), Expos.
and he shall weaken him, or break his strength, or glory, he shall lessen his
luster, and make him forlorn, and loose his pride: Nothinging him by his
spiritual appearance, and in the brightness of his presence.

8. It is but man's creature, and must ^umble.
Eighthly, This head of brass is the work of men's hands, and but of man's
Creation, and must be broken to shatters, Psalm. 29. this Image must fall, Dan.
2.32. But for the head of gold, the headship of Christ, the gates of hell shall
not prevail against him, Expos.
(...), the powers of hell, the policies of hell, Matthew. 16.18.
the very strength and force of hell, shall be set against him, but to no
purpose; for of his government there shall be no end.

Thus I have cursorily set before you a vast difference between a false and
true Church State, from the Heads; the one being of man's make, and the other of
Gods appointment, Psalm. 2.6. All things are to be put under Christ's feet, and
this head of gold shall wear a crown of gold, Christ's Headship will hold for
ever.
for ever and ever, Heb. 2.7, 8. Therefore it is that Kings, Crowns, Kingdoms,
Councels, Classes, and Synods, National Churches and States are shaken, and
shall be shaken, that the Kingship of Christ, which shall never be shaken, Heb.
12.27, 28. may remain for ever.

Thus you see how false Church-states are but the habitations of Antichrist,
built up by men; but the true ones are built up by Christ, Zach. 6.12. and the
habitation for his presence and honor to dwell in, Ephesians. 2.22. 2 Cor. 6.16.
Wherefore Friends! beware! beware of brazen faces! that have the face to cry up
that Head, which you have heard of! These are those that consult to cast Christ
down from his excellency, and delight in lies, Psalm. 62.4. Such brazen heads
fall (by thousands) short (yea, by millions of myriades) of the orders,
excellencies, perfections, plenitudes, virtue of influence, Government,
Sympathy, health, and soundness of this true Head of the Church. viz. The head
of gold. But now, Quest.
who be such heads of brass? Who be the Heads of Brass?


First is, that head of brass, the brazen-faced Pope (always brought up in
Brazen-Nose College) he was the first, Answ.
that had the face to prefer himself general-master of the Church; Lord, Head,
and Lawgiver. The first Head of Brass is the Pope, who calls himself, Christ
his Vicar.
There was no such thing from the beginning, but by little and little, and as
ambition, and base thirst of ruling began to rage, the care of Christ's Church
began to assuage; and then, we shall find, first began to be given to one man
the name of Bishop, (a name common to all Ministers of Christ, The History how
Bishops, Popes, Prelates, Metropolitans, etc. entered in at first.
Acts 20.28.) who was chose by the rest of the Ministers and Elders to be (as
it were) Consul in a Senate, or as a speaker in the house, and which was to be
for the time being and present, upon urgent occasions, to sit as Chairman: And
though he had (the honor) the name, yet no more authority, nor voice, nor
determination then any other; he had no negative power or voice, which all
lordly spirits pretend unto. The next step after this, was, by reason of the
paucity and poorness of Ministers and Overseers; and by reason of the rigor of
hot persecutions, the Church was neglected, and Bishops (so called) or
Ministers grew most ignorant, and very few to be ^ound fit for Church Affairs
as Overseers; and of those very few, most of them unlearned, and very blind
and dumb, and so idle, that they regarded not the Church, and let things go how
they would. Then began the care of one Church to be given up to one more then
to any other, and then did one take the most charge of Church-orders,
Ordinances, and Discipline,
which occasioned him to hoise up his ambitious sails to be filled with honor.
And so it began to be a perpetual and continual course and office, which was
only for a time at first (and that upon necessity too* in times of
persecution) conferred upon one and so all began to be guided and governed by
one, man's authority; and no more by joint consent, concurrence and votes, etc.
of the whole Church and Brethren, as was wont to be before, Acts 15.22, 23.

And after all this the veil of ignorance grew thicker, and darkness, yea,
gross darkness overspread the whole Canopy; so that scarce an able
understanding, discerning Minister, or sit Overseer, was in a whole City, Town,
or Province, to be had or heard of; and yet fearful Tyranny, and troubles the
Saints (poor, scattred, scorned, dispersed, and despised people) were then
under. How Bishops came in with their Diocesses.
Whereupon all the Churches that were in one whole Province, were (by those
times) brought under the subjection of one man; and so called his Diocese; and
that man the Bishop of that Diocese, and then he shook off the care and charge
of one particular Congregation or Parish Church, Ever since Lords Spiritual and
Temporal.
pretending the oversight of many; So that ever since the office of a Bishop
has been by such, left; and their ambition has been great, to be great, and
to get honors.

Thus it came to pass the Authority of the whole Church, and power by Christ
committed to the whole body, was usurped by one man; who sat as a god in the
Temple of God, ruling and reigning as he list (until of late in England these
lords were laid in the dust, which is eminently ominous to the Popes. Their
ambition like a Bladder.
) But ambition still growing bigger and bigger (as a bladder which the devil
had the blowing up of) being filled with sulpherous breath and bottomless
pit-smoak; Sim.
these Bishops climbed yet higher, From Bishops to Archbishops, Primates.

To Quadrumvirats, or Patriarks, and to Popes.

2 These. 2.4. Antichrist.


till there came to be Archbishops and Metropolitans, and Primates to rule
whole National Churches, in the whole Nation. After this the whole world, or
the Church (as they called it) all over the world in all Nations and Kingdoms
on the Earth, must be governed by a Quadrumvirat, i. e. Four Patriarks, who had
the charge of all the world; but yet not being high enough, up gets the Pope by
those stairs, Vide Cartwrights Eccles. Discipline.

Antichrist begins to fall the same way he began to rise.


and saucily leaps upon Gods throne; And so this Brazen-head, or Brazen-faced
Antichrist proudly came to sit in the Temple of the Lord, as 2 These. 2.4. Here
you have a true history of his rise, I doubt not but ere long you shall have as
true a history of his ruin. He is already begun to fall (here) as he began to
rise by Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, etc.
And this is an honest Narration of the Church-confusion in times of
persecution, and of the crowding out of all other Church Officers and offices
(as I shall show if the Lord please in the third Book) and of the stating and
starting up of Pope and Prelate, upon Gods throne. I shall refer you to 182.
page of Cartwrights Eccles. Discipline, Printed Anno 74. wherein you have the
Story at large. But after the Pope who called himself Christ's Vicar, ever since
to this hour: after, I say, him, who taught the poor people Psapho-like, to cry
him up for a great god, follows,

Secondly, Next a General Council or Synod, 2. Head of Brass, a Council, as
Christ's Vicar.
who usurps the power and authority of Christ, and his Church; they set down
Laws, and laying injunctions upon the Saints, they bid and forbid, command, and
countermand as they pleased; to make themselves Judges and Commanders over
consciences; and to determine, approve, and appoint what (as they accounted)
was truth, and what was not.

Thirdly, But this head of brass became also too hard a Task-master, and kept
the people of God in grievous bondage. 3. Archbishop next head of Brass.
Then after that, starts up the Archbishop, and he Lords it over the Bishop,
the Bishop over the Deane, the Dean over the Archdeacon, the Archdeacon over
the Parish-Minister, and the Parish-Minister over the people, Bulling. de unit.
Eccles. Sermon. 2.
and what a slavery were poor souls in then? The Prelate sat then in his
magnificentiall robes in pomp, like a little God, and petty-Pope) in his
High-commission-Court; but as Hierom says,
in Tit. and in Epist* ad Evagium. Non divina authoritate unum aliquem
Presbyteriis esse Praelatum, qui dicatur Episcopus, Not warranted in the Word.
etc. sed humana consuetudine; and this is not by divine right, or authority,
but having a custom up; they cannot, or they will not let it go down, but it
grows higher and higher, whereby the order and authority of Christ is cast by,
and their Lord-like, and their tyrannical Ruledome set up, and so it is they
came to reign. This, says Bullinger, Blessed Jerome speaks,
not of the Roman Hierarchy, as of every Bishop, or any one whatsoever he be,
that will take to himself power over any Church of Christ, All in primitive
equal in honor, dignity, etc.
or that does domineer over any Congregation; for ( ab antiquo) a Minister and
a Bishop, a Preacher, and a Prelate (so called) had one and the same honor,
dignity, power, and authority, yet next to this proud Prelate.

4 Head of Brass an Assembly of Di^vines or Synod.
Up starts an Assembly of Divines (as a Council did next the Pope) to be
Christ's Vicar too, and he is another head of brass, as bold as the former
petty-Pope to impose Laws, and penalties: these have usurped power over
Christ's Church too, they deliver their dogmata, and breath out their senses and
sentences with wild-fires about their ears, that swallow not their Judgments
and Laws by whole sale, and in the lump. Such Synods who have challenged to
themselves a potestatem juridicam) a Juridicall power over the Saints, as to
inflict punishments, to bind up consciences to their Cannons, Directories, or
Conclusions,
and by a Legislative Lordlinesse have laid down the Orders and Laws under
penalties and pains; so that they have been too brazen-faced and bold. There
is no precept for Synods, said Dr. Whittaker; but for this I shall refer the
Reader to Mr. Hookers Survey of Church Discipline upon this subject, as also to
the third book of his Treatise, Chap. 9.
and to Lib. 2. wherein I hope, all objections I meet with, that pretend the
necessity of this (usurped) power, are answered; but,

Another brazen-head that takes the same course in usurping Lordship, 5 Head of
Brass succeeds in Presbytery Classes, that are ruling. They breath by the
Popes soul.
is the Ruling-Classes: O! what a Platonian Metempsuchosis we meet with? these
all breath by the Popes soul! O mystery! Mystery! Mystery! of Iniquity! under
a new name, this is but the old head of brass! only furbished up in a better
form for appearance! It was the Assemblies vote (very like, and good reason
for it) That it is lawful and agreeable to Gods word, that there be a
subordination of Congregational Classical Provincial, and National Assemblies
for the government of the Church, etc. but how prove they that? from Mat. 18.
Go tell the Church, etc. very well proved: then the Church is meant the
Classes (this is a Doctrine for Asses) and is indeed agreeable to the Scottish
word of God, Mr. Dell in's way of Peace, p. 32, 33.34. Mat. 18. Go tell the
Church, i e the whole Elders, brethren, and all.
but not to our word of God. This is proved, (says Mr Dell) as the Pope would
prove himself to be above the Emperor out of Genesis 1. God made two great
lights, the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon the night; the Sun is above
the Moon (says he) therefore the Pope is above the Emperor; so do the
Assembly prove subordination (very well for an Assembly) but we may say as
Isa. 26.13. O Lord our God! Vide Cottons Keys p 46. etc.

Philips Ans. to Lamb, p. 150. Vide Damports reply to Paget p. 227, 228,
229.230, etc. Buroughs his heart-divisions cap. 22. p. 157.


other Lords have had dominion over us, but (now) by thee only will we make
mention of thy name. What is this National Assembly? but Archbishops
multiplied? what is their Provincial, but Bishops multiplied? their Classical,
but so many Deans? or Deans multiplied? their Congregational, but Prelaticall
Ministers multiplied? and is not this of Brazen-head-Colledge? and beat out
upon the Popes Anvil? Well, I might show what unsavory fruits there are that
grow upon this Bramble of Rome, and what corrupt poisonous Cankers are plucked
from it; but for that I refer to the third Book of this Treatise, only I must
say that such Plants as these (which are not of the Fathers planting) must be
rooted up, Matthew. 15.13. and shall conclude with honest Bullinger, Unsavory
fruits thereof.
De unitate Eccles. Decad. 5. Sermon. 2. Firmissime inhaeremus sacro-sancto
Evangelio, and indubitatae Apostolorum doctrinae, quae tollit omnem primatus
superbiam, fideleque nobis ministerium, and ministerii aequalitatem
humilitatemque commendat, etc. Let us keep close to the word of Christ, and the
undoubted doctrine of the Apostles, which does cast down this doctrine,
and suppresses this pride and Prelacy, pressing humility, and equality without
subordination, or superiority; These Idols must down, though never so bold and
brazen faced as yet.

A word more to the Magistrates.

They must not Head it over the Church. Regnum Dei non est regnum in quo
gladiis and fustibus res agaetur Marlorat. Expos. Eccles. in Luke 9.55. De
Oecumen. Pontif. Cham.


but that has been offered before in Chapter 8. I doubt not but the
irrevocable, and irrecoverable downfall of these brazen-faced Idols, is hard
by, let us wait but a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and then
as, Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? I
have heard the Lord, and observed him, etc. i. e. him, who is the Head of gold.

But before I finish this Chapter, let us be content with this Head, viz.
Christ alone, and be very cautious of meddling with secular powers (who have
their secular ends) in Church Matters; for though all Popish and Prelatical
discipline calls for the sword of the Civil Magistrate to support them; yet
this does not, only for the sword of the Spirit; for the weapons of our warfare
are not carnal. There is no need of forcing power, as appears in Chapter 11.
for Christ bids his Disciples, Go, and teach, but never to offer violence; so
says Chamier, Ea est Ecclesiae natura, ut nusquam magis requiratur persuasio
interna; nam ad fidem nemo potest cogi invitus, etc.) That the Church of Christ
is of such a constitution as necessarily requires inward persuasions and
workings upon the spirits of such, as enter, or are in. No man can be (well)
against his will forced to the faith, None ought to be forced to the faith.
for God will be worshipped with the whole heart or will; and hypocrisy (which
Coercive powers drive into) is detestable and odious with God: wherefore in the
order and government of the Church, this ought to be the bent and scope, viz.
to win into the Church by spiritual persuasions; Vide chap. ^. l. 2
and those that are so called, are to be so kept in, and continued, i. e. not
by violence but as voluntary. No such thing as Secular Magistrate to make men
be of any Religion, or to compel any to the faith; that was of force, or in
date three hundred years after Christ. Not in date 300 years after Christ.

In opere Articulatorum Art. 36. Deodate in loc.


And it was such a thing, says Zuinglius as Christ always set far from him,
at a distance, as if it did not appertain to him, nor his Kingdom to meddle
with, viz. with the worlds jurisdiction, or power, as Luke 12.13, 14. Who made
me a Judge, or divider over you? who? Expos.
not the world; therefore he would not intermeddle (though sought unto) with
secular Government (which has ever secular ends; Diodate in loc. Piety must
not dance after the pipe of policy. Trap. in Mat. 21.7.
for then Religion must dance attendance to policy, and what is that (says
one) but to set the Ass upon Christ, not Christ upon the Ass. This worldly
policy (says Luther) would ruin Religion; yet Christ is made a Judge,
Jo. 5.22. but his Judicatory power is not of the world, nor as the worlds;
Christ is a Judge, but in what Court of Judicature? Secular powers in, and over
the Churches, or in matters of Religion, are tyranny, and why? Constantines's
Letter.
and by this he would teach us not to introduce Powers so improper to the
nature of the Church into the Church, which must needs act, and be executed in
tyranny then, because they are quite out of their own Orb, and then they are
Phaeton-like, destructive: For the Church is called not of the world, though in
the world.

In Constantines time (when the Church it is said was lulled in his lap) whilst
the worldly powers were the Churches servants and friends; yet Constantine
would not come in as a civil Magistrate to compel any man, but absolutely
forbids it in his Letter to his subjects in the East: Let no man (says he) be
grievous one to another, but what every man thinks to be best, and most the
mind of God, that let him do, but be sure they live holy, and walk as
children of light, without malicing or menacing one another; and he concludes
thus; For there is a great diversity between voluntary and forced Religion; but
this will lie before us in the Second Book. Only this note, that this head of
Iron got in by the Apostasy, and ever since the Churches (so called) or rather
the Popes and Prelates have had a dependency upon worldly powers, whereby they
have been,
and shall be both undone together, and their fall shall be great, Rev. 19.18,
19. which the great hand of God has already given earnest of (as is seasonably
observed in my Lord Cromwels Letter from Dunbar, page 11.) and says he,
Cromwels Letter.
It is worthy consideration of all those Ministers that do take into their
hands, the instruments of a foolish Shepherd, to wit, meddling with worldly
policies and mixtures of earthly powers, to set up that which they call the
Kingdom of Christ, which is (indeed) neither it, nor if it were, would such
means be found effectual for that end; and they neglect, and trust not to the
Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit, etc. After Constantine, Magistrates
meddled not with matters of Religion.

Ambrose. Valentinian the Emperor.


But besides these Letters, we shall find after Constantines time too, That
Civil Magistrates (as such) had no right of Vmpirage (as Master John Goodwin
says in his sixteenth Quaere) in matters of Christian Religion, which appears
Proof-sure, in Ambrose his thirteenth Epistle to the Emperor Valentinian, who
says, When did you hear, most clement and kind Emperor, that Laics (Laicos
judicasse in causa fidei?) were Judges in matters of Religion? or ever censure
in matters of faith, etc. So that it seems (then) they were accounted very
incompetent Judges. And why not now? Unless that new invented inference be of
force sufficient to carry away the bell, that follows, Expos.


Object. Job, says in Chap. 31.26, 27. Answ.
If I beheld the Sun when it shined, o^ the Moon walking in Brightness; To the
Objection in travel to bring forth at White-hal. Feb. 22. 1652.
And my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand: This
also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judges, etc. Hence say some, Job
teaches, the Judges of the Earth are to meddle in such matters.

Answ. I shall easily demonstrate, 1. This Scripture teaches nothing of
earth^^ly powers or Magistrates.
that this Text teaches us not a tittle of Civil Magistrates Power; and then
secondly, That it treats not of their Power in Matters of Faith.

1. And first, We shall find, both by the Text it self, and by the words going
before, and following after, that Job speaks of God, the great Judge; (or if
you will have the Hebraism, Judges, and Judge of Judges) and not of earthly
Judges;

Reason 1. Because the Hebrew is too pondrous for earthly powers, The Text in
the original will not bear it.
and the word (...) is of great weight; and so Shaphat is as much as to say,
One judging and doing right in all causes, which earthly Judges and Powers
cannot do: viz. In such cases as are the Ablative to them, being out of their
orb, beyond their sphere, and too high for the principles of secular powers.

Reason 2. But for more satisfactions sake, see verse 2, 3. Is not destruction
to the wicked, The context foregoing and following, will not bear it.
and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? Does not God see my ways?
and count all my steps? etc. So come to verse 14. If I have done thus, and
thus, says he, What then shall I do when God rises up? and when God visits,
what shall I answer? So in verse 23. For destruction from God was a terror to
me, and by reason of his highness, I could not endure. So he comes to the Text,
If I have been so covetous to make gold my God, verse 24. Expos.
(If I have been so Idolatrous as to worship the Sun, or the Moon, verse 26. If
I have been a Hypocrite, or if my heart has run a whoring from God, and has
secretly sinned, being enticed thereunto by idolatry, or the like; and my
mouth, and my hand has consented, and agreed together; contrary to my open and
apparent Profession; as those that of old kissed their Idols, 1 King. 19.18.
Hos. 13.2. or else reached out their complementing hands to the Idols of the
Sun or Moon,
and then put their hands to their mouth in sign of honor and homage. But if I
have done so, will not God judge it? Or were it not an offense for God to
judge? Heinous and abominable, and against a high God. And for this kind of
Exposition, Diodate, Calvin. Arias Montanus.
vide Diodate, Calvin, Arias Montanus, with many others: Besides, see the
following verses, verse 35. O that one (the Judge) would hear me! Behold, my
desire is that the Almighty would answer me, verse 37. I would declare to him
my ways; and as a Prince (not as a prisoner) would I go near him. All these
Scriptures are of force and power to prevail with my reason, and to arrest my
understanding, that this Judge must needs be meant the just God, the Almighty
One; and not at all touching or teaching the power of earthly Magistrates.

2. For that the earthly Judges of the East-Countreys in Jobs days, were
Idolaters, and Sun-gazers, 2. Magistrates were the Idolaters.
and Moon-worshippers; and how then could Idolatry be punished by such Judges?

3. The Word is to be read thus, 3. The grounds of their pretended Inference,
and new raised Arguments, are of Humane invention.
This were an iniquity condemned, or adjudged, (iniquitas judicata, says Arias
Montanus) or damnable (says Calvin) or one of the greatest size (iniquitas
maxima, says Carthusianus in loc.) or the like; but I meet with no Expositors
(but the other day at White-hal) that assert this Text to give Magistrates power
in Matters of Religion, which is altogether against the Text, Context, and the
truth it self; besides, the original will not allow it; for to be punished by,
is not to be found there, but is added by our Translators, and is a bit of
their own brains. On which, all the Inferences, and Arguments that are built,
must needs fall; for this their foundation is of sand. But should we play with
them, and ply them a little for recreations sake (as a man does with the fish
that he has struck, and is sure of) we might argue with them, Ex concessis,
and then say:

4. Suppose it were so, 4. Should we grant this Text did touch Magistrates, yet
it could not be for Matters of Faith, but for Matters of Fact.
yet this were not to make them Judges of Religion, in matters of Faith; but
only as their object in matters of fact; for if my words and actions, mouth
and hand, verse 27. have agreed together in Idolatry, etc. Then the Judge takes
notice of it; so in verse 11. the brain is to be punished by the Judges: But I
offer this only for sports sake; for I adhere to the Answers before, as most
authentic, viz. That Job intended not earthly powers, or Judges here below.
But I have met with some more Objections and Questions of late, by a Letter
sent me, from a pious and an understanding Gentlewoman, Mistress Venn, which I
answered: Some of which are as follow, I shall pick out the powerfullest.

Quest. 1. Whether Magistrates being set for punishment of as well as for the
praise of them that do well, ought not to punish men for Heresies and
Blasphemies? as well as for swearing, drunkenness, etc.

They may as far as they break the Civil Laws.
Affirmatively, Within their own jurisdiction which is Civil, they may take
cognizance of all sins whatsoever; so far, as they be uncivil, and break their
Civil Laws; provided, that Civil Laws contradict not Christ's: So give unto
Caesar what is Caesar's. They judge of practices, but not of consciences.

Burtons Vindication.

Answer to Prynnes 12. In^errog. p. 70. And may take cognizance of Blasphemers,
Heretics, etc. as well as of Swearers, and Drunkards* for their actions.




2. We must (as Master Burton says) put a difference between consciences and
practices; God alone is the Lord and Judge of the conscience; but man of man's
practices, and actions, whether good or evil: So Romans 13.3, 4. If you do that
which is evil, be afraid. So that it is for deeds or actions, that are evil, he
is to punish. Actions are the object of Civil powers to countenance or correct,
as there is cause; not consciences, judgments, opinions, thoughts: So that as
they punish swearers, drunkards, whore-masters, etc. for their evil actions,
and not for their thoughts, opinions, or the like; so they are not to meddle
with Schismatics, Heretics, Blasphemers, or the like, for their judgments,
thoughts, or opinions, until they produce practices, and bring forth such
actions, as are the adaequate object of Civil Magistracy, and then they may and
must; but to a second Answer.

They may not usurp Christ's power to kill errors with the sword, which ought
to be destroyed by the Word. Vide Vrsin. de secundo Praecepto, p. 737. de
Potestate Magistratus. Examples of Luthers conquest over errors.

Of Zuinglius, respons. in libel. Strothionis, Tom. 2. fol. 302.


Negatively, Magistrates may not usurp the power of Christ and his Church, to
suppress sin, error, or blasphemies, by the sword, (being no more then
opinions, and before they break out into evil pr^ctises,) seeing Christ has
commanded they should be destroyed by the Word and Spirit (which convinces of
sin,) etc. Joh. 16.8. Thus Luther in his Epistle to them at Erphard, says,
Consider with what sword I have conquered sin, and overcome their errors, and
subdued policy: I have never touched them with a finger, but Christ has
destroyed them all by the Spirit of his mouth. i. e. The Word of his Gospel.
And this is the only instrument of conquering, converting, and convincing.
Thus says Zuinglius, Haec unica eaque sola via est, etc. This is the only way
to subdue errors; the Word will conquer, when nothing else can; we suffer all
the writings from Papists, to be freely and openly read, and read again: For
the sword of the Spirit shall slay all the evils that are taught in them. Now
judge (says he) whose cause is most suspicious and surreptitious; ours, who
would have even the adversaries doctrines published in our Churches, Errors
all to be suppressed by the word, not by the sword.
that we may overthrow them by the word? or yours, who reproach our doctrine
before the simple people as heretical, yet by your good will, neither
suffering them to read it, nor understand it, nor yet so much as offering to
overthrow it by the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

Thus we see how secular powers are excluded from meddling with matters that are
spiritual or mental,
and that the Word and Spirit are the Instruments appointed by God for the
overthrow of errors, Vide chapter 2. lib. 2.
and suppressing of heresies and blasphemies.

Object. We find the Reformers of the Church in the Old Testament that looked
after the worship of God, Obj.
that they used their material sword and Civil powers (as Kings and Rulers)
to cut off the Idolatrous Priests, 2 King. 16* 5.20. and false Prophets, etc.

Ans. 1 Such as were types of Christ, (both King, Priest, and Prophet) did many
things by extraordinary warrants, and 1. Extraordinary and typical.
which were to figurate the administrations of the Spirit, which were to answer
thereto, as Number. 9.13. and 5.2. Levit. 10.2. Exodus 32.24.27. 2 Priests and
Prophets did civil offices then.


But these were in extraordinary cases, such were the extraordinary persons of
Eliah, Samuel, David, Daniel, etc. who exercised both offices, and as I may say
both swords, But the case is not the same with us now.
but this was extraordinary, and for extraordinary ends; Now,

Secondly, Lo! we may prove Priests and Prophets did execute in Civil offices
too, as Phineas in putting to death Zimri and Cosby, Number. 25.7, 8. Psalm.
106.30. but (our case being not the same) proves no more that Civil Magistracy
belongs to Ecclesiastical men, so called; 3 There ever was a specifical
distinction betwixt Church and State, Magistracy and Ministry, matters Civil,
and matters of Religion.
then that Ecclesiastical power and offices belong to Civil Magistrates (as
such) But besides

Thirdly, It lies evidently before us in the Old Testament, that
Ecclesiastical Powers (so called) were ever distinguished from Magistraticall;
For the Priests and Levites had their distinct proper acts and places, both in
respect of order and jurisdiction; so had Moses and Aaron, one having charge of
the State, the other of the Church, Moses and Aa^on.
and not the one confounded with the other, Uzziah the first Civil Magistrate
that durst meddle with matters beyond a Civil orb.
or confined by the other; Yea the^ stood at such a distance that as none of
the Priesthood could meddle with State-matters, or take that government upon
him; so none of the Royall-stocke, or blood, could meddle with the Priesthood:
Nor durst any (as I know of by ordinary warrant) until King Vzziah, puffed up
with conceit and pride, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. but he escaped not scot-free,
and it hangs upon record as a scarecrow to cautionate others of his temper;
Aristobulus.
neither do we read of any Priest (unless by extraordinary warrant, Proved in
the New Testament.

Christ the High Priest ever kept his orb.


as is said before) that durst meddle with Civill-matters, till Aristobulus
most rashly, after their return from Babylon joined and jumbled the Kingdom
and Priesthood, Mitre, and Crown together, so says Eusebius. 8. lib. of his
Preparation to the Gospel: And the New Testament, and Gospel, are as clear
against it as can be; Christ (the High Priest) ever kept within his compass,
refused to meddle with Caesar's matters, as to divide the heritage, Luke 12. yea
and to be a King, Jo. 6.15. being a thing Civil, and out of his sphere, and so
he forbids his Apostles over and over, meddling with such matters, Mat. 20.26.
and Mark. 10.42. Luke 22.25. he tells them, that though it befitted Kings
Courts, and Gentiles, yet not them, they being called into other and better
offices, and distinct from them: the Apostles themselves disclaim it also, So
the Apostles
2 Cor. 1. ult. yea, they refused to meddle any longer with the charge of the
Poor, seeing there was no such necessity of it, but bid them choose Deacons:
Act. 6. Much less would they meddle with matters merely civil and worldly, to
take them off their Ministry and duty, 1 Timothy 2.4. 1 Cor. 24.25.26. Romans 12.3.
and yet ah! how! how ambitious have many been in all ages? not content with
their calling, but still aspiring? and usurping? I find Mr. Cartwright in his
Eccles. Discipline p. 80. speaking of the pride and ambition of Bishops
complaining much of their meddling with Civil matters, which (says he) is
contrary to their own Cannons, The History. How Bishops grew big and
ambitious, and became temporal Lords at first.
and to the old Cannons called the Apostles Cannons in 80. and 82. p. and
contr. Council. Carthag. 3. Cannon 18, 19, 20. and which (says he) is most
bitterly inveighed against by the Ancient Fathers; but this came in at first,
he tells us, thus. When things were in controversy, and estates lay at variance
between parties, there were not those hot and eager suits at Law then (nor that
fatting or feeding of English locusts (I mean Lawyers) as now is) those things
that were in controversy were wont (by consent mutually from both parties) to
be given up to a Bishop, or Bishops, trusting to their consciences, First by
intrusting them with lands in controversy.
and looking upon them as more then other men for piety and conscience; for
they conceived this the best means and issue to end all controversies, Bishops
lands belongs to the poor by right.
and so came in Lands called Bishops-lands in part. Since which Kings and
Princes partly out of good minds, and out of earnest desires to adorn them,
and the Church (though they were not wary enough in what they did) and partly
because they were themselves so continued in wars abroad, Then by the favor of
Kings and Princes.
which required their own persons, therefore they (in their own absence, and
by reason of such like hindrances) gave authority to Bishops to correct such
with Civil censures, mulcts, and punishments as disturbed, They had Civil
powers lent them to punish offenders.

And then soon becomes Treasurers and Lord Keepers, Judges, etc.


or troubled the Church; which in little time they took so much likeing unto,
and were so ambitious of, that no honorable office in Civil-state, but they
got into their hands by book or crook; becoming Lords, Treasurers, Keepers,
Chiefe-Justices, and of the Privy-Councel, and upper house of Parliament, and
what not? who desire a fuller account hereof, may find it in Dr. Willets
Synopsis 5. Genesis Controv. 9.3. p 278. How at first, the Privileges and
immunities were enlarged by the munific^nce of civil powers, and Princes, and
with divine authority, and so Marsilius Patavinus asserts it ( ex gratuita,
Their privileges from Civil powers.
etc.) Praefat in Council. Senonens. And that the revenues and lands of
Bishoprics were (some of them) given by devout and religious persons, Princes,
etc. Cod. lib. 8. tit. 54. l. 54. Justinian. And their titles of honor, being
created Barons, and made Lords of the Parliament house here in England, were
bestowed upon them by the bounty of Kings about four hundred and twenty years
agone. Bishops-lands.
Cod. lib. 2* tit. 7. leg. 14. but never by the word and warrant of God,
Barons, Lord.
that they got these Civil honors, places, and employments. But we shall
find many Laws that were made to invest them into honor and pomp. As Cod*
lib. 1. tit. 6. leg. 28. Anthemius made this Law, that if a stranger dyed, and
left no Executor, the Bishop of the place should be his Executor: So Cod. lib.
6. tit. 54 leg. 10. if a stranger dyed intestate, his goods should be
delivered to the Bishop: And abundance more of such like Laws; so that at
length what places of honor were in state, but they got either gratis? And so
things Civil and Eccles. viz. Christ's and Caesar's, came to be mixed together.
or by begging? or one way or other? till they had mingled Church and
Commonwealth? Kings and Bishops? Christ's and Caesar's? Civil and Ecclesiastical
matters so together, that they made a mere gallomaufrey of Religion, and of the
Laws of Christ? But is there now a Reformation amongst us? or do not our
Ministers most unworthily imitate them in their ambition? and boldness? whose
deserved fall lies before our eyes for our caution, and whose Lordlinesse is
laid in the dust? State-Ministers too much alike them.
Oh! I do fear lest this notorious fault should appear as full and foul upon
States-Ministers (I mean such Ministers of the Gospel as have very painfully
and profitably preached Christ to the people formerly, till they come to be
preferred by the States) and then not only their Doctrine, but their lives are
of another style, i. e. more State-like, lofty, and high-strained; Corrupted
with honors, and then they consent to the joining of Civil and Eccles. Christ's
and Caesar's together.

Many hundreds bewail it.


for then they are meddling with State Affairs, and nibling upon State-honours,
and so come at length to be corrupted by greater honors, favors, preferments,
and places, and turned into mere complements. Methinks the late Prelates, with
their precipitant and sudden fall may be set up as a good Sea-mark lest they be
swallowed up in such sands. I know this very thing lies a heavy burden upon
the spirits of hundreds (very godly) in this Commonwealth; and it is their
continual complaint with grief and groans (as I have heard with my ears)
that such Ministers are more like Magistrates, viz. lofty, proud, and stately;
and that such Pastors creep apace to be Masters of Colleges, Heads of
Universities and States-chaplaines, or else get to be Committee Men, into
offices or Armies, or some thing or other that may make them stately, That they
turn great men, in Civil, Secular, or Martial affairs.
and lord it over others being employed in secular or Martial affairs. And
though the intents of our States and Grandees (for whom we can never be
thankful enough) be very godly herein; yet the Lord make our Governors so
wise and vigilant in all those honors or preferments they set upon the heads
of such as are Gospel Ministers, as that thereby they do not corrupt them, and
wrong the Church, and lull her asleep (as we hear she has been in
Constantine's lap) least more mischief follow it, then ever went before by the
Dragons rage in former ages, These are sad and seldom failing Omens of the
Chu^ches danger, which is more now, then it was in the Dragon ^ days, o^ forme^
times of persecution, vide chap. 2.

Such complain of others usurping their office and places, and yet they usurp
others offices and places, and turn Politicians.

O the shame of this age!


as Chap. 2. Which we are somewhat jealous of, having such clouds (as we have)
hanging over us, and (seldom failing) Omens right before us; and the universal
and univocal complaints of Gods people, pursuing and following of us.

But we hope our wise God, will give those Ministers an effectual
warning-peece, before the decree come forth. I much wonder why such men so much
complain of others for usurpers; for if a poor Tradesman, an honest Soldier, a
gifted Brother, or any other of Civil or Martial employment, do get but up into
their Pulpits, they cry out upon them; that they should be suffered; and yet
they themselves cannot keep within compass, but soon grow hungry of secular
employment, and seek high places, Military or Civil, and think it no usurpation
at all; although that a Civilian may be more able for a Preacher, and better
qualified, and not step so much aside (for ought I know) as the Preacher does
to be a Civilian, or Politician, and to meddle with State Affairs, which makes
him so stately.

O this! This is the most grand scandal of this age! That our eminentest
Ministers in account, are such as meddle with such matters, and study Politics
ding-dong; when one upbraided* Lysander the Lacedemonian Captain, for doing
many things by fraud and policy: O Sir, says he, smilingly, Sim.
when a man cannot obtain his ends with the Lyons-skin, he must put on the
Foxes-skin. So say many Ministers by their practices,
though they preach in Lambs-skins, yet they put them off, when they come out
of their Pulpits; and instead of the Breast Plate, (the Pectorale or chosen
Hammischpat.) they wear the Headpiece all the week long, to work out their own
ends; Sphinx an emblem of Policy.
and herein they are, at least, Masters of Art, if not Doctors, etc. It was
accounted by the wisdom of the Ancients, very apt and apposit, that Augustus
Caesar bare a Sphinx in his signet; for he was famous for policy, and unriddled
many a new Aenigma, with dexterity and promptness to promote his own ends; and
so do these, in stead of a Daniels spirit to expound the Visions and Dreams of
these days: For as the Poets fain, that Sphinx was a monster multi-forme;
having the face and voice of a fair Virgin, but the wings of a Bird, and the
talents of a Griffin; he lived in a mountain near Thebes, he was full of
riddles, and he used to surprise, and set upon poor Passengers of a sudden, and
so destroy them that could not find out his Aenigmaes.

And indeed Policy is such a Sphinx, a very Monster, having infinite variety; A
description of Politicians.
and its maiden-face flatters many, and learns your Politicians to cog, and
complement; but the wings are the Arts and Sciences; which such have commenced
masters of, which carry them acutely and accurately from one to another. But
the Griffin griping-talents are Axioms and Arguments which fetch in their
Atalanta-like Golden-balls, pleasures, and profits; though they step aside for
them to fetch them in, as Atalanta did, ( Declinat cursus, aurumque volubile
tollit.) But such Apples of honors, and pleasures, may make them lose
themselves, and their race.

These Politicians live loftily on the Mountains, and almost scorn to look
below them; they are full of riddles hard to be expounded, whereby many a poor,
plain, simple, innocent soul is surprised of a sudden, and made a prey; but
here is our comfort, our Oedipus is on his way, who will find out the folly
and fraud of the Politicians of the times;
and most of all, of State-Ministers; and then Policy shall be discovered, and
destroyed, as Sphinx was; whose body was laid on an Ass, and led in triumph:
For indeed, there is nothing so acute, nimble, Aenigmatical, or abstruse, but
shall be easily unriddled then to the lowest and slowest capacity. Christ's
appearance will ruin policy, and Politicians.
Christ's coming will put a period to this Tyrant, and set at liberty many a
poor, plain, harmless one from the Griffin-gripes of Policy and Politicians.
Wherefore if they reckon aright, they will find their time to reign is short;
although many a time Policy reckoning without Piety, Sim.
reckons without his host, and is like to pay for it at last; for their
Callender lies: But the Scripture which is ours, Expos.
tells us the truth, Isai. 27.1. That in that day the Lord will punish
Leviathan with his sore, and great, and strong sword, etc. (viz. Policy) that
piercing Serpent, that crooked Serpent, etc.

Woe be then to this Leviathan (...) Hebrew, yea, the subtle Serpent, as Ezekiel.
29.3. and devilish Dragon (...), Christ shall be too strong for him, and shall
find him out in all his crooked windings and turnings, insinuations and
subtilties; and shall punish him to the purpose ere long; and break and crush
his very head and skull, where all his cunning and craft lies.

Wherefore down with these Idols of Brass and Iron (if not of Iron and Clay) I
mean those Heads and Powers who have usurped the power and place of Christ,
viz. The Head of Gold, Psalm. 83.11, 12, 13. Make their Nobles like Oreb, and
Zeeb; Expos.
yea, all their Princes as Zebah and Zalmunna: i. e. Proph.
Like those Kings and Princes of the Midianites (a great army) whom Gideon
slew, Judge. 7.25. and 8.12. That is by weak means, Threats of Rulers ruin, and
of loosing their heads.
viz. As by three hundred men he routed and destroyed all their host, and then
cut off the heads of the Kings and Princes: So Lord (says David) who prays,
Let these Princes, Nobles, Rulers, be like them! And he prophecies, That they
shall be like them; and why so? See verse 12. they said, Let us take the houses
of God to be our possession. O sad! this is their sacrilege! to rob God of his
right, and to take it to themselves; When and why?
and so it is to take possession of his Churches, Church-Powers, and
Privileges, and to make them their's; as if they (who are Civil Magistrates)
must meddle with matters of Religion, and judge of matters of Faith, and make
Gods houses their right, and their possession, by Nomothetick Politics. O the
ominous! imminent danger of such a State! and of such Princes! and Powers! For
see the next verse, O my God! make them like a wheel! or else, as it is in the
Hebrew, When they are in most danger.
(...) set them as a round rolling Globe, or Wheel, ready to run, run, run,
run, till they have run themselves all to pieces: So that it seems Magistrates
are never in more danger of a desperate downfall, and of running (as if they
were mad) to ruin, then when they take the houses of God, viz. The Orders,
Ordinances, Laws, and affairs of Gods house to be their's in possession, and
their's in right, to rule, rectify, judge, and order by their Nomothetick
Power, and Policy: For then they are set as a round wheel, ready to roll and
run, (more with might, then with right) when the least touch of a finger,
or an Argument, puts them upon a running motion (as to meddle with matters of
Religion.) O then, it is a mercy if they meet with any rub in the way, to
impede their precipitancy, or to hinder their rash running; For Civil powers to
meddle with matters of Religion, as Judges, is sacrilege.
for that is very seldom that such (who act out of their orb) are recovered,
and their career ruine-ward be stopped; for being set as a wheel (as it appears
they are, when they meddle with Gods Government in matters of Religion, and
take his houses into their possession, by going beyond their bounds of Civil
Magistracy, which is a crying sacrilege; I say then as a wheel) they are set
to run down, down, downward, (and can hardly be staid) till they be all broken
a pieces.

The Authors Prayer to keep the Parliament, from an Abimelechian fate and
destiny.
Which the Lord prevent in much mercy our States from being so set, or (if they
are) from being moved by any of the State-Ministers to run so; which will be
sad (if they do) to this Commonwealth, which hitherto the supreme power, and
overruling God has graciously kept; and kept also our Rulers from meddling
with that stone which has grownd the late King, and his family, with other
Princes and Nobles to powder, before their eyes; and so he will them, if they
be not wiser then others were, that fell before them. For doubtless, such are
under an Abimilechean fate and destiny, I mean, the unavoidable fall of a
millstone of wrath upon their heads, which will (at least) break their
brain-pans a pieces, and distract them. For if it be unlawful to remove the
bounds set by their fathers (as it is Prove. 22.28.) it is much more unlawful to
alter the bounds which the Lord has set. Romans 13.7. And so give to Caesar,
what is Caesar's, and to Christ, what is Christ's. For as we showed before, in
chap. 11. The Lord has made a most clear distinction, and distance between
matters Civil, and matters of Religion; and has required nothing of Civil
Magistrates, as incumbent to them in their Civil orbs, but Civil matters. Grant
that they be zealous; yet they may do more hurt then good, with a Jehu-like
spirit: What think you of Vzzah? did he not mean well? (poor man! Uzzah struck
dead for meddling out of his Orb, and with the Ark-matters.
) 1 Chronicles. 13.9. when he ran to save the Ark (in a time of danger too, and of
seeming, Verse. 20. necessity too) when the Oxen stumbled, and it had like to
fallen in the way from Kiriath-Jearim to Jerusalem; yet because he meddled with
what he had nothing to do, but went out of his own place to intermeddle with
the matters of the Ark, God gave all Israel a sore check for it (as Jeremy Dyke
says) and destroyed Vzzah.

And truly, I am of opinion, Magistrates must not meddle with matters of
Religion, were Religion in danger. Perez-Uzzah, why so called.
That if Magistrates will meddle with matters of Religion, were Religion in
never so much danger (by the stumbling of such as carry it;) yea, I am
confident, it will be a heavy blow, and an uncomfortable day to England; it may
cost us in England a check, and them their neck; and Perez-Vzzah will appear
afresh, for following Magistrates to make mention of, and to take warning by.
And sure I am, till each keeps his orb, and acts in his own proper place, I
mean, the Magistrate to meddle with Civil matters, and no more (being all that
he is entrusted with, both by God and the Nation, as to the office of a
Magistrate, Romans 13.1, 2.) And the Minister to keep in his sphere, as to meddle
with Ecclesiastical and Spiritual matters, or matters of Religion (being all
that he is entrusted with, Heb. 5.1. and 13.17.) and not at all to study
tricks, politics, or to meddle with Civil affairs:
But these being Magistrates or Ministers for Souls, and those Magistrates or
Ministers for Bodies; I say, till this order, and each orb be observed, we must
be far from a good Reformation, and look (in stead thereof) for a lamentable
check. And doubtless, the Heads of Brass and Iron will yet be kept up Idols in
the Temple, in stead of Christ, the Head of Gold.

Wherefore, once more, I must beseech the Magistrate, Nor Ministers meddle with
matters of State.
(as not to meddle with matters of Religion so) not to let Ministers meddle
with matters of State, and to study Politicians: For as Azariah the High Priest
(as we told you in Chap. 11.) cast out Vzziah, who was lifted to his
destruction, 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 17, 18. out of the Holy Place, Vzziah.
as the Law commanded; so ought Magistrates to keep, and cast us out of their
places, Luther.
which belong not to us; as Luther writes, Epist. tom. 7. fol. 209. to the
Dukes of Saxony, viz. Frederick and John. I would not (says he) that the Office
of Preaching be denied any, but that they have free Liberty; yet if they
transgress Gospel-bounds, and will be seditious and fierce, etc. then it is
your Lordships duty to suppress, and banish them, saying, We will freely grant
you, to fight with the Word against all false Doctrines; but we will restrain
your hands and spirits from those things, that belong to our Magistracy and
Civil Power, etc.

Either of these, I say, out of their orbs and places, are of a Phaeton-spirit,
obnoxious to all, and in such disorders, as will set all on fire again;
Therefore such are said in Scriptures, to be lifted up to their own
destruction, 2 Chro. 26.16. For such pride is never without a fall. And till
this be, both Magistracy and Ministry must needs lie under much contempt; both
which, in the restitution of times, will be glorious at first.

A word to both.
Wherefore, as Bishops had not best to storm, that they are thrown down from
their Lordships, Judgeships, Justices of Peace, or the like; neither let our
Stately-Ministers be offended for calling them to, and keeping them in the work
of the Ministry of Christ, whereinto they are called; nor yet our honorable
Rulers, whose honor is to rule well within their sphere, and not to meddle with
matters of Faith (which is an edge tool that will cut their fingers,) for,
Extorquere timidis commutationem possunt, sed fidem inspirare non possunt,
Ambr. epist. 13. it is out of their orb.

Quest.
Quest. But may not Magistrates suppress Errors? etc.

Answ.
Answ. Evil doings and practices, (as you heard before) they may and must; but
they are not competent Judges of controversal points, Not Judges of Opinions or
Doctrines. Vide Buroughs.
opinions, and doctrines: And thus, that eminent servant of Christ, Mr.
Buroughs in his Vindication against Edwards, answers this Question: he
says, That where the hainousness of the matter, and turbulency of the carriage
manifests stubbornness, etc. These heinous actions and turbulent carriages, do
come within their cognizance; but they are not the fit Judges of controversies
in Religion, or matters of faith: But why (says he) for this should there be
such a stir and outcry against that which is called the Independent way? as
if there must needs be a confusion of all things, if liberty in it be but
granted. The Lord judge between us in this thing, etc. But as it is an
intolerable wrong done to the truth, Christ, and his Churches to grade and
grace Ministers with such a Power (as we said before) which is most properly
the States; so is it no less lamentable; an injury done to Jesus Christ, his
Church and truth, to gratify Magistrates with such a Power, It is the Churches
power, or Christ's in his Churches; why Magistrates not Judges of doctrines, etc.

Magistratus non est Dominus, nec author legis. Noyes Temple.


which is most properly the Churches, as to suppress sin, errors in
opinions, and judgments, which is to be by the word of Christ: He is no Judge
of Doctrine, to pronounce which is true, and which is not, which shall stand,
and which shall not; because as Mr. Dell says, he is as liable to err as any
man, Acts 14* 14. vid. Owens Essay for Church government, p. 72.

Secondly, Because he will do all he can ( dentibus and unguibus, as we may
say, to uphold his own opinion and religion (though never so false) and to
sentence others (though ever so true) as if they were false, heresies,
blasphemies, and the like, 2 They would set up their own opinion, and sentence
others.
as appears, Acts 24.14. So did the Jews, Acts 28.22. and the Scribes, and
Pharisees sentence Christ and Christianity, and all but their own.

Thirdly, 3 And maintain Idols and crucify truth.
Every Magistrate would make it his office to maintain his own Idol, and what
a world of false gods, and false worships would be set up, and worshipped then,
and in most places true Religion put into the Rack.

Object. Obj.
But they must have the advice of the Assembly of Divines, or able Ministers.

Answ. 1. Then Magistrates must act upon an implicit faith, to see with their
eyes, and believe as they believe. Not on the advice of the Assembly of
Ministers


Secondly, Then Magistrates were but the Ministers or Assemblies executioners
(a flat piece of Popery) methinks Pilate stands for a Sea-mark before such, to
the end of the world, 2 Pilate is a warning-piece.
who did but execute the Priests sentence upon Christ in crucifying him. 3 This
would hinder Ministers in their work of ruining errors by the word.


3 This would take Ministers off the right means of ruining error, i. e. by
the word of Christ; and this would make them idle, and neglect their duties in
doing that by the word that such Magistrates would do (though they ought not
to do) by the sword; but

Fourthly, Why Magistrates (as Magistrates) are not to suppress errors etc.
is because Christ and his Apostles after him never meddled (as we heard before)
with secular powers to suppress blasphemies, 4 Because Christ would never use
them to suppress errors.
etc. neither was this Doctrine maintained or entertained as useful in Christ's
Church for three hundred years after Christ.

5 But Christ has left other Laws in force to do it without them.
Fifthly, Because Christ has left other Laws to suppress Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, as appears in 1 Timothy 1.20. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, etc. Cum
multis aliis etc. and by those Laws left us upon record in Primitive times
were errors depressed and punished.

Query, Whether a Member cast out of a Church-society, comes not under secular
Cognizance for punishment.

Answ. Affirm. So far as Christians, whether in, or out of Church Fellowship
are of the world, Ans.
they are under worldly government and powers, 1 Affirm. So far as they are of
the world they are under their powers.
but no further; For worldly government reaches not out of the world; but
Saints as Saints, yea as members of the Church visible, are called out of the
world; and Christ's Church, though in the world, yet they are not of the world,
Church Government is over men, as Members of the Church, Antichrist arrogates
both Powers, viz. Civil and Eccles. Vide Synop 7. Genesis Con. q* 2 and p. 1277.
and Civil government is over them as members of the State or Nation or
Commonwealth: The first is Christ's; the second Caesar's. It is Antichrist
arrogates both, and casts a Christian (under the notion of a Heretic)
erroneous person, or the like) out of one hand into the other. We grant that a
member (whether in the society or out, for it is all one for that) for as much
as he is a member of the Nation, must needs come under Civil Cognizance; but,

Negat. A Church cannot deliver up any to secular powers for punishment.
Secondly, Negative, I can find no warrant in the word for any Church of Christ
to deliver up any (be he never so bad) to secular powers for punishment: for
either he must be delivered up before, or after he is cast out, if before,
then he is yet under the government of the Church, and if after, then the
Church has nothing to do with him, being without her Lines. I do not find
this to be in practice in primitive times, till Popery was pretty ripe, and
then under pretense of Heretics the dear Saints suffered death presently and
frequently.

Secondly, But if Magistrates do take Cognizance of Blasphemers, Heretics,
etc. let them take heed, they outrun not Gods rule in inflicting mulcts and
punishments (though it be for actions;) I say, that they go not too far, Luke
9.55, 56. None to be put to death for misbeleeving, or not believing.

Witness John Husse. See Fox 1. part p. 804. Mr. Hooper.


I see not how they can sentence to death any for mis-beleeving, or not
believing our points of Religion, though they be the ( fundamental as we say)
principles of our Christian faith. O what an error is this) says John Husse
to his Adversaries) to deliver poor people up to secular powers to put to
death, etc! O cruel accursed invention! Mr. Hooper also in a letter of his out
of prison to a precious friend, Anno one thousand five hundred fifty five tells
him how thi^ tyranny, extremity, and force, has been the only argument
(which, says he, you must grant) to maintain the Pope: And what they cannot
do by the convincing word, they will endeavor to do by delivering us up to
worldly compulsive powers to be tormented.

This was also good Bradfords sense, Mr. Bradford.
as he says to the then Lord Chancellor, I have been (said he) now a year,
and almost three quarters in a stinking prison, and yet of all this time, you
never questioned me for my opinions, before this time or for any thing else,
when I might have freely spoke my conscience without peril; but now!
now, that you have a Law to hang and put men, to death, if a man answer
freely, and not to your minds, so now you come to ask me this question! (about
Christ really present in the Sacrament) Ah! my Lord! my Lord! Christ used not
this way to bring men to the faith.

Bernardus writ to this purpose an Epistle to the Pope Eugenius, who condemned
many, Bernard.
and delivered them up to secular Powers to be put to death, says he,
Apostolos (lego) stetisse judicandos, sedisse judicantes non lego, hoc erit,
illud fuit. I read that the Apostles stood to be judged, but I never read, that
they sat as Judges to sentence any. Saints shall judge their now judges, They
shall be adjudged heretics, who have judged them heretick^ Mrs. Askew.
But this shall be (for the Saints shall judge the world) and judge their
Judges that now deliver them up to be murdered and massacred. This we shall
find long agone the Saints were well acquainted with. A good woman, Mistress
Askew, Martyr in King Henry the eighths days, said to Wrisley (the Lord
Chancellor) I have searched the Scriptures all over, but I cannot find that
ever Christ, or any of his Apostles put any to death though Heretics, or
delivered them up to any others to put them to death.

Marlin. vid. Bartlet.
Marlinus that eminent French-Bishop upon this very account withdrew communion
from his fellow-brethren Bishops, and would have nothing to do with them,
because they consented, and gave way to Maximus the Emperor to cut off by the
sentence of death the Priscilianists (as known Heretics as ever lived) yet
said he, we have no power to put them to death, No^ power to put to death the
vilest Heretics that ever lived.
nor to deliver them up to the Emperor. Christ was put to death, but put none
to death (though Heretics) neither has he given power to any to do it, but
has denied it, Luke 9.56. Nay I will fetch a Gray-Friar that was Philips
Confessor, Alphonaeus by name, in his Sermon before Philip and Q. Mary,
Alphoneus.
February the tenth, one thousand five hundred fifty and five; he bitterly
cries out of those bloody Bishops for burning men, saying plainly, That they
learned it not in Scripture to burn any for his conscience, but the contrary,
viz. that such a one should live, and be converted, and many things to the same
purport. And dear Lord! shall we then be of a more rigid judgment? against
one another! against tender consciences! against erroneous persons, then the
Friar? It is very remarkable how Edward the sixth declined this devilish
doctrine; Mr. Cranmer had never more to do in all his life then to persuade,
and beg of him, but his hand to be set to the Warrant for delivering up Joan
Butcher to the Magistrates power to burn her: K. Edw. 6* that young Saint.
All his great Councels, with their Arguments could not prevail with that
Christian-hearted young King to set his hand to it: says he, what? Will you
have me to send her soul quick to Hell? you say her error will damn her;
should I then be so cruel to send her presently to the devil in this error?
More need that they live to repent, then send their souls post to Hell, if they
be in the way^
O no! let her live to repent! it may be to the saving of her soul, to give
her longer life and liberty to repent (which the murdering of her will not
do) I hold it more holy (says he) that she should live to be converted, etc.
that this sweet bird chirps; and this young man manifested his dislike of such
secular powers, and punishments for errors (though grievous) but O! how few
such Saint-like Caesar's are to be found now! I might heap up many eminent
testimonies, yea (I think) fetched from all ages against this bloody tenet and
opinion of giving up Heretics, or any other erroneous persons into the hands
of Magistrates to punish them: Eminent Martyrs breathed out flames against this
Antichristian bloody tenet. Latimer. Ridley.
Many blessed Martyrs have breathed out flames against this Antichristian
custom, which have lent us light into it, to this age. I have read (I do well
remember) when a flaming faggot was brought to Ridley his feet, to set all the
rest on fire, Ha! says Mr. Latimer to his Brother Ridley, Come be of good
comfort Brother! play the man! We shall this day light such a candle in
England, as I trust shall never be put out! I hope so too; for sure I am, by
that light we may see, that putting to death is none of Christ's Ordinance; and
that fire and faggots are no good Reformers. Were a man a Turk, Saracen, Jew,
Heretic, or what you will? Turks, Saracens, Jews, not to be punished for their
Religion.

Much less dare a Church deliver them up to be punished by secular Powers.

Antichrists weapons


whilst he lives quietly, and peaceably in the State; I know not who, nor why
he can be put to death; besides, he is verily persuaded he believes aright, and
enough; much less, can I see how a Church dare (warrantably) to deliver up any
one to secular powers (purposely) to be punished by them. This has been
Antichrists advantage to this day, and the weapons of his warfare in all ages.
But (blessed be God) it is clear to thousands now, (as the Sun that shines,)
that spiritual evils must have spiritual remedies, answerable to the nature of
these evils, 2 Cor. 10.4* 5. And that the cutting off of men's heads, is no
proper remedy of cutting off men's Errors;
but of cutting off men in their Errors: Must not be ours.
Let all means (spiritual) be used for the recovery of such whose diseases are
spiritual and mental, 2 Timothy 2.25. For we must not sweep up Christ's house with
Antichrists broom; nor fight with his hands Christ's battles, nor with his
weapons our warfare.

Quaere. What must Magistrates do then? Quaere.


Answ. All they can, Answ.
to encourage and countenance the servants and service of Christ, by giving
them liberty, Magistrates may and must* do all th^^ can to countenance the ways
of God, and Churches of Christ.
though ever so few, or contemptible; declaring against all known* and apparent
gross Errors, and Heresies; so as that they do not allow of them, or the like:
For what Bilson says, serves us, Commissio est a Christo, permissio a
Magistratu. Christ commands, and Caesar demands; Christ gives the Law, and
Magistrates the Liberty: But let not Magistrates take too much liberty (as is
said before; Zuinglius, Art. 35.
) Christ allows of, and approves of Magistrates Government, Magistrates must
allow and approve of Christ's. Christ has commanded theirs, and obedience to
them, they must command Christ's, and obedience to him: And as the Saints for
Gods sake, Romans 13.1. Gal. 4.14. are obedient to them (for sancti non
subjiciunt se homini propter hominem, As Servants, not as Judges, or Lawgivers.
sed propter Deum;) so they for Gods sake are to be obedient to Christ, and
servants to his Church, his Saints, and people of God.

Let them make much of the Ministers of Christ, neither to corrupt them with
hono^s, nor to honor them in their corruptions: Magistrates cannot hinder
Ministers of Christ, in their offices of preaching, etc. No Minister of Christ
can be sequestered ab officio, only a beneficio.

Constantine mingled not Civil and Ecclesiasticals.


As Ministers cannot make Magistrates, neither can Magistrates make Ministers;
and as Ministers of Christ cannot hinder Ministers of State (or Magistrates) in
doing their offices for Bodies, and in Civil affairs; neither can Ministers of
State hinder the Ministers of Christ, in doing their offices for souls, and in
spiritual affairs. Wherefore (as I said before) each must remember his place,
as Constantine could say ( Vos est is in Ecclesia, sed ego extra Ecclesiam
Episcopus) to a Bishop or Minister in those days; ye are Overseers and Officers
in the Church (within) and I am an Overseer and Officer out of the Church
(without;) Constantine kept his course some time, very well, within his own
jurisdiction; without mingling or mangling Ecclesiastical affairs with Civil,
or Civil with Ecclesiastical; so must every Magistrate be sure to do: For it is
Gods design, to destroy those powers and policies that hinder Christ's reign in
his Zion, and Church, as the alone Head and Lord. None must govern in ^he
Kingdom of the Son, but such as shall govern in the Kingdom of the Father; but
Magistrates as such, must not rule in the Fathers Kingdom; Ergo, etc.
Christ's Kingdom (of the Son) and the Kingdom of glory (the Fathers) are both
alike; who rules in one, rules in the other^; who are admitted into one, are
admitted into the other; whom the one receives, the other receives, and none
else: But the Kingdom of the Father, receives not Magistrates, as Civil
Magistrates, to rule, and govern, or punish there ( i. e. In Heaven to come,)
therefore not here, in the Kingdom of the Son. And he that dares usurp this
power of Christ (the alone Head and Lord) takes too much upon him, and as
Chrysostom says, Non est tributum Caesaris, sed servitium diaboli, etc. It is
not his due, but the devils work; And it will cause his unevitable downfall and
confusion, as it did the Devils. Trap observes there, on Matthew. 22.21. the
Greek Article (...), is doubled and repeated for this purpose, That our double
and special care must be to give God his due* Romans 13.7.


Oh! O that we did give the Lord his due! then should we not plead so for
Caesar's Chair in Christ's Church; that he should sit there with the heel of his
cruelty, to kick the Saints brains out; and to crush them headlong, that stoop
not to his form. In a word, Christ sits not on Caesar's throne, neither shall he
(who has too long) sit upon Christ's throne. For though other Lords have had
dominion over us, and have usurped Headships (which are Brass and Iron, Brazen
and Iron Heads no more; but Gold for Brass, and Silver for Iron.
Jer. 6.28.) yet the Lord will give gold for brass, and silver for iron, Isai.
60.17. This Head of Gold, and his Gospel, which is better then the silver seven
times purified. And if the very Philosophers, (Aristotle, Plato, and others,
vid. Cartwrights Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Authority of the Church) if
they could see and say that Estate is best, Expos.
and those Citizens happiest, that had God to be their King and Monarch, and
his Laws and Decrees to submit unto: Sure I am, the Church is never so happy,
holy, and heavenly, as when Christ alone sits upon his throne, in the midst of
them, and governs them by his Word and Spirit, see Cap. 2. and 9. of Lib. 2.
And sure, this is the great work that our God is bringing about; who is coming
to reign for ever and ever. In the mean time, Own no Head but Christ, the Head
of Gold.
let us own neither the Brazen, nor the Iron Heads, for our Head; (I mean,
neither Spiritual nor Temporal, Ecclesiastical nor Civil powers, so called!) O
none but Christ! the Head of Gold; our Master! Lord! Head! and Lawgiver!
without any other Partner or Paramount whatsoever, as has been at large proved!

Wherefore to conclude; All others are beheaded! having lost their long usurped
ruledom, and jurisdiction! John Hus Constant. Council.
And with John Hus; We say, Christus sine talibus capitibus monstrosis, melius
ecclesiam suam regulavit, Act. 27. Object. Christ alone is Head, and governs
his own Church (influendo and infundendo) without such prodigious helps, or
monstrous heads, as Antichrist would crowd in. Gregory the first to John of
Constantinople Patriark.
Thus said Gregory the first, Lib 6. Epist. 24. in his Letter to John Patriarch
of Constantinople, Quid tu Christo universalis ecclesiae capiti, etc. What will
you answer at the last day to Christ? the sole Universal Head of his Church,
and people? that thou dare to arrogate that title? which is Antichristian for
thee so to do? Hold fast the head, says the Apostle, Col. 2.19. from which all
the body, by joints and bands, having nourishment, ministered and knit together,
increases with the increase of God.

Therefore be sure you hold your Head; For first, it supplieth the members with
all necessaries; Expos.
The necessity of this Head. Vid. Ca. 9. l. 2. Hold him fast.
Secondly, It knits every member to its self, and one to another; and thirdly,
It increases every one with a spiritual increase: Now Christ in his The
anthropie, is this Head, which we must fetch our life, sense, and motion from,
by Nerves, Veins, and Arteries. Christiani Christo capiti adhaerent, and ab eo
percipiunt, and hauriunt vitam spiritualem, etc. No Member of his, but has
much moisture, nourishment, and spiritual growth. And every Member is moved
with their Head, unless some Palsie-Members (so Palsie-Christians) that move
not as the Head (Christ) directs. Sim.
When Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, after his return from Rome, was asked
by his Master, What he thought of the City and State, answered; O Sir! It is
Respublica Regum, a Commonwealth of Kings, and a State of Statesmen: And so is
the Church, wherein Christ is King and Head; O happiness of such a Church! For
if he be in us Head, he is heart, hand, and all. For quickening of us,
he is our Anima, the life and soul of the Church, and of every Member; as he
resolves us he is Voluntas, as he makes us think he is Animus, as he gives us
to know he is our Intellectus, as he deliberates us he is Men's, as he keeps our
remembrance he is Memoria, as he gives us to judge he is our Ratio, as he moves
our desires he is Affectus, as he breaths us and inspires us he is our
Spiritus, and as he enables us to apprehend he is our Sensus; So that Christ
our Head, is our Heart, and all. Wherefore let us hold him fast for our Head,
and hear of no other, no Brazen-face, no Iron-pate, no

O monstrum horrendum! inform, ingens! cui lumen ademptum! Christ willed, when
he saw Caesar's stamp on the coin, Sim.
to give Caesar his due; so when we see Christ's stamp on his Saints,
Ordinances, Worships, Churches, we must give Christ his due there, which is to
be the alone Head and Lawgiver amongst them. But thus far for this Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. (...) or (...) (...) Tsur. That Christ is the only Rock, and sure
Foundation for his Church to be built upon: All other Foundations being false,
sandy, and such as will fail.
A House without a foundation cannot stand; and to have an unsound, sandy
foundation, is little better then none at all, Christ the foundation.
if not sometimes worse, as being more deceitful and dangerous; Great is the
fall of such an house, Luke 6.49. Matthew. 7.27. Vide Dr. Mayo^ in loc.
But this spiritual house has a sure foundation (if it be of Christ's
building) which Christ has laid with his own hands, as Zach. 4.9. Isa. 14.32.
other places are founded by the arm of flesh, but this by the Power and Spirit
of the Lord. Expos.
Palestina must fall, but Zion, i. e. (says Sasbout) the spiritual Zion
(meant Christ's Church under the Gospel) shall never fall: for the Lord has
founded it upon a Rock too, Mat. 16.18. Christ the Rock.
so Mat. 7.25. Mat. 6.18. Luke 6.48. and this Rock is Christ, as 1 Cor. 10.4.
2 Samuel 23.3. so that Christ is also the foundation of the Church, which the
Church is built upon, Ephesians. 2.20. 1 Cor. 3.14. Christ is not the Head of that
Church whereof he is not the foundation, Christ the Head, the Builder, and yet
the Foundation, how?
says Cotton: Christ is King, Priest, Prophet, Head, Master, Lord, and
Lawgiver, Advocate, Husband, Brother, Builder; and yet the Foundation of his
Church, what is he not unto his people? in any condition? he is man, and
Minister to himself as God: so that as he may be both the Prophet, and the
Word; the Advocate, and yet the Argument; the Lawgiver, and yet the Law; the
Master, Vide Wilsons* Cases, Aenigma 99.
and yet the member; the Priest, and yet the sacrifice; even so may he be, by
the same rule and order, the Founder, and yet the foundation: For as he
preaches himself, and this testimony was true; as he pleads himself, and this
argument is full; Christ is the Rock for foundation, how?
as he gives out himself, and this Law is life; as he offers himself, and
this Sacrifice is precious, and effectual; Even so he lays himself low to be
our Foundation, that we might be fitly built upon him, and this Foundation
will never fail; for he is a Rockie foundation.

First, Because the Rock is a sure and firm foundation, which will not sink
nor shrink (per saxum foederis firmitatem notabant antiqui: 1 The Rock is
firm, and will never fail us.
Venning) but soft, or sandy stones, will give way, and endanger the whole
structure: Now God in Christ is a sure and most firm foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11.
2 Timothy 2.19. which cannot fail us* our Salvation lies upon him, he cannot
deceive us: The Church is like Mount Sion which abides for ever,
and is immovable, because founded upon the Rock of ages: Si nos ruemus, ruet
Christus una, said that loud-tongued and liveli-spirited Luther: Luther.
If we fall, Christ shall fall too, and ( malo cum Christo ruere, quam cum
Caesare stare) I had rather (says another) ruin with Christ, then run with
Caesar; I had rather fall with Christ, then stand with Caesar: such can never
fall, 1 Pet. 2.6. as long as Christ the foundation stands.

2 Christ the Rock is high whence we look round us. Without lets.
Secondly, A Rock is high, whence we have pleasant prospects, and see far round
the Horizon and Hemisphere, whence we look with delight, and have the least
hindrances, Number. 23.9. Christ is such a high Rock, Psalm. 61.2. and the Saints
foundation lies in him, who is higher then all Rocks and mountains, Psalm.
87.1. or places, Isa. 57.15. Psalm. 91.14. From this high Rock (i. e. Christ)
the Saints see far, and fair, and have most eminent discoveries, and the
sweetest Survey of Heaven, and happiness, all other things being below them:
And they have the least hindrance in their prospects either up or down, or
round about, being filled with loveliest, liveliest, richest, highest, and
heavenliest soul-ravishing Discoveries.

Thirdly, A Rock is a place of refuge, 3 Christ the Rock is the place of
refuge the Castle of defense impregnable, etc.
of great strength and security, thither people run for refuge and safety, Isa.
2.21. 1 Samuel 13.6. and 23.25. a Castle in a Rock is accounted impregnable, and
cannon proof. Such a Rock is Christ to the Church and his Saints, Deuteronomy. 32.31.
Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 31.2. a strong Rock and Castle of defense; Hence it is
Saints are so safe in Christ, that they cannot be stormed, or taken: Saints
are secure in him; when all Devils in hell let fly upon them; For as
Tertullian says, Tertullian de Patientis.
the desperatest Bullets and Darts that men or Devils can shoo^, at this
impregnable and impenetrable Rock, are either returned with a powder, or
bounded back upon the heads of them that shot them, or else are fallen down,
Expos.
dead and blunted, without any more mischief. The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against them; that is, Ferus. Cameron in Mat. 16.
neither the power nor policy of Hell combined together; no not though the
Devil does by himself or others plot with his seven-heads, or push with his
ten-hornes; neither can all the fraudulent plots, practices, malices,
machinations, policies, powers, or engines that Earth or Hell can bring forth,
Against all Powers and Policies whatsover.
be enough to ruin the Church, who is seated sure and safe upon a Rock that
is higher and mightier then they. It is true, they may batter, but cannot
conquer* they may reach to her heel, (and peradventure bruise her heel) but
they cannot reach to the Head, but they will break themselves a pieces: They
cannot make a breach in true Religion, or a battery in this Rock; The Church
fears no Cannons, nor Ordinances.
no though the Devil should discharge the Popes Cannons, or the greatest
Ordinances he has at them: say they were as big as those two cast by
Alphonsus the Duke of Ferrara, the one of which he called the Earthquake,
Nor can she be ruine^ that is founded on the Rock.
the other the Grandiabolo, or the Great-devill, neither Earth, nor Hell, the
Earthquake, nor the greatest Devils can remove the Church founded upon this
Rock; they may shake her, but not shame her; disturb her, but not destroy her,
who may challenge the Venetian Motto, Nec fluctu nec flatu movetur, as Mat.
7.25. and Psalm. 62.2.
He only is my rock, and my SALVATION, he is my DEFENSE, I shall not be
greatly moved; so verse. 6, 7. But to make haste.

4 Christ the Rock keeps always the same in place and power.
Fourthly, A Rock keeps his place; removes not, and thus does Christ, who is
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; he alters not, nor removes from
being the foundation of his peoples principles, graces, happiness, joys,
enjoyments, and all; he is ever in this place, and therefore he is in Zion a
sure foundation, Isa. 28.26. and cannot be removed. Hebr. 12.28. immobile
saxum.

5 The Rock is lasting for ever.
Fifthly, A Rock is very lasting, an Heiroglyphick of permanency, durability,
and perpetuity; so is Christ, who can never decay, or decrease, but of the
increase of his Government, and peace there shall be no end, Isa. 9.7.

6 The Rock yields several benefits.
Sixthly, A Rock yields several and singular Benefits, it is a shade from the
scorching heat, and keeps from being Sunburned; Keeps from being Sunburned.

Jewels come from the Rock


so does Christ, Isa. 32.2. and he keeps from being sin-burnt, and hell-burnt,
and from the wrath of God; a Rock affords precious stones, and Jewels, such a
Rock is Christ, who is the Mine and Treasury of all precious things hid in
him, Col. 3.2. and fetched from him, Prove. 8.10, 11.18. Rev. 3.17.18. Rev.
5.12. Prove. 3.15. the Rock yields honey, Yields honey.
so does Christ, Deuteronomy. 32.13. Psalm. 81.16. his words are drops of honey, Psalm.
19.10. and his lips and doctrine drop sweet smelling myrrh, Cant. 5.13. The
Rock yields oil, Yields oil.
Deuteronomy. 32.13. Job. 29.6. and so Christ does the unction from on High, the oil
of grace, 1 Jo. 2 20. and Rev. 3.17 the Rock, Yields wholesome sallets.
affords wholesome herbs and sallets, so does Christ, whose cheeks are as a
bed of spices, Cant. 5.13. besides from the Rock flows the most rich, pure,
pleasant, sweet Crystal streams, Deuteronomy. 8.15. Job. 28.10. so the most springs
and best streams of water of life flow from Christ the Rock, And the best
springs and streams.
whereby his Church is refreshed, as 1 Cor. 10.4. Psalm. 46.4. Isa. 33.21. Joh.
4.13, 14. Joh. 7.38. 7 Rock is so hard that it will cost much pains before a
foundation in it.


Seventhly, A Rock is so hard, that a Foundation in it will cost much sweat
and labor, and continual pains, etc. so much means must be used, and much
pains must be taken, and much care, and continual vigilance must be had to
be well-bottomed upon Jesus Christ, Expos.
Phil. 2.12. therefore says Peter, 2 Epist. 1.10. (...) i. e. endeavor
sedulously, and study it diligently, and if so ye do; ye shall not fall:
therefore learn (says Solomon) Prove. 30.26. of the Conies (poor little
things) yet they with labor work out holes and burrowes in the roots of the
Rocks; Expos.
by this we are to learn diligence and be sure to get in force enough, and to
dig deep into this Rock, which is Christ.

Eighthly, A Rock, if it proves a stumbling stone, 8^ A Rock is most dangerous
to such as through heedlesseness or hautiness stumble at it, and on it.
is most dangerous of all to bruise and break thee, and batter thee a pieces;
so is Christ to such as by their carelessenesse or self-conceit do fall at
him, and on him, O! he is to them a (rough) Rock of offense! 1 Pet. 2.8. Romans
9.32. that will not obey him, and yield to him, but that stumble at him, and
reject him; they that fall upon this stone! are bruised and broken; and those
that this stone falls upon, are grown'd to powder, Luke 20.18.

Thus is Christ the Rock, and this Rock the Foundation of the Church, and
this, Austin in Mat. 16.
says Augustine upon Mat. 16. Christ meant, when he said, Upon this Rock I
will build my Church; Tu quidem Petrus es, cognominatus a me qui sum petra,
atque super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.) And thus says Peter Martyr
in 1 Epist. ad Cor. 3.11. CHRIST is said to be the FOUNDATION of this heavenly
FABRIC of his Church, Peter Martyr.
because it has its BEGINNING from ABOVE, and this FOUNDATION has the TITLE
of a ROCK, because CHRIST is the SVREST FOUNDATION (and Christus in summo loco
situs est, etc.) and he is the highest. But the Reasons why the Church has
Christ to be her Rock, and why this Rock for her Foundation, are diverse; I
shall trouble you with but one or two; as first is for safeties sake.

First, For safeties sake, the Church must meet with multitude tempests and
storms, winds, and waves, For safeties sake in the midst of her manifold
troubles.
Mat. 7.25. whence Bolton calls her the Tossed-ship, she meets with a
continual succession of miseries, and molestations, one on the neck of
another, like Jobs Messengers, and as Clouds rack, Eccl. 12.2. Fluctus fluctum
trudit, (...) The skies are overcast; sometimes they fall in lesser and lighter
crosses, as the smaller rain, but sometimes in sharp stinging and piercing
Calamities, like storms of hail, the rain falls, the floods arise, the winds
blow, the waves beat, and all to try the building, which like Noahs-Arke is
pitched within, and without, Omnis Christianus Crucianus.
and holds out, being upon a sure foundation, and cannot fail utterly, though
she may be battered, and will be tried day by day, and that to the purpose,
therefore she had need to be founded upon the Rock. We must sit down and
consider, and cast up what it will cost us to be Christians, how much we must
suffer; and then be sure that we be upon a good foundation that will not
sink under us,
nor shrink away from us, for we shall have many trials.

Church is built upon this Rock is for orders sake, 2 For orders sake, i. e.
to begin at Christ this Foundation first, and so to build upward and onward.

1 We must be in Christ, and then get into his Churches.

Many gathered Churches in danger of falling that are not built on the
Foundation (Christ) first.


that whosoever will venture to build, may begin at this foundation first, 1
Cor. 3.10. and be sure he go wisely to work (as I said before in the last
Chapter) so also, that whosoever will enter into this house of the Lord, may
first get up the Rock (which will be with much difficulty to flesh and blood)
and from thence to go into the house (Gods Church) built upon the Rock: many
have been wrong that thought first to get into the Church, and then into
Christ, no! no! but they must be first in Christ, and have a right to Christ,
and communion and closeness with Christ, and from thence enter into communion
with Saints, etc. 1 Jo. 1.3. Ephesians. 2.2.20. First on the foundation Jesus Christ,
and then verse 22. into the building: where this order is omitted, and not
minded, they build but upon a false foundation, and will never stand the sturdy
storms: And truly I am possessed with some jealousy that most of our gathered
Churches (or rather members in them) are built amiss, and are to be amended in
order, or else they will not stand.

For Reasons sake i e to support the rest.

Fundamentum est primum sustentare, and connectere, Tho. Aquin. 22. Q. 4.7.4.


Thirdly, It is for Reasons sake to keep up the building; to support the body
which the foundation is to do: Therefore is Christ the foundation to be first
laid, and all the superstructure to be built upon him, who bears up all by his
power, Heb. 1.3. for the which no other FOUNDATION could be laid to build upon,
1 Cor. 3.11.12. in whom (in which foundation) all the building (for every bit
and parcel must have a dependence upon him, and an abiding in him, Expos.
as being fastened and nailed to him) all being fitly ordered together do
jointly (and unanimously) grow (higher and higher) and are more and more built
up in Christ still) a holy Temple to the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. through his
Spirit. But,

First, We must be sure then, we have a foundation, and that that be laid
first to be built upon, 1 Be sure of the Foundation.
all wise builders do^ and in Heb. 11.10. Abraham (the representative of
B^leevers) is said to look for a City which has foundations, i. e. in
opposition to the Tents he set up to live in, 2 That that be laid first. Pareus
in loc.
(being but a passenger) which were without foundations laid, and could easily
be pulled down, and laid in the dust; I dare be bold to say it, that some of
our gathered Churches (built in a trice) are but such Tents without
foundations, which will (as soon, Expos.
What gathered Churches will fall of a sudden.
and in a trice) be pulled down and laid in the dust: but let us look for,
and verily expect with confidence (as the word (...) there signifies) a City i.
e. a house, a Church, a new Jerusalem, whose builder and maker is God, which
has Christ for the foundation; these Temples, Tabernacles, buildings will
abide, And what gathered Churches will ou^stand all storms, and abide ever.
but no others: for Prove. 10.25. they are on an everlasting foundation, and
cannot fall; This is the thing we must look for, and then build; first, make
sure of a sound foundation therefore, Isa. 44.28. say to Jerusalem, thou shall
be built, there is nothing mentioned yet of a foundation till the next words,
and say, O Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid! How to build.
or let it be laid before you begin to build the Temple of the Lord. The Temple
was a type, and in the type the foundation was first to be laid; Diodate in
loc. The typified must answer the Type in laying the f^undation first.
the typified must answer the typifying herein, as appears in Zach. 4 9.
Zerubbabels own hands that have laid the foundation of this house shall finish
it; but first, he lays the foundation of the house thus Hag. 2.18. Consider
even from the day that the foundation is laid: Consider it (as if before that
it were not worth considering) as if without that, little heed were to be
given to it, Expos.
(for it could not stand unless upon that, Else they are not to be regard^d or
worth considering.
and after that the foundation is once laid, and the principles settled, then we
must set forward (and not before) and build on with care and consideration,
heed and diligence; And from that very day the Lord will bless you. verse. 19.
From thence you shall grow up into a high and holy building; and go on
considerately, Quantum ad actum intellectus, and quantum ad veritatem
intuentis, both in your understandings, and judgments, which otherwise ( i. e.
without a foundation first laid) you cannot do; but must deviate from those
rules of reason, and right judgment, whereby you become considerate; and your
prudence is ordered and regulated, even from that day the Foundation is laid.
Consider, but

Use 2. Be sure that we have a good foundation (for it is not enough to have a
foundation, Be sure the foundation be a sound one.
which every man fancies to himself) but that it be a sound and sure o^e, and
that which will hold: One that builds upon a rotten, reeling, sandy, and unfit
foundation, Sim.
is found a fool; and so Christ calls him, Matthew. 7.26. And not a s^ndy one.
Dixon in Mat. 7.26.
For he shall find his fairest groundwork will deceive him; his building soon
will lie in the dust, and not endure the trial, but will down like a Spiders
web. All such fools (or unwise builders) fail in the main point, in that
necessary one thing, and do but build upon the sand; wherefore his building
soon sinks, How the wise builders house differs from the fools.
shatters a pieces, and tumbles down. The wise man's and fools house differ in
the subterstructure and superstructure both.

1. In the subterstructure or foundation.
First, In the foundation; the wisemans lies deep, little seen, and he is sure
it is sound (as the heart of Oak) and will never rot; but the fools foundation
is shallow, lies open, and is much seen; and is soon removed, and razed, and it
is so unsound, that it sinks under the building, and lays all in the dust.

Secondly, In the building too they differ, for the fools lies loosly, 2. In
the superstructure, or building.
and is not well fastened, neither to the foundation, nor one to another, and
may easily slip one from another, and all fall beside to the ground; which
groundwork is but as a stake stuck in the ground, and so may easily be pulled
up; and truly, I say this for fear many Churches, (as they now are) prove but
such buildings, because some so easily slip aside the foundation (pretended)
which is a sad thing, True Churches knit fast to the foundation, and one
another, as if they were all but one.
and they are too loose, and not well united to one another, nor fastened one in
another; but the Wise man's is as a City compacted, knit fast to the foundation,
and pinned in (as one with) the Rock: From whence they cannot be razed, raised,
or removed; and like an entire stone (as is it said of Solomon's Temple) are the
whole building one. So much sweetness, evenness, and union, is amongst them;
yea, in the midst of shakings and oppositions: That as none of the building can
be separate from the Rock, viz. The foundation wherein, and whereon they are
laid; so not one (by the violentest temptations that can befall them) can be
parted from another; but all are one in Christ, and one another. For he that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.

Now the very reason why many fair buildings (so in appearance) must be laid in
the dust again, is, Other reasons why many gathered Churches, (foolish
buildings) will suddenly fall, and so must. Peter Martyr.
because they have been built upon false foundations, of men's Creation; as
their Rules, Canons, Commandments of men, Directories, or outward forms of
holiness, and wisdom, or some thing or other which is sandy, and which will
fail them, and prove infirm and ruinous (as Peter Martyr, 1 Cor. 3.11. says,)
and which will make their buildings to fall upon their Heads. For every plant
which my Father has not planted, shall be pulled up by the roots, says
Christ, i. e. Their foundation, and all shall be discovered to be naught; and
so in Ezekiel 13.14. I will break down the wall (the work) that ye have daubed
with untempered mortar, and will bring it down to the ground. Expos.
Hab. 3.13. Rotten foundations shall be discovered.
Why so? Mark! That the foundation thereof (that rotten, ruinous foundation)
may be discovered, and it shall fall: None shall be able to save it; for the
Lord will have the naughty, deceitful foundations, discovered, and laid open to
our children after us, that they may not build upon such rotten stuff. And
therefore it is (I say) such buildings must fall, that their foundations may be
discovered, (It shall fall, says the Lord, none shall be able to keep it up,
it shall fall;) and then others will beware upon what grounds and foundation
they build upon hereafter: False Prophets are builders too, and will be as
busy as may be; but mark the metaphor, It is with untempered mortar, which
will tumble in the time of a storm;
Members of such Churches are in great danger in a storm time.
it cannot stand, but will fall on a sudden: Then they that under such
buildings are in danger for want of safety, or shelter; and are in as eminent
imminent danger, as the Twenty seven thousand of Benhadads men were in Aphek,
in 1 Kings 20.30.

O! O then be sure of a sound foundation! Such a one as will not sink, rot,
fail, fall, and then it must be a Rock. Wherefore beware of such buildings as
are made up of men's sandy and untempered stuff; for they will fall on your
heads, and do a deal of mischief. But the Word and Spirit must have the working
of this house upon Christ the foundation; that is strong, defenceable, and sure
of standing: Therefore,

Use 3. Be sure Christ be that Rock, upon which you are founded Isai. 28.16.
who is called the Stone of probation, Be sure Christ be your foundation.
the stone of foundation.

1. The foundation of Solomon's Temple (as I said before) being a type of this
foundation, 1. 1 King. 5.16. Who are fit to lay the foundation, and who not.
we shall find was to be laid by those, whom the Lord had endued with most
skill, the chiefest and ablest of the laborers in that building; and none are
fit for this work, viz. To lay the foundation principles, and to fit out Christ
to the capacity of the building in hand; but such as are very wise,
experienced, and filled with the Holy Ghost. Others, that are raw and
unexperienced, and not endued with divine skill and understanding for this work
(which will require the most accurate regard and judgment) do but do what must
be undone again, and bring much discredit upon the work. Therefore, as Solomon
sent to Hiram, 2 Chronicles. 2. and about, for able men; so must we seek hard, and
send up to Heaven, for the Holy Ghost to fall upon some, who may be fitted for
it. Another reason, why many gathered Churches will down again.
This is another reason to me, (full of persuasion and power) that many of our
seeming orderly gathered Churches that yet are, must be rifled, and ripped up to
lay the foundation (though it may be good) yet more orderly, and regularly; and
with more heavenly skill, and wisdom, then as yet it is laid: But,

2. In the next place, the foundation of the Temple was also the choicest
matter, 2. The most precious matter must be for the foundation.
as being of most precious and permanent substance, costly and curious stone, 1
Kings 5.17, and 7.10. Christ is the most precious tried stone, Isa. 28.16. and
8.14. Cut out without hands, and elect for that use, 1 Pet. 2.6. Most costly,
chary, and continuing for ever: Thus in Rev. 21. 19. the foundations of the New
Jerusalem we find garnished with all manner of precious stones; indeed all
excellencies, yea all manner of excellencies are in Christ, the foundation of
every particular Church.

3. Furthermore, when the foundation of the Temple was laid; there were the
largest and liveliest testimonies of joy, 3. The greatest joy at the laying the
Foundation.
that could be expressed, Ezra 3.10, 11, 12. So is it to be at the laying of this
foundation, (which is Christ) to build upon; it is to be done with shouting,
crying, Grace, grace unto it, Zach 4.6. or as it is in Hebrew, Expos.
(...) with wide acclamations and cries of rejoicing and gladness* O (shall
they say) the grace! the wonderful grace of God in Christ! And mark this, That
till the foundation be laid, there is no such loud shoutings out, grace, grace.
The whole strength and stress of the building, lies in the foundation, so does
ours in Christ; who is also our City of Refuge.

Now let this stone which most builders have refused, and which others have
rejected, become the Head of our Corner. Amen.

Use 4. The last use then that I would make (now) of this, is to inform us of
these two necessary things, in imbodying together. well grounded; secondly,
Informs, 1. Necessity of being well-grounded. 2 Of being well united. Without
both these, the building falls.

to be well united; without both these, better never to have been a building;
for the fall will be great. This is exceedingly requisite, and of all places, I
should pitch upon Dublin (at present) to press this; for sure I am, we have
great need of laying a sure foundation.

First, That ye be well grounded and founded upon the Rock; how requisite it is;
you have heard before; only this I add, 1. If Christ this Rock be your
foundation, you will stand till the coming of Christ.
That such a building will never fall, but last ever, and is of perpetual use
for the Saints to dwell in, till the full appearance, or coming of Christ,
without alteration or cessation. This Church State upon this foundation ceases
not; I say not, but the superstructure may sometimes want mending, ordering,
and repairing, but the essentials of it shall remain for ever, Dan. 7.14. Luke
1.33. Isa. 9.7, 8. and 59.20, 21. Ephesians. 3.21. Till it be grown up into a perfect
stature in Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and then it shall be translated into a state
triumphant, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. Therefore Paul charges Timothy to a special care
of those Ordinances which are to continue till the coming of our Lord Jesus,
Media cultus sunt immutabilia. Junius.
1 Timothy 6.13, 14. So see 1 Cor. 11*26. Christ has promised his presence and
personal assistance, to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.20. Now Saints that are
built up together upon this foundation, cannot fall; neither shall the gates of
h^ll at any time, in any age, be able to prevail against them, Matthew. 16.18.
Here is no room left, for that erroneous opinion of Mr. Prynne; now for such
States-Politicians that would make Christ's worship like the weathercock,
Politicians and States, sins herein.
to serve every wind; or his building but a Crane to serve the St^^e, Sim.
and to turn as they list; and Religion like a nose of wax, Sim.
to stand which way they will; and to be altered, and formed into what fashion
they think fittest for the State; and most suitable to the Civil Government and
Laws of that Commonwealth. But let that policy, power, and those persons
expect the rigor of his rod of Iron, which is already reached out, against such
Politicians of our times; who like the King of Navar (to Beza) profess not to
stir a foot further for Religion, Politicians Profession of Religion.
then it promotes policy, and agrees with his interest. Let such call to the
Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb.
The great day of his wrath is come. Seekers sins herein.
Revel. 6.16, 17. Neither in the next place, can we read less then an apparent
repugnancy to sound truth, and to this sure foundation in that lean opinion of
the Cessation of Ordinances, which some hold at this day, contrary to Ephesians.
3.21. 1 Cor. 11.26. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. Wherefore they forsake public assemblies,
Heb. 10.23, 24. Duties, Ordinances; Expos.
and will neither build, nor be built up; pretending the day is not come,
Gualther in loc.
as Hag. 1*2, 4. and it is time enough; wherein (as one notes) there is a
double sin. First, Their negligence, and pretending it not to be the Lords time
to cover their sin; and secondly, their rashness in charging others that are
about the work;
and in the building of Gods house, as if they made too much haste, and might
better let it alone, because the time is not yet come, etc. So that they would
have all lie in their ruins, till the Restitution of Miracles, as was in the
Apostles days, and then to do it by an Apostolick-power and authority, and not
till then: They wait for miracles.
But O! what an error is here! Have they any warrant in the Word for this? Is
not this an argument of a sensual? carnal? low spirit? that must be confirmed
by miracles, Job. 20.29. and of want of faith? Heb. 11.7. Besides, are not
miracles fallible? Nay, are they not notes of deceivers, and false Christ's in
these latter days? Matthew. 24.24. And does not Christ call them evil and
adulterous, that do seek for such signs? Matthew. 12.38, 39. before they will
believe, that they must go about this building.

In a word (I think) they are under a world of temptations, and very unsound
(if not sinfully sensual) that are of that judgment, though (I will judge no
person, And run a desperate hazard.
but the sin) for in forsaking Ordinances, Assemblies, Christian-duties, etc.
They run a desperate hazard, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. which, some say, is the
Prodromus, or Harbinger of that pardonless, pitiless sin of the Holy Ghost,
Verse. 26, 27, 28, 29. and of ruin, V. 39. But this I have offered on the first
part of this use, to show a necessity of being well-grounded upon this Rock,
Christ; and

Secondly, To be well-united in, and to this Rock Christ, 2 Part of the Use.
by communion, as 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the
communion of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: Union necessary.

In his twelfth Chapter of Communion of Saints.


This is the voice of all the Oracles (says Mr. Ainsworth) to raise men into
communion with Christ the Rock, and then with one another, 1 John 1.3, 7.

Hence it is, that there be such variety of similitudes to resemble this
communion, and to illustrate it; Sim.
as Christ the Head, we the Members; and all by due joints, arteries, Col.
1.18. and 2.19. 1 Cor. 12.12. Gal. 2.20. Romans 8.32.
and sinews, united to the Head; receiving life, motion, and government, in all
actions and affairs from the Head; and yet by the same arteries, sinews,
joints, and spirits united one to another: so Christ is the Vine, we the
branches, i. e. One with the vine, Sim.
the stock, the root, all participating of the same juice, fatness, John 15.14.
Romans 11.17.
sap, sweetness, and yet one branch deriving from another, refreshed by
another, growing to another, and one with another: So Christ is the foundation,
we are the building, Ephesians. 2.21. 1 Cor. 3.9. all fastened, knit, and united to
the foundation, Christ; although one may differ from another, in form, shape,
order, place, etc. And although some be of a courser, and some of a finer
substance and appearance in this building; Churches and Saints under different
forms, yet are all to be one with Christ and with one another.
although some be greater, and some lesser; some in one fashion, and some in
another; yet all alike do depend upon, and are set upon Christ, the foundation;
all are rooted in him, Col. 2.7. Ephesians. 3.17. grounded and built upon him; and
pinned, fastened, and united to him; and yet are so to one another (in faith and
love;) as if they could not live or stand, one without the other; for they be
many in particulars; and some are under one form, and some under another; yet
all are coupled together, tacked, and nailed together; so that they grow
together up unto an holy temple in the Lord.

Now if we lie loosely, (and not firmly fastened, as I said before) we shall
slip aside, and fall out, 1 John 2.19, 20. and thereby bring danger to the
whole building. In unity not in uniformity, or all of one judgment.

Ainsw. cap. 16. Communion of Saints.

All members even of the most discrepant opinions and judgments, and under the
most different forms, are useful and necessary.

Another reason why many of our gathered Churches must fall, viz. Their
standing by an uniformity. Unispirituality amongst all. i. e. Having one spirit
though many opinions.


This communion makes us in unity, without which is neither comfort, nor
continuance in a Church State; neither am I of opinion with some, that they
must be all of one judgment, and under one form, and of one opinion, in one
body or society, etc. that hold together in love and faith. For I find no
building, no body, no Church that ever was, or will be, without different
forms, opinions, appearances, etc. according to the nature of the Members and
Matter they are made up of. There be many Members (and particular parcels of
several shape and use) and yet by the wisdom of God, all are so well-united and
set together; that there appears so admirable a decorum, so goodly a frame, and
lovely a proportion and symmetry of the whole; I say, of the whole, that not
the least Member (though the most differing from others in form or fashion)
could be spared; for the Lord has use of all his people (under what
dispensation soever) to build up his house withal, as I shall (if the Lord
please) show in the second Book. Wherefore I am persuaded, those Churches that
consist so much in, and subsist so much of, and upon an uniformity, will fall;
for they are not of Gods building; but those the Lord builds (as before) though
many Members be in them that differ in opinions, forms, or the like; yet all
shall be very useful and necessary in the place the Lord has put them in, by
his holy Spirit, and shall be so far from making fractions, or divisions, that
they shall promote the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, being all are
borne up by one foundation, upon whom all are built, one as well as another,
and that foundation which is the strength of the building) is as able and fit
to keep up one as another (so fastened in him) be he of what judgment
soever, Those Churches whose unity is in the Spirit will stand, and are the
Lords buildings.
and under what shape soever he appears to others (so he be but good matter.)
Now those Churches are of the Lords building (doubtless) that do agree in
Spirit, though differ in form, and though they have in them of sundry Nations,
natures, languages, judgments, or opinions, yet are all one in Christ the
foundation, and are firmly cemented, and united one to another in Christ by his
own, and the same spirit, which enlivens, enlightens, quickens, comprehends,
acts, inables, moves, and governs all, though under diversity of gifts and
administrations: And these are they that shall stand by his wisdom, though not
in the wisdom of flesh and blood, or of the world.

Well in a word, Sion thus governed, thus grounded, and thus united as before,
must be the delight of the whole earth, beautiful for situation, not only in
a fair air, lovely climate, All laid on one foundation which is Christ.
and good land, but lying on a fair, full, and sure foundation, which shall
never be removed, but which he will establish for ever, Psalm. 48.2.8. SELAH.
Wherefore thus says the Lord of hosts, let your hands be strong, ye that hear
in the day the foundation of the Lords house is laid (Christ being for that
purpose preached) that the Temple might be built. For the building is all in
vain, that is not laid upon this Foundation.

And to conclude; The Lord make our Builders wise in laying the Foundation
first; I fear, too many (and I desire to deal home with my own naughty, A
word to Builders.
deceitful heart herein) that have sought more their own fame, then others
felicity, more to glorify themselves then God in gathering the godly into
Fellowships, and so they have gotten a good many, Churches must not be called
by our names.
and those great ones too, and made themselves some body; then they Christen
their Churches into their own names. The Lord shame us for it, whom he finds
guilty! Constantine the Great called Trajane (who was a Great Builder) the
wal-flower, for that his name was engraven on so many walls. So indeed are many
men's names most shamefully (if not impudently) engraven on your Churches. This
was not in Primitive times, we never read of any Churches called by men's names
then; as St. Paul's Church, Eagle-Saints are settled in the Rock.
or Peter's Church, but all called the Churches of Christ; for they were built
upon him for a foundation, upon this Rock which Eagles fly up to; but the
Ostridges have their nests in Sand. So that all true Churches and Saints have
one, and the same substantial Foundation. For as Rhetoric is said to be a
Fist extended and displayed into an open hand, Sim.
but Logic a hand contracted into a close Fist; So the Church is dilated into
many Congregations, but every good Christian is the Church contracted, and
condensed into one Bosom, being alike built upon the Rockie Foundation which
will never fail.

CHAP. XV. (...) Ahezachecha. That all the children of Sion called home, are
bound to make haste, and to enter into this Way of Christ among his Companions
in the Gardens.
THe next news is, that wisdom stands in the streets and calls to all, yea
the simple, and poor, to eat of her bread, and drink of her wine, to forsake
the foolish, and to go in the way of understanding, Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
she cries at the gates, at the entry of the City, at the coming in at the
doors, Prove. 8.1, 2, 3. yea she has sent out her Maidens (the Ministers) to
cry aloud (by preaching her doctrine) Prove. 9.4. and her Discipline, Wisdoms
care of us, and call to us.
Prove. 9.1. For wisdom has laid the foundation, and hewed out her pillars, as
you have heard before; what follows? why hearken unto me, O ye children!
blessed are they that keep in my ways, blessed is the man that hears me,
Prove 9.32, 34.
watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. Expos.


The gates of Zion are the particular Churches of Christ, into which Christ
calls all that have communion with him; Arise! and come away, Cant. 2.
which (as Ainsworth says) Believers are bound to do, and must labor
forthwith, to enter in, and being come in to abide there, In his communion of
Saints. First proved by Prophecy.
and to contend together for the faith, Phil. 1.27. which was once DELIVERED to
the Saints; For this is foretold in Isa. 2.3. and he will teach us his ways
(the very next step is this) and we will walk in his paths; as soon as ever
we know the way of Christ, the Laws, Ordinances, Institutions, and Discipline
of Christ, we must make no delay at all, but put into practice, and enter into
his way. It argues carnality to procrastinate, and put off Christ, and to delay
our coming at the call of Christ, when we have clearly and distinctly heard
it, Luke 14.18. and always observe that it is something or other of the world,
that is the let; but as Micah 4.2. says, and Jer. 50.4. They shall go and seek
the Lord, and ask the way to Zion, saying, Come, 2 Proved by Precept.
and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant. (I^unt, non
subsistent ad vocationem Christi, non moras trahent, Oecolampad.
Oecolamp. in loc. So Psalm, 110.3. besides the Precepts, Psalm. 45.11. Mat.
28.20. and loud calls a^ before, Threatenings.
the many menaces used in the Scriptures against Rebels, and such disobedient
subjects, do sufficiently testify to this truth, Psalm. 2.12. Luke 19.23. 3
Proved by Practice.
1. Cor. 16.22. and the practices of the Saints in primitive times, yea though
times of hottest persecutions and fiery trials; yet their (then) ready
obedience to this order of Christ, does very much manifest the reality of this
assertion, viz. that Saints are bound by virtue of positive Precepts to join
together somewhere in a Gospel-way and order, as has been before handled, Act.
2.41, 42. 1 These. 1, 4* 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 8.11.22. 2 Cor. 8.5 Cum multis aliis.
Now is there not reason enough for it? For,

First, What other visible way for Believers to walk in together, worship in,
The only visible way that Christ has left for Saints.
has Christ brought out of his Fathers bosom? and left behind him? when he
ascended on high? till his second coming? but this? see Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

2 It is disobedience to live in Babylon.
Secondly, What an apparent piece of disobedience and contempt of Christ's Call
and Command is this, to live in Babylon streets? or as Lot in Sodom?
notwithstanding the Angel of the Sun is sent to cry aloud in our ears to
come away into Sion, and to make a habitation for the Lord to live in, Isa.
52.11. Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Ephesians. 2.21.28. yea and the Spirit is to be
our conduct, Jo. 16.13. and 14.26. and knocks at our doors, and tarries to know
if we are ready, and to put us in mind of making haste, by many motions and
instigations, And such are resisters of the holy Ghost.
and instincts: O then! how roughly do they resist the Holy Ghost! and quench
the motion of the Spirit! that stirs in them! and strives with them! Act. 7.51.
1 Thessalonians. 5.19. which is a sin of the saddest consequence, (if after they are
convinced,) Mat. 12.31. Mark 3.28, 29. Heb. 10.26.27. agnitam veritatem
flagitiose insectari. So Saul, Julian, Trap in loc.
Latomus of Loraine, and many others sinned the sin of death! that is, they
madly and maliciously resisted the truth, despised, and despited the ways of
Christ, notwithstanding their consciences checks, and the Spirits motions, and
so did Stephen Gardener, Melancthon
Fox Act. and Mon. Fol. one thousand nine hundred and five, Chron p. 5.
and diverse others.

O sad! sad sin! to sin against the office, and operations of the good
Spirit of grace! A sad sin.
which is more then to speak against his person in ignorance, for so did the
Sabellian, Eunomian, and Macedonian heretics, who yet found mercy. Wherefore
have a care how ye dare to live in the loathsome Babylonish ways of
confusion, after ye are called out thence, and convinced by the Spirit (since)
of the gates of Sion! whilst the Spirit moves in you, to make haste into
Church Fellowship, he is doing his office in you, look you to

The sad consequences which follow the neglect of entering.
Consider the abundance of ill consequences which must unavoydably follow this
disobedience to Christ, or this neglect, or omission of these ways of
holiness or Gospel-fellowship; for

1 A great wrong to the worship and service of God
First, The worship of God, or service to Christ Jesus (which should be our joy
and meat and drink) suffers by it, which is more acceptably and orderly
performed with joint consent, and in communion of Saints, Romans 15.16* 1 Cor.
1.9, 10. Zeph. 3.9. the Lamb is said to solemnize public service upon Mount
Sion with a hundred forty and four thousand Saints, there their voice is like
the voice of many waters, and mighty thunders, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. in the songs of
praises, and in their prayers; but for this I refer to Ainsworths Communion,
Chap. 16.

Secondly, without this, the Saints must needs fall short of that duty of
edifying one another, 2 A great let to their duties.
and of building up one another in the most holy faith, but then they grow,
Jer. 23.3, 4. Ezekiel. 34.14.16. and walk in light, Isa. 60.3. 1 Jo. 1.17. and
love, Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. 1 Pet. 1.22. and unity of the Spirit, Phil. 2.1,
2, 3. 2 Cor. 13.11. Ephesians. 4.3. instructing and provoking one another to
holiness, and good works, Mal. 3.16, Jude 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Heb. 10.24.
therefore are they implanted together to flourish in the Lords Courts, and to
bring forth fruits, Psalm. 92.13, 14. which will not fail, for the waters run
out of the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.1.

Thirdly, otherwise they have not that mutual aid and assistance for the
counsel and comfort of one another, 3 Hinders mutual assistance.
which they ought to have, Romans 12.3. 1 Cor. 12.22.26.

Fourthly, nor is there that unanimous compliance, 4 Hinders opposition of
enemies by an united strength as one Arm and Army.
or united force made against the opposers of the truth as is required, Phil.
1.27. Jude 3 Gal. 5.1. 1 Cor. 7 23. Can. 6.4. til they be in communion, as an
Army with Banners, and then they are terrible to their enemies being all under
one Captain, Heb. 2.10. (grant there be diverse colors) having all the same
word, Jer. 31.33. marching all in order and rank, Col. 2.5. making all one
arm, and strength against the same enemies, Joel. 2.7.
and jointly vindicating the truth, jointly praying, and then out of their
mouths comes fire to destroy their Adversaries, Romans 11.5. jointly suffering
for the truth, 1 Cor. 11.26. Romans 12.8. jointly refusing traditions,
trumperies, and whatsoever is contrary to Christ's word, jointly disputing for,
5 Else there is not such a sympathy as ought to be in bearing, forbearing, etc.
and maintaining of their Liberties and Privileges, Gal. 5.1.

Fifthly, without this Fellowship together, there is not that fellow-feeling,
or Saintly sympathy as ought to be, 1 Cor. 12.25.26. Romans 12.16. nor is there
that bearing one another burdens, Gal. 6.2. Heb. 13.3. nor forbearing one
with another weaknesses, as Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3* 12, 13. in bowels of love,
pity, patience, and without censures, Romans 14.13. Romans 13.1, 2, etc.

Sixthly, besides they are exceeding deficient in many other Christian duties,
6 They fail in many other Christian duties required of them a^ Church members.
who are not in Gospel-fellowship; for how can they Prophecy in the Church? 1
Cor. 14. or tell the Church? as Mat. 18.17. if they are not members of a
Church? or obey them that are Elders, Heb. 13.17. or vigilantly watch over one
another conversation? and admonish, or reprove orderly? Mat. 18.15. 1 Thessalonians.
5.14. and 4.18. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Romans 15.14. etc. But for this I refer to Mr.
Bartlets Model; But to the

Reason or Argument, which is taken from the special privileges which are
proper to them that are in the way of Christ above all others, There be
special privileges of Saints in fellowship above all others.
which are abundance:

As first, among them Christ does most manifest his presence, Psalm. 36.2. in a
more then ordinary measure, the glory of God is seen in the face of Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. Christ takes most delight in the midst of them to walk there, 1
Christ's presence is promised most to them.
Rev. 1.12, 13. and 2, 1. in his rich robes of righteousness to cloth or
cover with, the meanest (Saints or) member of his body, i. e. with a garment
down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle, for himself
as High Priest and his Saints as Priests. The names of Temples, house,
Kingdom, Tabernacle, yea and golden Candlesticks are given to Believers in
Church Fellowship, 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Ephesians. 2.22. Heb. 3.6. Rev. 21.3.
for this very reason, There is the King and Kingdom in his beauty.
not only because he walks in them, but there he lodges Psalm. 132.13, 14.
lives, and rests in a most remarkable manner, there the Kingdom and King is
seen in his beauty, Isa. 33.17. And for this I refer to the object of the
Church in Chap* 9.

Secondly, In this Way of Christ, the Saints have most singular refreshments, 2
Saints have highest enjoyments* and best refreshments there. Jo. 18.20. Act.
3.1. Act. 13.5. Luke 4.15. Act. 14.44.
and the sweetest and highest enjoyments of love, and grace, and powrings of
the unction from on high upon them; we shall find how Christ (yea and his
Apostles after him) did daily visit the Synagogues and public Assemblies, and
amongst them he uttered so many gracious words, and wrought so many mighty
miracles; and why so? if not to foreshew by this, how he would regard the
Church Assemblies of his people, and be their Prophet, to declare excellent
truths, and to open the Fathers bosom to them above all; for there he feeds,
Cant. 1.7. and 6.2* 3. and eats pleasant fruits, i. e. of his own planting,
Cant. 4.16. there the Lord is a place of broad rivers, Isa. 33.21. and Christ
is there, Expos.
Christ is a Fountain in the midst of his Gardens.
and to them streams from Lebanon, and a Fountain in the midst of them,
Cant. 4.12. as in Florence and Naples, where they have the most excellent
Gardens, they have in the midst a most excellent Spring, Sim.
a Fountain from which with an Engine they can sprout out water, and streams
round about the Garden, so alluding to this, More then in all the world besides.
is Christ in the midst of such a Church Fellowship, as we have spoken of, a
Fountain and streams i. e. they are refreshed with streams (in a more eminent
manner) then all in the world besides; For the common-fields, flowers, and
trees without, Wherein the Churches have the happiness of all others.
have the benefit of the clouds and ordinary^ rain and showers, but the
particular Churches of Christ, his bed of spices, Cant. 6.2. are more watered
then all others; for besides the outward means of grace, and preaching,
praying, expounding, and ordinary public showers or refreshments,
they have a fountain within that is never dry, of purer and more Crystal
showers that cannot be taken away from them; the Word and Spirit are (as it
were) entailed to them in a most spiritual manner above all, Exodus 20.24. Isa.
4.5.6. Isa. 25.6, 7, 8. Others are watered from the ordinary clouds without,
but these are from the fountain within.
Psalm. 132.13, 14, 15, Isa. 56.7. Isa. 59.21. and are (as it were) seated there
to sanctify, season, counsel, quicken, comfort, encourage, and assist them in
Church Fellowship above any other. So that when there is a drought without, and
the Clouds are steril, and the earth barren, yet there is (even there) within a
fountain and streams for the Gardens. When clouds are barren the fountain is
full.
So that though Ministers i. e. Clouds may be empty, yet the Fountain, i. e.
Christ cannot. Thus Saints in fellowship are fed with fat things Isa. 25.6, 7.
with flaggons and apples, Cant. 2.5. and full refreshments, and that above all
other the dwellings of Jacob, and they bring forth fruits (even) in old age,
Psalm. 92.13, 14. 3 Christ is most free to impart his best bosome-loves to such.


Thirdly, Christ is more free with them then with any others, as a Husband with
his Wife to impart his most intimate bosome-loves and secrets, Cant. 7.12. 2
Cor. 11.2. and to let out his very heart-loves into his wives arms and bosom,
Isa. 62.4, 5* and Isa. 61.10. Psalm. 36.8.

4 They are most under his care and protection, and on his account.
Fourthly, Such (of all) are under his protection and banner of love, Cant. 2.4.
Isa. 4.5, 6. Joel 2.32. Isa. 54.17 and in the midst of them is salvation
placed, Isa. 46.13. Zach. 2.5. And in a word they have a heaven upon earth,
Rev. 12.1.12. O! it is good being here!

For these and many more the like Reasons has this Gospel Order of Believers
in fellowship been always praised, prized, and indefatigably sought for, For
these reasons Saints in Primitive times (even) longed after Church fellowship.
and accounted of, even as of necessity, for believers in all ages: For the
Lord though he loves all his Saints, Deuteronomy. 33 3. yet he loves the gates of
Zion more then all other the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. and so much the
Saints have loved these Courts of the Lord, that they have accounted a day
better there, then a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84.10. the Apostles longed after
it, and to see the brethren in it, Apostles longed after it.
Romans 1.11.12. 1 These. 2.17. yea and esteemed them the Crown of their joy, 1
These. 2.19.20. yea, Christ himself (as man) exceedingly desired it, and sought
comfort by his Disciples prayers, Christ himself desired it.
Mat. 26.40.43. Luke 22.46. and he exceedingly longed after a most special
communion with them in fellowship with him, before he parted from them, and
was taken away to suffer. See Luke 22.15. with desire I have desired to eat
with you before I suffer; Expos.
as if he should say, I have most strong affections hereto, for thereby I shall
be abundantly stengthned and refreshed as well as you, We do but as Christ, his
Apostles and primitive Saints did in entering into Church Fellowship.
etc. O then! how dare any, that follow the Lamb, delay entering into these
ways of holiness, and love! did not Christ, his Apostles, and primitive
Saints go before us into this Church Fellowship, and Gospel Order? what
hinders us? nay what is the reason we do not run into them? for what a world
of proofs, precepts, promises, practices, reasons, arguments, motives, and
privileges, are there to provoke us? Use.
were they but duly weighed? who durst either deny, To put forward apace for
Zion, and in order thereto get into the Gates.
or delay coming or joining? The Lord added to the Church from day to day such
as should be saved, Act. 2.47. wherefore make this use! put forward apace for
the ways of Sion with the will! wherein you must have (in your hearts)
inclinations, resolutions for, and choosings of these Tabernacles above all
other ways; if once you get into these Gates of Sion, you will quickly be in
Sion. But some may say,

Object. But learned, able scholars, Object.
and godly judicious men do both print and preach against this way; the Answer
is easy.

Answ. First, In all ages, both learned and godly have been opposers of Christ
and his Church; Learned and godly (in appearance, the strictest Professors) in
every Age, Christ's and his Churches greatest enemies.
so were the Scribes and Pharisees, the most learned and (in appearance) the
most godly of the age; and so, Act. 13.50. were those that raised ((...)) a
running and a most rigid persecution-against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled
them out of their coasts; but this should never the more hinder us.

Secondly, Though they be learned and godly, yet they be but men, therefore
subject to mistakes; for judicium fit, 2 They are but men, and subject to
errors.
secundum vim intellectualis luminis, they preach, and print, but according to
their apprehension; But,

Thirdly, All are not learned, nor godly, that the world judges to be so; they
have a form of godliness, 3 Many counted learned and godly that are not truly
so. Who are (...) learned.
denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. and so they may have the letter of
Learning, but not the life of it, whole Libraries in their heads, but not a
Catechism, nor Principle in their hearts, Isa. 29.11. Isa. 50.4. I mean of the
true Divinity which the Father learnes us, Joh. 6.45. by his Spirit, 1 John
2.20.77. this none but the Redeemed have, Rev. 14.3. and in this the Spirit is
our Tutor, and teaches us out of the Lambs book, Rev. 5.5, 6. such have indeed
the highest skill of Tongues, and are most admirably conversant with the
original language of the Spirit, here lies the difference; but for these,
their Learning comes from the heart, Prove. 16.23. whilst the others comes but
from the head: But,

Fourthly, They know but in part, 4 Men know but in part.
they will know more then now they do.

Fifthly, Do not learned, able, and godly of all sorts print, 5 ^earned and
godly of all sorts for this way.
preach, and pray this way of Christ? by unanswerable arguments against all
opposers whatsoever? and answer the arguments, and objections of the
Adversaries? 6 Their opposition makes for it.


Sixthly, This opposition of theirs is necessary for the evincing of the truth,
and makes more for it, then against it, Act. 28.22. Act. 24.5.14.

Object.
Object. But when people enter into this way, they run into errors presently.

Answ. First, Some it may be that enter, do run into error, 1 This is not
the cause of it.
but this their uniting with the Saints in Gospel Order, is not the cause of
it; nay,

Secondly, There is no stricter enemy to error, that can be, then this order
of Christ, 2 It is a great enemy to error.
which will not allow of the least appearance, much less growth of error, or
sin, Romans 16.17, 18. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.16, 17. Act. 20.29.31. Rev.
2.14.16. 2 Jo^. 10. though such as are conscientious have (and are to have)
their liberty in things indifferent, Romans 14.1, 2, 5.

3 The not entering into this way, makes men run into ways of error.
Thirdly, Nay, to say the truth, the neglect and omission of this duty to enter
into fellowship according to Gospel Order, makes so much disorder, and so many
run into ways of error, as has been hinted before in Chap. 7. but grant it,
to argue ex concessis, then we say,

4 Errors are necessary.
Fourthly, Errors are useful, as well as truth, and it is expedient they should
be 1 Cor. 11.19. In Pope Clements the fifths time, Frederick King of Sicily
made this his master-objection against the Church, viz. the errors and
evill-orders (which indeed he might well do) but he was answered, and soon
satisfied with this Scripture, Truth and error must be both together.
That offenses must come, and that there must be heresies amongst you, that
they which are approved may be manifest; by Arnoldus de nova villa. This is
much for the glory of truth too,
and therefore in Isa. 60.1, 2. a glorious light, and yet a gross darkness
are both foretold for one time together; should we half so much prize the
light, and press for it, had we never a night? nor darkness? but both
together does well, and wisdom has so ordained it.

I have heard of a Ruler who gave liberty to his subjects for certain days to
do any manner of evil or mischief, and they should not be questioned for any
wickedness done in those days; no, though they murdered, or did villainy in
the highest nature; But this was in policy to indear government unto them, and
by giving his people a taste what it was to be without it, to make them the
more prize it.

Object.
Obj. We are well enough as long as salvation may be had here in Parishes, what
need we enter into any other way?

Answ. 1. Yet ye are not well enough; for ye live in disobedience, danger of
Babylons plagues, Not enough to be in Parishes, though salvation could be had
there.
and in contempt of Christ's commands, which shall not go unpunished, Heb.
10.20. And therefore, if you love your own souls, there is great need of
getting into the gates of Sion.

2. What a carnal, low, degenerate, base Spirit have thou, 2. This argues a
base carnal spirit.
to be as well content with Egypt, as with Canaan? and with the Onions and
Leeks, as well as if ye had the Milk and Honey? To be content with the Onions
and Leeks of Egypt.
Thou do fall foully short of the true Spirit of Christ in a Saint; which is
ever going forward, and cannot be content with the husks, no nor crumbs, as long
as there is bread enough in our Fathers house. Besides, how unkindly do thou
deal with Dear Christ? who took care for thee?
and brought this way from Heaven out of his Fathers heart for thee? and will thou now slight both him, and it? But,

3. It is a question, 3. Thou ar^ (else) a hinderer of thine own comfort and
salvation.
whether thy salvation may be had here in these Parochial ways and Discipline,
as long as thou art persuaded, and convinced by Gods Word thou art in a
false-way; but how ever, I tell thee from the Lord, thou art an enemy to thy
poor soul, and as much as (almost) may be an hinderer of thy own salvation. And
why? Quia quoscunque deus eligit ad finem; eos eligit ad media. Ursin. de
Eccles.
For thou do rob thy soul of the rich benefit of being watched over,
admonished, counseled, comforted, and may lie in some sin (which thou see
not, and others might see) which may be thy ruin; thou art subject to
wanderings now, and may be, runnest in a full career without stop or stay,
warning or check; besides, you have not here without in your Parishes the
benefit of many ordinances, as exercising of gifts, prophesying one by one, and
frequent communication and conference in the things of God. Mal. 3.16. And
suchlike precious benefits as are in this Church Way to be had at large for
your edification. 4. If thou continuest obstinate, it may be just with God, to
give thee up to the hardness and deceitfulness of thine own heart.


4. And lastly, it is just with the Lord, to leave thee to thy lusts, to swear
in his wrath, thou shall never enter into his rest; never to make one motion
more at thy soul, by his spirit, to enter into this way; or once to incline
thine heart thereunto; If now, now I say, after so many clear calls, thou do
resist the Holy Ghost. Wherefore as Heb. 3, 10, 11, 12, 13. harden not your
hearts ((...), Expos.
which comes of the word (...) to dry up, or wither) do not snib or nip off
those buds, or blast those blooms which are in you, and like to set so fair for
fruit; nor by the hardness of your hearts, and unkindness, and cruelties, to
the conceptions of Christ within you, do not dry up those sweet sappy motions,
which are made in your heart by his spirit; if you do, you will prove but a
barren branch, a withered sear stick, to be cut up for the fire, John 15.16.
Heb. 6.8. they are nigh the curse that do so, in the deceitfulness of sin,
Wherefore take heed, how you reject it.
i. e. ((...) ex a private. and (...)) drawn out of the way of Christ, by some
fallacy or other; who ever refuses this way of Christ, runs a desperater
hazard, then he is aware off; wherefore then let him take heed! take heed!

And let Ministers (so called) look about them too! and beware! Ministers must
have a care too.

A great change nigh!

Their warning piece, the last year.

A mortal blow to Morter-Churches.


for a greater alteration is yet to come! and to befall them! then ever has
been before! O then! Sirs! that they would be busy about the Lords house! and
no longer delay it! or do it by halves! Numb. 14.24. or by haltings! between
too! Do they yet know what was the meaning of the last lightning? and thunder
the last year? which grew so angry at their Morter-Churches and Parish-Temples?
what houses were burnt or beaten down to the ground, but those Churches? and on
that day of worship too? and in several Counties too? and which is not without
a Mystery? but it shall be plain, and made an History ere long; in the interim,
it were well, that Ministers and all would take warning and sin no more, (by
dishonoring God in idolizing forms! and humane inventions! or in worshipping of
Christ in Antichristian ways! and traditions!) least a worse thing happen unto
them. Was there ever any that hardened his heart against the Lord, and prospered
at last? Job 9.4.

Obj.
But some it may be will say, Sir, You forget your self (and so I would) whilst
you urge so much your Form of Discipline! For we look for Zion more
spiritually! and for spiritual worshippers!

We urge Faith more then Form.
Answ. 1. It is not so much the Form, as the Faith, that I would urge; I mean
obedience to Christ's positive commands (as I told you before) although some
soar too high into the air, that account the Practical Part of Worship a mere
Form.

2. I urge it not so much to be Church Members as Christs-members; but first to
have fellowship with the Son* 2. To be Christs-members, more then
Church Members.
and then with the Saints (as I said before;) but I say, both these are
enjoined, to be enjoyed: Yet I say further, whilst in the Form, out of the
Form; and whilst under it, yet above it; and so are all Saints in the Church,
spiritual worshippers of God, John 4.23. yea, in spirit and in truth together;
And in the Churches to be spiritual worshippers.
Wherefore let none be so censorious, as to say, We are all for the form of
Discipline, when indeed, we are least for it, and would have all our Brethren
to live above it in their Spirits with God, and with Christ; in the Temple, and
the Light of the New Jerusalem. We live in them, as Abraham lived in Tents, and
David in Tabernacles.

3. We also look for Sion more spiritually! 3. We look for Zion, and must first
pass through the Gates.
but this is in order thereunto: Before we can get into the City (which is all
glorious within,) we must pass through the gates, as appears, Psalm. 87.2, 3.
His foundation is in the holy mountains. The Lord loves the gates of Zion more
then all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of
God! Expos.
There is, first, the foundation laid by the Lord himself; and then secondly,
the particular Churches, or the gates of Zion, which the Lord so loves, (...).
And then thirdly, the City its self which is so glorious. But I say, before we
can come into the City, we must enter through the gates; which are these
Churches gathered: Particular Churches are the Gates of Sion.
So that this is in the way to that City, where Salvation is placed, Isa.
46.13. This is the way to Zion, as Jer. 50.5. They shall ask the way to Sion,
with their faces thitherward, saying, Come let us join our selves together,
etc. We must ask first the way, Expos.
(i. e. the Churches*) and when we are in the way, then for Zion. And thus the
Saints come to Sion, Jer. 3.14. Isa. 51.11. and 35.10. i. e. By this way, and
through these gates; we must first live in Tents, and then in the City, Heb.
11.9.10. First, in Tabernacles, then in the Temple; and that those that would
live in Sion in her glory,
and full effusion of the Spirit, must be in the Churches, in order thereunto;
which appears plainly in Chap. 9. lib. 2. For the Lord will be known in her
Gates, Towers, and Palaces, Psalm. 48.3. and 44.12.

Quaere.
Quaere. How we should groundedly know we are fitted for this Communion of
Saints in Church-society, as has been pressed?

Answ. 1. There must be clear satisfaction to your judgment, Clearly satisfied
in it.
and full persuasion in your breast, Romans 14. the whole Chapter, especially
Verse. 1, 2, 4, 14. Acts 2. and 19. and 8. Saints ever first believed, and were
fully persuaded, and then they entered.

2. Freely willing and longing.
2. You must be exceedingly longing and desirous after it; and then make ready
for it; be freely willing to it, by the Spirit of Christ in you, Psalm. 110.3.
Jer. 50.4, 5. For all in Christ's Kingdom are volunteers, 1 These. 1.6, 7. Acts
4.32. 2 Cor. 8.3, 5.

3. Ready to take up any Cross to follow Christ.
3. Such are made free to follow Christ any where soever, Revel. 14.4. And as
they come at his call, Mark 1.18. so they are prepared to leave all, and to
take up the cross, Mat. 19.27. accounting before hand, what it will cost them;
so that they pass not a pin for storms and afflictions, which they expect
before hand; as 1 These. 3.3. Phil. 1.27, 28. but they will hold out to the end.

4. You have a sweet and true object.
4. What is the object ye look on in these overtures of your affections? It is
the King in his beauty. O the sweet! Soul-ravishing presence of God in Christ!
in grace! and glory! This makes these Tabernacles so amiable! his goodness in
these gardens is so desirable, Psa. 87.2, 3. Isa. 33.17. Psa 27.4. Act. 2.28.
Ps. 84.1, 2, 7, 10. and 63.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3.18. and 6.16.

5. You have first fellowship with the Father, and his Son, and then with his
Saints. Else it is unsound.
5. Have ye a clear discovery of your fellowship with the Father, and his Son?
Then ye may from the same principle, and by the same spirit, have fellowship
with the Saints; 1 John 1.7. but be sure ye begin in Christ first, or else the
foundation is not laid; else ye will fall out and down in the dust, 1 John
2.19. ye cannot continue else; and then will your ending be worse then your
beginning.

6. What is your end? is it that as the chosen ones, 6. Your End is to set
forth* Gods praise, and to glorify God.
and those bought by Christ's blood, you may set forth the praises of him that
called you out of darkness into light? 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 These. 1.11, 12. and is it
nothing else but in subordination to this? why then these are good grounds. But
many there be that have base, by, sinister ends, Many creep and crowd in for
by, base, selfish Ends.

In Dublin.


for which they creep into this Church Way; who are (or will be ere long) a
scandal to the Gospel, and do bring a scorn upon the truth. O! how often has
it been said in Dublin (and that by such, whose sincerity is without exception)
with bleeding hearts! Look ye! there is one that could not tell how to live,
but has lost his trade, and for some place is got in to be a member of such a
Church; and he is now preferred, and made a Gentleman, etc. Nay, some have been
so bold as to boast of it, (among themselves) as if nothing else biased them
into these ways, but politic ends! O sad! The mischief that such members do.
such as these do bring the ways of holiness into contempt! they grieve many
that are in! and keep out many that are not in! they raise fractions within,
factions without; they open the wide mouths of the enemies to blaspheme; and
they side for lucres sake, or lusts sake with the great, rather then with the
good. Ah! alas! and indeed, though upon the naked knees of our souls, we cannot
be thankful enough for the liberty the truth has,
and that holiness and Religion is so much advanced; Never more Hypocrites,
then now; and why?
Yet I do verily believe, never more Hypocrites then now, who (because they
know none but honest men must be preferred into places or offices) do dissemble
with God and men; get into Church-fellowships (the name of a Churchmember
making them of note) and exercise their gifts, Their character and conditions.
and get up into Pulpits (which God forbid, but they should orderly) and change
their words, ways, and works, but not their hearts, Genesis 4.3. Hosea 7.16.

These are lights before men, but darkness before God, Matthew. 6.2, 5, 16. Isa.
58.2. and though these do not the evil which they love, (in their hearts, if
they durst do it,
or could not be seen by men) yet they will do the good, which they love not,
to be seen by men, Numb. 14.2. and 4.40. O these! these are the scandal of this
age! this Land! this Reformation! and of the Church of Christ! whererefo beware
ye be not biased by such sinister, And their End.
carnal, fleshly ends! for the Hypocrites hope will come to nothing, Job 8.13.
Their flower will fade, and their joy is but for a moment, Job 20.5. When
Religion is much in fashion,
it is much a fancy, and then most men will swim with the stream.

Thus have I roughly offered a few directions, and have lent my hand, by a few
helps to such as do seek the way to Sion! but least they leap before they look,
they will do well to weigh them in the balance of the sanctuary; and because
many Church-fellowships in my judgment (given me by the Word and Spirit) are
in a doubtful state at present; and which (I think) must be purged with the
Refiners fire, and Fullers soap: What Church Fellowship is best for sincere
hearted and tender Saints to get into.
I do therefore beseech you seriously to seek such a society as has,

1. The sweetest harmony, and most love, and to all alike.

2. Which has Christian liberty, and no one is robbed by the Rulers, of his or
her right.

3. Where they live more in the Spirit, then on the Forms.

4. Where holiness is highest, and appears in most power.

5. Where every Saint may walk according to his light (so he be holy, humble,
etc.) though he differ in some things from others.

6. Where you see most self-denial, humility of mind, and ready serving one
another.

7. Where you see most order and Gospel-decency.

8. Where appears most sympathy, and bowels of love, and pity.

9. Where their unity consists, not in the unity of the fo^m, but in the unity
of the Spirit.

10. Where you find most readiness to meet together, to instruct, counsel,
comfort, and build up one another in the most holy Faith; and where there is
not honor given, or taken, Joh. 5.44. after the manner of men, or a having men's
persons in admiration.

Many such things I might offer now, but I shall take more liberty hereafter;
only these things in brief I lay before you, till the next Books. And this I
do the rather, Experience has put the Author upon this Subject.
being induced thereunto by abundance of experience afforded me (through Gods
goodness) from variety of observations, which I have taken of many gathered
Churches in England and Ireland, as they now stand. The Lord open your eyes to
see, and your ears to hear, and lead you by his light, and Spirit of truth,
into his holy tabernacles, Psalm. 43.3.

Thus far for the first Part of this Platform, wherein you have the totum
essentiale of a true Church of Christ, from The Efficient Causes. The Material
Causes. The Formal Causes. The Objective Causes. The Instrumental Causes. The
And Final Causes.


All this is to show what is requisite before embodying; but the next part
relates, to what is to be done in* and the last, to what is to be done after
embodying together.

The End of the First Book.
(...) Challah. The Heavenly Nymph: OR THE BRIDE.

Rising up to Perfection, and preparing for the coming of her Bridegroom: Being
the Second Book of Church Discipline.

Wherein appears the BRIDES beauty in her Members, and Complexions, her
submission and obedience to Christ, her Modesty and her Chastity, her Humility,
and her Loves, with other Graces and Ornaments that appertain to her.

AS ALSO The BRIDEGROOMS great love to her ( more then to all other the
dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2.) his care of her, his special Presence, and
abode with her, his Royal maintenance to her, and provisions for her according
to his own fullness, and the riches of his Grace that fills all in all, Ephesians.
1.23.

Or you have (in this Book) a sight of the Moon shining (though under Clouds
and thick darkness) as she receives her light and life from the Sun (in the
former Book.)

Or Christ (her Head) coming in glory, being big-bellied with the precious
Promises and Prophesies, and Types, never before so opened, and which are
traveling to be delivered in these latter days, wherein the light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as of seven days,
etc. Isa. 30.26.

By JOHN ROGERS, A friend of the Bridegrooms, and of the Brides. Preacher of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Now at Thomas Apostles Land. But communicated at
Brides in Dublin in Ireland.

Psalm. 45.11. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. (...)

Isa. 62.5. As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall the Lord over
thee.

Rev. 21.2. The holy City, the new Jerusalem prepared as a Bride adorned for
her husband.

Zach. 14.20, 21. Holiness to the Lord; and every pot in Jerusalem shall be
holiness to the Lord, and no more Canaanite shall be in the house of the Lord
in that day.

Zeph 3.20. I will make you a name, and praise among all peoples of the earth.

Rev. 19.5, 6, 7. Be glad O all Saints, for the marriage of the Lamb is come,
the Bride has made her self ready, (...).

Ier. 30.17. This is Sion which none (to speak on) seek after.

Rev. 22 17. But the Spirit and the Bride says Come.

LONDON, Printed for R. Ibbitson. 1653.

To all Christian Readers of all Judgments, a word or two first.
Christian Reader,
IF thou be so, thou will not wonder, that I say unto thee, The Day is
coming when Kiriath-Sepher shall be smitten, Josh. 15.15.
whose name signifies the City of Books, and our City and Country are full
these times, which by the next Age will be all out of date, and lie moulding
like old Almanacks in corners; Sim.
for then the Lamb shall be our Light, and the Lord our Temple. And as Solon
said of Laws, says he, We have many good LAWS made indeed, but alas! there
wants ONE yet; and what is that? Why a LAW to put all the rest in EXECUTION;
The Lambs^ book will be ere long abroad.
so we have many good Books abroad, but give way to one more I pray, for there
wants one more, and that is the Book which will put us upon the practice of all
the rest; I mean the Lambs Book written within and without, Rev. 5.2, 3. and
Ezekiel. 2.9. this is ere long to come abroad, though I fear it will find but
few Readers. In the mean time, the Press says to the Pulpit, as Esaiah said
to Jacob, Plurima habeo, sint tua tibi, Genesis 32.4. I have enough my brother,
Genesis 33.9. keep what thou have to thy self. And amongst the multitude it comes
to my turn to bring in ((...)) but I hardly know whom to invite, In the mean
time what is presented in this book.
for although I may find a few guests (these stomack-full times) that may come
to feed, yet I know that most will but sit to look on. And indeed, I have not
provided for the proud, or Prelatick Palate; neither puffe-paste, Sim.
nor kick-shawes; But as Aeschilus the Poet said of his Tragedies, that they
were but small dishes of great Homers supper; so I say, I here present you a
poor Dish or two from the Lamb, who will sup with you in this the Kings house
and Palace, wherein you shall find the feast of fat things, flaggons of Wine,
and the Apples of the Tree of life, yea spiced Cups, and green Sallets, and
sweet flowers to boot, gathered out of Spring-garden: and because some men must
have their dishes set out with flourishes, they shall find the attestation of
the most eminent and orthodox Writers in all Ages to this Treatises truth: And
to satisfy all senses; the Bridegroom has provided the best soul-ravishing
Music, Math. 22.3.
I mean the melody of the Spirit; for his guests that come at his call to this
marriage-house and Feast, for all things are ready, the fatlings and oxen are
killed, Come!

But I know the wantonness of the times make many look for pretty knacks now,
as the last courses; but soft there; Those Spaniards are wisest who will have
the best at last, and your toys at first. It is true, the Books of these few
years coming, are like to be the last course; but let me tell you they must be
the best, Diverse sorts of Readers.
most solid, sweet, spiritual Dishes that have not been yet brought in.

1 To feed their fancies.
Some there be that will read good Books and Authors, but as the Butter-flye
that sucks flowers, only to paint her wings with; so to feed their fancies,
opinions, and judgments with, but not like the Be to fetch out the honey of
them.

Others there be that are worse, and would suck out poison, to satisfy the
lusts of their hearts; these may hap be taken too, as those in the act of
Adultery; for if one reads two are catched.

2 To feed their lusts.
Others there be that come out of Criticisme too, and to show the
ambo-dexterity of their captiosities, I should say capacities, little to their
credit do they buffet words with blows, and pick holes in ciphers to satisfy
the curiosity of their quick-silvered Genius.

3 To carp like Critics.
Alexander, when one did present him with his dexterity in finding fault with,
and vilipending of others, and in extolling his own Arts and Activities,
desired to see what he could do; so his choice art appearing (to be so poor)
as only to cast a Pease through the eye of a Needle a little bigger: Sim.
Well, says Alexander,
Give, Give him a bushel of pease for his pains to maintain his sport with. And
though Alexander was very free in giving gifts, and rewards, he thought a
bushel of pease reward enough to keep up his curiosity, So I say, to recompense
such Readers if they come hither, I have a whole bushel full for them to keep
up their trade.

Other Readers we have who mind more the mark then the metal, and more mind
who writes, then what is written; 4 Others mind more the man then the thing.
the name carries it upon the wings of credit, whereby many are bribed to buy
and sell their time, their judgment, and the truth at the Authors rate: The
rich Citizens are their best Readers, for they will pay most for it. And many,
I was saying orthod -- but I mean Organ-players will play no longer then such
blow the bellows, and fill the pipes; for their fame makes things furthest off,
look fairest, best and greatest.

But although I make account to meet with many of the third sort of Readers,
Sim.
who have said beforehand they will salute this Book with Argos-eyes, and with
a Zoilus his zeal,
yet they are accounted as Crates the Theban was called, the Door-opener, for
that he would rush into every man's company to hear what they said, and to
gainsay it at a venture; and so do these sometimes; What Readers have promised
me.
they reprehend what they understand not; and sometimes they ^ail because they
(think they) understand what (indeed) they understand not, Sim.
and like Dogs they choose to piss in the fairest places; and all times with
naked natural, reason they read; Like the Smith that smoaks for it,
for that he takes a red-hot iron glowing out of the fire with his bare hands
so I warrant them they burn their fingers (at least) for it, and will be
branded. It is this bids them to eat of the forbidden fruit; and makes them
Owl-like frown at the face of the Sun. Sim.
Those that make reason their guide, That read with carnal reason.
do but set a mad unruly horse to be foremost in the Team. Wherefore as Abraham
when he went up to the sacrifice of his Son, he left his servants and his Ass
below; so though our natural Reason, and humane Arts may serve for below, Sim.
yet they must be left behind if we will come up to the top of this Mount;
for our Reason without the Grace,
and the Spirit that leads up, is but like Sampson without his Guide when his
eyes were out, Sim.
for without the direction of his Guide he could not find the Pillars of the
house; Nor shall you find the Pillars of the Lords house without the guidance
of his gracious Spirit. Such will be lost in this house.


Thus Reader thou art invited to come and welcome, be of what judgment thou will, it is all one for that, for thou art bidden to the Feast, thou art guided
in hither by grace. Wherefore come hither heartily, yea as into a Wardrobe, not
to find an Inventory of new things, for that is too troublesome; but to find
out what is fit for thy wear, use, and application.

In the last Book I was much engaged upon the Power of Civil and
Ecclesiastical; but in this I shall be most in the power of the Church and
Spirit; the Spirit and the Bride. The Spirit in the Churches; which will be
abundantly powered forth in these latter days, Vide chap. 9.

As to Civil Magistrates, I have done my duty in showing their duties, and dare
not like some, Mermaid-like, sing them into the Sea. To Civil Corrupt Lawyers.
But I fear I may be answered as Antigonus answered one that presented him a
Book concerning Justice: Thou art a Fool (says he) to present me a Book of
Justice, when thou see me making wars with other Cities and Countries.
Little less said one of the corrupt Lawyers (viz. Mr Maynard) ^o me last
March before the Lords Commissioners of the Seal in the Parliament Chamber at
the Temple, whilst he was pleading the Law for a Delinquent (Malignant) Patron
(over and over, Corrupt Lawyers.
an open notorious Enemy and Cavalier against God and State) yet having
compounded he must have the power to present a man of a wicked malignant spirit
(none else) and known for swearing, Wicked men present corrupt Ministers to
livings.
company-keeping and other vices, and he must force such a one upon the poor
people (that never heard him so much as preach) to the joy of all the
malignant, godless wretches in the Country all about, and to the grief of all
the godly, who cry and complain of this detestable unsufferable injustice and
foule-oppression, Horrible soul-tyanny, sin, and impiety, which cries for
vengeance.

Mr. Colem. Mr. M. M. R. Mr. Birk. all eminent Ministers thus abused.


which will never leave crying for vengeance till it come with a powder upon
the heads of some; O! that godly, eminent holy men, whom all the Country would
petition, and beg for; the very faithful, useful Ministers of Jesus Christ,
must be justled out from a godly people, and a Church Communion too, and that
by Church-enemies, Christ's enemies and State-enemies, and all this is known
most notoriously; yea that Souls must be thus made sale of, and slaves of, to
serve men's lusts; and all this too by bribes, extortion, oppression, injustice,
and thorough friends made by money or gifts! O let the righteous God come down
and judge! The whole world that hears of it abhors it. And with tears and
prayers, some are crying aloud to the Lord of this lamentable Reformation in
the want of the Laws Regulation: The very justice of the Law as it now stands
is most monstrous injustice, and sends many a precious soul and family a
begging, against all honesty and Christianity; Lawyers live by sin.
for the wicked Lawyers (who live no other way but by sin; and one may in the
sight of God be as lawfully tolerated to live in drunkenness, swearing,
whoredom, and to get money by it, and to make a trade of it; as to live by,
take money for, and make a trade of lying, oppressing the Fatherless, and
widows, cheating of the Nation, eating up the bread of the poor, yea the poor
as bread, turning out godly, putting in ungodly and wicked debauched
Whoremongers, Adulterers, Drunkards, or the like in their room) I say these
ungodly ones (for I cannot see how they can be other) Christ himself
deprecates and accuses, as a crew from hell that live by sin; Woe to you
Lawyers, Luke 11.46, 47. for these are the enemies of Christ, Cursed of Christ.
Their God is Terminus.
and have another God, as the Romans had, which they called Terminus. But for
the incredible wickedness of those of that Profession, their guiltiness of
all manner of sins which the Nation lies under, as Blood, Theft, Oppression,
Injustice, Contentions, Hatred, Cozenage, and Fraud, Rebellion, Lying, Perjury,
and what not? and for the injustice and tyranny of the Law as it now stands
without regulation or reformation, to the utter undoing of thousands that are
aged, godly and deserving Families, with many a sad and lamentable history
thereof, and for the late excessive exorbitances of their injustice and
oppression, scarce paralleld in any of the former ages; I doubt not but an
accurate account will be given thereof to all the world in a book compiled for
that purpose. But in the mean time, this Mr. M. one of the cast out members of
the house (I hear) pleading for this cause of the D^vill (for I dare call it no
other) much offended me, insomuch that I was urged in conscience to say before
the Lords Commissioners: Sir, the Acts of the Apostles had been your best
Statute-book in this business about souls: You use not Gods word: but before I
could go further, he punched me aside, with some abusive fowl-mouthed
language (as I hope ere long to declare to the world) saying, They mock at the
word.
What do ye tell us of the word, we have the Law? etc. So the Lawyers pushed
me aside. But what a sad thing is this? that such Laws? and such Laywers should
be suffered? and how can a good reformation be laid upon so base a foundation?
Lawyers hinder Reformation.
They are the Lawyers all this while that have hindered the Reformation, and so
they will, as long as they have such influence upon the Parliament.

In reforming of the Commonwealth, I wish our Governors would beware of
leaning to Policy too much; for hitherto like Jewellers when they see a spot
or spek or cloud in the Jewel, which cannot be grownd out without sensible
abatement of the stone, Sim.
Why the Law is not regulated all this while.
they will not meddle with it: neither will our Governors as yet meddle with
the regulation of the Law (it seems) because there must (then) be abundance of
the corrupt, cloudy, spotty, oppressive part of it be quite taken away and
grownd to powder then; but I hope ere long that policy will be out of power
and prevalency.

I remember I have read Caligula, upon the suit and outcry of the people,
desired the Law might be set up that all might know it, and not be ensnared by
it; but he had so well learned the art of Policy, Never the better for being
Englished.
that he caused it to be written in so small a hand that none could read it, or
was the better for the setting of it open: I will not apply it; only this,
what are we the better for the Englishing the Law? are not the Lawyers as
complete Knaves in plain English as they are in their other language? which
(like themselves) is so full of Solecismes and Apocopies; so that as long as
this lasts, the pleas which some make for Religion and the Gospel, Sim.
serve only as Hacknies for their Lusts to ride and spur on in their way: Nor
yet is it that we would deal with the Law as the man in the Fable was dealt
with, by his two wives, the old which he had married plucked out all his
black-hairs out of his head (the evidence of his youth) and his young wife
(that he married after) plucked out all his gray-hairs, What we would have of
the Law, and what not?
that no standards of Antiquity might remain, so that betwixt both, they left
him bald; I say we would not, that there should be no antiquity of the Law to
remain (as some Levellers it may be would) nor would we that there should be
no Novelty of the Law (as the wicked Lawyers it may be would:) But we say, and
affirm it in the sight of God and men, That the Law must be purged to the
purpose, Laws, Lawyers, purged.
and the Lawyers too; and a great deal of the old (tyranny) must out, and much
of new must be added for the liberties ^f Saints and Subjects: For the best of
the Civil Forms are attended with abundance of corrupt (yet close) Interests,
that must down, down, to the ground. For that Form and Custom is got up in the
room of Reason and Right. Custom and Form is in the room of Reason and Right.


And this is the ground of our Controversy, with the Law and Lawyers, (as they
now are) and God himself must be on our side: For Laws were made by men, and
are themselves to be condemned so far, as they fall short of pure and restored
Reason; I mean the Reason of the age wherein we live, which is by degrees
restored to perfection. Now as Reason is purer in this age, As Reason is
better, Law must be better.
then in the last, so the Laws must be; and so they must be purer in the next
age, then in this. But many of our Laws are nothing else, but the results of
the humors, designs, and corruptions of men, to establish themselves, and their
mightinesses; so I account corrupt Presentations in the hands of wicked enemies
to Christ, and the Gospel; and so Fealties, Homages, Oaths, etc. with a hundred
other things that I could name.

And Law in this sense, is nothing else but Will, Many of our Laws are but M^ns
Lusts, Wills, Humors, to make themselves great.
Arbitrary Lust, Power, Custom, Pride, and is as corrupt, as those that made
them. But the day of the Lord, will deliver us! But so may the Lawyers say, Did
the poor man say to the Pirate, when he seized upon him and his ship, and was
plundring of it; O! says the poor man! at the last day ye will not know how to
answer this: Sim.
Say thou so! says the Pirate? Nay, if I shall stay so long before I answer
it, as to the last day, I care not; but now you shall go with me this day.

So the Brazen-headed oppressing Lawyers, it is like will say; Nay, if we shall
stay till that day, it is well enough; and so I have been answered. Say ye so?
Will not the Rocks and Mountains stand still yet? Though ye should say, fall on
us? O fearful! desperate boldness! but know this day is hard by, even at your
doors; and what will ye do now? Now the Lord is coming to judge the Earth? now
those whom you have judged and oppressed, The day is hard by, when Laws and
Judges shall be restored as at first. i. e. according to Conscience, Reason,
and Equity.
shall be your judges? For then (that is shortly) shall be the Resurrection of
Principles and Power, Equity and Conscience, Reason and Right; which is now
gradually rising and standing upon their feet. All Laws were made according to
the light of the Reason that the men then had that made them: Now as men grow
up in purified and enlightened Reason in every age, the Law is to be mended,
refined, and purified accordingly: So that the weak and imperfect Reason of
former ages, has lest much to be added to, and to be mended in the Law, by the
purer and perfected Reason of after ages. But for want of this regulating and
mending the Law, Lust has succeeded Reason, and has been (by fair glosses and
counterfeits of Reason) enthroned in the room of it. But as yet Reason is
turned out of the room and Lust set up for Law.
And Lust, Custom, Will, Might, and Form, has as yet the day of Reason, and
turns it out of doors, and condemns it for an Offender, a Law-breaker, and a
Traitor; as to instance, Let a Minister be in a living, and preach there three
quarters of a year, and then another be put in a week or two before the
Harvest; he that comes for that week or two, shall have all the Means (by the
abomination of the Law; Instance.
) and he that preached there, all before, must have nothing, says the Law; and
so said the foresaid Lawyers, before the Lords Commissioners; though Conscience
cries out upon it, and Reason condemns it, and Equity would not suffer it; yet
against Equity, Reason, Justice, Conscience and all; Lust and Will, Custom and
Form* will have it so, and condemns Reason, Conscience, and all for Traitors,
and Disobedient, and Rebellious; When in very deed, it is the Law as it stands,
that is an unconscionable oppressing, humorous, self-corrupted Form and Custom,
that is to be condemned, as being against clear Right, Equity, Light, Justice,
Reason, and Understanding. Now when this Principle comes to be restored, and
true Reason and Equity to be the Law; as I doubt not, but it will be within
forty five years; then woe be to the Lawyers, Ere long woe to the Lawyers, and
why?
and to all such Persons and Personal Interests! the Form tumbles! Custom
falls! Wills of men shall no longer be a Law! nor shall the Law be as Lawyers
say it then! But I will avouch it, The greatest Traitors, and Oppressors in he
world.
that the Lawyers, Judges, and such as are so strict to the Form, Lust, and
Letter of the Law, shall be found the greatest Traitors, Oppressors,
Prevaricators, Rebels, and Opposers of true Justice, Equity, Reason, and
Conscience; yea, to God, The greatest Traitors and Oppressors in the World. A
word and a warning to cut Governo^s about this. Isai. 2^.9.
and the States that are in the World.

In the mean time, O that our Governors would make have to reform, according to
their Light! and the Reason of this Age! If they will not, the just Judge of
all the Earth! who is gone forth against all Nations for their unjust Laws and
oppressions! I say this great God will come of a sudden, and regulate both the
Law, and them too! The Paracelsian that promises to restore nature and health,
to a corrupt body, does soonest subvert and overthrow both health, body, and
all together. So will our Governors, if they think to reform, before they have
well purged over and over the Law, and Lawyers:
Till then neither Reason nor Religion can have orbe-room enough. I hope none
will think me their enemy, for telling the truth; and speaking my Conscience.
It is to set light upon a hill, let none be offended; Let none be offended with
me.
but if they be, I pass not a pin. For as Theodorus of Cyrene answered
Lysimachus, when he threatened to crucify him, O Sir! said he, Let your
Courtiers and Favorites fear that! for I had as lieve rot in the air, as on the
Earth: I could (I hope) willingly save men an inquisition after me in such a
case, and say to them, I come of my own accord, Here I am! What will ye? for I
remember the Duke of Burgundy* Sim.
who was surnamed Carolus Audax, was son to that Duke who was surnamed Bonus;
for Conscience and Confidence, are near a kin: Wherefore of whom should I be
afraid? Psalm. 27.1, 2. for the Lord is my light, and my salvation, etc. I must
be as ready to write, print, preach, and pray against the sins of great men, as
of the meanest, and I will make no more on it, though I suffer for it: Or
though they deal with this, as the old Senate did, Sim.
that burned up Numa his Books, for mentioning the secrets of their Religion. I
have heard, that if the Crocodiles,
which besiege the banks of Nilus, and way-lay the Travelers into Egypt, Sim.
were but pricked with the quill of the Bird, Ibis, The way to disable Lawyers
from hurting us.
they will be so weak and stupefied therewith, that they will not be able to
stir, or hurt any more.

O that this course were taken with our English Crocodiles! Those wicked
Lawyers that way-lay, oppress, tear, and torment so many persons and families
of this Nation: Did every one arm himself with a quill; and make it a good pen,
with a hard nib,
and write but as long as that would last, what they know of them; i. e. and
touch them therewith but to the quick, (as well as they were able) I am
certain, we should find them stupefied, and stingless, and unable to way-lay
us, hurt us, and oppress us, as they do. But I shall say no more of them here,
expecting a more perfect Character of them ere long in a Book by it self.

The next thing Reader, that this Treatise most of all intends, The Author
looks for Antagonists.
is the Description of the Church; wherein I expect Antagonists, tag and rag,
of the ridged ones of all judgments, especially of the Presbyterians and
Anabaptists; but I hope to be armed for them with the armor of light. The
frothy agitations of some unquiet heads and busy brains, may cast away cost,
and twist straws; I mean, their labor may be worth a pound, but their matter or
stuff not worth a penny. But before hand, I shall pray them to forbear
passion, and the pride of a Prelate; For a foolish sentence dropped upon Paper,
But prays them not to rail, but reason.
will set pride and folly upon a Hill.

Memnon, the General of Darius his Army, hearing a mercenary Soldier, Sim.
with vile language revile Alexander, and exclaim against him; he struck him
with a Lance, saying, He hired him to fight against him, not to rail upon him.
Clamors against a very Enemy, requires rather reproof then praise; and I think
there was no man much commended (but much condemned) that poor empty,
wide-mouthed Libeller of Garlick-hithe, for his Pamphlet he put out lately, As
the Libeller that put out the Taste of Doctrine at Tho. Apostles.
whereby he has brought himself into the report and reproof of all that hear
his name, which may be eminently up, and famous ere long in London, as it is in
Cheshire, and other places: I had, I confess, a full Character of him (indeed)
by Master Manwaring (one that knew him well in Cheshire) at my Lord Bradshawes
Table lately, whilst Sir William Brereton, with an eminent Minister (that
knows him highly too) was by; and gave so good account of him, That I cannot
but wonder how he could end in one lying (impudent) Pamphlet; and like a Squib
(too dry, it seems) flash all out at once. But if he, or any other, will leave
railing and fall to writing, what tends to edification, I shall be for him, and
heartily embrace both it and them, so far, as I find a Christian Spirit with
them. And indeed, as the Athenians dashed out of their Calender a day in May
(when Neptune and Minerva were at odds, and in a bitter fray:) So from my
heart I wish all our bitter frayes may be ended, and their days blotted out.
And O! that the Lord would pour out his Spirit, according to his promise in
these latter days, upon all flesh; which will make us all one in love, and
holiness, and power of godliness, One Spirit will make us all one.
and equal worship.

To conclude, Christian Reader, A word more to the Reader, to instruct him.
if thou come to drink of the pure streams, sweep away the froth (for that is
mine) with thy hand of faith; and take up of what is spiritual and precious
(for that is the Lords) and make not too much stir, least you raise the mud;
for that will make it worst of all. Sim.
C. Lucillius. The Authors wishes for unlearn^d and learned Readers, and why?
Caius Lucillius, a Learned man, was wont to say, That he wished the things
that he had written, might neither be read of the (altogether) unlearned; nor
yet of the highly Learned: For, that the one would understand nothing; and the
others would understand more then himself. But I wish the quite contrary, for
that the unlearned might learn something of me; and the more learned might
teach something to me: So that I hope this will stir up some to read, and some
to write; Not l^arned ones are best Readers. 2 Chro. 12.10.
which will be the worse for the Worms, and may hap to keep their Libraries
from being eat up. But I wish they be the Learned of the Father, for such
learning is the Golden Shield which defends the truth. But when Golden Shields
were gone, Rehoboam was fain to do the deed with Brazen Shields. So I know
where this true Learning, is wanting some Wild Heads will supply the room with
rage, boldness, and impudence. I shall keep thee no longer, good Reader, in the
outward Court, or Common Chamber; but I pray thee go further, and enter into
his Chamber of Presence; where put up one Petition for him, who desires to live
and die the Lords,

And yours, And all in Christ, and nothing in himself, But JOHN ROGERS.
From my Study, at Thomas Apostles, 1. Month. 25. 1653.
An Epistle to the Parish of Purleigh in ESSEX, nigh Malden; wherein the Author
was settled Minister; till of late.
Dear Friends.
I Call you dear, not only that I found you at a dear rate, but I am forced to
leave you so; yet some of you are very dear to me, and in my heart, and whom I
can freely bear in my bosom to the Father. But because the Death, or departure
of a Minister from his people should be his last Sermon; I must therefore say
in general to you this, That my greatest grief for most of you, is, That like
the Cypress, the more you were watered, the more you withered. Would it not
grieve you, Husbandmen, to see your good seed every year to be lost, and to lie
and rot under huge, hard clods? and never to bring forth fruits, or to come up?
So how can it but be my complaints before my Lord and Master, when I give up my
accounts, Heb. 13.17. and say Lord, I have preached! prayed! catechized!
expounded! conferred for above this five years at Purleigh to such a people,
and they have not believed nor obeyed thy word: but many of them are as
ignorant, arrogant, bitter, profane still, ungodly, and opposers of Christ and
his Gospel still, as ever. O sad! what comfort can I have of this? Is not the
thriving of the flock the glory of the Shepherd? and their loss his grief?
Blessed be God whom I serve! that some of you are my joy and my crown, which
I shall wear with me to heaven, Phil. 4.1. But yet the most of you (with much
grief of heart, I must say it) have rejected the Gospel, and the tenders of
love, and the warm bowels and ^eeking blood of Jesus Christ; and oh! heavy,
shall I say, the Day of your salvation! O dear souls! precious hearts, for whom
I weep in secret! what will ye do in the day of the Lord! where will you hide
your selves from the wrath of the Lamb! O, O! how is it, that you bring forth
nothing but briars and thorns! what? are ye accursed ground? Heb. 6.7, 10.28.
Hos. 6.5. Matthew. 12.41. Ier. 11.6. Ezekiel. 34.13.33. etc. Let me ask you, Is it
not lamentable to see a poor father wringing his hands, and weeping over a
stubborn child, wishing he had never been borne! saying, I have tried him so
many weeks, and months, and years, and yet he is worse and worse, would you not
pity the poor man? and say of this stubborn wretch, Well, you have a good
father, God will never bless you, you cannot thrive, you will come to nothing.
Oh! so is it grievous to my heart! as it was to Jeremiah, and Elijah, to
complain to God of the stubbornness of the people: Ah! it is too notoriously
known that I have taken much pains to little purpose amongst you: And yet, O!
what plottings! and conspiracies there were against me? what lies and libels
were invented? what scandals raised? what scoffs and scorns I continually met
with? what huge taxes and troubles you cast upon me? what backbitings and
railings every day? what variety of designs were hatched in the midst of you
to afflict me? yea, with plotted and premeditated malice and menacings to undo
me? what work you made to render me contemptible to all the Country? before
Magistrates, Ministers, people, and all? yea the children and servants set upon
me to abuse me? yea to stone me? yea to swear to take away my life from me?
all which forced me to be much absent from you. And oh friends! do ye think,
God will not visit you for these things? have ye not suffered your servants
and children to laugh and sport in the public places openly in the sight of
all the people, whilst the word has been preaching? and when I have mildly
reproved them to make mowes and mocks at me in the open Church? yea to lay
dog-whips, and what not on the Pulpit cushion when I was to preach? What kind
of injury and abuses have you not returned to me, for all my love and pains,
and care, and continual prayers for you? has there one poor soul of us in
Church Communion escaped your malice and menacing? and your diligence to raise
ill-reports, and to cause wrongs to befall them? have ye not vowed not to
leave us, til you had rooted all of us from you, and not left a Roundhead or
Independent to dwell nigh you? have ye not consulted with all the Malignants
about, how to bring to pass these designs? yet in the midst of all these
troubles, and every day new trials and wrongs from some or other of you? yet
the Lord will one day witness what a care I had of you, when I could not be
with you, or durst not; how I provided for you, and how ye were the travel, as
well as the trouble of my soul. Yet when you had not worried me away with all
this, how often did many of you design to starve me from you? And though like
a Bird kept in a Cage without meat, yet I must do my duty, and sing, though
the thorn were ever at my breast. Still I followed you with love, patience,
pity to your poor miserable souls (O that ye knew it!) and with sweat and
swinke praying, preaching, and expounding, in season and out of season.

But as I have heard of the Seminary (in Lancashire riding disguised) that lost
his glove, one that found it rode gallopping after him to restore it; but the
Seminary fearing he was a Pursevant, put spurs to horse, and flew from him as
fast as he could, and for fear he should be overtaken, he makes his horse take
a hedge, and suddenly skipping over, fell full into a desperate deep pit,
wherein he was drowned presently; O! so Sirs! the faster I have followed you to
do good, to recover you, to help to save you, why alas! the faster you fled
away into sin, after sin, rejecting all offers and opportunities (almost)
refusing to come to hear the word on the weekday, and many of you not coming
above once on the Lord's Day! Oh, alas! for the Lords sake! hear! make not such
post-haste in sin to the ruin of your soul, body, and all! but O remember!
the Pit is but on the other side, ye may soon be in it; but have a care lest
you perish! Have I not spent out my own bowels, and like a candle consumed my
self (even out) to give you light! have I thought my life too dear for your
souls! O no! but you would not regard it! some pretended I was young, to keep
them off! but alas! this was but a color! did not young Solomon give good
counsel? young Daniel discern much? young Joseph fill the Granary with plenty?
and excel all the Grandees and Gravities in Pharoahs Court, for wisdom and
judgment? Did not young Christ put the Doctors to silence? and young Timothy
preach the Gospel powerfully and profitably? But indeed, the maine offense (you
know) was my zeal for God; for silence is the basest tenure a Minister can hold
his living by; I could not be silent, but tell Israel of his sins, and Jacob of
his transgressions. Though many feed their Ministers as the Thief does his Dog,
porrigit panem, ut sileat, he gives him bread to be quiet, and not to bark, Sim.
lest he discover him; but the truth is, benevolence could not tongue-tye the
truth, and 'twill be sad for you to have a Minister who can suffer you, and
see you live in sin, and yet let you alone; the City is in danger when the
Alarm-bell is tied up, and so is the Parish.

I have read of a Law made in a certain Town that none should bring a Rumor of
the enemies coming upon pain of death, Sim.
and this was because they had before some false Alarms; but alas! at last the
enemy came suddenly and destroyed them all; so that it was a Proverb, Here
stands a Town destroyed by silence. God grant it be not true of Purleigh,
for the want of a careful and faithful Minister! neither could I please your
itching humors, as to give you the Sacraments in the condition you are in, or
the like, which others (may hap) will do without fear or wit, warrant, or
order: Sim.
For as a Painter of old being asked, who taught him his Art; answered, The
people, for that he was forced to study how to please their fancies: So may
some Ministers say. But this I can say from my soul, that I sought all means
to make you sure of Christ. Sim.
And as the Angel stirred the waters of the Pool, ^oh. 5.
but thrust no man in, because it was a work to be performed by themselves;
so I have stirred, but ah! alas, how few of you have stepped in! only a few of
the poorer sort; As when an Angler lays in, Sim.
he has many small ones (and that was my hap) but few great ones that were
struck, ut puncti and compuncti, Act. 2.37. Yet this is my comfort, I have not
lost all my labor, and my reward is with my God: As an Advocate that has his
reward, Sim.
let the cause go how it will: Sim.
And though Flowers grew, though none gathered them, and Springs run, though
none drank them; yet there may come a sore drought when you will wish for
those well-heads that were opened to you but you regarded not.
The good Lord lay this in mercy upon your spirits.

And now let me leave one word with you, never to be forgot, viz. to prize the
Gospel, which is Gods book of Canticles, and begins and ends with love (as I
have formerly laid it before you in the Exposition of Canticles) it begins with
a Kiss,
and ends with Spices. The manna comes down in the dews of the Gospel. Prize
Gospel-Discipline, and Doctrine! and to enjoy* Christ in both,
is like to the Sun, which not only delights us with contemplation, Sim.
but warms, and enlivens us by his Application. Wherefore beware the world
steals not away your hearts;
the Bird that is limed is held fast, and so art thou! O then have a care! I
have read that when Honorius was told that Rome was lost; he cried out, Ah!
Alas! thinking it had been a Hen that he called by that name; Honorius.
but when he heard it was his Imperial City of Rome, that was lost and sacked
by Alaricus the Goth, his spirits were revived again that his loss was no
worse: so O! how few of you are half so much troubled to hear you have lost
your souls, as to hear you have lost your Cattle! corn! money, or such like
things as belong to the world! And without the Lord awaken you, ye are undone!
Julius Caesar had a paper given him of the Conspirators that were ready to
murder him; but alas! Julius Caesar.
not minding the paper, Sim.
but regarding other things of less concernment, he lost his life for it! And
so will you, unless ye arise! and repent! O hear the voice! with Jerome!
saying, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment! Jerome.
Arise ye dead, and come to judgment! Arise ye dead, and come to judgment!
O be warned! lest the many warnings (which ye have had by me and others) be at
last regarded!
And all of them knit together like the many beams of the Sun in a
burning-glasse, may (I hope) serve to kindle a fire and flame in your hearts
after I am gone from you, Sim.
and to be no more seen among you! Hear the Watchman! hark! he gives you
warning Sirs! by the word of God, (as (...) not (...)) beware of an invasion!
Satan is mustering up against your souls! the enemy is nigh! that will
destroy you! Up, up! make haste! Arm, Arm, Arm! but if you will not, yet I
shall have comfort, Isa. 49.5. and ye shall know (to your cost) that there was
a Prophet sent to warn you, whom ye have despised, Ezekiel. 33.33. Jer. 28.9.

Gods vengeance sleeps not, Sim.
but like a pragmatical Promoter is searching your houses for ill gotten goods,
i.e. gotten by theft, robbing God of his time, and honor, when you should be
at Church hearing the word, you were in the fields telling your Cattle,
counting your estate,
laying up for many years with the Fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.19, 20. Now the
searcher is coming who will apprehend ye all for fellons, and so bring ye
before the great Judge; and what follows but the sentence?

Demosthenes.
Demosthenes was asked the first, the second, and the third time what were* the
parts of Oratory; who answered, Sim.
Every time Pronunciatio, Pronunciatio, Pronunciatio; and so should I say, the
next part is the Pronunciation of the sentence. O what will ye do in that
day? Isa. 10.3. whither will ye fly? O I fear it! though you will not see
it! for as Caesar said of the Scythians, Caesar.
difficilius est invenire quam interficere; so I think may be said of your
sins (Sirs) which you will not see, Sim.
but ye shall see, and be ashamed, Isa. 26. yet I say I fear it, that many of
you, are as men that go to a Lottery with heads full of hopes, but return with
hearts full of blanks; Sim.
and the greatest blanke of all will be this, that the world has so filled
your hearts that Christ could find no room;
like the Reubenites, Number. 32.4, 5. you are content to stay on this side
Jordan, Sim.
because it is a place fit for Cattle: And like Spiders, Gaddites.
O what pains ye take! how ye toil! even to eviscerate your selves, and spend
your own bowels with working! and what comes on it? Hah! only a web to catch a
fly in, and which the least besome from above will sweep down into the dust
in one night, Luke 12.20. O! it is this that made them in Luke 14.18, 19. with
one consent to reject the offers of grace,
and the Call! Sim.
And it is this worldliness that makes you like Tumblers stand upon your
heads, and kick at heaven with your heels. It is this that made you to
persecute the Saints, and to expel us your coasts. O take heed! God has
planted his Artillery against you, and without a parley, if you make not your
peace with God, and forsake the world to follow Christ! from the Lord I am to
tell you it, that God is engaged against you with his armies of judgments,
Matthew. 22.7. and there is no hopes of you. And the world like a bullet shot
from a piece of Ordnance, whilst it runs up and down, Sim.
and danceth (you think before you) on the ground shall deceive you; (for you
shall be like the ignorant soldiers) that thinks to take it up with your
hands,
but it dasheth out your brains, which example shall warn others, and make them
wiser that succeed you, by seeing the Lords vengeance on you.

Thus having stood Sentinel all this while among you, though I must be justled
aside now from you; Sim.
I have given you WARNING, and so will leave you: You shall find the world a
Book full of false prints (as by men) but at the End of all, Sim.
thousands of Errata's shall appear to your shame: And being thus to part,
I shall say (with Synesius) I carry nothing from Purleigh (of PYP and LAOS
fire, and people) but bonam conscientiam and malam valetudinem, a good
conscience, The Authors leave of Purleigh, and he may say of England.
an ill constitution, and an empty purse (being denied by you the bread I have
earned with sweating brows) yet the Lord show you mercy, and melt your hearts;
and if it be his will give you the breast, and not the breach; His Prayer,
the blessing and not the blow, and spare the Rod for those few sakes; that
like children long for full breasts of milk among you. Wherefore fly Sirs! And
Counsel,
fly from the Common Law which will condemn you! to that Chancery-Court (the
Communion of Saints) where Christ sits as Judge to relieve you; And Promise.
and there I will promise to meet you by faith, and to plead for you by prayer,
though I never see you more face to face, unless you meet me at home in our
Fathers house.
And so farewell! Dear hearts! farewell! --

Finally, my brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of one mind, live in peace, and
the God of love and peace shall be with you all, 2 Cor. 13.11. Amen.

Thus prays

Your affectionate Friend, and late your Minister in the hot bowels of love to
you, yet ready to serve the meanest and worst of you, in the work of my Master
Jesus Christ. In, and for whom, I am JOHN ROGERS.
From my Study at Thomas Apostles Land. March. 25. 1653.
A TABERNACLE For the SUN.
The Second BOOK.
CHAP. 1. (...) Hhacham. That the persons, entering into Church-society must
consider what they do first, and be sure they be upon good grounds, being
thoroughly satisfied, and fully persuaded that the way they are entering into, is
the very way of Christ, appointed for Believers to walk in.
WE are come now to the very Gates of Wisdom, The gates of Wisdom.
Prove. 9.3, 4. to the Towers and Palaces of Sion, where the Lord is known to be
her refuge, Psalm. 48.3. But before we enter in, take some I^structions; Be more
ready to hear (says the Preacher) then to offer the sacrifice of fools,
Eccles. 5.1.
Expos.
for they consider not (...) to hear ( auribus cor^is and corporis) with head
and heart-ears, for these Lessons are to be let in by both ears, and concern
both the outward man (for fear of judgment, Consideration in some must be
serious in the first place^
1 Cor. 11.29.) and the inward man (for fear of damnation, Mark. 16.16. and
Romans 14.23. etc. which is better then to offer the sacrifice of fools, i. e.
Such as are rash and preposterous, and run post into Gods house without
remembering, Psalm. 50.17, 18. Prove. 15.8.
or seriously resolving in their minds what they are doing, whither they are
going; why, these content themselves with the outside form, and would be one
amongst others, though without sound faith, or saving grace. Such are the fools
which we are forewarned of in this Text; for it is not enough for Pastor or
Elder to try us, but we must try our selves: Sim.
Wherefore keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, Eccles. 5.1. that
is, keep a watch over it, as a prisoner who must not stir without his Keeper; A
strict self-examination.
that is, observe diligently whither thou art now going, consider seriously
that thou may go in safely, and enter in rightly, and reverently, and
orderly, Expos.
with humility and holiness, in devotion and full persuasion of heart; Such as
come rashly in, do but run themselves upon a Rock.
Hence it is in Psalm. 45.10. the very first instructions to the daughters of
Sion are, to hearken and consider i. e. in Heb. prudently to attend, and
skilfully or knowingly to mind. Thus Psalm. 48.13. Consider her Palaces. The
want of a solid, and a serious consideration makes many run into these
assemblies of Sion, This consideration is of necessity.
and Church-wayes, they know not how, nor for what; whereby abundance of
trouble is brought upon them, and upon the Church that so receives them. I have
considered my ways, Psalm. 119.59. (says David) and I will consider thy
testimonies, Psalm. 119.95. which is of such use and necessity, that without it
nothing is rightly ordered. The Mariner considers his course by his Compass;
Sim.
and the Pilgrim puts on his Considering-cap continually in his journey whether
or no he be in the right way; Stat and cogitat ipse secum utram debeat eligere,
Sim.
nec prius adoriendum iter quam animo definierit, and pleniore mentis
intention deciderit; And he will resolve which is best before he foot it:
Because of the variety of ways men have to worship God in. Cooper.
And must not we consider what is before us? beware of the sands! if we would
have a good haven! Does it not much concern us to consider our way! when it
lies doubtful between the Presbyterian and Independent (so called) Non omni^
via dirigit ad Jerusalem illam quae in C^^lis est, (says Cooper on Psalm.
119.) Now if a Christian be careless, and consider not the way he goes to
walk in, as he may rashly run in a false way, and think he is right; so
he may wrongly run into a right way, Expos.
and be in doubt whether he be in the Lords way or no: Now to doubt is
dangerous, as we shall show by and by. The Apostle Act. 17.23. tells the
Athenians that they were too superstitious ((...)) and full of false religions
(like worshippers of Demon-gods, for so the word will have it) and why so? whom
ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. Ye worship an unknown God,
although he be the true God, yet in ignorance to you; for ye know not whom,
nor what, nor inded how to worship him whom I declare unto you: wherefore it is
ye fall into false ways and Worships. And so it is with a people that worship
the Lord in a way of worship, that for all that they know may be false as well
as true; Ignorance is mother of mischiefs, and false worships. Negat quod non
notat. Tertul. lib. de Monogamia. Deuteronomy. 11.16. Ier. 17.21. and Mark. 13.9.
therefore it concerns them to consider the way first, Take heed to your selves
said Moses to Israel, and the same says Jeremy to Judah, and Christ to his
Disciples, Mat. 6.1. and 16.6. and 24.4 that no man deceive you; and Paul says
so to Timothy 1 Timothy 4.16. and Peter to all 2 Pet. 1.19. ye will do well to
take heed, take ye heed, watch and pray, Mar. 13.33. what is more pressed in
Scripture? and Paul in 1 Cor. 3.10. says, The foundation is laid, but let
every man take heed how he builds thereon ((...)) that is ( adjicere oculos
animi) let him see with a serious and discerning eye, what he does, not with a
light, slight, perfunctory glance, Expos.
but with an intent and attentive observation of what he is about.

The want of this made so many doleful complaints and sad invectives against
Israel, as Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, Sad complaints of such as
consider nor first.
and the Ass his Masters crib; he says not, Expos.
the Dog knows his Master, etc. he is more wity, but the dull block-headed
Ox, the stupid sloathfull Ass, they know what is good for them, Mayor in loc.
and will not eat any thing, but consider first what is before them; yet Israel
does not know, my people does not consider. They are said to be more brutish
and foolish, and void of understanding, because they did not consider what was
before them,
whether it was good for them, or no; but that would swallow down any
unwholesome trash or trumpery, superstition or Idolatry, and so like as one who
has surfeited with unwholesome food and trash, What it is. Consideratio
importat actum intellectus seu veritatem rei intuentis, etc. What is required
in consideration.

A sound judgment.


breaks out into scabs, botches and boiles. So Israel broke out into
rebellion, and sinful stinking soars, verse 6. This same consideration so
pressed, imports, and takes up the truth of the intuitive part, and property of
the soul, and requires a clear understanding to be actuated and put forth with
a sound and authentic judgment. Whence it is, that the defect of a faithful
and regular judgment, oftentimes arises from rashness and precipitancy, and
inconsideration; whilst a man omits those things which produce a right and
sound judgment; wherefore a serious consideration is a most necessary
injunction laid upon all that are entering into the Lords house; for otherwise
how can they be fully satisfied, and safely persuaded of the verity and virtue
of this way of worship! the Queen of Sheba was fully satisfied of Solomon's
building, ^. King. 10.
Expos.
and of the truth of the report that ran abroad of him, and of the Temple; when
she saw him, and his house, and the order thereof, and then no more spirit was
left in her; in the least to doubt or question the truth. And so it will be
with us; Four things in general to be seriously considered.
therefore with a serious eye let us observe what we are about, and not leap
before we look. In this point of consideration for satisfactions sake, these
four ensuing things will occur in order.

First, you must eye the essential parts of this Church or building of the
Lord, 1 Eye all the essentials.
whether it be of God, or no; for if it be, it will stand, Act. 5.39. else it
shall be rooted up, Matthew. 15.13. and fall, Psalm. 127.1. Now for this I refer
to the former Book; But

Secondly, consider how all these parts agree in one to make up one compact
building, 2 How all do agree in one, in quantum est una.
in unity, and order! being aptly disposed according to the word of God, and
rule, which Christ has left us behind him.

The third consideration arises from the excellent virtue, and efficacious
faculty and ability ( ad operandum and ad causandum) which this Church Way of
Christ has in her, 3 How this way builds us up in Christ, secundum quod i^est
vi^tus.
as to build us up in grace and holiness! to strengthen us in the faith, to
establish us in the truth, to edify, exhort, instruct, and provoke to love!
and good works! to exercise gifts and graces! and to bring forth fruits in due
season.

4. Consider this Gospel Order and Church State, 4. And how this Church State
does nourish and cherish all the fruits i^ brings forth.
(secundum habitudinem, quam habet ad causata) according to the sweet care,
habitude, and disposition it has to those gracious, holy effects, which are
produced by it, as to faith, love, holiness, gifts, graces, and the like. O how
tender is she of them! the Hen has not so much care to hatch up her chickens!
nor the fond Mother to nurse up her darling babe! Sim.
but this way of Christ has as much (yea, more) to nourish! cherish!
and perfect up Faith! Love! Peace! Purity! Humility! Holiness! and such like
fruits as are brought forth hereby in abundant measure, both for quantity and
quality! Be fully persuaded.
Now for your satisfaction, let your eye, I say, be set seriously on these
things, and be fully persuaded (says the Apostle) Romans 14.5. in your own
minds; and so let every man be, Expos.
for in Verse. 23. he that doubts is damned; a smart Aphorism, Because it is
very dangerous to doubt.
which is here rendered for a reason of the necessity of being fully persuaded
in your own hearts, That you are in the way of Christ: In your own mind i. e.
not by other men's opinions, etc.
In your own mind, not by another man's opinion, be he ever so able, learned,
wise, godly, yet man is but man; therefore be thou careful (Christian!) for thy
self! look to thy own conscience! and let other men alone, to walk according to
their light! other men's opinions, or conceits, or doings, are not to be thy
rule; but let every one understand what he does, whether he goes, and be fully
persuaded, or have his heart filled with persuasions, that he is according to
the Word of God in ((...)) the way! For he that doubts (i. e. dijudicare)
that is, What it is to doubt.
( alternantibus sententiis secum disceptare) is double-minded, Jam. 1.8. (...)
has a heart, and a heart, halts between two opinions, as to be now for the
Presbyterians, another time for the Independents: Now of this mind and
resolves this, then of that mind and inclines to that. Such a one is unstable
in all his ways ((...)) i. e. in the Septuagint stands but upon one leg, a
little thing will throw him down; and that is another reason, ratify this
truth, viz. Else thou will be mistaken.
That you must be fully persuaded and satisfied in thy heart, that thou art in
the right way; else thou will never stand long; but the least wind of doctrine
will throw thee down in the dust, and thy fall will bring a foul scandal upon
the truth, and raise the dust! But he that doubts ((...)) he still puts a
difference, and is at variance with himself; and knows not fully, freely,
certainly, or absolutely what to do; Budaeus. Danger of doubting, and the evil
of it.
but (as Budaeus says) is at no certainty with himself, whose understanding is
confounded, and judgment is divided into diverse parts; as when one of two or
three ways knows not which to take, is damned ((...)) is condemned of his
conscience, and adjudged guilty of sin: The reason of this is taken (says Par)
from the procreant cause of godly actions and motions (as they are holy, Par.
and of God) which is Faith. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; this is
the confirmation of the former Aphorism and Maxim.

Maxim or general Rule which is yet an undeniable truth; The sin of doubting.
and which makes me up a third Reason in order; for to doubt a thing, and yet
to do it, is a great sin, and against the first Table; it takes away faith, for
how can one believe he pleases God, or God accepts of him, that doubts whether
he does or no that which pleases him, and is his will. By faith is here meant a
full persuasion,
a sweet plerophory, which makes the way sweet that we are in, and the work
sweet that we are about; when we know, and are persuaded of the lawfulness of
it; and that it is the Lords, and according to his mind and will.

contend for the truth, Such as doubt, soon yield up the buckle^, and are taken
prisoners.
lustily and lively, Jude 3. yea, against all opposers, to thy very
heart-blood, Heb. 12.3, 4. and 10.32, 33. No, nor be so much as able to
maintain the truth by the Word! or to defend it by arguments out of Scriptures!
that art not convinced of it, by the Word and Spirit, and persuaded in thy very
heart, that thou art in the right, yea, though all the world, yea, the Angels
of Heaven, should say against it; be fully persuaded, your good meanings and
minds will not serve turn, nor yet the gray, Colliar-like, implicit faith of
Papists (which believe as the Church believe, they say.) And this is the most
you have from your Irish Catholics at this hour; and yet ask them what the
Church believes,
why they will say, as we believe; and what do ye believe? why, as the Church
believes; and that is, Implicit faith not enough.
they know not what: But such a simplex conversio is all we can get from most
of them, talk a day together with them. But a Christian must be able to
maintain his doctrine, and to warrant his opinion and judgment, whether in
doctrine, or discipline, by the Word, Isa. 8* 20. Or else, says the Prophet,
there is no light in them; That is, else they want understanding, which ought
to be rightly informed and enlightened as a beginning imperant (says Par, upon
Romans 14.) and they want the will too, well sanctified, Par.
and made pliant as a beginning obsequent and e^cequent, and then ere you are
aware, your soul will be set on the chariots of Amminadib (as we may show in
the next Chapter. Cant. 6.12.
) For conscience carries thee out sweetly, and with a sure testimony within
thee, (that white stone;) when by good arguments out of the Word, thou art
assured, That thou art in the Lords way of worship; Who are best Champions for
Christ.
when thou can comfortably and cordially say, as Romans 14.14. I know and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus. Not I think, or it is very likely, but I am sure
upon certain and infallible Scriptures; and I do steadfastly believe it in my
heart.

O then! thou will prove a stout Champion for the truth indeed! and dare
stand for it! when thou know thou art right: Thou know it first; for thy
faith and persuasion is in a sense ( subjective) seated in thy knowledge and
understanding, Proprium principium actus sit in intellectu sicut in subjecto.

How to attain true persuasion.

1. Persuasion must be by the word of Christ. 2 Pet. 1.19. (...).


as in the subject; thy opinion or persuasion is according to thy apprehension
and understanding; wherefore in order to your full persuasion of, and
satisfaction in this way of Christ, or Gospel-fellowship; you shall do well

1. To examine your knowledge of the Scriptures concerning this way, 2 Pet.
1.19. have ye searched the Scriptures? and do you find them to bear a clear
testimony to this truth? does the Word (in your judgment and understanding)
warrant, and witness to this way of worship, as the way of Christ? And to this
Gospel-fellowship, as the Gospel order? then you will well do to walk in it;
fear not yet discouragements or troubles, you must meet with in it, let them
not daunt ye; do you your duty, and let God alone to defend ye, and to do ye
your good. When our Savior bad Peter, with the rest, throw their nets in for a
draught of fish; why they had many discouragements; for all night long they had
thrown in, and lost their labors; Nevertheless, at thy word (says Peter) I
will let down the net: So should we say, though our friends will be offended,
our persons hated, our names traduced, our injuries great, our enemies many,
and multitudes of discouragements; that we must be sure (and look for it
aforehand, though the skies are very calm at this present) that we shall meet
with; yet for all that, At thy Word, O Lord, we will enter into this way; so we
have but Christ's word and warrant for it, we may be confident and courageous,
and fully satisfied: But to further this direction, those that would enter into
this way, must

1. Learn the order of the Gospel, as given at first.
1. Be well instructed and informed of the order of the Gospel in primitive
times; what manner of fellowship they find the Word to hold forth in the
Apostles days, and some hundred years after them; that is, before the Church
was deflowred and defiled with humane inventions, dregs, and devices; whilst
the pattern was in the Mount; and the institution of Christ was the only
Canon Law and liberty. As the Apostle would, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. bring them to
consider the first institution, so does Christ about divorcement, bring them to
the beginning and first institution; and that divorces were not lawful, Christ
proves that they were not so from the first, The promises of the Restitutution
of times are to a state as at first.
Matthew. 19.4 7, 8. So in great and rich promises, the Lord is pleased to
foretell the restoration of his people, as at first, Jer. 33.7, 11. so Acts
3.19, 21. To teach us what we are to look for, that is, things as at first;
holiness* fellowship, doctrine, discipline, as at first; and we should ask
after, Jer* 6.16. The good old way, And why?
(quam primum, and verum, and optimum) that is, the true way; for truth is
older then error; and error is nothing but the excrement and corruption of
truth. The Primitive practice and order of Christ's Church, is to be s^t before
us for our satisfaction; because it is as a pattern to all succeeding ages.

2. See how far we are in our present condition, from the order as at first.
Barlet.
2. Be also well informed of the order and practice of our Churches now in these
days: Sit down (says Mr. Bartlet) and compare our present stations with the
first order of the Gospel; and see wherein we fall short, and blush, and be
ashamed, Ezekiel. 43.11, 12. and then come out of Babylon: But for this, I refer
the Reader to the former Book.

Thirdly Then when ye have found out (in your judgments and belief) a
Church-society in Gospel Order, Get into that Church that is according to your
light, and according to the word, nighest Gospel-rule, and primitive practice
and are fully persuaded of it, and do find it in your heart that you are
prepared and ordered for it; do not delay entering into it, but be sure first,
it be into such a society, and Church Communion of Saints as you see (and that
upon Scripture grounds) you judge to come up nighest to Rule, and closest to
the Primitive pattern and practice, which ye shall do well very diligently to
look out for.

And fourthly, observe the motions of the spheres, and all the particular becks
of providence how things join together, 4 Observe the concurrent motions of
Providence. Dr. ibs.
and so fittly concur for your admittance into this Church Way: for as holy
Sibs says, fitting occasions, and suiting of things well together do intimate
Gods will, and Gods time. And indeed all Providence have their language to
Gods people, Sim.
and they mind their Call clear, when Providence makes the way for them. For
indeed Gods Providence runs along like waters in a Brook, where every little
peble has a language in it, therefore we shall do well to understand them;
For as wrong reading spoils the sense, so will the not reading of Gods
Providence to a full period and stop. But thus far for the first Direction.

Secondly, Be sure ye have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. neither in
your self, i. e. your own wit, parts, gifts, Second Direction. Have no
confidence in the flesh.
or the like, thereupon to run (rashly) into this way (rather upon a
presumption out of pride, vainglory, self-love, or curiosity) then upon
well-grounded persuasion; nor yet have any dependence upon any others whosoever
they be; for then the Lord will reject both you and your carnal confidences,
Jer. 2.37.

Thirdly, Be not biased one way or other, Third Direction. Be impartial, and
unbyassed as to opinions.
as by imaginations taken from your own senses (which are very shallow and
unsound) for by such spirits (full of spite) came Christ's way to be evil
spoken of in Act. 28.22. and so 2 Cor. 10.5. Satan has strongholds in such
men's hearts, to keep out Christ and Gospel; Ierem. 4.14.
wherefore let your judgment master your affections (lest false conclusions
be ushered in by carnal reason, fancy and conceit: Romans 1.21.
) For the wisdom which is from above is without partiality, Jam. 3.17* that
is, (...) or mis-judging i. e. either out of love to one way, or out of
prejudice (being prepossessed with hard conceits and opinions) of any other
way. We wrong a man much by prejudice, when we take up prejudicate opinions of
him without grounds; and so suffer our conceits of him to be envenomed against
him by unjust suspicions, Sim.
Prejudice does much wrong
whereby we deprive our selves of the good which we might have by him. So the
Pharisees were set against Christ, and the Jews against the Gospel; yea this
prejudice made Nathaniels question in Joh. 1.46. Canany good come out of
Nazareth?
wherefore be impartial, without any conceit or deceit, when thou searchest
the Scriptures, hear the word, inquire out for the Truth; O then! then!
let the Lord cast the scales; and this is the way to be sweetly satisfied in
your own breasts, and to have a heart full of persuasion according to the word
of God.

When ye have attained to this sweet and swelling Plerophory, ye may, yea
must move accordingly, and that upon a certainty; After persuasion, follows an
assurance.
which certitude or assurance (being the highest part of your persuasion) that
ye are in Christ's way, is to be considered.

Certainty, or Assurance whence it is, and how.
First ( Ex causa certitudinis) from the verity of the word, and certainty of
the divine truths, which do so persuade and assure you; and thus ye conclude,
seeing the word of Christ is sure and true, etc. the persuasion which it begets
must be so too, and sound.

1 Ex causa certitudinis.
And then ( Ex part subjecti) from your own capacities and qualifications,
according to your knowledge and judgments; th^nce ye gather up this
conclusion, 2 Ex part subjecti.
that ye are the persons called into this way of Christ by his Word and
Spirit, and that ye stand in great need of this way, and that for diverse
reasons, being fully persuaded of it, that ye are appointed and prepared for
it, and it for you; hence arises a full persuasion to enter into it, The
conclusions which arise.
and a clear satisfaction about it, which is given by the Word and Spirit, and
which is so necessary for all that would enter into it, and continue in it, and
have the comforts of it, that they should not dare to venture or enter one foot
without it. For what is not of faith is sin. Now as it will do well that
every one of us be fully persuaded that it is the very visible way of worship
that Jesus Christ has brought out of his Fathers bosom (the Tabernacles that
came down from above) and when he ascended on high, Bring them to the Trial.
Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12. that he left behind him for all believers to dwell and be
perfected in; so also will it be necessary for every one to bring his
persuasion to the trial and touchstone that they may be sure, else (as Dike
says upon Faith,) you may be left in the lurch, gulled and cheated in this
point too: for in 1 King. 22.20, 21, 22. you read of a lying false spirit that
persuades and prevails. Now as Clement (lib. 5. Recognitionum) says, False
persuasion most dangerous.
What is more obnoxious and hurtful to the Church of Christ, then for a man
who believes he knows what he knows not, and sees what he sees not, to
maintain that a thing is what it is not? (being but to him what he imagines)
tooth and nail he strikes at truth for falsehood, and falsehood for truth. Like
a drunken fellow that thinks himself sober, he does all things, goes all ways
like a Drunkard, and yet is persuaded he does, and goes as well as any sober
man whatsoever, and would have all others to think so too; Sim.
and yet perhaps his giddy brains and fancies, make him believe that it is
others that stagger, who go steadfastly, and that he goes steadily whilst he
staggers; such whimsical persuasions are of dangerous consequence. It concerns
us then to know whence our full persuasion arises, How to know true persuasions.
and whither it reaches, or what it brings forth. But to the first:

First, 1 True persuasions proved and approved from the word and Spirit.
A true and full persuasion flows from the word of Christ without, These. 2.13.
as we have said before, and the Spirit of Christ within us, Joh. 16.8. Joh.
14.16. 1 Job. 2.20.27. 1 John 5.6. these have convinced our judgments,
enlightened our understandings, conformed our wills, and persuaded our hearts,
with undeniable arguments and proofs.

Secondly, If it be true, 2 Waits for fit time.
it waits upon the Lord with patience for his concurring Providence, and for
the accomplishing his promises, as David did for his Kingdom, Abraham for his
Son, Israel for Canaan; runs not rashly, without fear or wit, as we use to
say, before God; He that believes, makes not haste; Isa. 28. not too much
haste, or more haste then good speed; but he waits to go along with God, with
his presence, by his Providence (as is said before) into this way of
Gospel-fellowship.

3 Meets with trials, yet gets the better.
Thirdly, It will meet with many trials and assaults, but yet will get the
better, and abide firm. So Act. 19.23. What a stir there was about the way of
the Gospel ((...), contra viam Domini) or as some read it, against the
Gospel-way, this way of the Lord which Paul preached at Ephesus, Sim.
and yet it gained the ground; So 2 Cor. 7.5. they have no rest, but threats
and fears, and troubles, and oppositions; yet this faith and full persuasion
stays the soul, quiets, and satisfies the spirits, establishes the heart, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. ie stays the inward man in much peace and assurance in the midst
of multitudes of troubles and trials. As the ship that lies at anchor, though
something tossed with wind and weather, and with the swelling threatening Surges
of the Sea, rising thick one on another, and boisterous beating about the ship,
yet remains safe, unmoved, being firm, and fastened, and cannot be carried
away; So art thou able to undergo all oppositions, threats, swelling, surging
waves, or the like, if thou rest resolved, established and fully persuaded by
the word of God, so that still thou will stand by faith, and grow stronger and
stronger, as the house of David did, 2 Samuel 3.1. in the midst of his dangerous
conflicts, and trucelesse troubles with the house of Saul: and as Israel, the
more afflicted, the more multiplied, Exodus 1. for true faith will have the
conquest and triumph at last, 1 John 5.4. 1 Pet. 5.8. Heb. 11.33, 34. Ephesians. 6.16.

Fourthly, A true and full persuasion in the way of Christ makes thee most
ready to run into it (but orderly) and very obsequious, 4 True persuasion makes
obedient.
Gal. 5.6. Heb. 11.8. Romans 16.26. O then! how readily desirous, and thankfully
observant art thou to do the will of God, to please him in his way of worship!
and to be obedient to his command of coming out of ( Babel) confusion into Zion!

5 It shows emptiness in all other ways and worships.
Fifthly, A true and full persuasion of the way of Christ makes thee see an
emptiness, and a worthlesnesse in all other ways, and an excellency and
usefuln^sse of this way (which is Christ's) that all others fall short of. Thus
David seeing an amiablenesse in the Lords Tabernacles above all others, had
rather be there one day, then a thousand in any other tents, Psalm. 84.1, 2.10.
and says Psalm. 86.8. There is none like thee; No ways like thy ways, etc.

Sixthly, A true, full persuasion, makes thee exceedingly fond, of, and
longing, and laboring after these ways of Sion! 6 It makes thee long after
them.
O! how do thou thirst to be in them, Psalm. 84, 2. Psalm, 63.1.2. and enjoy
the benefit of them! Psalm. 42.2. Cant. 8.1. Cant. 7.10, 11. Rev. 22.20. and
though he that believes, makes not haste, as before, yet in this sense he has
fullest persuasions, and most faith makes most haste of all; and cannot but
make haste (but regularly.)

Seventhly, True and full persuasion makes thee very confident (but with a holy
confidence) and bold (but with an humble boldness) having the testimony of a
good conscience to bear thee out against all adversaries or oppositions
whatsoever, 7 Makes thee bold with humility.
therefore in Heb. 10.22. Heb. 4.16. Ephesians. 3.12. It is not a saucy, impudent
boldness, which strangers that intrude may have (and carry a boldness, Sim.
whilst their hearts tell them they go beyond good manners) but this is a
sweet, humble, and friendly familiar boldness upon invitation, and calls from
Christ, grounded upon Gods free love warranted by the word (not swelling at all
with selfe-confidence or conceit, but alleging merely love and grace from
above; such a confidence in Christ makes them humbly bold, and ready to
approach his Court and Sanctuary (audaces sunt promptiores.)

Eighthly, This full persuasion puts thee upon others to persuade them (by the
Word and Spirit) that they may also participate with thee in this Church Way,
Cant. 6.1. Mal. 3.16. 8 Puts thee upon inviting others, saying, come let us go
up, and join.
Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.5, 6. Heb. 3.13. Thus Andrew called Peter in, and Philip
Nathaniel, and Paul young Timothy and Titus, and many others. We cannot be idle
to others, then especially those whom we love, those we would feign get in,
Prove. 11.30. By these few notes from the true rise and effects of the true and
sound persuasion, ye may examine before ye enter.

I have been the longer on this Point, because many people run hudling on
headlong in, and they scarce know how, The sad consequences of doubtings, and
of not being fully persuaded.
nor care how, so they get in, but this may be had for a lamentation: And poor
souls! what comfort can they find in this way, without faith, who stagger
through unbeleef, and cannot tell (being full of doubts) whether they are right
or no! alas for them! the Ordinances are nothing (to speak of) sweet to them,
whilst they think to do this, or to be in this way, which it may be (they
think) pleases God, and it may be it displeased him; Drives them into despair,
and errors.
and this drives them oftentimes into despair, and always into error. This
makes so many run into strange opinions and errors that run so rashly into this
way of fellowship, which is the Churches Threnodia and deep sorrow at this day:
O then! that men would be more careful! Sim.
for as the Sun (says Erasm. Roterod. in Simil.) the more directly he bears
upon us with his beams, the less shadow he makes, but the more obliquely, the
greater. So a wise man that understands himself, and is informed, and fully
persuaded by the divine light of the word, the beams of Christ, the Son of
righteousness;
the more this Son has shined upon him, and he is satisfied with the truth,
the less fancy, imagination, or foolish opinions he has, and the less he
runs into errors, but the more obliquely he enters into the Lords way, and the
less he is by this divine light (from above) informed and fully* persuaded,
the more he runs into errors, and the longer shadows he makes.

But to conclude, I beseech ye beware! O beware! how ye enter into this way of
worship! They meet with a cu^se,
let serious and due consideration be had that ye come in due order, otherwise
ye will meet with a breach instead of a blessing, 1 Chronicles. 15.23. and this
Church State instead of Peniel may be called Perez-uzza, And are not welcome,
but provoke the Lord.
or Perez-nephesh, i. e. the breach of thy soul; so see Mat 22.12, 13. what
befell the friend that came in, and not in a right order. Besides the Lord does
not make them welcome, Mal. 1.10. for they are a provocation to him in Numb.
14.11. Psalm. 78.21, 22. and the Ordinances of Christ are not so effectual to
them, Heb. 4.12, 13. this want of faith, and full persuasion that they are in
the Lords way, Hinder the energy of Ordinan^es, and obscure the excellency of
the way.
in Christ's Gospel Church State, doing the Lords will, does enervate, enfeeble,
and deforce the efficacy and excellency, virtue and operation and spiritual
advantages which believers find in it, As thou have believed so be it, Matthew.
8.13. and chap. 9.29. See Mark. 6.5, 6. one such a doubting member, does much
mischief in a Church, and is a great hindrance to it. But, dear friends, if ye
have faith, and doubt not, Mat. 21.21. and are but fully persuaded in your
souls, that this is the way of Christ you are entering into, then welcome,
expect great blessings and mighty works, and energy in the midst of you, Ephesians.
1.19.

CHAP. II. (...) Nahar Sahhish. Those that are thus satisfied, and fully
persuaded, as before, must by a voluntary consent unite, and knit together in
one body.
THis comes in order next, of which in the former Book, Chap. 11. and 13. you
may read at large: but let this be brought into the balance of the Sanctuary
too; and let every soul see to it, Expos.
how he enters into this way of Fellowship, The Lord draws with his arms, the
Spirit his right hand, and word his left.
that it be by a voluntary and free^motion without a coaction. No earthly power
can compel a man into this Church of Christ; for the Father must draw him,
Joh. 6.44. that is, with his spiritual arms, the Word and the Spirit, which
are the Lords hands, and his two arms reached out all the day long, Romans
10.21. None are to be constrained into this communion, unless it be by the
Word and the Spirit; thus the Lord is said to add to the Church, Act. 2.47.
and by his power makes them a willing people, Psalm. 100.3. and so Cant. 6.12.
when the will is set upon the Chariots, or wheels, a man must needs run, Cant.
1.3. hence a man is oftentimes said to be according to his will (a volunteer
or not) which is as the great Wheel, that sets all others a going.

Now it should necessarily follow, that such as are fully persuaded, as before,
must become voluntary, and freely assent to what they are so persuaded of,
persuasio importat assensum intellectus ad id quod creditur, before they enter
into it, or act in it, Men must come in voluntarily. Proved* by several
considerations, as
which we offer proof for under several considerations, whence the reasons are
raised to ratify this truth. As

First (A principio agente) from the principle that moves them and makes them a
willing people, which is either ( in se, or extra se) a natural principle which
produces natural effects, and natural actions, 1 From the powerful principles
which carries them extra se.
and natural motions, from natural reasons for natural ends; or else a
principle above nature, that is a principle of grace, which produces acts of
grace flowing from divine reason for divine ends: and such a kind of
voluntarinesse I speak of here, as from such a principle which carries the
soul on through a thousand difficulties and dangers; though it cost never so
much, though flesh and blood, and world and devils be all against it, Vide
Fen^ers Alarm.
yet he will do it, because he is carried on by an high and holier, and more
God-like principle and power; thus the Spirit is said to be willing, Mat.
26.41. (...) or free with alacrity and readiness to run, Psalm. 119.32. Gal.
5.7. thus Luke 15.18. I will arise, and I will go to my Father; I will, come
what will come; come death, come life; come temptations, come troubles, come
all that can come, yet, I will home to my fathers house, there is bread enough,
and I will no longer be starved with husks, among a swinish multitude; no, but
I will arise, and run into the Lords house; thus to will ((...)) is present
with me, says Paul, that is, Chapter 2. an efficacious will, Romans 7.
which takes in both the principle, and the act. O then! the heart is hurried
away indeed upon the Chariots of a most noble people, Cant. 6.11. with strong
and lusty flaming affections and desires! I will go in the Lords way, I will
get out of this bondage! this Babylon! this Cage of unclean birds! I will not
have the Cage-door shut! I will be set at liberty! though the flesh be never so
violent, though my friends nothing but frown on me, though all the devils of
Hell rage, yet I will be gone for Zion, and get into those assemblies, etc.

This may serve for a reason, why this voluntary consent is so viz. because it
is a living principle which produces such gracious effects: And this is the act
of a perfect heart, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Serve him with a perfect heart and willing
mind, Because this principle is absolutely necessary in all that would be
Church members, which makes them willing.
they come otherwise without hearts, Psalm. 119.145. dead to duty, and heavily
forward; but when men are made willing, as before, they have a principle of
agency, and need no constraint at all, 1 Pet. 5.2. not by constraint, but
willingly. O then, a man is in motion indeed, and will do the will of God, and
go into the way of God! though no body else of his friends, or family will do
it, nay though he be hated of all his neighbors, and acquaintance for it, and
have no thanks at all among men by it, Expos.
but he being carried on by a divine principle (extra se) considers not what
he suffers, as what he seeks, which is abundantly above himself, therefore.

Secondly, Consider that ( omne agens seu motum agat moveatur propter finem,
Second consideration* From the end which suit* with the principles.
every man who is moved (as before) by the abovesaid principle in the day of
his power whereby he is become a cordial Volunteer) I say that every such a
willing man proposes to himself some end that suits his principle, a divine end
for his divine principle, but a carnal principle seeks a carnal end; for
always observe the end, to which the principle carries, is evermore of the
same make and nature, with the principle, be it good or bad, spiritual or
carnal; Voluntas su^ natura vult finem.
if the principle by which he is moved be above himself, then the end for
which he is moved, is above himself; see but in a stone which you throw up to
hit such a mark with, the up-motion of the stone is by a power which is not in
it, Sim.
it flies upward by a principle (extra se) and a power seated in the man that
throws it, and therefore the up-mark of the upward motion is the end (extra
se) which is appointed by him that throws it, and according to that principle
that appoints it; but in the falling down of the said stone again, this
downward motion is by a principle of its own ( in se) and seeks its own
Center, viz. the earth, which is the end answerable to the principle.

Now I say, it is not enough for a man to move, but to move to some end. (Non
solum ut moveantur, sed ut moveantur in finem) What is the end of those things
whereof ye are now ashamed, 1 Pet. 4.17. Heb. 6 8. Ph^l. 3.19.
says the Apostle, Romans 6.21. the end of those things is death, but the end of
holiness is everlasting life. Destructive principles have destructive ends,
but saving principles saving ends; wherefore the Apostle would have us look to
the end. Requiritur cognitio finis aliqualis, the end must be known.
We have used to say, every one knows his beginning, but not his end. Yet in
this sense, I say, men may know their end if they know their principles. And
now I am upon it, I must press the knowledge of the end, Sim.
at well as the motion to the end, lest ye bring but the sacrifice of fools,
Eccles. 1. a wise man sets the end of his motion or action ever before him,
both before he begins, and when he has begun, and as he is proceeding. Every
one who is wise in Christ (and would fain be in the ways of Christ) who is
carried to Zion-ward by such a principle as before, has a certain knowledge of
the end which he purposes, promises, and proposes to himself, and he has not
only his principles to move, In alio a quo ei imprimitur principium suae
motionis i^ finem.
but to move for that end proposed; as if it be for the honor and glory of
God, to set forth his praises, as a peculiar one called thereto, 1 Pet. 2.9.
But he that has no knowledge of the end, though he has in him a principle of
motion or action, yet the principle, which moves or acts him for such or such
an end, is not in him, but in another, (as was shown before in the simile of
the stone) by whom he is said to be moved for such an end.

Now I say, a Saint who is moved by the Spirit, has spiritual ends, and by a
principle from above has ends from above, glorious, divine ends above
himself; but a natural principle has natural ends; and so such as are carried
on into these assemblies of Sion by carnal principles, come always in for
carnal ends.

reason why such as would be Church Members must be volunteers, Because a
volunteer has the end for which he moves before him.
and carried on by divine principles into these divine ways, that is to say,
for divine ends. Now when a man knows the end to be according to his desire,
and suitable to the principle by which he moves to that special end, then he
is become in a special manner voluntary in his motions, and into means
conducing to that end; and to say something more, Res quae est ratio finis and
ratio finis.

Second consideration is from the rule of the will.


he sets before him, not only what is the end, but also why it is the end that
he seeks after, and centers toward; (...) is my Motto. And consider

Thirdly ( Regula voluntatis) the Rule, according to which the will is moved,
and the heart is carried and continued: for every (principium ad cer^um finem)
principle putting forth to some end, Sim.
has some kind of order or other in his motion to that end; now ( debitus
ordo ad finem secundum aliquam regulam mensuratur) the will without a Rule,
Which is twofold.
is like an unbroken colt without a curb, kicking and flinging, and running
any way at random, without order or equity. In all things which are done by
the will, there should be a Rule, and this Rule is either humane reason, which
is homogenean, and most nigh the will and mind of man (this is regula proxima,
say the Schoolmen) or else it is divine Reason, the Wisdom and Word of God,
the eternal Law of God, which is the supreme, and primary rule of the will
(Regula suprema) which some call Heterogenean to it. The Rule which certifies,
is divine Reason.
Now such men as move obliquely, and crossely to this Rule, walk disorderly and
sinfully, and from such withdraw thy self (ab hac rectitudine obliquatur) as 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 7.11. for every good action and motion agrees with the Law of God,
the commands of Christ, which are their Rule; Now as many as walk according to
this rule, peace be on them, Gal. 6.16. and let us all walk by the same rule,
Phil. 3.15, 16. Expos.
By this Divine reason and rule are the wills of all that are made willing to be
ordered, and fitted and directed into this way. Thus Christ sits and rules (by
his Law) upon his Throne in the Temple, Zach. 6.13. Mat. 2.6.

Now this serves for another Reason why we should voluntarily come in, because
those have this rule to order their steps, direct them into these ways of
holiness. Volunteers have this.
Now the order according to the Rule of Christ, viz. the word of God, whereby
the will is brought into obedience, is,

First, By inclining the will to the ways of God; Rules to order their will
how.
so Psalm. 119.112. then you have a good mind to them, as suiting your
condition, and the need you have of them; for, Omnis inclinatio is ad
conveniens. Expos.


Secondly, The Intentions and Purposes of the will follow, which you read of
Heb. 4.12. (...) the intents of the heart, which word takes in both the cause,
and the effect: Propositum est actus voluntatis deliberata, etc.
1 The cause, that is, the faculty of conceiving: And 2 The effect, that is the
things conceived, viz. the purposes and intentions. Thus Daniel purposed in his
heart, Dan. 1.8. and Paul purposed in the Spirit, Act. 19.21. Romans 1.13. this
is the act of a deliberate will spontaneously, and freely carried out (after
inclination) into resolution and determination. This made Paul determine to
know nothing save Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. so eager he was after
Christ alone, nothing else would serve his turn, but all else is as dross and
dirt to him; because the intentions of his will, heart and all, were after
Christ.

Thirdly, Then the will comes to turn aside from all other vain and false
ways, Psalm. 119.113. Psalm. 119.101. And

Fourthly, To make absolute choice of the way of God above all,
Psalm. 119.30. so Isa. 56.4. this election is the proper effect of a free will,
or will set at liberty, whereby a man picks and culs out one way (that is the
way of God) to walk in (aliis recusatis) letting all others alone. Now to this
free election or choice which the will makes, two things concur.

Two Things must be,
1 Knowledge (ex part cognitivae virtutis, etc.) whereby a man must discern a
difference between that way which his will most affects, 1 Knowledge.
inclines to, resolves upon, and makes choice of, and other ways; and must
know wherein this way that he chooses to walk in excels all others, and is to
be preferred and chosen.

2* Desire.
2 Desire (ex part appetitivae) whereby is requisite that he be of a sound
judgment, and so as that he does most ardently desire to walk in that way
which he judges by the word of God to be the way of God; thus Psalm. 119.173.
and this sets the soul a longing and desiring, Psalm. 119.5.174. and Psalm. 62.2.

Fifthly, and lastly, then the will comes to challenge, and the heart to
appropriate an interest in the way of God, 1 Pet. 1.7. O this is the way for me
to walk in, and here is my Beloved to be found! Cant. 5.16. O then the soul
clings close to Christ in this way! as Hezekiah did cleave unto the Lord, 2
King. 18.6. And as Ruth did cleave unto her mother, Ruth 1.14. that is whilst
Orpah left her,
and went from her; Ruth would not leave her. Verse. 16. Entreat me not to do
it, says she, for where thou go, I will go, and where thou live, I will
live, and where thou dyest, I will dye; and thy God shall be my God, and thy
people, my people, nothing shall hinder it. Oh! so to cleave close to Christ
whilst others ( Orpah's) fall from him! and to continue in his way, and worship
when others contemn it, and fall away from it! this is a sign his way is
indeared to you indeed, and that you prize him, and his way indeed, to make his
God your God, and to make his people yours, his ways yours, to live where he
lives, etc! O when no discouragement can daunt ye, or drive you to decline the
truth, or way of Christ! no not all the world that can stir you thence, this is
sweet indeed; then you say with David, I have stuck to thy testimonies, Psalm.
119.31. O then! then! how precious are all the Promises, Providence,
Ordinances, Privileges which you enjoy, by virtue of a right, and propriety
you have to them!

And thus the will is ordered by the Rule, and carried on by divine reason into
the Temple of the Lord to worship there. Now every voluntary action or motion
is good or bad, according to the recourse that it has to this order taken from
Divine reason.

Fourthly, Furthermore, let us set before us the (objectum voluntatis) object
of will, so fitted, as before, Fourth consideration is, From the object of the
will which is good.
which is ( bonum apprehensum) something that is desirable (at least so
apprehended to be) which moves the will and affection (bonum omnia appetunt)
say the Philosophers, Tho. Aq. Ethic. lib. 1. Tom. 5.) some good or other that
is conceived to be proper and convenient to the Principle which moves the Will,
every man desires, and looks upon, and makes his object in his voluntary
motions into the house of the Lord. Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. is
every ones question; therefore what is good in the understanding (nonex
veritate rei) is said to be the proper object of the will. A moral principle
looks on a moral good; a natural on a natural good; Good differs how?
a civil on a civil good, a spiritual on a spiritual good; we do not say
things right or wrong true or false, for they are as they are in the mind
(objecta intellectus) but things apprehended good in agreement with the moving
principle, Mat. 7.11. in that verse, there is a different good according to the
principle that moves them, Expos.
either natural or spiritual: And hence it is that the appetitive faculties of
the soul, or the longing affections are distinguished according to the
apprehensive faculties of the soul; for the more thou apprehendest this way to
be for thy good,
or this thing to be for thy good, the more thou desire it, and willest it
with longings; Nam appetibile non movet appetitum nisi in quantum est
apprehensum.
but the less thou see it to be for thy good, the less are thy affections
toward it; for though a thing be most excellently good and desirable, yet it
moves the affections and will no further, then it is apprehended so to be.
Prove. 19.8. He that keeps understanding shall find good. David does most
earnestly desire to dwell with the Lord, and to draw nigh to him, because he
apprehended it to be good for him so to do, Psalm. 73.28 So it is good for us to
be here, Mat. 17.4. therefore Lord let us build Tabernacles.

Now this is another Reason, why men should come voluntary into Church
fellowship, because of the good, the universal the spiritual good, and heavenly
advantages to be had hereby, Because of the good in this way of Christ.
and such as are suitable to the principles by which we are to be made a
willing people. What makes men so desirous of eating? but the meat that is (or
is to be) and so is in their apprehension) set before them to be good? what
makes men run in a race, as if they were mad, but the rewards which they set
before them? Sim.
And why do the Apostles so press the practice of Christ's commands, but
because of the good which is set before us? Tit. 3.8. Heb. 13.9. Now if ( bonum
universale, which is originale) an universal good (i. e. a good for all times,
in all conditions, The universal good (that is God) moves the will most.
in all places, upon all occasions, etc.) if such a good be thy object, and
draws thee as the Loadstone, doubtless God alone is this good, Mat. 19 16.17.
and then he alone (his love which is better then wine, his presence which is
better then life) can fill thy Will, and sufficiently move it, as the only able
and effectual object. No one good like unto this can move the will, and make
thee a complete and thorough Volunteer; when Moses prayed to see his glory,
Exodus 33.18. he said Verse 19. and I will make all my good to pass before
thee. But consider,

Fif^h consideration from the operation of the will.
Fifthly, The operation of the will, (which is velle bonum) what is it else but
a strong and undeniable inclination, and resolution of the person willing into
the thing willed, or into the object of the will?

Now from this sweet working of the will into the thing universal good, another
Reason might be taken to confirm this truth, That those who would enter into
Christ's Church Way must come by a voluntary consent, Because such labor most
sweetly for the good.
being earnestly carried out into God this universal good, which is that they
run for. Hence says Aug. de dono persever. C. 13. Nos volumus, sed Deus
operatur in nobis and velle, Austin.
nos operamur, sed Deus operatur in nobis, and operari, etc. We will indeed,
God is in us the principle, to us the object, and the end of all.
but it is God that works in us that will also, both to will and to do, says
the Apostle; we work, but it is God who works in us that working of good
also. He is in us the principle, to us the object, and for us the end of all,
Ephesians. 4.6. Consider,

Six^hly, The Instruments which propound and offer this object to the will,
Sixth consideration from the isntrumental causes of this voluntarinesse.
and the means by which the man is persuaded, and prevailed with to be free and
spontaneous, and voluntary to enter into this way of Christ, or Gospel Order,
which are the Word and the Spirit.

First, The outward instrument is his Word, this is the Sword of Christ's
Kingdom to conquer with, 1 The word Christ's sword and Scepter.
and his Scepter to govern by. So Act. 2.41. All that were received into the
Church, gladly received the word, as Ainsworth observes, (...) that is,
willingly, Expos.
and voluntarily without any compulsion (...) they embraced it (cum
approbationes) with welcome, Ainsworth.
joyfully with hearty entertainment, as to the dearest friend, or best guest
that could come; now such as received the Gospel so, were made members of the
Church* The Church did all according to Christ's word, and Gospel, whether in
binding or loosing, taking in, or casting out, still the Statute-book, Christ's
Word and Gospel was by them in all. So that nothing was to be done by the
Decrees, Laws, or Canons of men, or by their Votes and Orders in Classical,
Provincial, or National Assemblies; no, no such thing was heard of; nor yet
were any cuffed in, or staved in by Magistrates powers. Mr. Dell.
I am of Mr. Dels judgment in His way of peace, Psalm. 63.64. etc. who says,
Who so ever affirms that the Laws, Decrees, or Canons of men, Rabbis,
Bishops, Assemblies, or Councels, are fitter and better to order the Church by,
Luther.
then the pure and naked word of the Gospel by the ministration of the Spirit,
speaks in my judgment very blasphemously. Luther says (in Epist. ad Carolum
Ducem Subaudiae Tom 7* for* 483.) Christiani eo verbo and non alio regi debent,
quo Christiani (i. e. liberi a peccatis) fiunt, Without addition of Doctors
Fathers, Councels.
(sine additionibus conciliorum Doctorum Patrum, etc. that all Christians are
to be ordered by the Word of God, the Gospel of Christ, whereby they became
Christians (that is, set at liberty from sin) and this without the addition of
Councels, Doctors, Fathers, or the like; for what is it to govern and guide
Christians by their Councels, Decrees, or Words, which they may keep, and yet
neither become Christians, nor continue such: Nay, many times they cease to be
such by those means;
and we lose the truth for their Traditions, the Scriptures for their
Scribbles; the Bible for their Babel; yea Christ for the creatures images,
which the intellect has taken up; and the doctrines of Christ, for the
Devices, Decrees, and Ordinances of men.

Moreover for such as are not yet called; suppose they be not Christians, they
are not to be tampered with, or restrained by the ordinances, or traditions of
men, but to be let alone, as Paul says, Col. 2.20.22.

Neither is the Magistrate to meddle with them by his Secular powers, And
without the iron weapons of Secular powers. Luther.
so as to force them into the house of God; none can be compelled by iron
weapons to join to a Church of Christ against their wills (as has been
largely handled in the former leaves, Chap. 11. and 13. which I shall add now
little to but this) because (as Luther says in the forecited Epistle)
Christians are all to be so spontaneously, only as they are persuaded by the
Word of Christ, convinced, and lead by the Spirit of God, Joh. 16.8. Romans 8. So
are they by the same means to be brought in members of the Church of Christ,
Quae ergo insania est spontanee bonos urgere legibus malorum? and yet there be
some rough spirits abroad that spit nothing but fire and blood, and speak of
nothing but imprisonments and punishments for such as are not yet convinced,
enlightened, or come up to their opinion. Some imagine men must be brought in by
the Magstrates sword, and that the Gospel is to be promoted and propagated by
weapons, What Magistrates may do? and what not.
blows, and cuffes. It is true as Mr. Hooker in the third part of
Church Discipline, chap. 1. asserts, That the Civil power may (as a thing
Civil) require them to come under the tenders, and call of Christ (which is vox
significativa) but cannot compel their consciences; and that Power is very
uncivil that intermeddles with Church Matters, but Magistrates must leave the
Church to follow the rule of Christ, in receiving such as have gladly received
the Word; and whom the Lord has by his Word and Spirit persuaded, and
prevailed with; and so, whom the Lord adds unto the Church, and not whom men,
Magistrates, or any other (by any indirect means soever) shall add. It is
known to many in Dublin, that I durst not but bear testimony to this truth,
Dublin.
though (to no little persecution of my self and others, in name and persons,
as is well known to the Church-gathered, with whom I walked for the time I was
there; who have also had their share of sufferings by some, Without any other
indirect means.
and also have added their testimony to mine.) I say, although the reproof
reached great persons that invited many in by indirect means (more proper for
Seducers, then Saints) whether by promising expressions of preferment, or by
commanding words, to such as they had power over, which were under their
commands; or by going to houses to make proselytes by their power, or the like;
if their purposes might be good, yet the effects were very bad, I am sure;
Hypocrites by that means in abundance.
for hereby many Hypocrites crept in amongst us, being biased with by-ends;
and who afterward proved incendiaries, and so disturbers of our peace; they
should have let the Lord alone to bring into his Church, whom he pleased; and
the word alone to have persuaded them by the Spirit; and not have sought the
enlargement of the Church, to get up to great numbers, And such are all, but
the Word and Spirit.
(which men eye too much) by any other means then the Word and Spirit.

When great men are Members of a Church, Caution.
that Church must have the greater care of receiving, least any should enter or
crowd in more out of love to,
or fear of those great ones* or out of any ends of getting a benefit, by
having great men their Brethren, or the like. I say, more then out of love to
the Lords Courts, and Assemblies, as being enlightened by the Word, and
enlivened by the Spirit, and fully persuaded in their own hearts, that they
must enter into these ways, as the ways of holiness; which the Lord has left
here for believers to walk in together; wherefore our experiences produce this
Caution to others; for want of which, we have sufficiently suffered to give
others warning. It was Boniface the third (that I first read of) that used his
Volumus, Mandamus, Statuimus, etc. as the means of bringing in Members; The
Power of the Word.
and ever since has the Church wanted peace, and been persecuted, by such
commanding powers; for till Antichrists time we find none Members of Christ's
Church, but such as were made willing by the word and power of Christ. Christ's
words are works (when his Word and Spirit go together) Psalm. 33.9. He spoke,
and it was done. (In verbo Christi factiva est ratio.) He said, Let there be
light, and it was light; he said to the Damsel, Tabitha cumi, and she arose; he
bid Lazarus come forth, The Word is the arm that gathers into the Fold, and
makes men ^un willingly.
and he did so, John 11. there is so much virtue in his voice, (verbum Christi
est expressivum and operativum) that it is called the power of God, Romans 1.10.
And the arm of the Lord, Isa. 53.1. To save, assist, deliver, draw out, and to
gather into his fold: This arm does all this, and is the only outward
instrument, whereby Christ does draw them in; and then they run after him,
Cant. 1.3. and leave Father, Friends, and all, to follow him, and his commands,
or call; they stand not disputing it, but immediately obey his call, Matthew*
4.20, 22. and come away.

2. The Spirit makes willing the inferior instrument.
Secondly, The inward working Instrument, is the Spirit of Christ, whose work is
to convince us of the truth, John 16.8. and to lead us into the truth, Joh.
16.13. and 14.17, 26. or guide us; that is, not to drag us, whether we will or
no: But it implies a willingness in us, Expos.
being informed by the Word, that this is the way, and that we must walk in it;
that we must follow the Spirit as a guide, a skilful guide, a counselling
guide, a comforting guide; that will go before us, and make way for us.
And if we be in suspense, and hang off, why then it is his work to convince
us, (...), as it were, by undeniable Arguments, and Reasons; and so, as that we
shall not have a word to say, but that we shall heartily and willingly yield to
his motions and persuasions, Christ's Spirit known.
and find him both a protection and direction.

Quest.
Quest. How shall I know I have Christ's Spirit?

Answ.
Answ. By his efficacy and power in doing his office: A painted fire will not
warm, Sim.
nor a painted Sun give light; now by their effectual operations you know which
is the true fire, and the true Sun.

Besides, the true Sun will discover false painted suns, and true fire will
burn up the false; so will the true Spirit of Christ, discover, judge, and
condemn all other false spirits; But

Quest. How does this Spirit of Christ convince and bring in, and then keep in
the way? How he convinces it


Answ. 1. Mouendo, by inlightning our intellect, 1. By inlightning.
informing our minds with his counsel and admonitions; he leads us with open
eyes, Psalm. 32.8. And the wisemans eyes are in his head (Christ;) This is the
first work of the Spirits illumination, Ephesians. 1.18. He makes us to see an
amiableness in the Lords Tabernacles, above all other tents. Thus our
understanding is filled with light, Col. 1.9. So, as that we see the object
which moves the will and affections (that we spoke before of) to be the (
attractivum bonum) the best good; and then

2. Movendo, the Spirit inclines our hearts, 2. By in livening.
moves our wills, and makes us resolved in this way of Christ; before the
Spirit took us up, as upon Mount Pisgah; that is, by divine contemplation to
behold Canaan: But now he makes us willing to enter into the way, with all our
hearts full of wishes and desires, which makes us swift in motions.

3. Removendo. This Spirit removes the remora's, 3. By preparing the way, and
making paths strait.
answers all objections, takes away all impediments, and puts us on through all
difficulties whatsoever; though Satan like a roaring Lion robbed of her whelps,
rage at us, and assault us with his rough Claws, and sharp temptations; though
the flesh fly upon us, with full-mouth and foul-mouthed language and
invectives; Though the world frown on us, and threaten never to look well upon
us, and friends forsake us, neighbors estranged to us, acquaintance persecute
us, and all threaten to beggar us; yet, I say, the Spirit makes us to triumph
over all; and carries us through all, as more then Conquerors, and thus Cant.
5.6, 7, 8. The Spouse through inward temptations, Verse. 6. When Christ had (in
her eye) left her, forsaken her, nor regarding her prayers, or tears, and
outward troubles, Verse. 7. Yea, when the watchmen (that should have been her
friends) frowned on her; The Spirit carries thorough all calamities clearly.
yea, smote her, till they fetched blood from her, and the keepers of the wall
abused her, and took away her vail, and tore it in pieces, on purpose, to put
her to open shame; and to show her nakedness, before all in the streets to hoot
at, after her, and to hurt her, and to make the world believe, she was an
Harlot, and not a true Spouse of Christ; yet for all this, (that Ministers and
Magistrates were both against her,) yet, I say, the Spirit carries her on. And
thus the Psalmist says, Psalm. 44.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. yet 17, 18. Expos.
Thou make us a byword, a reproach, a derision, a spoil to them that hate
us; as the appointed for slaughter, and broken in the place of Dragons; and
confusion is ever before us; and for all this, Verse. 17, 18, 20. Yet, yet have
we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely with thee; nor is our heart turned back
from thee; nor do we decline thy way; no, not yet; and why? But because the
Spirit of the Lord carried them through all, thick and thin, as we use to say;
and so it is here, the Spirit removes all thy rubbidge-corruption that would
hinder thee, and throws down to the ground every strong hold, or imagination
thou have against this way, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Which before he admonished thee of,
and motioned thee to; and

4* By ratifying.
4. This Spirit confirms thee in it, as well as conforms thee to it; and
therefore he is called the witness in thee, 1 John 5 10. In the way of Christ,
the spirit witnesses. On his own knowledge, as a witness in a Court.
If any false witness do arise, and rail at this way of Christ, (as the theif
on the Cross did revile Christ.) If thou meetest with any arguments from flesh
and blood against it, that would fain weaken thy faith and foundation; why yet
the Spirit bears testimony within, and that upon his own knowledge, that thou
art in the right way, Joh. 16.13. And this witness within, Sim.
and the word without, do both agree in their testimony. Expos.
Yea furthermore, the Spirit is called a seal, Ephesians. 4.30. The Spirit seals.
And set me as a seal upon thy heart, Cant. 8.6. That is, that I may be not
only near to thee, but on thy heart, even in thee, as thine own spirit: A seal
is more then a witness; for it carries the witness with it, and is not only a
witnessing to us, but a work upon us, and in us, carrying the image of him that
seals us, says Sibs in his Fountain Sealed. An image of God confirms. Sibs.
Now a Seal serves to confirm, and thus does the Spirit seal instruction to us,
Job 33.16. that is, confirms us in what the Word instructs and declares.
Besides, Distinguish es betwixt true and false.

Dr. Sibs Fountain sealed.


this Seal is for distinctions sake (as Dr. Sibs says) to distinguish which is
the Lords way and worship, from all others of men's making, 1 Timothy 2. The Lord
knows who are his, and who are not his. This distinguishes the precious from
the vile Jer. 15.19. And by this seal the Lord knows his, and the Saints know
which is the Lords; For the seal sets the Lords image on his way and worship.
Moreover, a seal signifies a propriety and right to a thing, as Merchants use
to seal their wares, Sets a propriety.
that others may not claim a right to them. So Psalm. 4.3. Know, that the Lord
has set apart the righteous for himself. Sim.
He has set his mark on them, in the Hebrew, Expos.
it is the Lord has culled out and severed in a most excellent manner (i. e.
by his Spirit) the righteous; that is in Hebrew, Chasid, the holy One, Thus God
seals*
Acts 13.35. full of holiness, goodness, piety, grace, to himself. And as the
gracious man, so the gracious way of Christ, he has set apart for himself, i.
e. as his way, and his right. Thus every Saint sets his seal to, And every
Saint seals by the same Spirit.
in John 3.33. who being convinced by the Spirit, as before, and now confirmed
by this testimony within him (which holds against all opposers) he gives his
testimonial to the truth, Deuteronomy. 32.4. and bears witness to the way of Christ,
Joh. 15.26, 27. and sets to his seal, and subscribes to it, and chooses it to
walk* to live and die in. So that they are Christ's witnesses, and do bear his
testimony with the Spirit, as well as by the Spirit, Acts 5.32. It is the
Spirit which assures them, as well as persuades them; whereby the will is set
upon the wheel; so after the Saints believed, they were sealed, says the
Apostle.

5. This Spirit then rests on thee, 5. By resting on thee in the way.
and on that way thus witnessed and sealed to; as the Dove did upon the Ark;
yea, as the Spirit did rest and abide upon Christ, John 1.32. whereby he was
known; so hereby (by the same Spirits resting on us) we are known, and the way,
and worship, and Church of Christ, is known to be from above. So 1 Pet. 4.14.
Happy are ye, for the Spirit of the Lord, and of glory, rests upon you. And
Paul says, The power of Christ rests upon him, 2 Cor. 12.9. The Word is, Sim.
(...), that is, as the Dove which wandered about, This Dove rests in the Ark,
no where else.
and not found rest, nor where to set the sole of his foot: In this world
iniquity does abound, and the waters are up, and the floods are so high, that
the Dove, i. e. the Spirit comes again weary and spent, into the Ark, and from
thence is sent out: So that this Spirit found Christ such an Ark and rested
there; The Church is the Ark.
and finds the Church such an Ark, and rests there, (yea, a Saint in a sense,
such an Ark, and rests there;) And from thence, he is sent out (by Messengers,
means of Grace, etc.) abroad and about the world, to find footing among them
without; but oftentimes he returns with this tale, That the waters are too high
yet. But here the Spirit rests, and by this the Church is known to be Christ's.
The Spirit is but one in all.
We are all baptized by one Spirit, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.13. Into one
Body, and made to drink into one Spirit. So Ephesians. 4.4. We are one Body, and have
one Spirit; Sim.
that is, As one Soul in the Body, quickens, moves, governs, comprehends all,
and every Member, so does one Spirit in the Church every Member, Eye, Ear,
Hand, Head, Foot* etc. It is one and the same Soul, that acts in every one, and
all the Members, though in a different way; as the Eye to see with, Ear to hear
with, Hand to work with, Foot to walk with, tongue to speak with, Head to plot
with, etc. And so many several ways the Soul works, and yet is but one and the
same;
so the Spirit works in diverse ways, and sundry manners, 1 Cor. 12.4. in
several Members; some to prophecy, some to teach, some to exhort, some to
oversee, some to direct and rule, some to distribute, etc. Romans 12.4, 6, 7, 8.
some to one thing, some to another; and yet it is but one and the same Spirit.
This one and the same Spirit rests upon every Member, and we must by this one
Spirit be brought into this Body of Christ, The difference betwixt Hypocrites
and true Church Members, in the voluntary motions into this Church State.
which is his Church. Thus I have done with the inward instrument of working in
us, and winning upon us, to enter into Church Fellowship.

Now in this, there is an apparent difference between Hypocrites, and true
Saints, entering into this way: A true Saint is made willing and spontaneous by
a principle within; but a Hypocrite, or any other man, is moved as the Automata
are moved, or things of artificial motion, as Clocks, Jacks, or the like
engines of ingenuity: It is some weight without that poyseth them, and puts
them upon motion; Sim.
so something or other that is without, swayeth, and works, and weighs upon
the hearts of Hypocrites, to make them willing (as we said before concerning
Dublin) and not an inward principle.

But thus we have done with the instrumental or organical of carrying the will
on in the way of Christ; The Spirit is Gods other arm.
which is matter for a Reason of the necessity of a voluntary cause* that is,
because the Word and Spirit are the two arms which the Lord has appointed to
pull them out of Babylon with, and into Sion; and no other instruments or means
must do it, until these hands of Jesus Christ do lead them out of their carnal,
corrupt, or Antichristian condition, Till then on men come before called.
they have no call to come; and when they are thus called, and convinced as
before, they come running by a voluntary instinct, and consent, flowing up (
more fluminis, as the tide by a natural instinct, and not by compulsion) into
the mountain, where the Lords house is on the top of all mountains, Isai. 2.
But consider

7. Lastly, That because the will of man is inclined, and way of Christ (as we
said before) ( ab interiori principio) by an inward instinct and principle,
Violence is repugnant to voluntariness.
and all kind of coaction, or violent compulsion comes from without, (ab
exteriori principio) therefore it is a high absurdity, a groundless and
irregular opinion, and positively repugnant even to the principles of one
spiritualized, and made willing by the power of Christ, to call for compulsive
powers, to promote the ways of Christ, or to bring in any man that way, seeing
( violentia direct opponitur voluntario, and violentia causat involuntarium)
he must be a voluntier. And this will serve as the seventh Reason, to ratify
this truth, That men must not be compelled, but come in voluntarily; for
violence is inconsistent with the will.

Thus under several considerations has this point been offered for a
voluntariness, to be wrought in us by the power of Christ, before we venture or
enter into his Church Way. Now a man may be said to be voluntary two ways; How
voluntarily.
directly or indirectly.

1. Directly. Then the will is the agent of his willingliness, (having an
inward principle, 1. Direct.
) even as the fire (having the principle of heat) is the agent of heat in the
water. Sim.
But such a one as is

2. Indirecte.
2. Indirectly voluntary, is made so by some outward means, promises, or
threatenings; hopes or fears, or the like; and such a one will be a dangerous,
doubting, and disturbing Member.

But such men and women as are directly voluntary, by the means I have
mentioned in this Chapter, may come with welcome: For they are called and
invited, and if there be first a willing mind (says the Apostle) you are
accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12. Virtus no lentium nulla est, Trap in loc.
For Christ will enjoy (says one) his Spouses love and person by a willing
contract, and not by a ravishment; He is none of them, he will have the heart,
to consent with all the heart. O then! let us say with the Apostle, The love of
Christ constrains us; and with Job 32.18. The Spirit constrains us. These
are the best and sweetest compulsive powers. But thus for this Chapter.

CHAP. III. (...) Sagad Dur. or Pagad Dur. After this full persuasion and
voluntary motion, and concurrence, comes in the communion of Saints, by an
orderly uniting and embodying together in a solemn order, suitable to the
solemnity of the Ordinance, and that in some public place.
MAny there be that in the time of the Churches tranquillity will intrude, Many
Intruders.
and pretend willingness with the Lords people to go about the Lords work,
and build; especially when earthly powers and Rulers look kindly upon us, and
allow us our liberty to go and build, and when they as Patrons, and protecting
Fathers, prove favorers and abetters of what we are about. But let us have a
care! and say with Zerubbabel, and the rest of the Fathers of Israel, Ezra 4.2,
3. Caution.
It is not for you and us (jointly) to build an house unto our God, you have
nothing to do with us, but we our selves together will build it, unto the Lord
God of Israel. Remember that we are a people that must be separate, the clean
from the unclean, the holy from the profane, and by one free consent (being
fully convinced) concur together in this work of the Lord without the
unclean hands or help^ of them without, who are adversaries to Sion. Now
because our Ruler is the God of order, Order in the Church. 1 Cor. 14.33.
and not of confusion, he would have all things done in decency, and in order,
1 Cor. 14.40. (...) that is ( compositis moribus) fitly for use and ornament to
the Church, Expos.
which is a rule (says one) of great request and inquest, Trap in lo^.
both for real and ritual decency which is to be observed, Ordinationes in
ecclesia faciendae.
and is of much concernment. And for this Colosse was so largely commended,
Col. 2.5. and Christ himself (our sweet Master) intimates so much in setting
down the people on the grass, (...).
Matthew. 14.18. and 15. and feeding them, rank by rank (as it were) as they
sat. So his Churches are called beds of spices, Cant. 6.2. that is, as beds and
borders orderly set out, to s^ew us what delight he has to live in an orderly
and well set out society. Order is Gods Ordinance; Now to make up this order,
some things are extra-essential, Ordo formae, Et materiae.
and left to liberty according to what is requisite to the constitution and
condition of the Church; and other things are essential, and positively relate
as well to the being, as well-being of the Church (ita ordo dicitur respectu
principii) and may by no means be omitted; but of this latter we have been
large before; Ritual order and decency.
and for the former, respecting ritual decency and order, we must grant that
men must not be tied to such things as of necessity, but they are left free,
whether to observe them, or change them, as often as there is cause for the use
and excellency of the Church.

I could not omit to premise thus much before I proceed, and shall say with
Luther, What if any one Church will not imitate another in things indifferent
and doubtful, outward and circumstantial, Left to liberty
ritual and formal? Yet what need is there of compulsion by Powers, Decrees, of
Councels, or the like; which are presently converted into snares and laws; and
as he says to the Church at Wittembergs (about the form of celebrating the
Supper) in quibus omnibus cavendum, Luther.
ne legem ex liberate faciamus, etc. Be sure that our liberty be not made a
Law by men, and a snare to souls; such a warning I will give the Reader ere I
go on, that he confine not his light, opinion, judgment, or persuasion to mine
here (or any other man's) in those things which are left to liberty; I am not
about establishing a set Form of Discipline, or making a Directory as necessary
for others to walk by, or to ensnare any souls,
or trouble any consciences, but to set before you (as is given me from above,
and that by measure) the pattern of Gods house; Caution.
and as for this Form of embodying together by a solemn order, This is no s^^
form.
which I am now treating of in this Chapter (as we have promised else where)
you have our experiences of it, and proofs for it, and may follow it, if you
please (it being in our judgment the most orderly, and heavenly manner we have
met with, and most Scriptural and consonant to rule both of Reason and
Religion.) Now premising thus much, and promising this more, that I shall
heartily embrace, and willingly give way to the unction from on high in better
teachings about this order, and be ready to receive from any, whatsoever shall
be offered as more useful and profitable in this form of uniting; I shall
proceed.

In order to a communion of Saints in a Gospel-Church-state, 1 Christians meet
together often first, and why?
those who are godly, do often meet together; as in Mal. 3.16.17. when all that
feared the Lord, and thought on his name (and his worship) conferred often
together; and this is a duty deeply incumbent to the Saints to do so first of
all, and to speak often together, to pray together, to make mention of the
Lord, with savoury speeches tending to edification, Ephesians. 4.29. and 5.3, 4. Heb.
3.13. Jude 20. Act. 18.23. and this as often as there is an opportunity; and
then you shall find, To prepare for the work.
Mal. 3.17. after this the Lord promises to set upon gathering his people;
then, says the Lord will I make up my (...) peculium, Expos.
my jewels picked out, and bind them up together: And this day wherein I will
do this, shall be a day of distinction and separation betwixt the precious and
the vile, the sheep and the goats; the righteous and the wicked, and then Verse
18. shall ye discern between him that serves God, and him that serves him
not. Now I say, in order to this, the people of God must first meet, and that
often together, to try, and have knowledge, and experience of one another, to
inquire after one another, and all together, by their joint prayers, and
offerings to contribute their best toward the building up of this Tabernacle.
Then let all vain communication be kept out, Ephesians. 5.4. and let your words be
savoury and seasoned with that salt of the word (that has not lost its savor)
and be ready to answer any objection, or question that shall be made, Col. 4.6.
exhorting and provoking one another to duty, Heb. 3.13. and 10.24, 25. and
declaring to one another their clear satisfaction and full persuasion of the
way of Christ, and their manifesting of longing fond affections for these
Courts of the Lord, and to be in his amiable Tabernacles, Psalm. 84.1, 2. saying
one to another, Come, let us go up to this mountain of the Lord, the house of
the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths, Isa. 2.2, 3. and asking the way to Zion with your faces thitherward,
Saints not tied to one Church.
saying, Come, and let us join our selves unto the Lord, etc. Now this is
preparatory to the work of embodying which follows, and yet these godly are
left to liberty to join in what society seems best to them, and are not tied
to one place, therefore did the Apostles gather people together in several
Cities where they dwelt, and so established many Churches in one County, (as
the seven Churches in the lesser Asia, Rev. 1.4.10.) the Churches of Galatia,
Syria, and Cilicia, 1 Cor. 16.1. Act. 15.41. Corinth, and yet Cenchrea, Romans
16.1. (in the Suburbs of Corinth) that the Saints might enter where was most
convenient.

After this, Those that are clearly convinced of the order, and well satisfied
with the work it self, And secondly, ^o give up their names together.
and one with another (as before) being affectionately desirous to walk
together in this way, and having agreed it* Amos 3.3. they do write and give
up their names together for that purpose which they propose (as being the best
way to intimate their desires, and seeming most to be in practice in former
times, Act. 1.15. Nehem. 7.5.38. which thing they do to one whom they appoint
to receive them, 3 Keep days of humiliation and prayer.
and to call them, as occasion serves. In the mean time they most unanimously
desire, and appoint a solemn day of humiliation (or more) to be set apart,
Which habent quatuor.

1 Invocationem Dei. 2 Commemorationem beneficii Dei. 3 Petitionem 4 Et
obs^^rationem.
All which must be 1 In elevatione mentis ad Deum and -- 2 Fiducia impetrandi.



and to seek the Lords presence, and his promises of direction and guidance in
so great a duty, which else they dare not undertake, Isa. 58.11. Jo. 14.26. and
15.26. and 16.13. on which day they lie low before the Lord, and lick the
dust, Nehem. 1.11. and Nehem. 9.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20. Act. 14.23. this
they do by themselves separate from others, Nehem. 9.2. and it is usually a
most humbling heartbreaking day, whilst they come before the Lord with fear
and trembling, wondering at his love to pitch upon them for so great a mercy, to
pick them out and leave so many behind, to visit them with light, and
refreshings from on high, Act. 3. Oh! how does a thousand of these
considerations melt them before the Lord! and yet make them with tears to lay
hold on all the promises made to them in this case, and pressing him with
Moses, Exodus 33.15.16. to be with them, and to go before them in this work,
for wherein say they shall it be known that we and thy (despised) people have
found grace in thy sight; is it not in that thou art with us, and go with
us, and guidest us? By this, shall we (Lord) and thy people be separated and
know from all the other people (without) that are round about us: Therefore
say they* For Zions sake we will not hold our peace, nor give thee rest, till
thy righteousness go before us as brightness, and salvation be in the midst
of us as a lamp that burns, Isa. 62.1.7. and till thou have made us a praise
in the earth, and we be called the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord,
Hephzibah, and Beulah, Verse 4. and 12. We will not go up (say they to the
Lord) without thy presence with us; if thy presence go not with us, carry us
not up hence, etc. This, or these days thus holily, solemnly, and spiritually
spent, the people look like the new mown grass (or tender springs) that has
the Sun shining upon it after a shower. O then, what a humble holy fr^me of
spirit may we find amongst them! what Angel-like looks? sweet words,
Christian carriages are there then? O how they bless the Lord with much
alacrity and life for the returns made upon their spirits! that the Lord is
with them, and will guide them by his own presence, and they give in an
account to one another (before they part) of their confidence and comforts
which they find within, being fully persuaded the Lord will be with them, and
calling for the time to be appointed when they shall make a Church-body and
unite; having nothing to obstruct, And unity.
but the work of the Lord lying plain before them, they set apart the day for
that duty, and (if any be nigh) they send and seek out for the assistance of
some other Church, as it were to join with them, and bear testimony to them
upon that day; and at the parting at the end of the day and duty, will give to
them the right hand of fellowship as a Symbol of love, and of approbation (as
Pareus has it in the Margin, lib. 2. p. 161. Intimae conjunctionis symbolum,
non authoritatis) of friendship and familiarity, not of Lordship and authority.
But as Beza says, Porrexerunt manum, quod symbolum esset nostrae in Evangelii
doctrina summae consensionis; So says Paul, Gal. 2. when James and Cephas, and
John perceived the grace that was given me, they gave unto me and Barnabas the
right hand of fellowship, (vide Expositors and Septuagint in Gal. 2.) so that
it will be very comely, and an argument of their love, and good-liking, but it
is not necessary; wherefore to proceed.

4 The day they are embodyed.
The day appointed being brought in now as upon the shoulders of the Saints to
be united together, I mean by the daily prayers and preparations for this
great and weighty work; they judge it (for the reasons which follow) to be
most expedient, and more to the honor of Jesus Christ, and more to the
convincing of them without, on this day (however) to appear in public (unless
there be persecution) I mean in such a place where any that will may come to
hear, They appear in public.
and carry away what they can. This day is begun and kept on for some hours
with the prayers of the faithful, as Act. 8.15. as John and Peter began it in
Samaria; and for the same effect, viz. that the Holy Ghost might fall upon them
this day, Powerful in prayer.
and rest on them. They pray not in a slight, overly formal way, but with an
holy violence, to beset, and to take heaven by force, and bounce hard, with the
greatest might for the greatest mercy, and with an united lively power for the
large pourings out of the unction from on high upon them, Nehem. 9.1, 2.
Act. 1.14. even until the room, or house is ready to shake again. But after
this; there is some preparatory Sermon, or speech made (by one that is able,
and appointed thereto) full of exhortation, as Act. 11.23. Barnabas bid them
with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord, and as in Nehem. 8 1. etc. the
book of the Law was brought out and read in a most religious manner to all that
could hear, both men and women, and all the peoples ears were attentive. V. 2,
3. which Ezra opened in a Pulpit of wood where he stood for that purpose, v.
4.5. And then blessed the Lord, and all the people, said, Amen, Amen, lifting
up their hands. Verse 6. and besides Ezra, Exhortations.
Joshua also, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, and others, etc. Verse. 7.8. read
in the book in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the
people to understand. So I say, it is fit that the book of Christ's Law be at
that time read openly, unto which he who preaches and exhorts, is principally
appointed in a Pulpit of wood in the public place, or elsewhere, which is as
convenient for all peoples, men and women, Order of Christ op^ned and proved.
that will come of all sorts to hear: For then the rules that the Church is
gathered by, the grounds upon which they embody together, and the Gospel Order
and fellowship of Saints according to Christ's Law, are all laid open, proved
and pressed, that it may appear to all that hear and understand that they do
nothing without the Law of Christ, to which the peoples ears will be very
attentive (as we have experienced in some places already) and such as have
before (through ignorance of this Gospel Order) been enemies to it, and
inveighed against it, and now came but to laugh at it, and to carry tales, and
make scoffs, were (upon such a day) convinced by it, and inclined to it,
enquired after it, being as it were dazzled and amazed at the beauty of it, when
it came to be opened out of the Word, and to appear armed with argument of
proof out of the Laws of Jesus Christ; and then they cried, Amen, Amen, unto
it, (probatum est.)

But now after this is declared to all, what they do, and why they do this
which they are about to do, their Rules, Reasons, Grounds, Script^res, Account
of faith made.
and Proofs being produced and drawn up, as it were, into a compendium; but so
as that the (...) do lie obvious, Experiences of the work of grace.
and as much as may be beyond objection: Then the next thing that follows, is
the Confession of Faith, begun by him who is appointed thereunto as the ablest
to lead the way hitherto; this brother besides gives an account of the work of
grace upon his heart, holding out at least some of his Experiences (and such as
are most useful for such an Auditory) 1 Pet. 3.15. with sweetness and
humility of spirit, so as thereby others may judge him laid upon the
Foundation, and be in a regenerate state, and changed from darkness into
light, from death to life, from a state of nature into a state of grace, and to
have indeed fellowship with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.7. But I purpose
to insist upon these particulars more at large in the Chapters that follow. A
declaration of full s^tisfaction from Gods word.
But after this Brother has delivered himself at large (having the more
liberty, because he leads, as it were, others, and declared his clear
satisfaction and undoubted persuasion to walk in the way whereinto he is now
entering, as the very way of Christ appointed for believers to worship God in,
and as the will of God, By the ablest in p^blick.
wherein he is confident upon a Scripture and Spiritual account that he pleases
God: Then follows some others of the ablest of the Brethren, (for herein care
must be had in public, lest the weakness of a Brother give advantage to them
without, to harden their hearts against the truth, and lest thereby Christ
should suffer in his honor, and the Church in her happiness) I say, such
Brethren as are ablest to speak, are appointed for that one day, being so
public: And these, as Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, etc. read in the
Scriptures the Law of Christ distinctly; I mean, they lay down the Scriptures
and grounds of their satisfaction and full persuasion to enter into this way
(as that which Jesus Christ our Lawgiver has laid out) and they declare their
sense and judgments, and then proceed as the former Brother did in rendering a
reason of that lively hope which is in them, by Confession of faith,
Experiences of the work of Grace, and the like, declaring their cleaving to
the Lord in this way with full purpose of heart.

Thus as many as are appointed, and thought fit for that day, do go on one by
one in order as they are set out, and possibly on this day but few (as eight,
or ten, or more, or less) may be appointed, and in the number for the first;
because the work is this day the most difficult, the most public, and must be
most especially regarded, and wisely and watchfully carried on.

In his communion of Saints* Chap. 17.

Few at first* and those that are without exception, and fittest and ablest.
Dan. 2.


Besides (as Ainsworth says) the Church is small at first, a little grain of
mustard seed, which is the least of all seeds, Mat. 13.32. and as Israel once
was the fewest of all peoples, Deuteronomy. 77. Christ began but with two at first,
and God has promised to take them, but one of a City and two of a Tribe, Jer.
3.14. and these are the poor, despised, contemptible ones of the world too for
the most part, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. and it shall be said of Sion, Psalm. 87.5, 6.
This, or that man was born there, so that not numbers are to be expected (or
indeed to be desired) at first, A Covenant.
but rather to be a little stone cut without hands, and growing greater, and
greater, and so a little one shall become a thousand. After they be gone thus
far, some will have a formal Covenant in writing brought forth for these to
subscribe, and so all others as they enter; Register.
but a Covenant they have taken, and engagement made before, which may be will
appear sufficient when we come in the following Chapters to speak of the
Covenant. But after all this is done, Prayer.
their names are taken together into the Register, And Resolution.
Nehem. 7.5. Act. 1.15. upon Record (against whom no exceptions could be made
as before) and these do by prayer together give themselves up unto God, and
one to another willingly, 2 Cor. 8.5. to worship the Lord, and to walk
together with him as a Church, and to serve him in all his will revealed to
them, as such whom the Father has picked out for that purpose, Jo^. 4 23. 1
Pet. 2, 9. and to be helpful to one another in particular, and to the whole
body in general, according to their duties mentioned in the Statute-book of
Christ, which is always to lie open before their eyes.

And to conclude this busy day, they pour out prayers and praises in such a
measure* that as it was said of Israel, in Ezra 3.13. when the Foundation of
the Temple was laid, that they could not discern the noise of the shout of
joy, from the noise of weeping, both were so great: So here it may be said,
And Praises.
the Saints are so filled with praises, and with prayers, that the noise of the
one can hardly be discerned from the noise of the other. And as upon the
reading of the Law in Nehem. 13.13. separation was presently practiced from the
mixed multitude, so that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude; so
these are now a people no more to be reckoned among the Nations without, but
such as are separated from the mixed multitude. As for other Brethren, and the
Sisters which are to be admitted, they do make their Confession of Faith, and
(as we have heard before) declare their full satisfaction, The Church admits
when she is alone.
and clear the work of God upon their hearts by his Spirit in private (I
mean) when these people thus enchurched^together are alone by themselves,
separate from the mixed multitude) being now a Church in visible order. And
their admission is most proper so, because the world should take no notice of
their weakness in utterance or expression, or the like, whereby to upbraid
them, and the truth. But this I purpose to speak to afterward; in the mean
time, I, and hundreds of the godly with me must needs be much offended at the
practice of some that run preposterously into a way of fellowship without any
rule laid down, How rashly some embody.
or any Law of Christ read and opened, upon which they embody together,
clearing nothing of the way first, Sad sign of a breach.
to give satisfaction to such as sit in darkness to it* but without any day of
humiliation, or due preparation for this weighty work, without any solemn
prayers, (and serious self-examinations) on a sudden, Expos.
in an hours warning or two, and in some place or other too that is unknown to
any but themselves, they write down their names together, The most solemn
O^der must accompany the most solemn Ordinance.
choose officers, and all at once, and so in an hour or two's time, make up a
Body, and call themselves a Church, and then all that will be joined, must be
joined to them that are thus jumbled together in darkness, and in a most
undecent and undue order; but let them remember that in 1 Chronicles. 15.23. Sim.
The Lord made a breach upon them, for that they sought him not after the due
order; as Dike says, The failing in a prescribed formality (which some would
think nothing, Dike.
and that God regards not) causes a breach upon them, instead of a blessing; so
precisely strict is God to require the most solemn order too in the most
solemn Ordinances, and so quick-sighted a Judge he is in small prevarications
in such cases. For as to go and fetch the Arc, and to enquire of God at it,
was an Ordinance of God, but to neglect the solemnity of carrying it, and to
carry it in a Cart hurrying, and not on their shoulders, and to neglect to
sanctify themselves for that service, but to run to it hand over head, was
not Gods order: So also this Church-gathering, or uniting together into a
Gospel Church State is an undeniable and solemn Ordinance of God, and Law of
Christ; but to do it without any seriousness, solemnity, or the like,
hurrying, and rushing into it without due regard and heed, and neglecting
prayers, fastings, holy conferences, and preparatory means appointed to season
us, and sanctify us, and qualify us for this great duty, is doubtless a
great offense to God, and I am sure none of his order. And what must we then
expect? believe it, a sore blow; The Lord smote them; it proved a sad day to
them at last: and if this severity was but for failing in outward order, in
carrying the Arc on a Cart* O! then sure it will be a sad day to such as fail
in that inward and spiritual order, with, and in which this great duty is to be
performed, God will be sought in a good order, as well as in a good Ordinance,
or else he will deny his blessing.

But I shall perform my promise, Why the first day in public solemnity.
and so conclude this Chapter: there is a great deal of reason and order in
it, to have the first solemn day when we are to embody and unite, performed in
public, in the times of the Churches peace and safety, and that those who are
judged (indeed) able to speak (without discredit to the Gospel, or the Church)
should make their speeches also in public, in the bearing of all that will.

First, Experience has given it in as a great means to convince men of the
way, such as upon that day have stepped out It is more to conviction. Vide
chap. 6. p. 98. etc.
and spared an hour or two out of mere novelty; why these have heard the way
so laid open before them out of Scriptures (and so proved and pressed from
precepts and practice, that they have gone away with another spirit, and if not
altogether, yet with Agrippa almost persuaded. now they have not such an
opportunity when you do clandestinely and closely embody together: Christ did
so
Christ went often into the Synagogues to convince the Jews, and to reprove
the Scribes and Pharisees, he was sure to find them there, and he would lose
no opportunity: So he disputed with the Doctors in the Temple, and put them to
silence, for he would go to them where he knew they would be, seeing they
would not come to him. Thus Act. 18.28. this is the eminent character of
Apollos that he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by
Scriptures, Expos.
etc. (...) he confuted them over and over, and quite non-plussed them, and
for the greater honor to the truth and himself (as a servant to the truth)
he did this publicly, says the Text ((...)) that is* in the company of
multitudes of them, in the midst of great Congregations he convinced them; and
the Lord is said openly in a great public appearance that he shall come to
convince all the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their hard
speeches, which he shall do with a vengeance; Jude v.15.
and that will be more then if it were done in a corner, viz. to do it openly.
So certainly this is a fit opportunity to be in public for this purpose, and
to cast the net in where the most Fish meet together.

Secondly, This would stop the wide mouths of many, and prevent the scandals
which are raised by reason of secret and embodying together; many (and such as
are godly too) be ready to censure such practices, It would prevent many
scandals.
as if they were ashamed to be seen, as Joh. 3.19. This is their condemnation,
they loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil. Popish
Religion was laid in darkness, R^x Plat.
and lives in it, unless it be under bastard lights, as candles, and such as
are of men's make. Tenebri^nes Papistae male sibi conscii, Expos.
aeternum atri and tetri, etc. and so does all the false. Truth is hurt, and
cannot help her self, when she is kept a close prisoner and immured up; and
when she is not let out to speak for her self, men are apt to take for truth
what is spoken against her; therefore it is that Peter calls so upon us, 1 Pet.
2.12. to have us come abroad, and be seen among men, that by our good works,
we might stop their mouths that speak against us as evil doers. This would
remove many scandals which men raise, as if we were of a false faith, and all
erroneous persons, and a company of Hypocrites, and Pharisees, and the like:
would we but appear in public upon that day of embodying, whereby all men may
hear our Creed, and the Evidences of Gods gracious works upon our hearts, and
some signs of our oneness with Christ; and then the world will believe, Joh.
17.21.23.

Thirdly, It is much for the credit of the Gospel, and for the praise of Zion,
that her beauty appears in public, and her amiable beams shine abroad. For the
honor of the way.
Beauty loves to be seen; the Sun has the more honor and praise, and
esteem, by how much the more he shines abroad, Sim.
and about; and the Church is (in these days) to look forth as the morning,
Expos.
Cant. 6.10. bright, beauteous, lightsome, and welcome (after the dark night
of Antichristian ignorance, and error, which we have been so long under.) Now
she is to arise in public, and to be seen by all, and in an ascending light
from year to year; from one administration to another, till it be perfect day,
Prove. 4.18. and highnoon, Cant. 1.7. and every year there shall be more light
then in the former, Ephesians. 3.3, 4. Veniente perfecto evacuatur imperfectum) for
it is not an evening, but a morning light, Isa. 58.8. and then follows, Fair
as the Moon, in Heb. Lebanah,
shining bright, to show when she appears thus in public (as the morning) she
appears in pulchritude, to the admiration of all others (as in Verse 9.
before.) Thus Ezekiel. 16.14. Thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy
beauty, etc. Clear as the Sun, Much honor is had by public embodying. Act.
2.24.
and terrible as an Army with Banners, i. e. then, when she appears and looks
forth in public abroad, as the morning; O what a terror is she to all the
enemies of truth! when they see Saints in a good array, rank, and order, to
march together in one body, all armed with the Armor of God, Expos.
and under one Captain of their salvation, against one and the same enemy.

This is the benefit of appearing in public, and it adds much to the name of
Christ, and to the glory of the Church. See but Act. 5.13. when the Saints came
forth into a public place, viz. Solomon's Porch; O what honor they had by it!
in that little time, says the Text, The people magnified them (...) and
honored them, and the way which they were in. Doubtless might Christians in
primitive times have had their liberty,
they would always have been in public.

Fourthly, It answers the Rule most, to appear in public day, and in that
duty; Most consonant to Christ's Law.
It is most coming up to Christ's Commands, see Mat. 10.27. What I tell you
(whether concerning Doctrine or Discipline) speak abroad in the open light,
preach it on the house-tops, that is, in the most patent and public places;
Expos.
teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, Matthew. 28.20. thus
Wisdom sends forth her Maidens to cry and call in the open streets, and in the
most public places of the City where is greatest resort, Prove. 9.3. and Christ
tells his Disciples in Mark 4.22. there was not any thing kept in secret, but
that it should come abroad.

Fifthly, This public appearance would be most answer Christ's practice; And to
Christ's practice.
yea and his Apostles and Saints too in the primitive times (though then
dangerous;) see what Christ says, Joh. 18.20. I spoke openly to the world, I
ever taught in the Synagogues and in the Temple, whither the Jews always
resort, and in secret have I said nothing. So Act. 20.20. I kept back nothing,
says Paul, that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and taught you
publicly. Thus the Church of Ephesus was brought out into public too
sometimes.

public practice, and uniting together, is more answerable to the work it
self (being a work of light) and therefore it ought to be done in light, To
the way it self.
and openly, for veritas abscondi erubescit, Joh. 3.21. He that does truth,
comes into the light, that his deeds may be manifest, that they are wrought of
God (says Christ, who is Light.) that is, all as from God, and for God; such
are neither ashamed of their principle, Sim.
nor of their end, and quoad fontem and quoad finem, says Aug. in loc. The
honest Tradesman is content his Wares should be carried to the street-door from
the dim shop-board. It is for Heresy to hide it self, says Hall; And for
Antichristianisme, and false Wares to loath the light, they are Bats and Owls
that love not to be seen. But let us walk as children of light, Ephesians. 5.8.11. It
is said of John Frith Martyr, that when the Archbishops man would have let him
gone away, and escaped; says he, Frith.
In Fox Act. and Mon. fol. 1927.
no; If you go to Croyden, and tell the Bishop that you have lost Frith, I
will follow as fast as ever I can, and tell him, I have found Frith again, and
would deliver my self into his hands; for what do ye think, that I am afraid to
declare my opinion before the Bishops in a manifest truth, or to come into
public? no! --

reason more to this, and that is the Encouragements which others would hereby
have to join in that fellowship; To stir up others into the way.
for the public appearance of the Christians in Solomon's Porch, Act. 5.12. was
very attractive as in V. 14. Believers were the more added to the Lord,
multitudes both of men and women. So that the Church lost nothing, but got much
by it, whilst Clandestine embodying discourages many, etc.

It must needs be so, that when people come to see such an amiablenesse and
excellency in this way of Christ above all other ways, and how the Beloved is
in this Church- state the best of all beloveds, carrying away the Banner from
ten thousands, and that his presence is most familiarly and ravishingly in
these Gardens enclosed (and this appears to be promised and proved out of
Scriptures;) I say it must needs be, that their bowels will earne after these
ways, and to live in these Gardens, when they know what the way is (as when
the Daughters of Sion did ask first (of Christ) what is he? Cant. 5.9. Expos.
And then (when they heard how he excelled) the next question is, Cant. 6.1. O,
where is he? whether is be gone? etc.) So when they hear what this way is, the
next question will be, O, where is it? how shall we get in? tell us, that we
may seek him with thee; that we may partake of these privileges with you: And
they shall say, We will go with you, for we have heard, that God is with you,
Zach. 8.23.

Many Reasons more I might add hereto, But see Hookers Survey of Church
Discipline, 3. part. chapter 1.

Appear the^ in public.


and produce more Scriptures to confirm and strengthen this Exhortation of
appearing in public upon that day especially, ( sed sat sapienti.) In a word,
If you do these things, show thy self to the world, John 7.3. Let all men see
and observe how sweetly your practice agrees with Christ's Precept, and this way
with his Word; till which time, men surmize much evil of you and your opinion,
and think you are without warrant, and walk by fancy, not by faith. As if a
man, Sim.
who never saw any dance in his life, should see a company in a field (whilst
he is afar off) and before he can hear any music) he thinks them mad, wonders
what they mean to skip about so; but when he is come nigh, and hears the melody
of the music, Sim.
and observes their dancing, and how they agree, both in time and order, with
the tune of the musicks, he then admires on the other side; changes his former
thoughts and judgment of them, and now is much taken and delighted with them,
and marks with much affection the agreement of the foot to the tune, and could
attempt to enter in, and be one amongst them, were he but fit for it; and yet
he can hardly forbear.

So it is, that the vulgar and ordinary sort of people (such as are most
strangers to this way of the Gospel) may think you mad, and wonder what you
mean, Many wonder at this way of the Gospel, till they know it.
to separate from their Parish ways, to join in fellowship in this orderly
way; till they come to see how it does agree with the Word and Spirit;
and then they cannot but with much content observe the Order, and mind the
Word, and this way together, to agree most sweetly; and then they wish to be in
the number of them whose practice appears so home to the precepts and practice
of Christ, and Saints in primitive times. And that this sweet order and
agreement might be the more observed and asserted, I do heartily wish, for the
honor of him, whom I serve, that there may be no more Chamber-embodyings, but
openly to all, for the conviction of many, especially now in the time of the
Churches tranquillity and liberty. And let this be done by them in due order
and solemnity, Dublins experience teaches most of these things mentioned.
answerable to the weight of the Ordinance; and then they shall grow up in all
things in Jesus Christ their head, from whom the whole body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, shall make increase of the
Body, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. And in whom all the building fitly framed together, shall
grow up an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21.

CHAP. IV. (...) Beith. The Church thus constituted, takes in Members, and of
their Admission, upon clear Testimony; and without dipping, or tying to Forms
or Judgments.
THe Church thus orderly gathered and united together, do receive in Members,
as Acts 2.41. and 5.13. and 9.26. Now in their Admission, we must consider,
First, the Power that takes them in; and then secondly, the Persons that are
taken in.

First, The power is the Churches, not the Elders or Officers, as some would
assert; 1. The power is in the Body ^o admit Members.
to which I cannot assent, because that the Keys were given to the Church, and
left with them, Mat. 16.19. John 20.23. And whom ye receive, shall be received;
whom ye loose (or give liberty to) shall be loosed; and whom ye restrain, shall
be restrained: The words are read in the plural number, in John 20. and in
Matthew. 16. spoken to Peter, as the Representative of the rest of the Disciples,
and in the room of the whole Church, Expos.
as appears from Verse. 15. and 20. where he speaks to all; Proved*
and we find the Church ever took this Power in the places before mentioned.
So Acts 9.26, etc. and in Revel. 2.2. says the Lord to the Church of Ephesus,
Expos.
Thou tryest (or examinest) them which say, they are Apostles, and are not, and
have found them liers. Now as Perkins upon the place says, Mr. Perkins*
Christ gave every one of the seven Churches (and so Ephesus as well as any
other) power and authority, to take in, or keep out, or cast out obstinate
sinners from partaking with them in their spiritual and special privileges,
else he would not have commended them for executing this Power. Doctor Ames in
his Medul. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 37. sect. 6. says, Dr. Ames.
Potestas (quoad jus) pertinet ad ecclesiam illam in communi, pertinet enim ad
illos ejicere, and pertinet ad illos admittere, etc. The power by right is the
Churches in common, for it belongs to them to cast out, and to admit Members,
etc. this is most certain. Mr. Fenner.
And Mr. Dudly Fenner de Sacr. Theol. l. 7. p. 277, 278. affirms, for affairs
that concern the whole body, and matters of public moment, that they are to be
done in the Assembly, by the authority of the whole Church; and if the people
have any thing to offer, or any thing to object, or exhort, or counsel, they
have their liberty; and after that, the matters are to be determined, when they
have been heard to speak all they can, and have given their consent.

Now I say, Officers have not the power to admit or exclude, It is nor in the,
Elders to admit.
( Clave non errante,) for as Acts 15.22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders,
with the whole Church, etc. The whole Church had the knowledge of it, the
voting in it, and consenting to it; the Elders neither had, nor have any
absolute power in themselves, and therefore can do nothing on their own heads,
that concerns the whole, as has been spoken in Cap. 8. of the first Book, and
is like to be at large discussed in the third Book. The Church has the power
and authority positively seated in her; ( ^ui inest virtus and authoritas
essentialiter and necessario,) which she may execute by her self (which is
always best and safest) or by her servants that derive it from her. ( Quibus
inest contingenter, and accidentaliter and minus principaliter, says Dr.
Whitaker de Cavil. q. 5. p. 178, 179.) Now if by her servants, as from her; Who
are servants.

A warning.


then let the Church be sure to set orders and limits for her officers, in the
execution of their derived or borrowed power; that they may know they are but
servants, and not masters, and are to be ordered by the Church, not to order
the Church. For all are yours, says the Apostle to the Church of Corinth, 1
Cor. 3.
all, whether Paul, Apollo's, or Cephas, all yours to serve you.

Now in this sense, we consent to a derivative power in Officers (if need be)
to prepare matters for the Churches judgment; and they may make way ready for
the admission of Members, as by inquiring into their lives, questioning with
the persons, propounding them to the Church, and the like; but neither by
taking any in, nor putting any by, nor the like; for that Power is absolutely
in the Body to admit, and judge fit: Thus Vix plebi persuadeo, ut tales
patiantur admitti. So Epist. 11. Caeteros cumi^genti populi suffragio
recipimus. And cannot admit any.
Cyprian Epistolarum, lib. 1. epist. 3. And I am much mistaken, if Master
Hooker grants not as much in his Survey of Church Discipline, Part. 3. chap. 1.
but whether he does or no, that is all one to me; the thing is proved.

2. The persons admitted, Men or Women.
2. The Persons to be admitted, or taken in, are chiefly to lie under
consideration, which are men or women. Wherein (as Mr. Hooker has it) two
things are to be attended. 1. What is to be done before. 2. What in their
admission.

1. What must be done before they be admitted.
First, What is to be done before. The person (or persons) that does earnestly
desire to be admitted, makes his desire known to the Elder, or some Officer or
Brother, who acquaints the Church therewith; Their names to be taken.
then order is given to take his name into the first Record, among those that
have been propounded for admission; and the person is desired to come on
another day: In the mean time the Church gives order to some Officers or
others, Strict enquiry made of them.
to inquire strictly, and to inform the Church carefully and honestly of the
persons life, the uprightness of his conversation; his carriage to them
without, and to them within, at home and abroad; and what report he has among
those that fear the Lord: As also to deal with the said person at some time, by
conference and questions, and to gather what he can of his knowledge and
acquaintance in the things of God. For the hottest Presbyterians, Mr.
Rutherford himself admits of this, That they ought to be neither scandalous nor
ignorant; wherefore a searching enquiry must be made of them. Now, I confess, I
cannot find this work (with the New England Brethren) to be only the Elders,
By such, whom the Church appoints thereunto.
and those that do it, to entrench upon the place of the Elders; but such as
the Church appoints thereunto, have a sufficient call, and do but their duty
therein. Now the day appointed being come, and nothing appears scandalous, or
sufficient (to the Church) to keep him off any longer (after this sufficient
time of information) he is then called in to be admitted. But some may say,
before I step further; stay Sir.

Quest. What is it you count sufficient to keep one off?

Answ. This has been at large discussed in the former Book, Chapter 5. But in
a word, What is enough to keep him off of admission.
If he lives in any known sin, either in commissions of evil, or omissions of
his known duty, and makes this his practice: Why, he professes himself (says
Mr. Hooker) thereby, not free to submit to the Laws of Christ, nor fit to be
his subject, Mr. Hooker.
nor to enjoy the privileges of his Kingdom; not obeying the Authority of his
Scepter. Nay, by such a sinful life (in case he had crept into the Church) he
did enough to be cast out again.

Secondly, what is to be done now in admitting them? 2. What is done when they
are to be admitted.
The Church appoints whom to speak, (who is usually the Pastor) as the mouth of
the Church; and this the rather to restrin the wantonness and pride (as Mr.
Hooker has it) of some men's spirits, which are ready to impede the progress,
and profit of Gods ordinance in admitting Members, by asking many nice,
indirect, and unprofitable questions, or the like: Now for orders sake, and the
peace of the Church, when they have appointed whom to speak for the Church; the
person (formerly propounded, enquired of, and now to be admitted) is called in:
His name is called, and prayer made for direction from above, He is called into
the Church.
that they might have a discerning spirit in this great work, to put the Lords
difference, between holy and unholy, Prayer first made.
sheep and goats; and remembering promises made, as in such cases: This done,
the person to be admitted does express his earnest desire of entering; and so is
to be received upon a threefold Testimony, Their testimony threefold
Negative and Affirmative.

The first is, When he is propounded, and no body can object against the person
propounded; 1. Negatively. When none (...) object.
which is desired of any that can, and upon what grounds. For Acts 9.26. though
Paul assayed to join himself to the Church, yet so long as the Disciples were
afraid of him, and did question him, and were in doubt of him, he was not
received. Wherefore he is propounded to them all, to know who can object any
thing; as Mr. Dudley Fenner said before. Fenner.
But further,

2. Affirmative. First, from others.
2. Another testimony of him, is from others; who can give him a testimony upon
their own knowledge; and for how long? if there be any Churchmember (whose
testimony is most valid) can so do, it will do well), as Romans 16.1. Col. 4.12,
13. whose testimonies are many times writ down, and upon record, for future
use, if need be. Or else, such as testify from the mouths of others; as those
that the Church sent out to enquire of him, giving in their best information,
and experience of the person; and this faithfully, and especially touching his
unblameableness in conversation, as much as may be. But,

Affirmative. Secondly, from himself. 1 Pet. 3.3.
3. For a further and fuller, and most satisfactory testimony; that comes from
within; the person to be admitted, being desired for the Churches satisfaction,
to make an account of his faith, and of the work of grace upon his heart, he
does so, Experiences.
(as we have said before, and shall show in the next Chapters what manner of
confessions are made, or experiences produced.)

But now, if enough be not spoken to the satisfaction of all, he that has any
doubts, does ask some question for his satisfaction; and none can deny that
liberty: Now this testimony is for the most part, most sweet and useful indeed,
and deserves to be registered. Some of the most special that I have met with,
and written down, I shall instance in, in the Chapters following; and often
times from a gracious heart, they come undeniably before they have done:
Although we grant that some are very imperfect in utterance, If we^k in
utterance, what then?
and cannot express themselves so well as others, that it may be are (most)
gracious, precious Christians. Then one of these ways we take; either to get
what we can from them, Ask them quest^ons, easy, and according to the ability
of the person*
by asking them some easy questions, and that discreetly too; and yet such as
are useful for that season, and so receiving such broken and imperfect answers
as they give; though they be but words dropping sweetness, and savoring of
grace, yet put together, may make weight, and will signify something
well-spelled.

I remember once in Dublin, a sister (propounded to be admitted, as before) was
thus quaeried with, by the Churches appointment, and answering at first very
fearfully, and uncertainly; so that some were unsatisfied, and desired that she
might be past by for this present, till the next meeting, Leeson of Dublin
admitted.
(not daring to put her by, because she was an approved godly Christian in
life.) But when she heard this, she burst out into tears bitterly, before the
Church, and amongst many other words, which argued a broken heart, Sir, says
she, Her broken (yet brokenhearted) speech.
to me then present, it was but the last Lords day, says she, you, preaching
over the water, said, Christ called us freely, without any such qualifications
first; and that he said, Joh. 6. that those that come to him, he would in no
wise put by, and upon these promises I am come; the Word has called me, and
Christ has called me, and bid me come, and I must come, without any worthiness
in my self; and shall I now be put by? -- With that ( poor heart!) her passage
was stopped with tears for a while, which drew tears from the tender hearts of
diverse in the Church, who observed a great deal of grace, thorough these
weeping words; and yet her bold challenge of the promise, and of an interest in
the Church (Christ's Body) upon as free account (without any formal
qualifications) as she had an interest in Christ the Head, having the like
call, etc. (though there might be a mistake in such an apprehension,) for
qualifications are requisite in this external union that are not in the
internal, we must take Christ on his terms, and the Church on hers; yet (I say)
as when the Sun shines through a watery cloud, Sim.
so she appeared gracious and amiable in the eye of the Church, and upon
debate, her love, faith, zeal, obedience, and grace, appearing to the
satisfaction of all, this tender soul was received.

Mr. Will. Fenner.
I remember Master Fenner in his Sermon called Christ's Alarm to sinners,
mentions a story of Demosthenes, That when a man came and told him how a
Neighbor had abused him, and beaten him, uttering it coldly and carelessly, and
spoke it, as if he dreamed; Demosthenes answered the man, That he could not
believe it.
No! says the man! in a passion! do you not! why he took me thus, and held me
here, and struck me thus and thus! (the man acting it now zealously, etc.) And
do ye not (says he) call this beating? will you not believe it? yes, says
Demosthenes, now I believe thee; for now thou speak, as if it were so
indeed. So many will hardly believe any to be a Christian, but such as can word
it well, and speak, and act zealously; but let them take heed of grieving
tender hearts, in expecting too much from them, Take heed none be put by for a
form. Mr. Dell.
after the formal way of speaking, least they should send any away, that keep
not touch to their fancy and form. For as Dell says, and it is true; It is a
most pestilent doctrine to make things necessary that are not so; for God
regards not the form, time, or circumstances of such things (as to him) but
they are left to us to be used according to the wisdom and discretion of the
Church, without ties upon the spirits of any. It is not the form, but the
faith, nor the appearance, but the power of godliness, which we are to eye and
own, and which God does eye and own. In the mean time, seeing the Church,
whilst she is with men, and dwells with flesh and blood, must use some external
rites (which are not absolutely necessary, by which the Church is nothing
sanctified nor satisfied) and things merely of outward order and decency. In
outward forms and rites
Caution.
Yet let her be sure to observe these rules.

Rules.
1. To order none of them, as of necessity, or as if they were in, or keep out
any; and

the wisdom of grace, and by the discretion and direction of the Spirit; and

Thirdly, To do all for peace and pieties sake, for order edification. And

Fourthly, Let all be done in deep love, and with sweetness of spirit in
meekness and humility, without rashness or roughness. These things observed,
such a form as we before spoke of, will not keep a good Christian out of the
Church, who is more to eye the substance then the circumstance. But of this
more hereafter.

Secondly, Or if any is to be admitted that is very unable to speak in public
(I mean) in the Church, 2 Such as are weak are sent to for their inward
testimony.
as some Maids, and others that are bashful, (or the like.) Then the Church
chooses out some whom she sees fit, against the next Assembly to take in
private the account of Faith, the evidences of Gods work of grace upon his or
her heart, which they either take in writing, and bring in into the Church, or
else (which is most approved) when that person is to be admitted, So was it at
Dublin when Mrs. Amee Avery was admitted.
they do declare by word of mouth, whilst some easy questions are
(notwithstanding) asked of him (or her) for the Churches satisfaction, and for
the confirmation of what was before delivered in private to the brethren; and
then declaring his (or her) clear satisfaction in, and full persuasion of this
way of Christ, the party withdraws until it be debated; and when all consent
to his admittance, and all objections and scruples are answered, and every one
declares his consent to accept of him into fellowship with them by some token
or other; the person is called in again, Receive the right hand of fellowship.
and the Pastor (most ordinarily) or whom the Church appoints in his absence to
receive him with the right hand of fellowship in the name of the whole Church,
using a short Exhortation, and requiring some resolution (which is often done
by a formal Covenant) from him to cleave close unto the Lord in this way, and
to his utmost power to walk as becomes his calling, and the Faith which he
professes in all the Rules of the Gospel, and under all the Laws of Jesus
Christ, which are, or shall be manifested unto him; After admission, End with
prayer for them, and praises.
as they end with prayer and praise^, so the persons or person now (newly)
admitted, must be mentioned, especially to the Lord.

If any before I go further, should ask me, why we are so strict to have a
threefold testimony for all we admit; it is to keep out scandalous and ignorant
persons (as much as we can) which makes us so strict; Why so strict to have a
threefold testimony. Mr. Rutherf.
and yet we are very tender (as I told you before) of tying any to a form, or
of putting any by that we can judge truly godly. Mr. Rutherford in his Right of
Presbyteries, Lib. 2. page 296. requires, Profession to be of that nature, that
it may notify to the Church that there is (indeed) saving faith in the souls
of such as profess, and that they be invisible Saints who desire to join
themselves members to a visible Church. Therefore it is, the Church is bound to
have her eyes in her head, and in an orderly way (as Mr. Hooker says) to
inform her self (as fully as she can) of the fitness of them that she takes
in, Mr. Hooker.
lest she break the Laws of Christ, and bring a scandal upon the order of the
Gospel.

Obj. In receiving women you will have them (that are able to do it) to make
their account of Faith, and give out some experience of saving grace on their
souls, and so to speak in the Church; which the Apostle forbids, 1 Cor. 14.

Answ. Though we shall speak to that more hereafter, yet at present I answer
only thus; Women may, and must speak in the Church.
That women are forbid to speak by way of Teaching, or Ruling in the Church,
but they are not forbid to speak, when it is in obedience, and subjection to
the Church (for this suits with their sexes) as in this case to give account of
faith, or the like, to answer to any questions that the Church asks, or the
like; But I shall answer to this at large afterward, because it is so much
opposed.

Quest. What if we be to receive a member of another Church? Members of other
Churches taken in, and how.


Answ. First, He must make it appear that he is so, and then

Secondly, That he has liberty from them to join with you, and is free from
any Church-censure, and so

Thirdly, He must have the Testimony of a Church of Christ, which will be
sufficient to recommend him, unless there be any suspicion of the person; and
then for the Churches satisfaction, several questions may be propounded: but
be sure he has a recommendation from the Church, or at least some
Church Members, or other, as can upon their own knowledge testify for him so;
2 Cor. 8.18. The brother whose praise is through all the Churches, and so Romans
16.1. Col. 4.13. Ephesians. 6.21. The Disciples were very cautious of Paul, and would
not admit him, Act. 19.27. till Barnabas did bear a testimony to him,
which is very large, and so exiled the jealousies and fears that they before
had of him. Thus the Church is to seek such satisfaction as suits with the rule
of Christ, of all that are admitted; Church must take full satisfaction.
and must require (therefore) some report of the work of God in them, and of
the frame of their Spirits t^wards him, as has been said before; unless they
be members of other Churches, recommended by a full, and satisfactory
testimony from a true Church of Christ. But before I conclude this Chapter,
there be one or two grand Objections to answer.

Object. First, But you take in members such as you judge godly, without
baptizing them, which the Apostles never did in primitive times, but first
baptized, then admitted.

Answ. First, Those that were baptized, as Act. 2.41. and 8.12. etc. before
admitted, were such as never were before baptized; No baptising again.
but those members which we admit, have been baptized already, which is but
once to be administered, and never to be repeated; because of the stability of
the Covenant of grace, and his gifts and calling are without repentance, and
there is but one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. and by this, configuramur morti
Christi, now Christ dyed but once, and this is our initiation too. Now I say,
such have been baptized already, and they must not be baptized again. And for
this, Eusebius. Perkins. August.
see Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 8. Perkin. 1. Vol. p. 75. cap. 34. August.
lib. 3. cap. 2. contra Petil.

Secondly, Object.
But in Act. 19.4, 5. we hear of some Disciples baptized again. Expos.


Answ. First, Because they were before washed indeed, but baptized, but only
to John's washing, Verse. 3. that is, first in John's name, which was not Christ's
institution, and therefore none of his; Hence it is in Verse. 5. they were
baptized now in the name of Jesus Christ; but those members we admit, have
been baptized in the name of Jesus Christ; and then,

Secondly, The Holy Ghost had not yet fallen on them in We have not so much as
heard whether there be any Holy Ghost; The baptism of Christ that he looks
on, is with the holy Ghost.
much less enjoyed it, and therefore they were baptized now in Christ's name
for to receive the Spirit. Verse. 5, 6. or the inward baptism, with the
outward; but now we admit no members, but such as we verily believe, and judge
to have been baptized into Christ, and so indeed dead and buried with him in
baptism, and such as have the inward baptism of fire, and the Holy Ghost,
which is the substance and thing signified.

Thirdly, This baptism, or washing of John, was to fore-run Christ. Verse. 4.
That they should believe on him which should come after him. But the baptism
that Christ has instituted is, to believe Christ is already come, Baptism of
John, and Christ, differs.
dead, and buried, rose, and ascended, and therefore of another nature: for
John, who baptized Christ, was baptized by Christ, and with Christ's baptism;
the fore-running administration was (as John's) passed away, in the Apostles
days, which when the Disciples heard and understood, they were baptized with
Christ's Ordinance. Verse. 5.

Object. 3. But we do not account that baptism, which you were baptized with
any thing, and therefore we intend not a baptising again (for that we abhor,
say some godly people) but we believe that baptism (you so call) to be none,
and therefore would have you baptized, before admitted*

Answ. Baptism is Baptism (though corruptly administered; Our baptism before,
was true baptism, true ord^nance, if not true order.
and should we grant you a grain too much, yet too little to make you weight,
that we when Infants were undue subjects, yet) the want of due order makes not
the Ordinance no Ordinance, no more then the preaching the Word to such as do
not hear, or understand it, makes the Word to be no Word. If they had the
essentials of baptism they had enough, and need not, nay must not ( de nov^)
take it up again. The substance will stand without the circumstance or
ceremony. For matter and form.
Now who can deny but the godly have had the essentials of Baptism, viz.
matter and form (materia vel est remota, vel proxima) the matter is the water
(generally) but the washing (especially.) The form (without speaking de modo)
is the baptising them in, or into the name of the Father, of the Son, and of of
the Holy Ghost. Now the godly have had this matter and this form in their
baptism; therefore were baptized. But still you say, you were not fit
subjects; what then? is therefore the Ordinance no Ordinance? Sim.
Suppose my glove were put upon a child's hand, would it therefore follow that
it is no glove, because it is not the child's glove, and fits not the child's
hand; nay surely, so long as there is the matter and the form of the glove it
is a glove; but

Object. Fourthly, You were not dipped in the water, which is the right
baptizing.

Answ. First, It is true, the word ((...)) does signify to dip; we say with
Beza out of Matthew. 3.13. to dip, Dipped how? Not dived nor drowned under water.
not to dive over head and ears; but to dip, as in Number. 19.18. Ruth 2.14. 1 Samuel 14.27. Deuteronomy. 33.24. non per modum immersionis sed effusionis; that is not
to drown, throw down, dive all over, keep under water, but only to dip; And

Secondly, The word signifies to wash also, and so is used in Scripture, Luke
11.38. the very word there wash is (...) baptize or dip; Now

Thirdly, Sprinkled and washed same with dipped.
Washing is the maine thing meant by the institution of this Ordinance of
baptism of water, ad corporis ^blutionem non modo per immersionem verum etiam
per aspersionem vel effusionem aquae. Thus Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near to God
with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled (i.
e. with the inward thing signified viz. the blood of Saints) and our bodies
washed (i. e. with the outward thing signifying) with pure water, there you
have it expressly in the terms of sprinkling and washing; as also in Ezekiel.
36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you. So the Apostle points at this, 1
Pet. 3.21. and as Mr. Hooker observes in 2 Chap. 3. Part of Church Discipline,
God is said to save us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, which is said to be powered out upon us, Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5, 6.
following the resemblance of water powered out in the washing of baptism which
brings me to the fourth thing.

Fourthly, Consider, how we are baptized by the Holy Ghost; so are we to be (
ad proportionem and similitudinem) by the water, Act. 1.5. but we are not dived
or drowned (as yet) into the Holy Ghost; The Holy Ghost is powered on us, and
falls on us as yet, not we into it.
but only the Spirit is powered upon us (as yet) guttatim as it were) Act.
2.33. and 11.15 it falls on us, we fall not into it, although it is (...). Now
we are baptized by the Spirit, when that is applied to us first, and
administered upon us. So that baptism may be by sprinkling, or pouring water
on; and diving or plunging over head and ears in baptism is not necessary; and
being a form, one is of as much force and as significant as the other, and all
is left to liberty. For the casting water on the body resembles the nature of
burial (as sense will suggest in casting the mold and dust upon the dead) as
well the diving of the body into the water resembles the casting of the body
into the dust, That which is most significant is best.
and so the pouring on of water, the pouring on of the Spirit, or the
sprinkling of it, the sprinkling of Christ's blood to wash, etc. so that this is
left to liberty to do that which is most orderly, useful, and significant,
whether to sprinkle, power on, dip or dive; and indeed (I dare not deny my
judgment to reach thus far for dipping above the other forms of sprinkling or
pouring, that were it as orderly in our Church, and used, and no offense to
weak souls; I should sooner be induced to dip one that was never before
baptized, then to sprinkle one; for to me it would be more significant, and
full, and pregnant with former practices; but all is one, and signifies the
same thing, and is of the same use; what need we jangle about Colors?

baptized by a corrupt, and unlawful administrator before?

Ans.
Answ. Suppose that should be granted also (which we may choose whether we will
or no; Sim.
for I am persuaded, many godly were baptized by such as were orderly sent
forth) but I say grant this, yet his corrupt hand, or foul fingers, does not
null the Ordinance, and make it no baptism, a jewel, though in a foul sink,
(an unfit place for it) yet is as much a jewel (in its self) as if it were in
a silver Cabinet; Baptismus datus a meliori, non est melior, quia efficaciam ex
merito and spiritu Christi, non alterius.

Secondly, The latter baptism dispensed disorderly, and without an
administrator lawfully called and sent out.
Let such dear Friends whom I highly prize and have in my heart (and yet (as
yet) cannot be of that judgment with them, till a positive warrant for it in
the word) I say, let them but consider, this latter baptism of theirs will be
found guilty on the same grounds, they charge ours, viz. unlawfully
administered, or by an unlawful administrator, or one not lawfully called to
it. Some do it as if they had extraordinary warrant for it (whilst
extraordinary officers had their Call and Commission immediately from heaven,
which they cannot prove; but we can prove they are ceased.) Others do it upon
their own private motion, and mere supposition that any gifted brother, or
ordinary disciple, that by his gifts and instruction has won any to this
opinion, he may baptize him, and so make him sure; but if so, why did Christ
ordain officers, and set them in his Church for this purpose, and no man, says
the Apostle, takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God.

Indeed, Anabaptists in Dublin, not like the Christians.
I did much wonder at the boldness of one in Dublin to do this, and yet
known to be a man of a most dissolute carriage and conversation, for cursing,
and swearing, and blaspheming, (saying, A pox upon all Ordinances, and Forms,
and he would down with them, and the Devil take prayers) in such desperate
ways as would make an honest man's heart ache; and a man of a most malicious
spirit, studying to do mischief, as indeed most of that judgment there are,
to all, that are not over head and ears in with them in their opinion: thereby
they bring a very great scandal upon the Gospel, Far differing from them in
London.
and hereby they make many enemies to the way they are in, as if it could not
be of God; but these things are their shame, the Lord humble them for it, for
in these things they exceed all others of that practice that ever I met with;
whilst many of that judgment here in London, and other places, may be set for
eminent examples (both to them at Dublin, and us here) of sweetness, patience,
humility, obedience, self-denial, and love, even to all Saints; and indeed such
in whom my soul much rejoices, and has been much refreshed; but I do not
find what lawful call they have, that do administer this Ordinance of
Baptism (anew) to any. And it is not the purse of a True-man in the hands of a
Thief, that makes the Thief a True-man. But

The inward Baptism (the efficacy of the outward) should satisfy us.
In the last place, to bring up the Rear, and so all judgments into one (that
is in the Spirit.) Sure none can deny but those truly spirituallized in Christ
Jesus, have the efficacy of baptism, though they were baptized in their
infancy, which is a Spiritu sancto; the inward work with the outward washing,
the inward grace and baptism of the Spirit within, (...) Romans 3.6. an insition
or incorporation into Christ himself. Now what can we desire but this in any
member, that is to be admitted; so that grant there were many failings in the
outward administration, as long as we see so good success, and such a blessing
with it (though much might be omitted in the outward order of it, which might
make us judge (therefore) the Ordinance the less useful, and more uneffectual)
but I say, as long as we find the fruit and effect of baptism to follow this
Ordinance in a lively manner upon their souls, we are satisfied. This covers
all former failings, and the outward is swallowed up in the inward, which is
that, that we account qualifies them, and us* and fits them and all, for
orderly admission; and not the outward dipping, which many make, and call*
their fundamental Ordinance, without which (they say) they must have no
communion with us, though we be ever so holy or godly. Dipping is not the
fundamental ordinance of Church Fellowship, though initiating.
Oh, I fear! such set up the Form too much, and make as mere an Idol of that,
as others do (or did) of Infant Baptism by attributing to that very empty
sign (nothing in its self, Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature in Christ, Gal. 5.) what is only to be attributed to Christ's
baptism of the Spirit, and to his power (and pouring out) from on high.

And lest I should be thought to censure too severely, I shall insert a Letter
which was sent to some members of the Church at Dublin (with whom I walked
there;) to some few members that those of Waterford held private correspondence
with, on purpose to break us, which they both threatened (by the Captain that
brought it) and endeavored by instruments, which they had a^ work on purpose
in private places with those members to whom they writ this Letter, which was
indeed of dangerous consequence, and did much mischief in the body, and made a
sore rent at first from us by some, whose judgment were blinded, though
(blessed be our God that keeps us night and day) the little Foxes were catched,
and could not root us up, and all the effect was to draw that party from us (a
great mercy to us) who were so rigid in judgment against us, who did
lamentably rail upon us, and cruelly afflict and wrong us, that would not run
rashly with them into that way: But as Paul said of Jannes and Jambres, their
madness is made to appear to all.

A Letter from Waterford.
The Church of Christ in Waterford, walking in the faith and order of the
Gospel, do wish all grace and peace to the Saints in Dublin. Beloved Friends,
WE hearing that there were many of you that do not only believe, but have
professedly put on the Lord Jesus Christ by * Baptism, did think it our duty
in the bowels of love to enquire of your estate; and we hear that you do not
walk up orderly together, but are joined in fellowship with such as do
fundamentally differ in judgment and practice; to wit, such as agree not with
you about the true state of a visible Church, nor the fundamental Ordinances
thereof. Now the Prophet says, Can two walk together except they are agreed?
but that we may manifest to you, beloved, that we have a ground and occasion
of grief, and offense at your so walking, as we shall make appear from clear
sight of Scripture.

Consider the Commission in that of Mat. 28.19.20.* where Christ lays down an
order that is binding, which is this, That they should teach all Nations
baptising them, teaching them to observe whatsoever he had commanded them, (ye
see here is an orderly way commended to teach to the Nations;) secondly, to
baptize such as are taught; and thirdly, to teach such as are baptized, to
observe whatsoever Christ had commanded; that is, as we understand, all the
Laws of Gods house, the baptized person is to submit unto, and by the Ministers
taught the observation of, and this Order is binding.

And secondly, It appears the Apostles did so understand the Commission,
because they taught and practiced this Order, and this only, to wit, first
preached to conversion, then baptized.

Thirdly, put them in the practical observation of what Christ had commanded
in, and to his Church.

Again, else the Ordinance of the Supper would be profaned, if that should
be received before that fundamental Ordinance, by which we put on Christ, and
are ingrafted into Christ, and planted into his death. Now we say, this is a
profanation of Gods Ordinances, the Jews might as well h^ve admitted such
uncircumcised persons to eat of the Passover; but the very end of
Church Fellowship is the observation of all Christ's commands, as the Commission
holds forth; but this your practice, crosses in that you agree to walk with
such as have not, nor practice the Ordinance of dipping Believers, and by your
communion with them in Church-administrations, you are made guilty of their sin
of disobedience, you willingly having communion with them in
Church-admininistrations; for Beloved, you may upon the same principal admit,
into fellowship one that will not receive the Lords Supper, but pleads want of
satisfaction of that to be his duty; another that will not own the Ordinance
of preaching, but confer only (as some such we know) and others that will
not give alms, or contribute to the necessity of the Saints; and thus in a
word (upon the same ground) that you admit one that walks in disobedience to
the Ordinance of baptism, whether through ignorance or error, you may admit
all manner of disobedience into your Society upon the same ground, which is a
total destroying, the end of Church Fellowship, which is to bring up every
member to a visible subjection to all the Laws of Christ their King, or else
cast them out of that Society as old leaven.

Besides, as we must not allow in our selves any known sin unrepented of; so
must we not allow it in any in the fellowship; but when we shall begin and
constitute a Church Fellowship to walk in sin, and disobedience, this is a
horrible impiety.

Besides in the fifth place, there cannot be a true visible Church union
without baptism, as appears Ephesians. 4. * and beginning where the Apostle pressing
union brings all these things essentials that must be agreed in, to make a
people one, and that he takes for granted the Ephesians did agree in the same,
which as he says, There is one hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
God, and Father of all. Now observe a true Church must of necessity agree in
owning one and the same Lord; secondly, one and the same Spirit, one and the
same Baptism, one and the same Faith, without which they cannot walk together
in the Lord. Again, many of these unbaptised persons do justify that Idol of
childrens baptism, and consequently the Church and Ministry from whence they
had it: And you having communion with them, judge what you do, bring your
selves into communion with, by entertaining persons into communion with you
that are unbaptised.

Thus beseeching you to beware of by-pathes, that our Lord and his Ministers
have left no footsteps for; but rather beloved, meet together, and lead one
example of sweet communion distinct, using all means to convent such as have
any fear of God, that they may come into you, through the door, and not at the
window, as Christ says in another case.

And thus leaving you to God, and the word of his grace, that is able to build
you up, we remain in the name, and in the behalf of the Church,

Yours in the Lord, Tho. Patient. Will. Burgis. Ed. Hutchinson. Ed. Marshal.
Rich. Sutton. James Standish. Swads. Tho. Brenton. Peter Row. Will. Leigh. Geo.
Cawdron. Rich. Ladbrooke. Edw. Roberts.

Dated at Waterford, Janu. 14. 1651.


This Letter was brought by Capt. Vernon, and A.G.A. to some seven or eight of
their judgment, whom they withdrew from the Church into private meetings on
the Lords days; especially, where they with them that were sent from Mr.
Patience, clandestinely consulted how to carry on their design against us.
These, and none else, are their Saints.

Believers *, and such baptized ones, i. e. Anabaptists, they put together, as
if none were believers but Anabaptists. Some of that judgment that were in
fellowship with us, they write unto as to Believers, and exclude others that
differed from them in that point of Rebaptisme. Besides, they account them
disorderly walkers, that have so much as Christian communion with us, unless
we would be dipped. They say without this, we fundamentally differ from the
true state of a visible Church: Let discerning men judge then the foundation,
and dangerous situation of such Formalists Fellowships I who (by their own
confession) have laid their foundation in the Water, and on the Sand, not on
Christ the Rock of ages, that is Christ himself laid in the Spirit, etc. Vide
cap. 14. lib. 1. In this sense they ought to read that Scripture which they
mention with too much wrong to it, as they use to do ( qui Scripturis
auferunt, non afferunt) it is Amos 3.3. Can two walk together, unless they be
agreed? The Prophet means not, Can two walk together, unless washed together,
or unless in one Form, judgment, opinion or practice: for as Arias Montanus
observes, this was their sin for which he threatens them in v. 2, 4* 5. viz.
for their great agreement in false Forms, to adore Images, and make them
Idols; herein they were very harmonious and unanimous, to their cost and
calamity, says Theodoret. But the Prophet means, they must be one in the
Spirit, Ephesians. 4, 3, 4. Even as Two Travellors who have one and the same end of
their journey (vid. Diodate) mind one and the same home, heaven, happiness;
therefore the word is pariter; Can they walk alike, without they be of one
spirit; thus says honest Calvin too, Est igitur arcana ita consensio Spiritus
sancti: and to apply this to the form or judgment, as that there must be an
agreement in dipping, else none in believing; or that there must be agreement
in the outward, else none in the inward, is to make Faith a form, Religion a
fancy, and to take a mere outside appearance and opinion, for the inward power
and life of godliness; which is an agreement in Idolatry, but not in the true
worship of God, Spirit, and Truth, so that these Gentlemen mistake the Prophet,
and compel a construction, as it is coined in their own brains. * The
Commission is next; let us see what they would force from those words in Matthew.
28.19, 20. All power is given me, etc. Go therefore teach all Nations, and
baptize them, etc. This has been their hold for many years, out of which they
have been hunted by hundreds of orthodox able Writers which save me a labor;
but only this I say,

1 The Praeface, viz. v. 18. ( All power is given me ((...)) that is jus
agend^) tells us, that this Commission is to be executed by Christ's power, i.
e. by the Spirit, vide Pareus in loc. so that some affirm, this was the
baptism of the Spirit which Christ speaks of her 1 Cor. 12.13. which the
A^ostles (as Apostles) had commission in to baptize, (...) etc. into the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which Water-baptisme could not do. Orig.
An. 200. in Romans but how ever it was to be executed by Christ's Spirit.

2 The command is, Teach them, (...) make them my scholars; now little ones,
as well as great ones; Infants, as well as grown ones may be his scholars in
his school to learn: for a little child that knows not a letter in the book
is a scholar as well as others that do; so not only the lowest boughs, but
the uppermost and least twigs partake of the nature of the root. But,

What do they infer? 1 That none must be admitted, but such as are baptized; we
say so too, but we deny they must be rebaptized. And whereas they instance in
the Apostles practice, they would do well to clear up the difference of old,
betwixt adulti and catechumeni, for qui been distinguit been docet, otherwise
they will but lead about the blind, and leave them in the ditch, in darkness.

2 They say this is that fundamental Ordinance by which we put on Christ.

Ans. To call the watery part of baptism, viz. in abstracto, I say the element,
the fundamental Ordinance; by which we put on Christ, and are ingrafted into
Christ, and planted into his death, etc. is to make no less, (if not more)
then an Idol of it; and so it is to attribute to Dipping what is only
attributed to Christ himself: for what is Idolatry, but exhibere cultum Dei
and honorem Christi creaturae, Th. Aq. 22. q. 94.10. to give the worship and
service of God, the glory and honor of Christ to a contemptible poor
creature? Is not this to say, Lo here is Christ! but believe them not. O sad!
sad sin of this age! that Professors should fall down so to this Image, which
they imagine must do all for them, without which no salvation. Were ever the
Pontificians or Prelates* more uncharitably rigid for it, to Idolize it on
Infants, then they are to Idolize it on grown ones; that then presently they
are accounted Saints, Believers, Christians, ingrafted into Christ etc. as if
Dipping did all; Alas a day! what could the Pool of Bethesda do? till the
Spirit moved the waters, there was no healing! O this soule-dangerous and
dreadful glorifying the form! Idolatry is gravissimum peccatorum, say the
Schoolmen, and makes the shortest cut to confusion! The Lord help poor Ireland!
still the land of Idols and Ire.

3 They say the Jews might as well have admitted uncircumcised ones, as they
u^, to have communion with them! O charity! where art thou? that thou should
live! longest, and strongest of all? O unchristian! and uncomfortable tenet! For

1 Their non-communion with such was by the command of God; but yours is not
with us.

2 Jewish Church was national, ours not.

3 Jewish worship was in the form, but ours in Spirit and Truth.

4 Jewish eating the Passover was typical.

5 Circumcised ones after the flesh was enough with Jews, but it is not with
us.

6 We have been baptized (as you put it in the room of circumcision) and more
answerably unto it then you.

7 The case being altered as it is now; we find that Jews and Gentiles,
circumcised and uncircumcised, had sweet communion together, Act. 15.5. Gal.
2.3.7* 12. 1 Cor. 12.13. in several Churches; so that the outward form was
left to liberty, Romans 14.2.5. as a thing of nothing, Gal. 6.15. as it is n^w to
be.

8 Their end and their beginning, they make one, viz. Dipping, i. e. their all
in all; and indeed very indiscreetly and disorderly they lay that down for the
end, which is the Rule by which they are brought into fellowship; so that it is
like enough Logic is the language of the Beast to them, that know not how to
define Church fellowship.

Lastly, Because I want room to write more: They conclude, that because of
their great disobedience in joining with us, they must make amends by casting
all of us that would not be dipped out of Church Fellowship for old leaven; and
accordingly, the members of them sent from Mr. Patient, with those of them that
walked with us, consulted often together, conspired and plotted, and laid
snares in designs to break us in pieces; but when that would not be, they
bruited abroad scurrilous and scandalous reports of many of us, to represent us
wicked and unworthy to the world and others; after that they thought to have
excommunicated us for old leaven, but the Lord would not suffer it; so that
their plots and designs brought forth nothing but wind, which became a blast to
themselves at last. But whereas they say they may as well admit all manner of
wicked men, as one that will not be dipped; do but observe their spirit in
deifying Dipping, and in vilifying the Spirit, that without this (though we be
under Spirit-baptisme) we must not have so much mercy shown to us, as to
partake of Church Priviledges, is this doctrine of Christ? or the Devil? but I
pray mark their ground, for you may (say they) as well admit one that will not
partake of the Lords Supper, etc.

Ans. Suppose one should be admitted that were unsatisfied therein, were that a
sin? But

Secondly, we deny this their haire-brained assertion, for that there is
positive command for the Lords Supper, Preaching, Alms, etc. and so there is
not for Dipping, but all the Scripture is against Re-baptising, as being but
the Idol of the Brain, and a brat that must be dashed a pieces, Psalm. 137.9.

* The next thing to this Commission, with their several forced, and unworthy
Inferences; In the fifth place, they would feign insinuate a necessity of
Dipping out of Ephesians. 4.4, 5. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace; he says not, the union of the Form, but of the Spirit,
which is preserved not by outward forms, but by inward principles. Then
follows, Verse 4.5. One Faith, one Bap^isme; etc. all these must be to make up
the Unity of the Spirit; and it is true that they all must own one and the
same Baptism; but what is that, I pray? not dipping; but Christ's Baptism,
Matthew. 3.11. We are all, mark, all (Jews and Gentiles) before and since the
Law; before, and since Christ; all Saints of all ages; members of one Body;
viz. the Church of Christ mystical; and all this by one Baptism, 1 Cor. 12,
13. For by one Spirit we are All baptized into one Body. Now this cannot be (as
by this Letter they would feign have us believe) by water; for so all Saints,
in all Ages were not so baptized into one Body, or Church; for before the Law
this was not the fundamental point, which these men say we must hold; so that
they peel but the bark of the tree, and the Goars may do so; but we feed upon
the sap and substance. This is a principle of spiritual union, viz. the
baptism of the Spirit, which all Saints of all judgments must, do, and have
enjoyed; for the life remains, though the Letter alters, as the soul does,
though the body be altered; variante materia, yet forma manet eadem. But let
these uncharitable Formalists, and unkind unchristian friends know, that by
this Letter, and their suitable practices, seeming to answer most cruel and
unchristian principles, that they have frighted many of their wel-wishers from
them: for Fishes will not be catched in a bloody net, though some Commanders or
great ones amongst them, may drive many times some silly little ones in: And
indeed I fear that Religion, which lies so much in the Form, or outside, will
do but little service in the day of the Lord, to shelter us from heat and
storm; yea I fear, that the life and kernel of it is already perished, when
ear-wigs and vermin have eaten so into it, and can find a hole (through the
outside of it) to go in, and out as they list. You know what I mean, and be
PATIENT.

In this Letter you find ( Reader) how Dipping, called their fundamental
Ordinance, without which they were to have no communion with us, but either to
draw us thereto, or else to cast us out for old leaven, and be distinct from us.

Now it appears not to me to be a fundamental Ordinance, on which (as on a
foundation) should lie the Church; no, though it be taken in their own sense,
for the true and right administration; but rather it is an initiating
Ordinance, or entry, through which we enter into the Church; so that there is a
great difference between a foundation, and an entry, or door. And for their
calling us persons unbaptised, What is a fundamental Ordinance? Robinson
Justif. page 230. says it is an error which some hold, that Baptism
constitutes the visible Church.
and threatening them that have any communion with us, as guilty of the sin of
disobedience: We have proved that we have passed through the water, and the
fire, and the Lord has been with us, and his Spirit rests upon us. We have
been under the element of water, and the baptism of the Spirit; and if these
satisfy not, we are to seek in a new way, which they make their Foundation
(but it is of water, and will not hold long) whilst Christ is our Foundation,
who is a Rock and stands sure.

Expos.
As for the particulars in that Letter, they are easily answered, Baptism of
the Spirit by which we enter into Christ's body.
and have been often, over and over. The Baptism therein mentioned out of Ephesians.
4. which the Apostle indeed makes an argument of union, is the one baptism of
the Spirit, not the sign (so often altered) but the substance, by which all
believers in all ages, under all forms and dispensations are, (and ever were)
all baptized into one body, both before Christ, and since, 1 Cor. 12.13. this
is Christ's baptism, Mat. 3.11. Now the unity of the Spirit consists not in
uniformity, In baptismat^ flaminis non fluminis.
in that outward form and element: (for men may, and do differ for all that:)
but in the baptism of the Spirit, which the Apostle plainly speaks of; it is
an unanimity, not an uniformity, as we shall find out hereafter; wherefore let
all wise, sober, spiritual discerning Christians, yea even of that judgment
(which are without exception many of them) but tell me.

First, 1 They attribute too much to the Element.
Do not these lay too much upon the Letter to call it a Fundamental Ordinance,
without which they are to have no communion with us, but to cast us out for old
leaven; and which in the very element they lay down to be a putting on of
Christ, an ingrafting into Christ, a planting into his death, etc. Now let any
judge if this be not an Idolizing of a Form (which they cry down so much in
others) is not this a worshipping of the Element? to attribute so much to it,
as is true in no baptism, but of the Spirit? Surely this must be grownd to
powder. But

Secondly, Ought we to be so severely sentenced, 2 These are too censorious*
as to be cast out for Dung, old Leaven, and uncircumcised ones, because we
could not (nor can we) find a word to warrant our consciences in the practice
of this, which is their opinion? Oh! uniformity enforced (says one) is the
very break-neck of peace, and love! we durst not have dealt so with them, it is
point blank against our principles and practices.

Thirdly, Ought any sober sound Christians to have sent any such Letters to
make a breach in a Church, and by secret and under-working instruments to do
the more mischief, without any discourse, Unchristian and uncharitable to
Christ in seeking to break his Church.
or knowledge of us (as from our selves) that were not of that opinion? and
only for one Form? wherein neither the unity of the Spirit, nor our communion
with Christ Jesus can consist; this I am sure was none of Christ's doctrine, nor
device to sow such seeds of Divisions.

But I shall leave them to the Lord* who loves not confusion, nor (I am sure)
can allow of such unchristian practices, like carnal men to watch for our
mischief, and to lie in wait for our b^ltings, and to render us odious to all,
as persons fit for excommunication, and only because we could not turn
again to that low and beggarly element (I mean so to us now, that are in, and
under the unction from on high.) For Act. 11 15. when they were under the Holy
Ghost which had fallen upon them, then came to mind in Verse 16. John baptized
with water indeed; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, that is far
beyond the other of water. And should we be so foolish ((...)) or mad? Gal.
3.3. having begun, and thus far gone on in the Spirit, to think, or seek to be
perfect by the flesh! no! God forbid! therefore our sufferings are sweet! even
as drops of Christ blood! and draughts out of Christ's cup for our consciences
sake! The element to us is (as it were) passed away.
Well, I could wish them to be more moderate, lest happily they be found fighters
against God, Act. 5.39. that have been too rough to the poor harmless Saints
at Dublin on this account: And let them do all in peace and by love, as
becomes Christians, and not by plottings, power, force, or censures, as the
carnal Churches of Antichrist to this day; and let them not busy themselves
too much about empty things, so as to press and promote traditions, for
truths, the letter for the Spirit, the creature in the room of Christ, and
husks and shadows that are past away (as to us) or to pass away, in the room
of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. That although we differ in
judgment, yet we may be all of one Body, Christians of all judgments should
be one in spirit.
one Spirit, one hope of our calling; having one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father of all, above all, through all, and in us all; it is this
that keeps the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. This leads me to the
next Chapter.

CHAP. V. (...) Regneh. In admitting, none that are godly, are to be put by,
though of different opinions; but all Believers are to be received, yea, of all
judgments.
WE have heard how the Word warrants all that are godly, that are fully
satisfied of the way; and excludes all the wicked and scandalous in toto and
tanto, that are not called of God, but none else. All Saints of all judgments
to be admitted.
The weakest Believer that belongs to Christ, is to be received, Romans 14.1. And
our present assertion is this, That none who appear truly godly, are to be put
by; (merely for their opinion and judgment;) we are not in admitting of
members so much to mind their judgments and apprehensions, as their lives and
conversations, viz. That they be holy and gracious; and that they be sound in
the faith; that is, for fundamentals and essentials; such as are sanctified in
Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. Romans 1.7. Phil. 1.1* 7. Col. 3.12. and 1 These. 5.27.
(...), the word does not say, such sanctified ones that are o^ your judgment
and form. For we shall prove by Scriptures and Reasons, That those (godly)
though under different forms, and of different opinions, are to be received,
and taken in; and that it is our sin to shut them ou^. This appears by
Scriptures, Precepts, and Precedents.

First, this is commanded and commended to us, That every man walk as he is
fully persuaded in his mind, 1. Proved by rules of Christ.
Romans 14.5. Now mark the meaning of that Text, (for indeed the whole Chapter
treats on this subject,) there arose some differences about opinions, but the
Apostle presses and preaches this, Expos.
That diversity of opinions, for things indifferent or doubtful, Rom 14.
expounded.
ought not to make diversity in affections, or a breach in charity or unity
among Brethren, when they do it out of conscience.

Now that I may unlock the meaning of the words, I must orderly proceed in the
Chapter, which is very pregnant in proofs for this purpose, (and wherein you
will have the point stated, proved, and ratified by abundance of Reasons. To
the first Verse, Verse. 1.
Him that is weak in the faith, receive, ((...)) assume to you, admit of, and
make one with you, affectu charitatis, All believers admitted.
and put him into your bosoms, etc.) In the time of the Jews dispersed, most of
the Churches consisted of Jews and Gentiles together; and so did this Church of
Rome. Now the Jews would not be brought off from the observation of Ceremonies,
and Levitical Laws, wherein they had been brought up,
even from their cradles; looking upon them as ordinances of God; and
therefore, although they entertained the Gospel, yet out of conscience, they
held difference of days, and of meats; as necessary to be observed. Now the
Gentiles were not for such Jewish observations, being persuaded of our
Christian Liberty, purchased by the blood of Christ, from such ceremonies and
trifles; and therefore they rejected them: And thence there arose hot contests
and dissentions in the Church, almost irreconcilable; and as the Gentile
thought the Jew profuse and superstitious; so the Jew thought the Gentile
profane and sacrilegious. Now in comes Paul to appease these differences, and
to compose these commotions; he brings in his bucket (as Par says) to quench
the flame, Par.
and undertakes as an umpire, to determine these differences, Though out of
conscience, they differ in judgment, opinions, and practices, about things
indifferent.
which arose about things indifferent: Wherefore he lays down rules in these
his Hieraticks.

It is a general precept, and an undeniable duty, to receive such as are weak
in the faith, ((...)) although so weak (as one that is sick) and scarce able to
stand on his legs; yea, such babes in Christ as cannot brook strong meats, that
have sick and queasie stomachs, such receive with open arms; take them in unto
you, and join them with you, and entertain them as friends, and dear brethren;
but not to doubtful disputations ((...), etc.) not into ambiguity, to quarrel
or contend with him, and his opinions, though differing from yours, thereby to
make him stagger, Romans 4.20. Nor yet to judge him for his opinions, as
Augustine says; nor to fill his head with intricate things, or curiosities,
Romans 14.1, 2. Gal. 6.1. 1 These. 5.14. But as in Verse. 2. One believes he may
eat all things, and another, who is weak, Verse. 2, 3.
eats (only) herbs: Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; nor
him which eats not, judge him which eats.

Now, though there was this great difference of opinion, here is a direction to
their duty, one to another; that is, Expos.
to preserve peace and love; and that this make no difference or distance, in
affection or reception: Let not the strong, despise the weak ((...).) i. e. To
look on him as nothing, nullius praetii; or set him at naught, Ab (...) and
(...).
as not fit for your company: For the word is so, as to villifie, or nullify a
man. Now take heed here! for difference of opinions and practices in things
indifferent, ought to be no demur or hinderance to the admission, or reception
of any; neither ought there to be therefore the least battery, or breach to
love and charity: But now to the question.

Quest. What are things indifferent which we may differ upon, and yet be all of
one Body and Church? Qaest.


Answ. Such things as are of a middle size and nature, and not absolute (Quod,
Answ.
id quod est per essentiam suam relatum posterius est absoluto, Things
^nd^fferent* what?
) for absolutum est prius relativo secundum esse, and posterius relativo
secundum dici;) nor yet necessary, these are called indifferent.

First, We say a thing is indifferent, when it is not absolute; but yet in some
degree good, but not so good, but it may be mended; and yet not so bad, but it
might be worse: Such a thing, we say, is indifferent good. So a man (though he
be not absolutely in health) nor yet very ill, but might be better, and might
be worse;) such a one, we say, is pretty, or indifferent well: But I speak not
in this species.

2. Things indifferent.
Secondly, Some things may be done, which are not necessary; such things are
necessary which are commanded: But somethings are commanded to be done, and
somethings are forbidden to be done. Now such things are indifferent, which are
neither commanded nor forbidden; and those things are doubtful, Things doubtful.
which are not expressed at all in the Word, but left darkly, or which meet
with seeming contradictions therein: Now for the first sort of doubtful things,
and things indifferent, they are called by the Ancient, things in our power,
and left to liberty, (...), as lying either obscure and uncommanded, or in the
midst, between commanded and forbidden. In Paul's time when he writ this
Epistle, these trifling observations of days and meats, were mentioned as left
indifferent, to be used or not used; as they conceived it tended most to the
honor and praise of God, (which was the very end of their enchurching*) we
find Paul circumcised, made vows, purified himself, and yet writes against
them, as Gal. 4.10. Why so? why before Christ's death, Indifferent, not
indifferent.
these Ceremonies were not then indifferent, but necessary, as commanded of
God; but after Christ's death (till the Gospel entered,) for a while after they
were used (though but for a little time) as indifferent, Quia Christi adventu
lex ceremonialis obligare desiit. Now such Ceremonies remained amongst the
Jews, Paraeus.
as yet (says Paraeus upon the place) in use; because Christian liberty was
not openly up, and risen in their room: Now with Christ's death and resurrection
they lost their life, When Ceremonies, and such like indifferent things died,
and gave up the ghost, and were buried.
and gave up the ghost, Col. 2.14, 15. Quasi animam exhalarunt, and breathed
out their last; but as yet, they lay a while unburied and above ground, which
ought to have a religious and solemn sepulcher, and which they had soon after
in that solemn Church Assembly, Acts 15. Where, all such legal ritual
observations were seriously and solemnly laid in their grave; as being now (but
dead Corpse, and ready to stink and corrupt) and too heavy to be longer borne
above ground; but before this their burial, they were used as indifferent. This
Augustine declares in his 19. Ep. ad Hieron. as Paraeus observes, Augustine.
Sim.
by an elegant similitude. A man's friend dies, he does not so soon as breath is
out of his body, whilst his body is yet warm, take him by the heels and drag
him to the grave; but he keeps him a while, (whilst he is yet sweet) and wraps
him up with fair clothes, and so with honor, in due time, accompanies him to
his grave; and thereby he avoides scandal, suspicion, and contention, which
else might arise; by giving sufficient content to all, even to his best friends
and mourners for him. So it is here, these Ceremonies were alive till Christ;
they died with Christ: Now the Apostles did not presently drag them to the
dunghill, and cast them out ( ut faetida cadavera) whilst they were yet warm;
no! but to avoid all scandal and doubt of their death; they show (in the Acts)
that they were dead, and to be buried, which was done in a decent, honorable
manner, as Acts 15.10, 24. whilst they themselves accompanied them to the very
grave. Now that is the reason, (that Paul in this Chapter) for so long a time
did allow liberty to them as things indifferent; but after they were buried,
their indifferency ceased, and now they were absolutely forbidden: Before their
burial (says one) they were mortuae, dead; but now after their burial,
they are mortiferae, deadly and dangerous: And now after this, Dangerous to
meddle wirh them now, after they are buried.
if a man raises them up again, and rakes them out of the grave, and digs them
up again, he endangers a many (by their unwholsom stench,) Et non esset pius
funeris deductor, sed impius sepulturae violator.

Hence you read the reason of Paul's writing to the Church of Galatia, Coloss,
and others, against them now; and after this burial of them, he would not
circumcise Titus, (though he did Timothy before) but preaches their funeral
Sermon, and says, it is dangerous to keep them above ground any longer, Col.
2.20, 21. and Gal. 5.2, 4. tells them then, Christ would profit them nothing;
and it would be to deny the effect of Christ's death. We shall find Paul
opposed Peter, and that openly, Gal. 2.11. to his face, for urging these
Ceremonies, and pressing the Gentiles to Judaize.

But here in this Chapter the Apostle forbids the Gentiles to judge the Jews
for their liberty in these things which might be used, Adi^phora considerantur
vel in ^e.
or not used (as yet) being things indifferent and left free which the Greeks
call Adiaphora, which things are to be considered either as they are in
themselves, and so they are said ( quoad substantiam operis) to have an
indifferency of doing, Vel ratione principii sui.
or omitting (as we said before;) or else as they are in the intention of that
principle by which they are done, or omitted; and in that sense no action is
said to be indifferent (taken with its circumstances) but it is said to be
good or evil (Prout ex mala vel bona intention procedit) for as much as it
flows from a principle intending good or evil hereby. All this ratifies the
point.


But thus I have done with the direction and rules, and have opened the name
and nature of things indifferent, and do now reach the reasons which the
Apostle renders to ratify his and, my assertion, of accepting and receiving
such as differ in judgment from us in things indifferent. And first,

for God has received him, therefore you are to receive him, God has received
such.
and lovingly to take him in, for God has received him ((...)) that is ( ut
suus) as his own, a member of Christ, to grace, an adopted one, into his own
family; Expos.
how then dare thou deny him, or despise him, or not admit of him, or the
like? for thus runs the Argument, whom God has received into his Family, you
ought not to despise or put by, but him that eats (that is,
is of this opinion) and him that eats not (that is, is of that opinion) God
has received, therefore you ought not to put him by (that is, be he of this
opinion, Argument
or of that opinion) but to receive him, and admit of him, as one that belongs
to the Lord. This Reason runs a pari statu utriusque partis coram Deo, from the
common benefit of adoption which them of both opinions do equally partake of,
and as if he should say, Such outward things as these, do neither justify, nor
unjustifie, commend, nor discommend before God; they neither help to, nor
hinder from the Kingdom of God, therefore they should neither help nor hinder
any in the Church of God here below; For such whom the Father receives, the Son
receives; and who are admitted in heaven, should be admitted in the earth; but
all Saints of all opinions are admitted in heaven, and received of God, ergo,
etc. God regards here (says one) no more the manner, time, or such like
circumstances, then he does the manner, time, or such like circumstances of
eating, drinking, marrying, etc. being left to wisdom, and discretion for
order, peace, and unities sake without ties. Now if thou see one enlightened,
and livened by the Spirit of God, thou see enough, says Calvin in loc.
Calvin.
Satis testimonii habes etc. wherefore despise not, contemn not, refuse not,
condemn not, one whom God has received.

The second Reason or Argument is taken ( a jure gentium) right or equity,
which is, Expos.
that every man has the rule and ordering of his own family, and none ought
to be so polypragmatical, as to meddle with other men's servants, Verse 4. They
may see they are the Lords nighest family servants, for all they differ in
opinion.
Who art thou that judge another man's servant? here is an objurgatory
Apostrophe. Who art thou? how dare thou do it? why, for he is the Lords own
servant whom thou thus put by (for all his opinion as before) the word is
not (...) a hired servant, or a day-labourer, but (...) a household servant, one
of the Lords own Family, who always is waiting upon the Lord his Master in
such services as are nearest his person, and in his presence. This makes the
Apostle (then whom none was more full of the bowels of love, pitiful or
tender) yet this makes him question with much indignation and heat, how you
dare to deny them admission, who are the Lords servants, and that of his own
household, and the nighest to him in his Family; Besides the Argument, see the
Amplification in verse 4. which shows that thou art not to judge harshly of
him, for he stands or falls to his own Master; that is, whether he does
well or ill, pleases or displeases, it belongs to the Master (Stare vel e^dere,
est recte vel secus agere) therefore prevent not the Lord judgment, who
himself will take account of his servants, and that strictly, Mat. 18.23. Mat.
25.19.

Reason 3. For God is able to make him stand, Verse. 4. This Argument is taken a
spe profectus from the possibility, God will establish them as well as the
strongest to hold out.
and probability of their establishment in the faith, he shall stand, for God
is able to make him; but if you say it is an unsound conclusion or an absurd
collection to argue a posse ad esse (as the Papists do in Transubstantiation)
we answer, True, if we be not certain of Gods will withal; but his will,
with his power appears here, for God has received him. Now if such a one be
weak, and of a differing opinion from you, the Lord has promised grace to
him, whereby he shall stand, as well as you, and as firm in the true faith,
and as fast in the truth, and by his power be preserved from falling, therefore
receive such, for the Lord will engage, for him, as Hezekiah said, Lord
undertake for me!

Reason 4. In Verse. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his; this argument
is gotten from the qualification of a member, Christian liberty in things
doubtful and indifferent.
and the nature of his qualification, which is the plerophory and full
persuasion spoken of in Chap. 2. of this Book. One man (says the Apostle) is
of this mind, and esteems this, and another man is of that mind, and esteem
that most; this is the case. Now the remedy is, Let every one walk, as he
thinks best (reject neither) but he must be sure it be with a full persuasion
in his own mind, that he be full and clear in his own sense and opinion;
Quisquis suo sensu abundet: Not so to abound in ones own sense, to give way to
an unlimited liberty, but to a Christian-liberty limited by the Laws of
Christ, to be fully persuaded that it is on good grounds, and by good arguments
flowing from the Word and Spirit together, Mark. 12.24.27. Joh. 16.8. 1 Thessalonians.
2.13. and as Romans 14.14. Isa. 8.20. Sim.
A horse in a pasture has liberty to run at random, range, and friske, but
not when his Rider is upon his back,
but then he is checked, and curbed, and kept in; so must our apprehensions and
persuasions, therefore let every one look to his own conscience, and not look
what others hold or do, but that what he holds he well grounded and
warrantable in the word which the Scripture mentions in matters of faith,
though not always in matters of fact; who has this plerophory and clear
persuasion is to be received, whether his opinion be thus or thus in things
indifferent.

Saints of all judgments answer the one and the same end of Church fellowship.
Reason 5. Verse. 6.7. He that regards this, regards it to the Lord, and he
that regards it not, regards it not to the Lord, etc. This argument runs ab
intention generale fidelium, or a bono fine utriusque partis, from the unity
and brevity of the end, which the Saints of all opinions aim at, and which is
one and the same, for all aim at the honor and glory of God. Those of this
opinion, and those of that have the same end, viz. to glorify God, 1 Cor.
10.31. Col. 3.17. to give God praise, 1 Pet. 2.9. the sum of this then is to
cease despising, denying, or rejecting such as aim at the same end with you,
viz. the praise and glory of God, therefore receive them, though of a differing
opinion from you. The Apostle has it thus, Those that do all to the glory of
God are to be received of you, but those of this opinion, and those of that
opinion aim all at the glory and praise of God, ergo, etc. and this he proves;
1 Ab adjuncto in Verse. 6. 2. He proves it, V. 7. a toto ad parts thus, who
wholly lives, Argument
and dies to the Lord, does eat, or not eat; do, or not do this, or that thing;
use or not use this or that Christian liberty to the Lord; and ab illatis. V.
8. whether we live or dye, we are the Lords. Et a relatis we are the Lords
servants, having necessary relation to him, They serv^ one Lord.
we are under his subjection and tuition; and by all this he teaches us to
receive them, as such who are the Lords, in the Lords service, and aiming at
his honor and glory, being persuaded from the word, their opinion is to his
praise; and then as one says,
it is better to follow an erring conscience when it cannot be (yet better)
informed and corrected, then to do against conscience; so that though they are
such as cannot in conscience come up to, or unto our opinions in things
indifferent,
yet we must not dare to put them by, or (therefore) to deny them.

Reason 6. Verse. 10. Why do thou judge thy brother, etc. This argument is
taken ((...) ad utramque partem) from the relation the one stands in unto the
other; Art thou strong? 6 Such b^ then alike.
the weak one is thy brother, etc. And so on the other side, though not by
natural generation, yet by supernatural regeneration: Have we not all one
Father? Mal. 2.10. all alike borne of God?
all alike beloved of God in one Christ Jesus? God is to Saints (of all
opinions) one Father? without respect of persons or opinions? Now the true
Church of Christ is a Kingdom of brethren; and it is an ill part for brethren
to contend, despise, reject, or shut doors against one another. It was ABRAHAM'S
argument to Lot for peace, and our Spiritual JOSEPH, bids us not to fall out by
the way, which yet we do, and that for trifles too; This is the new
Commandment to love all Saints, Ephesians. 1.15. Joh. 13.35. and 15.12.17. 1 John
4.21. not all Saints of such or such a judgment, All are one, ho^?
but all Saints; being all one in the original love of God, all one in Christ,
all one in the Covenant of grace, all one in one and the same Spirit, having
all one and the same privileges, joy and glory, therefore we should be all
one in our love and acceptance, knowing no distinction, but Saintship as
Tichborn well notes, on Job. 13.35. Now it is our living too much in the flesh
and form (as we shall show by and by) which makes us mind so much such men,
as are of our judgment above others, and to put a difference! This will be
cause of pale countenance one day, that we should so fall out by the way,
whilst we are all going home to the same Fathers house; O then! why do we fall
out! are we not brethren? a brother must be received and welcomely admitted!
censure him not, though he be not of thy judgment, for he has as much right
to the Ordinances of the Church, and to be a member of the Church of Christ, to
suck of the same full breasts and privileges (having the same Father and
Mother, and elder-brother) as thou have.

Reason 7. Verse. 10. etc. We shall all stand before the judgment This argument
is drawn ( a proprio jure Christi) from the day of judgment, Day of judgment.
being amplified from the person judging (who is Christ, Ast. 17.31. whose
authority and right it is to judge, Joh. 5.22) and by the persons judged. ALL:
the manner of their appearance ( shall stand) whilst the Judge himself sits.
The argument runs thus: They that shall stand before Christ's judgment seat to
be judged themselves, ought not as judges of their brethren to put any by (for
their opinions) or to condemn them; you shall all stand before Christ's
TRIBVNAL to be judged your selves (all of you strong and weak;
Some usurp Christ's throne and how?
) or else ( a jure Christi) he proves they usurp Christ's place, whose sole
right it is to judge them for what they hold out of conscience (as Pareus
rather thinks the Apostle here intends) and that they shall stand before Christ
for this sauciness and pride over their brethren, Pareus.
which is easy to draw up into argument, mood and figure. The judgment seat
by a figure (per metonymiam signi) and per metaphoram a judiciis civilibus, is
taken for the judgments which pass from the Judge sitting in his Court.
Now the consideration of this should induce us to our duty to our brethren
(that differ from us) for we shall stand together before Christ at one and the
same Bar, 2 Cor. 5.10.11. and shall the prisoner, that shall stand at the Bar
for his life as guilty of a world of errors,
leap up into Christ's (the Judges) seat? to condemn his brother? as for an
error? and to keep him out of Christ's Church? Oh! how will Diotrephes tremble
at this his arrogance! pride! and impudence, then! that he durst shut the
Church-door against his brethren? as 3 John 9. For as Anselme in loc. says,
Qui judicat fratrem tantum crimen elevationis incurrit, ut Christi Tribunal
sibi videatur assumere, and ejus judicium praevenire; he pre-possesses Christ's
seat, Anselme.
and prevents Christ's judgment, wherefore judge nothing before the time, 1
Cor. 4.5. this he makes a seventh Argument against this judgelike power in
receiving.

Reason 8. Verse. 13. This runs (a scandalo dato) from offense given thereby,
that is by censuring, condemning, Much scandal arises else.
or forbidding such Saints communion with you, who differ from you in opinion;
this will be but a putting of a stumbling block in his way. Verse. 13. To
hinder, and hurt him. ((...)) As a stone which is laid for a poor weak feeble
man to fall on; or at least to dash his foot against: Offense what?
for in regard of his weakness he will easily stumble, if not fall ((...).)
There is an offense given by obstructing, or censuring, Sim.
or judging of a (different) brother, but it is got up to a scandal (scandalum
gravius est offendiculo) when you do deny, put by,
and not receive such a brother. Now what is a scandal? Tertullian says de vel
andis virginibus, Scandal wh^t?
it is an example (non bonae rei, sed malae, edificans ad delictum) not of a
good thing, but of an evil thing, which emboldens and heightens, and builds up
into an open, (undeniable) sin. At first it may be but doubtful whether it
be well or ill; How this is a s^andal. Vide Pareus and Par in loc.
but at last it lies open to be a sin; so is this your rejecting of the
brethren, and not admitting them into the Church, because not of your judgment
and opinion. The word (...) ( claudico) from the Etymology taken, signifies to
make lame, and limp, and halt like a Cripple, by causing some great fall, from
whence I accept of it, Aquin. 22 43.1. Jerome in 15. Mat.
and shall arrest with the Schoolmen this definition for mine ( scandalum
proprie est dictum vel factum minus rectum praebens aliis occasionem ruinae)*
It is a word and work not well performed, but producing and affording occasion
of falling to others. 1 To brethren so d^spised. That occasi^ns them to fall off.
So is this a scandal to keep out my brother, and not to receive him as before,
which may hinder and hurt him ever after, and occasion his falling. And
although scandal is taken in general ( pro aliquo impedimento) for any offense,
and hinderance, or ob^x in the way that obstructs, bolts, or bars (as) out of
doors, Sim.
or hinders, yet in special I find this is the offense which gives a (
differing) brother any occasion to fall away (whether such a brother does so or
no) and this is a sin so much forbidden in Scripture.
Hence the Grammarians say, that scandalum is as the bridge in the trap, which
when the Mouse once treads on, o^ touches, she is taken sure; and so is it to
give a scandal to a brother (that is not of your opinion) it is to lay a trap
in the way to take him, Sim.
and destroy him.

Hence it is dangerous to despise (such differing) brethren, and not to receive
them; for first, it is a scandal to them (says the Apostle) it discourages,
discomforts, discontents them, 1 This mak^ brethren fall some^im^s f^w^y,
Ranters and erroneous.
and occasions oftentimes them to fall, at least to limp* and halt, and grow
worse and worse; and this I account one reason of so many Ranters and erroneous
ones now adays, 1 Cor. 8.13. 1 Cor. 10. O sad! as we shall show by and by,
that some Church-fellowships are so fleshed and fat, that they will not abate
an ace of their form for a brothers sake,
neither to bear with him in their formal kind of Covenanting! subscribing!
confessing! nor any thing else which is left (by Christ, do what they can) to
Christian liberty! But ( scandalum) offense is either (activum dantis, What
kind of scandal.
vel passivum sumentis) active, and so it is given, or passive, and taken. That
which is given (I speak of)* is active and pragmatical to offend; and thus in
urging, pressing, showing indiscreetly, rashly, and unseasonably the practice
of your opinion upon others, as urging the use of outward things left to
liberty and indifferent. O! take heed of any of Christ's little ones Mat. 18.6.
Now the Apostle presses this argument taken ( a scandalo) many ways! for
first, I say it is an offense to this brother whom thou receivest not; and it
is an occasion to his fall, therefore receive him. 1 Scandal with reference to
brethren.
For it is a greater sin, and a greater punishment remains for such which
cause others to offend and fall, then for such who do so offend and fall.
So the Serpent was punished more then Eve, and Eve more then Adam, and Jezebel
more then Ahab. (Peccare non tantum in se perditionis habet quantum quod
reliqui ad peccandum inducuntur, Chrysostom. Hom. 25 in Epist. ad Romans

Secondly, It is a scandal with reference to Christ.
Verse. 15. for whom Christ dyed; O! what will the world say! what? 2 A scandal
with reference to Christ.
are these Christ's Disciples, that gurn, bite at, abuse, despise, refuse, and
condemn one another thus! is this all their charity of weak ones to shut them
out of doors! and besides, how dare you to offend one of them for whom Christ
dyed? do ye think they are of so little worth for whom Christ dyed? that you
will not receive them? 3 Scandal with reference to brethren, and the Gospel way
its self.
what do you make of his blood? what a scandal is this?

Further, the Apostle, to enforce this, finds out this scandal to reach to
Profession, Religion, the truth and Gospel its self. In Verse. 16. Let not your
good be evil spoken of* or your Gospel liberty, and way of Christ be defamed,
nor truth traduced, nor Doctrine, nor Discipline, nor the Kingdom of grace,
Olevian.
(as Olevian says) be blasphemed! ((...)) or evil spoken of, 1 Timothy 6.1. 1
Pet. 2.12. 1 Cor. 29.30. Ambros. in loc. Vide Burtons Vindication p 44. Prin.
12.9. of 12 serious Questions.
How eagerly did Mr. Prin, Bastwick and others take advantage to write and
print all they could against this Gospel of Christ, for that the niceties and
curiosities of some Church societies did exclude, others (that were not of
their judgment) though truly godly and holy! Therefore for the Gospels sake
receive them, and have special regard (for by not admitting such, and judging
hardly of them) you will open the mouths of Gods enemies against the truth, and
give them advantages against the way, Bernard.
whereby with Bernard in Sermon. Ezekiel. 38.17. the Church sustaines great damage,
even by her own Children.

Reason 9. Runs from Verse. 14, 15, etc. I am persuaded by the Lord Jesus
Christ, nothing is unclean of it self, but to him that esteems it so, All
indifferent things lawful in themselves.
etc. from this Concession (that nothing of its self is unclean) comes out a
correction. Verse. 15. Therefore condemn not thy brother for eating, because it
is an erroneous conscience that makes a thing unlawful: For all actions receive
their qualifications according to the will of the Agents, and the will acts
according to the object, a thing apprehended by reason; If thou judge by thy
light that to do this is sin, and yet thy will carries thee to it; why then
it is unlawful indeed, and thou sinnest to do it; but if thou judge it no
sin, it is lawful according to thy light and conscience to be (by will)
carried thereto; What is sin in indifferent things.
therefore let thy light be Gods light, grounded on the word, and then be
persuaded. It is miserable to doubt in things commanded, What is miserable.
and to be commanded in things doubtful and indifferent, (praejudicium non est
judicium sed vitium.) Things indifferent are lawful to him that esteems them
so, and unlawful to him that esteems, (...). Beza.
and is persuaded they are unlawful; see Chap. 1. therefore let not one
censure, condemn, cast by, or grieve the other, but receive each other in
charity, and bowels of love, and each walk according to his judgment and
persuasion, chapter 1.

Reason 10. Verse. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat This Argument is
taken (a natura rerum mediarum) from the nature of things indifferent, Kingdom
of God consists not in outward things.
and drawn up from the definition of the Kingdom of God; from the Thesis and
Antithesis take this argument, in form thus; for those things the Kingdom of
God consists not of, we ought not so to contend; but meats and drinks, outward
forms and Covenants, But in things necessary.
etc. the Kingdom of God consists not of, etc. ergo, etc. contend not so for
such indifferent things, as to judge, or not to admit, and receive a brother.
The Kingdom of God consists not of things doubtful or indifferent, but
absolute and necessary, Luke 17.20, 21. 1 Cor. 8.8. therefore none are to be
shut or kept out of this Kingdom, The Kingdom
for their judgment in things doubtful or indifferent. 1 Of glory.
This Kingdom (sumitur pro regno gloriae) sometimes is taken for that of
Glory, the Fathers, 2 Of grace.
which is to come ( ubi Deus erit omnia in omnibus) and by some ( pro regno
gratiae) (and so here) for the Church of Christ, the Kingdom of the Son, the
state of grace here; but take which you will, they are both of one kind, of one
make, have one and the same matter, form, and end; Both of one kind.
and neither of them consists in outward forms, or is in meat and drink, or the
like, but both of them consist in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost, that is, the substantialia regni are one and the same; and such members
as are fit for one, are fit for the other. These are Characters of such
Citizens as are fit, whose Christianity, Religion, Profession, enchurchment,
etc. lies not in meat and drink, that is, in the outward forms, letters, and
things left to liberty, whether to do, or not do; but in righteousness
inherent and infused,
and also expressive and declared in faith and holiness, and in their duties
of obedience, and in peace, which follows justification, and unity one with
another, which is unity of the Spirit, the Holy Ghost being the procreant cause
of this peace and love, and joy, which issues and runs out of such a
righteousness and peace before spoken of: now those things are necessary,
which the Kingdom of God consists of. Oh then! that differences should arise
about such things as the Kingdom of God consists not of! but can as well be
without! Sad diffe^ences about things unnecessary.
as about Covenants! Confessions! and Subscriptions! and such things that are
indifferent! or that are doubtful! as the subjects of baptism, and whether
dipped, or sprinkled, or such like, being left without positive warrant in the
word. Oh then! learn, learn, to put a difference where the Lord puts a
difference, as between things spiritual and things carnal! For want of putting
a right difference
things of a middle nature, and things necessary, which the Kingdom of God,
the Church of Christ cannot be without! And let us make no difference where the
Lord would have none.

Reason 11, from Verse. 18. For he that in these things serves All Saints
Christ's servants.
The Argument is thus: He that is the servant of Christ; is to be received, but
he that is righteous, and believes, and obeyes the Gospel (whether he eats, or
eats not, notwithstanding these forms) is the servant of Christ, therefore to
be received.

Thus the argument is a genere: but from the effects, 1 Gods acceptance; 2
Man's approbation. He that is acceptable to God, is to be received: but he that
serves Christ, believes in Christ, and obeyes the Gospel, in righteousness,
peace, and joy of the Ghost, though he be not of your opinion in things
indifferent and doubtful, yet is acceptable to God, therefore to be received.

Further thus from the other effect, He that is (...), a tried Professor, and
a current approved Christian amongst men, Pareus.
is to be received; but he that serves Christ (as before) in righteousness,
Calvin.
peace and joy of the Holy Ghost, though he be not of your judgment, yet is a
tried approved Christian amongst men, ergo; loquitur de hominibus recte
judicantibus, says Pareus in loc. and Calvin.

But now! see! O, what arguments the Apostle brings to clear this point; yea
with what big-bellied arguments (one in the belly of another) he urges them to
receive Saints differing from them in judgment! being holy and peaceable,
accepted of God, approved of men, Prove. 3.1, 2, 3. Act. 10.35. 1 Pet. 3.13. the
Kingdom of God is not in words, but in power, Nazianzen.
(...), said Nazianzen.

Reason 12. from Verse. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make
for peace, and wherewith to edify one another. arguments to receive
(differing) brethren; Else disorders and strife in the Church, the body no^
rightly built up, it is for Churches peace.
as

First, What agrees with the true peace and order of the Church is to be
performed, but to receive such brethren as before, agrees with the true peace
and order of Christ's Church. This Peace is either Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
(so called) this latter (if true) is taken out of the former, and is content
with the substance to find faith, love, grace, holiness in brethren, though
they differ in form, Not as the world has peace.
(and for this, see Dels way of peace, about page 120, 121. etc.) therefore
Christ has left his peace, (his) in the Church, but not as the world gives it,
Joh. 16. the world can have no peace but with men of the same mind and
judgment; And for her order.
but Christ's peace, and Christ's love is to all Saints alike, without respect of
persons or opinions. This bond of peace and union is spiritual, As a Family.
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. and so is this order in symmetry with the Rules of Christ,
which (has been proved) do require all Saints to be admitted and received.
Hence the Church is called the Lords house and family, which consists of old
and young, great and small, high and low, etc: yet the difference of sexes,
relations, sizes, statures, ages, estates, make it neverthele^^e in order and
peace, a family or house; So it is called his building, in which it is
necessary there should be matter to make it up of different form and hew; and
though there may be much difference amongst them that are the building, yet
being orderly and fitly disposed, A building.
it hinders not the welfare of that building at all; therefore the Church is
also called a Kingdom and Corporation, a City compact, etc. in Scriptures; and
all to show, A Kingdom. City.
that although there be such as do differ, as it were, in Trades, Callings,
complexions, places, employments, professions, ages, statures, yet being all
subject to one Law and Lawgiver, there is never the less peace and order:
Psalm. 122.
So a body, 1 Cor. 12 for although the members differ much, one bigger or
lesser, and some gifted more then others, Body.
and more useful then others, or more fair and formal in appearance then
others, yet all serve to make one body; and this difference is necessary
thereunto, to make up a more orderly body. For as the unity, peace, welfare,
Difference necessary.
and order of the body stands well with a distinction, and difference of
members,
which does not hinder, but help the unity, and order, and welfare of the body
(and is better then if all the body were an eye to see, or an ear to hear,
etc.) so does the diversity of Church Members, with diversity of gifts, and
graces, Romans 13.6. help much to the order and edifying of the Church* which is
his second Argument.

That which is for the Churches edification ought to be performed: but to admit
Saints of all opinions (differing only in things indifferent) as before, is
for the Churches edification, Ephesians. 4.29. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. as the least member is
useful to the body, and the meanest matter in the building useful to the
building* Now falsely constituted Churches that are of Antichrist (indeed)
cannot stand without uniformity, but Christs-can, and be edified as a growing
Temple, Ephesians. 2.21.

Reason 13. from Verse. 20, 21. Though all things are (in themselves) pure,
(yet) it is evil for that man which eats with offense. Things of a middle
nature must be let alone, rather then offend a brother.
nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbles, etc. So in 1 Cor. 6.12. and 10.23.
all things are lawful that are not expedient; by these the Apostle would teach
us to abstain from things (that in themselves are good, pure, clean, lawful)
that are indifferent, for a brothers sake, 1 Cor. 8.13. the Apostle tells us
thus much; as first, That all things of a middle nature may be waved (as
Covenants,
subscriptions, etc. Forms, and false Circumstances) Secondly, rather then
cause a body to fall or stumble as before, they must be waved, and not be
urged, which is the scope and drift of this Chapter, and of the eighth Chapter,
and tenth Chapter of 1 Cor. Now it is the Church that has power to determine
the use of indifferent rites by the Word and Law of Christ, for the maintaining
of good order and spiritual peace, and unity. Christian liberty to be kept.
Now Christian liberty consists as well in abstaining from, as in using of
those things indifferent. We may use our Christian liberty (says Par) before
them which know it; but before them which know it not, Par.
and are offended at it, out knowledge is sufficient, and our use is forbidden;
therefore wisdom and discretion is earnestly to be sought for from above,
that you may know when, where, and how to use your liberty, to call for, or not
to call for; use, or not use things indifferent; for when liberty (as Greg.
Mag. Moral. 28. marks) Indiscrete tenetur, Gregor.
amittitur, cum discrete intermittitur, plus tenetur) is unwisely held, it is
oftentimes lost, it is no longer a liberty, but oftentimes when it is wisely
and prudentially intermitted, it is made the more a Christian liberty; now the
excellency of it,
is the use, or not use of it. The actions of Gospel-discipline, are such as
are essential, as piety and power of Sanctity and Profession, or else such as
are ordinate (and media) or helps appointed for the orderly performance of such
a Worship and Discipline; so are all Ordinances, means of grace, and
administrations; now in these are the (...) and the (...) to be considered, the
things that are to be done, and the manner of their doing;
the first, are instituted of God, and revealed in his word; Abstain from
pressing things indifferent.
but the second sort concerning the manner of performing them, as time, place,
gesture, and such like circumstances, are left to liberty, as is best for the
order, use and unity of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.40. 1 Cor. 11.24. Now those
brethren that do differ from you in things left to liberty, that have not
posit ve precept; the Apostle says, you must admit and receive, and rather
abstain from those things then (as to him) then render offense, or cause him
to stumble; for though thou bevest this or that may be, yet have thy faith to
thy self. Verse. 22. and not for another.

Thus you have the scope of the whole Chapter to ratify this undeniable
assertion laid down at first, Proved further by Prophecy.
for receiving of such as are weak, though differing in opinion; and this
point lies clear in many other Scriptures besides, Expos.
both Prophesies and Precepts, and practice of primitive Churches. You have it
pr^phesied in Micah 4.5. This Chapter begins with the promised happiness, and
eminency of the Church of Christ foretold these latter days, and amongst other
things, Jew and Gentile, bond and free.
this is one Promise made, foretelling her eminency thereby, and her exceeding
glory above the glory of former ages; for that all Nations shall come, that is
not meant (says Gualter) All of all Nations, but many peoples of many
languages, under many ways, forms, Gualther.
orders, and dispensations, shall come in to the Church of Christ, Jew and
Gentile, bond and free, of all sorts, and opinions, One body all.
that are the Lords, under the reign of Christ shall come in; though Jew and
Gentile are at as much variance and distance for their different judgments one
from another as may be, yet they must be one in one. For there is but one Body
of all believers (of all judgments) Ephesians. 4 4, 5, 6. in all ages, Such as halt
between two made one.
under all forms of all degrees and measures, of light and life, Ephesians. 2.15.
Col. 3.15. having all the same faith (for quality) in the same Christ, and all
live on Christ by faith (not by form.) Thus all (of us) will walk every one
in the name of his God, and we will walk (also) in the name of the Lord our
God for ever and ever; Every one according to his light and measure obeying God
constantly, and then says the Lord, I will assemble her that halteth between
God and Baal, 1 King. 18 (two opinions;) and make even her a remnant, and a
Congregation, over whom I will reign in Zion. Besides, Ezekiel. 36.37, 38. you
have the richest blessings reserved for the last days, One flock all.
when Paradise shall be restored, and the Church shall become the Lords Eden,
Expos.
in verse. 35. I will increase them, says the Lord, with men like a flock; how
is that? i. e. thus, in a flock (alluding to a shepherds flock) there be old
and young, Lambs and Ews, Isa. 40.11. of several sorts, sizes, colors,
complexions; yet all make but one flock, and it is not the difference of the
fleece, of the color, or outward appearance, or tone, or bleat, or going, or
weakness, or leanness, or raggedness, that makes it none of the flock, so
long as it is a sheep still; as long as none of these differences are such as
make it no sheep. That serve one God.
So the Church of Christ shall consist of Saints (though they differ in
opinions, so long as those opinions cannot make them no Saints) that are under
variety of dispensations, Expos.
administrations, forms, opinions, and several measures of grace and spirit;
And yet the Lords flock, a holy flock. Verse 38. all having one
Master-Shepherd, serving one and the same God, Expos.
as Zeph. 3.9. I will turn the peoples of all Nations to a pure language, i.
e. of the Spirit, and then all (under all forms, orders, languages whatsoever,
all) shall serve the Lord with one consent, all shall agree in one, and consent
in that to serve the Lord, and to draw together with one shoulder; Sim.
as the simile runs, from a yoke of Oxen drawing together; yea the Leopard,
and the Kid, the Lion and the Lamb shall lie down together. See this also
foretold by Zach. 2.11. Many Nations shall be joined together, Expos.
and Zach. 8.23. of all languages, shall take hold of him that is a Jew, God is
hastening to bring AL into ONE.
saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you: that is,
Men enlightened that have found the Lord (as in verses before) and are united to
him, they shall now enter into the Church of Christ, where the Lord is with
them. Precepts.
Though they be of all Languages, Nations, habits, forms, and appearances, so
they be but holy, and seekers and servants of the Lord as before, Expos.
they must be received, though there be as large a difference (in things
outward and formal) as between other Nations, and the Jews, yet they must be
all one, and brought into one body. God will gather all his people into one,
and every year he is hastening this design, to bring all into one.

But for further proofs, see Phil. 3.15, 16. If any be of another mind) what
then? not put him by, no but walk with him; for God shall in time reveal it to
him; Nevertheless whereunto we have already attained (and are all of one mind
and judgment) let us (all) walk (together, as Phil. 1.27. and Phil. 2.1, 2.)
by the same rule (of Christ) let us mind the same things (that is, of God, the
honor and glory of God, the worship and service of God) thus much, to me, lies
under the Commission Christ gave in Mat.. 28. Teaching them to observe all
things that I have commanded you, (...) to keep them charily, Expos.
whatsoever commanded and commended to them in Discipline and Doctrine; Christ
would have have his babes tenderly taken in.
now this was one in Mat. 19.14. to admit even of Infants in Christ, of such
who are as weak, simple, innocent, and as unable, as little ones to speak or
express themselves, etc. yet such are to be by Christ's Disciples
(Christs-Church) received, and admitted as well as others that are of a more
manly, grown, and strong stature in Christ; for of such as these little ones
(as well as of strong ones) consists the Kingdom of heaven.

Moreover, we might muster many Authors together to bear testimony to this
truth; Practice of primitive Church.
but besides what was said before, we shall find the examples of all Churches
in primitive times to take in all Saints, though of different opinions (if
holy, and believers) in Corinth, Rome, Galatia, Antioch, In Apostles days.
etc. where were Jews, and Gentiles, circumcised and uncircumcised, and such as
did exceedingly differ in opinions; thus Romans 14. Gal. 2.11. and 5.1. and Act.
15.1, 2. and 1 Cor. 12, 13. for by one Spirit are we all baptized into one
body, After them in vol. 1. page 72. Anno 157. Polycarpus An^cetus.
whether Jews or Gentiles, bond, or free; so after the Apostles days, as
appears by Ecclesiastical Writers, all that were godly in Christ Jesus without
respect of persons or opinions were received, their faith in Christ and love to
all Saints was looked upon as necessary and enough (as Mr. Fox observes) till
the hot contest between the Asians and the Romans about the observation of
days, Fox.
An. 157. and then in Antoninus Pius's reign was Polycarpus feign to go to
Rome to Anicetus (then Bishop of Rome) and though they two differed in opinion,
Church admitted Saints of different opinions, and of different observations
157. and after. Irenaeus.

Victor Bishop of Rome.


yet were they one in most sweet, kind, and Christian communion, and both
avoided the breach of unity or peace, says Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap.
23, and Socrat. Schol. Hist. Ec. 5. cap. 21.) and as Irenaeus writes to Victor
(as we shall hear by and by) the Church before this time received such as were
of contrary opinions, and held contrary observations, and yet notwithstanding
held fast the bond of love and unity. (Vide Par on Romans 14 v. 6.) Afterward in
Comodus's days the poor Saints had a little breathing time, and respite from
persecutions to take air a little, and then arose (as is usual in the times of
the Churches peace and liberty) a loud difference amongst brethren about the
observation of Easter day, and such trifling ceremonies, some (and those of the
Western parts) as Mr. Del takes it in's way of peace, Til ^an. 200* in Victor's
d^yes, Bishop of Rome, he went about to cast out, and not take in them that
^iffered in opinion.
page 116, 117.) pretended the tradition of Paul and P^ter to observe it on one
day (although indeed they had it from Hermes and Pius) and the Eastern
Churches pretended the tradition of John to observe it another day: and about
these trifles they had hot word-wars and skirmishes in discourses; but yet love
continued, and unity and order in the Church, till Victor's time, a fiery
(brand, or) Bishop of Rome; and he rose high, and as hot as a Toast, to
excommunicate all that were not of his judgment for Easter Day, after the
(pretended) tradition of Paul. Which Irenaeus writes against in a letter to him.
And the Asian Churches not yielding to his opinion, he would cast out, and
take none in, but those that did just jump with him in his opinion; hereupon
those of his opinion went to him, and of the other, to the Churches of Asia.
Now the difference growing great, even to the breach of unity, Uniformity began
an. 200. Th^n Saints judged Schismatics, and Heretics, and to be
excommunicated* that differed in opinion. Eusebius. l. ^. c. 26.
order, and all, and that about trifles, things not necessary; Irenaeus writes
to Victor Bishop of Rome roundly, and tells him it was not so before: for among
former Christians, and in the Churches then, they were all at peace, and in
love amongst themselves, although there were variety of opinions, and
observations, and till this time Christian liberty continued in use, and it
remained fresh to use or not use things indifferent; but now began uniformity
to be of force and in fashion, and to be all of one opinion a thing necessary,
(and not before) and such as differed to be judg^d Schismatics, Heretics, and
the like. And now all alike have been in a flame, and the Saints of Asia (that
could not be induced to them, or seduced by them of Rome) were to be cast out,
and excommunicated by Victor; but then the word was brought forth to decide the
difference: and those spiritual weapons* to win the Conquest Irenaeus uses (as
before) and says thus further to Victor in his letter. Not so till Victors
time proved by Irenaeus.
The variance and difference about ceremonies is not now new, nor strange in
the Church of Christ, both about Easter day, and Fast days; and yet for all
this diversity, they were in unity among themselves, which he proves, and
brings abundance of examples for it, and instances in Telesphorus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and others, who neither tied themselves nor
others to an uniformity, 1 Wh^t is not commanded, is left to the liberty, and
light of Saints.
or to be of their judgment or opinion, but all were left to Christian
freedom. And as Socrates lib. 5. cap. 19. says of the several sorts of
fasting then used in several Churches, because none can bring any commandment
written of this matter,
it is plain (says he) it is left free to every man's mind and will, and none
to be compelled by fear or necessity to do this or that.

Thus we see in those days the Saints that differed in judgment and opinion
were beloved, and received, and accepted as Saints, without respect to their
opinions, till Victor's time, when Antichrist began to get a head, and to
assinuate secular powers, etc. And ever since, O what sad differences have
arose! (by the Devils subtilties, Ever since Antichrist climbed up to this,
what difference are there and breach of opinion, is breach of affection.
and Jesuitical sophistries) and what rank seeds of division have been sown
to set Christians together by the ears, and that about nothing! empty shadows,
and puff-paste appearances! and all hereby to vilify the Church of Christ, and
true Saints, as if such could not be Christ's Disciples who differ so, seeing
they should all love one another, Joh. 13. and not fall out, and jar as they
do. Do not the enemies of the Gospel to this day, Papists, and others make
sport of this, and make it an argument against us that we are not Christ's? O
what a may game they made (and do yet) at the hot contestations between
Calvin, and Luther in Germany? and betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists? what
fearful, detestable, unchristian combats are there yet? how unkind and cruelly
hateful are the one to the other, and all about opinions? And in our days what
a bone is cast in to make a quarrel between the Presbyterians and Independents?
Independents and Anabaptists, etc? Now that which is worst, is, that they
differ in affections as much (yea more) then in opinions (which is a most
miserable thing amongst them that are indeed godly) now this was not so from
the first; for as we have heard before; so Augustine and Hierom differed in
opinion, but yet loved one another heartily, All should love.
and did not at all disturb the Church thereby, but had high esteem one of
another for all that, as Peter had of Paul (who differed from him, and preached
openly against him, Gal. 2.11.) yet, says he, Our beloved brother Paul, 2 Pet.
3.15. And I remember, when the Donatists did urge Cyprian's opinion for
rebaptizing, Aug. Vincentio Contra Donat. and Rogat de vi Co^rig. Epist. 48.
O, says Augustine for him, Hunc quasi nevum candidissiim pectoris cooperuit
ubere charitatis, but he has covered this faulty opinion of his most fair and
candid breast, with the full bigs of charity; A good lesson for Anabaptists
especially them in Dublin, and Waterford.
for he did hold fast to his brethren that differed from him, in all love and
sweetness, and would not rend away from the Church, but maintained the unity
of the Church (which was not of his mind) and kept continually the bond of
peace! Oh! O then, that all brethren of all opinions would learn this lesson,
and we should be glad to have communion with such kind of Anabaptists!
Donatists! Cypriansts! or what opinion soever, so holy! But thus I have proved
it to be the practice of primitive times to admit differing brethren, till
Antichrist began to start up. And Melancthon says, Melancthon. Ali Saints,
though differing in opinion must be one in heart and love. Bucer.
(as Dell observes, page 120. in's way of peace) seeing we agree together in
the chief Articles of faith, and Christian doctrine, we must embrace each
other (as brethren) in unity and Christian love, order, and peace; and let not
the difference of rites, or variety of Ceremonies, or difference of opinions,
dis-joyne our minds and hearts from one another; no, nor yet the difference of
Ecclesiastical government (says Bucer) make us differ from one another: have
we not all one Father? for shame let us love and live together as Saints.
Besides all this Artillery to defend this truth, viz. That all Saints might be
admitted, I might fortify it further by other Reasons, which I shall omit them
now (having been alreardy at large) unless taken in two or three
considerations; 1 Consid. Saints children of light.
As

Expos.
First, that all Saints are Sons and Daughters of light, and therefore have
liberty to lay by what is dark to them; for as Psalm. 39. ult. in the Lords
light they see light, not in man's light; they cannot see with other men's eyes.
Therefore they have a liberty of rejecting, or refusing whatsoever they find
not agreeable to the revealed mind of Christ; And whatsoever is asked of them,
or accepted from them (as matter of faith) and they are required to obey, or
yield submission to, they must, and will have Gods word to give it them, and
the Gospel of Christ to hold it out to them, or else they return a blanke to
it, or a negative answer, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Col. 2.20, 21, 22* 1 John 4.1, 2. Act.
17.11. Gal. 5.1. and will have none of it, that has none of Christ's Commands
for it: wherefore it is with them as it was with the Beraeans; they search the
Scriptures whether they can find such things so or no. Children of day, they
see where they go; but them of darkness do not, Act. 17.23. 1 John 2.11.
they go they know not whither,
but at a venture do as others do; whilst the Saints of God walk warily,
wisely, knowingly, etc. yea and armed with light too, Romans 13.12. being round
about swallowed up (as it were) in a clear truth, which they are able to defend
and maintain, having put on the armor of light (...) instruments, weapons of
light too for defenc^. The word of God which conquers them they use to conquer
others with, In armor of light to defend truth.
and in such cases as these are, (as to the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ)
the Saints had need to be clear; for they shall meet with many adversaries,
oppositions, enemies, hot, strong, sturdy, and lusty, and that will with full
blows, and violent buffets, and arguments use all means to assault, wound, and
knock them down;
therefore, I say, they had need to have the armor of light on, against the
time they are to meet their storming, angry, raging adversaries, else they will
soon yield and faint; therefore it is that nothing should be urged upon them
which is dark to them. For as darkness is caused by the absence of the Sun,
so is darkness in the mind, and upon men's spirits, Sim.
when they find not Christ's (the Suns) light to shine in their hearts, and
to give them the knowledge; and when they find not in the Gospel, that form,
opinion, or practice, which others urge to them, and would press upon them,
When they are in the dark.
then they are in the dark, which ought not to be thrust upon any Saint, or
Brother, that is to be received.

For first, wherein they are in the dark, they are disconsolate; whilst those
that live in the light walk in the day, 1 Disconsolat.
and do what is clear to them out of the word of God, and do it cheerfully,
freely, comfortably, and indeed confidently. And the conscience is cleared, and
rejoices in such practices as are approved by daylight, and are cleared in the
understanding, and proved by the word of Christ. And

2 They cannot see.
Secondly, darkness hinders sight, tenebrae a tenend; and tenebra est visus
impeditiva; and so do such opinions and practices which are pressed upon us
without the word of Christ (without the light) and not in the beams of the
Sun; those brethren cannot see other things (oftentimes) that are swallowed
up in them. Who are more blinded (as to the most spiritual objects and
discoveries) then your greatest formalists? that are most hot, high, stirring,
pressing their own forms, opinions, judgments, especially in things
doubtful, and indifferent (and such things as are left indifferent (and such
things as are left in the dark without the word;) O! how bitterly are they
besotted and incensed against the more subtle! oriental! spiritual! and most
splendent truths! ( color omnibus unus) thus were the Pharisees, and so Isa.
29.10. and Joh. 9.39.

3 They cannot walk in it well.
Thirdly, they know not how to walk when they are in the dark (est gressus
prohibitiva) nor whether they are right or no; And

Fourthly, they walk in fear (for so much as they are in the dark, 4 They
are in fear of it.
est timoris incussiva) and so they cannot but be faint and fearful of that
opinion, practice, or form, which they find not in the word of God; And

5 Liable to fall from it, or else to fall in it which is worse.
Fifthly, (est casus inductiva) it is dangerous, and they are liable to fall
then when they are forced or induced to do that which they see not warranted in
the word, but left in the dark too: and who then would (as was said before)
give a brother such occasion to stumble and fall?

6 Makes them too bold and fiery.
Sixthly ( est verecundi^ diminutiva) this night-opinion, or practice, or form
(whatsoever it be) which any are brought into, makes them (many times) too
immodest tooth and nail ( unguibus and dentibus) to fight for, and act for
what the word warrants not. Sim.
As the night that makes night-walkers too bold in immodest forms, and
appearances and practices suitable thereto. As at this day we find among
Presbyterians, and others, etc.
So, O sad! some of your formalists you will find have the Whores forehead!
harlots-dresse, and are too bold! (as blind Bayard) and confident for such
forms! opinions! practices! and ways, which have none of Gods word to give
life or light to them! and yet how hot are some for Antichristian orders, and
customs, which (were the light up, and did the Sun shine in their Horizon)
they would even blush to own, and be ashamed to show their heads for. The
golden rule conscience
Now all these (and many more) inconveniences would be unavoidable
consequences of such practices, as to press our opinions or judgments upon
any of the Saints, and upon such conditions to admit of them into Communion,
which God forbid should be in our thoughts hereafter; For let us do as we
would be done by, and let every one walk (that is a child of Light) in the
light and liberty of his own conscience; for better it is to follow even an
erring conscience, when it cannot be informed and corrected, then to do
against conscience. But thus for the first Consideration.

Secondly, Consider what is the glory and beauty of Sion, (which shall be
shortly) the joy of the whole earth? 2 Consider. The beauty of Zion i^ all in
one.
is it not variety in unity? and into unity? The Church militant is the image
or figure of the Church triumphant, and all her Ordinances, Orders, Forms of
Discipline and Doctrine are no more, (nor less) then a shadow of what is to
come in the Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4.26. wherefore the word Jerusalem
in the Heb. is of the duall number, The Church here looks like her above. Amama
in Cor^nide.
to teach us (as the Cabalists confess) there is an heavenly, as well as
earthly Jerusalem^ and the taking away of the letter jod out of J^rushalaim 2 Samuel 5 13. teaches the earthly Jerusalem is but the shadow, and the shadow
vanishes away into the substance, which is that, that is above. Here a shadow
of what is to come here ^f^ter.
Thus the Apostle intimates in Col. 2.17. speaking before of many Ordinances of
Circumcision, Baptism, Sabbath-dayes, etc. which are all (says he) but a
shadow of things to come. Like as you shall see the image of the Sun in a plash
of water, Sim.
where it looks like the Sun, full of light, and very lively, as if the Sun
were seated there. Expos.
So Cant. 6.9. the Church here is said to be the only one, So are all
Ordinances.
the choice one of her mother (i. e. the Jerusalem above) that is, she looks so
like her Mother, as the very picture of her. Baptism.
So her Ordinances are but shadows of what is to come. Word
Baptism whereby they are washed here (and in primitive times the Catechumeni
and Adulti were wont as soon as they were wash^d, Singing.
to be clad with white robes) it is but a shadow of what is to come, Rev.
7.9.14. when the Saints shall be clad with white robes, washed in the blood of
the Lamb. The word here enunciative, is but a shadow of what is to come (the
body is Christ, Sabbath.
says the Apostle) he is the word essential, Jo. 1.1. the singing of Psalms
Hymns, and spiritual Songs is but a shadow of that Hallelujah which i^ to come,
Christ is the substance or body of all.
which we shall all sing with one voice before the Throne and Lamb for ever,
Rev. 1.9.1. and again Verse. 3. and again Verse. 4. and again Verse. 6. as never
satisfied, How a shadow here.
and yet ever satisfied with singing it (Victoria Hallelujatica.) The Sabbath
here is but a shadow of that which is to come. Christ is the body and substance
of them all, What a shadow is.
he shall be the Temple of the New Jerusalem, that is, he shall be in the room,
and stead of all Ordinances, Sacrifices, Worships, and services, viz. Christ,
the substance of all. All the shadows are empty things, though caused by the
substance in the light, yet the shadows are variable (as the Sun turns) in
ev^ry age,
and shall grow less and less, shorter and shorter, as the Sun grows higher
and higher, till they be swall^wed up in the substance, and are no more (as
shadows) seen. In the interim where the shadow ends, the substance begin^.
The shadow is the dark, or imperfect representation of the person, and has
some similitude thereof. The Church here is a representation, or similitude of
that to come; that here is more in variety, that to come more in unity; for in
that to come, Saints of all judgments, under all forms, in all ages, are
members of one Church; and the more the Church here (now) looks like her that
is to come, the greater is her beauty and glory; and the more her variety is
swallowed up in unity; the more she looks like the Jerusalem which is above,
Variety in unity.
for all shall be one Rev. 7. from 1. to 10. of all Nations, kindreds, peoples,
tongues, which no man could number; this is the work, the strange work that
God goes on so fast with, especially in these last Ages, and in these Nations,
as Ephesians. 1.10. To gather together into one, all things both which are in heaven
and which are on earth, God is hastening it.
even in Christ (the substance) ((...)) to recapitulate, and bring up to one
head, to collect (as in multiplication) all into one sum; All things in one,
all Saints, all Ordinances, all opinions, all forms, Expos.
all excellencie^, to gather all into one. To reduce all to one head. For this
Christ prayed so, Joh. 17.20, 2^. that all Saints (in all ages, of all opinions
whatsoever) that believed, All Saint^ in all ages of all opinions, one: Christ
prayed for it.

It will be the Churches glory in every age more and more.


or should (for time to come) believe in him, might be all one, and then their
glory would be great, Jo. 17.22. and they would be made the more perfect. Verse
23. O! we shall see every day more and more (as the gathered Churches are more
and more refined and spiritualized) that they will less press the form, or
pray for the opinions of such as are to be received and admitted, but will make
it enough to know that they are believers in the Lord Jesus and therefore ought
to be one with them, be their opinions different from them in things doubtful
and indifferent; and this Doctrine shall shortly be embraced without scruple or
question; and then the Church shall be more glorious and beauteous in the sight
of all. And her beauty.
As the b^ams of the Sun which are here below are many, and various, and spread
diverse ways, Sim.
yet the higher and nigher to the Sun, they are the more united, and the more
they are united in one, the more splendent, and glorious they are; Nigher
Christ, the more all is one, and her perfection.
So the Church growing upward to her full stature in Christ, the nigher she is
(to this Sun) the more her multiplicity of forms, opinions, Saints, and all are
made one in Christ, and the more glorious they must needs be; and besides the
more sweet and perfect they are too; as variety and discord in music, Sim.
make the sweetest concord, and most orderly and perfect period; but thus far
for the second Consideration. 3 Consider. the rule of admission, is prudent and
charitable. Vide Noyes Temple p 63.


The third Consideration is from the rule of admission, which is a rule of
Prudence, and Charity which are not membra dividentia) any degree of true faith
in Christ is enough to take them in, upon Romans 14.1. where we find an absolute
probability of a person converted by the power of grace, and called from
darkn^sse to light, Where there is the least degree of true grace and faith in
Christ.
there we are to take satisfaction, without a curious scrutiny (which some
make) into their judgment in matters indifferent.

Mr. Calvin in Epist. Romans 14.4. says, Semper been sp^remus de eo in quo
cernimus aliquid Dei, etc. Calvin.
Let us always think and hope well of that brother in whom we see the ^east
tokens of grace, or any thing of God dwelling in him; ^t is a great fault
amongst many to exact an excellent height of grace, judgment, or the like; and
to look for a Paul, or an Abraham presently; O no! for God accepts and
receives the least grace and growth in truth: And so must we even him that is
weak in the faith, Romans 14.1. Now that rule which exacts other things, and
requires more then is necessary, even to the weakest in the faith, excludes
many times such as God includes, and has (himself) received and accepted of;
wherefore we must have great care of grieving any of the Saints, or putting any
by for their opinions in things doubtful or indifferent; for to deny a truth
(even a very truth) in things of a middle size, and left indifferent, does
breed but a tolerable error at the most;
but to do it in points positively commanded and necessary (I confess) is an
intolerable error at the least; for stiffely to stand to an error in points
necessary and fundamental, makes a man a Heretic at the least, whilst the
other can make him but a Schismaticke at the most.

But thus for the third Consideration; some more I might have added, Dangerous
to oppose Saints of Christ. Oftentimes comes to fight against God.

With a false zeal.


but I hope I have said enough to wise men, and to all the true Churches of
Christ in the world, to ratify the truth asserted of brethren (dissenting in
things indifferent.) Besides what Gamaliel said to the Council, Act. 5.38, 39.
Refrain from these men, let them alone, lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God. Mr. John Goodwin hereon affirms, it is wisdom not to oppress
any in Gods ways, of Gods servants, and to attempt any thing against a way,
which for all that we know is the way of God, Goodwin.
may be found but a fond engagement, and a fighting even against God himself;
so it is to shut out any for an opinion (he holds) which is left doubtful or
indifferent in the Scripture, a great imprudence, if not impudence: And a zeal
without knowledge, Romans 10.2. Eccles 7.18. which is full of self-conceit. Now
the Rule is a sound knowledge out of Gods word of the thing for which we are
zealous, that it is right, And with a rash judgment.
and required in Gods word and Gospel, Gal. 4.18. and let it be ( ad aequale)
according to our knowledge, Duo sunt (says Anselme out of Augustine. Sermon. 202.
de temp.) in quibus temerarium judicium cavere debemus, Anselme.
cum incertum est quo animo quicquam factum est, vel cum incertum est qualis
futurus sit qui nunc vel bonus vel malus apparet. Rash judgment of any brother
we must beware of in two things: First, when we know not with what a mind the
thing is done; And then secondly, when we know not what the man may be that
thus appears good (at present) or bad to us; O then,
therefore take heed how we judge, condemn, or keep out any believer, be he of
what opinion soever! But so far for Explication: To be brief in Application.

Use 1 Reproof: Are not they too to blame then, that stand too stiffly upon
Circumstances? and trifles? and forms? and left to liberty, Reproves such as
put a necessary use of such forms as are le^^ indifferent.
and yet to impose a necessity upon them, is not this pestilent? and
unsufferable? And yet, Oh how many unskilful builders in this age, that urge
(and that strongly) an Uniformity, Uniformity! as the Bishops cried out for a
Conformity, without which (and they say true) their Churches cannot stand. O
sad! how this mystery of iniquity works yet! when the Churches order, peace,
and happiness consists in unity of the Spirit, and not in the unity of the
Form, as of a Prelatical, Presbyterian form,
or Prelatick Independent Form, or Anabaptistical Form; O no! but in
unanimity, not in uniformity! For all outward Forms (be they what they will,
as Mr. War says, (in his Dispute betwixt Form and Power, a pretty Tract,
Form^ childish things.

1 Cor. 13. Must all pass away.


page 33.) are part of those childish things which are to be done away, as Paul
says; hence it is that even as childhood is done away, and ceases in a more
excellent growth and glory, viz. in the state of manhood and perfection; so
shall all Forms of Discipline whatsoever; Wherefore it is wrong done to the
Church of Christ to keep up a F^rme to hurt, or hinder our growth, or offend
any of the Saints, or (as a dead Carcass) when it stinks, not to suffer, it to
be buried; so I say, to keep up any Form as an engine of cruelty or
persecution, or to make variance betwixt brethren. For who is so ready to
crucify Christ, as the Pharisee, or man of form? who is so contentious, and
quarrelsome at the approaches and appearances of Christ (in Spirit? Man of
fo^me most enemy (...) Christ.
) who is so captious at the truth shining in splendent spirituality? who is so
ready to betray them? who sits so much at Council against them? and all, lest
if Christ (in the Spirit) should be believed, their ( Mosaical, Levitical)
rites, and forms would fall apace, Church of form the Egypt in which Christ
is crucifi^d.
and be of small repute, and not be received. So that, that Church-society,
whose peace, love, order, and unity lies altogether in the Form, I may safely
say, is such a spiritual Egypt as we read of in Rev. 11 8. which is full of
dead carcasses, and where Christ is crucified (at this day.) For as Egypt
(which typified darkness so) it is a place of darkness, Expos.
How it is an Aegyp^.
and at least a veil to keep poor creatures under ignorance, and to hinder
them, and hide from them the excellencies and discoveries of Christ in the
Spirit. In this Egypt are many Magicians and wise men, who imitate Moses and
Aaron, and they take counsel against the servants of God, They deal subtly
against the Sain^s.
the spiritualized ones, and Saints of Christ, saying, Let us deal wisely with
them, Exodus 1.10. lest they multiply and be more then we, etc. or let us deal
subtlely against them, Stephen.
as Stephen says, the Greek renders it to keep them under us. By policy
So that they work against us more by policy, then by piety. As by putting
strange names on the truth, to make it odious, as the Pharisees did on Christ
in the flesh; sometimes calling him Samaritan, sometimes Wine-bibber and
Glutton, sometimes one that works by Beelzebub, To make Christ in the spirit
odious, and would keep him up only in the for^ and lett^r.
and Devil, sometimes the friend of sinners, etc. all this to render him
odious, that they might have the more suffrage to make him suffer as a
blasphemer and malefactor, and none to pity him; so subtly do they disguise
the true Gospel of Christ, the ways of Christ, and spiritual truths, with new
and strange names, calling them Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, etc. and what
not? And why? but that they may the more unanimously, and with the freer
consent of the poor ignorant people (who know not what they do) crucify
Christ in the Spirit: such subtilties are in such societies, as we find
amongst the Presbyterians, and others counted Independents too, at this day. O
how confidently they accuse,
condemn, and crucify the Lord, and spit on his face! and lash him with their
tongues in those truths, that they with wide-mouthed malice naucifie and
scurrilize, and speak so unmercifully against! Besides, O, what severe
Taskmasters, Hard Taskmasters.
are in this Egypt! how the Ministers of it put poor men upon works, lay
burdens on their consciences, compel them to their opinions, and set them
upon doing day and night, and press them to it on pain of death, hell and
all! but alas a day! poor Saints, they have not where withal (in themselves)
to do any thing!
but to build a Pithom and Rameses, Treasure-Cities* for Pharaoh the God of
this world, to garrison against the appearances of Jesus Christ! Furthermore
they in this Egypt would confine Saints (Israel) to their land; to worship
there, and to serve there, Will not let Israel go out from them.
and then they could be content; if we would but keep within the bounds of
Egypt, and not go from our own Parishes, Classes, Teachers, or the like!

And moreover, O what a trouble to them it is to see Gods Israel does increase
and multiply, do what they can, And are troubled that Israel multiples, and
are afraid of it.
and how are they afraid! such a Church, I say, is but a Spiritual Egypt,
whose streets are full of dead carcasses! corrupt unsavory, stinking, dead,
useless, life-lesse and abominable Forms, which are not fit to be above
ground in any place,
but where our Lord is crucified. Now, I say, O, it is sad! where we yet meet
with such hard Taskmasters, as would keep us in perpetual bondage, under their
Forms, and Ordinances, and impose things upon us which we are not able to
bear. All forms must dye.
Seeing all Administrations and Forms must run their race and fall: And we
find not that a Form was created for a standing rule, but a temporary help
to serve a turn, for an age, or so, wherein it is once useful (and then
veniente perfecto, Sim.
evacuatur imperfectum.) For as every man will dye in time, when his radical
moisture is spent, and yet he may be said to dye before his time, being
anticipated in his course by intemperance, or miscarriage and mischance, and
the like; Uuntimely death of forms when they are made Idols, is a warning to
the formal* Anabaptists.
so every Form will fall in time, and naturally expire; and yet (as we say)
may be cut off in the midst, and the fall of it hastened by the intemperance
and miscarriages of such fondlings, as abuse it, and adore it: As the
Brazen-serpent* was suddenly knocked down when people began to give honor to
it, and to Idolize it; for God is jealous of his honor, and rather then his
glory shall be given to the Form, he will break it in pieces like a Potters
vessel, and grind it to powder to be no more seen, nor set up again (as he
did the golden Calfe.
) wherefore how dare we dote upon any Form^ which must and shall pass away!
we read that Austin, Austin.
An. 598. asked Gregory, how it came to pass there should be so many forms,
and such diversity of customs and ceremonies in several Churches and
Countries, seeing there was but one Faith all this while? why says he, that
you may choose out of all the best, and picked out things, out of all the
Churches about here and there, whether in Rome, France, or else where, they
being left to take which you best like, and approve of in conscience to
practice, as most useful and orderly. So that we are not to be tied up to any
one Form, Christ in the form of his flesh, and in the form of his Churchway,
run parallel, how.

Christ crucified, glorified* living, dying, in flesh and spirit.

Christ risen*


nor to have our consciences bound up to things left to liberty.

Now methinks the Church of Christ (which is his body too, and flesh (as I may
say) now in his Saints, does appear much parallel with Christ's fleshly
appearance upon earth; For Christ in his flesh (when he was here) and Christ in
his Church (now here) to my judgment, are said both to be his body in a
parallel Form; For in this Church-forme every member, or Christian brother
therein is (as it were) an emblem (representing Christ) in one stage or other
of his life; some live in a crucified Christ, some in an exalted and glorified
Jesus; some live in his life, some in his death; some are debased and abused;
some are honored and owned; some live in Christ after the flesh and form,
others live in Christ after the Spirit, and power. And in this form or
appearance (as it were in his flesh) Christ does and suffers, lives, and dies,
descends, and ascends into a higher glory, and the highest pitch of a
Christian's life is Christ risen and sitting,
at the right hand of God. In this form he silences the Doctors, whips out
buyers and sellers too out of the Temple (turns out mixed multitudes) teaches
in the Synagogues (or Parishes) yea and works miracles, and yet for all that
the Pharisees (of the Synagogues) do slander him, and seek to crucify him, as
we said before; so that in a Form he is capable of suffering too, especially
when his people are inslaved by an enforced uniformity, for which Antichrist
makes use of Secular powers. But God has in all ages powered his Unction (the
Spirit) upon some of his choicest servants to oppose Uniformity enforced;
Gerson.
and John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris a hundred years before Luthers time,
lays about him hard, to beat down this Antichristian doctrine of Uniformity,
or tying all to a Form. For in his Sermon before the King of France (pro pace
and unione Graecorum) in his seventh Consideration, he says, Men ought not to
be bound up to believe and hold one and the same manner of Government in things
that do not immediately concern the truth of faith, and the Gospel of Christ;
(and says) he, Forms are not to be enforced, but left to liberty.
were this well observed it would be the principal key to open a door of peace
and love, and union among all different brethren, and Churches, and now between
the Greeks and Latins who differ in many actions and forms, and rites, and
rules. As for BAPTISM, the Latins say, I baptize thee; but the Greeks say,
Let us this servant be baptized, etc. So for the SVPPER, the Latins will have
leavened bread, the Greeks unleavened bread; but says he, Let every Province,
and Church be at liberty about in his own sense, and use his own order and
form. Our Fathers before the Flood lived and worshipped in one Form; after the
Flood in another, before the Law in one, and under it in another, and after it,
under the Baptist in another, under the ministration of Christ in the flesh in
another, under the Gospel in another;
under the dispensations of the Spirit another way, etc. as Heb. 1, 1, 2.
diverse ways, and in sundry manners.

Now all such Forms (as Gerson speaks of, and of such I speak) why they are
left free to use or not use (as there is need of them) without ties; wherefore
no Form should be so urged or pressed upon any brother or Saint, as to
despise, judge, cast him out, or keep him off if he come not up to it, and
under it (which is a yoke to him who is not free;) Now, we must willingly lay
them aside, rather then lay them on any as a burden; for even Gods own
Ceremonies, Ephesians. 2.15. and Commandments were laid aside, and put by to make
peace and unity, that there might not be any difference among brothers; no not
between Jew and Gentile (so far off) but that they might be one. Gods forms
laid aside for peace and union, much more must ours.
Much more must all our Forms (for of such I speak all this while, let none
mistake me) they must much rather be thrown aside, then thrust on any Saint
whatsoever. Famous is the answer of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome to Lucius K. of
Britain (as Hollinshed in his Description of Britain, chap. 7 Anno 187.
historifies) when the Gospel began to be preached freely, and Britain
received the faith, and without any impeachment,
impediment, or Ceremonies at all; yet King Lucius sends to Eleutherius for
some model, or form of Church Government, who had this answer. That Christ
has left sufficient order in the Scriptures for the government of his Church:
you require, says he, Our Forms and Laws; but our Laws are faulty, G^ds Laws
are never so, take the Scriptures, and look you out a government there, and
follow that. So that this was rare, even from a Bishop of Rome himself (being
the fourteenth after Platina's Arithmeticke) but it seems in those days they
were more modest then they were afterward, when they haled in, and hoised up
humane inventions, and would make men submit to them, or else censure them; yea
I may say, then they are in these days, that do even grate their teeth, and
hate at their heart, such tender conscientious Saints as do but doubt or
question their injunctions and Precepts; Like Turks, when forms must not be
questioned.
and surely this were fitter for the Turks, for it is among them, that a man
must not question (no not on pain of death, and damnation) their general
received Religion and Ceremonies, whereby they enjoy a ( pace pudendo) peace
which we may be ashamed of; but this it is, among men of form, they are afraid
lest their Idols should be loathed when they are known. Many Professors
Idolaters.
There is a great deal of Idolatry yet in England; as when your Formalists set
up any form, or thing, in the room of God, which is not God; Perkins.
that is done, says Mr. Perkins upon Gal. 5. three ways:

Godhead is ascribed to a mere creature, as it was said of Herod, The voice of
God, and not of man.

Godhead is ascribed to the creature, or thing, or form, Act. 12.22.

And thirdly, when the heart and affections are given up to creature, Col. 3.5.
or Forms, when they make Idols of them. Act. 12.22. Forms Idols.
An Idol is taken two ways:

1 A thing devised, a fiction, a humane form or invention.

2 When we conceive of a Form otherwise then it is; Thus many have their Idols
up, in this age, which God will down with to the dust in the next: Though they
say, Oh, they are holy, spiritual! as Col. 2.20, 21, 22. what difference is
between the Papists worshipping God in images, and the Presbyters, and some
others in their forms? which they adore so, and set up in the room of Christ,
and his Spirit; is not this Idolatry? When Phaedra lay with Hippolytus, Sim.
she protested that she embraced Theseus in him, Featly Sermon. p. 491.
whom he so nearly resembled; but yet this freed her not from being an
Adulteress: so Papists say, they worship not the Image, but the person in it,
not the Crucifix but Christ: so say others, we do not so adore the
circumstance, but the substance, the form, but the thing; but alas! this does
little quit them from the guilt of spiritual Adultery, viz. Idolatry. O then!
they are in a high blame, and Articles of high Treason might be compiled
against them* that thus stiffely stand up for Uniformity of necessity; and such
do but let their nails grow long to scratch the truth with. In every Form
there is weakness, Sim.
and in some degree or other a tincture of the flesh, The occasion of Form^
self Division, etc. For the occasion of them is our darkness, weakness, and
imperfection. Now it is Gods design to purge all forms from their dregs and
filthiness, for they are full; wherefore let not them under one form judge or
condemn them that are under another; for the wisdom which is contained in
every one of these administrations is justified only by her own children, and
the refiners fire shall (shortly) have about with them all, and burn up all:
in the mean time urge your forms upon none, for all must cease in time, though
useful for the time.

Use. Exhort to two things. First, we must not cast off the present use of
Forms (whilst they are in date) though we Idolize them, adore them, urge, 1
Not altogether to despise or throw by forms, for they are useful.
and force them on others. For as lace sets out the Garment, so do some Forms,
Ceremonies, Orders, etc. adorn, and not obscure (if they be not abused, if
they be not laid on too thick and many) the substance of Gods service. Now, I
say, we must not in stead of paring the nails (which indeed ought to be) be
too covetous at first, and cut the fingers of the Church, or make her hands
bleed; no, not although her nails were too long, too strong, too ugly, black,
and uncomely, Let all things be done in decency, and in order.

Secondly, All Saints we must receive and love, Ephesians. 1.15. that are in the
faith with us Ephesians. 4.5. for all Saints before, 2 To receive all Saints that are
in the same faith.
under, and since the Law, Abraham, Moses, David, Apostles, Saints in all ages
under all Forms, and Opinions, and Measures (though never so much different)
to this hour; yea and all that were, are, and are to come, live in one and the
same (mystery of) faith, in one and the same Christ apprehended by faith; For
as the Branches of the Vine though some are higher, Sim.
and some lower, some bigger, and some lesser, etc. yet they all alike possess
of the same life, though some come one year, some another, yet they all
(equally) live the life of the Vine, the little twig that came out but this
year as well as the greatest Branch that came out many years agone, all live
the same life of the Vine; so in faith there is unity and equality all (in all
ages, of all opinions, and under all Forms yet, all) live the same life of
Christ.

Now let us not stand at a distance about trifles, as upon shadows, whilst
we live all in one Faith, one Christ; We know the lower the Sun is, the
longer the shadow is, but the higher it is, the shadow is the shorter: So it is
here, the more we have of (Christ) the Sun, and the substance, the less we
see or mind the shadow, or the Circums^ance. And it is because men have the
Sun behind them, but let us keep the Sun before us (with our faces toward*
and full eyes on Jesus Christ) and then we shall keep the shadow behind us,
and walk as Children of light indeed. O then, dear friends! do not stand so
much upon a Circumstance, Sim.
in receiving in the Brethren! for believe it, Why men and Churches are so
formal.
they are Carnal Churches of men (more then of Christ) that do so much trouble
themselves, and stumble others about outward things.

Hence it is that all must do as they would have them to a tittle, or else
they, shall presently be posted up for Heretics or erroneous persons at the
least; and many times men are cross, and love to be singular, and to oppose
others in their practice and opinions, though without any grounds at all. As it
is related of certain Islanders near China, who will salute by putting off
their shoes, because they of China do it by putting off their hats; so some
out of crossenesse to others (that they love not) will differ from them, though
they run into gross errors and great absurdities thereby, which are more
ridiculous then religious. But let us not look for shadows in the room of the
Sun, or empty forms for the righteousness, peace, Sim.
and joy in the Holy Ghost. Such as are sound in the faith we must admit, for
the worship of the Temple must be measured.

Hence it is that the Church must be satisfied that they are Believers, and in
the true faith of our Lord Jesus, whereof every member whom they admit, do
give in some evidences, or make some account, or other; whereby the Church
rests satisfied. All that are found in faith must be admitted, for all their
judgments in things indifferent.


Thus we did in Dublin, the Confessions of faith (so called) made by some,
lying much of this Form which follows, and is the same for matter and
substance made by all.

An Account of Faith, as it was made and given in by word of Mouth, on the
Eighth day of the Eighth Month, 1651. In a Public Meeting Place at Dublin,
upon his entrance into Church Fellowship there, By J. R. etc.
I Acknowledge and profess from my very heart, before the Lord, and you all
here present, That I do believe there is but one God; who is omnipotent,
omniscient, omni-present, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. Joh 8 17, 18, 19. 1 John 5.5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Matthew. 28.19, 20.
and an infinite and all-glorious Being; and distinguished into three
subsistences, or (if that word offend) I will say into three personal
proprieties and relations, according to his several operations and
administrations; namely, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Father is of
himself; the Son proceeds from the Father; and the Spirit from them both. And
although the Saints cannot take hold of God, Rom 1.19, 20.
as God incomprehensible, and inapprehensible; yet they know him as a Father,
as a Son, as a Spirit, dwelling in them; and so far as his several attributes
makes him known to them.

1 The Father. Isa. 40.28. and 43.15. 1 Peter 4.19 Rom 3.14. 2 Chro. 20 6.
Psalm 66.7.
First, Concerning the first Person (so called) of the Trinity, or God the
Father; that he is the great Creator and Governor of all things in Heaven and
Earth; eternally distinct (as in himself) from all Creatures (as Creatures) in
his absolute Being, and absolute Well-Being. And that this God shall judge the
World. But,

Secondly, Concerning the second in the Trinity, the Son, Jesus Christ, 2 The
Son. Acts 10.42, 43. Isaiah 45.21, 22 1 John 5 29. Isaiah 9.6, 7. 1 Timothy 2.5. 1
John 4.2, 3. 2 John 7.
of whom Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles wrote; and in whom all the
Scriptures are, and shall be fulfilled: I believe him, as he is both God and
Man, making a complete Mediator; and as God equal to the Father, as Man of the
tribe of Judah, the line of David, the seed of Abraham, and born of Mary, etc.
And as both the only Mediator between God and Man; And he was from everlasting
(and yet) as Man from the Womb, he was separated, called, appointed, and
anointed most fully with all gifts and graces, H^s Offices.

1 Prophet. Mic^h 5.4. Malachi 3.1. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3.22, 2^. Isaiah 54.13.

2 Priest. Hebr. 9.12, 14. and 10.3, 10. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Peter 1.24. John 10.15.
Col. 2.14, 15. Isaiah 53.12. Heb. 12.24.

3 King. First, ^n general. M^tth. 28.18. Psalm 2.6. Psalm 45.6. H^b. 8.8.
Isaiah 9.6, 7. Rev. 2.26, 27. Secondly, In particular. Matthew. 2.2. Luke 1.33,
74, 75. Luke 19.27. Phil. 2.9. Haggai 2.7. Heb. 12.27, 28. Isaiah 45.22. Micah
4.2, etc.


necessary for all mankind.

Concerning his Offices, That he is King, Priest, and Prophet,

First, As the Prophet, he has revealed his Fathers whole will, so far as is
necessary to Salvation in his Word and Ordinances, and speaks it to his Church
and Saints, by his Word and Spirit.

Secondly, As Priest being consecrated for us* he has appeared to put away
sin, and has offered himself the sacrifice for the sins of the people, once
for all; laying down his life for his sheep, and he has absolutely abolished
all legal and Ceremonial rites and shadows, and is now entered into the Holy of
Holies, and sits at the right hand of glory, making intercession for us.

Thirdly, As King; in general all power is given him in Heaven and Earth, and
he does exercise his power, over men and Angels, good and bad, for the safety
of his Saints, and destruction of his enemies, till he has made them all his
footstool.

In particular, that Christ is King over his Church, and shall reign on Earth
spiritually, in the hearts of his Saints; and by his Word and Spirit, he
gathers all his peoples together from Idolatry, Superstition, Darkness, etc.
into his own Spiritual way of worship and holiness; and brings them to the
Father, and by his Spirit he makes them a peculiar people, a royal Priesthood,
a holy generation, and instructs and governs them by his Laws, prepared for his
Church, and people.

Thirdly, Concerning the Spirit ( the third of the Trinity) that he is sent by
the Father and the Son to make application of the whole work of Redemption, 3
The Spirit. John 16.13, 14. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 4.30. Zach. 9.11. Malachi 3.1.
Heb. 10.29. and 13.20. and 8* 6.8, 9.
to those whom the Father has given to the Son, by his decree; and whom the
Son has brought to the Father, by his blood, according to the everlasting
Covenant, made between the Father, and the Son; which the Spirit carries on to
us, as the Covenant of Free Grace, for our Salvation; By the operation of this
holy Spirit in me. This Grace was begun first by and through the Law which
awakned me so, John 16.8, 9. Rom 8.2. Romans 4.8.
as that I saw I was lost, and undone for ever; and then by the Gospel, whereby
Christ was revealed to me (and in me by his Spirit,) and his righteousness
cleared up mine (But of this hereafter.)

John 15.26.
This Spirit applied Christ Jesus, ( as far as I knew him) manifested to, and
in me; by which, I was brought at length to close with Christ; and that so
unfainedly, that I resolved to loose all before Christ.) So such are, First, by
Christ's righteousness justified; Secondly, by his Spirit adopted sons; Thirdly,
R^m. 8.16* and 1.4.
by his Grace sanctified and really changed to the piety and purity of Gods
holy Image ( gradually;) and Fourthly, Glorified and changed from misery to
happiness; which begins in the inward sense of Gods soul-melting love to them
in Christ; from whence, is the hope of glory, and assurance of salvation, Gal.
5.22, 23. 1 John 5.7.
joy, peace, and happiness within, etc.

Fifthly, Concerning the Scriptures in Old and New Testament, 5 Scriptures.
Psalm 147.19, 20. John 5 39. 2 Cor. 1.13. Acts 26.22. 2 Timothy 3.16 2 Pet. 1.20,
21. Gal. 6.16.
they are the Word of God, as they were writ and indicted by the holy Spirit;
and that they are the standing rule left us, both for our knowledge and
practice, doctrine, and Discipline, here below.

Sixthly, I believe, that by the first Adams disobedience we all fell, and that
we are all by nature the children of wrath, dead in sins and trespasses; and
that those who live and dye in their sins, 6 Man. Ephesians. 2.1, 3. John 3.3, 4.
Acts 17.30, 31. Romans 8.13.
cannot be saved, nor any without regeneration or new birth.

Seventhly, Concerning the Church of Christ, I know it is but one Body,
Universal, and Catholic, and that is of all Saints, 7 The Church. Ephesians. 4.4.
Invis^ble and Universal. 1 Cor. 12.27, 28
past, present, and to come, invisible and visible, yea, spiritual and formal:
But this I also believe, that God has left a rule in his Word for Particular
Congregational Churches here upon Earth, as the visible, to make up his one
entire and universal Body.

8 Churches visible and congregational. 1 Cor. 12.20. Col. ^ 19.
Eighthly, Now concerning Christ's particular Churches, I believe as I have
preached and proved such a Church to be a Fellowship called out of the world,
and united to Christ, As Members to the head, and all one with another;
according to the Word, for the worship of God, Ephesians 2.21, 22. Matthew. 28.20. Ephesians
4.29. 1 These. 5.11. John 15.19. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 19. Revel. 18.4. Psalm 110.3.
Isai. 2 2, 4. 2 Cor. 8.5. Acts 11.23. Mal. 3.16. Jude 20. H^b 10.24, 25. Acts 6
3. and 14.23. Exo^. 20.24. 1 Kings 9.3. Isaiah ^.5, 6. and 25.6, 7, 8. Psalm
132.13, 14, 15. Revel. 2.1. 2 Co^. 6.8. Cant. 4.16. and 6.2, 3. and 7.12. Isai.
33.17, 20. Psalm. 122.3.
and the edification one of another; and that such must be separate from false
ways, worships, Antichristian superstitions, observancies, etc. and willingly
join in Christian Communion, and Covenant, or resolution of cleaving close to
the Lord in this his way, with purpose of heart, and by free confession of
their Faith, and subjection to the Gospel; and therein especially, I believe,
That the Ordinances of Christ are to be freely and frequently dispensed; as
preaching, praying, prophesying one by one, Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, Sacraments, Censures, Offices, and Officers, and often and
ordinary exercising of gifts.

And that there is a choosing of, and setting apart Officers by the whole Body,
and that none does orderly do the office of a Minister among them, but such;
and besides (to omit many other things) and bring all up in this rear, I do
really believe, that such orderly Churches, have privileges royal, oracles,
and seals, and precious promises of Gods love* presence, and protection, in a
special m^nner, more then all the world besides: And although particular
Churches be distinct and Independent Bodies, even as Cities compact. Temples,
Houses, etc. yet all Churches must walk by the same rule, and have counsel and
comfort, and help from one another, when need requires; as being all Members of
one Body, of which Christ is the Head.

And to conclude, I am fully persuaded in my very soul, that at the day of
judgment, when the dead shall arise, John 5.28. 1 Cor. 15.19. Acts 17 30, 31.
2 Timothy 2.18. Heb. 12.23.
that I shall arise also, and shall rejoice in Jesus Christ my Savior and
reign with him for ever, and sing Hallelujah for all Eternity, in the
Congregation of the firstborn; where the Spirits of just men are made perfect.



And this is my Faith, fetched from my v^ry heart, and presented in the hearing
of a heart-searching God, and all of you here present.

Thus after satisfaction is given to the Church of their sound faith, I find
no other thing necessary for this fifth Chapter; wherein I have been prolix,
but I hope profitably.

CHAP. VI. (...) Chasid. Every o^e to be ADMITTED, gives out some EXPERMENTAL
Evi^ences of the work of GRACE upon his SOUL (for the Church to judge of)
whereby he (or she) is convinced that he is regenerate, and received of God,
which is proved and approved by about forty examples of worth.
Grace in a convert discovered two ways.
IT is said of Christ Mark. 7.24. That he could not be hid, neither can grace,
nor the Spirit of Christ; which is known ( vel per revelationem, vel per
operationem) either First, by Revelation, as when God reveals it to a poor
soul (under extraordinary sad temptations, and soule-miseries) by
extraordinary ways, 1 More extraordinary.
many times in dreams, and visions, and voices, etc. (all which you shall find
instanced by and by) this way to some he takes, 2 More ordinary.
to comfort them, and recover them, and to acquaint them as he did Paul, 2 Cor.
12.9. that his grace was sufficient for them. Or else secondly, by the
operation of the Spirit (and per aliqua signa) in the wonder-working, and
changing effects of grace; for then thou hate those lusts that hinder thee of
Christ, and then thou longest vehemently after Christ, and love the means of
grace, and live in the works of grace, and find a great change in thy
judgment,
will, and affections now, and can look up cheerfully as to thy Father now
(being delivered from the bondage of fear) and can come with an humble
boldness by the Spirit of adoption, and say, Father, I want a new Coat (I must
have one, viz. Christ's garment) and I must have a new Book, viz. the Book of
life, etc.) and thou can find a power in thee (more then before) for to
resist sin and temptation, and a readiness to obey, Act. 2.41. and do any
thing for God, out of fondnes and sincerity of love to him; Of both those ways
excellent examples follow.
yea thou contemnest worldly things, and think them below thee; and eatest
hidden manna, Rev. 2.17. and have the white stone, and the new name which none
knows but he that receives; the sweetness of which thou tastest, and can
tell it by experience, which is by no others to be known. And such kind of
experiences I could produce abundance, and intended it, but that I am this very
week prevented by a little piece, tituled, Spiritual experiences of sundry
Believers, recommended by Mr. Powel; yet how ever I shall instance in some of
both these sorts of Experiences in such as are the most remarkable and picked
out, as they were given in at Dublin by such as were admitted; the rather for
that I find not the like of some of them ever put forth for public advantage;
and I believe they are some of the flowers of the Spring in these days.

But before this, we must prove this practice warantable out of the word of
God; Experiences prove principles.
for I would not willingly offer any thing, but what is Gods own, and in Gods
order. Now to a poor soul, all such things as are in the soul, are made
known by experiences; experience, we say, proves principles. A man's principles
are known and experienced by his actions, as we know how the will stands, by
what it wills (Homo p^r actus experitur principia intrinseca. Proved by
) But to the thing it will appear by the word, that the Saints are to hold out
their experiences to others, yea in the open Congregations, Precepts.
and then we shall show you the reasons, and so to the examples, to the proofs
first, by precept and practice; by precept, as Matthew. 8.4. when Christ had
cleansed the Leper, he bid him ^oe, and show it for a testimony; and Matthew.
28.7 the Angels bid Mary Magdalen go quickly and tell the Disciples, that
Christ (whom ye seek) is risen, Go tell them it; and Verse 10. Christ meeting
with the Mary's, renews the precept, Go tell them (my brethren, for all that I
am risen, yet they are my brethren) Go tell them, etc. for now ye know it,
and have seen me, Jews pract^se now.
and can assuredly say that I am risen. Joel 1.3 Tell your children, and let
their children tell your children, and their children another generation; And
this is observed among the Jews at this day out of Deuteronomy. 6.7. and to add more
solemnity to the commemoration of Gods Law, Vide the Hist. of Jews by Leo
Modena chapter p. 2.
and their deliverance from Egypt, etc. they write it down in a piece of
Parchment, and then rolling it up, superscribe it (...) shaddai and fastened it
to the wall, or the post of the door, the right hand of the entrance; and as
often as they go in and out, they touch it, and kiss it with great affection
and devotion. This also lies commanded, Psalm. 34.8. Come taste and see that the
Lord is good, and 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Comfort your selves together, and edify one
another, even as al^o ye do. This is excellent to edification and consolation,
to tell what God has done for thy soul! for hereby many receive benefit, and
may meet with the like; and other comforts, who have met with the like.

2 Proved by Practi^e in primitive times
Besides, there be abundance of Scriptures to prove the practice of this, as in
Psalm. 26.6, 7. I will tell of all thy wondrous works; yea Psalm. 66.19. Come and
hear (says he) all ye that fear the Lord, and I will declare what he has
done for my soul; for Verse 19. Verily God has heard me, and has not turned
away his mercy from me; So that it is no new thing to tell our experiences in
public to the whole Church, Expos.
and in the society of Saints. I wish it were more in practice; for the rich
discoveries of grace in Christ, and many wonderful various ways of Gods
working in these days in his Saints would thereby be laid open. Expos.
But see further, Psalm. 18 30. The way of God is perfect (says David) God is a
rock, faithful, etc. How know thou this, David? O says he, I have tried
it, the word of the Lord is tried; I can tell it by experience, and I know that
he is a buckler to all that trust in him. And David, Psalm. 51. promises, Expos.
that as soon as his broken bones were healed, and the joy of his salvation was
restored to him, Verse 12.13. that he would presently preach it, and teach even
sinners Gods ways, to give them warning of uncleanness, sin, etc. and to
tell them what it is to lie in hell, Expos.
horror, to have a wounded spirit, an accusing conscience, and the judgments
of an angry frowning God. Thus also 2 Cor. 5.11. We knowing the terror of the
Lord, (that is, by terrible things which would make a man tremble, and his
heart ache) we persuade men ((...)) we tell them the condition we were in, and
now how we are out, on purpose to persuade them to believe in God, and to get
out of their carnal condition; Expos.
for presidents sometimes do prevail before precepts; so that this is no
novelty to declare the condition which we have been in, and are in; Taste and
see, the mercy, grace, and love of God in Christ in the Gospel, by pardon,
peace, reconciliation, assurance, or whatsoever is to be tasted, as Dr. Ames
observes on 1 Pet. 2.3. if so be ye have tasted how gracious the Lord is
((...)) not only taken grace (for so many do) but tasted grace ( per
metonymiam effecti) and found experimentally feelingly, feedingly how it
tastes: O then, Dr. Ames.
you will say, O it is good! O this is sweet! and say to others, Come and
taste! The Israelites, when they had tasted the manna, they called it Angels
food, but before they slighted it, What is this? Thus Psalm. 119.103. but why
should we taste it, and tell it to others? There be diverse Reasons, both with
reference to God, the Church, and those Saints themselves that do enjoy them,
why they should declare them to the Church.

First, It is a bearing the best (outward) testimony to God Attributes that can
be, It is much for Gods glory. Sibs his Marriage feast page 103.
when we can say by experience that God is gracious, loving, slow to anger,
ready to forgive, that he is true and faithful, for we have tried him, and
therefore know it, Psalm. 18.30. But on the other side, it is the want of this
that makes us call his care, and his truth, and his mercy and love so often
into question, especially in times of trials, (as Sibbs says in his
soule-conflicts, chap. 18.) in Joh. 15.27. and ye shall bear witness (says
Christ) because ye have been w^t^ to me from the beginning ((...)) ye shall
witness upon your own knowledge (the word is) not from hearsay, Expos*
but have-say, from your own experiences, ye shall testify even before the
Judge in the eye, and ears of all the people, that I am full of grace, light,
life, and salvation. You shall know it by experience, and witness to his
truth, faithfulness, righteousness, justice, mercy, etc. And though a
thousand should deny it, a child of God that can say by experience, that God is
a good God,
the word is a true word, his love is a most soul-ravishing, and never-ending
love, and the like; and his hand helped me, his blood cleansed, cured,
comforted me, his own good will restored me; Oh, such a one opens the mouths
of many to praise the Lord! Psalm. 35.18.27. and to believe in the Lord, Joh.
17.21.23. Jo. 11.48. Act. 3.9. Luke 18.43.

Churches benefit too, to set upon this duty to declare experiences of Gods
work on the soul, It is much for the Churches advantage.
and that for these several Reasons which follow, As

1 To know (so far as may be judged by the effects) who are the Elect of God. 1
In judging of such as a^e Gods.
1 Thessalonians. 1.4. beloved of God (that is by the judgment of charity, not of
infallibility) for none can say for certainty thou art a Saint, or elect, but
so far as we judge and believe in Verse 5. the proof of Election lies in
Vocation,
and ye know what manner of men we were, says he; so that the Church was
endued with a spirit of discerning, 1 Cor. 12.10. Now such as the Church
believes to be called of God, she believes to be of the election of grace,
Election is a mystery.
Romans 11.5. and such she must admit. Now to make Election sure (as 2 Pet.
1.10.) and clear, we must make our Vocation sure, and Calling clear, 2 Timothy
1.9. where it is called a Holy calling, that is from sin, to grace, Tit. 2.11,
12. from darkness to light, 1 Pet. 2.9. from former sins, Sim.
and lusts, to holy life, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. and by this our election is known.
To open which note, know that Election it self is secret and mysterious, as it
lies in the decree, it is from all Eternity. Now poor man must needs be lost,
to look what was done from all Eternity, in the secret conclave, and council
of Heaven; a Being that is spanned by time cannot reach to it; his Decrees are
kept close under lock and key (till it is time to open them; Sim.
) wherefore I find it not praiseworthy in them that so distract themselves,
and others by their curious disquisitions, and nice disputations in this point.
For our way to have the fruit of it, is not to dig deep, and to search to the
root, but to reach to the boughs and branches thereof.
Sim.
So look out, and take hold on the Holy calling; For the head of Nilus cannot
be found out, Made known by Vocation.
but the many sweet issues and Springs of that (hidden) head are found out, and
known: So though the Head is secret, and kept hid, yet the Springs break out,
in our vocations, and holy obedience and conversation (as Adams on Peter P.
210. has it) for a River may run a great while, Adams.
and a great way under ground, but in time, and in some place it breaks out,
Sim.
and runs openly: So the Decree may be hid and secret for a while, but the
streams break out in Vocations, which is the way from Predestination to
Glorification, Romans 8.30. This cuts off that absurd, sottish,
and soule-overwhelming opinion of many poor wretches, who say, if I am decreed
to be saved, Obj.
then I may live as I list, for I am sure I shall be saved if it be decreed;
but if it be decreed I shall be damned, why I shall be damned do what I can,
and my best way is to live in pleasure, loving and serving my self here, Answ.
for I am sure all my care cannot alter Gods counsel. Oh, alas! how subtle is
the Devil! but does the Word say thus? no! but the Word says, If God have
decreed thy salvation as elect, why then thou shall walk in the way of
salvation, and then thou art decreed to be called (as well as saved) from sin
to grace, to a holy life, from all uncleanness, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. to
sanctification.

Origin makes mention of one sick, who was persuaded by a friend not to send
for a Physician; for says he, Origin.
if it be appointed you shall dye, the Physician cannot help you; if it be
appointed you shall live, you do not need him, but shall live without him;
Nay, Sir, (answered he) but if I be appointed to live, I will use the means
(which are also appointed thereunto) for such an appointment to take effect.
Now I say there is a strict, Election from eternity. Vocation in time.

Salvation in the De^^^e before sanctification, but in the execution of the
decree, sanctification is before salvation. Dr. Twisse.


and inseparable connection betwixt Election and Vocation, and Vocation is a
comment upon Election. The letter (says Culverwel in his White-stone) was
dated from Eternity, but the Superscription was writ in time, viz. Vocation,
now though the Letter be writ first, yet the Superscription is read first, and
then the other is unsealed and read, the (...) that was in Election, well
becomes (says he) (...) in Vocation.

Doctor Twisse on the point of Predestination, telling us how God is not guided
by second causes, in any of his Decrees, and how nothing in us was the cause of
his Decree concerning us, be it what it will; yet says he in the execution of
his Decree (which is in time) there is another order; for to instance in the
Decree it self, from Eternity, glory is first, Salvation is first ordained,
which produces grace and sanctification; but in the execution of the Decree (in
tempore) grace is before glory, and sanctification before salvation, as was
said before of the Letter, the Superscription is first read though last writ.
Wherefore I say (for to this end I speak it) that it is altogether irregular
and anomalous,
and out of our order, for any to pry, and pore, and peek first out for
Election, and that would first look into the Decree.

How the Church is to jud^e of (...) Elect.
Now would the Church know (so far as they are able in charity, for they cannot
on certainty) and would thou know whether thou art an elect received of God,
decreed to be saved; it is not to search the records in heaven first, but the
records in thy heart first ( for what is bound on earth, is bound in heaven;
and loosed on earth, is loosed in heaven) how is it with thy heart? Sim.
art thou called yet? changed yet? art thou holy? have thou left off thy ill
courses, companies, conditions, etc. for where there is fire, there is heat;
and where there is true vocation, there is (inseparably) sanctification, and
holy life; would we know if the Sun shine, why we shall not need to climb up
into the clouds, Sim.
to clamber to the skies; no! but look upon the beams shining on the earth.
That Astrologer, says one, was sufficiently laughed at, that looking so
intensely upon the Stars, and staring with so much amazement at their
twinkling, Sim.
tumbled (unawares) over head and ears into the water; whereas, had it pleased
him to have looked lower in the water, he might have seen them lively
represented in that Crystal glass; so many do but undo themselves, and are
over head and ears,
that look so high at first, as to search the secret will, which they shall
easily see in sanctification, and regeneration revealed. And as a Father that
resolves one son shall be his heir, which shall be he (amongst many) he says
not, (but keeps that secret) yet so far reveals his mind,
that it shall be he that observes him in obedience to his commands; Sim*
so God, though he has kept secret who they be that shall be saved, and whom
he has elected (he locks this up in his own bosom) yet he has revealed it
thus far, that such shall be holy, obedient to his Gospel, believe in Christ
Jesus; these effects, Election brings forth, and we are not able to judge of
the cause, but by the effects. And judges of the cause by the effects and
means. The order of telling experiences.
So that when poor souls power out their experiences, and tell the means, and
show the effects of their Call; we cannot but (in the judgment of charity)
believe the cause of this their Call, their faith, their holiness, is the
Decree of Election, Ephesians. 2.10. 2 Pet. 2.8, 9, 10. and that they shall attain
to the end, viz. Salvation. Now I say, in the pouring out Experiences they
acquaint the Church with the means, and the effects. And you will find both
these in the examples that follow, where they tell their preparation and
qualification.

In their preparation, 1 When they came to be taken off of sin, self, world,
lusts, or the like, some at one hour, 1 Preparation.
some at another, some in the night; some in the day, some at home, 1 When, the
time?
some abroad; some when younger; some when older (but that is most seldom.)

And secondly, how? some more violently, 2 How* the means?
the Lord came in the thunders, storms, fire on Mount Sinai, and in frightfull
flashes of lightning, like a Ghost, a Destroyer, a judge, in flaming vengeance,
To bring them down into hell.
roaring like a Lion robbed of whelps to many; In afflictions, crosses, losses,
dangers, frights, threatenings of Law, terrors of Hell, and the damned roaring
in their ears, and in such dispensations as cut to the heart, pierced to the
quick, sharp, and fetched blood from the soul, wounded the conscience, Mr
Rogers. Mr. Fenner.
with a thousand stabs, as Act. 2.37. such Sermons Mr. Rogers of Dedham, Fenner
preached, etc.

But secondly, others more gently were won in by love, cheries, promises, warm
tenders of the blood of Christ, lively openings of a crucified Christ, which
melt their souls, and make their hearts bleed, and mourn to look up unto him,
whom they have pierced, by such Sermons as Sibbs, Crispe, etc. preached. Thus
they were brought low, wounded in spirit, broken in heart, To bring (...) down
into (...)* Dr. Sibs. Dr. Cr^spe.
and with fresh bleeding wounds weep (though some more, some less) for a
Christ their Lord, but they know not where he is laid, Joh. 20.15. and know not
where to look for him, but sometimes are afraid, and fly off, and on, and up
and down, and here and there, under a thousand temptations, being in a ( holy
preparing) desperation, and utterly undone in their own sight and sense, till
by some Ordinance, Promise or other; Providence or other; the Lord ministers
comfort, and by his secret Spirit whispers pardon, and peace, and joy
abundantly, and brings them to Jesus. And to raise them up into heavenly places
in Christ Jesus.
O then they say with Mary, Rabboni! My Lord, have I found thee! Oh what sweet
claspings! and closings, and ravishing embracings! and kisses of love, and
banquets, and flaggons! are betwixt Christ and such souls then! -- none can
express it! Sim.
O but it is best known by enjoying! It is said in Samuel ^f many multitudes
in Saul's Army, But f^w so. 1 King. 31.
that only a few bankrupt undone beggars came to David in the Cave of A^u^^am;
and indeed, it is true here, none but a few undone souls* poor beggars, that
have spent all, lost all, wounded Cripples, brokenhearted Publicans* troubled
Hanna's weeping, sobbing, sighing (and yet seeking) Mary's, and sin-feeling
souls that come to Christ; and that are cast in upon him through mere misery
and want, and thus prepared for him* are received of him,
Joh. 6.37. Mat. 12.20. Mark. 5.26. and none can be put by* 2 Qualifica. By
the alteration that is in them* and such like effects.
that thus come.

The second is Qualification; In their Experiences, you shall hear how they
are changed; O! what a great alteration there is now in them! all old things
are passed away, and all things become new! Expos.
O what trouble! and signal change they then find! a new nature! a new heart!
new affections! new objects! new smilings, and flowings of light, and love! Oh
then they could be content to dye for God! to lay down their lives for
Christ! yea if it were to be cast to Hell, 2 Cor. 1.^.
so they have but Christ in their arms! their sweet Jesus in their hearts! yea
if they thought that he would not save them, yet they will love him! and
serve^ him! and do any thing for his sake! and though he slay them, yet they
can find in their hearts to trust in him! and now they forsake all evil
ways, and prize the word (as a hungry man does food) and feed on the
Ordinances heartily; and are frequent in prayer and duty, and are able to
comfort others in the like case that they have been in; and do all they can to
call home others, and to get them into Christ; they are loath to eat their
sweet morsels alone, and this makes them so ambitious of the fellowship of the
Saints; all which will appear in the ensuing Examples; so that it is for this
Reason also to satisfy the Church, that they give out their experiences of
their Call to Christ. But I shall be briefer.

Secondly, by this they are a warning piece shot off in the ears of others, to
keep them off from coming into such sinful practices, purposes, and
persuasions as they were in; To give others warning. Tho. Goodwin
so it is in 2 Cor. 5.11. If the rich man (as Thomas Goodwin has it in his
Child of Light walking in darkness, page 113.) the rich Glutton had gotten
but a little while back again from hell; O what stories would he have told
his brethren, to have scared them, and frighted them from sin here! hear the
like of such, I say, of such as have descended hell! and seen the wonders of
God in the deep! O now they are ashore, and lie at anchor, or are safe (through
mercy) at harbor in Christ! hark! now they can tell you of the rocks and
sands,
the sad shelves and storms, the roaring, threatening, surging, waves, and
gaping gulfes that they have met with, and been in, and under. And all sinners
that live in the like concupiscence, passions, lusts, covetousness, pleasures,
and the like, must look for the same, and without mercy too; if this be not a
Sea-mark for them, seeing they are escaped, and (as it were) rose out of their
graves, and returned out of the deep dungeons, and black abyssnesse of endless
wrath to give them warning, I say, if this will not do, and they will not
believe them, then they shall find experience the Mistress of fools.
Piscatorictus sapit. Else others shall find these stories true.
The Fisherman made haste to thrust his hand into his net to take out a Fish,
but was instead of a Fish bit with a Scorpion; this made him ever after wiser,
and then he had learned to look before he leaped: So many unwise men are made
wise (it may be too late) by too lamentable experience; Sim.
and as Robinson (I remember) says in his Essays, page 198.
Some who will not believe sin has so sad a sequel as it has, till they
know it by experience, are like that Physician Tertullian speaks of,
Herophilus by name, who bloodily butchered six hundred men, that he might
search into their bodies, and know their natures, Robinson.
destroying them to know them, Sim.
and murdering man to find out the nature of man. O monstrous wickedness!
Tertullia^*
but oh more wicked Monsters! that are so merciless to their own souls! I
say it of such, who will not learn the nature of sin so as to avoid it, till
fatally destroyed by it, and then they will learn by experience indeed (woeful
experience) when others warning will do no good, no not though the dead do
(as it were) rise again to give them warning;
neither will they regard the rough checks of their consciences within them,
but will still go on; they are like the Fly, which though it has scorched its
back, and burnt its wings in buzzing about the (candle) flame, Sim.
again and again, yet it will venture again, and still to it, Till bu^ied in
the flame, some will take no warning.
till it be burnt down, and buried in the flame: I say, so many mad men, who
will take no warning till they be burnt, and burning and buried alive in the
flames of hell! -- O sad, when Examples, and such as these too, told by
experience, instruct not! God teaches as well by them as by Precepts (says
Mr. Rogers on the good Samaritan, Mat. 5.12. Mr. Nehemiah Rogers (my honored
father) in his Parables Ardeus.
page 222.) And the two senses of learning, viz. seeing and hearing have both
enough to do to instruct them by such experienced examples, as are now before
them ( Et scripta sunt exempla p^iorum ad cautelam posteriorum, ARDEVS;)
wherefore that is the second Reason to warn others.

suspend our censures, and to forbear prejudicate opinions, To learn others to
forbear censuring such.
or harsh judgment of such as suspire (and perhaps long too) and aspire under
lamentable soule-travel, and heart-pangs! and agony! and afflictions! and
temptations! all which Christ suffered, to succor them that are under them!
Heb. 2.18. Luke 4 13. Mat. 4.3.11. after which the Angels came and ministered to
him. Verse 11. But in the mean time whilst poor souls are set on the rack,
and roar under torments, though they cry out, Oh! they are damned! undone!
forsaken of God!
etc. yet condemn them not, for even then, they may be the dear children of
God, and pass a false sentence upon themselves for some time! so long as they
lie under despair, and in the sense of their own ruinous condition, till they
see a repair in Christ! O how they cry out, O wretched man that I am! Sr.
Fran. Spira. Romans 7.24. and Act. 2.37. and 2 Cor. 12.
and as David roared out in his troubles, and said, This is my death, Psalm.
77.11. Sir Francis Spira thus despaired, but doubtless dyed with an interest
in Christ. So do in these days many, and so you may find it in that little
Treatise of Experiences before-named, and in these that follow; and yet they
were raised out of the fire refined, and out of horror the more holy; For
before we reap in joy, we must sow in tears, Ps. 126.5.6. and for one seed, or
tear, we shall reap a whole sheaf of joy, and their joy shall be like the joy
in harvest, Isa. 9.3. and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil; that is,
before they arrive at it, there is a time of great trouble; a seed time before
the harvest, a fighting-time before the spoil. Expos.
In the seed-time there is rending and plowing! and trampling and harrowing of
the poor earth; Sim.
and when all this is done (to look on) you would think it a dirty, black,
barren, piece of ground, for you see no fruits at all upon it. Oh! so it is
with the Saints! they have a seed-time, such time as they are rent, and ripped,
and torn (as it were) in pieces, and beat! and bruised, and trampled on! and
harrowed with sharp cutting goads! and daggers! Act. 2.37. pricked in their
hearts, (...) stabbed as't were with a world of troubles, wounds, temptations,
Saints have a seed-time, and then a harvest.
and piercings to the quick; now alas! to look upon them then, to hear how
they complain of themselves then, and of their condition, as if in despair
then, Expos.
etc. you would think them without hopes in a very sad case, dead, barren, and
unprofitable;
but alas, the seed is in the ground, and lies hid (under clods) now, but come
afterward in the harvest time, and see then; Oh how white their fields are!
what big-bellied crops they then bring forth, Joh. 4.35, 36. what abundance of
smiling fruits! flowing and blossoming! grow then upon them! happy are those
that reap from them? Surely you will say, here is an alteration indeed, even to
admiration! what?
is it possible that this can be that same black barren ground, that seemed so
rent, torn, useless, and disorderly, it is scarce to be believed, that it can
be the same, when you see such a change. So that before their joy be as the joy
in harvest (for others to reap of them too, and get by their Experiences, etc.)
they must meet with a Seed-time. And so with a fighting-time too, a time of
great troubles, dangers, desperate conflicts against sin, and Satan, giving no
quarter, but kill or be killed, crying, Arm, Arm; A fighting time, then a
conquest.
fight for thy life, strike with all thy strength against thy lusts, against
their lives with the two-edged sword; O spare none! none! rout them all!
ransacke the Camp! pursue them hard! beat them out of the field! and keep thy
ground etc. now it will cost many a bl^w, a wound, a hazard, a desperate
engagement, on all sides before the Saints can come to joy, as those that
divide the spoil; Sim.
neither can they come off without wounds; A time of travel, and then a birth
of joy.
etc. but then their sorrow ((...)) as of a woman in travel, that is full of
pangs, etc.) shall be turned into joy, Joh. 16.20, 21, 22. O sweet change! but
before this joy, Christ himself tells them of sorrows, yea of such, as their
souls shall be in travel with bitter, great, sharp pangs (Medea was wont to
say, she had rather a thousand times be slain in battle,
then bring forth one child (mallem pe^ire quam parere) but all tends to the
birth of joy (sed finis edulcat media, says Keckerman.) Now whilst poor souls
are in their pangs; it is neither piety nor charity to censure them; Keckerman.
for in so doing, as Asaph says, Psalm* 73.13, 14. you will condemn the
generation of the just, and will but gratify the Devil, to scandalize the
ways of grace in those strict passages which are through the strait-gate; All
this will appear by observing the Saints in their Experiences,
whereby as thou may learn the way to live in Christ, so thou may to
avoid the censures of such as p^sse that way; which is (at first) so full of
Difficulties, and dangers, and gulfes, and shelves, and as we say, By
weeping-crosse.

Experiences you will learn how various God is in his ways and workings, 4 To
teach others how variously God works.
as Heb. 1.1, 2. (...) in diverse ways, and sundry manners; for some men he
comes to in one way, to some in another; to some as a Lamb, to some as a Lion;
to some as a whirlewind, to others as a Noah's-flood, Expos.
to others as a flash of lightning, to others as a Thief in the night; to some
by sickness, to others by crosses and losses, to others by Sermons, etc. he
leaves some a while in darkness where they see no light, Isa. 50.10, 11. in
distresses of conscience, and their souls on the rack, where they see no way
for deliverance, and others are in dull, Vide Goodwins Child of Light Chap. 12.
duskish, imperfect light, whilst their Sun is in the eclipse; yet some
again he sweetly shines upon even in the morning at their first conversion and
Call; and yet their Sun may be soon over-shadowed; and some that have less
grace, and have lived basely, it may be they have (especially at death)
splendent, and most radiant shinings, and go into Christ's Kingdom with full
sails, swelling desires, and have abundant entrance, whilst others, Means to
convert one, not the means to convert another.
that have walked more strictly with God, and who (you would think) should
enter more Champion-like, triumphingly and glorious, are fraught with fears,
and doubts, and have their Sun set in a cloud. Now God works diversely,
according to the diverse complexions, conditions, constitutions, dispositions,
or the like, that he has to work upon; because spiritual comforts do not
tend simply ad esse, but been esse, to the well-being, as well as to the being
of a Christian. Now by these Experiences of Saints you will learn that God has
diverse ways, and diverse times, and diverse m^ans to work with; and some that
seem very contemptible too: so that if he do not work on thee or thine, one
way, he may another; he knows what means is proper; for that which will help
this man (may be a wrong means) and it may be will not help that man, or
another.

Fifthly, Experiences declared do oblige others, and allure them exceedingly to
rely upon God, and to believe in him, Jo. 11.48. Act. 3.9. etc. For as David
says in Psalm. 22 1, 2. Experiences teach others to trust in God in times of
troubles.
I cry, I roar, night and day for deliverance; but what argument does he make
use of? why verse 4* 5. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou
did deliver them, they cried unto thee and were delivered, they trusted in
thee, and were not confounded. Expos.
Therefore deliver me too, for I trust in thee, Verse 11. so that the
experiences which others have had of Gods gracious dealings with them, and
deliverances of them, do encourage David to cast his care upon the Lord too,
for the like deliverances out of his troubles. So in Psalm. 31.24. Be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord, even
as he has strengthened mine heart, and heard my voice and cries, as in the
verses before; so he will yours! O all ye Saints! Expos.
Thus you shall see in Joh. 4.28, 29. the woman of Samaria ran into the City,
Thus Samaritan^ brought in.
and told her experiences of the Messiah come, how he told her all things, etc.
and lo! how this weak means worked upon a many, and effected a great matter,
in verse 39. for the Text says, That many of the Samaritans bebeleeved on him,
because of the sayings of the (poor) woman, though many more in Verse 41.
because of his own word; but I pray mark, what a profitable means the poor
woman's experiences told were to win them, and to work upon them to come to
Christ; Thus was Junius converted.
and then in Verse 40. they besought Christ to tarry with them: And thus Junius
professes that the very first thing that turned him from Atheism, and made
him believe in God, was a Conference with a poor Countryman of his, not far
from Florence; and it is observed in the blackest times of Popery (by Fox Act.
and. Mon. fol. 750.767.) when good books and good Preachers were ( rarae aves
in terris) as rare as Black-swans (almost) yet then did one holy man resort to
another, And othe^s in time of Popery.

And in these days.


and one good neighbor conferring with another, and declaring their
experiences to another, did convert him, and by this means the hearts of many
were turned to the Lord, and had light in those dark days; and I dare boldly
say by this means more then a few are convinced,
if not converted in these days, and some that have said it to me often, have
been exceedingly wrought upon by hearing the experiences of others; some
informed, others confirmed others confuted by those means, which are of much
use; I wish they were as much in use, whereby others might be encouraged to
trust in God by hearing what he has done for our souls.

The Church is hereby strengthened in the Experiences of her members, as Act.
4.23. when Peter and John had reported their usage, etc. the Church united the
more strongly together, and gathered up all their strength together, Verse.
24.29, 31, 32. against their foes, and for God. The experience of Gods hand and
judgment upon Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.11. struck fear upon all the
Church, In Dublin Church experience, Of prayer answered in a miraculous mercy.
and as many others as heard it, that they might beware ( cavebis si pavebis.)
It is well known in Dublin the very first day after embodying, being the
thirteenth of the eighth month one thousand six hundred fifty one, the Church
met together, and was ratified by a remarkable mercy, and pledge given in; for
one of the Brethren (viz. Captain Lieutenant Johnson) his wife was in labor,
(which did occasion his absence from us:) she had been in labor two days, and
two nights (as I take it, for it is upon record in the Register-booke) and had
two Midwives, her danger was great, her pains violent, her death (in the
account of all present) imminent, the Midwives gave her over, friends, husband,
all gave her over for a dead woman, that either she, the child, or both, must
(unavoidably) perish: and now they had (as it were) no hopes, what does he (her
husband) whilst she was on the rack (as it were) roaring, but (finding his
own prayers uneffectual) runs to the Church (knowing where they were met
together) in great haste, as fast as he could hie, (as we use to say) being
much distracted, and disturbed, tells us his wives condition (almost past hopes
in all appearance) and begs the earnest prayers of the Church at this instant
season,
that God would be seen, which the Church did (indeed) I am persuaded with a
most hearty, heavenly, united strength; And by a holy violence did prevail,
for her life, and her little one, and begged both alive out of Gods hands to
the admiration of all: for that very time to a minute as well as we might
guess, and as we were informed by this brother himself, and others) at that
very instant time whilst the Church was so earnest and incessant, she was
safely and easily delivered (even to the wonder of all with her) and soon after
well recovered, with her child, and both grew strong again apace, and are well
(I hope) both at this hour; This was such an apparent return of prayer, and so
seasonable a first fruits, and pledge of Gods owning us and answering us; that
we could not omit, but did as a Church return thanks and praises for this
seasonable experience, whereby the Church was abundantly confirmed in her
faith, for future.

And to trouble you but with one testimony further, it is not unknown, what
advantage the Devil made of those Divisions which did arise in this Church
afterward, by some who threw oil into the flames (as we heard before in the
fourth Chapter) and would but fan down the fire, to make it mount the higher,
until they had effected (what they sought for) a breach in the Church; after
which, we that held together in order being wounded, and the body being in
pain with the rude rent of seven or eight members from us, Church experience
of prayers answered in another parallel mercy upon the Author.
the Church was forced to fly to the Physician to be healed, and a day of
Humiliation being appointed, whilst she was yet bleeding in her green and
fresh wounds, our good God who has promised to hear their cry and to save
them, Psalm. 145.18, 19. gave them another, and new pledge of his owning of
them, and presence with them, which was very parallel with the former and (as
much as to say) he was with them yet, which has been an experience full of
virtue and force to this day, and the which I hope, I shall never be unmindful
of, or unthankful for; for it pleased God to visit me with a sore distemper,
and such a one as did suborne many doubts concerning me all the night before
(this day of humiliation which the Church appointed, being in the last month of
the last year but one, one thousand six hundred fifty one) I lay in a
lamentable affliction, kept up with a vehement vomiting, which continued the
next day all the fore-noon I (keeping my bed) vomited four or five times, or
oftener in an hour, lying in a most high ( pestilential as was thought) and
raging Fever. I sent to the Church for prayers, who were consulting whom to
choos amongst them as a convenient keeper for me (many imagining that it might
be the Plague, or that it would prove the spotted Fever at least, being taken
in that manner that others were taken of these diseases) much means was used to
stay the vomiting and nothing would do, which at last turned to another color
as green as grass, and came from the very heart (as I thought) I sent my man
(afternoon) to the Apothecaries for more things to stay the vomiting, whilst he
was gone, I was thinking the Church was wrestling for me, wherefore with much
ado, up I rise, and got into my Study to prayer also, being persuaded I should
join with them, and the intercessions of Christ the High Priest also together,
and that we should prevail:
when Lo! what the Lord did to be admired for ever by the sons of men, Faith
in prayer forces out a quick answer.
presently the vomit was stayed, I know not how, and I restored (excepting a
light giddiness in my head) to such an admirable condition of health, and so
sudden (and which continued all my time in Ireland) so that I could not but
with wonder and amazement fall flat on my face to power out praises, the whilst
I was stirred up by an irresistible instinct to show my self to the Church, as
Matthew. 8.4. to show that their prayers were answered;
when my man returned he wondered to see me walking about the room with my cloak
on ready to go out, and tell the Church. He and others that came in apace to
see me (that feared the Pestilence, or such distemper was upon me) wondered and
asked me how I did? I told them well, at which they wondered more, not thinking
it possible; but rather that I knew not what I said, and telling them I was
going forth, though they thought me more mad then wise, yet away I went to the
Church who were yet praying, and that hard (blessed be the Lord that heard them
and drew out their hearts) on my behalf. My coming amongst them, to tell the
mercies of God, was much like Peter in Act. 12. verse 16. at which they were
astonished; but as he Verse 17. Verse 13, 14, 16. So I did declare unto them
how the Lord had brought me out (of prison) my bed, my sickness: so that this
renewed pledge to us, A renewed pledge when most need.
did throw us altogether upon praises and thankful returns, being so sweet and
seasonable an experience that I hope it will never be forgot; whereby the
Church (as it now is) was exceedingly satisfied and ratified to this day that
God was with us (yet) of a truth as much as before; from which day (as well as
ever before) I dare (assuredly) say the name of this Church may be, The Lord is
there, Ezekiel. 48.35. as Mat 28.20.

These things I have added to this fifth Reason whereby we were abundantly
obliged for future to trust in the Lord,
so that experiences declared, do much advantage others to rely upon him, and
to believe in him, Ps. 37 40. and to plead with him the experience that others
have had of him at such a time, in such a need, and extremity of trouble and
sickness. And as waters run strongest in narrowest passages, so does Gods
Power and Providence appear most and greatest in greatest straits. Sim.
But thus for the second sort of Reasons.

Reason 3. Relates to themselves that do declare their experiences; for it is
not enough to hear them, but to have them, as it is Joh. 4.42.

First, Hereby they try their own satisfaction, examine their assurance and
plerophory, 1 They bring their assurance to light. 1 Pet. 5.16.
by bringing all to light, as the honest Draper does his cloth, to give any
leave to object what they can against the goodness of it; so Hall says in his
Contemp. 4. part. P. 120. Now a man that owes twenty shillings may as well pay
in silver as in gold, and have as good a discharge given him; but if he paies
it in gold, then it is discharged in one piece without telling, or further
trouble; but if in silver, Sim.
then it is in many pieces, and requires the pains to tell it over before he be
sure that it be right; so is it here, the Saints have assurance of all
discharged and paid, and themselves set at large, the Creditor reconciled, the
Law at an end, etc. and all this by the immediate testimony of the Spirit,
which is with more speed and less trouble, as Ephesians. 4.30. or else by the
marks, and effects in many pieces, which will ask much pains to examine and
tell over; And thus in the experiences by several pieces of good coin (stamped
with Gods image) you have their assurance or pleonasmes of joy and love, and
light and all brought out; so that they being openly attested and approved, the
Saints are thereby often advantaged for future attempts, and troubles and suits
in Law; Caution.
so that there is great reason the Assurance be brought out to light; yet we
must beware that men's applauding or approving of us, Quest.
or our assurance deceive us not; wherefore let us a little call to account,
How to know it?
how a Saint knows that his assurance is real and substantial, and not shadowy,
counterfeit and false?

To answer this, we have Twin-testimonies and Single-testimonies to know it by;
Answ.
the Twin-born testimonies are surest ( and omni exceptione majores) and such
are infallible,) (but the others are not so) these are of two sorts; The Spirit
with our spirits bearing witness, Romans 8.16. (...) co-witnesses, 1 By the
Twin-testimonies.
so Romans 9.1. so says Paul, My conscience bearing witness by the Holy Ghost,
both go together (as honest Sibs has it) like a pair of Indentures, Surest
with sealing of the Spirit. p. 170.
one answers another: and that the Holy Spirits witness, is a clear testimony,
see 1 John 3.24. he assures the soul by powerful application (as Culverwel in
his White stone well observes) for the Father chooses us, and has decreed it;
Expos.
the Son executes it to the full, and the Spirit applies it,
and witnesses our interest in it, and sets strong and vigorous apprehensions
of love and mercy upon our heart, they be sweet and secret ((...))
soule-whisperings, and spirit-breathing, by which the soul and spirit converses
together (secret (...)) and have silent intercourse one with another, 1 Spirit
with our spirits.
which is not an enthusiastical fancy or illusion, but a real truth which
every Saint has a taste of, being inspirations; then the Spirit assures, (or
cleares) by a pleasant irradiation or brightness, beaming upon the soul,
whereby he sees the assurance real and genuine; see 1 Cor. 2, 12. We have
received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are
freely given us of God. So Verse 9.10. by this Divine light, what a glorious
gloss, a rich orjency,
a lively luster, and an excelling Exposition is upon thy assurance; so that
although from the flesh thou doubtest, from the Spirit thou see, and art
assured: For, seeing is believing, as we say; and you know this witness from a
fancy to be true, by its own convincing nature and efficacy, as you know light
by light; and so you know the Word by the Word, and are able to judge all other
words false, and all other lights painted, How to be sure of it that it is a
true spirit.
and all other Suns shadows; So you know the Spirit by the Spirit, Joh. 16.8.
by its own conviction which it carries with it (as true fire carries its own
evidences to declare that it is fire, but false fire painted does not do so. A
Ranter what?
) The light of a Ranting presumptuous Spirit is but like a blazing Comet;
presaging his preposterous spirit, or preparing a venomous malign,
and pestilential influence, and portending his ruin; A Hypocrite.
and the light of an Hypocrite, is but a transcient coruscation and flash for a
sudden, and is put ou^* but the Spirit displayes himself to the soul, and
gives a glistering manifestation of his presence in that heart, of his motion
in that horoscope and horison, and by his own beams (as the Sun) is to be
seen, and paraphrased upon himself, and witnesses to himself, that he is there;
so that (as one says) a man may sooner take the glo-worm for the Sun, then
an experienced Saint can take a false light (and delusion) for the light of the
Spirit. And who would be further satisfied, Sibs.
may see Sibs his Fountain sealed, Page 169.170. etc.

The other Twin-testimony is taken from the Word and the Spirit, the Law, and
the Testimony together, Isa. 8.20. Deuteronomy. 1^.18. Mat. 22.29. the Scripture and
the power of God, 2 Twin-testimony is the word and spirit.
which are to go both together to give assurance, else ye err ((...)) yea
cause others to err too, Expos.
as the word signifies, the Scriptures were endited by the Spirit, therefore
the Spirit and they must agree; now mark then what your joys, raptures,
comforts, graces, peace, hopes, evidences are? bring them to the Word; do they
agree with the Scriptures? these are the undeniable Testimonies which never
fail, and are ever joynt-witnesses to make thy assurance the clearer: But
before I come to the Single-Testimonies (which are the less certain and safe)
some object:

Obj.
I have not the Twin-Testimonies as I know of, but only the Testimony of my own
spirit, and conscience.

Answ.
If thou find not (as yet) the testimony of the Spirit (says Mr. Perkins)
yet the other testimony viz. sanctification of the heart will suffice to assure
us; A single testimony
for in true fire there will be heat (though thou see no flame) or see it
not; Sim.
Is enough.
yet this is not such a plerophory or swelling pleonasme of joy and peace,
which others have that have the Double-testimony; for certainty is not in
puncto, but has a latitude, per magis and minus, a man may be certain by an
assurance and Deed of an estate, but yet he may be more certain of that
estate, Sim.
which he is (now already) certain of; so though one testimony is enough for
assurance, yet a Double-testimony is not more then enough, but makes the
assurance more illustrious; of two Christians who are assured of salvation,
one may have a clearer, and consequently a comfortabler assurance then the
other, for one may have a double-testimony, and the other but a single; nay the
same Saint at some time may have a double-testimony, and at another time but a
single one.

Oh alas! I have had not long since a large Testimony! but now I am without
light and find none, Obj.
neither the testimony of Gods Spirit, nor yet of my own, but all clouds,
eclipses, blackness, etc.

First, There is a way left open yet for thee; Answ.
O have recourse to thy former experiences! evidence, assurance! When thou art
without a witness, what to do*
did thou ever enjoy a sweet serenity of spirit, a calmnesse in conscience,
on good grounds? did the Spirit once bear witness with thy spirit? then run to
former assurance and evidences for comfort; so did that good man, David, Expos.
Psalm. 51.12. O restore to me the joy of salvation! Three considerations.

Vide Saltmarsh his Free Grace. p. 80.


O that it were with me as it has been! Oh that my candle were light again!
but this is the spring within that cannot be dried up, viz. it was thus with me
once; And then consider,

1 Gods love is everlasting, his mercies sure for ever; he is still the same,
his Covenant cannot be broken, 2 Samuel 23.5. Ezekiel. 16.60, 61. Psalm. 89.31.33.
he changes not, though thou changest, and art not sensible at all times of it.

2 All the Father loves he loves in his Son (Christ;) now his Son always
pleases him, is ever alike beloved of him, so that nothing can separate us
from his love, Romans 8. because it is in Christ Jesus, he loves us, and not for
any thing in our selves. And

3 Consider (poor souls) If God love us less or more, as we are less or more
sinful in our selves, then he should love as man; but his ways are not as our
ways, 3 Considerat. to assure poor souls in Christ.
nor thoughts as our thoughts, for all his love to us is in Christ, who is an
unchangeable object, therefore Romans 8.1.33, 34, 35, 38. 2 Timothy 2.19. O then did
he ever but once smile on thee, embrace thee, emb^some thee; and will thou now
fear, and doubt! O no! rest satisfied in his unchangeablenesse, dear heart,
and thou shall find the least drop of true grace shall never be exhausted, nor
the least dram of true joy be dried up, or annihilated; And as it is in a
Court, the seal is as true a seal, and as good a sufficient evidence in Law,
though the print be defaced, diminished, and not so apparent, as a stamp that
is most fair, fresh, and full,
and not defaced at all; Sim.
So shall thou find it in the Court of Heaven, that the dimnesse of the seal,
or thy sight, though thou think the Marks are all worn out, the fair
image and print (which formerly thou saw) so much defaced, though thy faith
cannot find out that apparent stamp (that thou once saw) in thy heart, yet
all this mars not thine evidence, or assurance in heaven; this defaced seal
shall go current there, and a little imperfect seal is as good to thy
assurance as a greater in heaven, and gives as good an assurance of heaven as a
fairer and fuller: why so? for it was once, as good as any; and that in the
Records and Books of heaven: therefore look to the initials of grace. But
further,


Secondly, Is it so as thou say, art thou all in the clouds, reflex acts of
assurance (such as we spoke of before) be wanting, 2 When you want reflex acts,
run into direct acts, with a resolute recumbency upon God.
make them up in multiplying, direct and resolute acts; now! where wants
evidence, make it up in adherence. Now graspe a promise with both hands, and
say, Psalm. 23.4. though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet
will I fear none evil; O roll thy self resolutely upon free grace, and love,
and resolve there to lie, live and dye! though he slay me, Expos.
yet I will trust in him, and Isa. 50.10. When thou see no ligh^, Psalm.
37.19. 1 John 3.10. Romans 10.11.
yet stay upon your God. Thus the Spouse came out of the wilderness, Cant.
8.5. leaning (i. e. laying all her weight, care, body, soul, burden, all)
upon her beloved. O so! with a sweet recumbency cast thy self upon God, and
see how that will work! Like men ready to be drowned, who will lay hold fast,
Sim.
for fear the waves should throw them off; and he that believes shall never be
ashamed. Single testimonies. What assurance is.


But thus for the Double-testimonies; the Single are such as follow in the
effects and marks, which may be testimonies to others, as well as to our
selves, of our assurance; but such are not always certain, yet such as the
Church judges upon in Charity, those marks they hold out in their experiences;
for assurance is a reflecting act of the soul, by which a Saint sees clearly
he is in the state of grace, and heir of glory, Vita est in se reflectio, said
Seneca; so the Prodigal came to himself, and 1 King. 8.47. we see that we are
sure, 1 Jo. 2.3. (...) and we know that we know him. Their experiences tell
how much they differ now from what they were before their Assurance.
Thus much we express in our experiences of his love shed abroad in our
hearts; so that assurance is more then persuasion, it is the top-branch and
flourishing triumph of faith. Now do but mind these men, how much they differ
from what they were before their assurance of Gods favor and love: before,
whilst they were doubting, they did but stagger at best, if not tumble; and now
being assured, they stand fast; before they did but smoke, now they flame;
before full of faintings, palenesse, and shiverings, now full of faith, of
ruddy complexions, lively and vigorous; before but tossed about, but now at
anchor; before afraid to lift up their quivering hands, and trembling eyes, but
now boldly wrestling with Omnipotency its self; before durst not draw nigh the
Lord, but now durst run into his arms, and leap into his lap; before came but
behind to touch the hem of his garment (Scriptures and Ordinances;) but now, O
they can look him on the face! and fly into his bosom with embraces! before
they durst not touch a promise, and scarcely cast an eye upon a promise, but
now they covetously claim all, graspe greedily, and appropriate for their own
all; before their performances were green and unfit, but now mellowed with the
hot Sunbeams, and are sweet mature fruits. O how they can snap asunder now
those arrows that before made them bleed at the heart! now they can quench
those fiery darts that formerly wounded them so deep: and whereas before they
were under bondage, and went a begging, now they have an assurance they are
free, and can command, Command ye me, says the Lord in Isay; O blessed people!
what a change is here! from Mount Sinai to Mount of Olives that drops fatness,
where Christ is found transfigured,
Matthew. 17. Now by their experiences you shall hear how they attained to this
top of the Mount, and have many remarkable Marks and evidences; and yet so, as
they will neither themselves (nor would they have you) to confide in those
testimonies as infallible (for Hypocrites may go far in these latter, but not
in the former.) It is not their new change from sin to grace, from
uncleanness to holiness, from creature to Christ, Single Testimonies, not ever
certain.
from conflicts to peace, from darkness to light, from bondage to liberty, from
Sinai to Sion, from carnal-courses companions, etc. to spiritual, that causes
their assurance, but their assurance rather causes these, and makes this
glorious change, and these happy flowings of joy and peace. It is dangerous to
place assurance in mortification of sin, and dying to our former lusts, or in
vivification, and living a new, another life; such as are legally enlightened
may lay hold on Promises, claspe about Christ; cry out, away with their lusts;
meet with some soul-meltings in praying, preaching, reading, or the like; and
long after the Ordinances, and taste a sweetness in them, and what not? and yet
be under darkness, doubts, fears, etc. for there is something within that
fetters and manacles them, till they are under the ministration of the Gospel;
for as we know green wood with fire in it besets the room with smoke, Sim.
and fills all; and so some poor hearts, whose principles are yet too sensual,
and full of (our) sap which may have many sparks of the Law, and Curses for
sin kindled in them, but they will be fuller of smoke then of light, till the
Spirit comes. And yet such smoaking-flax is not to be quenched, Times of
assurance.
but blown up: Wherefore, I say, this makes not assurance, they are all in the
dark, and smoke yet; yet we cannot deny but that the times of Assurance, are
times of great change and alteration, the prison-doors are set open, the
iron-bolts knocked off, the captives at liberty; yea they are sealing, and
settling times ad corroborandum Titulum, they are times of the souls victory
and triumph over lusts, Rev. 2.17. and with the Virgin-company of following the
Lamb whither soever he goes; they are times of trampling on all things below,
and keeping the moon under foot, yea they are watching and working, and
warning, and arming times too, and times of breathing after full possession,
Experiences of Saints are demonstrations of their assurance to others.
etc. and all this (and more too) will appear in the experiences of Saints: O
what stories can they tell! even a new Canticles! what Jubiles! love songs! and
soule-raptures do they meet with! then is Aurora gaudii, growing more and more
to a perfect day! Now so far as we can judge of it by the rule of charity;
we have matter enough afforded us, in the historical and demonstrable part of
their experiences. It is well noted by one ( Donn. fol. 658. Dr. Don.
) of the Evangelist John (who was wrapped up so much into the Divinity of Christ
of all other) that he does ordinarily double that asseveration so often in
Christ's mouth, viz. Amen, Amen, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, etc. whilst the
other Evangelists mention it but Verily, I say unto you, etc. so is it that the
more we are beloved of God, and the nearer we are come to Christ (to ly in his
bosom) and the more we are swallowed up in his Divinity, the further we are
from single assertions of truth; and the more we meet with, and manifest to
others double testimonies of Gods love, and our assurance, Sim.
which like some precious mineral-waters, will not only mundifie the ulcers,
but comfort the sores, cool the heat, supple the wounds, stop the infection
from going further, and by degrees will heal all. Now the fuller we are of the
love of Christ, and the more we are in his Divinity, the more assuredly we
assert it, and confidently we ^ver it, even as it were by double testimonies,
Full assurance affords full experiences even (as it were) with double
Testimonies
and are nothing ashamed to show our assurance, as much as we can express it
by our experiences.

But thus for this first Reason, wherein I have been the longer, because the
Point is so useful, and excellent to all Saints of all judgments; but I shall
be now shorter. To the second Reason.

Secondly, True experiences (puff not up, as Col. 3.18. etc.) but teach
humility, and self-denial, for then they know man True experiences keep humble.
for this end had Paul experience of Satan's buffets, of thorns in the flesh
of great afflictions, of violent temptations, and strong corruptions of smart
blows from the Devils fingers, and such as came so thick that he could hardly
take breath, lest he should have been exalted and puffed up in 2 Cor. 12.17.
for then we are most fit for use, when we are most humble, and kept low. And it
is observed that the very Turks at this day do pretend the pride of the
Hungarians, and of the Epirots or Albanians to make them unfit for Slaves,
wherefore when they take them, Sim.
they torment them to death most cruelly of all others: Vide Hist. of
Standerbeg lib. 2.
So doubtless their destruction is most desperate, and the Devil takes a
great advantage to put to death such without pity that are in his hands, who
are exalted by their experiences; and Diotrephes-like,
loving a pre-eminence, Hypocrites puffed up by them.
seek with a corrupt desire to be some body in the eyes and opinions of others.
Without infinite mercy, and deliverance this will ruin us; and thus the hearts
of many Hypocrites and Professors are puffed up, and swell out with conceits
that they excel others. Such the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 4.18, 19. and Col.
2.18. Let no man beguile you, who is vainly puffed by his fleshly mind ((...))
that is, let him not Lord it, and brave it, as great Boasters do, Expos.
or as such Lords that scorn others should come near them; for such a one is
vainly puffed up (temere turgens, (...)) blown up like a bladder with a
breath, or some windy, empty, and unusefull humor, and dangerous or
destructive tumor; of such take heed: In a dish, or a spoon, the inside and
useful side (says Staughton in his Right Plea, 8. Sermon. p. 81.) is hollow, but
the outside is swelling out, and unequal, but it is the inside that is hollow,
Sim.
which holds, and is of use; so it is an humble low spirit, Dr. Staughton.
and self-denying, and a nothing-seeing Saint (I mean nothing in himself) that
is so useful, and holds so much of the liquours of life, and of what is good,
whilst a Hypocrite puffed up with a proud heart, and self-conceited swelling
spirit, is but like the unequal superficies, Saints humbled.
and holds nothing. Now you shall find that it is the lowest valleys that are
fullest and fattest, and the sweetest streams glide through them. Such sweet
souls, humble Saints, says Bernard, are like the violets which grow low and
hang their heads downward, but are full of excellency and virtue. The grass on
the housetop, Sim.
and the fine July-flower on the wall will soon lose their luster, and wither
away, but the violets, and other flowers that grow lower and nearer the ground,
Sim.
hold longer and livelier, and smell sweeter, and so do such as are humbled by
the Lords hand, 1 Pet. 5.6. Now it is a sign their experiences are right, when
they keep them humble, Romans 12.3. and the more weighty and full of worth they
are, Sim.
the lower they will lay them that have them; For as in a pair of scales the
most light (and worthless) pieces of gold rise the highest, but the weightiest
bear most downward; so is it here, the richest in grace, Truest experiences lay
us the lowest.
and that have the best experiences of Gods love are the lowest and the least
in their own eyes; The best balm sinkes to the bottom, and the best corn
keeps in the bottom of the fan. Sim.
O weigh things in the scales! the greater they are, the lower they sink! and
so it is with the Saints (says Don. Sermon. p. 44.) the greater they are in the
sight of others, and the more excellent in their esteem, the lower they sink
in themselves, Sim.
and are in their own eyes.

Sim.
Now (I say) the more experienced Saints are, the more humble and broken; for
although a whole garment is more handsome to men then a rent one,
yet a broken heart is more pleasing to God then a whole one; We are wont to
slash and cut our apparel in pride, Sim.
but happy if we had hearts were so cut and rent in humility and repentance
(says Adams on Peter) A roab artificially mangled and divided, and then richly
tied, Adams. Souls slashed for sin, low, and humble.
and united together with silk, silver, and gold, or the like, Cant. 1.11.
appears the more glorious; and so is it with a soul that has been slashed, and
nobly (as it were) cut in pieces, but now united, and made up again with rich
grace, and love, and peace, etc. O how lovely is an experienced soul in the
sight of God! and is reserved as a choice one for the Wardrope of heaven! And
souls exalted in Christ are the more low, and nothing in their own eyes.
yea such as have been (as it were in the third heavens, are hereby humbled;
For the higher the tide, the lower the ebhe. See but Paul, who was more
exalted? 2 Cor. 12.5. who had higher experiences? And yet who was more humble
in his own eyes? he accounts himself nothing, Expos.
2 Cor. 12.11. what Paul? that preached Christ so powerfully? that writ so
fully? Examples.
that disputed so manfully? that converted so plentifully? and yet says he in
1 Cor. 9.16. I have nothing to boast of. No, why Paul was the Zealot of the
Apostles, and in nothing behind the chiefest of the Apostles; why Paul the
stout Champion of truth, he was full of revelations, manifestations, and
mysteries, Col. 1.26, 27. Ephesians. 3.3, 4. etc. carried up to the third heavens,
caught up into Paradise, when he heard ((...)) unspeakable words, and had
glorious visions, and yet (says he) I have nothing to boast of, but of my
infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.1, 4. I will not glory of self. Verse. 5 and Verse 9. I
will rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.
I will rather tell of them, and declare my infirmities, and how for all them,
the power of Christ rests on me. So he says Phil. 3.13. he forgets all that
is behind. See this soul-humbled Apostle, he passed through many perils,
troubles, 2 Cor. 11.23.25, 26, 27.
without, within, day and night, by sea and land, was stoned, suffered
shipwreck, beaten with rods, in continual labor, and lassitude, weariness, and
watchings hunger and thirsts, cold and nakedness, and in prisons often, and
more then all others, and all for the truth, and yet he forgets all; why he
fought beasts of Ephesus, conquered the Athenians, non-pluss'd the Stoics,
planted many Churches, and what not? yet forgets all. Good man, full of grace,
full of experience, full of revelations, and yet humble, and so much nothing in
his account that he forgets all; and as if (of all men living) he had the least
to be accounted of, he knows of nothing, unless his infirmities to boast of.
Blessed Saints! that are swallowed up in such an annihilation and Enochian
life, Genesis 5.24. when self is turned out of doors, and Christ all in all, and
the love of God alone looked upon; when a man reflects not on himself (as
Giles Randal says in his Bright Star, chap. 14.) but all on God in free grace.
What have thou then, O man, to boast of! that is thine! thus, I say true
experiences make us more selfe-contemners; Randal.
and it is a sign of a height of grace, and of one exalted to degrees of the
love of God, to be of an humble, meek, self-denying spirit; for as Hezekiahs
sign was the Sunne's going back so many degrees (viz. 10.) in the Dial; so a
Saints going back (or from himself in selfe-denial and humility so many
degrees, and growing still humbler, is a sign of his advancement and assurance
in Christ (another self) in whom he goes as many degrees forward.
For as it is said of Tygranes, whilst at the feet of Pompey he threw down
first his Crowns, Sim.
and then himself, he did thereby so much affect this great Commander, that he
(with his own hand) put the Diadem upon his head again, and raised him up
from the ground, and set him down by him in a Chair of State, as his dear
friend and companion; and so deals the Lord with such low, selfe-denying
Saints; for though by stooping low they lose of their bodily height, yet by
humility and such self-denial they lose nothing of their spiritual. You may see
Re. 11.16. how the Elders there rose up off their seats, and fell flat upon
their faces before the Lamb, that is in humility and self-denial, which is more
for their honor (as well as for Christ's) then if they had sat still; Sim.
Expos.
True experiences more declared the more humble us, and lessen us and lower us
in our own eyes.
for Moses had more honor by his veyl, then by his face. The Scriptures are
very full of this; we find, Mat. 25.37. the righteous there had learned it, and
so have all the Saints, as you see by their experiences, that they have nothing
to boast of (of themselves) but of the Lord, and his love, all the day long)
Psalm. 44.8. Romans 2.17. and the more they tell humbled before him.

Experiences teach best.
Thirdly, Why we should declare them, because by them we are best taught the
worth and excellency of the love of God in Christ, as the Queen of Sheba said
of Solomon, It was true, all the report that she heard of him, 1 King. 10.6.7.
Howbeit she believed not the words till she came, and saw with her eyes what
she heard with her ears; and then she said, Behold the half was not told me.
Now behold a greater then Solomon is here; and such as have left all to follow
him, and are gone out of their own Country, Psalm. 45.11 (by self-denial) to
prove this spiritual Solomon, with questions, petitions, cases, etc. hard to be
answered, and have received satisfaction from him, must needs say, Although
they have heard much of Christ by his Ministers, Servants, Scriptures,
Ordinances, of his worth and excellency above all, and more then they have
believed; yet now they have experienced him, they believe more then they have
heard, and the half (of his worth, wisdom, beauty, fullness, etc.) cannot be
told, no not by the very Angels of heaven. O then! they see it a happiness to
be his servants! As p. 8
to dwell in his house! to sit at his table! to enjoy his presence indeed!
when once they have had experience of him, and of the fullness of his grace!
As in some precious stone, or Pearl is some occult qualities, and excellencies
which make it of more worth, and none can tell it, but those that find it by
wearing it; Sim.
so in Christ this precious pearl, there be many hidden virtues, and
properties and excellencies, that men and Angels cannot express, that the world
knows not of, that neither word nor letter nor language is able to utter, and
they are best known by enjoying him: those that have experience of the worth
of Christ, can say it is not possible for all the ablest Ministers alive to set
forth half so much of Christ's excellency,
and worth, as their souls find by experience.

And, as I remember, I have read of Dyonisius a Stoic, who wrote a book that
pain was nothing but a fancy, and an imagination; but falling fearfully ill of
the stone (not long after) and feeling the torture of it, then he roars out;
Oh! all that he had written was false! all was false! for now he found pain
more then a fancy; and so surely experience teaches ingenuously and truly. And
such as know Christ, and the love of God by experience, can say, their former
conceptions, and apprehensions of him as an a^steer Master to please, exacting
duties, and a severe Judge, hasty to condemn, Saints by experiences know more
then men or Angels can tell them of Gods love.
and that he damns thousands, etc. I say, they will say these were all false
and foul conceptions and aspersions, and that God is gracious, merciful, ready
to forgive, slow to wrath, passing by iniquity, transgression and sins, etc.
that his bowels are open to embrace and receive (even the worst of) sinners of
whom we are chief; and that all the Ministers, Ordinances, Books, Scriptures,
that ever were or will be, cannot tell, or utter half of his love, grace, pity,
and good will in Christ, etc. but only the back-parts of his glory, not the
face or fore-side.

Now as a Physician finds those secrets (and oftentimes excellent things) by
his practice and experience which he could never attain unto by all his
reading or search, Sim.
or study out of books, or out of others mouth; so I say, many sweet Christians
by experience find and feed on that sweetness and excellency of the love of
God in Christ,
which the greatest Rabbis or learned alive cannot acquire or attain by
reading books, Scriptures or the like, so that experience teaches more, and
better then all. A blind man, though from his birth, he has heard the Theory
of the Sun read to him, yet he can never conceive of half of its glory and
beauty, or take the hundredth part of that sweet delight in it which they do
that see it; Sim.
nor can any thing we hear of Christ, work half so much as what we have of
him and of the promises, etc. And one that has tasted honey, and fed on it,
knows better the sweetness of it, then one that never tasted it, but only
can tell it is sweet by reading (not by eating;) and so (I say) such precious
souls must needs better know the sweetness of free grace, the worth of Gods
love, the excellency of a warm Christ in their souls, and the use of his most
precious blood, brought hot to their hearts, then such as never enjoyed him,
nor tasted how gracious the Lord is, 1 Pet. 2.3. notwithstanding they may have
read much, many Books, all the Scriptures, and heard the most precious
Ministers that are, or ever were (though Apostles) every day; for they cannot
teach so much in a year of sweet Jesus, as spiritual experience will in a day;
nay an hour sometimes to some Saints; But so much for the third Reason.

Fourthly, Experiences embolden them that have them (and strengthen them for
the future, Experiences make more bold for future.
as the Experience which David had of deliverance from, and destroying of the
Lion, and the Bear, he makes a running and round argument against the
uncircumcised Philistim, Expos.
1 Samuel 17.36. and when Saul questioned him in Verse 23. for his audacity and
presumption (expecting it to be no work for him) telling him he was but a boy,
and came but now from keeping sheep, Example.
not having any experience of warfare as yet, and that this great Goliath was a
stout Champion, and valiant Soldier from his youth; Ah, but says David, for
all that, David therefore declared his experience
I shall tell thee my experience which makes me so confident and courageous at
this time; Sim
it is but the other day since I killed a Lion and a Bear, and saved but a poor
Lamb by it; More bold against enemies and in future troubles and trials.
and shall I not find now as full a power, as fresh an experience, and kill
this proud Philocompos of Gath; go to, fear not, I shall save now more then a
Lamb (even Israel) from this Lion this day, for the Lord will deliver him to me.

Now it is true, a fresh water Soldier (as Dr. Tailor says, Dr. Tailor.
Ps. 32. p. ^67.) is afraid of a Gun, looks aside the danger, and the noise is
a terror to him, he fears it will cost him his life; alas poor heart! but now
an experienced Soldier fears no colors, looks full face on danger, frights his
foes with frown^, and every perilous opposition, and hostile blow, beats but
an alarm to his undaunted courage and valor; such Soldiers are all
experienced Christians; More bold with God too.
neither was David such a fresh water soldier, but he could gather courage
upon his former experiences; and as they are thus emboldened against their
adversaries, and for future troubles, and temptations, Sim.
so are they by their experiences the more emboldened to deal with God; Like to
the experience that a poor-man has had of some special friend of his, who
helped him at such a time, in such a strait, when else he had been utterly
undone, the remembrance of this revives him much, gives him good hopes, and
great confidence, and boldness to come to him again (yet with an humble
boldness) and he assures himself he shall find him the same still. Certes,
so it is with us that have found and felt the bounty of Gods love, and grace; O
we grow the bolder (and yet the humbler) and dare confidently believe he will
not (nay that he cannot) fail us at another time, when we need him ( cum
lateres duplicantur!) See the Psalmists courage and confidence, Psalm. 23.1. I
shall not want! why? what makes him so confident? See Verse. 2.3. He is my
shepherd, he makes me lie down in green pastures, he leads me, he restores my
soul, etc. I have had all experiences, thus he has done, Example.
and thus he yet does for me; therefore Verse 4. I will not fear, no! not
though I go thorough the very shadow, nay the very valley (from whence all
might think I should never more ascend, and never more be seen) of the shadow
of death, Expos.
yet I fear not. So Psalm. 27.1. whom should I fear?
Why the Lord is my light, and my strength, and my salvation; of whom (or of
what) should I be afraid? as some men say, Why such a great man or Lord is my
friend, what care I? I fear not. So say the Saints, this emboldens us, why the
Lord is our Friend, and a tried Friend too, that never failed us, what need we
fear then? Sim.
Oh! these experiences are singular good helps to us against future troubles!
and temptations! in what kind soever they are to come! we need not care as
long as we have so sure a Friend (the Lord) to come to! so that troubles and
temptations cannot soon captivate such souls. For as the breathed Deer are not
so quickly caught as others; neither are the breathed hearts that have been
long hunted with the bloodhounds of Hell, Sim.
and dogged by the black-mouthed Cerberusses of their own lusts; these
experienced Christians are not so soon catched as others, or entangled with the
subtle gins of Satan laid under the loveliest Roses of the worlds pleasures or
treasures, but they run the faster, and fly the swifter, and the safer from
them all.

Fifthly, Spiritual Experiences declared out of the Mat. 12.35. are like a
storehouse opened, whence a man fetches forth things, They are as a
storehouse to give out new and old.
(for use and need) both new and old, Mat. 13 52. ((...)) extrudit copiose and
alacriter, he throws them out tumbling (says the Text) without spare ( non
libro sed labro) So Can. 7.13* Expos.
So the Spouse has such a storehouse, Sim.
or experiences laid up for afterward, new and old, which I have laid up (says
he) even Mandrakes in Heb* Dudaim, not from Dodim loves, ( p^ma mandragorae
sunt blandimenta amoris) in the Belgic, called Doelappelen, they are very
sweet, lovely, 1 To give out.
Expos.
and pleasant to refresh the weary and languishing faint spirits; Experiences
Mandrakes.
so are the choicest experiences. And as they were dedicated to Lovers, so are
these to Christ and his Church, such an antipathy have Toads, Snakes, and such
like venomous creatures to the Mandrake, that they will not come near them, but
they drive all such serpentine poisonous creatures away from them.
( Vide Lemnius de Mandragor) so do these experiences of Saints, which sinners
cannot abide, but are driven away by them, as having an antipathy to them:
besides as they be exceeding Physical, and for singular use to the sickest
Patients (being odoriferous and somniferous) and so certainly are all fair,
full, fresh-gathered experiences to sick souls, like Mandrake-apples of love,
(and at our gates all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid
up) that is at home: but before this, the Mandrakes were abroad in public and
private, far, and near; at home, and abroad, the Saints are full of sweet,
precious, odoriferous, soul-refreshing experiences, 2 To lay up.
new and old, i. e. of all sorts, sizes, seasons, Sim.
day and night in an abundant measure to be bestowed and communicated, and with
which they welcome Christ (their beloved) to; therefore they must be declared,
and brought forth, yea and laid up too for future time of need; Sim.
there will be need of them when thou art a Patient, Psalm 63.7. He that shoots
his arrows at a But or Mark, puts them up again into his quiver for another,
and another, and another shoot yet; so the people of God, though they give out
their experiences to others, yet they gather them up again, they lose them not,
but lay them up for future use, and advantage; and such especially as have been
successeful, and are sweet, and they will not, they cannot forget them. Thus
Christ recruits the memories and minds of his Disciples, When I sent ye out
without scrip, or shoe, or money in your purse, etc. Lacked ye any thing? and
they said, No! (O then treasure up for afterward) and so in Matthew. 16.9, 10.
Do ye not remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets
ye took up? Expos.
nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
Why then reason ye thus? (or do ye so dialogize) have ye not laid up these
experiences! to furnish you for future? for a time of need? in adversity and
want? wherefore the Saints should lay up this Ammunition, and provision for a
Siege-time, seeing the enemy is making ready every day against us;
therefore learn of the Ant (says Solomon) who has a Storehouse in the
Summer to lay up for the Winter, and then you will not be surprised by any
sudden incursion or abruption of any raging storm or lust whatsoever.

Sixthly, True experiences put the soul upon longing for looking out for, and
lingering after further manifestations of his presence and love, They set the
soul to long for more of Christ.
which is better then wine Psalm. 4.7. and 42.1, 2, 3. and 63.1, 2. and 84.12.
Psalm. 119.174. Cant. 1.3. Cant. 5.4. Cum multis aliis. When the child has once
tasted of the breast, then it cries, and nothing but the breast can content it,
1 Pet. 2.2, 3. when the Israelites had once tasted of the Mannah, then they
longed after it, and then they cried for more and more of it; which till they
tasted of, they wondered at, and desired it not ( ignoti nulla cupido) but said
What is this? as Mark. 1.27. the Jews said, What thing is this? What new
doctrine?
Why? for they never yet tasted it; and so Act. 17.19. they think it cannot be
good, and therefore do not yet desire it till they taste it; Sim.
and then, O how they prize the Ordinances! Ministers, means, administrations,
and manifestations of the love of God! The horse that has fed on Provender
will look and neigh, and with a wanton laughing eye turn about, and about, and
long for it, whilst the Jade that eats no oats, but feeds only on hay in the
rack, requires no more; so such Saints as have fed upon the bread of life, and
tasted of the l^ve of God, in Christ, cannot but look after it, and long for
it, Many content with Parish-Ministers provisions.
and stir about and about, till they enjoy more of it, whilst such as never
tasted it, but only heard of it, are content with their common fare, of
hearing and formal worshipping according to what is before them in the rack,
and what the Parish Ministers appoint them,
and that is all; when alas! experienced Saints long for lustier food, and
provision.

A man (it may be) that should newly come out some deep dark Dungeon, Sim.
who never before saw the Sun (no^ ever so much as heard of it) when he sees
the Sim go down, set, and gone, is in a great perplexity, and peradventure
thinks it is quite lost; but experience now teaches others otherwise, and that
it will the next day arise again, and give us fresh light;
therefore they are content to wait for it, and they wish it with expectation:
and so do all experienced Saints, with assured confidence call for more of
Christ, and more of grace; and of the love of God, which they have experienced,
and they wish for more, with expectation of more, as John that looked still for
more visions and revelations; yet the Saints prize them (at their hearts) that
they have already. So the Spouse, Cant. 3.2. loses him, but Verse 4. finds him
again, and then she holds him, and would not let him go.

Seventhly, Experiences declared, do oblige them (that have them) more in
obedience to God; for by them thou gracious God indeed, They yield further
obedience to God.
and a Father. Now you shall a find a child, if a stranger bid him do this, or
that, he will not obey him; but if a Father bids him, then he obeys and runs
strait: so do thou willingly (and running readily) obey the Lord, when thou
know by experience he is thy Father, and look not on him as a stranger;
and then thy obedience is full of life and spirit indeed, as Joh. 4.24. for
thou can not be dull in his service that art full of experience, because thou
art then full of love and life, And fill them with life, spirit, and love.
2 Cor. 5.14. 1 John: 5.3. Exodus 21.5. Take a glass and knock it with thy
finger, if it sound dull, surely thou will say there is some flaw in it; so a
dull obedience is but cracked; Sim.
but a filial obedience which flows from love, is shril, sounds well, and is
full of spirit and life,
Phil. 1.11. it is not (...) 2 Cor. 9.7. but (...) Col. 3.23. Romans 6.17. Now
their experiences prompt them up to it, Psalm. 40.8. and are directory as well
as consolatory in a time of darkness and trouble, even in the shadow of death,
as well as in a time of light and peace to serve the Lord, Sim.
so Phil. 2.8. even with a Daniel in the Den, as well as with a David on the
Throne. See a man that is used to walk in the night, as well as in the day,
fears no more one, then the other; and as some man can better find the way in
the dark, to which he has been used, and which he knows (by often going it)
then another that never went it, (it may be) can do by the best instructions
can be given him by others; so such as have experiences have the best
instructions, and directions in their obedience, and are better, and more
orderly walkers in the dark, then others in the day; in trouble, then others in
peace; in afflictions, then others in joys; in any manner of adversity, then
others in any manner of prosperity; and they will keep within their bounds in
obedience, which others cannot; and therefore are in greater danger then
experienced Christians. As the Dear that is leapt over the Pale, and is gotten
out of the Park, Sim.
is in greater danger then the rest, and every dog is at his heels. Such as
have most experience of the love of God, seek themselves least; and therefore
are the best in obedience to God. But we see as the Hunter that crosses the
highway, and keeps it not, is but following his own game all this while; Sim.
for the way is not there: So the Hypocrite crosses the highway (that you
read off, Isai. 40.3.) and runs out of Gods road, whilst the seeks his own
game, and serves himself more then God. But the Saints of God are guided by the
Spirit of God, and have the Pillar of fire (by night to direct them) as well as
a cloud by day: And whither it be night or day, adversity or prosperity, Donn.
still they can see to follow Christ; and as Donn says (in his Sermon. in fol.
p. 139.) You shall see a man that is reading in the Evening; Sim.
he has read a pretty while before, all in one and the same Book, and on the
same Subject; now night comes in, twilight is on, he can hardly see a Letter.
Yet let him alone, he will see to read longer in that Book, and on that
Subject, which he has been on all the while, then if he took a new book, or
new subject to read on. So we that have been all the day-long doing Gods
service, and in the Sunshine of peace, and prosperity about our duties, and
obedience: We, I say, shall the better do them (that have been used to them,
and experienced in them.) Now darkness surprises us, and adversity comes upon
us; and in a time of darkness, In a time of darkness as well as in a time of
light.
when we see no light; yet we shall obey the Lord, and hear his voice (having
continual experiences) to direct us. Isai. 50.10, 11. And yet we shall walk
(though in darkness, without the immediate light of Gods love,
and countenance seen; yea, without the former evidences, and comfort of
graces, in a stormy night, without light or star, Acts 27.20. But to be in
doubt, what will become of us; Expos.
and to be stumbling at all our comforts, and to be filled with great fears and
terrors;) yet, I say, we shall continue walking and serving God, hearing and
obeying his voice; which is an argument of a stout experienced Christian
indeed; Experiences conducing very much hereto. But thus for this, and all the
Reasons, which I shall gather to ratify this undeniable Truth.

We have sufficiently (I suppose) proved the assertion of the use of
Experiences declared in the Church, being much for the honor and glory of God,
the advantage of the Church,
and themselves, that make them. Now we all concur* Schoolmen, Ministers and
all, That where there is true grace, experienced Saints know it sweeter then
the drops from the honey comb; and qui accipit gratiam, Vide Tho. Aquin. 1.2.
q. 112.5. o.
per quandam experientiam dulcedinis novit se illam habere, quam non experitur
ille qui non accipit; as we have amply before mentioned: Such men must needs
know the love of God is sweet, who have tasted and digested it. They can
comfortably use Laban's words in Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience, that
the Lord has blessed me. Jehovah has raised me, Expos.
and increased me, I have experience of it by comparing my former condition
with my present. So the Saints do tell by experience, how Jehovah has helped
them, and blessed them, even with spiritual blessings in heavenly places. Some
of which (though not so perfectly as they were delivered, yet) as well as I can
collect them out of the Notes which I took of them from their own mouths, when
they were admitted into the Church, I shall present, as a sweet posie of some
of the chiefest flowers that I have met with this springtime in the Garden of
the Lord! the Church of Christ!
which is growing apace up to an Eden; from flowers to fruits; from Plants to
Trees of Righteousness, planted by Rivers of Water.

Examples of Experiences,
OR Discourses and Discoveries of the dead hearing the voice of the Son of God,
and now living: As they were delivered in Dublin by diverse Members admitted
into the Church; Being a clear account (to the judgment of charity) of the
work of Grace upon their hearts; in diverse ways and sundry manners converted;
some extraordinarily, and some ordinarily. When? where? and how? with the
effects.

But before I begin, I shall premise this, for the godly Readers sake, that I
must contract much their experiences as they were taken, least they be too
voluminous: And although in the choicest and most extraordinary ones, I shall
gather the stalk longer, least I hurt the beauty and hide the excellency of
those flowers; yet without hurt to the rest, in those which are ordinary, I
shall be very short, being prevented by others (in that little Treatise of
Experiences newly put out.) I shall gather out the flowers only, and give you
the sum of what they said, and so tie them up together for a conclusion of the
whole matter. The most of these are men's, and some women's, and a very great
many more I might add to them, which I have met with in England, Essex, and
London, and in Ireland, and at Chester, Holly-Head in Wales, and in my travels;
but that, I say, I am (I hope) seasonably (though unexpectedly) prevented;
although many more do lie prepared by me.

But to the business, as coming last from Dublin to declare some of those
precious ones (and which are the greatest treasure) that I brought with me from
thence: Encouraging others over in to Ireland.
The savor of which (I hope) will be attractive, and encourage others over into
Ireland, where the Lord has his Garden enclosed, and full of Spices, Cant. 7.
ult.
with the Mandrakes laid up for the Beloved against his coming; which is looked
for every day there, as well as here; and there the ^ride says, O! come Lord
Jesus! come quickly!

The Testimony of Tho. Huggins, Preacher of the Gospel, October. 8. 1651. of
Brides in Dublin.
IT is my joy to see willingness in Gods people to walk together in fellowship
with the Father and the Son; and such I desire to have fellowship with, where
Christ (the King) in his beauty appears most: I do acknowledge (as you have
heard) that account of faith before made by our Brother R. and do
experimentally know; and therefore must acknowledge that glorious Being of one
God in his three distinct relations, of Father and Creator, Son and Redeemer,
and Spirit, and Sanctifier; and I find in me by his Spirit, and the several
operations of this his Agent, these things. I believe the Scriptures, Old and
New Testament, to be the very mind of God; and do heartily desire my soul may
be turned into the nature of those truths therein declared; but to that which
is expected from me most, I come, viz. to my conversation. I was but young when
I began to be warmed, yea, within, In a formal righteousness from his youth.
being under a zealous Ministry, and much put upon duty, I did use to read the
Scriptures every night, and to repeat Sermons often, and so spent the first
scene of my youth, till I came to be sent by my friends to London, and there I
lived for a year or two; but in that time, as often as I saw any Minister, I
could not but weep, and always wished that I might be one, to be able to preach
too. After this, I was sent to one of the Universities there, but being wild
with youthful company, I was soon after sent hither to this College of Dublin,
where I am well known, and here I continued till the Rebellion brake out; at
which time, I left it, and went for England into the North-parts, and about
Liverpool, where I preached, (till now I returned hither.) But all this while I
was but formal, and as the yong-man that said, he had kept all these from his
youth: So was I from my youth religious, well-given, loving the means,
following of them, and seeking to serve God. But alas! yet all this while was I
in darkness, and did not know it; Called first, when and where?
but afterward, I saw that I was blind, and but carnal: For about the year,
1645. called thence on the Mountains.
1645. I began to be in great doubts and troubles, and very much clouded in my
spirit, and was exceedingly bound and tied up for a time, under the sense of my
formal holiness, and sins, till the Lord was pleased to give me light. Once as
I was walking all alone (sadly) upon the Mountains, he immediately powered his
Spirit upon me, and satisfied my soul in Jesus Christ, 2. How? Extraordinarily
and ravishingly
and filled my heart with heavenly joy, and peace; and with most ravishing
contemplations, which continued without a cloud for six weeks together, which
gave me full assurance of Gods love; ^. Effects of this cal^.
and ever since I have lived in the righteousness of the Lord Jesus, though I
have met with many clouds and storms since, yet such as have passed away, and
cannot hinder me, as long as Christ (mine) is above them. Being thus translated
from the form into the power, I do heartily propose my self to be one with the
members of Christ in his Church: And although before I was not free in England,
or elsewhere to join thus, it being so in controversy and disputable; yet now
I am fully satisfied, and do see God building up his Jerusalem apace, and am
confident of what he is doing to Nations; yea, I joy to see that you all seek
to unite by one Spirit, and all to be one in Spirit, if not all in one Form,
and so do I, not doubting but this Ministration will be most to edification.

A further Testimony added to the truth, by the experience John Bywater,
Preacher of the Word.
BRethren, I do declare here this day the desire of my heart, which is to have
fellowship with such a society as are built up by the Spirit; to be one with
all those that are one with Jesus Christ the Head; knowing this, That all
rudimentary and elementary things, do but point at a higher glory. As for my
Faith, Called, 1. When. 2. How.

I acknowledge God one, not three, but as you have heard before, etc. As for my
life, I shall in short say thus* When I was a little one, In horror of Hell for
an oath, wept, delivered out of it.
going to School, God began with me; for once I swore one Oath (as I was
playing with my School-fellows) but I was presently struck with horror for it,
and sense of it, as if I were to go to Hell for it presently; in which horror,
and great trouble, I left my School-fellows playing, but I could no longer,
being in this misery for that sin, but away I went into the Church Porch (not
far off) and there I sat alone, and wept bitterly to my self for some time; but
at length growing in some hopes (I know not how) of pardon, I began to grow
cheerful, and fearless, And cast into it again worse then before.
until a little while after that, I went to see some malefactors suffer; and
after I came home, this sight ran so much in my mind, and was for a long time
set so before my eyes, That my sins, and the horrors of Hell came afresh upon
me again; so that I was exceedingly cast down, and cried out, O what shall I
do! how shall I be saved! which I had often in my mouth, and in the hearing of
my friends: Delivered out of it upon surer terms then before.
in which condition, I could take no comfort from them, till the Lord himself
brought me out of it, and gave me to be given up to Jesus Christ, by the life
of Faith which I now live; notwithstanding. I was under several temptations,
and oftentimes very thick, but even then I resolved, if that I were flung into
Hell, yet it should be holding on Christ; 3. Effect^ of it. H^s resoluti^n
after it.
for I will not let him go now, and here I hold through mercy, ever since. So
that I take Christ for my King, Priest, Prophet,
and do believe him to be a Propitiation for my sins. And I believe, that he
will restore to us a pure language, and that we shall all worship him in one
Spirit, and with one consent: And my desire is to walk with you thus, in union
and love, and by one and the same Spirit.

Another Testimony or Report made of the work of grace heart, (at the same
time, in the same place) by John Hewson Colonel, and Governor of Dublin.
HAving an opportunity to speak something to you, I shall do it without many
words --. Time was, that I was in a state of disobedience as to God, a child
of wrath, and lived in a wicked and profane family in London; Called, 1. When
and where? 2. How? By the Word. 3. Effects of it.

but yet I went often to hear a good man in London preach, by which means I was
brought to see sin, and shown within me, that I wanted Christ; which when I
saw, I began to desire him, and to long after him, and still frequented the
means, and by the use of the means, I was drawn nigher to himself; but ever
since I find I have a corrupt heart, and have much ado to keep it in;
therefore God brings me under many troubles and temptations, more then many
others. And I (though I am in places of power, yet I) account them nothing,
seeing an emptiness in all things, and a fullness in none but in Christ. I
confess, I was sometime for the Presbyterians, From Presbytery to Independency.
and very rigid and bitter against all others of the Independents, till the
Lord did show me the Parish Church was no true Church, being a mixed
Congregation; and I was ignorant of this way which they call Independent. But
now I am clearly convinced of it, and satisfied in this society, and for matter
of Faith, I concur with the Brother that before spoke, and find what he said
to be true in me, and do desire communion with you, as you have with Christ
Jesus.

Testimonial of Raphael Swinfield, or his experience, as was taken out of his
own mouth in Dublin, in another public place called Michaels.
I Do declare here what God has done for me. First, in my youth, my Father,
(being a godly man) brought up his children very religiously; but for my part,
although I were well brought up (and instructed,) yet I was very disobedient,
Disobedience to parents.
being young and headstrong, and hearkened not to my fathers advice, (which I
had often, but regarded it not) which grieved me greatly afterward; for I could
not endure to be curbed or kept in; but at length, because of his continual
(and yet justly) reproving me for my ill courses, and ill company which I kept,
I resolved I would stay at home no longer, but I would be gone into the
Low Countries, and we were put out to Sea, but by contrary Winds and Seas were
driven back again: But I could not see this, but still held on my purpose, and
having an opportunity, I got away for all that into England; Went from them
into England.
and I was in England a while, where my friends set upon me, and persuaded me
to turn home again, telling me many things to move me; but whilst I had my
abode with my friends there for some time, I began to be acquainted with some
things; for there I heard good men, 1. When and where he was called.

2. How?


and Ministers often, and there I was made to see my sin, and wicked
disobedience, by one Master Evans; and I was thereupon sadly affected, and
disconsolate, and could have no quiet nor rest: In this time my Father hearing
of me, 1. By the Word preached.
where I was (not knowing before what was become of me, but that I might be
dead or drowned) now writ a Letter to me, 2. By a Letter writ; by both which,
cast low into torments.
wherein I was admonished to beware of such as run headlong to perdition, with
many other good advices; and he seemed (as Jacob) joyed to hear that his son
was yet alive, etc. All which things struck me heavily to the heart, 3.
Effects. Delivered out. Cast in again. Delivered out again on better terms.
and so I lay long, under the fearful sentence of my sin and disobedience, and
could not take any comfort, or content. I prayed, fasted, heard the Word, went
to Ordinances, yet had no satisfaction at all. And thus I continued till my
heart was ready to burst a pieces; Yet in fears till a Dream extraordinary.
and then I began to make it known to my friends, how I was afflicted, who did
a little comfort me, but this lasted but a little while; for I soon fell again
into my old malady and grief as before, being sadly diseased; and so as I could
find no comfort at all, by any means, until that place in Isa. 50.10. came
into me, How he that sits in darkness, and sees no light, should trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God: which did much fasten upon
me, and me upon God; whereby I had abundance of comfort, but yet never free
from many temptations, and fears, and doubts; and such sometimes as made me I
could not tell what to say; until once, that I had a sweet dream,
which has done my soul good to this day; and in my dream I was told, that
Gods love was free in Christ Jesus, I need not fear, for his grace was granted
in Christ, and he puts none by that comes. 4. Effects.
This proved to me a sure comfort in Christ, that I was one of them that could
not be put by, but re^^ived to mercy to this day; but afterward I went into
New England, and had much comfort from them, and their Ministers, and was
affected with their way; but by reason I could not (before) bring my Wife and
Family over thither with me, I came home again hither to my Wife and Family,
whom I found (I thank God) all well and living; and ever since I have been
here, but walking alone, and very desolate for want of such a society as this;
and I shall now much rejoice, if I may be one with you in this oneness of love
and spirit,
which (I perceive) you are in.

Experience of Francis Bishop.
earnest desire is that I may be worthy to have fellowship with you in Christ;
as for my Experiences, they are many more then I can tell you in a long time.
My first main work upon my spirit, was suddenly, and it was upon an Alarm
given whilst I was in the Troop, Called suddenly 1 When? 2 How?

which took such success, that I lay all under an apprehension of Gods wrath
upon me, and was much cast down; so that though I prayed, and prayed, yet I
could not look up, and had no confidence, but confusion was before my face.
Cast down deep into hell
Presently after I came to Town here, and was impeached upon an Article of War,
for to lose my life, and I was imprisoned for the breach of it; by all which I
was in the apprehension of Hell about me, Raised in an extraordinary vision.
and could do nothing but weep and moan, and pray, sometimes, and I counted my
life as lost, and yet was more troubled under the wrath of God, then the wrath
of man; but it pleased God to give me great comfort,
even whilst I was thus in despair, and moaning (one night) in my bed of a
sudden, the room was all alight, and I saw my self as in a lightning, Cast
down again.
and being terrified, I looked till I saw it written in these words, Thy sins
are pardoned, and thy life is bid with Christ in God; this comforted me much in
that extraordinary trouble and despair which I was in; Condemned to be shot to
death.
but yet for want of faith, this comfort did not continue with me, for I
thought after that, that I saw God with a wrathful countenance, and I could not
dare to look upon him, and the next news that I heard was, that* I was
condemned to be shot to death; O then! I cannot expres^ the terrors that I was
in! my woeful misery was such, that neither the reading of the Scriptures, nor
prayers, nor the promises would do me any good; for I could not believe I had a
right to them, I could not lay hold on them, and in this woeful misery I lay a
condemned man both in soul and body; and so lay lamenting. When I turned open
the Bible in Joel 2.13. and saw it thus written, Turn to the Lord YOUR GOD, for
your God is gracious, Raised up out of wrath again by an ordinary means, viz.
the Scriptures, as the ^urest comfort to him.
etc. merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the
evil; with that, pondering a while upon it, said I, and is he such a God? well
then, he is my God, and with that I gave my self up into his hands to do what
he would with me, yet he should be my God, and so I resolved, and was settled,
and satisfied; but after this, I was set free out of prison; and though I
thought this had been enough, yet for all this, I found much opposition
(afterward) in me against God, which I did not think could have been; but I
was grievously wounded for it, and could have no quiet, 3 Effects.
but went to Mr. W. about it, and he told me I had fallen from my first works,
I must repent, which rent my heart, and I had no rest; I returned from him, and
applied to prayer, and kept that course continually to pray, and by little and
little, And by prayer his faith.
I was recovered out of that condition; and I praise God, since I have seen him
smile, and look kindly on me, and know that he loves me, and I am sure of my
pardon in Jesus Christ, on whose merits I rely, in whose righteousness I
rest, and by his grace I am now set free to serve him.

Experience in Mihil, made out by John Jecock Captain.
I Can say something, and shall give out some account of Gods working upon me
at the first, when I was in a wretched state, Called, but he refused.
and without God in the world. Once as I was walking alone by my self, God did
call to me,
and began to open and reveal himself to me, but my heart was hardened,
Conscience afflicted.
and I refusing mercy at that time, the Law laid hold upon me very fiercely,
and I was so terrified in my spirit, and my conscience did so reprove me, that
I was afraid even of every bush and tree that I met with in the dark; still I
could have no rest, nor quiet, Helped by prayer extraord^narily by a shining
light. Called, 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects.

having refused mercy when it was lovingly tendered to me, which I thought was
so great a sin, that it could not be forgiven me, but yet I continued praying
always almost, and heard the means; and one time being in this affliction hard
praying, and with fervency of spirit seeking God, there came and shone such
light round about me, and in such a way that I could not hold, but my heart was
full; and all admiring, I most wondered how the Lord should set his love so on
me, on such a one as I; after this, I was full of refreshment, and have been by
faith wonderfully carried out, and I can see God doing great things in me and
for me. Truly at sometimes I have had some sweet refreshments after troubles
since; and I find some enlightments in me oftentimes, but nothing to the first,
which was so sweet that it was extreme glorious. After that I was made ever
more cautious of company, and conversation, and ever since that sweet
manifestation of love, as often as I offended God, though but a little,
it struck home to my heart, and I was very sensible of it ever since, and
very careful in my walkings.

Experience of John Cooper.
longed to enter into this fellowship, ever since January 4. last, Prays for
clear persuasion.
being the Lords day in the night time after prayers; and many troubles I had,
earnestly praying to be confirmed in faith, and fully persuaded for some way or
other to walk in, which the Lord was best pleased with; and (after prayer) I
slept, and so continued in one sleep until about five a clock in the morning,
having had this Dream that I now give in: for I presently upon my waking made
have to write it down, lest I should have forgotten it again, or any thing of
it; and this is that which I writ down, Confirmed by a Dream.
as I remembered it, that I present to you under my own hand.

The Dream of John Cooper the 4. of Jan. 1651. as it was given in under his own
hand,
WHich was this. I thought I was in the company of Mr. Rogers, Col. Hewson, and
my Lord of Clogher, and that we were all going together upon a fine green way;
and did all travel together a long time, and then I thought Mr. Rogers turned
back to us, and said; Brethren, you may see, what a great comfort it is to
walk in the paths of Righteousness; For, for all we have traveled so long,
yet we are not any thing a weary, etc. And Brethren be assured, that I will
lead you to a place of great joy and comfort before it be long, if you will but
follow me. So then (me thought) we went a little further, and we came to a
very large and spacious place; wherein there was a great gate* and there Mr.
Rogers made a prayer: and as soon as he had concluded; the Gate was opened, and
we entered therein; and then me thought we went into a great Garden, and there
was a very large pair of stairs, where we went up, and there I saw me thought
a great many of dead peoples bones, which appeared to Mr. Rogers in full and
perfect shape as ever any were, as I conceive, for at those bones he made a
stand, and said unto us all, Look brethren, and take good notice of the handy
work of our great God; for here you may see that they are in as perfect shapes
as they were in the lower world. So then (me thought) we went up a little
further, and there Mr. Rogers made another stand, and said, unto us, Brethren,
Now shall I see whether you be strong in faith, or not. So then (me thought)
we came to a place where we must needs go over, and it was in the likeness
of a small Pike laid over a deep pit, and then me thought Mr. Rogers said,
Come Brethren, our journey is in vain without we go over this Pike, for they
that will see the Habitation of the Lord, must go through many dangers, and I
will by the grace of God be your Leader; And so then (me thought) he went over
with as much safety and ease, as if he had gone on the earth. The next that
went over the Pike aforesaid, was Col. Hewson, and he went with as much ease
also, and after my Lord of Clogher; The next it came to my turn, which I
seeing so great a downfall, and the Pike did so bend and shake that I could not
set one foot over it, was afraid; so then me thought Mr. Rogers cried out, and
said, O friend, friend! you have walked in the paths of unrighteousness! So
then (me thought) he made a prayer to Almighty God, that he would admit me to
go over: And so then (me thought) he bowed three or four times, and cried out
with a loud voice, and said, O thou great God, how much I am bound unto thee
for all thy loves and manifestations toward me! So then (me thought) he took
me by the hand and bid me, Come over, and not to fear; and then I walked over
with as much safety as the rest; so then (me thought) we went a little further,
and we came to a very fair Room, and there was not any in it as I could see,
but Mr. Rogers, and Col. Hewson, and the Lord of Clogh^r: They saw, and spoke
with God (as I conceived) for after they had done speaking, they gave many bows
and thanks; and then (me thought) Mr. Rogers said, Come, we will sing praises
unto the Lord for all his Promises, and great Gifts to us. And then (me
thought) we began to sing, and I heard a multitude of voices with rare
Music, and I could not see any,
but our selves; so when Mr. Rogers had done giving God his glory in singing of
praises; he did rise up, and saluted us, and said; well, Brethren, I have but a
short time to stay here with you; and for the Time I have been amongst you, I
have endeavored to bring you the Right way to worship God. And for the time I
do stay with you, I shall (by the help of the Lord) make known unto you
Greater things then I have done yet; So I desire you to follow my counsel, and
it shall be for your own profits; and so I waked, or else I might have known
more. --

After this his Dream, he was much confirmed in this way wherein we walked, and
the effects of it were of such influence, that he said he could not rest, nor
be satisfied until he had showed it to the Church, and proposed himself to
walk with them; at the time he was admitted, he said more (though not much)
that he was called home to God, taken off of sin, and the lusts of the world;
and that he had found in him a great change, though he were not able to
express himself in words, and was now desirous to please God, to walk in his
way, longing after Christ, and communion with his people, being long before
wrought upon by the word preached, and prayer, and that now he had given
himself up to God, with such like expressions coming very brokenly from him
in much appearance of humility and holiness.

A fuller Testimony as it was taken from Elizabeth Avery, out of her own mouth,
and declared by her self to the whole
IN this society I see much of God, and have a great desire to be one with you.
From my childhood I have lived under good education; my Father was a godly man.
Mr. Parker was her Father, that able Divine that writ De Eccles. Polit. so
largely; but she married Master Avery a Commissary in Ireland.

Called legally.

1. When. 2. How? 3. Effects.

I was always tender and conscientious, but my conversion was wonderful. On one
Sabbath Day I was playing, but I was soon and soundly checked for it in my
spirit; and went home, but I was a great while troubled, and lay under bondage
all along: And I was much distracted and confused for sin a long time, till
about sixteen years of age; and then I began to be very strict, and so retired
in my life, that many wondered at it: I had an entire love to the preaching of
the Gospel; O how I longed after it! but alas! we had then no good
Preaching-Ministery to be had or heard about us! and yet my heart longed a long
time after it, till I came to be married. But alas! I was yet under the Law,
and Works, Yet under the Law.

Till called out of Egypt into light by Free Grace.


until God called me out of Egypt; and I could not tell how I was once wrapped up
in a light, and hearing something spoken of Free Grace, then I melted. Yet for
all these, I had great afflictions, and amongst others, by the loss of my
children, Gods rod was laid heavy upon me, insomuch, That he struck three of
them together; and one child above all, Yet in great afflictions.
a most sweet child, and one, that I least thought of them all would have
died, was very ill; and we were talking (I, my Husband, and some Friends,)
together of comfortable things, and amongst others of David, when he said of
his child (dead) I shall go to it, it shall not return to me. Ay says one,
that is to the grave; which word wounded me; and I went into the Garden to wail
and moan my self; but soon after, my Husband came and told me my child was
dying; at which I was left in an horror, as if I were in Hell, none could
comfort me, nothing could satisfy me, no Friends, Even in Hell.
nothing; then it was sad indeed to me, a Hell indeed. I sent for the Doctor
and others, but to no purpose. Yet after this the Lord wrought on me much; and
one, Deliverance by ordinary means.

Effects of it.


a Minister of Christ, that had power from God to do me good, gave me much
satisfaction by a Letter of his: And after that, me thoughts, I was content to
part with all, and to let all go; then God tried me, and took away another
child from me, and I could bear it very well, and was not troubled, but rather
did rejoice within me to be thus tried. No cross, nor loss could trouble me
then, Nothing could trouble her.
and I continued in this strength (I praise God) pretty long. But after this I
was like to have died, and then, to add to my great sorrow, the good Minister
that did me so much good, Began to despair again, but soon quieted.
left the place, and went away, and my friends slighted me, and one thing added
to another, made me begin to despair again; but then I know not how God quieted
me again, which I wondered at, and was much comforted, and confident, that God
would do me good, and I hoped and looked for it: And the very next morning as I
was at prayer, Called Evangelically. Extraordinarily In a trance.
God wonderfully appeared; and then was it, that Christ was manifested to my
spirit, and I was as in a trance for a while, but after I awaked full of joy;
And confirmed by ordinary means, the Word.
and yet for all this, I was somewhat under bondage (me thoughts,) but the Word
and Means of Grace did confirm me, and comfort me. In the times of the Wars in
England, I was brought out of Egypt into the Wilderness. O! I was much
refreshed by the Lord two or three years, and was much contented, In times of
wars, full of joys, and peace, and inward teachings.
and had his teachings within me, yea, and (many times) without his outward
instruments; for I had his Spirit, his voice speaking within me, and God alone
was with me, and no strange god. But when the wars began to cease, my greatest
trouble, and that at which I took offense was, That we were so without the
means, and without able Ministers; for now I could not be satisfied, but even
doted on them, This forgot, and doting on outward means altogether, and on men's
persons.
and could not wait with patience; for I had forgot now how God had taught me
within before, and without them. Yet I followed and hunted after my lovers,
having men's persons in admiration; and thus God suffered me for a while to go
on after them. A while after this, Colonel Lambert desired me to go to Oxford,
and when I was to go, I made ready my self, packt up my clothes and all, and
rid away; most, with desire for communion with godly people there, for (as yet)
I could see no further -- * I heard their disputes between Master Kiffith and
others, very hot, A stronger temptation to d^ny Ordinances, and the use of the
means.
but saw nothing of God there, and was troubled at it, and could not after that
hear him or others; but I went into a Garden alone my self mourning, and sat so
a while under a Wall, and by and by came three men to me (passing that way) and
wondered to see me so; they asked me many questions --. But a little after I
recovered my self out of that passion, and went and told Colonel Lambert how it
was with me; but he told me, I should not only be taken off of Ordinances, but
off of believing too,
within a while; at which I was troubled, and went away unsatisfied I was
troubled to hear any Preach, and being once got to go to the public place,
Tormented at them.
I was so tormented that I could not bear it; for I could not join with them,
nor hear, nor pray, nor had no rest, no comfort, nor ease, nor could I eat or
drink, but went (as I was wont) to bewail in a Garden, where I was moaning,
when there came one unto me, and presently told me, That I was under the
opening of the fifth seal, and very near the sixth, in the condition which I
was in, and should be in. --

Being thus afflicted, I desired to go home again from Oxford, and writ to my
Husband, but the Letter was burnt; -- but I was in such a condition to see Gods
wrath in every thing against me, as is not to be expressed; I was left in all
kinds of troubles (as it were) at once; What was her comfort, and her Heaven
in this Hell?
but here was all the comfort that was left me, and it was my Heaven in my
Hell, that God would be glorified by my destruction: And so long I found some
ease, and content (me thought,
) and it did joy me at my heart to think, A high pitch. Effects of Christ's
call, a true and strong love.
That all things should go well with the Saints, and they should be happy;
though I had no share with them, yet these things did me good. And indeed, I
dare boldly say when my faith was gone, and hope gone, and all gone, and flew
from me, and could not be seen in me that I had any; yet love remained, and
might be seen, 1 Cor. 13.13.
and was not gone; noe,
though I were to be cast presently into Hell* yet I could love God, and was
glad he was to be glorified, though I were to be ruined; and so I was glad at
the welfare of Gods people.

Thus I was three quarters of a year, and did not now care for my self, what
became of me, Not caring for self, but for God and his people.
for the reasons I said before; but it appeared my deliverance was near at
hand, though (as yet) I had no assurance of salvation; yet at last I was
carried out with a great confidence, that light was near at hand, And yet I met
with terrible shakings for all that, which lit altogether upon the flesh, for
the spirit was free: So that some three years agone, How delivered.
God came in upon my spirit, and gave me full assurance, and I heard a voice
say --, And sorrow thou shall see no more. Extraordinarily by a voice twice.
Then I writ down what God had done for me, and writ about to my friends; but
yet I was struck in the flesh again,
which I wonder at; and then I heard the voice again say, It was sin that was
suffering in me, and the flesh as the punishment of sin; Effects of it.
and so I found it was, for the destruction of the flesh; and ever after that I
found Christ in me, Extraordinarily called.
ruling and reigning, and taking all power to himself, and he has caught the
man-child up to God, which I brought forth. i. e. The flesh, (by his
incarnation) and I have found in me (and do yet) his judgment seat s^t, to
judge and sentence sin, and lust, and corruption, and his throne is there for
himself to sit, and to rule by his own Laws: And thus it continues with me at
this day, and the Lord leads higher and higher in himself; and for that I see
so much of him here in the midst of this Church, Her Husband a Captain.

This Gentlewoman declared to several Church Members, that before the Author
came over, she had in a dream one night of her troubles, a vision of him so
plainly, that after he was in Dublin, the first Sermon. he preached, she told her
friends this was the man that God had declared to her in a vision, should
comfort her soul.


I desire to be one also with you.

Another Testimony or Experience made by Elizabeth Chambers, in the Church
aforesaid, when she was admitted.
I Have often prayed for communion with Gods people, which I hope to enjoy as
his answer --. When the Rebellion brake out here in Ireland, I went over with
my Husband into England, and at Bristol there were a poor despised people that
met together, and had some communion, but they were made a mere off-scorn, and
disdained by all almost; but I desired to know them more; and the more I heard
them reproached, and abused, and called Hypocrites, and holy Brethren, or
Sisters, in mockery or the like, the more I rejoiced, and desired to be one
with them; and I reproved their enemies for reproaching them; for that (by
that) it appeared the more to me, That they belonged to the Lord, and I wished
I might be one with them: But being afterward to return hither, when I was
come over, I went to hear at Katherines Church (so called) in Dublin; but I
could not well hear the Minister, and when I did, he railed so bitterly against
the godly people, that I could not edify any thing by him; but I heard Mr.
Brisco, and was much moved by him; Called Assurance. 1. When, where. 2. How?

but yet I was without assurance, and had no full and clear satisfaction all
this while; until the Lord, who hears prayers, sent over Mr. Rogers from the
Council of State to us, who on the first subject that he was cast upon to
Preach out of Gal. 1.15, 16. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, that
I might Preach him among the Heathen, I conferred no longer with flesh and
blood. He did show, that unless Christ were revealed in us, he was veiled to
us; and the ablest Preachers speak from inward revealings, Christ revealed in
them. And in the handling of this, he showed, that unless Christ be in us, no
Salvation to us, 2 Cor. 13.5. Now after I had heard him on this, I was much
cast down, In great troubles and travels of soul.
for I could not find Christ, but corruptions and sins in me; and being
removed from my former bottom, I was much troubled, and could not find any
thing in me to build my comfort upon; but lay lamenting, and afflicted day and
night. My Friends were much troubled to see me, and questioned much with me;
but yet being cast down, and undone thus, upon the first sight and Sermon of
this man, I sighed and prayed, and sighed and prayed, and went to bed with my
heart full, and head full, and eyes full, and ^ell afflicted; at length I slept
and dreamed, A Dream.
That unless Christ were in me, I were damned, a reprobate, undone, and lost
for ever. When I awaked, my heart aked, ready to break, 3 The effects of it.
I rose up, and wept sore, and with sighs and tears I took the Bible, and
looked out for Christ there; and looked out and turned to the proofs that
Master Rogers mentioned, and examined them; A good example to women.
and then I examined my own heart, and searched; but all this while I was at a
loss, and lamenting, I told a Gentlewoman my condition, and she did what she
could to comfort me,
but to no purpose. The next day I hasted away to hear him again, and there I
found comfort, for he was now upon certain signs whereby we might (likely)
judge of Christ within, revealed in us, and know it; and also to others, he
gave and urged the tender of Gospel-promises, upon their willingness to accept
of, and receive in Christ, as Isa. 55.1. and John 7.37. Revel. 22.17. John
6.37. and 16.20. and Matthew. 12.20. Isa. 44.3. Psalm. 145.19. and Prove. 13.12,
19. and Matthew. 28.5. Fear not, for you seek Jesus; with some other places. And
moreover, he proved to us, That some had Christ (within) when they think they
have him not; but therefore do pass a false sentence upon themselves, Fully
satisfied, that she had found Christ.
and seek him without; as the Canaanitess, and the Spouse, in Cant. 3.3. and
Mary Magdalen, etc. By all which, I was much raised up, and went home with joy,
and was sure that I had found Christ now; for my heart was changed, and
satisfied, (as it were) full of light, and joy, and I saw clearly, that I had
Christ; 3. The effects of it.
and all my motions, desires and heart, went out after him, and him alone.

After this, my sister had the sickness, and yet I was not afraid, but lived on
God, To do others good.
and fed on Christ, as all my comfort: And I saw all was empty and nothing, and
not worth loving without him; and I often spoke to my sister of Christ within;
and did often pray by her, and was ( through grace) made an Instrument to do
her great good; I being always with her, and seeing her a dying woman. Yea, the
more the Lord has taken away from me, as my Husband, Father, Friends, Sister,
Children, and all; Christ is her all now.
the more have I made Christ in me, in the room and stead of all these to me.
And I let God alone to do what he will with me,
and I applied that place to Abraham, Genesis 17. Fear not, for I am God
all-sufficient, etc. And so I rested on God, and the life I now live, is by
faith in the Son of God; who gave himself for me, and died for my sins, and
rose again for my justification.

Henry Johnson, which is taken imperfectly and very short.
I Have met with many great mercies, when I was in the West Indies, there we
wanted the means, and had no good Ministers; but after that with conference
that I had with a good man, I began to know something of God, for till then I
was in great ignorance: Afterward I came to London, and there indeed I heard
many good men, and had much means, yet but a little assurance; and so I held in
a formal-way of working and worshipping; until a time, when I was surprised
with fears, I had a a vision, and an appearance (as it were) round about me, A
Vision extrao^dinary, and a voice.
and full of glory, which I cannot express; but a voice said, You shall see it;
at which I was afraid, and after all this, I thought I was but a Formalist, and
no better then an Hypocrite, and could not have rest or comfort, but went
about, and desired prayers to be put up for me, and durst not go to hear; until
it pleased God to bring into my heart, Isa. 50.10. Heb. 10.20. and 13.5. I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee* Confirmed by ordinary means.

Effects.


And such places which did abundantly comfort me, and satisfy me, and so I
could come with boldness in Jesus Christ; and then durst go to hear, and have
been settled on Christ ever since, and have used the means of Grace and
Ordinances, with great affection to Jesus Christ.

Experience of Edward Wayman.
I Am not able to express what I have found of Gods goodness to me. My first
call was upon a dream, Converted by a Dream of a Black Dog.
which I had of a great black terrible dog, which seized upon me, and took hold
on my ear fast, which I thought was the Devil; at which, I waked with screeks
and cries, and such frights, as for three weeks I thought I should have gone
distracted; for I found this was sent to raise me out of my sins, which were
after set so before me, Effects of it.
so that I was a long time afflicted; and so, as I could scarce walk about the
streets for feebleness: But it pleased God to comfort me since by Mr. Fowler,
and some others; and in private meetings, and in prayers; So that I am sure I
am pardoned in Christ, and that God has accepted of him, as an offering for
me. I was zealous before for Forms, but now I desire to be built up by the
Spirit, and to live by the Spirit, in Christ, whom I make my all: And for that
end, I desire to join with you, as you do with the Father and the Son.

Experience given in by Humphry Mills.
MY Father was a Gentleman of a fair estate, had many children, eleven Sons of
us, he was High Sheriff; and when he died, we were all the Family of us broken
in confusion, and dispersed: Two of us were brought up within five miles of
Gloucester in England, but I was placed in London an Apprentice after; and by
this means, my sorrow and troubles began to be great; first out of
consideration of this change and it continued so a while, till I was about the
seventeenth year of my age, and then my sorrow was turned into another kind of
sorrow and trouble for sin: I was for three years together wounded for sins,
and under a sense of my corruptions, which were many; and I followed Sermons,
pursuing the means, and was constant in duties, A formal righteousness.
and doing; looking for Heaven that way: And then I was so precise for outward
formalities, That I censured all to be reprobates,
that wore their hair any thing long, and not short above their ears; or that
wore great Ruffs, Very precise.
and Gorgets, or Fashions, and Follies: But yet I was distracted in my mind,
wounded in conscience, and wept often and bitterly, and prayed earnestly; but
yet had no comfort, till I heard that sweet Saint (now in Heaven) Doctor Sibbs;
by whose means, Trouble in mind.
and Ministry, I was brought to peace and joy in my spirit. His sweet
soul-melting Gospel-Sermons won my heart, and refreshed me much; for by him I
saw and had much of God; and was confident in Christ, and could overlook the
World; and then I did not care for it, and was not afraid of afflictions; Till
Dr. Sibs did comfort him.

Called by the Gospel 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects.



and yet sometimes I was under a spirit of bondage again unto fear: But
nevertheless, my heart held firm, and resolved, and my desires all Heavenward.
I heard Funeral Sermons much, but Doctor Sibbs most, by whom I was most
effectually wrought upon, and satisfied with comforts. After this I married a
precious Christian full of Christ, and a great comfort to me. My Trade was in
Wholesale, and since those times, I have lost in England and Ireland, Fourteen
hundred pounds. I did not think to have lived here, when I came over first, and
brought wares; but I found God to deal very graciously with me. And being much
refreshed by your Meetings and Members, I desire to be one with you in Christ.

Experience of Ruth Emerson as it came out of her own mouth in the Dublin.
THe Lord has exercised me much, and to pass by all outward troubles which
have been very many, I shall declare what the Lord did for me when I was young.
I was called out once to hear one some four miles off, where I lived, who was
counted a very good man, and I went (with others) to hear him, not knowing well
what I went about, but I got leave to go, and he was on that subject* Thy
testimonies are sure, holiness becomes thy house for ever. Called by the
word. 1 When, where. 2 How.

The Minister preached exceeding well, and I began to be affected therewith;
and after that my mind ran much on what he said, and I was carried much after
the Word, and went often five miles off to hear Mr. Archer, whom I followed, by
whom I came to see that I was lost, and left by Adam in a woeful condition, yet
still I heard him one Sermon after another, but was all this while in great woe
and misery, and so continued a long time under the sense of my undone
condition, and damnation, 3 Effects.
until Mr. Archer perceiving my condition, offered me Christ freely, only
upon thirstiness and weariness, which he proved was as much as was required on
our part to come to Christ upon, and to tender him as he did; I made many
objections (which would be long to tell now) but he answered them all out of
the Word so fully that I could not tell what to say more, but was so wrapped
in, that I could not but resign my self up to this Savior Jesus Christ, and
that I would roll my soul upon him, and leave my self so with him. Temptations
manifold.
Yet afterward not finding my self so gifted and graced, nor having so much
of Gods Spirit, as I saw others had, I was in great doubt for a while of my
estate, and was much troubled again, especially when I thought I heard how the
damned roared in hell, and blasphemed God to his face; O this! -- this cut me
to the very heart! Sense of hell.
to think I should be one of those that should blaspheme God,
this wounded me more then hell! But after this, hearing the Word constantly,
Deliverance.
Christ was offered to me time after time, till I was fully called to Christ,
and to hang upon him as I do at this day, with confidence and assurance of
grace and mercy. And seeing God has done thus for me, and has given me this
beginning to let me see his everlasting love; now surely I will rely upon him,
though I be in darkness and see no light. Resolu^ion
Yet I confess I walk not according to the mercies received, but I find
backslidings; yet I remember Gods everlasting love in Christ Jesus, and whom
he loves, he loves to the end; wherefore I rely on him, and know that by his
grace I shall stand; and do much desire to walk with you, that I may be watched
over by you.

Experience of Anne Hewson, wife to Col. Hewson, as it was taken
Called by the love of God* 1 When where. 2 How. 3 Effects.

I Lived in London, and was a frequent lover of good men, and especially of one
Mr. Culverwel, a very able godly Minister, and I received much comfort by him,
he preached the love of God so sweetly that my heart melted to hear him, and
hereby he first showed me my miserable condition in showing what the love of
God had done for me; and after I saw my misery in my self, I came to see no
happiness but in Christ alone; and I was very much troubled, because for a long
time I could find nothing, but the legal work upon my spirit, and I feared
that the work was not yet perfect, therefore I followed and heard the most
searching Ministers I could; and was still tormented in my mind; but Mr.
Culverwel (poor man) did still do all he could to comfort me,
and to encourage me, and told me that God would not break the bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking flax, and that I was in the way to have Christ a full
satisfaction, and bid me be of good comfort, but I continued in these troubles
and temptations as if Satan had been let loose upon me, yet this did something
comfort me, that other of Gods people were in the like condition with me; but
yet I was thus till I met with Mr. Bolton, by whom I had much comfort, and by
other means together I became fully satisfied and assured of Gods love to me in
Christ.

Experience of Dorothy Emett.
Owen was the first man by whose means, and Ministry I became sensible of my
condition, Called by Mr. Owen.
I was much cast down, and could have no rest within me, and so I continued
till his going away from us, Effects. A voice in her sleep satisfied.
and at his going he bid me believe in Christ, and be fervent in prayer; but I
said, how should I do to believe? I lay a long time in this trouble of mind,
until in my sleep one night came to me a voice, (I thought) that said, I am
the Fountain of living water: and when I awaked, I was much refreshed, for I
had great thirstings after Christ, and yet I was under some doubts, until I
heard one at Cork-house upon that subject, Romans 8. The Spirit witnesses with
our spirits, that we are the sons of God. So that God satisfied me very much,
and I have had ever since a full assurance of Gods love to me in Christ.

Experience of Anne Bishop.
I Have tasted much of God upon my spirit; the first Sermon that I heard here
so wrought upon me, that for a year or two, Called perplexed. 1 When wrought
upon. 2 How by Christ freely offered. 3 Effects.

I was much tormented, and could have no comfort at all, or confidence to take
Christ when he was offered; for I had this objection continually, that I was
not fit to receive Christ, but afterward bearing Christ freely offered without
any fitness or qualification in us beforehand, without any such conditions of
worthiness, but with hungrings and thirstings, and that he must be taken thus
barely (as it were) as from us, and willingly so as to part with Father, and
Mother, and all for him. I was at last wrought upon to take him on these
terms, Temptations.
and yet I had abundance of temptations, and trials both inward and outward
(which I hope to have time to tell hereafter) but I durst not do any duty, nor
so much as pray before any, apprehending that I was an hypocrite,
and once I sat down in great perplexities, when it pleased God to come upon
my spirit, and to reveal to me that I must believe in him, and cast my self
upon him, yet I was troubled, and bid the Lord do what he would with me, so I
might but have him. Assurance in Christ.
All this was before he made himself so known to me as he did afterward; for
he made me first to see my self nothing, and although before I rested on my
works and duties, and so I did long, yet now I could find no rest there, but
thought all my former hopes were gone, and Christ to be lost, and I was
destitute and comfortless; but since, I have found Christ to be mine, and that
I am his, and the Lord has appeared to be my righteousness, and has fully
satisfied me, so that I live barely upon him.

Tabitha Kelsall.
I Was determined once to have life by my own actings, and thus I was a long
time in England, 1 Formal for doings.
I was of Paul Hobsons society, and ere long all the Ordinances grew dead unto
me, 2 Denying Ordinances and duties.
and I knew not what to do; I lay long under a sad condition, and so as I could
not read, nor pray, nor hear, but found all unprofitable to me; many ways did
God shake me sore* Temptations till the word was opened.
and I lay under many trials and shakings long till the Lord came in by
himself, and settled that in my mind, which is in Heb. 12.26. Yet once more I
will shake not the earth only, but also heaven, that those things which cannot
be shaken may remain: For the Lord by his voice did thus comfort me, that
although heaven as well as earth, inward, and outward man, my spirit as well my
flesh, and all my works, and righteousnesses were shaken, yet it was to make
way for what could never be shaken, and yet after this I was lifted up to much
by knowledge, and withdrew from Ordinances, but seeing how some that did so,
and denied Ordinances; did live disorderly, and walk wickedly, I was much
troubled at it, She saw other Ranters live wickedly.

Called in ^gain by the word, and made a Covenant with the Lord.


and yet left in the Wilderness a long time after until God did discover by
his word to me, and declare clearly that I must not withdraw from the
Ordinances, nor deny communion with his people, and then I made a Covenant with
the Lord, that I would not, and that I would part with all for one smile, and
was glad at my heart that I was received again, and brought under the means of
grace, and Ordinances of Christ Jesus.

Andr. Manwaring, Major.
An ill liver.
I Was brought up well, by Parents accounted Puritans, till about sixteen years
of age, after that I was Apprentice in London, but ill company drew me away,
and I took but ill courses until the three and twentieth, or four and
twentieth year of my age; In dangers.
then I came into Ireland in the beginning of the Rebellion in the North of
Ireland, I passed through great dangers, and many deaths, (as I may say) for
there my Father was killed, my Wife was wounded, and I my self with much
danger escaped from the bloody Rebels; after that at Tredah-fight I was, when
it was delivered, and being laid in the field among the dead, with fifteen
wounds, I was given up for one of the dead; but after that recovering, Even
death.
I went into Engl. and then returned into Ireland again; at which time I began
to look about me to follow the Word, to hear good men, being sensible of my
sins! and former forgetfulness of God, and goodness. I heard one Mr. Owen
here, who did me much good, and made me to see my misery in the want of Christ,
and so I continued, till Mr. Rogers was sent over to us, by whom I have
received great comforts and assurance of Christ, Called, 1 When. 2 How.
Confirmed. 3 Effects.

and now I do verily believe I have fellowship with the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ, and find a great change in me, and I abhor ill company and
courses, and desire to walk in all well-pleasing to God; and though I meet
with temptations and hindrances, yet I bless God he carries me on in
goodness, and I can now pray, and that by the Spirit, and I love the Word and
Ordinances, and do earnestly long to have fellowship with the people of God, to
watch over me; for I am yet weak. Blessed be God for his free grace in Christ
Jesus before I had any knowledge in Christ, the Lord spoke to me by the means
of an honest man about thirteen years ago, Called, 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects.

who worked much upon me. I heard Sermons, and followed Ministers much after
that; I was wont to hear in London Mr. Cradock, and Mr. Simpson; Mr. Cradock
wrought much upon me, being upon that saying in Isa. Woe is me, I am an unclean
creature, etc. And truly I could find it in me, as if he had spoken to me
only; what he said, so that I was thereby wrought upon: I was much afflicted
for a time, and gave my self much to prayer, and did love the truth, and all
the Saints, and so I continue now, and I have found, and do yet those things
true in me, which were spoken by Mr. Rogers of that oneness of love and unity
of the Spirit, which ought to be among all Saints, which has much wrought upon
me, and affected me; I have seen my (sad) condition by nature, and now I shall
see it in grace: and now O! how I love the ways of God, and holiness, and
duties! and means of grace! which before I did not, but such things of God, as
before I loathed, I now love, and long after Jesus Christ alone.

Edward Hoar Captain.
A legal righteousness.
I Shall declare something of God upon my spirit. It is some twelve years since
(before which I understood not the happiness of enjoying Christ, that I began
to say, What shall I do to be saved? I followed the Ministers, frequented the
means, and did too much depend upon my doings, and rest on works; and what I
heard from the Ministers, I took for granted truths,
because they said so, without searching or examining the Scriptures, and the
mind of God. I tried the Scriptures by men, not men by the Scriptures; but at
last, I saw them to be subject to errors as well (or worse) as others, and then
I saw that humane Learning could not get beyond humane: And what Peter said in
2 Pet. 3 16. Which they that are unlearned wrest, (as they do also the other)
Scriptures to their own destruction; could not be meant of humane Learning,
Peter himself not being so, but of Spiritual. So that ever since I could not
look on men as infallible, and thence forward I believed not things to be so,
because they said so, Assurance.
but because God said so, and his Word. But now I live in Christ, and I can
positively say, I have faith, and am sure in Christ to be saved, and look upon
none else; and I was darkness, yet now I am light in the Lord. And so I
propose my self to you, I had opportunity in other places before now to have
been of a society; but I was not free in my spirit for that I found them to
live too much in forms, and not in the Spirit; but hearing of so much love and
freedom of the Spirit in this Society, I desire to be one with you in the
Lord, and one with another.

John Spilman Captain.
A despiser of Ministers for long preaching.
BEing a member of the Church at Yarmouth in England, of which Mr. Bridges is
Pastor, I have given there an account of my faith and life, only shall say
thus much more, that once in a carnal condition as I was, I did slight the
Ministers of Christ,
especially your long Preachers, and could not abide that any should preach
long; but at last I was catched by one, and he was on Heb. 8.8.10. the new
Covenant made in Christ, which was applied to me very home, and touched me to
the heart, and made me to inquire into my condition, Called, 1 When, where. 2
How.

hearing the danger of being out of that Covenant, as it was to be out of
Noah's Ark, and I asked my heart about it, whither I belonged to it or no! but
(alas) I lay long in great affliction, and had no satisfaction, nor assurance,
so that I knew not what to do, being under many temptations, sometimes I would
hear, and sometimes affected the Ordinances, and sometimes not, and so I
continued a while, until those promises comforted me much in Hosea 14 4. I
will heal their backslidings and love them freely, for mine anger is turned
away from him. And Heb. 8.12. Confirmed.
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more. And that in Romans 5.6. In due time Christ
dyed for the ungodly. And verse 8. While we were yet sinners. And some other
places besides; but yet I questioned whether he dyed for me or no, and that was
answered, yes, for me; for I was one of the number of sinners, and ungodly that
needed Christ, but being in fears, I went to Mr. Bridges, told him how I was,
and indeed he satisfied me very much for the time; but I fell into great
trouble after all this, and had a sentence of death within me, and thought I
was damned, and utterly lost for all this, still wanting faith, and looking
upon my own actings and graces, till the Lord laid these sayings of Paul to
Corinth home close to my heart, Covet the best things, and I tell you yet a
more excellent way, Assurance by Christ.
and I thought there was yet a better way, but I was a great while troubled,
for I was well enough until I had some sweet enjoyments of Jesus Christ, and
then I discovered the most excellent way, Effects.
which is Christ and nothing but Christ, and then I grew confident, and full of
courage and assurance, and loved Christ, in all, and all that was Christ's, and
Christ more then all.

Experience of William Walker.
great work of God upon my heart in delivering me wonderfully, from several
destroying sins, which once I thought ^leight; but so great that I can scarce
utter them; I was very extravagant, even here in Ireland, but was brought very
low in body and mind together, and then was sensible of disobeying my Parents
from what the Word says of men, they shall be lovers of themselves, Called, 1
When, where.
heady, and disobeying parents, which cast me down, afflicted my conscience,
and troubled me so, that I cannot utter it; and I lay thus a long time till I
heard once Christ freely offered, even to the worst of sinners, and then I
began to look up a little, with hopes of comfort, and applied these offers to
me as needing him, and so I began to be satisfied with peace, and rest, and I
followed the Word* and rejoiced in it, and loved the godly to have company with
them, 2 How.
and yet for all this I was under much temptation, 3. Effects.
and too much I was given to drinking, till Mr. Strong told me, Brother, I hear
strange things of you, that you are given to drinking, etc. which so smit me,
with the abuses I received abroad by the profane sort, who said, (O this is
one of Fowlers followers) that I was wounded in my spirit a long time, that I
should bring such a scandal upon the Gospel, and a blemish: For two months I
was tormented in my mind till the Lord recovered me, and gave me resolution
and power against the sin, which has been ever since, I acknowledge this great
mercy to me, and do live upon Christ the true Messiah, whom I believe to have
dyed for my sins, and will save my soul.

Experience of Lawrence Swinfield.
I Have been a Travell^ur for some years, and wandered far Countries beyond
Seas till I came back again into England, and all this while in my natural
condition, and so I continued a great while, but I came hither in a sad
condition, and very comfortless, and could not tell what to do, but to fall
to prayer, and I did that often, In his natural condition long
and found ( I thank God) much refreshment from that means but nothing to
satisfy my mind, for I have been much troubled in conscience, and could not
take comfort until the Lord was pleased to give in some promises to feed upon,
Troubled in conscience.
as Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. where he promised to ease the heavy, oppressed, and
to make his yoke easy and light, and then I began to long for a Reformation,
and to desire to be under his yoke, How releeved.
which was before (I thought) a burden to me, and so Esa. 55.1. Come buy
without price, and without money; Effects.
and so I came as freely as I was called, and was presently confirmed by the
Spirit of God persuading me to give my self up into Gods hands upon these his
own terms, and so I did to this day, and many other sweet promises I had,
whereby I had a great deal of peace and comfort; and can confidently say, the
Lord is my God, and I have ever since found in me a very great change from what
I was before. As to instance in anger, I am now so free from that Passion, that
I think,
none can anger me; and so for many other things,
and I have a great delight in the Word and Ordinances, and have received a
great deal of comfort, and been much confirmed by Mr. Rogers, Confirmed and
assured.
and some others, and I know now that my Redeemer lives.

Experience of John Chamberlain.
one God, manifested by three Relations, and I believe this Church Way is
Christ's, and the very mind of God, and that the Premises made to the
Assemblies of Sion, are yours being thus separate from them wihout. But to tell
you my life, it has been very evil; From the ungodly.

In a carnal state.


but now the Spirit of God testifies in me that I am his.

About fourteen years agone, I was a grievous Wretch, and was cast out of doors
for my disobedience. But afterward being bound an Apprentice, the example of my
Fellow-Prentice (who was well-given) wrought much upon me; and he seemed to
me to do all for Heaven, and to mind Heaven altogether, Wrought upon by a
good example.
which began to incline me much that way too, and one time I went to him, and
desired him to own me, and to let me be with him, and partake, but he told me
he must not cast bread to Dogs, which troubled me much; but then I remembered
to say, But I may have the crummes, and thence forward was he willing to help
me all he could; so I went with him often, and by my self to hear good men,
and the word preached, but I was yet puffed up with Spiritual pride, and did
backslide from my promises, Yet proud.
and the profession which I made; we were after that about such a way of
walking together as this is; but we were not so strict, and careful of
admitting; Sinful and scourged by sin in again.
so I was admitted without any great Examination or Trial; but by reason of a
Contract with a Woman which I could not own, I was much troubled, and brake
out into sin, and God would have one sin a scourge to another sin, to
fetch me home again, which he did to the purpose; and I was after much
trouble in mind restored again to the favor of God. Strong temptations.


Since that, being a Soldier, I was thereby brought under many Temptations to
sin, especially that vile lust of Drunkenness, which too much pursued me, and
so strongly, that sometimes I was ready to yield, at other times ready to make
away my self, which I oftentimes was tempted to do, Delivered and satisfied.
and sometimes I was ready to wish all manner of curses upon me for that
sin; yet so I continued till the Lord at last came and delivered me out of
these snares, and filled my heart with his promises and presence, and assured
me of love in Christ; and now I long to enjoy more of him, and therefore desire
to seek him with you in this fellowship.

Experience of Adrian Strong.
FOr my life, I was two and twenty years a child of wrath, and then by the
word preached, Called in when he was tempted.
and read out of good Books and the Bible, I was brought in to God: for my
preciseness and walking in the ways of God, I have been imprisoned twice.
Sometimes I have had money before these troubles, and then my heart was set too
much on it; but afterward I was taken off of all, and then I began to leave
swearing, and drinking, etc. which I did too much incline to. And ever since as
afflictons have grown greater on me, grace has grown greater in me. I was
traveling into England; but now I bless God for this mercy ordained for his
Saints, that I can have so sweet fellowship with them here in Dublin.

Hugh Leeson.
I Have something to say, and I desire, that the grace of God may appear more
in me every day. I am convinced of this way of Christ, for believers to walk
in; and I have nothing to plead but my own unworthiness, yet fully assured in
Christ, I am emboldned to bring my desires here like smoking flax. I cannot
deny, but my life has been very bad, A great sinner.
and I have been exceedingly given to ill company and courses, and can complain
(and do) of what I have been more then others, viz. A great sinner, till grace
was given me, and mercy shown to me, and Christ manifested in me by his Spirit;
First wrought upon by his wife. 1. When, where. 2. How?

which was begun at first by my Wife, a Widows daughter in this Town, a godly
Christian, and whom God made the first Instrument of my good; by her often
reading of the Scriptures to me, and giving me good councels and admonitions,
and by the Spirits working within me, with it: And yet I did even hate the
Saints, and forbid many of them coming to my house, and was yet under many
temptations, I must needs say; but I am now made sure of Christ, convinced by
the Word, Confirmed.
and much comforted and established since Mr. Rogers came hither; 3. Effect.
and do now long after nothing so much as Jesus Christ, and do desire earnestly
to be in one with his people, and pray them all to pray for me, that I may
stand by faith established in the truth.

Frances Curtis.
I Cannot but condemn my self before I speak, I am so unworthy of this mercy. I
have lived wantonly in my youth, forgetting God, doing no good, but all evil,
till Gods hand was heavy upon me for about eleven years; and when in my outward
state I began to mend, Called by afflictions, outward and inward.
still in my inward I was much troubled, and wished that God had taken me away
by my former afflictions; these inward were so great, and a troubled spirit,
who can bear? But afterward I was much comforted again.

In these wars I was stripped by the Rebels (being abroad) and came home so,
thorough sad tempests, and since have gone thorough great troubles, and very
many. A while after, I heard my Husband was killed by the Rebels, which I
feared was by my sins, and so my troubles were renewed; and then the enemies
came upon us, the Cannon-bullets flew over my head; and in few days I was
turned out of doors, with my child in my arms. I cannot express what God has
done for me, in saving my life, and my Husbands, in hearing my prayers and
tears; and now in satisfying my soul with himself. Satisfied. Assured. Effects.
I have received much sweet satisfaction by Mr. R. and have now the testimony
within me of Gods love to me, which makes me so unfainedly to love him, and his
ways, and desire to be a member with his people, in his Church.

Experience of Mary Turrant.
I Lived till my Twenty third year, and knew not God; but after that, I came to
religious people, and received some good, and soon after was brought to the
sight of my self, and then I despaired of mercy; Dispaired.
and thought I was damned, and none of Gods, a great while, but was at last
comforted by good Ministers, and the Word of God; Recovered by the Word.
but I was in such a place and condition, that for seven years, I do not know,
that I (...) so much as a Religious man. My children were murdered by the
Rebels, and I lost my Husband by the sickness, and yet the Lord has spared me
in mine old age; and now I see why? That I may enjoy this great mercy, which I
never looked for, Effects.
to comfort me in my old age.

I have received great comforts indeed by Master Rogers and I must needs say,
That I serve my God with a cheerful heart, etc.

Experience of Elizabeth Marrow.
Cork-house, from the Governor, and often from Mr. Brisco, at -- precious
truths, and have been much affected with them, and told my Husband, that I have
heard of Christ. But after that the sickness came into my house, which drew me
much to God, Doctor Sibbils did me much good, Called, 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects.

speaking of every one that had a darling sin, which they loved: By which I was
put upon the inquiry and search, and was so troubled and afflicted in my mind
for a time, Confirmed and assured.
until it pleased God to satisfy within, by his holy Spirit, and to reveal to
me, That he was my Father; of which I have a full assurance, and the witness is
within me.

30. Experience of Rebecca Rich.
I Was wont (by Gods providence) to hear Mr. Cradock by whose Ministry the Lord
wrought much upon me, Captain Rich's wife.

Called, 1 When, where. 2. How. Lived much on forms. 3. Effects.



and I thought I was the person that he particularly spoke to; and I lay long
afflicted under the sense of my natural condition, and under the burden of a
wounded spirit, and after that whilst I lived nigh London, I lived much upon a
form, till God was pleased to come in by his Spirit, and then all was nothing;
but Christ was all, and the best of all, and ever since I have received Christ,
I have loved his ways, and desired the society of his society. Confirmed by
that ordinance of prophesying
I was much comforted and confirmed even the last night in Michaels public
place, by that Ordinance of prophesying one by one, which the Church kept so
sweetly, and I was very much convinced of your walking together in love and
unity of spirit.

31. Experience of Mary Burrill.
I Have been infinitely troubled by my marriage to my second husband, and have
been afflicted in Conscience about it much, til the Lord gave me comfort within
that my sins were forgiven me. I was as prone to sin as any, until my God
wrought very much by the means of my constant hearing M. R. ever since his
coming over to us, Called, 1. When. 2. How.

God has made him the chief Instrument of doing my soul good, for which I
thank my God through Jesus Christ. Confirmed in Dreams.
I have had in my dreams two terrible conflicts with Satan, by all which I have
been much assured of Gods love, for that I always had the better, the victory.
3. Effects.
O I love the Saints of God! his Word! and all his ways! and I rest on Christ
Jesus alone! and on nothing of self! and I do desire your prayers to God for
me^ to grow in grace, etc.

32. Experience of Mary Barker.
I Have great experiences of God, though at present I am not able to express
them. I have been much afflicted for many years together in my relations, 1.
When brought in, by afflictions.
which for my sins have been taken from me; but the Lord who has laid his hand
heavy upon me, has made me very sensible of my sins, and I have long layn
under the burden of them; 2 How confirmed.
but the evidence of my pardon is, that the Lord has removed the burden, 3.
Effects.
and brought in the room his grace, and given me a heart to him-ward, and I
have received much benefit by preaching, and praying, and reading in private
and public, and by the preaching of Mr. Rogers, I have received infinite
good, and found great comforts by his showing how we might know Christ is in us
of a truth; and by prayer which the Lord brought me earnestly into; the Lord
made those means so useful to me, that I am much satisfied in the love of God
to me, in Christ in me, who is all in all, and I do rest alone on Jesus
Christ, for pardon and Salvation by his blood.

33. Experience of Margaret Fanshaw.
I Was a long time under trouble and temptation; being persuaded to hear none a
great while, Rejected the means.
because I could not tell they were Christ's Ministers, a twelve month agone we
came over hither, and yet I heard none a while, after a while I heard a little
boy, Called home, 1. when? where? 2. How?

and then I heard Mr. Fowler, but yet I received but little benefit by any
until Mr. R. came over, and after I had heard him four or five Sermons, I
began to see my sin, negligence, etc. which lay a heavy burden upon me, 3.
Effects.
and Oh! I am yet grieved much that I denied the means so; and since by Mr. R.
I have been comforted with the offers of Christ, and all the promises in him,
whom I have heartily accepted, and am now persuaded by Gods Spirit, I shall
never run into those sins again, but I find his Spirit putting me forward to
hear and to follow the means now, with all greediness and love to God and all
his ways.

34. Experience of Ann Hanly.
I Have always had a great desire to walk with God, but was very ignorant, and
in the dark, till I heard Mr. Rogers, by whom I have had conviction of my
ignorance and sin in neglecting the means, Called, convinced, 1. When, 2. How
troubled.

and Christ offered by the means; I have seen my sins and been much troubled,
and have earnestly sought pardon, and I am by the Spirit of Christ confident of
it, and I trust in Christ that I shall be established, and do believe it;
Satisfied.
3. Effects.
and I do find daily a great change in me, and now I long to hear of Christ,
and I love the Word and Ordinances of Christ, Assurance. Resolution.
and am sure that Christ has paid the ransom for my sins, and I am resolved
in the power of the Lord to walk in his his ways, and to do his will.

35. Experience of Sarah Barn-well.
IT has pleased God to exercise me with much afflictions, and his love was all
which drew me to himself, and nothing else; 1. Under the Law.
but first I lay long under a legal sorrow and grief for sin, and I was then
put upon works and duties hard for heaven, but I saw I could not get it that
way; Working.
and in this great Plague-time in this City I was carried further, from the
notion to the Power, and to spiritual holiness, and higher into Christ, yet I
used the means much, as praying, preaching, reading, meditating, etc. and by
the Word I was struck home, when Mr. Dunstable teached on the sad condition of
some (even Professors) that were in Hell howling! Oh!
this sad doctrine struck deep to the heart! and I lay long wounded in my
spirit upon it. But it has pleased God to work upon me in diverse ways; 2.
Under the Gospel.
and by his Spirit he has set me free from this bondage; which mercy I
obtained first from the consideration of Gods great love in Christ, and hereby
I was brought to this assurance which I have. Assurance.


36. Experience of Jeremy Heyward.
THE Lord has opened my eyes to see sin, and shown me my self, and I lay
under his wrath half a year, and so long as I sought to make out my own
righteousness, Under sense of sin.
I lay thus; and yet this while, I followed the means, heard the Word, and I
saw at length nothing but Christ would serve me, and till then I could have no
comfort, wherefore one first day of the week, I fell to prayer, I prayed
thrice, and at the third time I heard him say, Lo! By prayer and the voice of
God,

Confirmed in Christ.

Effects.


my grace is sufficient for thee; whereby I was much satisfied ere since,
rolling my self on Christ, and living in him alone; and I find so great a
change, that I can say, whereas I was blind, now I am sure I see.

37. Experience of John Megson.
I Have often been in danger, yea of losing my life, and then have desired to
live, and to amend; in many great afflictions I have been in; in my youth time
I was very ign^rant, but now I am earnest for more light, that I may be in the
ways of God. That Scripture of Christ, in Revel. 3.20. Standing at the door
and knocking, Called, 1. When. 2. How. 3. Effects.

did work upon me, and then I understood Christ must come in, and all evil be
put out, and then I did desire Christ, and seek out after him, and so I do
yet; and shall do; though I dare not presume of any thing of my own, but all
on Christ, and therefore I desire to be of this Church, for God shall add such
as shall be saved.

38. Experience of Ann Megson.
I Have been long time troubled in mind, but yet I dare not despair; for, Come
unto me and I will ease you, says the Lord. The Lord did let me be long where
there was but small goodness to be learnt: But at London-stone I heard a good
man out of Isay 53.6. like sheep we have gone astray, and he showed how the
Shepherd had a Dog, when any run out of the flock to fetch him in again,
Called, 1. when, where. 2. How.

and so the Lord did by his Word fetch in us that went astray; and thus the
Lord wrought upon me, and made me see my sins, and my self, and I was long
afflicted, Temptations.
and I thought if I were the Lords I should not be in this trouble; but then I
remembered that Daniel was in the Den, 3. Effects.
and Jeremy, and Hezekiah were afflicted, and these were the Lords, and that
the Lord delivered them; and so that he would me in due time: and I bless God,
he did deliver me out of them all. O that he would give me the heart to praise
him!
I was lewd, but now am changed by his grace and goodness; and I love the
Lord, and I wish there were such an heart in me that I may ever live for his
honor and glory. I do long after Jesus Christ, and love to be here in the
ways of Christ; and I praise my God that he has brought us so much out of
darkness as now to see his ways.

Many more experiences I might insert, but being of the same nature with these
I have omitted them; and shall keep them by me for another occasion; There were
others in Dublin that did declare many excellent passages of Gods workings in
them and upon them, as Captain Jones (since Major) whose being imperfect I
purposely let alone, lest he should take offense, and William Holme, Giles Me,
Randall Lester, William Fanshaw, Elizabeth Holm, Anne Bell, Joice Latherd,
Elinor Meek, Robert Barnwell, Elizabeth Gardner, Robert Glover, with many
others. And I do earnestly desire pardon where offense is thought to be given,
especially of such dear friends, whose testimonies I have brought into public
view,
to bear witness to the world of the workings of Gods Spirit in these days:
to the facilitating of which I do (to all the world) call God (who is
righteous) to bear me witness herein; That,

1. In the first place, I have aimed (herein) at the honor and glory of God, in
the setting out his rich love to the lost sons of men, and declaring the
variety of his dispensations in grace, and the sundry ways of working, both
ordinarily and extraordinarily (yea in these days) to the fulfilling of his
promises made us.

2. I have dealt faithfully with all, as I find them in my Notes, as near as I
can to a tittle, taken out of their own mouths, without respect of persons;
excepting some of the most ordinary sort, which I have taken summarily, as I
promised at the first.

3. I think I have done my duty herein, and wish it might incite others to do
thus, viz. to gather out the flowers of their garden, to present to the Saints
in other places; and though some appear in their weakness as well as in
strength, this does the more magnify free grace, and all those variety of
notes concur to make up the tune of the song of the Lamb,
that one song of Moses and of the Lamb: So that the variety of the flowers,
and of the colors, and of the natures, and of the formalities of them, gathered
together into one, give a glorious luster, and like the Rainbow of many
colors, signify fair weather for Ireland. Sim.
Fair weather for Ireland.
And I am in good hopes no good man can have the heart to blame me for my good
will and work; before any take offense, let him seriously ponder upon it, and
summon his heart in sincerity, and say, For what am I angry? if the proud flesh
and puff-past-heart say, O sad! I am seen in my nakedness! and known in my
weakness! Art thou says, the Spirit? and it is fit thou should, that it may
be known who clothed thee, and that thou may have nothing to boast of; And
was not Christ so too for your sins? besides says the Apostle, my strength was
made perfect in weakness; 2 Cor. 12.9. most gladly therefore will I glory in
my infirmities; and verse. 10. when I am weak, then am I strong. God has a way
of himself, as Nazianzen says, to make himself the more admired, God is seen
most in our weakness. Nazianzen. Luther.
(...), and he does most of his works as Luther said, in mediis contrariis, by
contrary means in contrary ways, which makes him the more glorious. Be not
then offended at your weakness; Sim.
for the waters had better run though muddily and thick,
then not at all; and so you in your infirmities and weaknesses better be seen
to run into the Ocean of love, then to lie still, or stand like a stinking
poole. Neither be ashamed (in what the Lord is honored) to be seen in your
weaknesses, Sim.
for the rooms of the house that are greater, lighter, larger, colder, etc.
have the same foundation with the other, and thus says the Lord, Joel 3.10.
Let the weak say I am strong; Exposition.
strong in the Lord: But lest any should cry Crucify, and should follow me
with the ^louds of the red Dragons humors, let such spirits know what they do
before they spit fire at me, or throw wild fire about my ears, or plant their
Mortar pieces against me. Two things requisite before censure.
Two things are requisite to a right grounded knowledge, viz. the apprehension
first, and then the judgment. Now do but read these lines by the same spirit
they were writ, and dexterously discern the purpose of the Spirit speaking
hereby, and I will abide your worst who ere you be:
but I confess first to judge (as the fashion is) and then to apprehend, is
irregular and unsound. For if your understanding deal amiss, your judgment
will I am sure, and so the sentence will be false and full of sin; and so
already by righteous ones I have been judged. But I fairly leave you, yet not
the thing that I treat upon, for I shall speak more fully to it hereafter,
only offer two or three experiences more in the mean time, which are full
variety in unity.

39. Another testimony to the Truth or further Experience of John Rogers
Preacher of the Gospel, and given in to two Churches in England and Ireland.
TO give a formal account from year to year of my life, would make me too
tedious, to you and my self; and I fear somewhat offensive to such as are to
follow, though I may safely say in every year since I can remember, I have been
enriched with so many and such remarkable experiences; as might make some of
you rather admire then belieeve: but I hope we shall have opportunities
hereafter to open our selves in this kind one to another; In the mean time to
tell you some few for the present, I shall cite some of the most remarkable
passages which (to my present remembrance) I have met with in former years to
this day, to do their duty and homage before you. And first when I was a
Schoolboy at Malden in Essex, I began to be rowsed up by two men, viz. Mr.
Fenner, and Mr. Marshall. 1. Call to awaken him by the Word.
The first of these about the tenth year of mine age, as I take it, (for what I
was before I know not, a mere -- I know not what) although I was kept
continually in good order, as to read every day, and be Catechized and the
like:) yet then hearing Mr. William Fenner full of zeal, stirring about, and
thundering and beating the Pulpit; I was amazed, and thought he was mad; I
wondered what he meant*
and whilst I was gazing upon him, I was struck; and saw it was we that were
mad which made him so; O says he! you knotty! rugged! proud piece of flesh!
you stony, rocky, flinty, hard heart! what will thou do when thou art roaring
in Hell amongst the damned! etc. this made me at first amazed, which run often
in my mind after, Scared at the thoughts of Hell.
and I began now to be troubled, being scared and frighted, and out of fear of
Hell, I fell to duties, hear Sermons, read the Scriptures, (though I knew not
what I read, but only thought the bare reading was enough) morning and evening,
and learned to pray (at first out of Books, Very formal and strict in it*
and all the Graces (so called) that I could get) and besides Family prayers, I
was afraid every night lest the Devil should carry me away to Hell, if I did
not first to my self (whilst my brother my Bedfellow was fast asleep) say my
prayers, and my Our Father, and I believe in God, etc. and the ten
Commandments, and my little Catechism (Dr. Hall's) which I had learnt, and
this I did every night duly before I durst sleep; and I made as much of them
as of a charm to keep me well that night; which else I conceited the Devils
would tear me a pieces; and yet sometimes (when I was sleepy) to make the more
have I should say some of them at least (to be in a forwardness) in the
Chimney corner whilst I was unbuttoning me, Right formality.
or untying my hose or the like, preparing to go to bed, thinking all was well
enough so 'twas but done* only sometimes (though I was unwilling to it, yet)
out of fear (I remember) of the Devil, or some mischief, being ready to fancy
any thing to be the Devil, I should say my Prayers, or Commandments, Under
great bondage of works.
or Catechism, or all twice over, suspecting I* said them not well enough
before, but often too fast hurrying over before, and skipping somewhat; and
sometimes if I said some things confusedly and too hastily, I would recover
them again, or else remember them when I had done al, to say them again better;
but thus, as the Apostle says, when I was a child, I did childish things, and
I thought this was very well, and very oftentimes would I be talking with some
boy or other, getting him from all the rest to walk with me, and I would tell
him of Hell and sin, and such like things, for it ran always in my mind, and I
lived under a desperate fear; but for all this, Mr. Marshall a while after in
the same Pulpit took me napping; whilst I was I know not how bewitched to nod,
2. Call to awaken by the Word.
and began to sleep, but his powerful voice thundering against such as are
drouzy, and sleep, and slumber away their salvation, was at that time picked out
for me, and very prevalent, I started up with an aching heart, and was frighted
at his words, (which he yet pursued) and wounded me to the heart when he told
us, how that when time was lost we could not call it again, and he knew no
other way for us, but now to double our diligence and redeem the time we have
lost, by making more have, taking more care, and pains, or else we should be
lost for ever. O! I was sufficiently wounded, and fell a weeping; I could not
hold, and after Sermon I went home (where I boarded) and sat alone! crying and
complaining that I had lost my time; and at that time I took up a purpose never
to sleep at Church more, and made a covenant with it; which I think (to this
day) I observed ever since; How to keep from sleeping in the Church.
and when I began (as at first I was often tempted) to be drowsy, I would
always stand and hold on nothing, and cast my eyes about to open them more.
But after this I was not content with my former customary duties; for now I
must double them and do more then before; wherefore I resolved to write down
(as well as I could) every Sermon I heard, and to get them by heart, More
formal.
and to say every night one Sermon, and to learn (out of a book, for I knew no
better yet) another prayer for morning, and another for night, and sometimes
for noon too, especially on the Lords days, so that my task was now doubled.
How to help the memory to bear away Sermons.
So I began to write down the Sermons, (which for a time was very little,
having no skill to write fast nor orderly) but I ever observed the Doctrine,
and would write down the Reasons and the heads of the Uses; and when I came at
home, I would get it by heart at noon, that which I heard in the fore-noon, and
at night that which I heard in the afternoon: and this course which I took
made me more ready (at night when my Father repeated the Sermons, or the
Landlord where I boarded, for they both did it, being very godly) this made me
readier to answer when we were asked what we could remember, or what the
Doctrine, or Reason, Custom every night.
or Use was, then any other; and this course I took customarily for nine or ten
years together (long after I came from Cambridge) every night to repeat Sermons
to my self alone, or rather to say them by heart (as duly as I went to bed) the
Lord's Day night that Sermon which I heard in the forenoon; 1. Day. 2. Day. 3.
Day. 4. Day. 5. Day.
the Monday night (so called) that which I heard on the last Lords day in the
afternoon, the Tuesday night, Wednesday night, Thursday night, always left to
say by heart, Sermons I heard a month, 2. months, 12. months, and so (as I
increased in years) for 2, or 3, or 4, 5, or 10. years before; and I would
usually get up the oldest, and of longest standing; and such as I had almost
forgot, or not lately recovered my memory with, so that by this means I could
remember many Sermons, and such as were long agone preached, perfectly: Now on
Friday nights I repeated as I did on the Lords day nights always: 6. Day. 7.
Day.
and on Saturday nights and Monday nights always alike. But you must observe,
if Sermons fell out in the week days, as on fasts or otherwise, then I was
wont to pick out Tuesday nights, Wednesday or Thursday nights, and so kept on
the order, and was fit for fresh Sermons on the Lords day; and the Lord lead me
on into this orderly way, I know not how, by himself without any creatures
direction on the earth; so much did I plot out for salvation by such means as
these, and to redeem my time. Yet you must know, having so much to do every
night, I sometimes began (to my self whilst I s^te in the Chimney corner)
before supper, and usually left nothing but my Sermon to repeat for my bed, and
my prayers by my bedside morning and evening; but this I must say, How to keep
Sermons many years.
from this form I learnt much of God and goodness; for what I did at first for
fear of hell, I did at last out of love to heaven, and of late to God and
Christ as if it were without heaven;
and hereby I was not only able to tell many men's Sermons together, and it may
be ten years after they were preached; but also able (though chiefly by higher
means, as I may show afterward) to preach at 18 or 19 years of age; as I did in
Huntington-shire (if not sooner) to the amazement of many, but to the table
talk of more. Well, thus you hear how formal I was, and yet as I may say, I
was but feared (not loved) into this strictness of religion; and I remember
then, I should have been glad if any occasion happened that there were no Sermons
on the Lords days, or if I heard them not (which I dare not but do
notwithstanding if I were well) for it was more ease to me (I thought, or else
the Devil in me) to repeat the old,
then to get in n^w.

But not long after this, that I had heard Mr. Marshall as before, I was
further awakened by my N^hemiah Rogers that writ on the Parables.
Father (afterward) who preaching upon the good Samaritan, and showing his
compassion to wounded ones, 3. Call to awaken by the Word.
yet in reproof to sinners, show how they were more guilty then the hard
hearted Jews, that crucified Christ afresh now, and have no compassion on him,
now he is in glory, but spit on him, and made him suffer, and how his blood
would rise against them: and if Abels a mere man's did so, much more his; and if
David prayed from bloud-guiltinesse, how much more from this guiltiness of the
precious blood of Christ, etc. which he preached and pressed so powerfully,
that I was thrown into a trembling, as lying under the guilt of Christ's blood,
and was long perplexed about it: but after all this there is another remarkable
passage that I must never forget, which I met with, or rather met with me to
the purpose; about 1637. (as I take it) at Messing in Essex, I was playing with
children (my fittest companions then) and running round about the house we
lived in, (through two or three little gates) in sport and idleness, as I was
running with the rest, (I know not how, nor upon what occasion) I threw out
vain words, and crying, O Lord! (which we were not suffered to do) my heart was
suddenly smitten upon it, and I was suddenly set a running as if I had been
possessed, 4. Call to awaken, was by a strange Vision.
(by I know not what power or spirit) not having any strength to stay my self
(were it upon my life); until I was (headlong) carried through a little
gate-way, where (as plainly to my thinking and in my appearance, as ever I saw
any thing by the Sunshine) there was set a naked sword, glistering with a
fearful edge (I thought) and which took up the whole space of the gate from
one post to another, with a broad blade most keen and cruel; at which sad
sight so fraught with frights, I ghastly screeched, A warning to such as take
Gods Name in vain.
and yet had not the least power to stay, or stop my precipitant course; but I
was quickly carried quite unto it, so as that the edge of the cruel blade
meeting with my body, it seemed to me impossible I should escape death: and I
made no other account but to be quite cut off and parted asunder;
but afterward being hurried through, with that headlong and furious force, I
had strength to stay a little beyond it, and to perpend the perplexible peril
which I was in; I stood as one amazed, or rather as one that knew not whether
he were alive or dead; I knew not how to believe my self less then a dead man,
and afterward at least mortally and deadly wounded, if not desperately and
deplorably eut in twain: Oh! how I stood trembling and tumbling in my thoughts,
until the vital blood (which was fled for the hearts defense) began to
disperse again, and to go quietly to their own homes; and then I looked about,
and turned me to the gate-way, but the appearance was passed away, the sword
gone and vanished, whilst I was left (alone, the rest running away) in a
labyrinth of fears without any wound without, but deeply and woefully wounded
within; and never si^hence (to the praise of Gods grace) as I know of, have I
had such extravagant preposterous expressions passed from me. But, Good God!
What was thy will herein! Thou who art not tied to means or order, best
orderest and disposest of all things, for thine own design and glory! and so
this was I am sure, but what it was I know not; yet it left a lasting
impression upon me, and the scar is yet to be seen in my heart, though the
wound be healed. But, alas! How long and lamentable I lay afflicted and in
continual fears after this!
Every thunder and lightning, I looked upon as my fate, and sent for me; and
then would I fall to my Prayers, Formal and Ph^risaicall duties still.
and saying my Creed and Commandments, and to my Sermons as fast as might be,
that I might be found well-doing at least; if not as a charm to defend me, or a
challenge to God by virtue of them to keep and bless me: this I remember was
my great comfort to consider, some did not do thus, but altogether sl^ghted
holiness, duties, and did live wickedly, and carnally in drunkenness,
disobedience, Sabbath-breaking, and several sins every day, which I was so
far from grief at,
and weeping over, that I (in my heart) rejoiced in it, that I was in more
hopes then they, and (as I fancyed my self) better then they, and should
receive more favor. But all this while like an Israelite in Egypt, I worked
for life, and my services were my Saviors; and I would to my brothers,
sisters, and School-fellowes and companions to take occasion to talk of heaven
and hell, and what a hard thing it was to be saved. For some time after this is
Malden where I was boarded, and put to the Free School, I had a certain dream
(which by the consequence proved a praevision of what is now come to pass) it
was on a night about the time when the Spaniards and Hollanders had a scuffling
and a kind of Naumamachy upon the Downs; A praevision in a dream at Maiden in
Essex.
for then some talking of that fight, filled me full of fears, and in the night
my dream was; that fire rained (as I may say) or rather powered down round
about; and looking where I was, (I thought it to be without the Coach-yard gate
of my Fathers house, and I was frighted to see nothing but fire, looking upward
and round about, praying for deliverance, none came nigh me round about by a
good space, but flaming else (I thought) in all places, and I could see none
exempted; wherefore being afflicted for my Father and our family, I fell on my
knees for them, and I thought I continued so, long ere I could be heard, but
was at last bid to arise, and look, and then I thought the fire fell not so
fast on my Fathers house as it did before, but by little and little abated till
I awaked. Now although this dream had seized much upon my spirits, yet I made
no other account of it then of a fancy, till five or six years after in the
Isle of Ely meeting with Dr. Draiton D. D. he declared to me, for several
reasons, Interpreted by Dr. Draiton.
that this must be more then a mere dream, as working of fancy, and that
something was to come which I should find this to predemonstrate, instancing
in some of the like kind which himself, his wife, and others had met with as
warnings and predictions; and therefore he wished me in no case to slight or
contemn it; for that he was confident it did show some fiery and angry
dispensation upon all our family and my father, and the rest should lie under
some trouble by the times or otherwise; and my self should be set free, and at
this liberty to pray for them, and that by degrees they should be recovered and
brought out, and the fire abate: which interpretation (more fully by far from
his own mouth) is for the most part verified at this day. Came to pass.
But all this while I was laboring for life, exceedingly formal, and I did
much covet to know the things of God, and therefore wished often I were but a
Minister! such a one as Mr. Fenner is, or Mr. Marshall, or Mr. Hooker, Resting
in doings.
or my Father, or some other (that was eminent) that I might attain to their
knowledge, and then (I thought) I should do abundance more for God, (as if God
were beholding to me for my obedience) and I would then (I thought) be sure to
get salvation, (as if I could then easily do it).
Thus a poor creature, I continued for several years together, (and if you
knew but half what I have met with in that time, you would say I was a poor
creature indeed as any alive) for I kept to my self many fast-daies (and would
eat nothing) heard, read, sang Psalms, meditated, used Soliloquies, and prayed
many times a day, Despaired. 5 Knock awakened by the Word.
and what not? and yet at last despaired even to the depth: what by often
thoughts of hell, reading Drexellius upon eternity, and then thinking of
endless, easlesse, and remediless torments; and what by frequent frights as
before, and what by my Father, once preaching on the fool in the Gospel, Luke
10.20. Thou fool, this night will I take away thy soul, then whose shall those
things be that thou have provided? Whence he handled a point of the folly of
men to lay up here, and forget heaven; and showing that heaven came not with
ease on a down bed, but many shall strive hard to enter and shall not be able;
and that except you exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 5.20. you shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. What with
these and other things, I was almost in the bottomless abysmes of torments: I
took the Bible to look these Scriptures, read them over and over and over
again, but the more I read the more I roared in the black gulf of despair,
where I was cast so deep as (to me and others) I seemed sometimes past all
recovery* I prayed, fasted, mourned, got into corners, yea many times (being I
was ashamed to make my case known, I have ran into barnes, stables, house-of
office, any where (pretending as if I had business) on purpose to pray, sigh,
weep, knocking my breast, curse that ever I was born; wishing I were a stone,
any thing but what I was, for fear of hell and the devils; whom I thought I saw
every foot, Fearful afflictions and fears.
in several ugly shapes and f^rmes (according to my fancies) and sometimes
with great rolling flaming eyes (like sawcers) having sparkling firebrarnds in
the one of their hands,
and with the other reaching at me to tear me away to torments! O the leaps
that I have made! the frights that I have had! the fears that I was in! which
continued off and on to the beginning of these times! Besides great outward
afflictions which I met with, were of much force to bring me into this
condition, being often (and doubtless I might deserve it too too much) beaten,
bruised, turned out of doors, whirled and kicked about, hardly and unkindly
used; at which times I should sometimes be tempted to murder my self,
Temptations.
sometimes think I could not belong to God, for then he could not endure to see
me thus used and afflicted, and yet I fly to him, and pray, and pray, and
pray, but as good speak to a post, for I am not relieved: sometimes I should
read, and weep, and as my usual manner was in the time of my great despair,
fall flat (all along) with my face on the ground, and cry, and call, and sigh,
and weep, and call for help, but the Lords time was not yet come to answer; and
I was wont to weep half the night together, if not all sometimes, and to water
my bed with my tears, for fear of hell and the devil, and therefore for sins
or rebellious disobedience; and ever slept with my hands clasped close together
in a praying posture, that if I did die, or that the Devils did prey upon me,
they might find me in a praying posture sleeping as well as waking; I never
durst go to sleep otherwise (to my knowledge) for five or six years together.
But the greatest blow I had was from the sentence of the aforesaid Scripture in
Mat. 5.20. The greatest blow.
Surely (thought I) I but strive against the stream, and seek out
impossibilities, if I must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees. For I had often read of their strictness in their Houses, and
Synedriums, and Schools, that the ordinary of them repaired at least three
times a day to their devotion, viz. in the morning at Sunrising, till about
the fourth hour of the day, (called S^h^^with) and in the afternoon (Minchah)
about the ninth hour, and in the evening (Arbith) and so in a manner all day
long in devotion. Besides their laudatory prayers, and thanks not only for all
the mercies they receive, but upon every extraordinary accident and in every
action they do, a prayer for every time they eat, they will not drink without a
prayer; a prayer for every good smell, a prayer when they wash, yea when they
evacuate, a prayer upon every new thing they have, and what not? insomuch that
some say at least 108. Benedictions a day (Meah Beracoth) as Leo Modena the
Venetian Rabbine writes; and we have read how strict they are on their
Sabbaths, and will not gather wood, kill a fly or flea, dress any victuals,
make a fire, write, cancel, or quench a fire, or carry any thing, or use any
hammer, nor eat any thing dressed upon that day, nor any fruits gathered, nor
wear any thing on that day but even necessary apparel, nor speak of worldly
matters, as buying, selling, giving, or taking, nor make any bargains, nor so
much as touch any thing, a weight, or burden, or tool, or instrument, nor
handle any money; nay on the Friday before evening comes, all worldly things
are laid aside and the Sabbath began, etc.)

Now these considerations and such like made me think it in vain to seek to be
saved; and it was but to beat the wind, or build in the air; for if the
Scriptures were true it could not be, for I could not tell how to excel their
righteousness.
Hereupon I despaired deeply indeed, it being so deliberately; Deep despair
strong tempting.
and the results of serious debates; so much the worse, lying under the
severest sense and sentence of that Scripture; I could take no comfort, but
accounted God most cruel to exact impossibilities of men, (as such a
righteousness) and to let so many be damned (as I thought) because they could
not excel their righteousness! O these hard thoughts I had of God! At length
I was tempted not to pray, read, hear, or do any duties at all: for I thought
it not possible after all to be saved; and so I was sometimes tempted to deny
all: sometimes I was also tempted to think there was no God, but all things
come by nature; and to challenge God, if there were a God, to require a sign
and seek a proof: but in a word, to such a height I was grown up unto, that I
did not only despair, but began to be distracted, and out of my wits (as we use
to say) I thought trees sometimes good Angels, Despair.
sometimes bad, and looked upon bushes as the den of Devils: I should sit up
whole nights, sometimes in a little Turret (we had in an Orchard) from the
house, studying, singing, whistling, hooping, or drawing figures, or one thing
or other, or else be walking in the fields, woods, or some other places,
talking to my self, speaking to trees as to men, or as to Angels, or God; and
thinking the least whistling of the wind, or chirping of a bird, or lowing of
a beast to be some answer sent to me, as I would fancy it; but as these
distracted distempers grew higher, I could not avoid the forcible temptations
of a furious Devil, making me sometimes whet a knife, sometimes take a billet,
sometimes one thing, sometimes another to murder my self, and sometimes
others, and sometimes all; for I would have had all to have gone my way (me
thought) many ways I tried, but was always prevented, till at last I was
taken and bound hand and foot, and held (or tied) fast in a bed till the raging
fits were over; and then when I was spent and patient, if let go, yet without a
watchful eye, though it may be I said nothing, yet the first thing I went
about, it may be, would be to seek a knife, or to get to the window to cast my
self down headlong: but I have been strangely and (almost) miraculously kept
(which would be too long to tell) even in the very act and instant of time when
a few minutes longer had been too late to save my life. Miraculously saved from
self murder,


I should not be so long in this History, but that I dare hide nothing wherein
God has appeared my God for his own glory in what I am now by grace. And
therefore as things eminent are brought to memory, I am bold to declare them,
for the magnifying of his alone love, and the riches of his grace in Christ
Jesus. I dare boldly say, few that saw me in those headlong distempers, did
think me at the best, fit for any place but Bedlam; and that I should ever be
restored to what I am, which was also as strangely. Inward melancholy and
despairs:
For as the distracted fits did much abate me, they did turn more to inward
malady and melancholy; my continual cry being, I am damned, I am damned, I am
sure I cannot be saved! it is impossible! Oh! Hell! Hell! fire about me! the
Devils are at me! and I thought I heard the damned roaring and raving, A word
to the wicked.
and saw them (as 'twere) roasting, and their frisking and frying in
everlasting torments. My mind and all was taken up with their howlings and
screechings.
This sad condition day and night lasted upon me, until I was persuaded that
there was a God! and that this God was righteous, and that he would hear
prayers if I continued but knocking with importunity and gave not over, seeing
the unjust Judge that we read of in Scriptures, was prevailed with by the
widows importunities: then I resolved with my self (and gathered together here
and there those scattered relics of reason which were le^t me) that I would
continue prayer, and so I did (though by fits I was froward, and mute, and
wild, and I know not how) yet off and on 5 days together scarce eating a bit
of bread in all that time; and was after that in another form and frame of
spirit (though by fits full of distraction and desperate thoughts) yet more
serious, and set to weigh things as in a balance, and to expostulate with the
Lord, and to pray by fits most furiously, and now and then tears began again
(which were all dried up before) to trickle and come tumbling down my face like
swollen drops of blood, and I continued thus three or four days till one
afternoon coming into a chamber (my heart being as big as it could hold) I
threw my self flat on my face (as I used to do) knocking the boards and calling
and crying to the Lord for deliverance, and using such exorcising expressions
as might discover me in despair; and starting up, I walked a turn or two,
saying, Is there not a God? is he gracious! are the Scriptures false! can
thou take delight to see a poor soul thus set on the rack! sighing and roaring
in torment! rise up and appear for thy self thou great God! show thy self
gracious in one act of mercy! maugre all the Devils in hell! and with knocking
my breast and tearing my hair, I threw my self upon the bed, whilst my eyes
were glazed with tears! Restored extraordinarily by a dream.
and there I lay, in a sudden sleep which seized upon me, and I dreamed of the
same Scripture (the letter which killed me) and yet of Christ (the Spirit which
quickened me) and that his righteousness (by faith made mine) did excel the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees: and except I (in and by the
righteousness of Christ made mine) did excel the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, I could not be saved; that is, not without the
righteousness of Christ. When I awaked, I was so much changed that I was
amazed at my self, at the suddenness of it; Evangelicall.
for I dreamed I was comforted, and my heart filled with joy, and when I awaked
it was so indeed; I started up, and rebuked my self, saying, Why, I am not
damned! what is the matter? am I so filled with a fancy? with a sudden hope of I
know not what, Confirmed and seconded by prayer and the Word.
nor whence? at which time I fell to pray, and whilst I was praying, I said,
Lord is this true? say! is it true! if it be so, let it be shown me that it is
so: So I was persuaded that the righteousness of Christ was mine, Romans 10.3.
Tit. 3.7. Romans 8.4. Isay 53.11. Phil. 3.9. Gal. 2.16.
for that this garment was provided only for one so naked and torn out of all
as I was; which weighing I took the Scriptures, and found these divine
infusions, and immediate resolutions given in me, agreeing with the same will
of God given out there, and then I began to breath upon it, and to pant a
little; and by degrees to revive and look upward with some hope; And got into
an assurance of salvation, and how.
till the Lord satisfied me by pouring it upon me, and writing it within me,
that I (in Christ's righteousness my only justification) did exceed theirs! And
thus I had the first assurance of salvation;
for that very same Scripture that before condemned me, did now justify me,
that is in Christ. And after that I began plainly to see my self (and by my
self others) why I despaired, and was so long and so lamentably lost, Why so
many despair of heaven.
that it was because I sought in a wrong place for justification, and therefore
a wrong way for salvation, Sim.
as if one of you should dig in your yard for a mine of gold, no wonder that
you lose your labor at last, after sweat, tears, prayers, cares, pains, fears
and all; seeing that you look in a wrong place. Thus it was with me all the
while I was looking, and poaring, and paining my self for a righteousness of
my own, and to seek in my self to excel the Scribes and Pharisees; alas! I was
lost, undone, and could not find it! nor see any door of hope set open for my
soul, till Christ in's righteousness was revealed in me! and then I knew him a
Savior to me. Well, with this joy I continued to this hour! holding and
keeping ground against all temptations, which are infinite, that I have met
with ever since; and such as you have scarce heard of, of late. For after I had
solemnized and celebrated my new life, (and being begun anew in another
righteousness, and in another self) by singing of Psalms (and then I began
Hymns and spiritual songs to my self) and continual open-hearted returns of
praises;
whilst the Angels rejoiced with me. Yet Satan (my continual and never
ceasing enemy) now began to muster up afresh more troubles against me, and to
follow me with an host of afflictions and temptations, as Pharaoh followed
Israel with a purpose to destroy him; when once out of his territories: and see
how a bird that is escaped out of the hand is hunted up and down by the boys,
Sim.
the doors are shut, the windows and holes stopped to hinder her escape; and
see how they hunt her, throw their hats at her, scare her up and down till they
think to tire her, and make her fall into their fingers again: Satan's fresh
bouts.
So did Satan set upon me (I may say) a thousand ways by himself and his
agents, to hunt me up and down, and to tire me out, and to make me (if he
could) fall into his fingers again, but that my God whom I unfeignedly serve
from my soul, did deliver me, does deliver me, and I trust will deliver me, 1
Cor. 1.
as the Apostle says. For though the Devil did use many snares, and beset me
so about (as you will hear) that it seemed scarce possible I should escape, yet
the Lord set me at liberty from the snares of the Fowler, though sometimes so
subtly laid, that I could not discern them; and what he could not do by his
fair insinuations and subtleties, and inward motions and temptations; he tried
to do by violence, in tormenting me and making me the most object of affliction
and misery all about; Greater afflictions.
for to proceed, my friends became mine enemies, and my preciseness was an
eyesore to many, near relations cast me off, and I was looked upon as
disobedient for keeping company with such as were godly Puritans, and accounted
then Roundheads, and for praying and holding communion with them (though
commanded to the contrary) at length I found so little love, and so much malice
from some, that I was turned out of doors, and forced (as men say to seek my
fortune) to fly with my own feathers, with three shillings six pence, or
thereabouts (as I take it) to travel up and down in strange countries, and
that in the coldest winter time of the year, in snowie weather, (up to the
knees very often) and whilst the very isicles hung on my hair or cheeks,
a conflux of tears that came hot would thaw them, which fell abundantly from
me in the open fields, and highways, where none but God took notice of them.
Yet I did often beg at poor cottages, (or so) but to come in to warm me, or dry
me, or for a draught of small beer, or so; which would make some poor souls
fall a weeping to see me. But after many dangers and troubles I footed it as
far as Cambridge, where I sought from College to College to be but a sizer
or poor Scholar, my little stock of money being all gone, and the Servitors of
Kings-Colledge (of which I was one before) being dismissed, but I could have no
place, and I had no money, and I wanted bread, and that so long that all others
failed to do any thing for me, insomuch as I was forced for life to try all
things, and eat leather, and drink water, and eat old quils and pens (where I
could pick them up out of the dust or dunghils) roasted in a few coals (which
were left in the Chamber where I was) and I assayed sometimes to eat grass,
and did it: yea, Almost starved at Cambridge.
I grew to that height of penury and famine, that I sometimes tried to eat my
own fingers, biting them till I could endure it no longer; then tearing my
hair, and crying, I had recourse to prayer, whereby the passion (it may be)
would away for the present, but this continued so long, Temptations strong.
that I met with temptations in this wilderness to turn stones into bread, and
the Devil did often tempt me to study Necromancy and Nigromancy, and to make
use of Magic, and to make a league with him, and that ^nen I should never
want, but show me (as 'twere upon the pinnacle) the glory of the world (so
represented to me in my, fancy) bidding me but obey him (that is, The Devil
tempts to yield to him.
fall down and worship him) and I should have both my bags of money by me, and
be honored of all men, and owned by all my friends, and go home with great
riches, and in great respect. But God would not suffer me to hearken to him,
but to tell him, thou art a liar from the beginning! away thou malicious
accuser of the brethren, tempt me not, Is repulsed.
for thou did do thus to Christ, but he overcame thee, and so I trust I shall
by his power; and then I prayed, and read the Scriptures, and writ holy
meditations, and Soul-soliloquies on the 88 Psalm, all in verse very
patheticall and suitable to my condition, and I began Dives and Lazarus here,
and Lazarus and Dives hereafter: two books (which I soon after concluded) using
in it English, Latin, Italian, French, being very tragical,
and all in verse very suitable to my condition under several temptations; all
which I had thoughts (with some others which I have by me) to have printed for
public profit, but wanted a purse: so that in stead of Magical and
Astrologicall studies, I bent my mind to holy meditations, soul comforting,
Angelical and Evangelical contemplations: yet I continued under strong
temptations, but to the praise of God, I speak it, I think never was I more a
growing Christian, then after Satan had these repulses; but yet I must not omit
to tell you, The Devil tempts another way.
that I had one other temptation first; which was almost irrecoverable, but
that I was prevented extraordinarily even as I was upon the execution thereof.
For finding my self almost starved and pined to death, my strength almost gone,
my eyes sunk deep in my head, and wearing deaths colors, I was almost at my
wit end: I confess when I felt a passion come, or fit come upon me, I would
fall to prayer, reading, or something or other, whereby sometimes they were put
by, and I had much comfort, but I could not always avoid them by this: for now
one temptation got ground of me, and came on audaciously, and grew strongly
upon me, so that I could not escape it,
but it followed me; I took up the skin of my wasted hand and arms with a
resolution to tear it off for hunger, but in vain, the Devil had so besotted
me, that I could see no ways to evade death, for I had been beholding to all
the Scholars I could find any courtesy in, A most strong temptation.
to bring me scraps, or skins of salt-fish, or something or other in their
handkerchiefs or pockets, which kept me alive a while, till at last they were
all weary, and I wasted almost to death, and ashamed to beg openly about; and I
was blinded as to any way that I could find to recover out of this condition.
Wherefore, after violent and never-ceasing temptations, I drew my knife,
whetted it sharp, To murder himself prepared.
opened my doublet and shirt, and in the midst of the room where I was alone,
kneeled down to prayer, to surrender my soul up into the hands of God; my knife
lying by me prepared, and I prepared for the act, when behold a door which I
thought was bolted all the night before, was but shut to, which a Scholar
opens, and with the screeking of it made me start up, and throw my knife into
the chimney in have (as ashamed of what I was doing) and in comes the Scholar
to tell me of a place in Huntington-shire to teach Gentlemen's children at my
Lord Brudenels house, But strangely prevented.
and how one of our College was sent to, but refused it; by which means I was
recovered out of that eminent danger, and after the Scholar was gone, did
exceedingly reprove and check my self, for suffering this temptation to grow so
upon me, for want of faith, and was much afflicted at it, and the more for that
this mercy came in so upon it: O! that I could not wait upon God! but being now
night, I went (as I use to do) supperlesse to bed, Much affl^cted for his sin
and yielding to Satan.
(after duty) but my heart melting into abundance of tears, first for the sin
that I was about, that I could not believe, and resist the Devil (as I had
done in Gods strength before) and then for the love of God, and his care
appearing for me, even at that instant too, when I took no care of my self at
all, Evangelicall.
but had devoted my self to death, and that now he should not only deliver me,
but send me news full of hopes! O how these things did break my heart! and
work upon me most part of the night! until with an heart full, and head full,
and eyes full and all! I was fallen into a deep sleep, and visited with an
extraordinary token from on high both in dream and vision, which has been
since accomplished (as I take it) and the last in Ireland the last year. The
Dream was this*
that I was walking home to my Fathers house, with a staff in my hand, and
fearing lest I should be out of the way, Comforted and confirmed in Dream and
Vision extraordinarily.
I looked for the path, which at first I could scarce discern was a path, and
began to look about, and to question it, till by and by I perceived some
footsteps of some that had gone that way, with that I went forward, and the
further I went, the plainer I perceived it to be the path, and that I was in
the way (and I could see no other) at which I rejoiced, and went on confidently
as if I feared no evil, nor enemy; till I came to a fine glorious beautiful
house and building on the left hand of me, out of which came forth a beam which
reached a little cross the way I was to go in, so that I being at a little
stand at first, yet would not stoop under this beam, but stepped aside and so
passed away, laying my hand on it as I stepped by the side of it, but the house
(I thought) was all in a flame of a sudden, so that being something troubled
thereat, I passed on in the way, wondering in my self what this should be, till
I was overtaken by some rude violent malicious men that laid to my charge the
setting this house on fire, and would not hear me speak, but were harshly
haling me away to prison,
with which being sufficiently frighted and all my flesh set a trembling, I
awaked, and was offended with my self, The Dream reiterated.
for being troubled at a dream, a foolish fancy, so I laid me (it being yet
dark) and fell asleep again, and was cast into the same dream again, word for
word; and at my right hand I thought there was a grave ancient man full of
white hairs (like wool) a long white beard, The Dream interpreted in the sleep.
who stood by me, and bid me cheer up, fear not! for the Lord has sent me to
comfort thee, and to tell thee that he has chosen thee to preach his word and
Gospel of Christ, which is the staff that thou have in thy hand, and which
staff, (that is, How first called to the Ministry in his sleep.
the word of God) thou shall walk home with to thy Fathers house, i. e. Heaven,
where is fullness of joy. But after a time thou will be troubled with the
different opinions, and ways of men, and seem at first to be at a loss, but
the Lord will be thy guide,
go on, and as thou go forward, the way of the Lord will lie clearer and
clearer before your eyes; but the footsteps are the examples of the Saints that
have gone before you, which will be a great help unto you; and you shall walk
cheerfully on in the way which is clear to you (then the which you shall see no
other) but yet you must meet the fair house on the left hand, Prophetical.
i. e. the glory and great ones of the world, who make a great and fair show to
men (as built high) but they must fall,
and are but on the left hand of you, whilst you will despise them, preach
against them, Partly performed of late in Ireland, as it is well known.
and turn your eye; looking forward to go on in the way of God (and turn not
about) but the beam that comes out of this great house (which makes so much
show) is meant the powers and opinions of such, which (whilst somewhat cross
to the way) you step aside and will not stoop under, they are set on fire, and
enflamed of a sudden; but be not troubled, go forward, although they will send
after you, saying you have brought this fire upon them, and they will falsely
accuse you, and seek to hale you away to prison for this fact. At which I
awaked again, this being morning about daybreak, I wondered with my self what
this meant, But I believe not wholly.
I thought it surely more then ordinary, and being filled with confidence and
comfort, I rose up and writ it down presently, And away I went that day toward
Didington in Huntington-shire, where the Lord Brudenell once lived (but was
then sequestered) and one that the Committee put in, had Gentlemen's children to
board with him, whom I (afterward) taught. But after all these deliverances,
From that time how he grew fit for the Ministry.
I did multiply abundantly in gifts and graces, either to pray, expound, read,
sing Hymns and spiritual Songs, with the Spirit and with understanding, as
Israel in Exodus 1. the more he was afflicted the more multiplied; so blessed be
the Lord, I was the more filled with the Spirit, endued with strength and
grace, refreshed with peace and joy, the more I had so suffered. So that all my
troubles were but a Joseph's step (through grace) to higher enjoyments; 2. Call
to the Ministry.
and finding the Lord so abundantly to endue me from above, and to qualify me
for the call, which I had before in the night (for the ministry which then I
little meant, or imagined could be, it being often resolved against before by
my Father, and my books ordered to be packed up) but finding things following
so fairly to concur, I was much confirmed in it, that the Lord had designed
me thereunto. In Huntington-shire teaching school first at Brudenel's house,
and afterward the Free School of St. Neotts, I began with the boys ever in
prayer first, His order when he taught School.
at 7. and 1. and ended with prayers at 11. and 5. on the Saturdaies in the
afternoon, I catechized them, and expounded their Catechismes by the
Scriptures, and expounded Scriptures, and so singing a Psalm, with prayer we
concluded.

At this time I came to be convinced of the Parliaments proceedings and cause,
to be more regular and in order to the great work that God has to do in
Nations then the Kings, by comparing them together, and bringing them to the
Word;
and then I saw clearly (by the Word) that God would do what he has to be
done, by them and for them, and for the Commonwealth; it was not long after
this that I was by a godly people in T^seland earnestly importuned, 3. Call to
preach.
and at last prevailed with to preach the Gospel; and I was soon known in the
Country, and after sent for into Essex, where I settled (passing twice through
the Assembly on Examination and approbation). 4. Call.
So although ever since I have met with many sorts of afflictions and
oppositions, Vide Epistle to Purleigh before the 2. Lib.
lies, slanders, threatenings, libels, vows and endeavors to take away my life,
yet many have added testimony to the Word I have delivered in all places (the
Lord be praised) to the great refreshing of my soul, and toward the making up
of my joy when I shall give an account (to their comfort) at the great day. And
since that I have been sent forth, as a Pastor and public Teacher by the
Church, and I know my Ministerial commission and authority to be from the
Lord;
and notwithstanding the diverse temptations that I meet with yet, finding my
heart full of corruption, and my life a continual warfare of flesh against
spirit, yet I bless God who has delivered me, (in diverse ways which I have
not yet declared) from the fraudulent gins and snares of the Devil, and who
has called me out of darkness into light, that his power is stronger in me,
then any that has been against me; and I am the better provided against Satan,
for that I live now by faith in the Son of God, above the letter in the life,
above the form in the power, above self in an higher self, altogether where I
have my abode; so that I am not I, but by the grace of God it is that I am what
I am, as the Apostle said Why weep ye for me? for I am ready not only to be
bound but to dye: so I say (...), Act. 21.
I have provision within me, seeing Christ is in me the hope of glory. I am
assured of Salvation in Christ Jesus my head, Assurance.
my Lord, my elder brother, and the first fruits of all them that rise again.
3. Effects.
And although I meet with daily troubles at home and abroad, within and
without, yet am I all the way ascending heaven (though descending hell) the
same way with Christ; who has (through the vail) consecrated a new and living
way for me into the Holy of Holies. I can comfortably drink after Christ out of
his own cup;
and in eating his meat and drinking his drink, take gall and vinegar, as well
as wine and honey. I prefer Christ before Salvation, and had (if I know my
heart) yet not I, (but my spiritual self) had rather go to Hell with Christ
in my arms (if 'twere possible) then to heaven without him; accounting the
enjoyment of him to be the enjoyment of all the excellencies and happiness in
heaven and earth, Super omnia Christum; I am very confident Christ cannot be
perfect without me, nor I without him, but that I shall appear perfect (for all
Eternity) in Christ's righteousness, and am pardoned by his death, purged by
his blood, sanctified by his Spirit, and saved by his power, and this I am as
sure of to be glorified as he is glorified, and shall see him as he is. I could
say much more, and have many more experiences; but I fear I offend others, I
shall cut off in an Apocope, but pray, pray for me, that Gods power may appear
more in my weakness, and whilst I live and breath (I hope and resolve) it
shall be with him and for him, as well as by him, dum sur sum dum sur sine Spi
to Spe to

and that I shall not desire to live one minute longer then to his honor and
glory, and for his service, which the Lord make me fit for and faithful in,
and prepare me for that glory which is to be revealed. But these things I have
spoken in the fear of God, wherein you hear what I was, what I am, and what I
shall be; I know no more yet to trouble you with, but according to the
accreasings of the holy one in me, and effusions of the unctions upon me, I
shall speak more hereafter for your advantage, I were a wicked wretch should I
smother any of the appearances of God which I meet with.

40. An eminent Experience, or relation of John Osborne member of the Church at
Purleigh, of the which Mr. R. was Pastor: as was taken out of the Church
Register word for word.
JOhn Osborne, a poor laboring man, was admitted a Member of this Church,
April, 16. 1650. his visible carriage in word and deed seeming holy, and his
outward conversation such, as he was well approved of (after his confession of
Christ, After he was admitted he was much afflicted in his conscience.
and resolution to cleave close to the Lord in this way) nemine contradicente;
but it seems this man was much unsound, and not yet fit matter within
(whatsoever he seemed without) and it being best known to God and himself, Gods
design was to work out the discovery of him out of himself, he began to
manifest much grief and gall within him by his outward color and complexion,
but kept it close to all the Church, that his ill life was the cause of his ill
looks; yet he followed the means, Yet carried the fairest side outward.
frequented the Communion, used the Ordinances at home and abroad, in public
and private, so that nothing could be gathered (in the Churches apprehension)
but godliness in him; He would press an exact walking, Gospel duties; and in
discourse cast in his mite of knowledge and measure of light: So that some
took much content in him, much comfort of him, but for all this his heavy
countenance did discover that there was somewhat in him lay undiscovered, and
not yet brought to light. But Gods time was near to do his Church good, and to
give them some real testimony and tastes of the first fruit of his love toward
them by making him known to them, whom they thought they knew) but indeed did
not know; for what God saw in him that was naught, was not visible to the
Church, but what was visible was good, but that which was invisible to us was
the rottenness and unsound part of the man. But mark how God met with him, who
upon the 28. day of Or the second month* i. e. Ziu.
April, 1650. was after Sermons (being the Lords day) struck by a sudden
distemper, which in the night produced dangerous fits which continued at times
for two or three days: the Pastor of the Church J. R. he did visit him, Gods
time to discover him.
but at that time being Wednesday, May 1. following he discovered no
discomfort, discontent or burden within him at all; but he had good
expressions and motions, yet was once or twice in his fits very fearfully; but
after he was recovered the Pastor with prayers for him, and directions given
him departed home. The next day being the Lecture day after Sermon was ended,
it was moved in the Church to contribute unto him, who did it freely and
largely, and that very night the Pastor J. R. was sent for again to him, The
Churches prayers for him;
but first the Church made prayers for him: And it is observable, that this
Osborne being in very strange fits (as ever were seen) like one possessed he
grovelling and foaming; and his hands, feet, eyes, mouth, were most gastlike
drawn out into a Convulsion-manner, but much worse; at that very hour, that
the Church made prayers for him, and not ceasing till God were prevailed with,
Answered.
those strange kind of fits and distempers left him (to the amazement of all
that knew it, so that after that not one fit more had he, though they continued
upon him so thick, and for so long a time before, that no Doctor could help
him, but all gave him over for a dead man without recovery. But this was not
all yet, that God intended to do for his people; this man was not discovered
to the Church to be what he was all this while; And though the Lord heard the
Churches prayers to recover this man out of this condition; yet the Lord cast
him into another condition for the Churches good. But by this time was the
messenger come for the Pastor (it being above a mile distant) to come quickly
to the said Osborne; Thither he hasted, Taken in another manner.
and carried with him the Churches contribution: when he came into the house,
the people within told him how suddenly those strange fits left him; and now
how he was altered, and taken in another course, crying out to speak with the
said Pastor, who went in where this Osborne lay in another posture (then
formerly) upon his bed, Howles and roares he is damned.
and seeing the Pastor begins to howl and roar; crying out, O I Am damned!
I Am damned! I go to hell! I go to hell! (repeating every sentence he said I
think at least a dozen times, with a most deplorable voice) O I am rotten! I am
rotten! at the heart! Oh the heart! with abundance of such bitter language;
the Pastor wondered; began to say one thing and another; to apply for one aile,
and for another; but all in vain, for the more he sought to help he seemed to
hurt, and the more he sought to cure he seemed to kill, and the more to fret
the disease. The Pastor retiring himself for a time into the next room as
desirous to seek to God and to bewail the man's woeful misery, was there told
by one or two, that the same Osborne has formerly been suspected for adultery
lying with one Right's wife hard by, Reported to be guilty of sin with one
Right's wife before he entered into Church-fe^lowship long.
and for some other misdemeanors, which were never before known or imagined to
be in the man (by any of the Church as I know of, or that any of the Church did
speak of.) Well the Pastor returning thanks to the parties that acquainted him
with this, went out into the yard and then earnestly sought the Lord, that this
man's affl^ction might be useful to the Church, and that by his own mouth, that
might be discovered within him, which none could see, and few suspect by his
outward deportment and profession; The Pastors prayer about him.
and if he were so wicked, and that such sins and baseness were in him, that
it might be manifested openly to the terror of the wicked, that as at the
judgment of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.11. fear might come upon all the
Church and those that hear these things. With his heart full of such hot
desires; the Pastor returned in to the man (much relying on God) and as soon as
ever the said Osborne saw him, he cried out alowd, Oh I Am damned! I Am damned!
I Am rotten, I Am rotten, This Osborne discovers out of his own mouth.
'Ime rotten! The Pastor asked him why, and like a flood his voice violently
bursting forth, for lying with such a woman, naming her openly to all comers,
and continuing this his unsavory speech so long and in so much despair that the
Pastor was constrained to leave him so; he being incapable of making use of
what so ere was said to him, A warning to Hypocrites.
though ere so urgently; so that the said J. R. the Pastor hasted home (being
now dark night) hoping to do him more good by dealing with God for him, then
by any further dealing with him; being much afflicted for the great sinfulness
of the man; and for that those without would take all he said up in the worst
sense, and with the most malicious construction they could; so reporting it
about the Country as it might reflect much upon the Church; and that to the
public reproach of profession and the Gospel practice;
which (afterward as we shall hear) through the great grace of our God, (who
turns light out of darkness, and good out of evi^^) made mightily for the
Churches advantage and comfort. The next day the Pastor praising the Lord* for
this large discovery made of the man's sinfulness and unsoundnesse (who was
condemned out of his own mouth) in his private study strongly sets upon God,
and by a holy violence beseecht, and begged of him hard that he would scourge
him here severely, by some visible sign, and that to the purpose, for others
to take warning by, The Pastors prayer again.
and for the further manifestation of such as were unsound and rotten in the
Church, and for the fuller strengthening and establishment of his sincere and
precious on^s in the Faith, and that his soul might be saved at the last day.
Thus continuing his undeniable requests for the space of two days all this
while, news was brought that Osborne was now drawing on, This Osborne dying,
drawing on.
in his last sweat, and senseless and knowing no body, but speech less, and
upon giving up the ghost, only now and then he raged, and flung about; But
every one had given him up for a dead man and without remedy* (in their eyes).
After this the said Pastor did set afresh upon the Lord, and lay hard that it
might be enough, what was done, and to withdraw his anger (if he pleased to be
prevailed with through Christ) and now to spare him, and try him a little
longer, Pastors prayer again for him.
if he did heartily repent what was past; and resolve against temptations in
time to come; and to walk up more closely to the rules of the Gospel, upon his
promise so to do, that he would try him now, and be pleased to be pacified and
show him love, etc. The Pastor continued praying for him, In private and
public.
the space of a day or two more, and this not only in private, but publicly
in whole body and society (May 7.) it being a day of special Communion; On
which day one member of the Fellowship being sent to see him; he was asleep
fast, so as he was not seen to rest for a long time before, being tired under
so many torments as he was in; and so 'twas hard to say whether he were dead or
alive, thus he slept a long time. At last when he awak^d, both himself and
others by him being wonderfully amazed at so sudden a change as he seemed to be
in; for as others knew not well, whether he were dead or alive, and all
concluded he was drawing on until this sleep, so himself (as he affirmed to
the Church after) wondered he was alive, This Osborne thought he had been in
Hell.
and altogether thought that he had been dead and cast into Hell; and was there
enduring the torments for his sins, not imagining himself upon the earth, for
these four or five days (ere since the Pastor J.R. last left him in a
despairing condition) not capable of comforting being senseless. But suddenly,
he awaking, and wondering at himself, he starts up off of his bed, and by all
means would be going to the Pastors house, He awaked with strange words and
reports.
and to the Church; and told the people that now he was beholding to his Master
(for so he called the Pastor) indeed; and for that his Master had done
wonderful things for him; and the Company asking why? Oh! he answered that his
Master had prayed to God for him; and the Church had prayed for him. And that
God had stayed his hand now, and had forgiven him his sins past (he was sure)
upon his promise to amend, and that his Master took a great deal of pains with
God, and would not be quiet till the Lord had commanded the Serpents that had
tormented him for his sins to fly back for a time, etc. with a great deal of
such like language, which yet the more amazed them, they thinking him half
frantic to talk so; and looking on him as a man drawing on;
but as on the morning or last night, and not like to live; and yet he would
needs be gone to the Pastor to tell him, what God had done for him, He rises.
and had already got on his clothes, and got out of doors; but being very
weak and ready to reele down in the way about a field off, his wife and
neighbors running after him much against his own mind got him in again. But
his wife and neighbors perceived him another manner of man, then what he was
before; by his good motions, prayers, discourses and desires heavenward; it
being a great delight to him to acquaint them with his experiences of God under
this sharp dispensation. After a day or two he feeling strength, He comes to
the Church.
would not be stayed from coming to the Pastor, and it fell out to be upon a
day when the Church gathered together to break bread; but the Pastor coming to
him called him aside, The Pastor deals wiih him.
and in a room by themselves, he set very severely and plainly upon the man in
many particulars; and especially for his presumption to enter into this way
being such unsound and unfit matter, and therefore that he could not long have
continued, with so fair an outside, but the inside rottenness would at length
have broken out, and he be cast from the rest of the building, A plain warning
piece to wicked church members.
as 2 Timothy 3.5. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 13. Tit. 3.10.
Matthew. 18.18, 19, etc. 1 Timothy 1.20, etc. For though he had done contrary to the
rules we must do according to them. Withal, dealing with him upon such
Scriptures, as Jer. 7.9, 10. Psalm. 50.16, 17, etc. Isai. 35.8, 9, 10.
questioning and expostulating with him upon them, and those Ezekiel. 44.7, 8. Jo.
4.23. and many others, and charging it home upon him, the wrong that he had
done to Christ and his Church by opening the mouths of her malicious
adversaries, to speak against Christ's way, For the scandal he brought upon the
Gospel to Churches.
the worst words in their hearts; to vilify and slander his Saints, to deride
Religion, to wax proud against profession, and grievously to offend those weak
in the Faith, and yet though he had mocked men he could not mock God; but now
that the Lord had opened his inside to us, that we might see what a Traitor he
was to the Truth, what a hypocrite to God, and what not?
As the Pastor was opening him to himself yet more; this Osborne told him that
the Lord had pardoned him, upon his promise to amend, and the prayer of his
Church for Christ's sake, He said he was sure his sins were pardoned.
and that he saw his pardon writ before him and his sins blotted out, etc.
The Pastor urging it upon him, how he knew he was pardoned, and what he meant
by seeing sins blotted out, who then began to tell the whole story of his
agony, and torments, and deliverance; which being long the Pastor desired him
to cut off, and to acquaint the whole Body with them after the last Sermon,
before they dispersed to their several homes; Because that as there was
visible offense given to Christ and his Church, so there must be visible
repentance and apparent evidences of his conversion, etc. So the Pastor parted
with him, the Church could not admit of him into Communion, but he must hold
off, till he could give satisfaction, only he had liberty in the converting
Ordinances; and to converse with any of the Society or the like; In the Evening
about five or six a clock the said Osborne was called into the Society to
answer to such things, as were laid to his charge; and first the Pastor
earnestly seeking God that nothing might be done, Prayer in the Church.
or concluded on but what should be agreeable to the mind of Jesus Christ, and
the rules of the Gospel; and to stablish all that are present in the faith, and
that they might be the more strengthened, by what did, or should of Gods power
appear to have been upon this man, to punish him, and of his love to deliver
him, and that this Church might not be deceived, through the subtilty of Satan,
as to believe a lie, or to give no credit to the Truth, but to make them
discerning in his ways, and to eye him in all his goings, etc. After the
Pastor had prayed, This Osborne declares in the open Church his sins forgiven
with great humility and yet confidence.
and the Church joined with him very devoutly, the charges being uttered
against this Osborne; still he continued his former story how God had forgiven
him, and he had seen his sins blotted out, and how the Serpents were suffered
to feed on him for his sins. So urging on him what he meant, by these things,
and straightly requiring him not to believe a delusion; No! he said he was sure!
the Lord did not delude him! and thus he began! After the fits left me (says
he) I sent for my Master (i. e. the Pastor) because I was to dye (as I
thought). Then (this being on May 2. the Lecture day at night) when he
despaired (so that the Pastor was there) I thought that I had dyed, and was
gone into Hell for my sins, The strange story of it.
where God stretched out his rod, and then came out a huge great Serpent, which
God bid to go and torment me, and presently out of the belly of the great
Serpent came out seven Serpents more; so many Serpents for so many sins; and
they all together seized upon me, and stung and gnawed me, and eat off all my
flesh below, and my thighs, and gnawed all clean to the very bone; A sad
example for hypocrites that creep in.
and I heard my Master pray, and say, Lord punish him! till he amend! Let him
be punished, for a time! and still these Serpents continued on me, It is the
more strange, for that this Osborne told all the Pastor prayed privately, which
none ever heard but God.
and tormented me more and more for a long time (as we conceived for the space
of two days or thereabouts by the Pastors words, who acknowledged to the
Church that there might be some likelihood in what Osborne said, because that
he did indeed pray for two days or thereabouts, in his study privately, that
the Lord would punish him severely in the flesh, that his Spirit might be
saved, in the Day of the Lord, which the Church never knew, till he told them.
Moreover the said Osbornes tongue was bit quite through,
and a piece of his lip pulled off; which hindered his speaking so as he could
scarce be understood, and being asked how it came he said he knew not, unless
the Serpents had bit it, which he thought because he knew nothing, but that he
was in Hell not so much as imagining that he was alive upon the Earth. But his
wife said,
that once leaping up as in an infinite torment he bit his tongue quite through
and through; O sad example for sinners then; a severe warning to them*
and on another time he run a pin quite through his lip, and rung of a piece on
it, this being all in the time of these two days; But to proceed to his
story. For these questions were asked at the Conclusion) After these Serpents
had fed upon my flesh (says he) for so long a time I saw a Roll as of
Parchment lying before me, and upon it God had written, A sight of a Roll.
that he would take Justice, and my Master writ that he would have mercy upon
me, and the Lord writ again that he would take vengeance; and my Master writ
again, The clear answer of prayers.
Lord let it be enough; if he repents let it be enough now, etc. and I heard
(says he) the words as they were writing (then the Pastor so said to the
Church that it was so, after a day or two, that he indeed desired the Lord to
let it be enough; if he did repent, and unfeignedly promised amendment, and
that he would remove his hand; and this he did both in public upon the Lords
dey, and in his own study he thus prayed; not knowing all this while, but that
Osborne was as he left him on Thursday night, and in despair; And as men
reported him to be drawing on.) So my Master would not leave the Lord (says he)
till the Lord said well, he would try me; The Serpents went away, and the Lord
pardoned him.
and so the Roll vanished away, and flew upward, and God commanded the
Serpents to withdraw, so the little Serpents went into the great Serpents
belly; And by little and little (says he) the great Serpent did go back and
back till at last he went away down, (as might be at my Beds feet) which I
was mightily joyed at, because I thought that he would have tormented me so for
ever,
not knowing but that I was in Hell. After that I heard the Church plainly to
pray for me, and I beheld the Lord (not as before in his anger, Smiles on him.
Sets joies before him.
but) smiling upon me (as it were) and there were before me all the joys that
could be desired and Rivers ran before me as Crystal full of gold, so as I had
liberty to have taken what I would; A Paradise.
thinking I saw a Paradise. Thus I continued till I awaked,
when I wondered where I was, and could scarce think I was alive, not knowing
so much; and he found his heart filled with gladness; and (he said) he fain
would have come to the Pastors house, but neighbors restrained him.

But now being night the Church-Society must disperse, wherefore not being
satisfied with such extraordinary things, as he spoke of, he was held off
Communion for a time (being necessary that the Church should see a visible
change in him; by whom were such visible offenses given.) I shall not tie this
story to your Faith any further, A word to the Reader.
then as he related it himself to the Society, it is indeed wonderful, by
God's ways are wondrous these days: This man cannot read a letter. However
the result of all this made much for the Churches good, and to the
strengthening and establishing of others, and to the searching and examining of
all; which we looked upon as a special note of Gods approbation of us, and
love to us, who are from the roots of the heart given up freely and sincerely
to be his servants. And I shall only add this more thereto, that I have taken
this story verbatim out of the Church Book, which registers up such eminent
passages at Purleigh in Essex.

I shall tire the Reader with no more experiences; These examples are
sufficient, and some of them are very eminent: We are sweetly led by the hand
(manuducimur) to drink of these Brooks before we pass. Some are deep but
most shallow, and all clear as Crystal streams, unless at such times, when
Satan (by temptations) put in his cloven-foot. Those which are the most
extraordinary of them are uttered in Dream,
Trance, Voice, or Vision, and Vision is taken two ways, Vision is twofold.
either first actually, by the senses of the body, and so in some visible
bodily shape; or else 2. potentially thus, that although the soul ( ut forma)
is joined to the body, yet ( ut materia) above the body; And yet it uses not
any bodily senses for such a service, but sequesters all externals, and the
outward senses are (as 'twere) dead, or asleep, not at all intervening to
interrupt the soul; but when the soul is soared up in any high exigency, or
excellency to see great things; or is intent upon any rich discoveries, as by
Visions, Revelations, or the like; all the bodily senses lie (as 'twere) in a
trance, and all exterior motions are quieted and quashed, and flesh is silent,
whilst the Lord appears out of his holy habitation, Zach. 2. ult. and some
such special and spirirituall fruits, I have presented the Saints with, from
secundum naturam to supra naturam, whilst some of them were (as in an
Externination to self) transported from darkness into his most marvailous
light, by some extraordinary medium, and prevalent inspirations and visions, or
the like; which were taken up and arrested by the intellectual and
cognoscitive faculties of their souls. And indeed dear friends! the redoubled
experiences which my soul has had of a sweet Father, (who was found of me
sometimes when I gave over seeking him, as in some measure lies manifest in my
testimony) these facilitate my language, and felicitate my lines to breath out
somewhat for others; These experiences imperfect to what are to come.
of those involving rapsodicall visions, and Love-discoveries; And indeed! many
matchless manifestations I have taken from others (in other parts where I have
traveled) so alike and akin to these (but many more Sun-like and excellent)
that I cannot omit to tell you, that you have heard but stutterings and
stammerings to what are to come,
and have seen but a jelly and imperfect embryon to that degree and measure
which the Saints shall shortly meet with; which will afford us matter of
wordlesse worth, and too high too for any language to delineate. But in the
mean time I have presented these to all precious saints, The p^sie what
flowers are in it.
as a fresh posie gathered for that purpose; wherein they may have variety of
colors, and conditions, and all sweet and lovely, and they may find in this
posie, the Rose of Sharon, the pure Lilly of the Valleys, the sweet Violets of
humility, Time, and Winter-savory, with a great deal of Hearts-ease, all tied
up together with a thread of Scarlet, Cant 4.3. Tied up.
But many experiences of inferior glory, and lower appearance, I have purposely
omitted, yet I must tell you in these their Dreams, voices, and cries, they
were not to be observed in themselves as in the effects the effects of them.


As for those which are the ordinary ones of them, which are called home by such
means as, preaching, praying, reading, writings, or such like; In and by them,
if you observe, you shall find a Call twofold, Legal and Evangelical: as to
instance in Elizabeth Averies, Call twofold.
etc. And note further, those who are first called by the Word, An ^^derly call.
and preaching, are then 2. confirmed by the Scriptures and promises; and 3.
assured by the presence of Christ revealed in them; instance in John Spilman,
Lawrence Swinfield, etc. and many times your most ordinary are most infallible
and certain.
But these are the present observations, besides this; That every Church of
Christ which is full of experience, Happiness of Churches enriched with
experiences.
must needs be full of Faith, and have provision laid up for many years, which
being so advantageous as has bin said, should exceedingly oblige others to
bring forth out of their treasures, new and old; and I would have every Church
appoint the Pastor, or some others to take up all the experiences which the
members declare, and to bring the best and choicest of them into public
light,
Oh how beautiful would they be abroad! and how sensibly and forcibly should
we perceive the unparalleld appearances of Gods love and light as they shine
more and more toward the perfect day! Good work for good Pastors of Churches.
and oh how obvious to every eye would the work which God is about be in this
age! and then we should see how far these experiences surpass the former, or
the Saints in former ages; and how far our childrens will be before us.
And indeed it is a burning shame they should lie buried alive, and not be
brought into the light, which are given in to all the Churches in this age,
that are of excellency or use, but now at last I will wipe my pen and sit down.

CHAP. VII. (...) Berith. That Church Covenant may be, but not that it must be,
as that wherein the Formality of the Church consists.
THere is a threefold consideration (says Bernard) which is to go before every
work, Bernard lib. 4. de consider. cap. 51.
and which a wise man makes his main ( primum an liceat; deinde an deceat:
postremo an expediat) to consider whether it be lawful, comely, and expedient;
for all things are lawful, but all things are not expedient, says the
Apostle. Now in Christian discipline that does appear to be undecent which is
undutifull; and uncomely, which is unlawful and against command; and so also
that which is not lawful nor comely, must needs be unexpedient and
unprofitable. Wherefore let us find this Church Covenant (which we are now
come to) a thing lawful, decent, and expedient, and it may pass, or else it
must be put to a stand and examined; And sometimes (upon examination) though it
be found lawful in it self, yet being unusefull, and unexpedient for some
other reasons which are weighty, (and import the been esse, When
Church Covenant is indifferent and must not be urged.
or wel-being and privileges of the Church) therefore it must be put upon the
file (for the present however) and not urged as of absolute necessity to any
but left as indifferent. Now of such things we have treated at large in chap.
5. yet this I shall further add, that those things which are neither praecepta
nec prohibita,
commanded nor counter-manded by Scripture, yet may be, Things indifferent and
doubtful dangerous.
and in some cases they must be opposed by our preaching; especially when
pernicious errors do attend their practice; as to instance, when they are
cried up (if not as meritorious yet) as (Deoplacentia) things not only
pleasing, 1. When accounted so pleasing to God as if he were displeased without
them.
but as if without them the worship of God were displeasing to him; so that men
paint over their traditions by inventions, with such varnish to take others: Et
homines fascinati his ritibus, and then some men are ready to run mad for them.
Thus they run over head and ears into the water after the Anabaptisticall
error; as Melanchthon takes notice in his Common places, Melanchton.
De ceremoniis humanis. So did the Israelites after the golden calf, and so did
the Marcionites, Manichees, and Donatists of old. And so the Presbyterians and
rigid Disciplinarians now that do tie men to any empty form. And further,

2. When things indifferent are cried up for (necessaria Ecclesiae) and
dignified with the title of things necessary; 2 When they are cried up as
necessary.
and then those that desert those ceremonial rites or indifferent things, they
do presently damn for the members of Antichrist, of an Harlot, as seditious,
erroneous, or enemies to Christ, and these men make Religion odious, the
Gospel contemptible; the Church a mere external policy; whence it is, that so
much discord arises about outward rites and orders.
Thus do all rigid Disciplinarians, who cry up the Form more then the Power.

3. When men are made the more blind and bad by them.
3. When this opinion of things doubtful and indifferent, does darken the mind,
and makes man more blind, and brings forth ((...)) a foolish, froward, rash
violent, hasty zeal; as it did in the Pharisees for Mosaicall rites; and as it
does in those rigid sort of Anabaptists (I say not all) that at this day
contend with so much fire for their form, and that with violent invectives
(their loudest arguments) against all that differ from them, Anabaptist.
they hate, threaten, malice, rail at with the worst-words in their bellies the
precious ones of God; and are of a persecuting-spirit (as all formalists are) I
speak of such as I have met with, whose fire cant't be quenched without water,
Rivers of water.
without much, if not whole rivers of water: whilst the true servants of God,
and all true worshippers, do worship him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.

4. When they cause contention, and troubles.
4. When hot discords, doubts, differences, malice, madness, spite, hatred,
and anger or the like, arises from things doubtful, and indifferent, they are
to be laid aside, and left as things dangerous. And thus ought the
Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, and all to agree in one; How all, i. e. Presbyt.
Indep. Anabapt. may be reconciled, in chap. 5.
to cast away whatsoever causes contention, and is left in the word, without
absolute command or counter-mand; As the formal Covenant, baptizing infants,
rebaptizing, or the like, seeing that as once we have said before, even
ordinances commanded, for quietness sake,
and to make a oneness and peace betwixt Jew and Gentile (at a greater
distance then any of these now are) were taken away by Christ, that they might
be all one in Christ, Love is positive in which things useful and indifferent
should be laid aside.
Gal. 3.28. See Ephesians. 2.15, 16. and this ought to be, rather then the want of
love, peace, and unity should be among the Saints. They must deny all
indifferent and doubtful ordinances when they grow dangerous, and cause
discord. O that men were wise and would learn this! for loves-sake which is the
greatest Commandment of all other!

5. When the Hypocritical defenders of such Forms, 5. When cried up above
positive commands.
do cry them up for greater excellencies, and more useful then positive
duties, then they are dangerous indeed. So do the Presbyterians that cry up a
Prelacy, and call for Classes, rather then they will deny their high-spirited
opinion for peace and love with their brethren.
So do these Independents that do rather press their formal explicit
Covenants as necessary to the constitution of the Churches, then lay them aside
for love and union-sake; and rather then thereby any difference or discord
should arise. And so do those blazing Meteor-like Comets (for I fear they are
so in Ireland) those unchristian, rough, To some of the Anabaptists in Ireland,
i. e* the most rigid.
threatening Anabaptists (for I speak of them) that rather then lay aside their
form, they will see all the differing Saints in the world ruined, and help to
torment and persecute them themselves, and lay more weight upon their doubtful
ordinance, then they do upon the undeniable,
an absolute ordinance of love, (and prefer them before theirs) which is that
greatest and newest Commandment of Christ; Oh! it is sad to say it, but alas!
we s^e it. For it is the love of the form, not the love of the Father which is
in them, 1. Joh. 2.9.11. 1 John 4.7, 8, 20.

Where these errors accompany things doubtful or indifferent were they lawful
(in themselves) yet they are unexpedient, Yet in best Churches there is a due
use of things indifferent.
and unprofitable by reason of the evil effects; for such attendants are not
to be allowed or approved of. Yet we deny not a due use of things indifferent
even in the best Churches; in ecclesiis emendatis as Melanchthon has it
therefore, 1 Cor. 14.40. (...), for the order and use of the Church to the
edification of it, Melanch.
as in verse. 5.12. But yet so, Expos.
as to avoid giving of offense, or occasions of contention by imposing a
necessity of them, or a righteousness in them. The Doctrines of Devils when.
For in such a case the spirit speaks expressly calling them, 1 Timothy 4.1. The
doctrines of Devils. So says Christ, In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines, the Commandments of men, Mat. 15.9. Mar. 7.7. Col, 2.20, 21. Gal.
5.1, 2. These things are true when men make such things absolutely necessary to
the breach of all brotherhood, peace, unity, order, and love, which are left
doubtful or indifferent in Scripture: and I dare boldly say, this is the main
cause of our most contentions;
O! that men would be more mild, Church-Cove^^nt idolized.
etc. and say in such cases! Too many Church Members there be that make a mere
Idol of their Church Covenant, and (I think they do little less that make it
the Formal cause of a visible Church, (which we have handled in another order
the first Book chapter 6. and 7.) seeing it is left among things doubtful and
indifferent, to be used or not used for peace, and love, and orders-sake.
Melanchthon I remember memtions a story of one Spiridon a Bishop, who having a
friend upon a fast day, (now called a fish-day it may be) to visit him,
Spiridon a Bishop.
he bids his servants bring in meat, and some flesh being provided, was
brought; but his guest startled at it; Oh, says he, non vescor his body, sum
enim Christianus! I am a Christian, therefore I eat none of this to day; Nay
but says Spiridon, eat of this to day because thou art a Christian, for every
creature of God is good taken with thankfulness; and speaking in this manner
to the man, he was much convinced of his error, and fell to the meat, learning
thus much by this example, that the worship and service of God is more
excellent then so, and consists not in meats or drinks, or differencing things
indifferent,
and with hearty thankfulness he embraced his Christian liberty: and so I say,
to such a one as says, Oh! the Church Covenant! O I am for it! I think it
necessary, for I am a Christian! yea, a Churchmember! and art thou so? say I,
why therefore because thou art a Church member and a Christian, impose no
necessity of it, A word to Church Members.
for the worship of God is more excellent then so, it consists not in such
forms; but in righteousness, peace, Covenant of grace gives right to be
Church members.
and joy in the Holy Ghost (as has been said in chap. 5, of this book) and it
is not this makes thee a Churchmember or a Christian: But thou art within the
Covenant of grace made and confirmed in the Gospel and written by the warm
blood of Christ, and sealed by his Spirit; then thou art received of God, Other
Covenants left to liberty.
and have a right (as much as any has) to be received a member of the visible
Church, 2 Samuel 23.5, 6. And as for formal, Sim.
explicit Covenants they are like your riders knot fast and loose, says Mr.
Vines in his Sermon before the House, Church Covenant not necessary, why?
October. 22. 1644. p. 15. or else like Shibboleth merely to distinguish (for
prudence sake) between person and person, people and people; so that, I say,
not but a Church Covenant may in some cases be useful, Reas.
but it is not of absolute necessity; for these reasons, 2. No precep^s.
1. There is no precept for it. 2. And further we shall find that Christians
fell into such fellowship together (as we here treat of) without it, or any
such form in primitive times, 2. No practice for it.
Act* 19.9. we can find no footing for it in all the Churches Directory, viz.
the Acts of the Apostles. And further, Saints are of one and the same household
in the unity of the spirit, not of the form (as we said chap. 5.6.) Ephesians.
2.21. and 4.4, 5. the Church was represented (says Mr. Noyes in his Temple
measured) by your 12 cakes on the table in the Temple, Noyes Temp.
3. Saints one in the Spirit.
page 9. called the Bread of faces, because all the Saints sit together though
of different forms) by one spirit face to face, feeding on spiritual
refreshments in the Temple of God So that the excess of complements, Explicit
covenant may be where it causes no trouble, but must not be where it causes
trouble.
formalities and punctualities must be avoided and evaded as unsuitable to the
simplicity, and spirituality of the Gospel, Temple, and Worship. Wherefore I
find it evident, that explicit covenanting (pro modo and forma) is no
necessary formality, but may be used where it causes no contention or disorder;
and yet as men make it, it may be a dispensation too compulsory and violent in
respect of Gods free grace, and the covenant that he has made: For the
Ordinances of the Covenant of grace are suitable to the grace of the Covenant
But,

Furthermore, all the members of the Church are engaged kind of covenanting
and confederating together; All Church members are as much engaged without such
covenanting.
that is, by the same word and Spirit, by which they are bid and brought in,
they are bound in the ways of Christ; and in the communion of love, peace and
holin^sse.

There is an obligation that lies upon every Saint, of another nature, more
noble, loving, and lasting, which will not like a riders knot be fast and
loose* but binds them to love and obedience, without fetters or halters: and
this I account the brotherly covenant, Amos 1.9. not only made in prudence as
was between Solomon and Hiram, What covenant is necessary*
but in wisdom, Act. 11.23. which is the deed and decree of heart ((...)) not
of hand; and this is the bond of brotherhood, as the Hebr. has it, Expos.
which bond of peace consists in the unity of the spirit, not of the form, (as
has been fairly offered before) and this is by another spirit (as it is
recorded of Caleb) after God, Numb. 14.24. and not after man; for that the set
form which is after man makes many divisions,
dangerous separations, and sad discords even among true brethren, and then it
is far from uniting or true order; and ought to be abhorred. But lest some
lofty brethren look angry at this assertion, P. 16. chapter 4. vide the Narrative
of Churches in New England by W. R.
and language, and should fill my ears with clamours by reason of concurrent
contra-position of many eminent Ministers and others of this Nation, and of
New England of the congregationall way; I will but lead them to the Apology of
New England for the Covenant p. 32. and 44. wherein they acknowledge an
agreement or consent of Saints together; or of this or that Christian to walk
in Church Fellowship with this or that society; Vide Mr. Ho^kers Survey, part.
1 chap. 4. Explicit Covenants how and when useful.
and that this is sufficient and equivalent with the others. So says Mr.
Peter's in his Discourse of Covenant, p. 21, 22, 23. and T.G. I.G. But yet we
grant, that if this implicit Covenantings should produce such ill
consequences, as of contentions, discords, disorders, etc. which the explicit
Covenant would remedy and appease; that then there may be such a Covenant writ
in the Church book, and handed by the Church members, for so long as good use,
peace, and order are brought forth by it; but yet with this Caution, that it be
allowed only as a thing prudentiall, for a time, Caution.
(whilst the use or end is good of it) and not as a thing necessary for all
time, or as without alteration or cessation; for then you should say, When it
is to be cast away with abhorrence.

And when to be taken in.


^ie upon it, we will have none of it; when it begins to assault and entrench
upon Christian liberty. Now in this sense, and in such cases a Church Covenant
is lawful, decent, and expedient; and in such an exigency and emergency of
time, this was put in execution by the Church at Dublin, as a medium (in
prudence) to compose diff^^^nces, So in Dublin.
and it proved very effectual (blessed be God) to end the former, and to
prevent future disturbances, but it was not to be urged upon any one contrary
to Christian liberty. And thus far we can freely concur with Mr. Cotton,
Mr. Hooker, Mr. Ainsworth and all other eminent ones, that are so hot for an
explicit covenanting, though the implicit by your own confession carries the
formalem rationem of the other which they so urge; both being but adjuncts.
Forms of Church Covenant.
The forms of such Covenants are shorter or longer, as the occasion requires; I
shall insert one or two for examples-sake.

1. The Covenant of the English Church at Roterdam, when Mr. H. P. was chosen
Pastor.
WE whose names are hereunder written, having found by sad experience how
uncomfortable it is covenant in Baptism and avouch God to be our God.

2. We resolve to cleave to the true and pure worship of

3. We will not allow our selves in any known sin, bu^

places of government and obedience, with all good conscience, knowing we must
give an account to God.

growth in grace, by hearing, reading, praying, meditation, and all other ways
we can.

over-burthen our hearts with earthly cares, which are the bane of all holy
duties, the breach of the Sabbath, and the other Commandments.

Christian Discipline without murmuring, and shall labor so to continue, and
will endeavor to be more forward, zealous, loving, faithful, and wise in
admonishing others.

Gospel as occasion shall be offered to us.

We promise to have our children, servants, and all taught the ways of God.

We will strive to give no offense to our brethren by

Lastly, We do protest not only against open and

Per me F. H.

I might make mention of others, some of them very short and general; but
others fuller and more particular. But I shall trouble thee (Reader) but with
one more, which as thou heardst before was made use of, as a remedy to end some
disorders and disturbances, and subscribed by all that were free thereto upon
occasion of differences arising; to which this (much) related.

II. The Covenant of the Church in Dublin collected out of the word of Christ
according to the Order of the Gospel.
WE whose Names are hereunder written do freely give up our hands and hearts
to God the Father and his Son Christ Jesus, our only Lord and Lawgiver; and
do unanimously engage in the fear of the Lord every one of us, to our utmost
powers, through the gracious assistance of Gods holy Spirit,

That we will walk together in one body with one mind, sweetness of Spirit,
and Saint-like love each to other, (as the Disciples of Jesus Christ) and all
to the Church. Joh. 15.12. and 13.34. Romans 13.8. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 These. 3.12. 1 John 4.21, etc.

Jointly to contend and strive together in all good and ways, both by doing
and by suffering for the purity of the Gospel, the Truth of Christ, his
Ordinances and Orders, the honor and liberty, and privileges of the Church
against all opposers, Jude 3. Gal. 5.1.13. etc.

With all care and conscience to study and labor to keep up the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, both in the Church in general, and in particular,
between one another, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.3. 2 Cor. 13.11,
etc.

Carefully to avoid all causes and causers of Divisions (as much as in us lies)
and to shun Seducers, false-Teachers of errors or Heresies, Romans 16.17, 18. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. Tit. 9.3. v. g. 10. 2 John 10. Rev. 2.14.18.

Partaking and fellow-feeling to our power with one another, in every
condition, bearing each other burdens, Gal. 6.2. Heb. 13.3. 1 Cor. 12.25. 2 Timothy 1.16. etc.

To forbear and bear with one another weaknesses, and infirmities, in much
pity, tenderness, meekness and patience, not ripping up the weakness of any
one to any other, without our Church; nor yet to any within, unless according
to Christ's rule and Gospel Order, endeavoring all we may for the glory of the
Gospel and the credit of his Church to hide and cover one another slippings
and failings. Ephesians. 4.32. Romans 14.13. Romans 15.1. Col. 3.12, 13. 1 Cor. 13.4.7
etc.

And that we will (as the Lord our God shall enable cleave close one to
another, and every one to the Lord, and cheerfully undergo the condition and
lot the Lord shall lay upon (this) his Church, whether in perseeution or in
prosperity, without any wilful drawing back or falling away from the
fellowship or Faith which we profess together, Heb. 10.24, 25, 26, etc. to
the end, 2 Timothy 4.10.16.

Brother or Sister be afflicted, etc. fellow-feelingly to be afflicted with
that Brother or Sister; and in all Christian ways we can, to counsel, comfort
or assist, and to pray hard for such a Member, 1 Cor. 12.26. 2 These. 3.2. Romans
12.15. Act. 12.15.

contribute and communicate of things temporal and spiritual according to our
abilities out of our abundance both to particular members in want, and also
into the Publique-Treasury or Chu^ch-stock, 1 John 3.17, 18. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. 2
Cor. 9.5, 6, 7. Romans 12.13. 1 Timothy 6.17. etc.

watch over each others conversation, so as to counsel, comfort or correct
according to Christ's rules in such cases; provoking one another to love and
good works, with brotherly bowels and affections, 1 These. 5.4.14. Heb. 3.12,
13. Heb. 10.24. Heb. 12.13, 15, 17. Romans 15.14.

walking together in all holiness, godliness and humility of mind, (to our
uttermost) every day and often, and orderly meeting together to the edifying of
the body, for the glory of the Gospel, credit of the Church, convincing of our
adversaries, and them that are without, Mat. 5.16.20. Mal. 3.16, 17. 2 Timothy
2.19. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 3.12. Heb. 12.14.

Praying continually for the prosperity of this Church; for Gods presence in
it, and protection of it, against all the gates of Hell, Phil. 1.4, 5. Romans
1.9. Ephesians. 6.18. Col. 4.12. Psalm. 122.6. Isa. 62.6, 7. etc.

And lastly, because differences have formerly arose about a Pastor, we do
freely declare to embrace and own our brother -- for our Pastor, according to
the order of the Gospel; to submit with all ready obedience in the Lord to
Christ's Ordinances dispensed by him, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
Heb. 13.7.17. 2 These. 3.14. to pray for assistance from the Lord in the
administration to him committed, Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.3. 2 These. 3.1, 2. and
to esteem of him as the Lord requires, 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy
5.17. and to adhere and cleave to him in the Lord, 2 Timothy 4.6. 2 Timothy 1.16.18.
etc. All which we do in the sincerity of our souls declare, promise, purpose
and engage to, as our God shall enable us by his own gracious Spirit.

Per me W. H.

Such like are the forms of the Church Covenant, which are according to the
rules of prudence and piety to be altered, taken up or laid aside for love,
peace and orders sake, and are all (always) left to Christian liberty; For the
necessary combination, consolation, and confederation of Saints together is
spiritual; but the indifferent is this. Lib. de praecept. and dispens. in
principip.
Bernard tells us, de triplici necessario, of three ways, that a thing is
necessary, and this formal Covenanting is none of them I am sure ( necessarium
aut stabile, aut inviolabile, Threefold necessary.
aut incommutabile, viz. that which is stable and stands sure, 1. Stabile.
and though the formal Covenant will not appear necessary in this; yet for
this one reason, the spiritual obligation is necessary, for that is the bond
of perfection, Col. 3.14. as well as the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. And 2. that
which is inviolable, and cannot be broken is necessary, 2. Inviolabite.
which is this spiritual engagement, not the decree of the hand, but of the
heart, whilst the formal Covenant is often broken to pieces, and to powder: But
3. the necessary is unchangeable without alteration or cessation; 3.
Incommutabile.
so is not the formal kind of Covenant. Wherefore I cannot account so of the
Church Covenant,
as that it must be to make up the true form of the Church, as a thing
essential and constitutive to it; and of the true Church (as most do affirm)
or as if without this there could be no true Church, but all harlots. Oh
fearful doting upon the form! Answ. com. p 78. Spiritual ties and Covenant
hold firm.
For, as one says, It is not possible that these things which are knit together
by outward bands and sinews should hold longer then their bands hold: But
spiritual bands are everlasting, and the two staves, viz. Beauty and Bands,
are the unity of the Spirit in the band of Peace; and both hold together, and
both broke together by unbelief, as appears Zach. 11. Wherefore I am much
affected with that prophecy, in Ezekiel. 20.38. to confirm this Covenant, and
spiritual Obligation, which lies upon us as a stable, inviolable and
unchangeable tie upon our spirits, where the Lord promises to make his people
pass under the rod, and then to bring them into the band of the Covenant;
Expos.
Polanus.
that is, says Polanus in loc. the Lord will bring the godly under affliction,
and whip them into obedience as they are bound; Calvin.
But says Calvin thus, the rod is meant a shepherds crook, by which the Lord
gathers in the strayers to keep them within the fold, and not suffering his to
Apostatize or fall away; wherefore this cannot be meant the formal covenant;
but I had rather read it with the vulgar, that the Lord will subject them to
his Scepter, i. e. to be swayed and ruled by himself, the word (...) signifies
a Scepter: I will cause them by my Word and Spirit to come under my Rod, (that
is, my Scepter) to rule them; and then it follows, I will (i. e. by the same
power and Spirit) bring them into the band of the Covenant, that is, by this
means I shall oblige them to me, to keep Covenant with me, or to cleave close
to the Lord, as Act. 11.23. Wherefore to conclude, in what Congregation so ever
thou art, Reader, thou wilt do well enough who art united to Christ the Head;
for the Spirit of Christ obliges thee then; which obligation is absolutely
necessary, and must be; and the other kind of Covenant, What may be. Bernard.
if need be, may be; but in congregatione been vivis si vivis ordinabiliter,
sociabiliter and humiliter (says Bernard,
Sermon. 1 de Apost. Pet. and Paulo) thou orderly, avoiding sin and scandal,
What must be.
and all appearances of evil, and holily as one called 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 These.
4.7. from all manner of sin to all manner of holy conversation; and 2.
sociably, or in Saint-like fellowship, in love, peace, and good will to all
brethren, in watching over them, comforting, counselling and assisting of them,
all that thou can in love; and 3. walk humbly, look not on others at a
distance, be not puffed up with conceit; keep continually low before measures
the valleys, and gathers the violets that hang their heads continually by
self-denial; O learn hard, to be nothing in thine own eyes! The humble he
will teach in his ways, Psalm. 25.
The first of these nelates to thy self, (tibi) the second to thy brother,
(proximo) and the third to thy God (Deo) who accepts of all. But thus for this
Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. (...) Pupilla. That in the Church all the Members, even Sisters as
well as Brothers, have a right to all Church Affairs; and may not only
implicitly but explicitly vote and offer or object, etc.
THE Furies and Harpies are flowne up very high upon this point, and most men
do arrogate a Sovereignty to themselves which I see no warrant for. The
difference that is to be made is already proved to be between the precious, and
the vile, the clean and unclean; and not to be a difference of Sexes, ages, or
relations. Now because there be too bitter contentions about this, (which was
one thing that helped to set at a distance the two societies in Dublin, by such
as would rob sisters of their just rights and privileges) we shall prove their
liberty, and leave others to practice accordingly. Proofs for this may be
taken from Prophecy, Precept, and Practice, and which we shall ratify by firm
reasons out of the Word of God, and answering objections, shall leave all to
stand or fall according to their foundation and bottom. But,

Proved 1 by Prophecy.
The Prophet Joel, chap. 2.29. tells us of the liberty of Saints in the last
days; for where the Spirit is, there is liberty; Expos.
and this Spirit is promised to be powred-out; i. e. most plentifully and
largely in the latter days; Luther.
and as Luther says in these last days of the world; although this was began
in the Apostles time, Act. 2.15. faciendum initium sed non est satis, Paraeus.
says Paraeus, it is now to be further and fuller performed and is expected to
be powered out, ex abundanti, but only with this difference, that it was then
visible, but it will be (and is much already) invisibly; then extraordinarily,
and now more ordinarily powered out; and not dropped but powered, (...). Upon
whom? 1. Generally, upon all Flesh, non stillare sed plena copia fundere, let
out with a full stream and running force, far surpassing former ages, that is
the 2. circumstance says Calvin, Calvin. Paraeus in loc.
and it is to be considered, Sine discrimine populorum, sexus, aut aetatis, so
Esa. 66.18. Which 2. more particularly and expressly he explaines and confirms;
upon the Servants, and upon the hand-maides, for (...) signifies for certain,
and accipitur confirmative, that these latter days promises, as Isa. 2.2.3.
Jer. 50.4. etc. do most expressly and particularly relate to the weakest and
contemptiblest sort of people in the Kingdom of Christ, The weakest sort and
sex he will exalt most.
young men and women, and it may be some aged men too, but as Paul says, 1
Cor. 1.26, 27. Not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty are called, but
God has chosen the weak ones, and the despised ones, and the poor mean base
ones to confound the wise, that no flesh might boast in his sight. But by these
(and other) Prophecies it will appear God had care of the weakest contemptible
vessels, viz. women, that he would exalt them, and power out his Spirit much
upon them. As ( Mayer says) that they as well as men (even both sexes) young
men and women might manifestly appear to defend the Truth, vindicate their
liberty, Dr. Mayer gives the Reason.
prove their right to the Ordinances of Christ, either by speaking, pleading,
prophesying, or the like, and declaring their visions of truth. Besides, the
precept which I find for it, is full enough, Mat. 18.17. Go tell the Church,
i. e. the whole Church, 2. By precept
to whom power is given to consult and conclude, matters which relate to the
whole, not one member, age, Expos.
or sex excepted; but women that are members as well as men, must equally know
it, Fenner.
and (consensu omnium) (says Fenner) conclude about it being to be by the
concurrence of the whole. But say the Pontificians, tell the Church, that is,
the Pope and his Cardinals, (the representative); says Lyra, Who is the Church.
tell the Prelate (the representative); says Chrysostom, tell the Rulers (the
Representative); 1. Negative.
say the Calvinists tell the Synod (the Representative); and Maldonat says the
Judges: So say the Presbyterians tell the Classes (the Representative); or the
Presbytery (for so they call them) and some Independents say, tell the
Brethren; but we say the whole body consisting of men and women. For the word
is not (...) a Council, 2. Affirmative
or Synod, or some chose to consult and sitting for that purpose; but (...) a
people called together into one body, being separate from the world and all
false ways and worships for the Lords use, and service;
which word charges the whole body with this duty, and that without difference
of persons, sexes, ages, or abilities, but all together, and thus says Mr.
Cartwright in his 1. Reply to Whitaker, p. 184. Cartwright.
So in Act. 6.2, 3. the whole Church taken collectively (without any exception
of any for sex or degrees) they are all required to cull and call out, Expos.
look out and choose ^it Deacons; that is, that every member might have his or
her liberty; and give his or her consent thereto, seeing i^ concerned every
member. 3. By practice.
Furthermore you find this in practice in primitive times, wherein the Acts of
the Apostles, and their Epistles are full, in Act. 24.23. the whole Church (
collectively) chose them Elders ((...)) by the lift^ng up their hands, so 1
Cor. 5.4, 5. the whole Church as concerned so concurred in that business, and
Paul 2 Cor. 2.6. to 10. writes to the whole Church, for their consent and
concurrence in remitting and readmitting of love, So that in those general
terms you find no exc^pti^n to one off or exclude sisters concurrence, Sisters
must co^cur as members of the body.
and compliance with the Brethren, whether it be by voice or lifting up of
hands, or the like, whether as we say explicitly or implicitly; and more
expressly, you shall see in Act. 1.14. These brethren all continued with one
accord in prayer and supplication, Sisters did join in choosing an Apostle.
with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his Brethren, and then
Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples (the number of whose names were
120) now you have it in totidem verbis that the sisters as well as brethren had
a right and (accordingly) did take it in the choice even of another Apostle,
Expos.
and in ver. 23. they appointed (even those 120 Disciples men and women) two
etc. yea furthermore in Phil. 4.3. says the Apostle, Sisters were even
laborers with Pa^l.
I entreat thee help those women that labored with me in the Gospel, with
Clement also and with other my fellow laborers whose names are in the book of
life: Theodor. in loc.
Magna libertas, and maxima laus mulierum, says one, for the word (...) (and
so (...)) is read actively, Expos.
wherein they were admired and much commended; and yet men now think much to
allow them that common liberty (in Christ's Kingdom, which is the liberty of
the Subject) to vote or object, or ask, or answer, or say, or consent, Their
common liberty.
as need requires, which liberty they are (as I may say, as they are member of
the Church) born to, and cannot (by right) be deprived off: which I shall prove
further from the testimony of others, eminent men; yea out of their own
mouths, and by the right of reason and equity, and then answer objections. Mr.
Dudley Venner, de Sacr. Theolog. lib. 7. p. 278, 279. has much to this
purpose, Proved by learned writers. Fen^er.
that in all matters maximi momenti, of general concernment, as in censures,
voting, choosing of Officers, taking in, casting out, or in what things so ever
concern the whole, why they are to be done in the whole Assembly, or Church
meeting, by the authority of the whole Church, without any one debarred of
their liberty; and if there be any one (says he) that have any thing to offer
or to object; that he (or she) have liberty to bring it in, and so after
that, matters to be concluded by all. So Dr. Ames, Ames.
against whom can be no exception for piety or learning, in his Medull.
Theolog. lib. 1. chapter 37. Sect. 6. says Potestas hujus disciplinae, quoad jus
ipsum, pertinet ad ecclesiam illam in Communi, etc. The right power of
discipline appertains to the Church in common, every member has a right to
vote, offer, object, to take in, or cast out or such like; for it belongs to
the whole body in general, and ad illos pertinet ejicere, ad quos pertinet
primo admittere, which every brother and sister has equally a right to and a
liberty to do. Rutherford right of Presb.
So Mr. Rutherford himself in lib. 1. p. 49. produces Beza, Calvin, Bucer,
Bullinger, Melanchthon, Bucan, Paraeus, Rivetus, Sibrandus, ^unius, Trelcatius,
Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, who all require that Church affairs be executed plebe
consentiente, by the consent of all, i. e. every one without respect of
persons. So Dr. Whitaker, de council. q. 5. p. 179. and de Pontif. Rom 9.9.1. c.
1. Sect 1. and in several others, says enough to confirm us, Whittaker*
duobus l^co.
both of Churches and Members, that omnes pares inter se juris essent, they
were all equal among themselves in primitive times, without respect of
persons, Jam. 2.1. Dr. Sibs an Independent, and so Paul Baynes uses the same
word Independent in his Diocesan trial, p. 13. printed 16.1.
So Dr. Sibs in his Breathing after God page 94. compares the particular
visible Churches to Gods ^abernacle in David's time, every of which particular
Church he calls a several Church Independent, And as for the Church of England,
it is called (says he) a particular Church from other Nations, because it is
under a Government Civil, which is not dependent on any other forain Prince,
and in every one of these particular Churches, the members are without
superiority, all making one brotherhood, for par in parem non habet imperium.
So says Mr. Jacob in his attestation, Jacob.
(and proves it by many others most eminent in Primitive times and Ancient
Writers) who says that all affairs of government or order which concern the
whole are to be by the unanimous vote and consent of the whole; read the
Magdeburgenses in 2. Cent. chap. 7. de Conjo^iatione Eccl siarum. Si quis, (say
they) probatos authors hujus Seculi perspiciat, Magdeburgenses very clear in
it.
etc. If a man but search the Authentic Authors of this age; he shall see the
form of government was like a Democracy; For every single Church had equal
power of Docendi, administrandi, excommunicandi, eligendi, vocandi, ordinandi,
etc. And every member has a suffrage or voice. Cyprian.
So Cyprian Epistolarum. epist. 11. lib. 3. epist. 3. lib. 1. speaks of it
fully, and see Cottons Way of congregationall Churches cleared Part. 1. Sect.
2. Cotton's Answer to Baily and Rutherford.
So that women are included in the whole. And many others, had I time to
search, I should soon find to bear witness with me, of women's (as well as
men's) right to vote, offer, object, concur in and consent to all things that
concern the benefit of the whole body. But more particularly I shall take in
Dr. Willets judgment, Dr. Willet's Synops.
and then prove it by what our dissenting brethren have granted to us of it:
Willet in his Synopsis Papismi 12. Genesis Contract. Q. 4. p. 572. lends us light
enough to end this trifling controversy, for he tells us of a Heathen Priests
son converted by a woman, Women preached.
and the Iberi converted by the preaching of a woman, and of their ordinary
duty to teach privately (and some of them extraordinarily called to preach in
public) and yet we allow them not their common liberty as members.
Moreover he tells us of a Canon in the Council of Carthage, 4. can. 99.
Council of Carthage.
That a woman though never so holy, and learned, was not to preach in public
(in private as much as she would) nor to baptize, Can. 100. but never that a
woman was forbid to vote, or ask, or object or offer any thing which concerned
the whole body, for that it is a privilege which every one (woman as well as
man) has a right to as a Churchmember, and this must not be denied any, nor
can it be for the Churches benefit so to do; and that for such reasons as will
follow. So Tertullian tells us, Tertullian.
that in his time it was not permitted to a woman to teach in the African
Church, nor to baptize; but he does not deny the liberty which women had in
Church Matters, to vote, dissent, or consent according to the liberty of the
members of the subjects of Christ. But let us hear what our brethren say, they
allow them liberty to speak in some cases in the Church; as to give answer to a
question when the Church requires it; to render a reason of their faith and
hope, Proved out of their own mouths.
to give in a testimony of repentance upon their return from a fault or the
like. And Mr. Hooker himself in's Survey of Discipline, part. 3. chapter 1. p 6.
says they may so speak as suits with their Sexes, that is, says he, Mr.
Hooker of New Eng.
when their speeches argue subjection. Why, so then! we seek no more then this;
now their offering or objecting, or asking of the Church, or voting with the
Church does evidently argue subjection, and suits very well with their sexes,
and with their liberty as members, which they must not be robbed of. And Mr.
Ainsworth in's Communion of Saints, Mr. Ainsworth.
chapter 18. is exceeding clear in it, and commends it, and confirms it from the
Churches in the Apostles days, who (he says) had the like right and liberty,
for all the whole multitude of believers were both beholders and actors in the
common affairs; as at the choice of officers,
Act. 1.15 and 16.23. and 6.2.34* and 14.23. at deciding of Controversies, Act.
15.24.6.7.12.22, 23. and 21.22. 1 Cor. 6.2. at casting out offenders, Mat.
18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.13. at the choice and appointment of men to carry the
benevolence of the Church to the needy brethren, 2 Cor. 8.19. 1 Cor. 16.3.
These and the like privileges (says he) in the practice of the Gospel are
permitted to all the Saints in all Churches, which they must use in all
sobriety, order, and peace, Romans 12.3.16. 1 Cor. 14.33, 40. So that all the
members have a like privilege in common and public affairs; and women may as
much (de jure) vote, speak, and offer their judgments in such cases as men;
being alike and equal members with them. For all that, Antichrist would bring
a difference, This was ever an Antichristian Plot.
out of his seminary of discord, as he did formerly (and which too far takes
place yet) between the Clergy and Laity (so called) as if one were the more
holy then the other; 1 Pet. 2.9.
and therefore must be distinguished by garbes* gowns, caps, colors,
carriages,
or something or other distinguished from the other; who ought to be all one in
Christ, without such distinction. But we come now to the Reasons and Arguments
which confirm this practice and confute the contrary. And, The Reasons.


1. Votes concern all, ergo all must vote.
1. Is taken ( a toto ad parts) Thus, that which concerns the whole, is (by all
the rule of reason) to be done by the whole, or that which concerns all (
brothers and sisters) reason requires should be done (or ordered) by all (
brothers and sisters)* but to choose this or that officer, to vote this or that
thing, to cast out this or that offender, to take in this or that member,
concerns all (sisters as well as brothers) ergo. So says Whit. de council. p.
44. Quod omnes attingit, ab omnibus approbari debet, Dr. Writ.
etc. and ejusdem est recipere, rejicere, says Hook. part. 1. cap. 11.
The power which is in every brother and sister, or Churchmember combined
together, in one, Is potestas Judicantis. Is potestas Donantis.


1. The power to judge is in the whole, and concerns the whole, as to admit,
cast out, etc. 1 Cor. 5.12. the whole Church is bid to cast out ((...)) which
carries a causall power with it.

2. To give, elect is also the whole's, (as the Corporation has power to
choose a Mayor) and every member that is free in the Society has a right to
give his or her vote thereto.

Thus the whole has the power (...), Mat. 18.15. (...) (...), 1 Cor. 5.12.
and every single part must be subject to the whole, and serviceable also, for
the use and advantage of the whole. Salus populi suprema lex, which is the
highest law to look to, and after; i. e. the preservation and welfare of the
whole; and this lies in every brother and sister to be active in. For as in a
ship that is ready to sink, every one seeks the safety of the ship ( i. e. of
the whole) and then they are all safe; else none (says Bolton in's Tossed
ship) so it is in the Church. But to the next Argument:

2. ( A fortiore) If it be lawful for women to have any office in the Church
(which implies a power and authority) then it is (much more) lawful for women
to vote, wish, or offer any thing to the Church (which implies subjection and
obedience): Some women officers.
but it is lawful for women to have office in the Church. See 1 Timothy 5.9.
There were women that were chosen to look after the poor, sick, lame,
strangers, etc. and so Phoebe a Deaconesse, Romans 16.1. and so Phil. 4.3. some
women that labored with Paul in the Gospel, and Philips four Daughters were
Prophetesses: Now doubtless, and by an undeniable consequence, it follows,
that women must have the common liberty of members to vote or the like in the
Church.

3. ( Ab aequali liberate omnium in uno) Several arguments run from the
equal liberty of all members purchased by Christ. 3. Women have equal liberty
with men in and by Christ.
And to follow Melanchthon de liberate Christiana in's Common places, I could
argue thus, Quos filius liberavit, vere liberi sunt, sed, etc. Those whom the
Son has made free, are free indeed, Joh. 8.36. but all the Saints of Christ
(without difference of Sexes; sisters as well as brothers) are made free by
Christ, Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor
female, for ye are all one in Christ. I pray mark, the Apostle puts you in
mind of their equal liberty in Christ, and therefore, Expos.
that they should not contend or differ, in saying this is a Jew or Gentile,
this is a servant or a woman, why ye are all one body, have all one head, and
are all one (without any such difference) in Christ); in Christ there is no
such thing as subjection one to another, all equal, Perkins.
(so says Perkins in loc.) all sorts of believers are under a civil or
spiritual rule: in the civil there are such differences of Fathers, children,
Masters, servants, Magistrates, subjects, men and women; but in the spiritual
rule, and government of Christ in his Church and Saints all are one,
without respect of persons; no difference should arise amongst them. There is
no such thing as Jew, i. e. as opposed to Gentile: nor as Presbyterian, i. e.
as opposed to Independent:
nor Independent, i. e. as opposed to Anabaptist: nor as a Servant, i. e. as
opposed to the Free: nor as rich, i. e. as opposed to poor: nor as the learned,
i. e. as opposed to the unlearned in tongues and arts: nor as a man or brother,
i. e. as opposed to a woman or sister; How all differences are reconciled in
one.
for they are all one in Christ's account, in Christ's Kingdom, without any
such respect of persons, opinions, sexes, or ages; and have all one and the
same liberty in and by Christ. Thus Gualther gives out, and bitterly complains
of such as are enemies to Christ and his Church, Gualther. in loc.
that make differences about persons, opinions, sexes, or the like, and that
would rob any one of their liberty bought them by Christ. Now Christian liberty
has these two parts, viz. Deliverance from, and freedom to; deliverance from
the curse, power, and punishment of the Law, How women attained this liberty,
yet subject.
and from the observations of traditions, Col. 2.20. which women have equal
benefit of, with men. And so in freedom to the worship and service of God, the
ordinances of Christ, the kingdom of Christ, grace and glory; which also
appertains to women as well as men, being restored by Christ to that equal
liberty (in the things of God, and in the Church of Christ) with men, which
they lost by the fall; and they are now again to become meet and mutual helps:
for all are one in Christ, says the text. Now though there is a civil
subjection to men in their oeconomicall relations as we said before, that there
is not any servile subjection due to them, whereby poor souls are inslaved and
kept under in bondage from doing their duty to God, or taking their Christian
liberty in the things of God. Bernard.
Bernard in lib. de gratia and lib. arbit. tells us of a threefold liberty, i.
e. of nature, grace and glory, and every woman (as well as man) is made happy
by it, ever since Christ turned Eva to Ave, they have been restored into
spiritual liberty and Christian equality in the Church:
and the Apostle, Jam. 2.1. in his Catholic Epistle (so called) says it
agrees not with the profession to make difference of persons in the Church of
Christ, therefore my brethen have not the faith of our Lord Jesus with respect
of persons: not only in not preferring the rich before the poor, but not the
strong before the weak, (nor the men before the women) and is not this
partiality so to do? (says he) verse. 4. or have ye not made a difference,
where Christ has made none? Now the force of the argument is full for us. For
where there ought to be no respect of persons, there ought to be no difference
betwixt men and women,
(for the general includes the particular) but in the Church of Christ there
ought to be no respect of persons. Ergo, women (as members) must have equal
liberty with men. Besides,

4. Arguments may be taken from the alike privileges in the Church of Christ:
as the donation of the spirit; 4. Equal privileges in Christian liberty.
one and the same on all alike; (though not in like measure) the promises made
without distinction of sexes or persons, the ordinances dispensed, and price of
Christian liberty ( i. e. the blood of Christ) paid for all alike, without
distinction of sexes. And also acquired by the same means to the one that it is
to the other, that is quoad meritum, and quoad Spiritum Christi: by the merit
and by the Spirit of Christ. Now out of this matter may many arguments be
formed; and besides that Gods love to his elect ones, his original love is
without any such difference and respect, it is all alike, and gives all alike
liberty, and all whom he receives alike, we should receive alike into the
Church of Christ, Romans 14.3.

5. Argument may run thus, 5. Power.
that there is no power that any can have from heaven ordinarily, but by some
clear transaction between God and themselves, but there is no clear transaction
between God and the brethren alone, but primarily between God and the Church (
i. e. the whole collectively taken, consisting of women as well as men) Ergo.
So the covenant, promises, privileges, etc. are not to them alone, but to the
whole Church.

6. Taken (ab intention omnium) from their unanimous and samenesse in their
embodying together, 6. The intention, one and the same.
intending one and the same thing. Yet two things are said to be necessary in
the intention ( res and causa, quid and propter quid) the thing it self that is
intended, Bernard. Sermon. 1 parvorum.
which is to be the honor and glory of God, and for which it is intended,
which is to edify the Church. Now both these are alike intended by women as
well as men, and therefore ought to have the like liberty (as members) allowed
to execute their intentions, for which they are so admitted.


7. Reason runs from their excellencies and abilities of some women surpassing
men for piety and judgment; 7. Women have excelled men.
and therefore ought to have equal liberty, with them in Church Affairs; the
argument is free, the proofe's clear; for prudent Abigail excelled her husband;
for knowledge, Priscilla Apollos (though a Preacher); For faith, the
Canaanitesse, of whom Christ said, I have not seen so great faith no not in
Israel. Joh. 20.
For affection and zeal, the Queen of the South shall rise up against the men
of this generation, Luke 11.31. M. Magd. the first Preacher of Christ risen.
And Mary Magdalen, for piety and spirit, outran, and outreached all the twelve
Disciples in her diligence to seek out Christ: to whom Christ first discovered
himself after his resurrection, and bid her declare it to his Disciples; she
was the first Preacher of Christ's resurrection. So we read how Iael excelled in
courage, Judge. 4.
Deborah in thankfulness, 2 Timothy 1.8.
Lois and Eunice in faith and obedience: Lydia in entertaining the Word, Act.
16.14. The Shunamite in faith and zeal, and understanding, excelled her husband,
2 King. 4.8, 9.22.30. So the Samaritanesse the rest of the Citizens, Joh. 4.4.
And we read of some women exhorted to win in their husbands to the truth, 1
Pet. 3.2. Yea and Manoahs wife, Judge. 13.22, 23. you shall find of a sounder
judgment and faith then her husband. So that all these examples prove the
reason which requires their just liberty in the Church of Christ. I remember I
have read in Jerome's days of many holy women that exceeded others in learning
and abilities,
and in the studying of the Scriptures, and they had their Commentaries upon
them of their own making; Furthermore, the Kingdom of heaven is compared to a
woman, and Christ's Church is called his wife and spouse. Mat. 13.
Rev. 19. Cant. 2. And as Mary said it, in the behalf of other good women, He
that is mighty has magnified me,
and therefore they are not to be so rejected of men who are so highly received
and honored of God. But to the

8. Reason, which is taken from their strong affection to the truth, 8. And are
strong in affection.
when once they be in the way of Christ; and for the most part they are
exceeding men therein. Hence it is that Satan so often makes the first trial
of women for his turn and service,
seeing where they take, their affections are strongest (for the most part) and
he sped so well at first, that he cannot forget it; Et muliebrem sexum non minus
esse docilem ad disciplinas omnemque virtutem Probat Campofulg.
so he found out a Dalilah for Sampson, a Jezebel for Ahab, Pharaohs daughter
for Solomon, etc. For where they are bad, they are extreme bad; but where they
are good, they are exceeding good, and most fondly affected with the things of
God: thus Act. 13.50. you read of the devout women, or as the word will have it
((...), Sim.
etc.) earnestly or eagerly religious and resolved. For as the gold which is of
the purest substance soonest receives the form, and much sooner then the sturdy
steel, or hard iron which is of a gross and massy metal (says Cawdrey);
Caudrey.
So are women more readily wrought upon, and sooner persuaded and formed into
the truth then men, Women soone^ wrought upon and m^st docible.
who are for the most part like sturdy steel and iron, hard to work upon. And
as gold (so women (many times take the fairest stamp and fullest impression:
but I pass by this; yet before I conclude, I must speak a word or two both to
men and women. Let not men despise them then in the Church of Christ (as the
weakest vessels) nor wrong them of their liberty of voting or speaking in
common affairs, (yet with subjection, civility, Uses.
and in order) to prevent disorders and rudeness; 1. To men.
we were wont in Dublin to call over their names one by one, Dublin.
as well as men's: Object.
I know the ordinary objection is objected out of 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. Let your
women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted unto them to speak*
So 1 Timothy 2.12.

Ans. 1. Grant it in that sense the Apostle spoke it, which Expos.
that they keep from public preaching, or prophesying, How women must not
speak*
or teaching as Officers or Ministers do; or the like, etc. which all
Expositors grant that I have met with. Now we plead not for this; but for the
common ordinary liberty due to them as members of the Church, viz. to speak,
object, offer, or vote with the rest, which this Scripture (nor no other as I
know of) does in the least hinder, 2. In the condition that the Church was then
in b^t no standing Rule.
but rather help, being rightly considered. For,

2. He says it is not permitted ((...)) by reason of the disorders and
differences that then were in the Church* it was thought inconvenient to allow
women's liberty to preach publicly, whereby they brought but confusion into
the Church, as appears in the antecedent and subsequent words, verse. 33. and
verse. 40. so that the ill consequence was the cause of this rule of prudence,
not any positive command of Gods, but he spoke as in 1 Cor. 7.6. And it is a
quest^on whether it be a standing precept. So that from this very Scripture
(besides a hundred others) I do verily believe that handmaids shall prophecy,
and have more public liberty then now they have; but however this does
nothing at all disallow or deny them their common, private, proper liberty as
members of Christ's body; equally with men; I say as members (though not as
officers) and so subjective to the whole.

2. A word to women that they be not too full of words, hold fast their liberty.
2. To women, I wish ye be not too forward, and yet not too backward, but hold
fast your liberty, in Gal. 5.1. which the Apostle speaks as well to the sisters
as the brethren; Christ has made ye free, male and female, ye are all one in
Christ; and ought to be so in the Church; wherefore, stand fast, (says he)
that is, keep your ground which Christ has won and got for you; maintain your
right, defend your liberty, even to the life, lose it not, but be courag^ous,
and keep it. And yet be cautious too, 2. With Caution.
( festina lent) not too fast, but first, be swift to hear, slow to speak,
Jam. 1.19. unless occasion requires you; your silence may sometimes be the
best advocate of your orderly liberty*
and the sweetest evidence of your prudence and modesty, (as one says,
Silentium saepissime addit foeminis gratiam et decus, Sophoc. in Ajace.
maxim apud viros, cum de rebus seriis agitur) and yet ye ought not by your
silence to betray your liberty, Caution.
trouble your consciences, lose your privileges and rights; or see the truth
taken away or suffer before your eyes; Sim.
but I say, be not too hasty nor too high; for as the note that comes too nigh
the margent, is in danger to run into the text the next impression, so spirits
that run too high at first, may soon fall into disorder, and irregularity. It
is said, Dr. Featly Sermon. p. 205.
when Cyrus was young, his Grandfather made Sacas his overseer, to order him
both in his diet, time, and recreations; but when he came to riper years, he
became a Sacas to himself, and took not so much liberty as he had leave to do,
and as was allowed him by his governor Sacas. And so indeed that may be
lawful to you,
that is not (as yet) expedient for you; and rather then run into disorder and
confusion, hold your liberty a little in suspense, and wave it on some
occasions wherein you lawfully may, but lose it not for all the world which
Christ paid so great a price for, and prepare for fairer gales. As the Miller
does, Sim.
for though he cannot command the wind, yet he will spread his sails out, and
open them in a readiness, when he is in hopes of its coming; and so do you,
and when the wind blows (which begins) your liberty with full sails, shall
bring forth abundantly to serve all the country round. In the mean time, make
much of the ordinances, prize your (hitherto) liberty, and practice accordingly.

And in a word, I say to all, 3. To all
Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

CHAP. IX. (...) This last Chapter shows what Church this Treatise mentions;
and clears it from all others; and shows wherein the Presbyterians and we
disagree, and wherein they and the Papists agree in most of the essential
differences between them and us, for Discipline, Doctrine, and Practice; and
proves this Gospell-Church-State, the great promise and thing typified in the
last days, and the Paradise on earth to be restored.
I Had thoughts now to have rested me for a while, but I am jogged up again by
the jarring noises which many make about the name of a Church; I must now arise
and wet my pen a little more, before I conclude this Treatise, or take my rest.
You have had the essentialia laid before you, and in this first and second part
have had the totum homogeneum of a true Church, both what is to be done before,
and what in and upon embodying together; but what is to be done after, follows
after in the third Part (which I promise next, if the Lord give me leave)
wherein you shall have (I hope so) the totum organicum of a true Church of
Christ. But before that will be ready, I must meet with some rough Opinionists
who will bid me stand; or at least with such who have the hands of Esau, though
the voice of Jacob, and so the principles and practices of the Pope, though the
pretenses and protestations of a Presbyter, that will not let me pass thus,
without a full discharge, and a violent volley upon me made up of wild fire,
and not with the fire from above; but I must force my way in the name and
strength of the Lord, and I shall lay before them, before I leave them, the
rotten foundation they are built upon, which (without mercy) may be their
ruin; and whose cause and quarrel it is they are engaged in, A W^rd to
Presbyterians.
and whose design they carry on against the Saints and servants of the most
High; And the Lord give them grace to consider and separate from it; for else I
dare confidently affirm they will be found fighters against God, Act. 5. I
shall first offer y^u what we mean Church of Christ; (...)
where this discipline and order is set, which we have handled; and shall
endeavor to take off all doubts and distractions which may else arise about
the word, Church,
for that ( Ecclesia est quid dam (...)) various Controversies have shot out
from the word and name, as well as the thing and nature of a true Church.
Formerly between the Pontifitians and Protestants, and of late between the
Presbyterians and Independents, as will easily appear upon perusal of Mr.
Rutherford's Right of Presbyteries, Mr. Bailies Disswasive, Mr. Prinns 12
Questions, and Independency examined, etc. Mr. Ball's late Treatise, Vindiciae
Clavium, Mr. Hudson's Church Catholic visible, cum multis aliis, etc.

I take the name of Church two ways, either strictly, Taken two ways.
or at large, (proxime and proprie, aut remote and late); at large, or more
remotely and improperly, it is to be considered either in respect to, and with
distinction from Infidels and Pagans; 1. At large two ways.
or else collectively in respect of Christians amongst themselves: in the first
respect as opposed to Turks, and Paynims, Churches, and all that profess his
name, of what judgment soever, or conversation soever: whether Papists, or
Protestants, or Lutherans, or Calvinists, or Brownists, or Donatists, or
Arrians, or any. But in the second respect of Christians (so called) or rather
all that profess the name of Christ, though late accepta est) who make the
most and best profession of Christ, and are under the outward ministration of
his Word and Gospel. So are Protestants (in respect of Papists); So
Presbyterians are Churches.
and in this sense the Calvinists are before the Lutherans, and so far the
Presbyterians may pass for current; and Parochial constitutions are in a
remote (and very improper sense) called Churches. Parishes.
But the Church taken in her own native true sense, 2. Taken strictly.
and strictly, consists only of Saints, such as are elected to eternal life,
and all are in Christ their Head. vide Aug. in Psalm. 92. Cyprian, lib. 1. Ep.
8. Hieron. de unit. Eccles. Epiphanius, and thus she is said to be either
Catholic or Universal; or else Congregational or particular, Two ways too.
in the first sense, as Catholic the Church is so called ratione 1. locorum,
2. temporum, 3. hominum,
in respect of time, place, and people, being not confined to any time, 1. The
Church Catholic.
or age, or place, or Nation, or people; but taking in all the elect people of
God, in all the whole Universe, past, present, and to come, Jews and Gentiles,
under the Law, before the Law, and since, yea in heaven and earth, those which
are ascended, Vide Zanch. de Eccles. And Bulling. Decad. 5. Ser. 1. And Vrsin.
Revel. 7.8, 10, 11. and which are yet unborn, Rev. 6.11. invisible and
visible, triumphant and militant, all make up but one Catholic body of Christ
the head, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. But now in the other respect, as a particular and
congregational Church, which comes before the Catholic and Universal Church
(so far as it is visible and militant) it is confined to some certain place and
number of people orderly gathered together by the Word and Spirit of Christ; 2.
Church Congregationall.
having Christ alone for their Head (certo numero, certoque loco Ecclesia
particularis definita est). Bullinger.
And this is the Church which I have spoken of, and in opposition to all
Synagogues, Synedriums, Parishes, Conventicles, Classes or the like, as you
shall hear more of it by and by. But sometimes such Congregationall Churches as
these, Catholic.
are called Cathol^ck too, because of their Faith, and by the figure
Senecdoche, yea and as often as Catholic is taken for Orthodox. So did
Theodosius in his days, (says Sozomen, lib. 7. c. 4) command the Church to be
called Catholic, Perkins Problemes.
that he was a member of. Every such particular and Congregational Church is a
member of the Catholic or Universal (as all the learned say); and every
visible is a part (that is not yet ascended) of the invisible, Is member of the
Catholic or Universal.
whatsoever John writ in Rev. 1.4. to the seven particular Congregational
Churches, he writ to them as to the true members of the Catholic or Church-
Universal, says Mr. Perkins. For the Catholic Church, and the Congregational,
only differ as the totum integrale, and essentiale, that is, the Church
Catholic or Universal arises out of the Congregational and particular
Churches, and is made up of particular Churches, the Integrum, or whole, entire
is made up of the members thereof, that are the essentials of the whole. For
every person and Congregation of Christ (says Mr. Hooker, in his answer to Mr.
Rutherford) are the members of the Church Catholic, and therefore must contain
in them the essential causes of the Catholic or the (totum) whole, which is
made up of them, as parts, for the Logician does allow it, The Congregational
Churches are all the Essential parts of the totu^ integrale.
and men of reason cannot deny it, but that Integrum est totum cui par^es sunt
essentiales, that which is Entirely whole is made up of such parts as give an
Essential being to the whole; without which the whole cannot be so entire. So
the Churches Congregational and particular which make up the Catholic (as
membra integri) must needs have the ( materialia and formalia principia
Ecclesiae Catholicae, or toti integri Vniversi,) matter and form which make up
the Church Catholic, which none can deny (and then I say, I cannot see how
your Presbyterian Churches as Churches (who fa^l in form if not in matter,
Presbyterian Churches as Churches not true members of the Church Catholic.
as is proved in the first part) may be said to be members (as parts
essentiales and membra similaria) to make up this totum integrale, or Church
Catholic.)

Now the Congregationall Churches consisting of true matter and form (separate
and distinct from the Nations abroad and multitudes about) as has been proved;
Congregational Churches as Churches are constitutive and Causall to the whole.
are members causall and parts essential (of the samenesse and nature of the
whole) which give in (every one) there substantial share to make up the
entireness of the whole, or the Church Catholic, (quae habet rationem integri
est membrum, says Ames Medul. Theol. lib. 1. c. 32.) But furthermore it must
needs follow that the Congregationall Churches must cause the Catholic or
Vn^versal, and not the Universal or Catholic cause the Congregational; the
Catholic arises out of the Congregationall,
but not the Congregationall out of the Catholic, because they give a being to
the Catholic; and in order of nature the members must be before the whole,
because I say they contain the causes which make up the whole. For Integrum est
totum cui parts sunt essentiales, non totum essentiale in partibus, and these
causes or causall parts are also (by Til^nus de Eccles.) called parts
Integrantes Ecclesiae Catholicae, Tilenus.
having in them those things which give Integrity or Entireness to the whole,
Sim.
viz matter and form, as every piece of money has the matter and form to make
up the whole sum: and an Army is made up of many Regiments of the same kind
and principles with the whole. This is proved by Mr. Hooker in his Survey of
Discipline against Mr. Hudson a Presbyterian; who holds (with the rest of that
judgment) that Popish tenet, Mr. Hudson.
that the Catholic is before the Congregational: Mr. Hockers answer.

A Diocesan or Provincial.


primum in suo genere, that Pontifitians and Jesuits have bootelessely
wrastled for a long time; but I leave him and them of that judgment to Mr.
Hookers answer; only I affirm by all this, that there can be no such thing as
National Churches, Diocesan or Provincial; And must we say more to satisfy
curiosity? Church is a totum integrum.
then this (the totum is Integrum) the whole Church Catholic is entirely to be
taken distinct by it self, though made up of the Congregational members. As a
man's body that is made up of eye, ear, mouth, hands, feet, and so of all the
members from head to foot; yet the body is not said to be all eye; Sim.
or all ear; or all hands, etc. but a body entire made up of all these. So a
man is made up of soul and body, yet he cannot be said to be all soul, or all
body, but an Integrum made up of both. So is the Church Universal made up of
the particulars, yet cannot be said to be all this particular, or that
particular; all of them before the Law, or under it, or all of Gospellers, or
all Independent (so called) or Anabaptistical, Every member is a particular
Church, is a totum too; but not Integrum.
or the like. No! But one made up of all. And yet I must say that every member
of this whole, (as every member of our body) is a whole in it self, and
limited at the joint, and so cannot usurp another place; every
Congregregational Church is a whole Church, and entire in it self; and one
member is distinguished from another by limits set; so that although we say
(with Ames in's Med. lib. 1. c. 32) particulares Congregationes sunt parts
similares Ecclesiae Catholicae, Ames.
that particular Churches are essential parts to make up the whole Entire, and
have of that in them which will make up the whole, and yet we say, So
particular Churches ^^ue Churches.
such particular Churches are in themselves whole and entire from all others*
having matter and form, and power and privileges, the Keys and Ordinances
within themselves entirely and distinctly from any others. But thus far for the
name and nature of the Church which is here handled, and handed forth.

The next thing that I offer (before I conclude) is the Presbyterians and
Papists in their Discipline and order. But before I go further, A humble
Presbytery we close with;
I give this caution, that when I speak of the Presbytery, I be understood of
it, as it now stands with them of that judgment, and not as it stands in the
Word of God; for in this later sense we allow of Presbytery, and say it is in
the Congregational way, according to the Word of God: This gives no allowance
of that Lordly high Prelatical Presbytery that the Presbyterians now tug for
tooth and nail; But not with a Lordly proud Prelaticall Presbytery.
and which we speak of; and if they should enjoy it, what a goodly bit those
biters would have of it, I leave it to themselves to be their own Judges; Will
they promise but impartially and pensively to contemplate what familiar
acquaintance and friendship their Discipline and the Popes have one with
another; and without anger (for loves sake) let them weigh wisely how close
they set their feet together, and embrace each other (and I wish I might say it
was only through mistake) How near they are akin, or How like they look, the
Daughter resembling the Mother; I shall rough-draw before your eyes, though in
dead colors (at the first) Yet so far as will sufficiently deliueate a near
resemblance between them in as many parts as I can, (...).
at this instantanous present time, place before you, as the head, How it
agre^s with Popery.
body, eyes, mouth, hands and feet, yea and spirit of this Image which must
fall. But let not men be angry with me, or (...) boil out into a foame against
me, Dr. Homes.
for as Dr. Homes says, I do but (...), Gal. 2.14. walk with my right foot in
the way of the Gospel, and the Lord now knows it is love to the Truth as it is
in Jesus, brings me to this business with a spirit, in the which I hope I
shall appear more zealous then Zoilus, and rather an Irenaeus then Cassander,
and when I meet a Critic, I hope to prove a Christian, and part in peace; but
however if I must pledge Christ out of his own cup (for this his own cause) if
I know my heart I am content though they give me gall and vinegar, for I had
rather suffer then sin; and so I set forward -- and out of their own books
shall show you how they agree; for I cannot but bear testimony with precious
Mr. Hooker, Survey of Discipline, part 1. chapter 15.

The Presbyterians need Popery to prop them.


who is of the same mind with me, and manifests it to the world; his words
are, In my retired meditations I could not but observe a secret kind of divine
d^spensation, that the Presbyterian way must need the help of Popery, not only
as a pillar, by which it must be under propped, but as a foundation or
head-corner stone, upon which their whole building must rest and be erected;
thus says this worthy Champion but a little before his death; So that I shall
neither be the first nor the last, that on good grounds do affirm their
Presbytery and Popery to live one in the other, and that the Presbyterian way
is maintained and kept by Popish points and principles;
and keeps up Popery alive in England, which cannot dye as long as that lives,
the which I shall easily demonstrate in their congruity together, whilst they
dispute for the same things, hold the same points, profess the same
principles, (I say not all) and are so a like in practices; but to instance in
particulars.

I. The Pontificians and Papists affirm the Church to be ( aliam principalem,
1. Vide Kerkerm. de Eccles. they agree in their account of Church in the
general.
aliam minus principalem) principal, and less principal; The Church
principally they call the Council of Cardinals, and Bishops, together: but the
less Principal they say is the Body of the People, or Congregation of the rest
together that are gathered under the Roman See, and acknowledge the Pope of for
their head. Thus says Bellarmin. 1. lib. de Ecclesia. The Presbyterians
profess this, (with the Papists) both in their judgments and practices, that
the Synod, or National, Provincial particular Classes, is more then the (
Church, viz.) the body of all the brethren and sisters; For they take upon them
(as the Church-Principal) to set laws and to lay down rules and orders; and to
make Directories, and the like for the Congregations, and Churches to be under;
and they take upon them power of commanding, compelling, condemning, punishing,
or the like, as the Church-Principall, (yet pretend themselves the Church
Representative, and therefore they are called the Presbyterian Church, because
made up of Presbyters and Elders as a Representative Body,) thus they say they
are the Church primarily; and not the whole Body of Believers together, but
they in a Classis, Synod, Council of Ministers, So Hudson, de Eccles.
Catholica, etc.
and such like are the first Subject of the Keys; to open and shut, bind or
loose, command or countermand, vide Rutherford right of Presbytery, lib. 2. p.
9, 10. to 14. which is all one with the Papists, and the same thing: So in this
sense is it, We dissent.
that Mr. Hudson sets the Catholic first, and then the Congregationall; But

2. The Papists affirm that the Catholic Church is and has been always
visible (which is a general Controversy between them and us, as appears in
Willets Synopsis Papismi, 2. Presbyterians and Papists agree in their way of
Church Catholic to be visible.
Q* 2. of the Church) they mean not any particular Congregational Church, but
that the Universal Catholic Church is visible. Rhem. Annot. Mat. 25. Sect. 3.
Bellarmin. lib. 3. cap. 12. ret. 7. Calvisius cap. de fide, etc Symbol. Artic.
18.

The Presbyterians say the same, whither they all agree therein or no, I cannot
say, but Mr. Rutherford for them, Mr. Rutherford*
lib. 2. of his Right of Presbytery, and p. 291. and p. 293. and p. 304. and p.
311. calls the whole Catholic Church, visible, over over and over, and so p.
418. with diverse others, so Mr. Hudson concerning the Essence and Unity of the
Catholic Church, affirms that the Catholic Church is visible, Mr. Hudson
says so far for them.
which he urges by several arguments, and Mr. Hooker answers him, most of them
being the same which the Jesuits and Papists have formerly had full answer to
by our judicious and learned Protestant Divines, They have the same arguments
with the Jesuits.
as to instance in that argument of Mr. Hudson; If particular Churches be
visible, then the Catholic Church is visible, But particular Churches are,
etc. the very same argument in Bellarm. cap. 12. is answered by Dr. Willet, and
in Boner. p. 1691. and Marci Antonii object. 6. answered by Martyr Smith, and
this same argument Duraeus urged, which Dr. Whit. lib. 3. de Eccl. p. 110.
answers and so Sadeel answers Turrian; and all our Protestant men tell them the
ill consequence, yea absurdity of this argument, for that the particular
members may be (as^ectabiles) visible, but not the whole, i e. as the totum
aggregatum; besides for that the Catholic comprehends, We disagree from both.
all the Saints of all ages that ever were, are, and will be; that are in
heaven, and that are not yet born; and can these be all visible here?
Particular Churches are visible, Ergo, the Catholic; for shame my Masters
better arguments says Dr. Willet and Smith. Presbyterians hold what Martyrs
witnessed against with their blood. Glover martyr.
The Controversy in this, is the same between the Presbyterians and us, that
ever it was between the Papists and Protestants. For we with all (that were and
are accounted) Orthodox and sound, do affirm the Church Catholic to be
invisible, not to be beheld but by the eyes of Faith, Heb. 12.18, 23, 24. 1
King. 19.20. So says Mr. Glover martyr instancing in Eliahs days. Bishop
Farrar.
Fox, p. 1554. and 1712. and B. Farrar, which truth they sealed with their
blood, and such another witness was Mr. Philpot who affirmed the Church to be
visible and invisible, Philpot.
Bradfard argues it*
but the Universal Catholic Church to be invisible. Fox, p. 1824. col. 2. Mr.
Bradford reasons it, Fox. p. 1613. col. 2. as Eve was of the same substance
Adam was of, so is the Church of the same substance with Christ. i. e flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone, Ephesians. 5.30. So therefore as Christ was known
in the world, so is the Church (by faith), for Christ was not seen by the
world, nor known by any external pomp, but by the Word of God, and Spirit of
God: so the Church, Ecclesia Catholica non potest a quopiam impio, Dr. Whitaker.
imo, ne a quopiam pio videri, Whitak. de Eccles. q. 2. c. 2. p. 57. Perkins.
How many hundred might I bring of this mind that are eminent of all ages. Mr.
Perkins on Gal. 4.25. proves from that verse, ^ulling^^.
that the Church Catholic is invisible. So Bullinger de Eccles. 5. Cath.
Decad. 5. Sermon 1. cum multis aliis, and so say we against the Presbyterians.

3. The Papists assert a twofold Head or Ruler of the Church, viz. principale
and ministeriale, 3. Papists and Presbyterians agree in their account of the
Head of the Church, vide Keckerman. de capite Ecclesiae.
the principal and supreme Head, they say is Christ; but the ministerial and
subordinate head they account the Pope, (as Christ's vicar, etc.) So the
Presbyterians have taken up the same distinction, which was first of all coined
in the Popes Conclave at Rome, see Rhemist. 1. Eccles. 22. vide Bartlet, chap.
1. p. 21. they do not deny but Christ is the Supreme Head over all; but they
would make us believe, (about which I have had a share in the scuffle) that
there is a secundary or subordinary head (under Christ) over the Church; which
they account the Ministry and Classes. Herein they agree, but we agree with
neither of them, being both fictious and fallacious phantasmes, and the spawn
of men's brain; We disagree from both. Bullinger.
but we affirm with all the eminent Protestants against the Papists and
Jesuits, that there is no such distinction in Scripture (and doctores non sunt
ductores) aut imperatores, says Bull. de Eccles. D. 5. Sermon. 1. p. 354. Sed
Pastores Ecclesiae, 1. Gross errors of theirs of the head.
etc. and we say there is but one Head of the Church, and that Head is Christ.
First, that there is but one Head, appears, Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 1.18. and 2.19.
Isa. 9.6, 7. Hos. 1.11. 1. But one head.
Caput Ecclesiae tantum unum esse, necesse est, it is a rule in Divinity, for
two heads to one body would make the body a monster, and hinder the function
and action, Vide Keckerm.
or due execution of the members, yea though one head were placed under
another; Etiam si unum caput non juxta aliud, Sim.
sed sub alio collocetur. Keckerm. lib. 3. de capite. Eccles. yea the body
would be so much the more prodigious and monstrous to have two heads, and one
placed under another, now that Church is a monster that has more then one
Head, which is elegantly expressed, Ephesians. 4.16. Paul Baines on Coloss. 2.19.
Thus holy Paul Baines says on Col. 2.19. who did ever hear of any secondary
or ministerial head on a natural body without deformity? now it is a natural
body to which Christ compares his Church and himself as Head. Zanchy.
So Zanchy on Hos. 1.11. says God's Israel, i. e. his Church, has but one
Head, yea in Council. Aquisgranens. lib. 2. c. 9. Ecclesiam cum capite suo
Christo unam constet esse personam, the Church and Christ the Head thereof make
but one Person,
so do not the Pope and Church, the Prelate and Church, the Presbyter and
Church. Ergo; thus we affirm on Ephesians. 4.5, 6. and but one head of the Church.
And then 2. that Christ alone is that Head (without any other) Ephesians 5.23. Col.
2.10.19. Jam. 4.12. Isa. 22.21, 22, 23. Zach. 6* 12, 13. and the Scriptures
deny all Headship to any others, 2. In that Christ alone is that Head.
1 Pet. 5.3. Psalm. 45.11. Mark. 10.42. Luke 22.25. and the Apostles disclaimed
it (as is proved in the 1. lib.) 2 Cor. 1. ult. and the Scripture never speaks
of heads in the plural number, A second gross errors of theirs of the Head.
but only of one, that is Christ, who has absolute command and authority over
the vide Zanch. de Eccles. cap. For to be an head argues a pre-eminence, says
John Patriarch of Antioch in appen. council. but no man has any pre-eminence
over the Church, nor Servant over his Mistress; therefore none but Christ can
be head as having the pre-eminence, Sim.
and as the head is higher then the body, Col. 1.16. And besides none is
appointed for it but Christ, Matthew. 28.18. Joh. 5.22. Heb. 2.7, 8. nor can any
other do the duty of an Head but Christ, who alone qualified for it, as having
the Spirit above measure, Joh. 3.34. and as being the fullness of the God head
bodily, Col. 2.9. Joh. 1.16. The Head of the Church ought to be High Priest,
King, and so Prophet, and anointed of God, and appointed by God, Psalm. 45.6, 7.
Heb. 1.8, 9. Now none but Christ is so; And the Head is that which gives virtue
and power to all the members; which none but Christ can do, Perkins.
so that Mr. Perkins says in his Exposition of the Creed, speaking of the
Church, that there is no such thing as a Ministerial Head, or a Deputy under
Christ to Lord over the Church, but that it is a Satanical forgerie knocked out
on the Devils Anvil; He can have no Vicar.
for the Headship of Christ is of that nature and quality that it can admit of
no Deputy or Viceroy; seeing he must give commanding and quickening power. And
besides oportet caput nosse sua membra, and ab iis agnosci, a very novice and
Student in Divinity, knows that the head must know the members, and the
members the head; now none but Christ can tell all the true members of the
Body, as Perkins says on Jude, v. 1. such as is always present with them, as
the Head is with the members, which none else can be; for Christ as Mediator,
God and man, the Fullness of all power, spirit, grace, and goodness, is
present and gives influence to his whole body, Presbyterians third error of
theirs of the Head.
whether above or below, and lives with all his body in all places, which he
could not do were he not both God and man; though Mr. Hudson with some of the
Presbyterians run a ground grievously when they rashly assert Christ head as
man, page 23. of his Book, which is abominable, Papisticall, and an
unsufferable error, and against this see Whitak. de Pont. Romans 1.9. c. 3. arg.
3. and Beza in his Confessions, chapter 5. Antic 5. So Bullinger, de Unit. Eccles.
Dec. 5. Sermon. 2. Christo caput est non quia homo, sed quia deus and homo, where
they prove this headship to be too much for any man, and therefore Christ alone
to be duly and truly qualified for it, as God and man, Christ cannot be Head
but as God and Man.
who is with all his members every where, alias enim caput non esset, otherwise
he could not be head of them. And besides the head is ex is Christ because of
him every member has life, influence, dependence, and they are all by the
several joints ( viz. the Ordinances and laws of Christ) fitly set and
compacted together, Zanch. de cap. Eccles.
Ephesians. 4.16. and 2.21. and from him as the sole Head fitly joined together, 1 John 1.3, 7. Who makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self in
love; and none but Christ can do thus. And furthermore the Head of the Church,
debet esse perpetuum, Vide Kerkerm.
ought to be for ever, both in this life and in the life to come; now none but
Christ is so, Dan. 4.34, 35. Isa. 9.6, 7. Thus and in many other respects I
might show how Christ alone is head of his Church; as their light, life,
wisdom, safety,
etc. but this point has been abundantly handled before, lib. 1. chapter 13.
only I add this further, that all famous eminent men in all ages, This Head
witnessed by the blood of Martyrs.
whether Fathers (so called) or others are of our side; And the eminent Martyrs
dyed with this truth in their mouths, see honest John Husse, A^tic. 20. and Mr.
Hooper, in his Examination. 3 Fox, p. 1507. and Mr. Rogers, Mr. Rogers. Mr.
Hooper.
that eminent Proto-Martyr, says Christ is only Head, p. 1486. who does all
in us all, which is the true property of the Head, and which is a thing none
else can do, no not all the Bishops, etc. so say we not all the Classes or
Presbyters alive, therefore down with this Popery. 4. Presbyteri* and Papists
agree in the matter of a Church.
And 4. they agree in what they make the matter of Christ's Church, Materia est
Suprema, and Subjecta; Suprema, that is the Head, therein we have shown the
agreement, but subjecta materia is the matter we mean here, and are the members
of the Church; And in this the Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one
another. The Papists say all belong to the Church that make a profession of
Christ, Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 7. Rhemist. annot. in Joh. 15 Sect. 1.
this is a general controversy between Papists and Protestants, and so it is
between Presbyterians and us, Rutherford, Bailey, Answered by Cotton, Hooker.
as appears by Mr. Rutherford, and Mr. Bailey, etc. see chapter 5. lib. 1. Mr.
Rutherford and Bailey answered by Mr. Cotton, in his Holiness of
Church Members, and Mr. Rutherford answered by Mr. Hooker in his Survey, lib.
1. c. 2. whilst Mr. Rutherford says, the reprobates and wicked are not simply
forbidden, but they may be members of the Church, lib. 1. p. 116. and lib. 2.
p. 25. he says that bare profession makes him a member of the Church, so that
the Papists and they agree, and the very same arguments which the Papists bring
as you may see in Synopsis Papismi, 1. Q. and Bellarm. c. 7. lib. 3. etc. the
same the Presbyterians bring of the first general controversy, as you may see
in Mr. Rutherford, lib. 2. page 240.251. and Mr. Bayley above mentioned, which
I have answered in chapter 5. lib. 1. and so Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Cotton has at
large, and they have saved me the more labor. We disagree from them both
But we disagree from them in that we affirm true members of the Church are
only such as are visible Saints, i. e. that appear to us so to be, which is
sufficiently proved in this Treatise, both in the 1 and 2 book. Illa columba,
unica, pudica, casta, sponsa, non intelligitur nisi bonis, justis, sanctis,
says Augustine, The Dove, etc. i. e. the Spouse, the Church is understood of
those that are faithful righteous, and holy, therefore it is not true to say
wicked ones, This fit matter witnessed too by the blood of the Martyrs.
etc. so they have but a profession are true members of the Church. This is
witnessed by the blood of martyrs too; for one of the Articles against John
Husse, when he was condemned in the Council of Constance was this assertion of
his, that the Church are the number of the faithful, and none else are true
members, Fox 610. Artic. 8. So Richard Feurus, a French Martyr, affirmed that
the Congregation of Christ consisted in Saints called, John Husse* R. Feurus.
Ridley. Latimer.
and such as seem to be elected ones, Fox, p. 912. col. 1. For this truth,
eminent Ridly and Latimer, laid their lives at stake, (as well as for other
things) Fox, 1562. col. whilst they affirmed the Church of Christ to be made
up of living stones, such as are so inward and in heart, and not that it is
enough to be so in name and profession, Repons. ad Artic. Antonii, 7. Wherefore
knock down this Popish tenet too, which is guilty of the precious blood of
blessed Martyrs. But

5. Papists and Presbyterians are too much akin too against the true form of
the Church of Christ; 5. They agree in abusing us for separating from
Antichrist.
yea both parts of the Form, viz. segregation and aggregation, as is chapter 6.
lib. 1. or calling out and then in, out of Babylon into Zion.

I. Out of Babylon, Expos.
Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.16, 18. (...); separate, (as such who are select) and
depart out of the midst of them, Act. 19.8, 9. For this the Papists account
Protestants to be Heretics and Schismatics, Bellarm: de Eccles. cap. 9. and
10. lib. 4. saying, they are fallen away from the Church, So do the
Presbyterians succeed them in the same language and invective against us;
saying that we are Schismatics, Heretics, Prins 12. question. 7. quest. and
11. quest.
Separatists, and the like, and that we have fallen from the Church, meaning a
declining from their Antichristian discipline and orders; and saying, that we
separate from the true Church of England, etc. now this is ex falso supposito,
false, for they cannot prove,
(nor any alive) a National Church of Gospel institution; and till that be done
we dare boldly recriminate, and can easily demonstrate them to be but in
Babylon; but whereas they object our gathering Churches, is not out of
Infidels, but of men already converted, and so it is without warrant or example
of the Word, and is a gathering Churches out of Churches: Grant it were so,
Vide Mr. Burtons vindication, page 27.
did not John Baptist, Christ himself, yea and after him his Apostles? did not
all of them go about and gather Christian Churches out of the Jewish Church?
particular Churches out of National;
and may we not call out of Babylon? and gather out from Antichristian Churches
then? Yes, doubtless, without the guilt of Schism, Heresy, or the like;
unless it be from the sentence of such as Tertullus, who was the Jews Advocate
against Paul, Act. 25.5. and charged him for a pestilent fellow, a mover of
sedition, etc. yea a heretic, verse. 14. etc. and so do the Presbyterians (we
thank them) deal with us, and so do their advocates and Atturneys.
But we shall answer them as the P^otestants did the Papists, vide Zanchy in
Hosea, 2.8, 9. We disagree from both with the Protestants. Zanchy.
Nos rediimus ad priorem maritum, desertis fornicatoribus, i. e. idolis, and
deserta etiam lena, i. e. Ecclesia eorum, etc. This is a commendable, and a
commanded separation, to go out of false ways and worship, and to return to
our first husband again, to do the duty of a good wife, to leave that lustful
Bawd and beast, with all her Idol-worship and humane invention, and to disclaim
those Popish Babylonian garments, and golden wedges, which false worshippers
serve for (panis and vinum, lana and linum,) the tithes, and fatlings of the
flocks: and now to return and cleave close to our first husband,
viz. Christ, as the Churches found him to be to them in primitive times (at
first) that so we may find him in love and presence with us; Oh this is a
sweet and happy separation! so shall blessings be upon their heads, Deuteronomy.
33.16. else judgments, Hosea, 7.8. But for the second part,

Zanch. 1. lib. 1. ch 40. Keckerm. de Eccles.
2. In, into Zion, a visible aggregation or gathering together into one Body,
which makes up the Form, as chapter 7. lib. 1. Forma Ecclesiae est unio, this
oneness is twofold, 1. of the members with the head, Sim.

and 2. one with another; As the Commonwealth is formed from the peace and
tranquillity which the Subjects have by union with the Governnours, and then by
their union one with another. The union of the members with (the Head) Christ
is 1 John 1.3.7. a communion with Christ, Saints oneness with Christ their
head threefold.
whereby every member receives influence and virtue from Christ (the head) Heb.
2.17. This union is threefold, either of his substance, or office, or influence.

1. The Saints (his members) are in union with Christ their Head in substance,
in himself: 1. Union with the substance.
Ex convenientia essentiae, and identitate carnis Christi cum nostra, etc.
whence all communion flows between Christ and them; therefore it is necessary
this Head be both God and man, and it behoved him to be like unto us, Heb. 2.
for all our comforts come from him as God, through him as man. Against that
wicked Arianisme of John Bidle.


2. Furthermore, the members ( Saints) have union with Christ their Head in his
offices of King, 2. Union with him in his offices.
Priest and Prophet, ( quadam (...)) whence they are all called Kings, and
called Priests, and called Prophets, by participation of these threefold gifts
of Christ, All Saints are 1. Priests.
or of Christ in these threefold offices* and also by a certain semblance and
analogy, for they as Priests offer themselves to God, Romans 12.1. as living
sacrifices, mortifying and slaying the flesh, binding it to the Altar, and
offering the calves of their lips, and the like, 1 Pet. 2.9. all this by virtue
from Christ; 2. Prophets.
and so they are Prophets, to teach, instruct, comfort, confess Christ before
the world, and the like; being enabled by union with the Head Christ, Vrsin.
thus says Vrsin in's Catech. Q. 32. and 3. As Kings, they rule over their
lusts, 3. Kings.
and reign over their own flesh, and by faith overcome the world, Joh. 16.33. 1 John 5.4 and all this by virtue of Union with Christ their Head, Mat. 19.18. 1
Cor. 6.2. But then,

3. The members have union with Christ their Head in his virtues and
excellencies, 3 Union with him in his excellencies.
and spiritual properties of righteousness and holiness, light and love, and
whatsoever is excellent in life or grace, Joh. 15.5.7. And in all these are the
Saints (the members) in Union with Christ (their Head); which Union cannot be in
false Churches, that have other lords to reign over them, Which cannot be in
false Churches.
or between the members of such heads of brass or iron, as the Papists and
Presbyterians strike out for together; but they both fall short of, and fall
out with us for, this form.

Oneness one with another from Christ the Head.
2. Union of members one with another, (which depends upon the union of the
members with the Head Christ) as before. Now this Union consists not then in
the Form, or outward ceremonies or rites, but in the Spirit ( quo cum capite
and inter se membra omnia uniuntur) now although they are not all one in some
forms, yet being all one in spirit, every member by one and the same spirit, 1
Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, etc. distributes and dispences according to his diverse gifts
(suavissima Symmetria) in a most sweet and orderly symmetry and decorum, to
serve the head, to serve one another, and to serve the whole. Now although we
grant that the Presbyterians have a form (yet not this form of the Church) and
so have the Papists, Bellarm. cap. 9. a form like this, but ( simile non est
idem) not the same. Sim.
For as a dead carcass that wears the garment of a living man is not a living
man, though he look never so like him: so the false Church though they are in
union and love, and linck'd together, and ever so alike the form of a true
Church of Christ; yet they are not the true Churches. It is one mark which the
Papist makes of his Romish Harlot, Difference betwixt form of false and true
Churches.
for the true Spouse, viz. their unity; vide Synopsis Papismi 2. Controv. Q. 3.
Now know that their form consists in uniformity, but ours in unanimity; so the
Presbyterians in their unity of the form, but we say it is to be in the unity
of the Spirit. Martyrs against form of Presbyter. and Papists.
For as Mr. Bradford said ( Fox p. 1622. col. 1.) the Idolatrous Israelites
were one in their sinful way, and might have pretended to uniformity, were
that the argument of a true Church or worship. (See Latimer epist. ad Dr.
Bainton. Our form is in the unity of the Spirit.
) So Roger Holland: Fox 20^0. col. 2. What is the unity of the Antichristian
Church but idolatry? Bradford.
suspicion? tradition? commandments of men? and to persecute the poor people of
God, that cannot in conscience be one with them? Holland.
And to this we subscribe, and shall say with Helvetia Harm. sect. 10. p. 306
chap. 17. the Church is a company of faithful, Helvetia.
gathered out of the world, separated from false worships, and in communion
together, Bohemia.
by one spirit. And Bohemia, chapter 8. Harm. 316. that whosoever has not the
Spirit of faith and true love, is but a dead member, Auspurg.
and with Auspurg. Harm. sect. 10. p. 320. that says true unity is not to
agree on traditions or such doctrines; but all to agree in the doctrine of the
Gospel and truths of Christ. Add Helvetia chap. 27. p. 499. that the Church is
one, and the members all one, and agree in one, though there be diversity of
rites, and thereupon they may differ,
yet they are one in faith, and in the Spirit. O that all our Churches would
mind this more, and the Antichristian form (of fleshly and outward rites and
forms) less.

6. Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one another in the Foundation which
they lay for the Lords house, 6. In the foundation of the Church.
being both sandy; for see the Papists they will have Peter the Foundation of
the Church, and so the Pope as his Successor: but since this has been (to use
Mr. Hookers own words) hissed out of doors, and cast to the dunghill, arises
another Doctrine, which is it that the Presbyterians hold, viz. that the
profession (as Mr. Hudson has it) of Christ is the foundation, or confession
of faith, as many of them have disputed it with me, and vide Trap in Mat.
16.18. But we differing from both, deny the Doctrines of both, Trap. Mat. 16.
we disagree from both.
and do with the Apostle disclaim all other foundations (whither persons or
confessions) but Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. which is a rock and will hold;
chap. 4. lib. 1. and so we answer with the Protestants against the Papists in
Synopsis Papismi 2. controv. Q. 1. Chapter 14* lib. 1.


7. Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one another, in laying their
foundation by persecution, 7. Presb. and Papists agree in laying and carrying
on their Church-forms by persecuting such as differ.
both with carrying on their discipline, and branding such as differ from them
for Heretics, Schismatics, factious and seditious spirits, persons not fit to
live, and of late, some three years since, would needs have a Petition (the
Presbyterians were so bitter) against all that would not be Presbyterians, i. e.
really or dissemblingly so) that they might have no indulgence (which is their
own language); so that the Presbyterian would hear of no other thing, but
tyranny and cruelty to the Independent, or indifferent brother (non sequens
ecclesiam sed persequens) Now we declare against them both, We declare against
both.
whilst we affirm the Word and Spirit the weapons of our warfare (in chap. 2.
of this Book) and say (merely for judgment) no man must be so persecuted, Tit.
3.10. 2 Timothy 2.25.26. but with all gentleness and meekness instruct ^pposers,
if God peradventure will give them repentance to acknowledge the truth.
Wherefore the Lord will power his vial on that bloody Antichristian spirit of
persecution and Popery, yet among us!

8. They agree in the subject of the Keys.
8. The Presbyterians and Papists agree about the subject of the keys, i. e.
power of opening and shutting, Mat. 16.18, 20. which power the Papists say is
the Prelates, Rhemist. 1 Cor. 5. sect. 2. Bellarm. lib. 1. de clericis, cap. 7.
and as the Jesuits apply it to their Clergy, whence they have their name
Clergy, or Key-bearers. So the Presbyterians do to their Classes; see but Mr.
Rutherfords ninth Argument for a Presbyte^iall Church, Rutherford.
taken out of Mat. 16. That is the Church (says he) to whom the keys are
given, but the keys were given only to a classical Church there. And
furthermore, lib. 2. p. 9. he says, the keys were given to Peter, as
representing the Church-guides, viz. officers Ministers, as the first subject
of the keys, which is the same in nature with the Jesuits and Papists, and
not a pin to choose between them. Of this judgment, Vindiciae clavium proves
the Presbyterians too. So the Jus divinum regim. eccles. p. 108, 109. We differ
from both.
But we differing from both do affirm the Church of Christ, the congregation of
believers to be the first subject of the keys, Mr. Parker. The Parisian
School. Cotton. Aug.
which Mr. Parker, and the Parisian School grants, which Cotton in his keys,
p. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. sufficiently proves: so Philips answer to Lamb, p. 150.
and Augustine on Mat. 16. says Peter received the keys not in his own name,
but in the Churches, and Christ gave the Churches the keys as the first
subject,
so the Church in Peter received the keys, for all the Church is built on a
rock, Tract. in Johan. 124. Fulke. Brute.
ejusdem est instituere and destituere. So says Fulk on 1 Cor. 5. sect. 3.
against the Rhemists. So says Walter Brute who lived in Richard the second's
days out of Joh. 20.2^. argues thus (in Fox, p. 492.) To whom the Holy Ghost
is given, to them is given the keys, or power of binding and losing; but to
the whole Church of believers is the Holy Ghost given. So says the Bohemians
Confess. Harm Sect. 10. p. 335. c. 14. which power is committed to the Church
of Christ. Bohemians.
Wherefore throw down this Popery (for shame sirs) which makes Prelates or
Classes the first subject of the keys.

9. The Presbyterians agree with the Papists about Assemblies and Synods or the
like; several ways, 9. They agree* in the Councels,
in all which we dissent from them both.

1. Concerning the necessity of them; 1 As necessary. Vide Mr. Ruthe^ford. Mr.
Pri^ns, Mr. Bailie's Disswasion. 12. Q. and Independ^nts examined. We disagree.
Whittak.
the Papists say there is a necessity of them, and they cannot be without
councels. Bellarm. de council. lib. 1. cap* 11. the Presbyterians also plead for
a necessity of Synods, and assemblies, out of Act. 15. Whilst we assert no
necessity, but an usefulness of them; orderly called together, having a
consultative power, and being a wholesome means to prevent evils, and provide
good for the Church, as the Protes^ants answered the Papists; so Whittaker de
Council. p. 23. says they are not necessary.

2. Concerning the calling; 2. They agree in their call. We dissent from them
and others in the formale.
the Papists will have them called by the Pope, Bellarm. lib. 1. de council. cap
12. Presbyterians by the Civil powers, Princes and Magistrates; but we dissent
from both of them (and others too) when we assert it to be properly the
Churches power to call and convent Synods or Assemblies, as Dell says in's Way
of peace, p. 77. The world cannot call Councels of the Church, no more then the
Church can call the Councels of the world being dist^n^t from each; but all the
Churches, Synods, or Assemblies must have their power and authority from the
Church; who has power to call out, and to call in, at their occasion: but of
this in the next Book which is to come of the totum organicum.

3. Concerning the persons, 3. They both agree in the persons tha^ gives the
materiale.
the Council or Synod must consist of; the Papists say, the Prelates only must
have the deciding and determinating voice; although they grant others, Priests
and learned ones may discuss and consult. So Eckius loc. de council. Bellarm.
de council. lib. 1. cap. 14.

The Presbyterians also say the Clergy have the right of deciding and
determining; and that the Synod consists of such persons as are sent for and
appointed or nominated by the supreme Magistrate, Vide Rutherford and Mr.
Hookers answer (...) Synod in's Survey p. 4. chapter 3.

We dissent.


but we dissent from both in this, for that we affirm with Parker de polit.
eccles lib. 3. c 8. the persons that are fitted for the work are to be
appointed, nominated, and empowered by the Church without the Popish
distinction of Laity and Clergy, (for that in Act. 15. it consisted of
brethren as well as elders, (so Mr. Dell in's Way of peace, p. 82, 84. declares
at large) and that they be chosen out of the Churches,
and not out of the world or parishes; and that without respect of persons,
Parker. Mr. Dell.
every brother (as well Laymen (so called) as Clergy) must have a like
liberty to confer, consult, and to conclude, (aequali auxilio and consilio)
In this we agree with the Protestants against the Papists ( Synop. Papism. 3.
contr. Q. 3.) who say our opinion is grounded upon truth and Scripture, in that
we say not only Bishops but Pastors, not only them but Laymen ought to have
concluding voices in Council; and that rather the discussing pertains to the
learned Divines, and the concluding to the whole, Tit. 3.13. So Zenas the
Lawyer was in Fellow-commission with Apollos the Preacher. Act. 15.22. And
Augustine says, Austin.
that seeing the judicial power of the keys is committed to the whole Church,
therefore all sorts ought to be entertained in Councels. Nilus.
Thus Nilus, lib. 2. de primat. says, for the Greek Churches, (speaking of
their Acts and Councels) (...): Gr. Church. Former assemblies Antichristian and
lawful.
they made a common inquiry for the consent of all sorts in matters common and
belonging to all. But I purpose to speak fully to this in the next Book,
wherein we shall (I doubt not but) demonstrate easily to all men; that our
Assemblies, and Synods hitherto have done more hurt then good; and have usurped
their authority, which have been called by Pope, or Civil powers, and acted
for them, and have consisted altogether of Clergy, setting rules, laws, and
directions for the Church, Nazianzen.
etc. We may affirm with honest, Nazianzen that he never saw good end of such
Councels; and that he resolved never to came at them more.

4. They agree in the authority of them. For the Papists say, 4. Agree in the
authority of Synods.
that Councels may determine by their own absolute authority; and have a
decretall power, Bell. lib. 2. de council. cap. 12. which all men are bound up
unto. And the Presbyterians say, that Synods have a protestatem juridicam to
decree, determine, give their sense or sentence, which is binding. And Mr.
Rutherford p. 210, 212. argues for it hotly, that the Assemblies decrees lay a
tie and bond upon the Churches, p. 212. and his arguments from that Assembly in
Act. 15. are the same which that Jesuit Bel^armine brings, de council. 118. and
are answered by the Protestant Divines long since; and of late by Mr. Hooker
in's Survey, We dissent from both.
part. 4. chapter 1. and by Mr. Cotton, Mr. Bartlet chapter 2. with many others. And
eminent Whittaker de council. p. 19. tells us plainly that they have no power of
framing rules, orders, or articles to bind the conscience: whilst we say the
Apostles themselves did not determine any thing without the Word of God; for
James alleged Scripture; and all that any Synods can do is by the Word of God
to set down and dogmatize their judgments; Vide Hooker on Synods.
but they have no power at all to impose Canons or conclusions upon the
Churches. For as honest old Latimer answered Bishop White (Fox p. 1762.) they
were not to judge as they thought in themselves, but secundum legem dei, as it
was in the Word, Latimer.
And this the Protestants bear witness against the Jesuits and Papists,
Synops. papis. 3. Contr. Q. 7. as we do against the Presbyterians. Dr. Willet.


But besides all this wherein they agree; I might insist on more particulars
(but that I should be too large) under this 9th head; wherein they are too nigh
one another; 5. They agree.
as in that they have (they say) power infligendi censuras, We dissent.
of condemning, punishing, censuring, or the like, which we deny even from the
Presbyterians own grant, viz. that the power of a Synod is accumulative, but
not privative, now it would be privative to take this power from the Church; as
to excommunicate, censure, or the like. Sed jud^cium conciliorum est suasionis
non coactionis.
Besides they are too like one another, in urging all to bel^eve, and by a
blind obedience to submit to the Decrees of Synods, They agree.
(as if they were (...) the infallible breathings of the spirit) as most
certain and sound: to which Whittaker answered, de council. p 262, 263. and
says the very ultimate determination and judgment of a Synod may be false p.
231. and that those dec^ees or determinations of theirs may and must be
questioned p. 283. again; We dissent.
and examined by the Word as the (...) did Act 17.11. Search the Scriptures
whether those things were so or no, Whittaker.
that the Apostles said: and we say with that p^oto-martyr of Mary's days, Mr
Rogers, in Fox p. 1487. who affirmed that a poor simple Layman, (call him
Cobbler,
Tinker, or what you will) that brings the Word of God with him, Rogers
Proto-martyr. Luth^r.
is more to be credited, and obeyed then the whole Council gathered together
and determining on their own beads* whose Canons Luther calls but hay and
stu^ble, which is to be burnt up. ^ut to the last consideration (as concerning
discipline) wherein they agree and are one, (to mention no more now.)

10. They agree in giving too much power to officers and Ministers.
10. About officers, Ministers or the like; as the Papists give the right and
power of judgment to the Pope and Prelates, Bellarm. cap. 19. de council. so
the Presbyterians to the Officers and Ministers, Rutherford, p. 201. but
although the Cle^gie men have usurped it to themselves solely and alone for
many years together; We dissent.
and assumed the right and power of judging, whether judging of Doctrines,
persons, opinions, or the like* excluding ordinary Christians, so that they
could confidently declare against others, and pronounce others Heretics,
Sectaries, or the like; but none them, though they were so; yet we say, that
this power is given to the Church, to take heed of false Prophets, so Mat.
10.7. 1 Cor. 14. to try doctrines and persons, Rev. 2.2. and to judge as Mr.
Dell in's Way of peace has it clearly, Mr. Dell.
p. 85, 86. and that the Church has power to judge of her Ministers, not the
Ministers of the Church. Where^ore with unfeigned ejaculations for the fall of
this Babylon, and the overthrow of these Popish tenets, I leave them to agr^e
together (if they will not be wise and face about to Zion,
and join together against the beast and the whore, and trample under these
Babylonish garments (whereby such Citizens are eminently and evidently known)
but I must tell them, that partaking of her sins, they will partake of her
plagues; without a coming out from her, i. e. her false ways, worship, and
discipline, Rev. 18.
whilst the Lord will give his Zion-citizens victory over the beast, and over
his image, and over his mark* and over the number of his name; Rev. 15.2, 3.
holding the harps of God in their hands, singing the song of Moses and the
Lamb. but thus much for their alikenesse in discipline. They agree also in
Doctrine^.
They agree also in doctrine in many points, which I cannot orderly or properly
in this place present to view; only in some few for our purpose, with relation
to ordinances and duties, that I shall offer to any serious eye. As,

1. Concerning the Scriptures, the Papists to keep off people from read^ng
them, 1. About the Scriptures.
find fault continually with the vulgar translation: Rhem. praefat. sect. 6.
and they say the Church by her authority makes them authentic, so Echius
enchirid. loc. de authorit. eccles. Pigghius lib. 1. de Hierarch. Stapleton,
lib. 9. doc. princip. cap. 1. So Canus, Bellarmine, etc. and they affirm the
Scriptures to be most hard, difficult and obscure, Bell. de verbo dei lib. 3.
c. 1. So says Petrus a Soto, and Lindanus; and further they affirm the
Scriptures in their true sense are, as they are expounded by Fathers, Prelates,
Councels, and so to be believed; and that we must have recourse to them for
answer and satisfaction, Rhem. praef. sect. 18. Bell. l. 3. de. scrip. cap. 3.
and they say Scriptures are not absolutely necessary. So Petrus a Soto, and
Tilmam. de verbo dei. error. 17. Bell. de verbo dei lib. 4. cap. 4. arg. 1. but
besides them other things (as traditions) are necessary. Bell. cap. 3, 4. So
Andradius ex Tilmam. de verb. error. The manifold Popish sooty errors raised
again by Prelates and Presbyterians.
2. Now under this Doctrine of theirs are several gross errors, which our
Protestant Divines of old, yea in all ages some or other have impugned and
engaged against most of these errors, if not all, implicitly and obscurely, if
not plainly and clearly; are come up again under another cloak. And not only
the Prelates of late, but some of the Presbyterians (even now) are too rigid
and resolute to keep off poor people from the Scriptures; fearing thereby that
they would soon excel their teachers, and take their Pulpits from them. For
how fearful a thing it is to them of that judgment, to see such in Pulpits as
have not had hands laid upon them, is obvious to every eye, O how they scree^h
out for fear! See this in that frothy namelesse Pamphlet of a lying Libeller
(and scandalous Philo-compos, that is much cried up by that party for his
voluble tongue) It is entitled, a Taste of the Doctrine of the newly erected
exercise at Tho. Apostles, in page 2. he says, your setting up men of private
places and particular callings, whose education and want of intention to the
work of the Ministry, must needs bespeak want of qualification, whilst they
unacquainted with the original of the Scriptures (which are emphaticall) must
needs see dark and obscure places, but by the light of our translation, which
is but a dim and thick medium, etc. Their frequent manner is to fright people
from the Scriptures by telling them they want the original, and so stave them
with this Popish trick. Others of them have affirmed that their Classes,
Synods, or such like should deliver the authentic sense of the Scriptures, and
add their authority thereto, in which others should rest satisfied; and they
would have all to believe the Scriptures according to the interpretation of
those whom they account orthodox, Fathers, Commentators, or the like (and not
others) and look out for no further. About which I have been in the lists with
many, and that it is not simply necessary to read them, hear them, know them,
or the like, so they do but hear and believe what the Ministers tell them, what
need they more? and that other things besides what are in the Scriptures are
necessary; and pretending the difficulty and danger of meddling with hard places
of Scriptures, they telling them they are obscure and not to be ventured on, as
the Revelation and the like, keep off many poor souls, who stand (in ignorance)
at a distance from them, and as Exodus 20.18. the people removed from the mount,
We dissent from them both.
and stood afar off, being afraid: so do they that are so terrified by these
thundrings that they vulgar translation of Scriptures is necessary, and
sufficient (in matters of faith) for knowledge, Lambert.
which Lambert argues for ( Fox. p. 1116. col. 1.) and Chrysostom, Chrys^me.
Hierome. Meth^dius. Nelphilas Theodoret.
for when he calls all people to study the Scriptures in their own language,
Homil. 9. epist. ad Coloss. and therefore he himself translated the Bible into
the Armenian tongue. Hierome into the Dalmatick. Methodius into the Sclavonian,
Nelphilas into the Gothic: yea says Theodoret Sermon. 5. de Graecor. affect.
for this end were Conversi erant libri Hebraici in omnes linguas, were the
Hebrew turned into all languages, that every one might search the Scriptures,
Joh. 5.^9. though they understand not the original. We also say, we believe
not Scriptures authentic, because men, Councels, Synods tell us so, but
because Spirit tells us so; and it is the Spirit must add his authority to the
Scriptures, and tell us they be true, and interpret them to us, and lead us
into the genuine sense and sound truths of them, without which all the
Exposition of Fathers or writers in the world should not satisfy us; And
to sit down content with the Exposition of others (counted ever so orthodox)
without seeking further and fuller. For the way of the righteous shines more
and more to the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. Et veniente perfecto evacuatur
imperfectum, 1 Cor. 13.10. Now every man is bound to believe the Scriptures (as
Fulk says 2 Gal. 6 and Whit. Quest. 3. cap. 1. de Scripturis) without the
approbation of the Church, Mr. Tulk. Whittaker.
Synod, or Council to declare them; neither do we believe them because men say
it is so, but because the Spirit says it is so, who is the judge and witness;
1 John 5.7. to testify of Christ, Joh. 15.16. to reveal the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12. Esaias 1.7. to teach the faithful, Joh. 19.26. I remember
Dr. Whit. has an argument for this, The Spirit of God is the only Orthodox
Expositor.
thus, That only has the power to give the sense of the Scriptures which does
beget in us faith; but the Spirit only by the Scriptures is able to beget in us
faith, Romans 10.17. Ergo, the Spirit of God is to be our interpreter of the
Scriptures: wherefore if Pope, Prelates, Synods, Classes, Father, Presbyter, or
any other give us the sense of Scripture, and that thence our faith arises of
the Scripture understood; Arguments.
why then our faith must needs be built upon that Popes, Prelates, Synods,
Classes, Fathers, or Presbyters sense. And another argument the Protestants
fetch against the Papists, which serves us, is, that the Scriptures cannot be
interpreted but by the same Spirit wherewith they were written, 1 Cor. 2.11.
For who knows the mind of God save the Spirit of God? And 1 John 2.27. You
have the anointing, and you need not that any man teach you, etc. because as
Augustine says, Magister est omnium qui habitat in nobis omnibus, etc. We are
all fellow-scholars (says he) we are not your teacher, Austi^.
but he is teacher and master of us all who dwells in us all, etc.

We further affirm with the former Protestants, that the faith; and that it is
not enough to hear the Minister preach, for the Bereans searched the
Scriptures, Act. 17.11. Joh. 5.39. 2 Timothy 3.15.17. Whereas some say, it is
enough to have what the Minister or Presbyter gives; it puts me in mind of Mr.
Bradford's answer to one Willerton (Fox 1612.) who told him that people ought
to learn at the Priests hands, Bradford

Aye! (says he) why then (says he) you will learn the people to prefer a
Barabbas before Christ, and to crucify Christ, for so the people learned it of
the Priests.

esse and been esse of a soul, are expressed in the Scriptures, or included in
them, and concluded out of them; whether concerning faith or life; and that
nothing absolutely necessary is to be found besides the Scriptures, Joh. 20.31.
2. Tim. 3 16. whether for teaching, improving, correcting, or instructing. So
that we overthrow the necessity of all traditions, rites, forms, or the like
here, whether praeter or contra Scriptura. For as Augustine has it, qui
praetergreditur fidei regulam, Austin Witnessed by the blood of Martyrs. Dr.
Tailor. Bradford. Hawks.
(i. e. Scripturam) non incedit in via, sed recedit a via, He that goes beside
the Scriptures, goes not in but from the way: this truth has been attested and
sealed to by the blood of many Martyrs, Dr. Tailor, Fox. p. 1522. col. 2. Holy
Bradford, 1626. col. 1. and that valiant soldier of Christ, and stout Champion
Mr. Hawks Martyr, p. 1586. col. 2. says, Is not the Scripture sufficient for
my salvation? yea, says one of Bonners Chaplains, but not for your
instruction. Ah! says he, then God send me the salvation and you the
instruction. Caution.
Now let us not be mistaken, though we say all necessary is in the Scriptures,
yet we deny not but there may be some use (for orders sake) of rites and
forms; but not to be forced, knowing nothing necessary to salvation that is
not in the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Rev. 22.18. Mat. 15.3. Act. 20.27. and
26.22. seeing the Scriptures are the rule and measure of faith, they must not
come short of the measured, ( viz. faith) for all things necessary to faith
must needs be contained therein. But,


Lastly, the Scriptures are not so obscure, and dark, or Prosper says,
Parvuli, magni, fortes, Prosper.
infirmi, habent in Scripturis unde alantur and satientur, No age so young, no
wit so small, which Scripture does not fit,
There Is milk for babes, and yet withal, there is meat for stronger wit.


So Prove. 9.35. yea the Revelation, chap. 5.5. is a Book opened, Austin.
and as Augustine has it De doctrine. Christian. lib. 2. c. 9. In iis quae
aperte in Scripturis posita sunt, inveniuntur ea omnia quae fidem continent
moresque vivendi: in plain and easy places of Scripture, all things necessary
to faith and manners are manifest. Council of Tolet.
Nay the Council of Toletan. 5. c. 16. decreed the Apocalypse to be preached
by every Minister from Easter to Whit-suntide; so that they strictly enjoining
it, accounted not this book of Revelation, it seems, so hard as men would
persuade us to in our days; whereby they forbear to read, preach, or expound
it; but if it be hid, The Book of Revel. sent to the Church.
it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. It is sent especially to the
Churches, and is to be taken and opened by them.

But thus far for the first general Doctrine,
wherein Papists and Presbyterians are too near one another; and we are far
off from both, even out of the sight almost.

2. They agree about Baptism of ch^ldren.
2. They are something alike in their Doctrine about Baptism both with relation
to the Ordinance, the subjects, forms, and effects of it. As first in imposing
an absolute necessity upon it. Papists say, it is simply necessary to
salvation, Council. Tri^dent. sess 7 can 7. Bell. lib. 6. de Baptism. cap. 4.
such a necessity (or nigh unto it) do those hold who baptize the babes of all
sorts put upon it; and the very argument of the Rhemists, on Joh. 3.5. and the
Jesuits, Bell. ibid. have they often urged to me, viz. Unless a man be born
of water, and the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And I have
heard some of them severely inveigh against such as neglected to bring their
children, and to baptize them by such a time for fear a child should die
unbaptized, and the Parents for their neglect be under the judgments and wrath
of God. But we differ from them whilst we decline that necessity of Baptism
to Children; We dissent.
and whilst we affirm with such as were ever held orthodox in judgment
amongst men, ( vide Synops. 12. contro. q. 3.) that the Children of the
faithful that are holy, are holy before they are baptized, 1 Cor. 7.14. And
this truth is attested by Richard Woodman, Martyr Woodman.
a holy Martyr, Fox p. 1994. who says, I read in Scripture, he that believes
not shall be condemned, but no Sc^ipture says, he which is not baptized shall
be damned, neither dare I say so for all the goods under heaven In the Greek
Church Nazianzen says (in sanctum la^acrum) their usual time of Baptism were
but in feast of Pasch. and Pentecost, Nazianzen.
which would not have been so seldom, if the want of Baptism had been so
dangerous to Infants. We deny not the ordinance, but that there is much Popery
peeached up, and pleaded for, and practiced in their ordinance of sprinkling
Infants, all discerning men see and are ashamed of, and cry out upon it as
unsufferable and too impudent, and as having too much of the whores forehead in
it. Furthermore, although the veriest Jesuit do grant the positive necessity
of baptizing babes to be grounded upon tradition, Bell. de baptism. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
and not upon Scripture, Bell. lib. 4. de Ver. and so to baptize them at a Font
in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: yet how many imitate them
therein? and how hot the Presbyterians are for this positive necessity and
order? it is obvious to every eye. As for the form, whether in the Name of
Jesus Christ? or of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost? this has been a doubt of
long standing, and this did cause Novatus to disowne the Church of Carthage,
for that this form of Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Novatus. Cyprian.
and necessary baptizing of Infants were brought in; and he and Cyprian were at
great odds about this order, Anno. 240. whilst Novatus very earnestly pleads
for it, as the practice of Christ's Churches in primitive times, and all along
the Apostles days to that hour, viz. To baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
the Head of his Church. After that in Anno 400. was great contention about it,
but I leave this to further light and liberty, only affirm with all the
Protestants who are engaged against the Papists about the form (Synops. 12.
Controv. Q. 3.) that the name is taken for the virtue, power, and authority,
Act. 3. and so doubtless the Apostles baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ,
and healed in his name, and preached in his name only. Beda, Act. 10. Beda.
Jussit eos in nomine Jesu Christi baptizari. But I know no necessity of a
Font, nor of sprinkling, more then of dipping; nor any positive necessity of
baptizing Infants, (who are soonest drowned) but that these be left to light
and liberty of conscience, as things left either doubtful or indifferent in
Scripture (without positive precept) and I am persuaded for that purpose, that
every one may do as he is fully persuaded. As for Infants the Papists make it a
ground of their Baptism, They agree. Rutherford lib. 2. p. 262.
that they have the habit of faith in themselves, and so partly by their own
faith, and partly by the faith of others, they are to be baptized, Bellarm.
lib. 1. de baptis. cap. 11. So say our Ministers, they have the habit of faith,
though not the act; and by the faith of the Parents with that, they are to be
brought to baptism: We dissent.
but we say with the Protestants against the Papists, that Infants have not
true justifying faith (which is always actual, Gal. 5 6.) in themselves, nor
yet are profited by the faith of others, for Scripture says, Romans 1.17. The
just shall live by faith, i. e. his own particular faith; and believe and be
baptized: not, let others believe for you, for then it were as well that others
were baptized for you: but this will be entered at large (I hope in the next
part, 3. lib. of the body organicall) Tertul^ian speaking of Infants, Lib. de
Baptism^.
says, Fiant Christiani, cum Christum n^sse potuerint: Let them be made
Christ^ans (and baptized into the faith) when they be able to know Christ, (Et
per fidem est cognitio Christi) and that is by faith. Wherefore we say that
children as children have no right to Baptism, and then secondly, that parents
((...)) as parents cannot give them a right thereto; and seeing Baptism is the
ordinance of initiation, or entrance into the Church of Christ, it is
wonderful to see how sudden some are to null the very nature of that
ordinance. But lastly, they and the Papists are too nigh one another in the
effects which they say such a Baptism produces in children. The Papists affirm
that Baptism takes away original sin, in Council. Trident. Sess. 5. Decret. de
origin. Peccat. and in Infants newly baptized there is no mortal sin; Rhemists
1 John 1. Sect. 5. So have some Ministers hotly pursued this benefit of
baptism: viz. that baptism wipes away sins going before: We dissent.
whilst we dissent, and deny this Jesuiticall doctrine, applying this to be
the effect of Christ's baptism* (which none but Christ himself can baptize
with) Joh. 1.33. M^t. 3.11. viz. the holy Ghost, in a spiritual washing our
hearts and consciences with the warm blood of Christ, whereof baptism is a
sign (if not a seal) and in this we have declared our judgment before to be
different from the Anabaptists, that attribute so much to the form and element
as makes it an Idol. But to conclude this,
it is in baptism as it was in the pool of Bethsaida, Sim.
if the Spirit move on the face of the waters, there is a heal^ng, else none.

3. There is too much alliance between them in that Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, 3. They agree too much in the Eucharist.
(so called) I shall instance briefly (for I have been too long in this
chapter) in some few particulars. The Papists make it no more then a
preservative against sin, Bell. lib. 4. de Sacra: cap: 17. and would have
confession and absolution of sins to qualify for this ordinance, Council.
Trident. Sess. Can. 11. and that none are prepared but such as are absolved,
and then that all may come; but that they must be sure to come fasting to it,
and eat nothing before all, that day, Council. Constant. Sess. 13. Bell. lib. 3.
de Eucharist. cap. 22. ratian. 4. and then they would have every Communicant
highly adore (even cultu latreiae) and worship the Host, etc. who does not,
Bell. ibid.
is to be accursed, Trident. Council. Sess. 13. can. 6. And they say even
reprobates that receive the Sacrament, receive the very body and blood of
Christ, Rhem. 1 Cor. 11. Sect. 16. Now although our Ministers (I speak of the
violentest Presbyterians) do not altogether agree with them in these
particulars, yet they are not far from them. How they agree.
1. For preparation how earnestly do they press men to Confession of sins,
sorrows, legal repentance and the like, and bid the people to prepare
themselves? We dissent.
whilst we say the preparations of the heart are of the Lord, Prove. 10.1.
Psalm. 10.17. Et opera sunt secundum principium a quo sunt; and they are good as
they are of grace; our preparation is to be from Christ in us our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification; we hold with the Orthodox Protestants against
the Hetero-dox Papists, Opinionists and Jesuits, that we must have a lively
faith who come to this Ordinance, but it is to be the faith of the Son of God,
Gal. 2.20. and that we must have true Evangelical repentance, (which is for sin
as sin) but this must be in Christ Jesus; repent in Christ, believe in Christ,
for Acts 5.31, 32. Christ was exalted to give repentance for remission of sins.
So that there is no preparation or qualification by any act of our own, but all
by Christ in us, and grace teaching us to deny all ungodliness and wordly
lusts, Titus 2.12, 14. For as Mr. Rogers says in his right way to be saved,
page 54. many mistake and are deceived, whilst they dote for a faith, Mr.
Rogers.
and a repentance of their own make, and look for something to ground on in
themselves; they are like one that does not set a young tree, Sim.
but lets it lie on the ground till he see what 'twill bear, and then he will put
it in; so is it with such as would see their works and their fruits first, and
then would to the Ordinances and to Christ; No! get into Christ, etc. and then
see what fruits, and what works. This ordinance is a sovereign remedy for a
troubled conscience, therefore be sure of faith, 1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor. 13.5. for
according to your faith so be it: and this also Protestants (in Synopsis)
affirm to be sufficient. So Damascene lib. 4. c. 14. (...).
But further whereas they make this ordinance of great use, to strengthen their
faith, and preserve them against sin and temptations, it is true; and yet we
go further, and affirm it more, viz. to give nourishment and growth to
Christians too, to increase in faith, love, and grace, and is therefore to be
often; as one of the standing dishes in the Church to be often renewed; as a
daily diet, Acts 2.42, 46. therefore are there such elements, as signify to
refresh, cherish, quicken, strengthen, sustain, and nourish, and satisfy,
Joh. 4.14. and 7.37. How many (in the next place) put themselves and others
upon fasting that day before they receive, 2. We dissent.
and still retain this Popish invention, which we account a mere foppery; for
any man may eat if he will before, as appears, 1 Cor. 11.34. if any be hungry
let him eat at home; and besides we know Christ and his Disciples partaked of
this Ordinance together presently after they had eaten at supper. But whereas
the Presbyterians take all to it, that have those legal qualifications before
hinted, 3. We dissent from Presbyterians disorderly giving the Sacrament.
we cannot but declare against it as disorderly and unwarrantable, as we have
proved in the first book before, and we wonder in what one Scripture they can
find that ever any out of Church Fellowship did take it or durst give it,
grant they were ever so holy Christians and Disciples,
yet they were not to sit down at this Table, till in Gospel-fellowship
together, and in Christ's Church Way: For Christ had 70 Disciples, as professors
of Christ, and Preachers too, Luke 10.1. besides his twelve, yet none but his
twelve in fellowship with him, distinct from the world and in communion
together by themselves that sat down with him at this Ordinance, and read Acts
2.42. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 11.18, 23, 24, etc. or any other Scripture about it,
and you shall find that never any had it but the Churches, thus in fellowship;
and that it was left by Christ in the Church, for the Church, and for none else
that are without, as I not long since proved out of Luke 14.23. where we find
the Lords commission to his servants is to call and bring the hungry, Expos.
needy, lame, blind, poor, into his house, (his Church, Ephesians. 2. ult.) where
the feast is, viz. Christ, etc. dished out in his Ordinances in special manner,
and there the bread, verse 15. is, viz. this Ordinance of the Lords Supper; so
that we have no order to carry it out of the house to them without, (for then
none as in verse 18, 19, 20. would have excused, but any covetous, voluptuous,
carnal, drunkard, epicure, sinner will be glad of it so) but our order is to
call them first into the house, and bring into the Church, and then give them
these Ordinances, which are confirming, Matthew. 6.7. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Jer.
15.19. Ezekiel. 22.26. which twenty and twenty Scriptures more do prove; this is
a truth, maugre that malicious and spurious frog-like froth, which appears in
the Pamphlet entitled, a Taste of the Doctrine of Thomas Apostles: against this
infallible truth which will live when that lies (where it best agrees) in dung;
penned by a furious-pated Jesuitick Presbyter: (if not worse) hard by, and well
known for scandal and malignancy which has outed him elsewhere; C. of
Garlick-hithe, Land.
but I wish that he or any of his adherents would bring their works to light as
we do, else we must condemn them, John 3.19, 20. as say they are deceivers
and false-teachers; For they do what, they have neither precept nor practice
for, nor one Scripture to warrant; and I instance in this, of their giving the
Lords Supper contrary to all rule, and Religion, yea reason it self; And we say
that they are none of the Lords Ministers in that point that dare do it. But
furthermore, what a deal of folly do some of them learn the people? to adore,
(and I think I may say Idolize) the form, to fall down before it and to keep
devoutly on their knees, and to sit, or kneel, or stand a distance from it,
whilst they alone are at the table, unless they have others to wait on them.
From all which we dissent, whilst we assert the people should sit up close to
the table about, and about; and draw nigh with hearts fixed, 4. Dissent.
Psalm 57, 7. upon the Lord by faith; as much as may be in the manner of a
feast, and as much as may be without outward veneration or adoration as to the
form, but by faith full of inward; For Christ's body visibly present among the
brethren, his Disciples, was not, nor was it to be worshipped; so now there is
no necessity of it, nay there is a necessity of none of it, because it is not
of faith, (as the Protestants answer to the Papists, 13 Controv. Q. 9) Now what
is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. and faith comes by hearing the Word; but no
where in the Word are ye taught to do this, but to sit about it, and to
receive (by faith) orderly and holily; Romans 10.17.
So that were it no offense to the Church, or to any of the conscientious
brethren; one might as lawfully receive it with their hat on as off,
so he be a worshipper in spirit and truth, John 4.23, 24. but we shall handle
these (if God see it good) in the next book. Again, some of them have avouched
every one to have had Christ that had this Sacrament, and have drunk and eat
their own damnation: which is too Popish, 5. We dissent.
for the Protestants protested against it, Synops: 13. Cont: Q. 10. so do we,
and say that unworthy receivers have made themselves guilty of judgment
((...)) thereby; but they did not partake of Christ, for then they eat and
drink Salvation; Bradford.
for as holy Bradford answered Harpsfield, Fox 1615. Christ's body is no dead
carcass, but he that receives it receives the Spirit, and that is not
without grace. 6. Dissent.
Moreover we differ from them in that we according to the pattern, Vide Ho^kers
Survey, part. 3. chapter 2.
Matthew: 26.26, 27. and Luke 22. set us, do seek a distinct blessing to the
distinct parts of the Ordinance, first to the head, according to the first
institution; Christ took the bread and blessed it, (distinctly) and then after
that was done and delivered, after the same manner Christ took the cup and
blessed it, i. e. distinctly, not both together, as the Papists now do (and
then give one for both); and the first the Presbyterians and other Ministers
do; which we account an error in them, that should be reformed, and we differ
from them in their cutting the bread, and so in distributing it, which
destroys the nature of an ordinance of breaking bread, Acts 2.42, 46. Acts*
20.7. as it is properly called in Scripture; 7 We dissent. Many ignorant of the
ordinance of breaking bread.
seeing they who will have some of their humane inventions in it, and will be
meddling (though not mending) do slice or cut it ready to be given about; but
this ordinance (of man's make and mixture) I confess the poor people have had,
and been gulled with for many a year, whilst they are kept and continued in
ignorance (as to the Ordinance of Christ) to the Ordinance of breaking bread,
and scoff at it, not knowing what it is: Thus the poor people (as long as
they are without) are caged up under Antichristian darkness and discipline.

4. The Presbyterians and Papists agree much about their Doctrine of works,
which I shall instance in some particulars; 1. In the necessity of works to
salvation they agree in discourse lately with one Crafton, that preacher at
Garlic hithe, (a violent Comet) with some others.
As first, of the necessity of good works: The Papists say, that good works
are necessary to Salvation, not only necessitate praesentiae, but
efficientiae, as efficient causes together with faith, of our salvation.
Bellarm: lib: 6. de justificat: cap: 7. The Presbyterians (I mean the rigid
amongst them) have affirmed, and yet do the like necessity of good works, to
qualify us and prepare us for Christ, viz: repentance, tears, confession of
sins, etc. But we dissent from both, and say with Mr. Rogers, in his Right way
to be saved, page: 54. there be no works of ours which prepare us for Christ; We
differ. Mr. Rogers.
and such as look for something to ground on in themselves, mistake grossly
and are lost; Like one that does not set the young tree, but lets it lie on the
ground till he sees what fruits twill bear (as we said before) O no! but let it
first be rooted and grounded and then you shall see what fruits; so must you be
grounded in Christ, Sim.
and then bring forth fruits and works from Christ: then your repentance is in
Christ, Acts 5.31, 32. your faith in Christ, Col: 2.20. which is the work of
God, John 6. Fac Christi opera, etc. says Bernard in Paschal: Sermon: 2. Bernard.
Do Christ's works; good works we grant, but not as our own, but as
Christ's, for as Augustine on John 15.5. says, Augustine.
sive parum, sive mullum, sine illo fieri non potest, in Tract:
82. nothing little or much can be done without Christ, Mr. Bolton
for Phil: 2.13. and 4.13. he works in you both to will and to do: Est deus
in nobis, agitante calescimus illo: and I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me, says the Apostle; and in this sense is that negative
assertion of Dr. Twisse's, quod homo nihil boni facit nisi deus in illo
efficiat ut faciat: Therefore we must not be puzzled and perplexed about works
(de nostro) of our own to fit us for Christ; for whilst men think they must
do something themselves, or else they cannot be justified, and do nothing for
it, or in it, but only believe, and whilst they think God cannot but approve
of their works and accept of their services, they run a great hazare with the
Papists, 1 Samuel 16.7. Psalm. 62 9. and are with perplexible anxiety of spirit
spying out for good works of their own make, whilst the Apostle says, Ephesians:
2.10. we are all his workmanship in Christ Jesus, and tells us plainly our new
works arise from this new creation, for that no flesh might boast in his sight;
seeing Christ is not ours, (therefore salvation is not ours) by any act of ours
but of God in us, and of grace teaching us, Tim. 2.12, 13. within; hence is
vocation, 2 Timothy 1 ^9. Sanctification, 2 These. 2.13. faith, love, repentance,
Romans 2.4 every good work, Ezekiel. 36.27. and everlasting life, Romans 6.23. all
given by grace* Therefore no good works of ours qualify us for any of these,
Mr. Perkins.
thus says Mr. Perkins, upon Galat. page 159. the Gospel offers and gives life
freely without any condition of works, and requires nothing but receiving.
Object. Yes on condition of faith. Answ. Faith (says he) is mentioned in the
manner of a condition, but it is of free grace and the mere gift of God, as
well as life eternal. So that Faith brings forth works, but not works faith;
for good works (says one) follows Christ in us by faith, as the fruits of
the tree follow the growing and grounding of it: Sim.
a woman first is married then conceives, then brings forth, or else the
children are illegitimate; Sim.
and so are those works illegitimate, which flow not from the conjunction and
conception of Christ in the heart:
but if they be before, we may blush at the sight of them, and be ashamed of
them, and cannot boast of any credit or comfort of them; Opera sunt secundum
principium a quo sunt; and till Christ be in us, we say our best works are but
dead works, two ways, 1. effective, as sin, 2. privative, without grace or
the Spirit of Gods working. But furthermore, in the formal cause of
justification, the Papists affirm an inherent righteousness in us, 2. In the
formal cause of justification they agree.
to make complete the formality of justification, Trident. council. sess. 6.
Can. 11. Rhemist. Romans 2. Sect. 4. Bell. lib. 2. de justif cap. 3. many Clergy
men (unguibus and dentibus) do cry up an inherent righteousness too to make
up complete justification, which we deny and abhor, We dissent.
allowing the alone righteousness of Christ to justify us before God, and
fully able to do it without any addition of ours, or any inherent
qualification, as to that See Romans 8.2. Romans 4.56. Romans 5.24. 2 Cor. 5.21^
Phil. 3.9. for Christ's righteousness alone has fulfilled the Law, which is
ours by imputation for our justification, Romans 8.4. being absolutely justified,
and by that Christ's righteousness alone; as our good works do not justify
us any thing, Vide Cra^ock on Gospel-holinesse, on Romans 8.4. Sermon. 1. called
Mount Sion.
so our evil works do not unjustifie us; and so it is the weakest Saint is
as absolutely righteous in the sight of God, and as fully justified (in the
righteousness of another) as the strongest. And as most of the eminent
Presbyterians are (now come in to be) one with us in this point, so some of the
Popish special Champions upon a parley have laid down their arms, and do join
issue with us herein, as Pighius de fide and justifi^. Cont 2. p. 45. who
grants that we have no other righteousness to rest upon then that which (
Christus imputat nobis sine operibus nostris) Christ imputes to us without
works,
so Vatablus in Psalm. 18.23. and the Author of Antidid^g. Coloniens. as Bell.
confesses, etc. besides abundance of famous writers, which prove it at large.
In what sense inherent righteousness in us.
Now lest I should be misconstrued by Critics, know that we affirm an inherent
righteousness wrought by the Spirit in all such as are justified by faith in
Christ; but we say that it is rather a sanctification; or the fruit and effect
of justification, Beza annot. Romans 5.17. and Romans 8.13.
then any ways to be accounted of in justification; which altogether consists
in the righteousness of Christ which is ours by imputation. And to make this
more distinct and clear, Imputative righteousness how taken.
the imputative righteousness of Christ is taken into three parts, for besides
his essential righteousness or personal, which we account not communicable to
us;
yet there is first an habitual righteousness of Christ in our hearts, and 2.
his actual righteousness in doing the Law, and 3. his passive in suffering the
punishment, all which three are imputed to us; But,

3. As the Jesuits and Papists of old (to instance in Bellar. lib. 5. de
Justif c. 5. initio) were not ashamed to slander Protestants of old for enemies
to the Law; 3. They agree in slandring Saints, as calling them Antinomians.
as that Moses with with his Decalogue they should say belonged not to them,
and that they pleaded for Christian liberty from obedience and subjection to
the Law: So now the red-hot spirited men and Ministers of our age, the rigid
Presbyters pursue the same invectives against us, and in their Pulpits and
Pamphlets exclaim against us for Antinomians, and would explode out the sweet
doctrine of free grace as tending to libertinism,
and that we are against the Law, and enemies to Moses, therefore Antinomians,
etc. In which they with the Papists of old will be found to fight sometimes
with their own shadows of their own make, and at other times with God against
grace. With their own shade, whilst our God will witness for us (when they
shall be ashamed) Isa. 66.5. that we deny not the Law, but that Christ came to
fulfill it, Matthew. 5.17. for us, and in us, and we in Christ do it and not
deny it. Mr. Bolton. Lex jubet, gratia juvat. How we are under the Law, ( i^ e.
of life.
Mr. Bolton speaks for us in his Bounds of true Christan freedom, page 74.
when he says, we are freed from the Law, (the letter that kills) as given
by Moses, and are tied to the Law (of life that quickneth) as given by Christ,
and from Christ's hands, etc. we are free from Antinomianism then, unless Dr.
Preston were one, who affirmed that the Law cannot convert (on's New Covenant,
Dr. Preston on new Covenant.
p. 347.) and says he, should I preach to you the ten Commandments again and
again, it would be long enough ere you could keep them, therefore Gal. 3.2. It
is not by them, that thou will come to be a new creature, but by the Covenant
of grace, Heb. 8.14. that New Covenant made in Christ, that I must preach to
sinners: So that those enemies that fight against this doctrine of free grace
will be found fighters against God, and Christ, and the sweetest and safest
doctrine of Salvation: Dr. Sibs.
so says Dr. Sibs in his Excellency of the Gospel above the Law,
page 241. wherefore let us vindicate this doctrine says he, and not fear the
reproaches of men: Mr. Gataker.
and to impose a period to this, hear what Mr. Gataker says in his Book called
Gods Eye, etc. to the Reader, page 10. Note, says he, that men of learning and
sound judgment, do not cry out O Antinomianism! upon the Doctrine of free
grace, but do acknowledge it. Though many do as the proud Pharisees, cry out
away with him, he is a friend to Publicans and sinners, 4. Agree too much about
the end of serving God.
and he says that Harlots and Adulterers shall inherit the Kingdom of God
before them.

4. The Papists affirm and therefore preach and press works, duties, etc. for
fear of hell, and for hope of heaven, Rhemist. on Heb. 11.26. and on p. 4.
Sect. 6. so many poor purblind Ministers would put the people on duties madly
without fear or wit, so they be doing;
and urge these on the pains of Hell, for fear of damnation; roaring out with
fire and lightning about their ears to fright them and scare them, and there
to leave them! O! this is sad! Sim.
For suppose a man in the Thames were almost drowned, and having his head yet
above water, but ready to sink, cried out for help, if a man that might help
him with an Oar, or so, should brain him, and roughly knock him down, and drown
him quite, would we not say that this were accursed cruelty? and I pray what
do they less, that can cay little else but Hell and damnation to such as are
afflicted? despairing, sinking, etc. but to brain them quite? We find David to
destroy the Amalekite, in 2 Samuel 1. that slew Saul, Sim.
though Saul was in danger of his life, and little hopes of his escape, and his
enemies were upon him, and required the man to kill him, and was in deadly
anguish; yet David did give order to one of his young men to kill him, and why?
but because the Amalekite should not have killed him right out, though he was
wounded, and in danger, and not like to escape, yet he should have done his
devoire, and best to have comforted Saul, and to have encouraged and recovered
him, and to have bound up his wounds, and blown up his hopes, and have helped
him what he could; So ought Ministers with poor wounded souls though sadly
afflicted, and have little hopes of their recovery; yet must they use the
means to bind up the broken, to pour in wine and Oil into the wounds;
comfort them with the promises on the account of free grace, to apply
Scriptures to hold out Jesus of Nazareth, even a crucified blessed Christ to
their souls; and not to make so quick a dispatch of them as to throw them
quite into the gulf of despair; and if they should recover them by that means
only. We differ.
Why what would this do but to make them serve God for fear of Hell and
damnation, merely? and what does this but make men Hypocrites? Now we grant a
filial fear, Prove. 3.7. but this is a servile and slavish fear of Hell and
damnation, Augustine.
and Augustine on P^al. 127. says, it differs from true fear, as the
adulterous wife does from the chaste, they both fear their husbands (sed casta
timet ne vir discedat, sed adultera ne veniat) but the chaste wife is afraid
lest her husband should depart; How and to whom hell preached.
but the adulteress is afraid lest he should come, etc. Yea moreover we grant
the terror of the Law to be useful to uncalled hard-hearted insolent sinners;
but not to tender broken hearted sinners, wounded spirits,
or the like: but the promises and comforts are for them; and not to bring them
to serve God, or the like, for fear of Hell; for as Origin says on Matt.
tract. 33. Matthew. 25.24. I knew thou wast an hard man, and therefore I was
afraid. Origin.
This fear is not good, nor delivers us from punishment, Tindall.
so said Mr. Tyndall Martyr, Fox, page 1253. The people of Christ do willingly
hear and follow him, not for fear of the Law, but they are led by love and
allured by liberty of grace, etc. Neither is it out of love to heaven, (as some
Ministers press works popishly) for we ought principally to eye the glory of
God above our own salvation,
1 Pet. 2.9. for as Mr. Tyndall says p. 1255. they that for fear of hell, Sim.
or joys of Heaven, do a duty, or work, do a constrained service, as hired
men, or waged servants, which God will not have us do but as children.

5. Agree about the merit of their works in something.
Lastly, The Papists affirm a twofold merit of works, 1. meritum de congruo, ^
meritum de condigno; 1. of congruity, 2. of condignity and desert, Rhenist.
Romans 2. Sect. 3. the first kind of merit most Ministers assert, viz. those
that call for preparative works before justification and qualifying works for
Christ;
This was coined in the Popes ^onclave, as that it does agree with his justice
and truth to give reward to such works. We differ.
From which we dissent, but with this Proviso, that we do not dis-own a
gracious congruity, though we do a meritorious congruity, we grant that in
respect of such and such promises which God has freely made us in Christ,
that say it agrees with his Word, etc. to do thus and thus, as to pardon the
penitent: answer such as ask and seek; satisfy such as hunger and thirst; but
then this congruity is grounded on free grace, and Gods love, and not (at all)
on our works; for all is of free grace, and nothing of merit. The Papists
finding works too light in the balance, will have our Ladies beads put into
their St. Michaels scoals to make weight; Sim.
and in parallel to this how many Ministers that must have tears, and call for
them as duly as the Papists do for beads, to help good deeds to weigh down?
But alas! all works, beads, and tears weigh too light, and are little worth
till Christ comes, and faith be put in for allowance; Christ in us will soon
turn the scale for us:
For he is the weight of glory. We say, Sim.
the eye must have the faculty of seeing before it can see; and so the ear of
hearing before it can hear; So we first have infused habits before we exercise
the operation of them, and as the wheel does not run round that it may be made
round; neither are we first to act whereby we may be fitted and formed,
but first formed and fashioned by the Spirit of Christ whereby we act and do
good works, which then are opera congrua indeed. We assert good works.
And in this sense we assert the singular use of good works, to evidence what
is within us, and which way the wind lies as by a weathercock; and although
we cannot see the wind, yet we can see the sails of a ship that are filled
with the wind, and so our works that are filled with the Spirit of Christ.
But this shall serve for the fourth general Controversy between the Papists
and Protestants of old, and the Presbyterians, (I mean the violentest of them)
and us now: And to say no more of this then what Mr. Perkins says on Rev. 2.24.
that Jezebel and her followers in every age have and do highly esteem of their
own doctrines for deep, Mr. Perkins.
and opinions for Orthodox, and cry them up for learned, profound, and Divine,
and only Authentic, Expos.
thereby to bring misprision and contempt upon the Truth, as a thing simple,
foolish, and base. So did the Pharisees and Rabbis in Christ's days, to make
the poor fishermen and Carpenters sons odious. And so the Jesuits and
Cardinals in the Protestants time; so Prelates and Doctors in Puritans times;
Bishops, and great Scholars of the Episcopalians in the short life of
Presbyterianisme;
hot spirited and hair-brained Sophisters and Presbyterians in the time of
Independency, etc. but says the Lord, I have known the deepnesse of Satan,
that subtle sophister against the truth, to make it odious in all ages.

5. They agree in giving power to Magistrates.
Lastly, I might show how Papists and Presbyterians agree in giving power to
Magistrates as civil Magistrates, over the Church as the Church; and to
constitute Synods, make laws for the Church, punish offenders, murder
Heretics, etc. from all which we differ and have declared it at large, lib. 1.
chapter 11. chapter 13 lib. 2. chapter 2.

But lastly, The Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one another in practice
too, as well as in doctrine and discipline, which I shall instance in some few
particulars; for I have not undertaken a tract to show their agreement;
but only a testimony or two to prove the truth of it, how near the daughter
looks like the mother under discipline, doctrine and practice, for truths sake
instancing in some few things, though I might produce many for one, yet a few
are enough for proof. And now for their practice, first as to their Ministers.

3. They agree in practice.
1. Concerning their Ordination, what it is. 2. By whom it is. 3. In what order
it is.

1. In their account and ordination of Ministers.
1. For ordination what it is; the Papists call it a Sacrament, Trident. council.
sess. 23. Bell. cap. 8. lib. de sacram. ordinis, can. 3. The Presby^erians call
it a solemn inauguration of a person into the Ministerial or sacred function
(as they call it) by imposition of hands. From both we dissent, and assert
Ordination to be a solemn setting apart of a brother chosen by the Church, and
approved of as fitly qualified for this or that office, whereinto he is now set
apart by prayer. The Papists make imposition of hards the material part of
ordination, and to be essential, Petrus a Soto lect. 5. de ordin. We differ.
They agree imposition of hands.
So Hosius confess. Polonic. c. 50. So Bell. cap. 9. So the Presbyterians tooth
and nail cry up a necessity of imposition of hands; as if no ordination without
it, Rutherf. chapter 17. chapter 18. and the Libeller (before mentioned that writ the
Taste of Tho. Apostles Doctrine) calls the denying of imposition of hands the
denying of ordination, in p. 3.; whereas Mr. Crafton that preaches on
Garli^k-hithe has most falsely affirmed that I delivered ordination not worth
disputing or time to speak of, Land.
(as in the Pamphlet) it was proved to his face a forgery of his own busy
brain,
and that imposition of hands (which some called manumission) was the word
which I I said I would not meddle with as essential to ordination, as not
worth disputing about or spending time upon, being a ceremony, but not
necessary; for I sufficiently proved ordination that day (as ere long will
appear to the world) viz. a setting a part such as were duly qualified (which I
proved at large) into an office of Gospel-institution, Ephesians. 4.11. having the
Churches election, approbation, prayers, and acceptance, Act. 14.23. Act. 6.3.
Gal. 4.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. which Mr. Crafton could not deny before many
witnesses, notwithstanding his satanicall accusation, not beseeming any
Minister of this town (as I know of) that is looked upon; only himself who is
(to the grief of many godly men and Ministers) known too well (for one of his
profession, and to the scandal of the Ministry) for his hot furious
persecuting spirit, and most unchristian, uncivil practices and malignancy in
many places, as at New Castle, in Cheshire, and at Renbury, being by the truly
godly looked upon (as he is at this day) to be a crafty one, and a violent
enemy both to Church and State:
but the Lord has and yet will rebuke his spirit, I hope, for good at the
great day, for truly I pity him, and more such as are seduced and deluded by
him, against the truth. But before many I offered him the challenge, yea the
advantage of stating the question himself (to prove imposition of hands no
material or essential part of ordination, which he Popishly asserts, but with
words, not with arguments: and further, I offered him fairly to prove (and yet
do it) that his ordination which he makes to lie in the laying on of hands is
Antichristian and successive from the Pope, which I entreat him to accept of,
or else to lay down his boasting and belching out this against the truth and
the friends of it. For we affirm imposition of hands to signify nothing as to
the essence of ordination, for though it may be used, yet it is but a ceremony,
not as essential that it must be used. We dissent.
So the Protestants (accounted orthodox) have unanimously declared against the
Papists, Synops. 16. controv. q. 2. and Dr. Cartwright in's Ecclesiastical
polity, declares plainly, Laying on of hands is a needless ceremony.
that by laying on of hands in primitive times they did use to present the
person so set apart to God, for his gifts and graces to qualify them for their
offices, and that this was their general end. Hooker.
Whence Mr. Hooker in's Survey of Discipline, part. ^. chapter 2. argues thence,
that imposition of hands cannot be said to be a spec^ficating act, as to give
one the essentials of an officer. Thus eminent Bucer* de Gubern. Eccl^s. p.
337. says, Manus impositio quid est, nisi oration ^uper hominem? What is this
laying on of hands, Bucer. So Aug. de Bap^. lib. 3 c. 16.
but a praying o^e the person to be set apart? We read, Act. 6. etc. that after
they had prayed they laid their hands on them, not before they prayed, nor in
the time of prayer,
as the Presbyterians do, but after; and it was used (some say) rather in way
of blessing of them, (as Christ blessed the little children by laying on his
hands, and so the sick) then in a way of setting them apart to an office.
Chrysostom on 1 Timothy* 3. calls it plainly ferme nihil, a nothing. And says Aug.
lib. 5. c. 16. Chrysostom.
Ordinare, quid est aliud nisi orare? to ordain, Austin.
what is it but set apart by prayer? Hear but the Confession of Bohemia, chapter
14. Harm. sect. 11. p. 356. They may use some seemly and indifferent
ceremonies, which are no ways necessary;
such as to lay on hands, to reach out the right hand ((...)) or else they omit
them, say they. The like we have in the confession of Wittenbe^g, Herm. sec.
17. art. 35. who say imposition of hands is but an indiffernt ceremony and not
always necessary. For there is no precept for it and the practice of it was
extraordinary and significant; yet not always used; Christ used it not when he
sent forth his Disciples to preach;
nor gave it in commission to his Apostles, nor have they enjoined it to be a
practice for succeeding ages. And Matthias was chosen in Judas's room without
it. But to conclude, Polanus, Tilenus, Calvin himself with many others say it
is not necessary, but a ceremony.

2. By whom ordination is to be dispensed. The Papists say by their Bishops, 2.
Who have the power of Ordination.
or else that they are not ordained, Bell. de sacram: ordinis, cap. 11. So said
our Episcopalians, the power of ordaining is alone in the Bishops (who were
rather aposcopi quam episcopi) but that Controversy is ended as to the hand of
a Bishop to set apart; This is against the Council of Carthage, Can. 22.
for (as Cartwright says) in primitive times there was more then one to set
apart, Act. 13.1, 3. Act. 6.6. the Prophets and Teachers set apart Paul and
Barnabas at Antioch. O the abominable blasphemies! and wicked fogeries of
Bishops in laying on hands! and saying, receive the holy Ghost! But now the
Presbyterians differ as to that whilst they give this power to a classes or
company together in form of a Presbytery: Wherein they agree, we differ.
yet in this they agree with Popery, and Episcopacy to seat it in a Prelacy,
and primarily to settle it in a Classis: which we deny, for if the Classis be
Ecclesia orta,
then the primary and first power must needs be in Ecclesia unde Classis est
orta. We affirm, that first of all Christ had the sole power of ordaining in
himself, The primary power is in the Church. Cotton.
since that he has left this power in the Church his Spouse, and there it is
seated: And as Mr. Cotton notes in's Way of congregationall Churches cleared,
part. 1. p. 96. sect. 2. that in the second century of years the government of
the Church was administered not in a Classical but in a Congregationall way,
and so in the first century; witness the Magdeburgenses, cent. 2. chapter 7. de
consociatione ecclesiarum. 1, and 2. Cent.
Si quis probatos authors hujus seculi perspiciat, videbit formam
gubernationis propemodum (...) similem fuisse; administrando sacramenta, pure
verbum dei docendo, excommunicando Haereticos, Ministros eligendo, vocando,
ordi nando and justissimas ob causas iterum deponendo, Conventus and Synodus
congregando, etc. If a man (say they) do but search the authentic authors of
this age, he shall easily see the form of Church Government to be almost like a
Democracy; in the pure preaching the Gospel, administering the Ordinances,
excommunicating offenders, in choosing, calling, and ordaining Ministers, When
Independency got in.
and upon good grounds in deposing of them, and calling Synods, etc. So that in
those ages the power was in the Church; yea in the third Century of years,
Cent. 3. cap. 7 to use the words of the Centurists, 3. Cent.
we shall find (almost) the like form of government although somewhat corrupt
by ambition, which brought in Antichrist. For we shall find Novatus
excomunicate by a council at Rome under Cornelius. And Samosatenus was thrown
out by a Council at Antioch. When Presbytery came in.
So that in those days though corruption got in, in a kind of Aristocracy like
the Presbyterian way, When Episcopacy.
and after that a kind of Monarchy by the Popish and Episcopal way: but even
in those days some were orderly, and some Churches kept their power,
liberty and privileges; so that then was the power of Ordination in the
Church. Cyprian.
Cyprian tells us Epistolarum lib. 1. that then Bishops and Church officers were
not chosen by a Consistory of Bishops or Pastors amongst themselves (as is now
in Classes) but as they received it from the Apostles, so they held it for the
orderly celebration of Ordination; the Bishop or Pastor is chosen in the
presence of the people, as was in the Ordination of our fellow Minister
Sabinus, How Ministers were Ordained of old.
his office was put upon him by the suffrage of the whole Brotherhood and by
the judgment of other Pastors present; so in Epist. 4. the people fearing God
and obedient to the Laws and Ordinances of Christ have the power of choosing
worthy Ministers, and of refusing the unworthy: so in Epist. 3. he says with
much ado vix plebi persuadeo, immo extorqueo, ut tales patiantur admitti, etc.
do I persuade the people, yea and pull it from them that they would admit such,
etc. by which he shows the peoples concurrence; but in lib. 3. Epist. 11.
Caeteri cum ingenti populi suffragio recipimus; yea (says he) in Epist. 16. Ad
plebem examinabuntur singula, praesentibus and judicantibus vobis: to the
people all things shall be examined before you, you being present and judging.
Yea nihil statui (says he) sine confilio vestro, and sine consensu plebis:
Therefore this is no novelty to assert the power to lie in the body,
Melanchthon.
by which she ordaines her own Ministers; yea, says Melanchthon there is a
necessity of it, Yet servants may execute this power to her.
necesse est Ecclesiam retinere jus vocandi, eligendi and ordinandi Ministros,
that the Church retain her right of calling, choosing and ordaining her own
Ministers; this right is given to the Church, and no power can take it away
from the Church (says he:) yet we grant that the officers of the Church, may
execute the Churches power herein as servants.

3. They agree in the order of Ordination.
To the Third, In what order is ordination. Papists say first ordain him, then
let him be called, then chosen, Bellar. ds Sac. ordin. Disputabimus primo de
ordinatione, tum de vocatione postremo de electione: the Presbyterians say
little better, Mr. Rutherford for the Presbyterians Chap. 15. p. 265. soberly
asserts Ordination before Election; p. 267. A. B. says he, is first Called and
Ordained a Pastor by Christ and by the laying on the hands of the Elders,
before the People can elect him for their Pastor; so that they agree. We
dissent. Dr. Ames.
But from them both we dissent, and say with Dr. Ames in's Anti Bellar. Tom. 2.
lib. 3. De Ordinat. that we place the Cart before Horses, non Ordine sed
confuse disputantus Ordinationem praeponere Vocationi and Electioni, etc. and
they do very indirectly and disorderly to set Ordination before Vocation and
Election, which none judicious (says Hooker in's Survey, Our order in
Ordination of officers.
P. 2. chapter 2.) do; nor any of the reformed Churches maintain, for it is too
Popish; wherefore for shame friends away with it, fie on it! We affirm first,
a necessity of Vocation, or a Call, which we account upon 2 parts, viz.
Election, and then Ordination; (all which I hope to handle at large in the 3.
Lib. that is to come) this Election is when the Church has had trial of one,
and approves of him, and chooses him out to bear such an Office as being fit
for it, which is accompanied with examination and trial, (as I said before) 1 Timothy 3.10. 1 Timothy 5.6. therefore the Church is to choose, Act. 6. Act. 1.23.
Act. 14.23. not Pope, Prelate, Classes, etc. who is fittest for her to be
Ordained. Now the Election of the Brethren gives the person, jus ad rem, right
to the Office, and Ordination (as before) jus in re right in it. Oh that this
order were observed! it would be a singular means to fill the Church and
Nation, with able qualified Gospel Ministers; A special means to propagate the
Gospel, and to fill the Church and Commonwealth with all able godly Ministers.
(and to crowd out the scandalous) if none else (as it ought to be) were
Ordained but such as appertained to the Churches of Christ, and those too
approved of in the Churches as godly, and ably gifted; this would tend much to
the propagation of the Gospel (and this will be and must be ere long) and then
none can be Ministers but must at least be fit to be members of Christ's Church:
besides there would be no begging Ministers then roving about for bread. Oh!
that the Parliament would more own the Churches as the best nurseries of able
Ministers and Schools of the Prophets, and suffer no Ordination out of the
Churches of Christ, but look on it as Antichristian abroad. I speak not in
contempt of Universities (for they are exceedingly useful, as I shall show,
and I hope to satisfy any rational man in the next Book) but that all who are
Ordained Ministers, may first be found fit to be members of a Church of Christ;
and then to be orderly Chose and Ordained within the Church: this would be a
blossoming blessing indeed! which shall be in due time however. But before I
finish this I affirm, that as Popish Ordination, (or Ordination Popishly
dispensed) does not give the essential to the outward call of a Minister; so
the Presbyterian Ordination (which I now disowne before God and men,
Presbyterian Ministers have not the true essentials to the call of Ministers of
Christ by their Ordination.
as being in the steps of Popery and successively from it, though I was once
through dim-sightednesse under it in the very first Classes that ere was in
England, (if I mistake not) and tould'd into it; (yet I say) it is
Antichristian, and disorderly, as preceding the Election of the people of God,
and not giving the essentials to the call of a true Minister of Christ, which
as it must be by, so in a Church of Christ, Act. 6.3, 5. Act. 14.23. according
to institution. But the Election and Call of a people rightly in order
according to Christ's rule, gives the essentials to an Officer or Minister of
Christ, and leaves the impression of a true outward call upon him; which we
hope to have full proof for in the next Book, of the Body organicall; in the
mean time who will may have much satisfaction at present by Mr. Hooker in's
Survey of Discipline, part 2. chapter 2. p. 66. but thus far for the first point,
wherein they agree in practice.

They agree,
2. About distinction.
2. Presbyterians and Papists are too alike in practice too, about Distinction
and Differences which they make: as,

1. Clergy and Laity.
1. The Papists make great distinction betwixt the Clergy and Laity (as they
call them;) Clergy (which is meant the Lords heritage) they account the
spirituality, or Black Garb; and the Laity the Laymen, whom they will not have
to meddle in Church matters at all, Bellar. de clericis lib. 1. c. 1. Rhemens.
1 Pet. 2.3. They agree.
So the Prelates and Episcopalians kept up the distinction: and some of the
Presbyterians do at this day; and many of them keep up a distinction between
themselves as Ministers and the other people, excluding others from partaking
of their privileges, and would have no other dare to touch their sacred
function, or enter their pulpits upon pain of an Anathema; We differ.
but putting a difference between themselves and others as men more holy for
their functions sake. But we deny that distinction as Popish, and as the
seminary of a Mass of mischief, discords and decisions; we allow no such
distinction nor difference of persons, 1 Pet. 2.9. Jam. 2.1. but as an Alderman
or Common-counsell-man differs from the other Citizens only in his office, Sim.
which they have not of themselves neither, Sim.
but only of the Cities choice: and as the Speaker of the House of Parliament
differs from other members only in his place. This assertion the blood of
Martyrs witnesses unto, as Walter Brute Fox p. 496. col. 2. who said Christ in
the Gospel used not the name Sacerdos but Presbyter, Martyrs Brute.
that there might be no difference between Ministers and the people,
unless it be to exceed them in knowledge and holy life, so said John Lambert,
Lambert.
Fox p. 1113. and to this the Writers of those called Reformed Churches agree,
Synops. 5. Controv. Q 1.
averring (in lib. 1. de miss. private. abrogand. p. 1.) that there should be no
difference of persons amongst true Christians, as some to be called the Clergy
(or spirituality and inheritance of the Lord) others the Laity, etc. And Calvin
says, Haec appellatio aut ex errore, Calvin.
aut prava affectione nata, etc. Instit. lib. 4. c. 4. sect. 3.

2. Papists make distinction of their Priests by Garbes, Gowns, 2. In
distinction of Garments.
Caps, Garments visibly from others; as if more holy then others, and require
it by canon and injunction, Bellarm. c. 11. Rhemist. 1 Timothy 3. Sect. 7. So did
the Prelates, and so do many Ministers now think it needful to have
distinguishing garments and Garbes from other people;
which we think a superstitious foppery and pride, which the Martyrs witness
with us, and for us, accounting this a ridiculous custom, We differ.
to wear distinguishing robes to be known by; and Dr. Tailor (Fox p. 1324.)
when the Bishop came to degrade him, Martyrs Dr. Tailor.
did disdain to put on the Popish garments calling them apish toys and
trumperies, fit for boys to laugh at: Ridley.
So Bishop Ridley (Fox 1767.) called their distinguishing vestures foolish and
abominable, and too fond for a play:
Cranmer.
So said Bishop Cranmer (Fox 1883.) whilst Bonner was busy in degrading him,
Ha! (says he) all this needed not, for I had done with this gear long ago. I
mention these to show you their minds, that Ministers might go comely as
Christians, but not with superfluous niceties in Clothes, or Colors, Gowns or
Garments, to distinguish them from others; these being base and foolish; but
this will be more manifest in the third Book that follows under the head of
Universities and their Antechristian orders, distinctions and degrees,
which are not yet reformed. And

3. Papists give some of their Clergy principality and power over others of
them, 3. They agree in giving some Ministers superiority. We differ.
Bellarm lib. 1. de clericis c. 13.14. so do the Presbyterians in their
Classes, which we have exploded our discipline and order as detestable, and as
being diametrically opposite to Christ's rules and order left in his Church and
to's Disciples, Luke 22.25. Mark 10. 1 Pet. 5.3. See lib. 1. chapter 11. and 13.
But we affirm all one, brethren, without any superiority or uppernesse amongst
the Pastors, no more then there is among the Churches; and besides what has
been abundantly produced to prove this both in the 1. and 2. Books before; we
shall find antiquity does disowne such a superiority as is pleaded for, in
Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 34. Episcopus in quolibet l^co sedens, stare
Presbyterum non patiatur. A Bishop was not to suffer a Church officer to stand
before him, for intra domum colleg^m Presbyterorum se esse cognoscat, let him
know that he is in Gods house but a fellow and brother, distinct 95. c. 9. and
not a Lord or Ruler;
some there be qui de episcopatu intumescunt, who do swell with pride, and are
big because they are Pastors and Overseers, as if they had not a Ministerial
but an Imperial office, etc. O abominabe!

3. Agree about Tithes.
3. Presbyters and Papists are too alike in their practice too about Tithes
Papists say the payment of Tithes is a natural duty and of absolute necessity
to maintain the Priests, Rhem. Annot. Heb. 7. Sect. 4. and do not our
Ministers, and most of the Presbyterians profess so much? How the noise of
putting down Tithes frights them!
they cannot endure to hear of any other maintenance; this makes them assert the
Orthodox Ministry will down if Tithes down. We dissent.
But we dissent and do (at a great distance) disowne this necessity which they
put upon Tithes, and protest against them as Popish in their practice herein,
(as in the 3. Book may be mentioned at large, when we come to speak of Pastors
maintenance) but for present to clear this we affirm with the Protestants
(against the Papists) that the Law of paying Tithes to the Levites was in part
judicial, Synops. 5. Cont. Q. 6.
in part ceremonial, and in some sense might be said to be moral (though in
that very hardly.) First, judicial in this, 1* Tithes judaicall.
that forasmuch as the Levites (though the 13. tribe) were not much less in
common account then the tenth part, (I say not in number of persons, for the
Levites made but 22000 Number. 3. and the rest of the tribes were 603550. Number. 1.)
but as a tribe they were accounted as the tenth part, and therefore it was
thought fit that the tenth part of the brethrens goods should be allotted them,
which being a Judaicall and politic Law of that Country cannot tie us, They
are left to liberty of civil Powers.
but is left to the libe^ty and discretion of our Governors, as a thing civil
and politic: But 2. Tithes and tenthes were ceremonial as due to the Priests
and Levites for their service at the Altar: Therefore not to be enjoined, but
rather abolished, 2. They were ceremonial.
especially when they are a burden to the people, and abused by the Ministers.
So that in neither of these respects can Tithes be challenged as due, or
imposed as necessary. 3. Maintenance is moral, and must be.
But 3. the moral part of them is the equity of the Law, viz. for the
maintenance of the Levites; so also there is to be sufficient maintenance and
provision to be made for Gospel Ministers (as was before for the Levites) and
this is perpetual,
and by divine right, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. 1 Cor. 9.7, 9, 10, 13, 14, etc. Mat.
10.9, 10. Gal. 6 6, 7. Now we affirm with the reformed Churches (so called)
and Protestants of old against the Papists, these three things.

1. That the Parliament (or any other supreme power over a Nation) may lawfully
throw down Tithes, The Parliament may take Tithes away, yea, and must do it.
without dishonor to God or hurt to his Church; nay with much honor to God,
and advantage to his Church, (though disadvantagious to tithe-servers, and
time-servers, and preaching men-pleasers, the thoughts of this being ready to
break their hearts, which fail them for fear) but to speak and spare not; not
only they may do it, but they must do it, when they find Tithes abused, to
maintain impiety and impudence, idolatry and superstition in parochial
preachers; which evil thing would be suppressed by paying salaries or stipends
to the able and godly, and none else. To clear this,
it appears plainly that it has ever been lawful and in practice in
primitive ages, for the Prince or Supreme power of the Nation to take away such
lands, goods, estates or allowance as have maintained superstition and
iniquity, P^oofes.
which the said Prince or Power has converted to a better and fitter use; see
Constantines decree God. lib. 1. tit. 14. leg. 1. and 3. and so Theodos. So in
Augustines time the Christian Emperors took away many lands and dispossessed
the Donatists. And Aug. renders this reason for it Tractat. in Joan. 6. because
it is by the law of a Prince, King, or Power of the Nation, that Ministers are
maintained by this or that maintenance, in this or that way, with these or
those lands, et secundum jus ipsius possides terram, and according to this law,
or the Nations law do you take maintenance, and enjoy your possessions.
Wherefore the State does great service for God to alter the Ministers
maintenance, if Tithes do keep up a carnal*
covetous Ministry, and maintain pride, idleness, riot or excess, let them
then fall for shame, and the Dependents with them; for so the Idle Priests will
be spoiled; but then be sure they be for better use and ends disposed of, as
belonging to the State; though maintenance belongs to the Church. Caution.
Yet this withal, I do not defend such as are so earnest to tumble down Tithes
for their own ends and private gains.


2. Parliament must allow a competency for a Gospel Ministry in ^^en of Tithes.
2. We affirm a competent maintenance, and comfortable allowance to all able
Gospel Ministers who live soberly and godly, to be of divine institution.
Therefore great care must be had that poor men the Ministers be not as much
troubled, disturbed, disquieted in their spirits, and forced to suites or
wranglings for their Salaries or Stipends, as they have been for their tithes,
rates or former maintenance, but special care should be had in erecting their
Stipends, that the Ministers may be wholly given to their Ministry, 1 Timothy
4.15. and that they may receive them without troubles.

3. In such a way as the people consent to.
3. In as voluntary a way as may be (which we assert most suitable to Gospel
order:) our Savior warrants his Disciples (as Mr. Owen says in's Esh^ol.) to
take and eat of those things that were had by their consent to whom they
preached the Gospel, Luke 10.8. so that the people ought to be free in the
manner of payment or allowance. In Austins time no Tithes paid as now.
In Augustines time vide in Psalm. 146. there was no general law or custom in
the Church (or nation as now is) to pay Tithes. For says he, Decimas vis? etc.
will you pay Tithes? the Pharisees did so; sed tu vix millesimam das, but you
scarce give the thousandth part: Tamen non reprehendo, vel hoc fac, sic sitio,
ut ad istas micas gaudeo, here is a good man indeed; where is such a Minister as
says with him,
yet for all that I find no fault, do so still, for I so thirst after your
welfare that I refuse not your very Crumbs. We see then in those days there was
no forcing to pay Tithes, for he was content with the very crumbs, the ten
hundredth part. So in Council. Aurelianens. cap. 17. Sicut in arbitrio dantis
est ut tribueret quod voluerit, etc. the words are,
as it is the will of the giver to give what he pleases, so if he find him
stubborn and obstinate, and froward which receives it, it is in his power to
revoke the gift, etc. So that the word of God has laid no necessity upon
Tithes, this lay apparent before the Council, for otherwise they would not
have permitted such liberty, and have made the maintenance free and voluntary.
Thus the Bohemians have long since professed their opinion (artic. 15.) say
they, the Priests preach and say, Exhort. Bohem. art. 15.
that men are bound to pay them their Tithes; wherein they say falsely, for they
cannot prove by the new Testament, that our Lord Christ did command it, and his
Disciples warned no man to do so, neither did they themselves receive them. So
among the Muscovites, the Ministers are maintained by certain free
contributions, and certain houses are assigned to them, and they have no law
for Tithes, nor maintenance quoad determinationem quantitatis in respect of how
much:
The Lateran Concell was the first that confirmed them. Anno. 1215.
but thus far for Tithes till the next Book.

4. Papists and Presbyters agree much in their Names of days, (which seems
nothing, 4. They agree in their names of days, months, etc.
but is (indeed) very unsavory and unchristian) as to name days after the
Heathenish Idolaters and custom, from the seven Planets the seven days,
Sunday from the Sun, Monday from the Moon, Synops.
etc. Rhemist. Annot. Apoc. 1. Sect. 6. But we think (with the Protestants
against the Papists in Contro. 9. Q. 8.) this ought to be reformed, We dissent.
and these days are better and more Scripturally (as in Mr. Jesses Scripture
Almanac) termed, the first day, the second, or third, etc. as the Jews called
their days from the Sabbath. So other things and names must be reformed; as of
our months, for March is called from Mars, June from Juno, July from Julius,
August from Augustus, January from Janus, etc. So also the names of Christmas,
Michaelmas, Candlemas, etc. must be altered; and all such names and things as
sprung from Popery (...) Paganism: Fulke.
so said Fulke against the Rhem. and Hierom. in lib. de vest sacerdotal. in
Job. Arcturum and Orionem, etc. Hierom.
God forbid, says he, that these names should be any longer in Christians men's
mouths, Absit ut de ore Christiano sonet, etc.
O then that we would reform! Let young students beware of Heathenish names
and books, (but for this in the next under the head of Universities) and let us
learn our children in the language of Christ and his word, and no longer in the
language of the Dragon or the Beast. I commend such as are to learn this to Mr.
Jesse's Scripture Almanac. 4. They agree.


4. Their practice is much alike about the public meeting houses, called both
by the Papists and Presb. Churches. Fro,

1.That in the Churches God is most to be met with.
1. As the Papists and Jesuits do eagerly maintain (these meeting houses) their
Churches to be more holy then any other places, Bell. lib. 3. cap. 4. de
Sanctis. So do most Ministers (so called) and Presbyterians at this day hold
what they can neither prove, nor dare (to them that discern) openly own, viz.
a specialty in their Churches, as if holier then other places, or at least as
if God were more present and to be found there; and therefore for a world will
not allow of house preaching or the like. We differ.
From which we dissent, whilst we affirm their Churches no better then then
the streets or barnes in themselves, and so say all the (Orthodox) Protestants
against the Papists in Dr. Willet's Synopsis contro. 9. Q. 6. answering all the
Jewish objections which the Papists produce for proof, Dr. Willet.
as that Solomon's Temple was so etc. Proofs.
But our Savior says under the Gospel, there is no such difference of places
to worship in, Joh. 4.21. The hour comes when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor in Jerusalem worship my Father; but v. 24 in spirit and in
trith: Therefore his worship is not now tied or limited to places or Churches
(so called).
As for Solomon's Temple, it was a type of Christ's body, viz. his Church and
Temple more holy then all the World beside, Saints being the living stones
thereof 1 Pet. 2.5. A Jew, says Origin in M^tt. tract. 35. Nihil dubitat de
hujusmodi, Origin.
etc. does not doubt of this, that one place is more holy then another, but for
one that is departed from Jewish fables to Christ's doctrine to say so, is
strange. Besides, if the presence of God makes holy; then mark the promise
(which is not to the place but to the people) Mat. 18.20.
Wheresoever it be that two or three are gathered together in my name, I am in
the midst of them. If example would add anything, we have all the primitive
practice for us, both of Christ praying and preaching on the mount, and the
Apostles in any place, in all places, from house to house. Now although we deny
not, but that a convenient use may be made of those Churches, yet there is not
a necessary use of them as to the places holier then any others, or that God is
more present there. Origin.
For as Origin has it, Locum sanctum in cord requiro positum, etc. I seek a
holy place not in the house but in the heart: My son give me thy heart. Et non
putemus structuram lapidum, etc. Orig. Hom. 5. in Lev. Let us not then think
(says he) that the building of dead senseless stones is the holy place. Mr.
Tindall has sealed to this truth with his blood, Fox p. 125. That Christ has
taken away the difference of places, Witnessed by Martyrs. Tindall.
and will be worshipped in every place, neither is there in his kingdom on^
place holy and another unholy, but all places are indifferent; neither can
thou more heartily and better believe, trust, and love God in the Temple, at
the Altar, in the Church yard etc. says he, then in the barn, kitchen,
vineyard, bed, etc. And to be short, the Martyrs of Christ have honou^ed and
worshipped him in prisons and dark dungeons. Thus he: And so we.

2. The Papists appointed these Churches to be dedicated to Saints, 2. Too nigh
one another about Churches as dedicated to Saints.
and Bell. c. 4. brings an argument to urge Temples to be built to Saints. Now
although the Priests and Presbyters cannot for shame own these Popish decrees;
yet what do they less then approve of their Churches so consecrated and
dedicated? as to S. Mary, S. John, S. James, S. Thomas Apostles, etc when they
profess them theirs, and call them by their names as Sainted, and unde^take
them as such: We differ.
From which we dissent and do declare our dissatisfaction with Parish-Churches
as such, we disown the titles, and them as Temples and Churches, and we abhor
them as consecrated or dedicated as before, and affirm further that many
Ministers approbations of those Churches, and appropriation of them to
themselves, as theirs is not far from that manifest impiety and idolatry which
appeared at their first consecration and Christning (if I may so say) of them,
and does lead people into too much Popery and foppery about them. It were to be
wished that their names were left, and lost and buried never more to rise among
Christians, and that those places also were detested as to the use and end, for
which, and name to which they were consecrated. When superstition began to grow
big, this idolizing of places burgeon'd out also, though more anciently they
were wont to devote them to Christ, as Constantine did his Temple at Jerusalem
to the Savior of the world; but afterward they dedicated them to Saints,
Eusebius. Lib. 4. devit. Constant. Lambert.
which says holy Lambert Martyr, Fox 1108 the very Angels themselves would not
that we should dedicate to the honor of them. And for this take the confession
of Wittenb. Harm. sect 2. p. 46. who say, neither do we consecrate Churches or
Temples to any Saints or Martyrs seeing not they, but their God is our God. It
will do well (because many are and will be taught by the precepts of men, which
is a sad passage, Hos. 5.11.) therefore it would do well that our States would
declare against those Churches as no Churches, that they might never be eyed or
owned more then any other places, further then for conveniencie's sake: so that
as hot violent Ministers might not approve, so not appropriate them as they do.
But that they might be left to the liberty of the godly people, that when the
Minister of the parish preaches not, any other godly Minister or brother might
preach there, as having liberty and allowance as well as the other. For indeed
some proud s^lf-conceited, hot spirited Presbyterians I know, (that account
these Churches their own inheritance) will keep (or solely command) the keys
and suffer none to preach but themselves or of their own feather,
gang, and fancy with them; and on the week-daies keep the door so close that a
mouse may hardly get in, Presbyterians (...) truth out of doo^s.
for fear of too much preaching, which they account dangerous, unless on their
Rounds on Sunday: So that they ^hreaten to arrest such as dare preach in their
Pulpits or Churches (as they say) without their consent. Oh sad! such doings we
have in Countries yet! and are forced to preach under hedges or on mountains
(which I have done my self when we have not had a twig to shelter us from the
rain) But woe be to them; Gospel-propagation by this means.
for they have taken away the key of knowledge, and have not entered in
themselves, and them that were entering in they have hindered, Luke 11.52. I hope
in time, this will be reformed too, which though it seem a trifle, yet will
signify much whilst people have a Popish fancy of finding God there more then
in other houses, Churches how to be dedicated to Saints.
and that the word preached there is better then in private poor souls they can
seek no further. But if these places must be dedicated to Saints,
let them be dedicated to the use of Saints living, 6. Agree against us. They
alike do take advantages at our r^nts, differences, schisms, etc.
and for the Churches (that are so indeed) to meet together. Now to the last
thing I shall name (though I might many) more.

Lastly, The practice of Presbyterians is too alike the Papists, in their
accurate S^rutiny which they have of us, to observe what differences they can
find amongst us, to make their advantage and out cry against us: this is an
old popish trick, Bell. lib. 4. eccles. cap. 9. Do way-bible, p. 50. of the
Jesuits inventions, which as the Papists had to render the Protestants odious;
so the rigid brethren the Presbyterians do all they can to make us a reproach,
and by publishing our weaknesses which they get up from the differences and
divisions that are among the Saints, and Churches. So Edwards Gangrena: Baily
in's Dissuasive: Dr. Bastwick in's Rout: Mr. Prin in 12 Queries, Cummultis
allis, etc. But we with the good old Protestants and Martyrs must acknowledge
too many differences among us, and that about forms too; but we say that unity
is no infallible note or necessary mark of the Church of Christ; for as Mr.
Bradford said, Bradford.
Fox 1622. the Idolatrous Israelites then might have produced and pretended
this argument for them. And then,

2. There may be unity where is not uniformity; and where be differences about
some outward rites, yet all may agree in the thing and the end, Old Latimer
(Fox 1750.) proves and alleges Hierome, Latimer in epist. ad D. Baynton.
whose Translation of the Bible caused dissensions in a Christian congregation,
yet says Hierome, Ego in tali opere nec eorum invidentiam pertimesco, nec
scripturae veritatem pos^entibus denegabo. Hierome.
In such a work as this is, I will neither much fear this envy or fury, nor
yet will I imprison the truth of the Scriptures, or withhold it from them that
do earnestly desire it. But as Bell. did not blush to say in lib. 4 de eccles.
cap. 10. that an hundred several sects were sprung up among Protestants, but
that they (of the Roman Church) were one: so say our hot Antagonists the same
thing for the same end against us; says Mr. Baily in 's Disswasive from the
errors of the times. In the third shameful absurdity (as he says) is found in
our way of Independency; that there be multitudes of errors, dissensions, and
such like things and persons; whose Bellarmine-like language is arrested and
brought to a trial by Mr. Cotton in's answer to him, Part. 1. p. 82. where Mr.
Cotton proves, Cotton.
such reports of the way rather to justify then condemn it: But with all the
Protestants against this charge of the Papists, we affirm as the Apostle does,
1 Cor. 11.18, 19. I hear that the^e be divisions among ye, and I believe it.
For it is necessary that there should be also Heresies among you; that they
which are approved may be made manifest. It is a sign we are in the true way,
when the Devil does take on so, and storm, and studies all he can to set us
together by the ears, and so to break us, who united are terrible as an army
with banners. This makes an argument for us and not against us. We say as
Augustine once to the Pagans: Austin.
Non proferant nobis quasi concordiam suam, etc. Let them not lay before us
with boasting their concord and agreement, nor ^^st in our teeth (or fling on
our faces) the foul discords and dissensions of Christians; for Satan assaults
not them as ^e does us, for quid ibi lucri est, quia litigant, vel damni si non
litigant? What does the Devil get by it if they do disagree?
or lose by it if they do agree? but by sowing discords among true Christians
he helps to hinder the truth, raise ill reports upon the good land, break
professors a pieces, make way for persecutions, and draw off people from the
practice of Gospel Order, and from obedience to Christ's Laws. This is the
Devils cunning to cause contentions, and throw fire brands about our ears, on
purpose to puzzle others and to fright them from the true way into his snares:
Sim.
as a Fowler that has laid nets, lets those birds or prey alone that go on of
their own accord toward his gins and snares; but such as are going from them
and in the way to escape, he meets and frights and scares to make them turn
back, and drive them another way. But furthermore, though we have too too many
divisions and differences amongst us (God knows, which is our daily grief) yet
they are not so many nor dangerous as the bitter brethren would have all
believe by looking into their multiplying glasses: but those few that are, are
not about points of faith, but for the most part forms which are by some too
hotly and hastily pressed and pursued. Yet as Helvetia says, Chapter 17. harm.
sect. 10. p. 310. We cannot deny but the Churches planted by the Apostles were
true Churches, and God was in them and with them, yet there were great strifes
and dissensions in them.

Exhortation to unity to all the Churches.
Lastly, Let all the Saints and Churches take warning, there be such as watch
for their haltings; and will have at them when they find them in fractions,
for then they think they can deal with them! O would to God we were more one!
in one! This unity is the form and face of Christ's Church; and when the face
has flawes and scratches, what a blemish is it to the whole body? In what this
unity consists I hope to handle in the next Book, and to lay before you diverse
rules of walking all as one in the fellowship of the Gospel: Et veritate and
varietate. But for the present, I present you with Ephesians. 4 3, 4, 5. Endeavoring
to keep unity. Churches united (like a Faggot) cannot be easily broken. And the
usefulness of this appears in the several denominations of the true Church, as
his sheepfold, which is one, of which Christ alone is Pastor, Ioh. 10. his
vineyard one, Mat. 20. though many vines in it: and one mother, Gal. 4.26.
whence many children are brought forth, and are legitimate when they come from
the Churches conjunction with Christ, and the word; that incorruptible seed, 1
Pet. 1.23. begets to the faith being preached and propagated. So in Cant. 6.8,
9. though there be threescore Queens or particular Churches that are Christ's
(the Kings) wives who are taken into fellowship with their royal husband by
solemn stipulation, Expos.
and with consent of all friends on both sides, Hos. 2.18. and such as do bring
dowries of praises to Christ their husband, Note.
1 Pet. 2.9. yea and such have the keys given them to open and to shut, and to
order in the government of the family,
whilst Christ (their royal husband) is about more public affairs now in the
world, in heaven and earth: and such Queens too as bring forth their children
true heirs to the Crown, Kings and Princes, Rev. 1.6. yet there be more, viz
fourscore Concubines, or false Churches; that have not such intimate fellowship
with Christ, but only the name without Wedlock or espousals to Christ; so are
all Popish, Prelaticall, Parochial, Presbyteriall, (as now they are) national
and mee^ nominall Churches, though they have the ordinary ordinances, yet few
of them have a dowry of praises for Christ, all of whom are (to speak truth)
without the keys, and cannot order in the affairs of Christ's family, and their
children though born to gifts, parts, or the like, yet very rarely have to do
with the inheritance; Besides these, those that reject Christ, and too too
coily cast him off, and will not marry him, or espouse him, of the vulgar sort,
they are without number, exceeding many, Et nullius numeri, of no account, not
worth numbering; yet of the worst Churches there are most, of the best fewest;
and for all this, says Christ, My Dove, my undefiled is but one, that is all
at unity, and one, 2 Cor. 1.12. and his house is one, 1 Pet. 2. though there be
many stones, walls, chambers, How al Churches differing in forms, are to be one,
vide chap. 5.
and parts, and (differing in form) yet all make but one house: all these
things instruct us to unity; But what kind of unity is this? and wherein does
it consist? mark, it is the unity of the Spirit, wherein all Churches may bear,
for this is not kept and preserved by forms and orders, as other false Churches
have, and the Kingdoms of the world are; no! but by intrinsicall life and
spirit, and inward principles, not by being together, in one body, Churches,
City, or society; but by being of one spirit, and of one spiritual body, which
is Christ's. The heads are these which are offered for unity by the Apostle.
First, there is but one body, i. e. not natural, nor political, but
spiritual, viz. the Church compared to a natural body, Romans 12.4, 5. 1 Cor.
12.12. which takes in the Saints of all ages under all forms, and statures;
seeing none could be left out to complete the body, but that there is need of
Saints under lower as well as under higher forms to make up the body. Unity
urged.
Whence unity is urged, 1. Because all one body.
for that there is need of all to make up the body, viz. of the weak as well as
the strong, of the lower as well as the higher, 1 Cor. 12.18, 20, 23.

2. Unity is pressed here, for that this oneness of body flows from the
oneness of the Head which in corpore primas tenet, 2. One Head which is first
in ordine.
etc. (says Bullinger de unit. eccles Dec. 5. Sermon. 2. is the first of the
body; and is first, and then the body, (of right), for members do not unite
first, and then choose a Head (says Mr. Dell in's way of peace, p. 20.21.
etc.) but first they are (if true Churches) united to Christ their head, Dell.
by faith, (Uniuntur primo capiti Christo per fidem) and ipsum caput
conjungitur membris per gratiam and spiritum, Bullinger.
Bull. in loc. ibid.) and then one to another by love. Therefore all that have
but one Head, viz. Christ, I say all Independents, Anabaptists, or whoever they
be, should be one.

3. Unity is urged in this word one body, because unity of body stands well
with variety of forms, 3. Unity can stand well with variety.
distinction of parts and differences of members, 1 Cor. 12.23. which do not
hinder but help to make up the body, by a sweet symmetry and harmony, Romans
12.6. Licet sint membra plurima, omnium tamen est inter ipsa cons^nsio
pulcherrim^, etc. Bull. because what one member cannot do another can for the
use and service of the Head.

4. Unity is equality.
4. Unity is called for; for that in one body there is an equality of members
all alike, making up one body: Not one more then another; omnes authoritate and
dignitate pares sunt, (says Zanchy de unit. eccles cap. 3.) etsi alter altero
sit diti^r, etc. Zanchy.
So are all Churches equal in dignity and authority though some may be richer,
or bigger then others (as was proved, (...) lib. 8.)

5 Unity is urged, 5. Each contented with their place.
for that as each member is contented with its own place and office in the
body, so ought each particular society to be, 1 Cor. 12.18.

6. Unity is called for, 6. Sympathy.
from the sympathy and fellow-feeling which one member has with another in the
body, 1 Cor. 12.26. and all for and with the whole: mourning with them that
mourn, and rejoicing with them tha^ rejoice (Congruunt and conspirant inter
s^omnia, condolent sibi^i^icem, juvant se mutuo.) Ergo, afflict not one
another. 7 Unity is urged from the Law of love, (and therefore of peace) that
is among the members; 7. By the strings of love which one is drawn by to
another.
one member does not force another, or compel another, nor does one member,
beat, bite, quarrel, or fight with another; neither does one Church with
another that is one in the spirit. And then,

Lastly, Unity is urged for, that every member, 8 Unity is urged from the duty
of one to another and to the whole.
is to serve another, and to serve all (and not himself only (the eye is to see
(not for its self only) but for the hand, and for the foot, and for the whole,
etc. so the ear to hear, etc. and in serving the whole serves its self. Thus it
is among particular Churches, there is no one merely to serve himself, but one
lives to serve another, and then all, therefore the Apostle so earnestly
presses unity, for that they are one body, and are to serve one another; and
all the body of Christ. Let no Church break this bond of love and peace then,
seeing all make but one body.

The 2. Head is one Spirit. Hence unity is urged, for that as one soul, 1.
quickens, comprehends* moves, governs, Unity urged.
1. That one spirits acts all
and acts every member of the body, eye, hand, foot, etc. (sicut per eandem
animam multa membra unita sunt, etc. Zanch. de eccles. c. 3.) So one spirit all
the members; and every particular Church that makes up the body; one Spirit
quickens moves* governs the Independent as well as the baptized ones, etc. Ergo
unity. 2. One spirit unites all things under different forms.
2. For that as one soul vivificates and unites many and diverse kinds of
members, so one and the same spirit puts life into Churches under diversity and
differency of forms and appearances, and administrations. One and the same
Spirit of Christ, unites those in earth, and those in heaven,
those in the east, and those in the west: and though about several works, yet
all by one and the same Spirit, Romans 12.6.7. Hos. 10.11. This then is an
argument for unity. And, 3. Lastly, 3. Acts severally in all and yet but one
and the same.
as one and the same soul acts severally in every member; and so as if every
member had a soul to give it life, etc. yet it is but one and the same soul in
all: So the Spirit is upon, and in every particular Church of Christ, as if
every Church had the spirit solely in, and to her self; the 7. Spirits, Rev.
5.6. for the 7. Churches of Asia, and yet all but one and the same spirit,
though living in every one. This should engage every particular Church to unity
in the spirit, not in the form: that uniformity will never hold nor abide the
day of his coming, Mal. 3.2. 't's diversity of spirits that breaks the peace,
What breaks the peace of the Church and what not. Zanchy.
not the diversity of forms: for as Zanchy observes, Non externarum
ceremoniarum diversitas, impedit veram and essentialem unitatem ecclesiae: it
is not the difference of outward rites and forms, that hinders the Churches
unity, for God has left them to liberty, for every Church to use, or not use,
as it is most for order and edification, as to time, place, number, manner of
meeting, reading, singing, praying, administering Sacraments and such like: In
Augustines time some broke bread every day, some each of the day, Differing in
circumstances in Austin's time.
some thrice a week, some twice, some every first day, some of the first day;
that as to time. Then as to place, sometimes in private, sometimes in public
places, sometimes from house to house, yea as to number in Augustines time,
they broke bread sometimes twice a day, morning and evening, sometimes once
only. See Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 118. ad Januar. As to the manner, sometimes
without prayer, sometimes with prayer, sometimes with many prayers. Buccer. For
this vide chapter 5. lib. 2. at large.
Bucer contra Latomum, 133. So there were many ceremonies and much difference
about baptism, about prayers, about Ministers and their ordination, etc. and
yet was there unit as veritate, (says Aug. Tom. 2. epist. 86. ad Casulanum)
though ceremoniarum varietate: unity in verity, though in variety of forms and
ceremonies; yet true unity stood well with the differences and varieties of
forms, etc. because it was in the Spirit, Psalm. 45.13. the Church was all
glorious within, though without her outward clothing was wrought with variety
and diversity of needle work.

Thirdly, One Faith, in all, therefore Unity is urged, 3 Unity urged for all
that are in one faith.
seeing all Saints in all ages Moses, David, Daniel, Apostles, and we now, and
all that were, are, and are to come, under all forms, live in one and the same
mystery, and truth of Faith, 2. Cor. 4.13. apprehending the same Christ,
applying the same Salvation: so are all the Churches Independent, Baptized etc.
in one Faith, though not in one Form: they live not by form, whether you call
it a Conformity with the Prelates, or Uniformity with the Rhemists, or either
with the Presbyterians,
or neither with us; but they live by faith. Not on this or that form or
worship, so, as to think our selves therefore good, and others evil, this is
contrary to our life of faith, which is all on Christ. This oneness of faith (
est una and eadem totius Ecclesiae. Zanch.) which is one and the same in every
particular Church, Zan^h.
and throughout the whole,
agrees very well with the diversity of gifts, parts, forms, etc. so in and
through all one and the same Christ be apprehended, Therefore Unity may well
stand with it in all the Churches.

Fourthly, he calls for Unity from all that are called into one hope of their
calling: 4. Unity* because all alike in hope.
all that are called by the inward and effectual voice of God into one and the
same hope. All hope for the same thing, none for better or greater then
another. Unit as consist it in hoc, quod una eademque sit omnibus spes, una
eademque omnibus, proposita haeraditas coelestis. Zanch. For 1. Cor. 1.9. Zanch.
God is faithful by whom ye were (all alike) called into the fellowship of his
son Jesus Christ our Lord. All the Churches do a like expect the appearances
of Christ; the day of his coming the effusion of his spirit, the restoration
of Zion the reign of Christ, and the inheritance of the Saints. Ergo, Unity:
for it is for such as differ in their hopes to differ in their love and ways.

Fifthly, One Lord: no more Lords but Jesus Christ, nor no other Lawgiver, in
and to all the Churches; 5 Because but one Lord
therefore all should come under one Lord. For it is diverse Lords and masters
that make diverse Laws, and minds, and wills and ends. Hence a rise divisions
indeed: but one Lord, and one Law, one master, and one mind should be in all
the Churches. Besides he is Lord to all alike, as much to one, as to another.
Ergo, Unity

Sixthly, One Baptism: with which all Churches are Baptized, 1. Cor. 12.13. 6.
One Baptism, idest, of the spirit.
For by one spirit we are all baptized into one body. This is not the sign
which has been often altered* but the substance which will never be altered:
not the pouring on of water, but the pouring on of the Holy Ghost in gifts and
graces; which is in all Christ's Churches; and the Baptism of Christ indeed.
All that are thus Baptized with the spirit, are Baptized into Unity,
into one Body: wherefore the Welsh Curat (with his Welsh Crew) would do well
to learn better English (seeing he would insinuate that he is a Welshman of
Cardiff, The Welsh Curate his Rantisme in his Book so styled.
yet is the Apostle of the English, as he says, as Paul a Jew of Tarsus was,
yet the Apostle of the Gentiles) then to asperse and despise those Churches of
Christ that are under the administration and baptism of the spirit. He
professes openly and in Print proclaims himself to have Paul's spirit, (he
might have said Saul's spirit) not to build up,
but to destroy (so I thought) the Churches. For many of them are (indeed) such
seducing dangerous spirits which cause division, (which I confess I fear are
many of them crept into some Churches.) Now as fi^e with fire, and water with
water agrees well enough, so will all the Saints, Sim.
till there come in an Antipathy of spirit amongst them; and as fire with water
cannot agree together, but make a ^^ge n^yse, quarrel and fight together, and
oppose one another violently, with thundering threatenings till one destroy
another, unless one be thrown from the other. So is it with such contrary
spirits as are crept into the Churches, till they be out again; fire with fire
agrees, because being of one and the same principle and spirit, it adds to and
edifies one another; so the Saints with Saints etc. but water and fire cannot,
because the water is of another principle and spirit, and seeks to destroy the
fire; so it seems the Ranters spirits are Christ-Crucifying and Church
destroying spirits (by their own confessions) and in Antipathy to the Churches
and Saints in fellowship, Caution to the Churches, of that Church-destroying
spirits: for so they say of themselves.
that seek to build up and edify one another, and all in Christ: but when this
spirit comes, the Welsh Curate tells us, 'twill do all that may be to destroy
us. O that the Churches would then have a care in the admission! Of such! who
(as in Rev. 2.2.) say they are Apostles, but are not! (for they are Apostats)*
And the Church of Ephesus was highly commended for their strict trial of them,
and for finding them liars, seducers, and false Teachers; so let us do, and
let us all march on to the Land of Promise, under one and the same hope of our
calling whereunto we are called, and as baptized by one spirit into one body.

Seventhly, Unity is urged among all the Churches, 7 Unity, for that all have
one God and Father alike of all.
for that they have one God and Father of all. One Father without respect of
one more then another, God and Father to all alike, all alike dear to him, 2.
Cor. 6.17.18. who delights in all alike, and walks in the midst of the seven
golden Candlesticks, without respect more to one then to another, as that one
is better me^tall then another; seeing all are alike borne of God, and all
alike in one Covenant, and in one Jesus Christ, Mediator and Head of the
Covenant; therefore he calls for Unity, for that we are all a Kingdom of
Brethren, Mal. 2.10. one God and Father of us all.

2. Above all! We are not one above another; Above all.
but one aequall with another: but only our God and Father in Christ is above
us all, Mat. 23.8.9. we are all his children, and all alike live in his Will;
he alone commands, and blesses us all alike, therefore we should be all in
unity, Psalm. 133.1. O sweet for Brethren to live together in unity!

3. Through all. All alike profess him, possess of his nature, Through all.
and he, through all the Churches, and Ordinances appears abroad too, Isay
2.3. Micah 4.2. Ergo unity amongst all.

4. And in you all. He dwells in all the Churches ((...)) 2. Cor. 6.16. Jo.
14.23. his presence is in this body of Christ mystical, as it was, In all.
it was in Christ's body when clothed with flesh, Col. 2.9.10. Ephesians. 3.17.19.
the same for quality though not (yet) for equality. Ergo, unity amongst all.

These are the bonds of unity, The Churches ^it in unity, is a great ad^antage
to Satan.
to tie all the Churches together in one; Satan has no better sport then to
see them spit fire at one another, and is never in more hopes then then. When
Cyrus came near Babylon with his mighty Army, and found the River about it,
Sim.
over which he was to march with his huge Host impassable and unpossible (it
being so deep) to transport his Army that way, he was at a loss, Vt imp^ret
Divid^t* is his (...)
till he thought of a likely way, which he as suddenly set upon; he caused it
to be divided many ways, into many Channels, and several Currents, whereby the
main River sunk, and so on a sudden, and with great facility he got over the
River with his Army and took the City with ease. Thus Satan does when he has
any design against the Saints and Churches; he sets them into Divisions many
ways. Therefore my Council, as from the Lord, is to love one another, as
Christ's Disciples, and be steadfast in one spirit, Phil. 1.27.28. and then be in
nothing terrified by your adversaries: In unity, the greatest terrou^ that can
be to Christ's enemies.
All the powers of Hell cannot hurt thee then. It was the Council Severus gave
to his Soldiers, in vobis pacem and caeter^s dispicite: be one among your
selves, and a Fig for your Enemies; so ye will then be terrible to all Christ's
Enemies in the world, for they shall know, that out of Sion shall the destroyer
come, and they shall find Jerusalem a burdensome stone. Sim.
Vis unita fortior, as Mathematitians say of figures, the strait figure or line
is weakest, but the circle is strongest of all others and the best, and
usefullest, because one part has fellowship with another, and meets another,
and holds up one another; so should Churches help to hold up one another; and
as one line runs into another, so should they, and such are strongest and best
that are so united; the Lord delights in them most too: O my Dove! my undefiled
is one! this unity delights his heart. People seem much to eye the Churches
now; now they appear in public, and preposterous spirits are ready to judge
the last news of the Fleet beaten, and the Foraigne Nations, preparing and
threatening, to be prodigious signs, presaging ruin to the Churches. which
puts me in mind of Cicero's Oration, and answer to the Southsaiers, who upon
news of Earthquakes, and such terrible signs foretold great calamities ready
to come upon the State, (as our star gazers, and sign-observers do now but
says the Orator,
fear not; for the Gods will easily be reconciled to us, if we be but
reconciled one to another: so I say to such, our God will easily be at peace
with us, so we be but at peace one with another; and then let them (all the
world if they will) associate themselves together, and they shall be broken a
pieces: yea, in order to their breaking a pieces they must associate themselves
together, Isai. 8.9* and Gog and Magog from all parts of the world, must be
gathered together in battle, in number like the sand of the sea* and besiedge
the Saints, and circumviron the beloved City of God; but fire shall come from
God (the spirit of God) out of Heaven (the Churches and Saints) and shall
devour them and eat them up; as in Rev. 20.8.9. Out of their mouths shall come
fire and devour their enemies, Rev. 11.5. and whosoever hurts them must in
this manner be killed; No fears if we want not in Unity
so that there is no fear of all the foes in the world, though they be as many
as the sand of the sea. But if any thing hurt us, it will be want of Love; if
any thing will nothing us, it will be want of unity. Unities severed make no
number, Letters divided make no syllable, syllables divided make no word, Sim.
words divided make no speech, members divided make no body, stones divided
make no wall; so that without unity, all stands for nothing,
as a Cipher. I fear nothing so much as want of unity and love among Churches
and Members: for as Shepherds observe, Sim.
when sheep fall a butting one another, a storm is nigh; so may the Pastors,
that Christians contending, and butting one against another, and Churches
justling one against another presages a sad day, without mercy prevent;
wherefore to ease my heart, and unburthen my spirit, I am heartily possessed
with three things that will produce unity indeed. Which I shall hint to the
Churches, and so wipe my pen. Three things expected. ^ an hour of Trial
short, but sha^pe to the Churches.


1. A short but sharp time to try the Churches, that those that are approved
may remain; which day shall be short for the Elects sake, and is called but
three days and a half, Rev. 11 9 though in former years, the time of
persecution was long and hotter,
for now their bodies shall be above ground all this time of persecution in the
sight of all Peoples, and Nations, till the spirit of life enter in afresh, 1
Proph.
and in a fuller measure then ever before, and the witnesses stand upon their
feet again, v. 11. Then woe, woe be to the Nations to the purpose: And this
time will be so short that it is called the hour of temptation, Rev. 3.10. and
the hour of Judgment, Rev 14.7. and for a little moment his indignation, Isa.
26.20. 1. Pet. 4.17 and then will the Lord ar^e to punish the inhabitants of the
earth: they must begin at Gods house, 1 Pet. 4 17. but end in and with the
world. Then sinners in Sion shall be afraid, Isa. 33 14 and terror and trembling
shall surpriz^ the Hypocrites that are in the Churches; for they shall not be
able to abide his coming like a refiners fire, Mal. 3.2 3. nor can they endure
to dwell with those devouring fires, and everlasting burnings, which the upright
in heart shall live in. Yet this trial will be well for the faithful ones,
for though two parts will be found dross and left behind in the hour of
trial, yet a third part shall remain and be purified, and shall call upon the
Name of the Lord, and he will hear them and will say, this is my people, and
they shall say, the Lord is my God, Zach. 13.8.9. this hour will scatter
Shepherds as well as sheep, or Pastors as well as People. The Churches more
one then ever.
But then shall the Churches be more in unity then ever, and like gold run
melting together out of the refiners fire: for as a flock of sheep are loose
about, Sim.
and scattered, and every one for himself feeding, and divided one from
another, till comes a dog amongst them, and then they run together and keep
close one to another: and so are the Churches too much at a distance one from
another, and each one minding her self too much and her companions too little,
and too much divided, and (doubtless) will be till this time of trial comes, and
makes them keep together and closer in love and unity; so in the Prelates
times,
Oh what a sweet unity! love! and harmony was among the Puritans! and
Professors! when they were under persecution! how they prized one another! and
so it will be again and much more.

Secondly, This Unity of the Churches will be honored from Heaven with a large
effusion and pouring out of the spirit upon them; 2. Proph.
The spirit poured out upon all.
for in that day they shall know the Lord to be their God, and as one people
they shall acknowledge and never be ashamed, and then shall it come to pass,
that he will power out of his spirit upon all, Joel 2.27.28. And by this they
will be yet more one then ever before, Then unity most of all.
as appears Act. 2.17. and 4.31.32. when those that were filled with the holy
Ghost, were of one heart and one mind, and of one soul, neither said any of
them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, and then great
Grace was upon them all. Expos.
Great grace then indeed! Having favor with all people, Act. 2.47. This
blessed day is hard by us; when Jerusalem shall be a praise in the whole Earth,
round about us; but we must be purged first. In Ezekiel. 37.7. as the bones there
came together by the shaking, Sim.
bone to bone, so will the Churches by the shaking before mentioned, in the
time of trial, cling and come up closer together then ever before, Church to
Church, and all as one. Though they were before (as the bones) scattered, so in
their affections, and far asunder, they shall be shaked together, believe it;
and then they shall receive life, and breath from God more then ever before, v.
9.10.
Yea they shall not only be shaked together, but tied together with sinews and
cords and laws of Love that shall never break: and this is to be before the
full wind from all 4. parts blow upon them and fill them with breath and life;
When?
So I am assured from the Lord, and the Churches shall find it, that they must
be united together with strong ties and laws of Love, even with the liveliest
sinews and strength of affections, before they shall enjoy that great and
notable effusion of the spirit (which is the wind that blows where it lists)
in such a measure as from all parts, in all gifts, graces,
and admirable administrations as from all quarters, to enliven them, and
multiply them; for in that day they will be as an exceeding great army, Eze.
37.10.

Lastly, 3. Proph.
consider the great and notable day of the Lord is then (the next) that comes
upon us, 3. The great day^ the Lord the nigher it is, the more Churches will be
united in every year
Joel 2.31. and Zion shall be glorious. In the mean time as the lines of a
circumference, the nigher they come to the center, the more they are united,
and the nigher they are one to another. So for certain, Sirs, the nigher we are
to that time, the more we are united, and the nigher we are one to another; So
that we shall see every year the Churches more and more united and that in the
spirit, until the dispensation of the fullness of times, when all things shall
be in one. Ephesians. 110.

The Lord hasten these happy days: I was pressed in my spirit to acquaint the
Churches thus much, and to call upon them to unity, that the enemies might not
have such advantages against us, as they do take for our defect in this duty;
and that our unity consist not in forms but in the spirit; as for practical
rules heerto, I shall refer the Reader to the following book. But thus I have
shown wherein the Presbyterians and Papists agree and are alike in Discipline,
Doctrine, Ordinances, and Practices. In Discipline, for the Church Catholic,
Head of the Church, matter of it, force of it, foundation of it, and in laying
their foundation, and about the Keys, and Synods, and in Officers, to all
which we have declared our dissent and abhorrance, and so for Doctrine, and
Practices in all, in near fifty particulars, wherein I have clearly instanced;
the Lord make his people in England wise enough to avoid such Popish tenets and
doctrines, and give our Brethren that power and will to cry Down with
Antichrist, Down with Babylon, as we do that hear the voice; lest pertaking of
her sins they partake of her plagues, Rev 18.4. And let them not think me their
enemy for telling them the Truth. Gal. 4.16. But to the 3. Consid.

The 3 Consideration (to come to a Conclusion) is, that the Gospel Order in the
Congregationall Church Way (which we have treated of) restored to its
primitive purity and beauty, This Gospel way is.
is one of the great promises of these latter days; and the spiritual glory
of it sparkles in sight of the saints, (...)
out of many promises, prophesies, and variety of the richest types; and is to
stand apparently distinct by its self, from all other orders, ways, worships,
or Churches whatsoever, as the visible Kingdom of Jesus Christ, for his
subjects to walk in.

1. The great promise of these later days.
That it is one of the great promises to be accomplished in these latter days,
appears, Isa. 2.2.3. Micah. 4.1. Isa. 35.1. 8 9.10. Isa. 30.21. Psalm. 110.3.
Ps. 46.2.3.4.5. and 48. P. 3. Malach. 3.17.18. Isa. 51.3.4. Dan. 2.32.33.34.
Act. 3.21. Dan. 8.3. The higher is last; the best wine at last, and the glory
of the latter house shall be greater then the former. Hag. 2.6.7.9.21.22.23.
For further Explication (though I have been full in former Chapters, yet to
conclude this) I shall name these 6. special Heads which ensue, to prove this
General Assertions without exception.

1. Christ shall reign over all in these latter days.
The Prophesies and mproises are full for Christ's reign, as Head and alone
Ruler in his Church, especially and most visibly in these latter days. He
alone shall reign over them in Zion and for ever. Micah 2 17. Psalm. 99.1.2.
Isai 9.2.7. and 22.23. Psa. 2.6. And is set up King in Sion. He will be
greatest in Zion^ Rev. 2.26. Yea and rule the nations to, Rev. 11.15.17.18.
Zach. 14.9. Therefore all power is given him in heaven and earth, Church and
State,
Mat. 28.18. to rule all, as being more excellent then the mountains of prey,
Ps. 76.4. till all be under him, 1. Cor. 15.25. Thus he ^ides in our days
conquering, and to conquer. But to speak to his Headship; In his Zion, his most
special habitation and Kingdom. He is the alone Head, Especially as Head in
his Church or Churches.
of whom all members aptly joined, receive life and growth. And this he is to
us, as he is one with the Father, Jo. 17.21. From whom we have life and grace.
In especial manner he is to be manifested such a Head in these days of
restoration, Hosea 1.11. the children of Judah and Israel (though they differ
as to form, as Independents and Anabaptists etc.) shall be gathered together,
and appoint to themselves one Head, Expos.
and come up out of the Land, for great shall be the day of Jezreel. So the
Churches of Christ shall be all one, as we said before in Unity, under one
Head, viz. Jesus Christ. For although the Churches have stood off hitherto one
from another, as the 10. Tribes did from Judah, and so we^e divided into two
parts, as Independents and Anabaptists, God has promised to unite them, under
one Head, (when as circumcision and uncircumcision shall be nothing, but a new
creature) though for a time by reason of our too much Idol-worship, God
suffered them to divide, 1. King. 11.33. Yet God has promised the elect of
them shall be all one under one Head*
i. e. Christ whom they shall appoint, choose, proclaim, cry up with one
suffrage; Christ a King, how and to whom.
he says not a King for so he shall be to the Nations, and rule them with a
rod of iron, but a Head, and so he shall be to the Churches, to testify the
firm, sweet and inseparable union they have with Christ, as a Head to give
vital spirits power, nourishment, ^ife, wisdom, influence, And a Head, how.
and all to them, as the members; i. e. a more admirable, useful happifying
excellent union, beyond comparison, then can be between a King and people. And
then they shall come up out of the Land, the Churches shall arise out of that
of Babylon which held them captive; out of those forms which made them differ,
and from those Idols that caused their divisions, then shall they come out of
that Land that they were in bondage in, and be no more entangled with those
yokes. Gal. 5.1. and all this in the spirit, as Zanchy observes on Hosea
because great shall be the day of Jezreel. That is seminis Dei, of the holy
seed, the elect of God, Zanch.
that is, of Christ* as Psalm. 118.24. the great and glorious day of Christ's
reign, and great shall be the day of his Churches; i. e. the saints thus
congregated, that have (as before is declared) suffered affliction (for a short
time) in the valley Jezre^l, v. 4. wherefore in a word: Expos.
Exhort all the Churches (as Hosea 2.1.) say to your brethren Ammi, and to your
sisters Ru^hamah, say one to another Ammi my people. A word to the Churches.
The Lord says Ye are my people, the people that all these things concern, and
this great day will come upon. O preach this doctrine! and say to them, Ye are
my brethren and sisters: O that we would begin this! to stir up one another,
and to provoke one another to love and good works, Heb. 10.24.25. and so much
the more the nigher this day is, yea to call abroad to such of Israel and Judah
that are not yet gathered with you under this one Head, that they may make
haste to come up out of the land, wherein they are captive to the King of
Babylon, the Beast! saying to them without, there is mercy, and they may be
received;
for though by nature they are Loruchamah, and aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel, without grace, without God, without mercy, or love; yet by grace they
are Ru^hamah, i. e. a people that have found mercy, and hope, and may be
received as we, for his bowels are not shut, but means are offered. 2. The
precious Saints, the matter of these latter days.


Secondly, the Prophesies and promises premonstrate the most precious matter
which the Church shall be made up of in these last ages, as jewels, Mal. 3.17.
(...) his peculium, or picked out ones, in that day: So Esa. 54 11, 12. Behold,
I will lay thy stones with Saphires and fair colors, Expos.
upon Christ as the Foundation of his Church, (which is already laid, and from
this very day of the laying (Christ to be our) Foundation, Proph.
God stands engaged to bless us: Haggai 2.18, 19. From this day will I bless
you, says the Lord, your Churches shall be blessed, upon this foundation shall
be laid up the most excellent stones, living stones, yea the liveliest, 1 Pet.
2.5. having the fairest appearance, and the fullest virtue and efficacy. The
Jaspers, viz. are those that are heavenly minded, Jaspers who?
meant by the excellentest Skie-colour'd ones that are, those whose
conversations are in heaven, and contemplations about heaven. The windows, viz.
those that give light, or rather, through whom light (as they receive from the
Sun) comes to others, are to be of Agates, or rather as some read it, Agates
who?
of Chrystals excelling all in purity and sanctity, having of that pure river,
clear as Crystal in Rev. 22.1. yea and the gates by whom they enter into the
Churches, are to be as Carbuncles, Trem. says red stones, Tremel.
Carbuncles being of a red color like fire: the word (...) signifies fiery,
burning, as well as red, Carbuncles who?
and seems to carry out the excellency of those that do receive others (as
gates to let in) into the Church, viz. being full of the Word and Spirit, like
fire in the bones, by the searching Doctrine of the Word they make trial of
those that would enter, Rev. 2.2. as fire purges and tries, and proves, so do
they, being most excellent in divine and spiritual knowledge; yea, Most
precious Stones.
all the borders of precious pleasant stones; all this shows the excellency of
the Church, for matter, which is foretold by this Prophet, especially relating
to these latter days, all the stones (of which this building consists) even
from the Foundation to the topstone, yea and to the very borders, are to be of
the most precious stones, the precious from the vile, Ier. 15. not good and bad
together, or precious and common together, as have been hitherto, but all of
precious stones, (at least so in appearance) as Chrystals, Agates, Saphires,
Carbuncles, and such like holy and excellent Saints,
shining several ways for singular uses, with gifts and graces, and what is
spoken before figuratively follows plainly: They shall be all taught of God, i.
e. by the Unction from on high, 1 Jo. 2.20.27. and built up in righteousness,
i. e. in grace, spirit, power* etc. Such transcendent matter to make up the
Church in the latter days, lies evident for an undeniable truth, in Rev.
21.17. 18.19.20. and the foundations of the wall of this City were garnished
with all manner of precious stones etc. but that this is spoken of the Church
here, Expos.
appears in Rev. 21.2. called New Jerusalem coming down to dwell amongst men:
not that Jerusalem above, Gal. 4.26. as Paul speaks of it; but the Tabernacles
(i. e. every particular Church) of God with men,
to whom the Lords presence is sweetly promised, v. 3. and all former
afflictions and persecutions are to be removed, v. 4 and times of restitution
for new things to be restored, v. 5. Now let the Churches that live in the
days when the seven Vials full of the seven last plagues are to be powered out,
know; A word to the Churches.
that the particular description of their glory and excellency is obvious, and
view-able, for though before (till those days) they will be but as poor
tabernacles with men; yet then they (in unity as before) shall be the Great
City* having the glory of God, v. 10.11. and light, like a stone most precious,
(...), i. e. Luminosum Corpus, lumen ex se diffundens: i. e. the presence of
God most gloriously in her, viz. such a presence, and such a light shall the
Churches then be filled with, as will give and communicate light to others
round about; In this sense shall the glory of the latter house be greater then
of the former, for that in the former the presence of the Lord was manifested,
more according to Gods old way of appearing in the Tabernacle or Temple; that
is the Temple was then filled with smoke, When they shall excel.
as Rev. 15.8. his presence, and power* and glory, etc. appeared in smoke, and
were discernable so far as might be in smoke;
but then (it is ere long) there shall be another manner of manifestation of
God in the Churches more glorious, and excelling in power and presence, life
and light, then ever before* viz. by filling the Churches with a bodily light,
such a substantial manifestation of himself, as shall give light to others,
and no more in smoke, dark veiles, and forms, (which hurt the best sight
most) as before, but in pure light, clear and light discoveries of himself by
his spirit, filling the Churches therewith. And further, a further and more
special description of their happiness from the excellency of the man^er
which he shows to be all precious, v. 18 all the City of pure gold, which
fires or flames of persecution cannot consume, but make more illustrious and
pure, and will never wear away, but will be perpetual for substance;
yea the very outsides, and lowest matter most precious, and like precious
stones. Here are twelve named in number alluding to Exodus 28.15. the 12. Gems
set on the breast plate, for the High Priests ornament. Hebr. Coshen, agreeing
with Casha^; for the Saints are so to Christ the High Priest and in his
breasts; and will be abundantly unto his praise: As an Oracle silent, yet
seeing Chazah. And there were to be four rows, foure-square, doubtless to
signify a coming in from East,
West, North, and South, but what kind of matter shall make up the Church, may
something appear from the several significations and natures of the stones;
as first the Jasper, of the Hebr. Jashpeh, growing in Scythia and Persia, they
be of several sundry colors, but the best is the azure-green* or airy green,
1. Who are Jaspers.
which has a heavenly brightness, (which Pliny calls, Aerizusa) of admirable
beauty, sparkled with many blood colored drops, and it is of incomparable use,
and has variety of good in it; hung about the neck, it eases pains, in the
inwards, and comforts them says Galen, stays the violent current of blood out
of the nose, and mulierum menses prohibet; for it has an astringent faculty:
And some say it availes much against libidine and the luxurious lusts of the
flesh. Such excellent matter must Christ's Church, the new Jerusalem in these
latter days be begun with; And we find the former ended with it, In what
properties they ^xcell.
Exodus 28.20. and indeed we must begin where the former ended, and so go on to
exceed; such are Jaspers then, that are (as we said before) most heavenly
minded, and enlightened, sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, and of
incomparable use, being full of divine (though it may be occult) qualities, of
a strict conversation, and having an astringent power to take people off of
luxurious, libidinous, wicked lives, and from making provision for the flesh to
satisfy the lusts thereof.

Secondly, The Sapphire which is the Hebrew name, but in Chaldee is Shabz^z, is
very pleasant in the eye, 2. Who are Saphi^es.
which the Medes most account of; it is hard and durable, and delights and
chears the whole man. It is good against choler, melancholy, and the stings of
Scorpions, says Albertus Magnus. It expels Poison, and cures some pestilent
diseases; such are Saphirs then, (and shall make excellent matter for the
Church) who are precious in the eyes of all who have sweet, humble, In what
properties they excel.
self denying, amiable cariages (which were to be wished were more among all
Church Members now) as they had in primitive times Act. 2.47. to be praised and
highly accounted of, of all; such do refresh and delight the souls of others,
they are durable too, and will never fa^l away from the Church, or forsake the
truth, nor be frighted away from profession but endure fiery trials; such are
very vigilant over their own Choler, and do much curb and cast by their
passion, and they serve the Lord merrily with gladness of heart, and rejoice
in the Lord always, and are very useful against many reigning, raging
pestilentiall distempers, and venomous lusts to suppress them, allay the rage,
comfort the heart, and cure the disease. Such as these are in the second place
very precious matter: and further as some say, the Sapphire will keep a man more
chaste, by abating the boiling and burning heat of the flesh, and that it is
good to clear the eyesight, to restrain sweat; and so (doubtless) such Saints
are signified hereby that do keep their hearts and affections most pure to
Christ,
and most chaste and alone to the Lord, without running a whoring (as too many
do) to covetousnes, the world, flesh, pleasure, or the like, that will not
suffer their hearts to be taken up with any thing but Christ; and therefore
they curb and cool the heat of carnal concupiscence by the virtue and divine
power which is in them. And thereby these have the quicker and clearer sight
and faculties of understanding, and do much help others in their sight,
especially such as have their eyes oppressed with ill humors; and they much
restrain sweat and labors after things that will not profit them, and thereby
do keep their souls and bodies in the better temper, and grow the stronger and
heartier after things above; these are precious matter.

3. Who are the Chalcedonie's In what p^operties they excel.
Thirdly, A Chalcedonie, which is in Hebr. Nophe^, a sort of Carbuncle, as Pliny
says, lib. 37. chap. 7. it is plain simple stone in appearance, yet it has a
fiery brightness, and grows in the Northern parts, and is found about the
Straits of the sea of Chalcedon. Some say it is denominated from the Hebrew
Cadcod, as is before mentioned in Isay. 54.12. On this stone was Judahs name
engraven, of whose Tribe came Christ. Heb. 7.14. And this stone is of singular
use against foolish phantasms and flying illusions, and does very much
strengthen the constitution of the body (vide Zanch. de Ter. meteoris lib.
3.12. Zanch.
) The mystery of this is of such Saints that are precious within, though simple
and plain and of no account without, and that promise but little by outward
appearance, and yet are full of fire, and of the Holy Ghost, In what properties
they excel.
(of the Tribe of Judah) deeply engraven in them, and on them, as Ignatius was
said to have the very Letters JESUS written on his heart; such are found in the
faith, Ignatius.
and found in judgment, and of great use, and able to suppress the
fantastical flying conceits of unfound empty professors, pretenders, and
busy brains; as in every age many will be about to spread their sprights, and
whine out their whimsies and delusions; and such precious matter will be of
much use to strengthen whereto they belong.

Fourthly, the Emerauld, Smaragd. or in Hebr. Bareketh, 4. Who are the Emeralds.
of Barak, which is Lightning, Ezekiel. 1.13. is of a most pleasant, lovely,
lively fresh green color; on this stone Levi was ingra: ved: it grows in
Scithia; it is a very soft stone, and soon broke, and is not to be forced: It
is said of a certain King of Hungaria, that once when he lay with his Wife,
having this stone on his finger, it flew in three pieces, which may easily be
by overheating it; therefore but few wear them: It is a great enemy to Bacchus
and Venus, and cures many Diseases, helps the Memory, and is good for the
sight, and much expels dreams and fancies from men when they would sleep; and
certainly such Emeralds are those Saints that lively represent the Green
Spring, that is come; In what properties they excel.
the flowering and blossoming days that do come, that are fat and green
Olives in the house of the Lord, ye green figs that gives a good smell, and
such as are Priests and Levites in Christ, that are very tenderhearted; a
little passion, or pride, or carnal heat, of flesh, etc. makes them humble and
soon breaks their hearts; they cannot endure sin, no not appearances of evil,
or the least occasions to sin;
though there be but few of them, they comfort many a soul, cure many a
disease, help many a bad memory, enlighten many a dark understanding, and do
much enable against doting dreams, and foolish fancies that have no good
bottomes.

These are excellent matter indeed, but they will not endure to be forced, but
easily yield, and are willing in the day of his power.

Fifthly, the Sardonix: the word seems to be made up out of the Sardine and
Onix stone, named in Hebr. Jahalom, 5. Who are the Sardonyx.
(says Ainsworth) of smiting; for it is a very hard stone, and will bear
banging blows: it is (as Pliny notes lib. 37. c. 6.) of a fleshly ruddy
color, Ainsw.
to be found among the Indians and Arabians, and is excellent to make one
modest; and may mean such sort of Saints as are found and will suffer all
sorts,
yea the violen^est knocks, strokes, stripes and calamities for Christ's sake,
the Churches and Gospels sake, and yet will hold out and nothing fear at all,
and yet such as are innocent as Doves, very modest men, full of humanity and
courtesy to all, stoutly disposed and very gracious.

6. Who are the Sardius.
Sixthly, the Sardius, called in Hebr. Odem, of Adam, red. For it is a Blood
colored stone; the Chaldee calls it Samkan, and Thargum* Jerusalemi, Samketha,
it is found among the Sardians, whence it has it is name: it is of excellent
use to cheer up the heart, and as Paraeus further notes, to drive away fears,
to cause boldness, Paraeus.
to stay the issue of blood, to put an edge upon the ingenuity etc. It has an
attractive power over wood, and draws it to it self, as the Loadstone draws
iron, and it is excellent to receive a Seal or Image, neither is it dulled by
the often using it: such precious matter are meant by this, who are of the
second Adam, the image of him who is of the heaven heavenly, In what properties
they excel.
1. Cor. 15. washed with his blood, and so presented to the Church; such can
comfort poor souls as they have been comforted, 2. Cor. l. 4. and then cheer
drooping hearts by declaring their own experiences: these Christians (and
precious stones) will not suffer fears to possess them, but by faith are
above fears, full of fortitude and courage for Christ and the truth, and
evermore emboldning others to stand to it, to fight a good fight of faith,
being clothed with the whole armor of God, and to be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might, putting an edge upon them to act and stir for the
truth, and never to be idle; yea such as are attractive to draw the wood of
Lebanon,
the Cedars of the Forest, and fit matter for the builders use into fellowship
with them; and such as have the image of God, the likeness of Christ admirably
on them, and the plain seal of the spirit in them* and such as are never
weary with well doing, nor dulled with using, these are precious ones indeed
that shall be found (ere long in more plenty) fit matter for the Church;
although as yet but few of them are gathered, for they are somewhat obscure in
outward appearance.

Seventhly, the Chrysolite, which in Hebr. is Tharshish, the name of the Sea in
Psa. 48.8. for it has the name of a golden stone, 7. Who are Chrysolites.
and is called in Chaldee Crum-jamma, of the Sea^ole, because that the glorious
splendour of it is most splendent, shining golden sea green; it grows among the
Indians and Arabians, and fetched out of black earth oftentimes. It is of
excellent use to refrain from Venery and lust, and laid under the tongue it
does admirably abate the thirsts of feav^rs, or violent desires, and it shines
loveliest early, hora matutina, by morning light; such precious souls shall be
found out too, that shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, which is to
be as a mighty flood; and as the Sea covers the Earth, (Seagreen) i. e. having
their color and properties from this Sea and these waters. Such as were
fetched from the Blacks, of darkness into light; out of the black Earth of the
first man, by the power of God, In what properties they excel.
(although they will with the Chrysolite retain some signs of that place from
whence they are fetched, by some black spots which will appear viz. in their
infirmities) they are great enemies to the lusts of the flesh, and to carnal
concupiscence, having in them a restringent faculty to curb and keep back
themselves from running out; and they find a virtue in them, that allayes all
passionate and excessive thirstings after the world, or things below; and are
means to cool this in others that have violent Feavorish humors, and call and
cry for those things to satisfy them and to quench their thirst, which will
but increase their thirst; but these Saints have virtue from Christ (the Sun
that shines on them and makes them precious) that they shall never thirst (so)
more, Jo. 4.14. and these precious ones will seek the Lord early, as Mary
Magdalen did early seek Christ, Jo. 20.1. even while it was yet dark; they will
lose no opportunity, but take it betimes, and they shine best earliest. Such
are the precious matter promised to make up the Church in these last ages.

Eighthly, Beryll, in Hebr. Shoham, in Gr. Beryll, 8. Who are the Berylls.
the Chaldee is Burla; Pliny says it is an Indian-stone, but Dionysius that it
is found in Babylon also, of a watrish, sky-colour, for the most part, and
somewhat dull to look on (although they be of diverse sorts, and they having
diverse colors.) This is also of exceeding good Use, against the humors of the
Eyes, and to suppress sighs, and to help the ill liver, In what properties
they excel.
and (set to the Sun) to kindle a fire, etc. Such Saints are precious matter
indeed who excel in these properties, that are not only sky-colour'd, and
heavenly, but (watrish) humble and lowly, and willing to be of no account for
Christ's sake; they are little or nothing in appearance, but full of vigor and
virtue to comfort souls, to suppress sighs, and cause sorrows to fly away, to
help their sight, to remove humourish obstructions, and to work upon ill
livers, and to restore them to soundness; and having the power of Christ, the
influences of this sun of righteousness with them, they wonderfully inflame
souls, and kindle a fire in their hearts to embrace and embosome the things of
God, to long after communion with Christ, to be in love with him and his
ways, and to set souls a burning after grace and glory; such as these are
indeed precious matter.

9. Who are the Topaz.
Ninethly, a Topaz, of the Gr. Topazion, in Hebr. Pitdah, whereunto ^^pad or
Topaz is taken, found among the Aethiopians, Job. 21.19. Pliny says it grows
among the Troglodites, as Dionysius says it is an Indian Gemme, in Chaldee
Jarkam and Jarkatha, that is green; it is of a rich golden green color, it is
of excellent use against the Emrods, it affords (sometimes) a milky liquor,
cures a wound, helps the Lunatic, and keeps much from mutability. Surely such
Saints are precious matter, and useful Gemmes, that the latter days shall
find out, In what properties they excel.
for curing of many sharp humorsome diseases, that would obstruct the passages
of the excrements, which would be to the hurt of the body, such as would hinder
the casting out of traditions,
and excrementall doctrines which will hurt the Church: Such Saints shall say,
as Isay 30.22. Get thee hence: Oh fie upon it! out with them (as the word bears
it) as with excrements. Such Saints shall afford sweet milky consolations for
Babes, out of their bellies shall flow Rivers of water of life, they shall be
weak to the weak, as well as strong to the strong; they shall bind up many a
wounded and broken Reed, and pour Wine and Oil into the sad gashes of wounded
spirits, applying seasonable promises and Balsomes, yea the lunatic ones, that
fall sometimes into the waters (of drunkenness and iniquity) wherein without
mercy they will be drowned, and sometimes into the fire (of their lusts,
fitting them for the flames of Hell, if they be not helped by grace:) Such as
these may be means of recovering, and of confirming many in the Faith, and
keeping them from changing with every wind of Doctrine; and they do themselves,
and endeavor to make others hold fast their profession, and that without
wavering. Oh these will be precious matter too!

Tenthly, A Chrysoprasus, in Hebr. Shebo, in Gr. Achate, in Eng. Agate, the
name signifies a golden green, 10. Who are the Chrysoprasus.
and indeed the best of them are green sparkling with golden guttulis; it is of
excellent use to revive the spirits, to help the Eyesight too, and to shine
most excellently in darkness: Oh! In what properties they excel.
such Saints will be precious matter indeed! that shine best and most in
afflictions! troubles! nights! in a time of darkness! when they see no light!
these will be strong in faith, and are best in worst times, and therefore must
needs revive the spirits of others, and quicken them, which be of great use to
help the weak-sighted*

Eleventhly, the Hyacinth, or Jacinth, in Hebr. Leshem; it is but little, but
excellent, of a bright purple color, 11. Who are the Hyacinths, or Jacinths.
or somewhat violet-like, found among the Indians, and Aethiopians, (and so is
the following:) this is of admirable virtue to preserve from the blast of
lightnings, the danger of Plagues and Pestilence in corrupt and infected airs;
and as Albertus testifies, it causes sweet rest and sleep, defends the animal
spirits, and makes men rich: Oh the unspeakable excellent use of the precious
gems the Saints of the last days! In what properties they excel.
such Saints are surely meant here, as are violet-like, humble, with their
heads low, but hearts high; sweet and savory, the first flowers (as it were) of
the time, the witnesses of the Churches spring, and of the Suns approach;
these will be able by the divine virtue in them* to keep themselves and others
too from hurt by tempests storms or flashing persecutions or troubles; yea,
from the contagion of sin, and pestilentiall diseases, and corruptions which
reign in others, and make them rage; these keep up their spirits for God and
the Truth, and do defend the life of God in them from all that would offend
those vital and soul-spirits; yea such will be a means to make themselves and
others to rest in Christ (their beloved,) and to find their bed green too, yea
such do make souls (their own and others) Rich in Grace, and to abound in
wealth, and to fetch in apace of those Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge,
which are laid up in Jesus Christ for the Saints.

Twelfthly, An Amethysh, in Hebr. Achlama, is a Stone to be found among the
Indians, Arabians, Armenians, 12. Who are Amethists.
Galatians, Egyptians, etc. this is of a ruddy color* and is of excellent use
to cause and keep temperance, to restrain all excess and drunkenness, it
takes away from night-feares, and provokes sweet rest: In what properties they
excel.
So the Saints in these latter days that excel in these virtues, are meant to
be the Mystery of this Precious stone, such as are exceeding temperate, and
cause others so to be, that will not abide excess, and they are not afraid of
evil tidings, Ps. 112.7. nor of terrors by night, nor of those terrors which
attend times of darkness and afflictions, they live above all fears and
fancies, by an Heroic faith, being resolved, come life, come death, nothing
shall separate them; And they provoke to that sweet soule-rest, and holy
recumbency of Spirit which they have in Christ. These are the Precious stones,
the excellent Church-matter promised in these days to come: And these being
under a promise, O what happy days are coming! great shall be the day of
Jezreel indeed; blessed days then are approaching for the Churches: O let us
wait for them! and begin them, by bringing forth the properties of these
Precious stones, which are a mystery of the excellency of Church Members, and
matter, A mystery of the excellency of Church Members in the later days.
consisting of excellent gems and jewels, which shall be gathered up in these
latter days from all parts of the world; East, West, North, and South; Jews*
and Gentiles, Indians, Arabians, Medes, Persians, Scythians, Sardians, as well
as English, French, Spaniards, Italians, etc. These Precious stones, viz. such
Saints are exceeding rare, Precious stones Gathered out of all parts of the
world.
as yet; but ere long the appearances of Christ will be higher, and the shining
approaches of this Sun will be hotter, and the Gospel shall go further, even
beyond Seas to find them out, and to gather them up. And after the hours of
trial (which shall come upon the Churches of Europe) will the Spirit be poured
out amply, Proph.
for such an ample employment, viz. to gather Jewels and Precious stones for
Church-matter in all parts of the World;
As the excellency of the matter, Variety in their excellency.
so the variety of that excellency is also under promise, as appears by the
various properties of the Precious stones; and certainly Zion will be a
beautiful situation, and the joy of the whole Earth: And who will not in
those days desire to have a right in them? and highly prize them that are
members of the Churches (which make up this great and holy City the Jerusalem,)
as Precious stones, though now they are contemned and cursed by many, and
thought fit for the most furious and spurious foot of disdain to trample
upon. Oh alas! be they poor to look upon? plain simple, in appearance (many
of them,) yet their worth is not known to men as yet; but dogs do rent them,
and swine would trample them into the mire.
But then, when the seven Vials are poured out; When high-priz'd.
they shall be no more reviled, or vilipended, there shall be no more death, or
sorrow, or trouble, or pain upon the Churches, but they of a little one shall
become a thousand: and as Isay 60.5.6. and Isay 49.18.19. their destroyers, and
those that made them wast must be gone packing, v. 7. and then says the Lord,
lift up your eyes round about and behold; all these gather themselves together,
and come to thee (to be joined) and he says, they shall be ornaments to the
Church, Prop^^.
and all her waste desolate places shall be re-edified, and yet too little to
hold such a company of Zion-Citizens, and Inhabitants, insomuch as the Church
shall say, the place is too strait, give me room; make way ye Kings,
Nobles, Nations, I must have more, and more room every year, till this (now)
very little stone grow greater and greater, till it fill the whole earth; look
for this hastily, and be assured the Jews will be admirable ornaments, When
Jews expected to be most precious Church matter
and excellent Church matter by 1666. and many before; but of all the Tribes
the Church must have matter, as appears by the twelve stones which had the
names of the twelve Tribes engraven;
though some apply them particularly one by one to the twelve Apostles: Oh!
that in the mean time, A word to Churches and members.
every Church and every member would make one or other of these Precious
stones! and let them but study by the properties and excellencies of every
stone, how far the following Ages will exceed ours, and Saints exceed us, and
Churches exceed ours,
who shall be more (and more to be accounted of) for their inward excellencies,
spiritual and divine virtues, with varieties of them, then they shall be for
their outward appearances, or professions or forms, etc. But thus for the
matter foretold, which I chose to demonstrate from the signification of these
Precious stones, that I might not labor in vain.

Thirdly, The Prophecyes and Promises to be made good in the latter days, are
very full for the form of the Church, which we have sufficiently proved in
many Chapters before, 3. The form of the Church promised in these last days.
and which appears, Ezekiel. 37.19.21.22. Zeph. 3.9. so in Hosea 1.13. Isaiah
35.8.9. 2 Cor. 6.17.18. and in a word, all Churches shall admit her m^mbers one
way; therefore all the Gates (through which men enter into this City) are
Pearls,
all the Gates of one Pearl; i. e. Christ, the Pearl of price, in and by whom
alone shall be entrance into all Churches and Palaces of Sion. How all enter
in.
Rev. 21.21. and no other way, Act. 4.12. but something to this afterward;
only this, know that his fan is in his hand now, Mat. 3.12. to make
separation between Wheat and Chafe, Saints and Hypocrites, to the purpose ere
long.

4. The end of it largely promised.
Fourthly, the final cause of the Church is also promised in the latter days,
at large; what this final cause is, we have shown in 1 lib. which some make
twofold, (so Zanch. lib. 4. cap. 10. S. 39.) 1. the glory of Christ to be
thereby known, Zanch.
as Jo. 17.10. Twofold.
I am glorified in them, says Christ: now this is foretold, Mat. 16.26. Act.
3.13. with 21. Mat. 24.30. Rev. 5.12. thou art worthy of all glory. 2. the
latitude of Gods love even to East, West, North, and South, (as before Jer.
31.3.) to gather the Elect from all corners of the Earth, Mat. 24.31. Oh how
this does commend his love! Rev. 5.8. Ezekiel. 16.6. Hosea 14.4. Rev. 1.5. Jer.
31.3. But in a word, the general end promised and prophesied in the latter
days, is to set forth his glory and praise, as Ephesians. 2.21. so is it in Isay
65.17. as if he should say (says Brightman,) I will make to me a new people,
Brightman.
in whose Assemblies I will be praised, and glorified, so is it in Ier. 31.7.
Rev. 21.11. Isay 66.18. to Isay 49.3. in whom (in whose Churches of Israel) I
will be glorified, Isay 43. 21. so 1 Pet. 1.7. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 15.2.3. this is
especially a work that will lie upon the latter days,
let the Churches look after it. But the final cause with reference to us, is
that God may dwell with us, 2 cor 6.16. Rev. 21.3. let the Churches make these
their end.

5. Spiritual unity, and order of Churches promised in last days.
Fifthly, the Unity and Order of the Churches, is prophesied and promised two,
to be excellent and spiritual in the latter days, Jer. 24.7. Isay 54.13. Isay
56.6.7.8. Isay 60.21. worshipping him in spirit, and in truth, Jo. 4.23.24.25.
Ephesians. 2.19.22. and 1 Pet. 2.5. then shall there be gold for brass, silver for
iron, brass for wood, etc. Isay 60.17. spirit for form, truth for tradition,
life for letter, power for appearance, both in unity and order, 1 cor. 13.9.
and that which is more perfect shall do away that which is more imperfect; but
I have spoke to this also at large before: I shall conclude with Christ's
prayer, John 17.21.22. which as appears in v. 20. does include us in these
days as much concerned; Expos.
that the Saints (and Churches) may all be one, as the Father is in Christ,
Christ's prayer
and Christ in the Father,; that is spiritually, and in power, mystery, and in
truth: And for that end (says Christ) the glory which thou have given me, I
have given them: (those Saints and Churches that I pray for) what glory is that
see v. 5. i. e. with thine own self, (not with the worlds earthly pomp,
jollities, or terrene enjoyments, but with thine own presence and divine
being) this glory (says Christ) that thou have given me, I have given them;
that is, of this divine phesence, power, grace, and being, communicated to them
by the holy spirit; why so? that they may be one (there is unity and order
meant spiritually) as we are one: one with us, one one with another, by one and
the same spirit: this will be especially in these latter days, because,

Sixthly, 6. The Spirit poured out on the Churches and Saints, in a larger
measure.
the Promises and Prophesies are very pregnant and big-belly'd for the breaking
out of his spirit upon his Saints, and Churches in these latter days, Joel 2.
so Isay 59.20. the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and then v. 21. my spirit shall
be upon thee, and my words which I put in thy mouth shall never depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor of thy seeds seed, says the
Lord from henceforth and for ever, Isay, 11.9. H^bak. 2.14. Zach. 12.18.

Thus if we seriously perpend and weigh with the word of God these six Heads,
By six Heads appear the Gospel-Ord^r in Churches. is a great promise.
it will lie obvious to our understanding, that the Church of Christ restored
into Gospel-Primitive purity, is the great promise of these later days, as
appears also in several Prophesies, wherein the Lord has promised the repair
of Sion, and to build up the desolate and waste places, and Jerusalem that is
broken down, and such like Scriptures, Ps. 102.15.16. that concern us in these
latter days, so is it in Ier. 31.4. I will build thee up again, O Virgin of
Israel! (ye that are holy and pure sanctified in Christ Jesus! this Promise is
made to you,) so in Ier. 33.7. I will build them as at first, Expos.
says the Lord; in order to this work, is all the noise in the world; for all
the obstructions must be removed, and the old must pass away, as in the 2 Pet.
3.10. with a great noise; see in Zach. 4.6.7. where the Prophecy (which is for
our days, and from hence forward) promises the removal of all lets to this
work of the Lord; though they be mountains that hinder, yet he will make them all
plains: And also the Lord promises the progress of his House and Temple, The
foundation of all this is laid.
( viz. in these later days) which he has put into the hands of Christ (the
typified Zerubbabel) v. 9. (who has (already, even in our days) laid the
foundation of it) until he has finished it. So that in order to this
Church-worke, and building up of Sion, it will easily appear, that Gods
design in these latter days, is to throw down mountains, viz. the mightiest
powers, Princes, Armies, Monarchies, or Kingdoms that oppose the Kingdom of
Christ and hinder this work of the Lord in Zerubbabel's hands, Job 9.45. Job
28.9. Isay, 10.32.33 Isay 14 4.5.9.10. and 41.15.16. and 24.19.21.23. Hag.
2.6.7.21.22.23. he will throw them all into the dust that dare to appear
against Sion, or the King of Sion, Psalm. 2.9. woe be to all the Powers! Princes!
Nations, on the Earth! that take part with the Dragon! or the Beast! or Turk,
or Pope! Rev. 19.19. God will make all these mounts (be they never so great)
plains, by scattring them as dust, Isay 41.16. Dan. 2.35. scourging them, Isay
10.24.25.26. with furious blows, Ezekiel. 25.16.17. by stilling them, Exodus 15.16.
Isay 11.6. Ps. 8.2. by ruining them, Jer. 49.38. and 51.20 to the 27. Hag.
2.22. or else by converting of them, Comfort to us our day is coming.
Psalm. 102.13.15. Isay 49.11.12. and 60.3.4. Rev. 21.24. O then let us not be
afraid! Luke 21.25.27.28. but lift up our heads for our day is nigh!
Psalm. 46.2.3.4. but let all that would have Zion repaired, rejoice that the
Mountains God is making Plains, the great work then of his Church is hard by:
for the head-stone, ( i. e. the first Plantation stone, according to the
Primitive pattern, and practice, which Christ himself, and after him his
Apostles brought forth) is already in some measure (blessed be the Lord)
brought forth with shoutings, crying grace, grace, unto it: wherefore let us
bless God for that voice of Rev. 19.17.18. which we have heard in our Land,
and think it not strange the world is an uproare, for all this must be to make
for Zion, to make for the Gospel Order in Church State,
before the Apostolical primitive Church and order can be restored, which is
now hard by us: Et redir^ in principium.
and then the Churches shall flourish and rejoice, Isay 35.10. Joel 3.16.17.
and remain, Heb. 12.27.28. Zach. 14.11. and their name shall be the Lord is
there; wherefore read in the Book of God when all this shall be, Isay 34.16.

The next part of this Consid. is that the glory of the Gospel Church is
promised by many excellent Types and full Figures, as the wise know the Old
Test. testifies, 2. The Types promise, the fall of false worship, and he
glorious rising of the true Gospel spiritual worship.
and not only the glory of Christ's Church, but the shame, confusion, and
downfall or Antichrists Church in these latter days, is by Types laid before
us. I might instance for the fall of false Churches, under the Type of Egypt,
Ezekiel. 31.18. Rev. 11.8. that kept Gods people in bondage, and therefore must be
plagued again and again, Isay 10.26. after the manner of Egypt and of Sodom
too, Rev. 11.8. whence the Lot's are cal^'d out (even into a little Zoar or
handful at first) that they may be burnt up with brimstone,
Rev. 19.20. in the furious anger of the Lord, Psalm. 83.11.14 Isay 34.2.3. for
their spiritual Whoredoms and Adulteries: Antichrist ^^y^^fied by Egypt.
So also of Babylon, whence all that can hear are called (in our days, for
the voice is now) Rev. 18.4. to make haste out, for Judgments are coming upon
her; the mother of Harlots, Rev. 17.5. yea of a sudden, in one hour, Rev.
18.8.9.10. within these three years the smoke of her burning will begin to
appear, and smell in the nostrils of the Churches, Expos.

and soon after Anno 1655. All that see it shall stand as far from her as they
can, for fear of her torments, Sodom.
Rev. 18.10. though thousands that see it not will fall into it, and feel it
to their cost*
yet all the Saints, Apostles, Churches, Prophets shall rejoice, Babylon.
for that Babylon shall be thrown down with a mighty violence, never to rise
more, Rev. 18.20.21. but to speak no more to this; in a word, he shall come to
his end, and none shall help him, Dan. 11.45. and that this his ruin is nigh,
appears in the 44. verse; Expos.
because the tidings which he hears does already trouble him, as the
Expositors upon this place have foretold it, Pro*
to be fatally ominous, and to foretell his eminent fall. 1. For the signs are
the falling away from him, Antiochus Epiphanes, a figure of the Pope.
(which will be more apparent within these three years) as the Jews did from
Antiochus Epiphanes (a picture of the Pope.)

2. His fear at the tidings of rumors abroad, Dan. 11.44.
and at the troubles that are arising in all Europe.

Polanus. Brightman.
were he able: all these fore-run his ruin; as Polanus, Brightman, with many
others noted; now they tremble already, as Antiochus (the Type) did a little
before his end, which End was with the plagues and judgments of God; and after
which neither he nor his Kingdom, nor any of his posterity and temper did ever
more rise,
but were extinct for ever; and so will it be with the Pope, Rome, and all that
take part with the beast, Rev. 19.20.

Types of the Churches Palaces of Sion; Tabernacles.
But to the Types that foretell the glory of Christ's Church, whieh are many, and
of long standing; I might instance in the hill of Sion; in David's Tabernacles,
as they were Gods habitacles, which were to be made after Gods appointment,
Exodus 25.9. and all that was brought to make them was to be Free-gift, v. 2.
and there was to be the Mercy-seat, Arc, and Testimony, v. 21. and the Table
with Shewbread, v. 30. none were to become there that were unclean, lest they
defiled the Tabernacle, but if they did, they were to be cast out, Numb. 19.13.
and the Tabernacle and all therein was anointed, Lev. 8. and all loop'd and
tach'd together; that break one, break all; and the Lords presence was in one
Tabernacle as well as in the other, 1 Chronicles. 17.5. and Feasts of Tabernacles
were kept, Deuteronomy. 16.13. and the Tabernacle the Lord kept, and encamped about,
and filled it with his glory, Exodus 40.34. now that these Tabernacles do by
Types foretell the felicity of Christ's Churches, Particular Churches.
i. e. the particular Churches in these last days, will easily appear, Rev.
21.3. the Tabernacle of God is with us, and Ps. 43.3. O let thy light lead me,
and thy truth bring me into thy holy hill, and to thy Tabernacles! so Psalm.
46.4. there is a River, and there be streams which make glad the Tabernacles
of the most high. (i. e. the particular Churches: Dr. Sibs.
) so says Doctor Sibs on Psa. 84.1. O how amiable are thy Tabernacles! These
in these latter days are to be built according to the primitive pattern; all
that are taken in, are to be Free Will Offerings too, in the day of his power,
Psa. 110.3. In these Churches are the Seat of mercy to be found in especial
manner, and the Ark, viz. Christ,
(out of whom no salvation) and the Testimony within the Ark, ( i. e. the
secret of his Tabernacle, Psalm. 275.) viz. the spirit, which is the witness;
so the Tabernacle of witness is the Tabernacle of the spirit, Exodus 31, 21.
Numb. 17.7.8. and there are the special Ordinances in order fixed, and left;
there is the Lords Table, and breaking of bread, and prayers especially and
orderly in the Churches, Act. 2.42. not out of them; None that are wicked, dead
in sin, unclean Carcasses, or defiled persons are to enter in, Psalm. 15.1. and
to abide there,, but to be kept out and cast out, 1 Cor. 5.4. These Churches of
Saints and all in them must receive the annoynting,
1 John 2.20.27. in a large measure ere long, and all be linked together in
love, and loop'd in one; so as that to hurt one, will be to hurt all, etc. The
presence of the most high must be in one Church as well as in another, to
preserve them all, to protect them all, to fill all with his glory, Rev. 21.11.
and to feed all with fat things, Corn, and Wine, and Oil, the feast of
Tabernacles, Isay 25. Zach. 14.16. Skenopegia, of which the world shall not so
much as taste of, Isay 65.13. this is promised by the Type, and much more.

I might mention Jerusalem the holy City set as a Type, Rev. 21. as it stood
high upon hills, Jerusalem a Type.
was the vision of peace and safety, the habitation of Kings, the place of the
Temple, and worship of God; the City Compact, and the glory of the Earth. So
will the Church (which the congregational ones make up as membra causalia) be
upon the top of all mountains, above all in these latter days, Isay 2.2.3. and
be the only place of sweet Peace and sure safety for poor souls, for
Salvation shall be Walls and Bulworkes, and Zach. 2.5. they shall not fear the
Judgments that will be round about them. So shall the Churches be the Palaces
of Christ, the habitations of the King of Sion, Psalm. 48.3 Joel 3.17. in them
the Lord will be worshipped above all, The Sun (Christ) must rule the D^y (that
comes) though the Moon has ruled the Night (till now) Solomon's Temple a type
of the whole Church when all Tabernacles shall be joined.
and he will be there a Temple and Light himself, Rev. 21.22.23. and they
shall be all united as a City Compact, and be the glory and praise of the whole
Earth, Isay 62.7. and 60.18. Zeph. 3.19.20. I might also instance in the Temple
of Solomon as a Type of the Church universal, not particular, (for I have
handled that before) but universal in three things. 1. In the holy of holies.
2. The holy place. 3. The Porch. 1. The holy of holies, as a Figure of the
triumphant part of the Church. The 2. a Figure of the militant part of the
Church as it is visible here, consisting of such as are indeed holy, and
sanctified in Christ Jesus. And 3. the Porch (which as yet I account no part of
the holy Temple) for all to enter, viz. mixed Congregations; where all may
hear, till they be called into the holy place.

This Porch has mixed company in it, good and bad, Saints and Hypocrites, till
they come to be called into the holy house, and then they are separated. In our
days, we are but in Tabernacles* as we said before, but the Temple is a
building, Solomon's days are coming; in the mean time matter must befetch'd
from far (as we show in the Precious stones before) as Solomon sent far about
to find matter in all Countries for this building;
And at the last all our Tabernacles or particular Congregationall Churches
shall be turned into this one Temple, there shall be no more particular
Churches as now, but all shall be one Temple to the Lord; all, all Saints,
Churches, past, present, and to come, Jews and Gentiles, gathered from far,
East, West, North, and South, all shall make one Sheepfold. But before I
conclude, I shall bring in one Type more for all, that is a fulfilling in our
days, Vid. 5. Zanch. lib. 1. de Hom. creatione, v. 15.
and so will until our complete restoration, and it is of Eden or Paradise;
and that it is a Type will appear. Isay 51.3. so Ezekiel. 31.16.18. Ezekiel.
36.35.^6. he will make her like Eden. P^radise and Eden excellent full types of
the Church of Christ in these last days.
So it appears in Rev. 21. and 22.1.2. where there is also the Promise of the
clear Rivers, and the Tree of life again. So the Lord has promised to make
his Church a Paradise, that is in Hebr. Pard^se, an Orchard or Garden full of
trees of Righteousness, Cant. 4.12.13. Eccles. 2.5. a watered Garden, (...)
as Isay 58.11. etc. See to this, in Chapter 3. of 1. lib. the promise is too to
make her an Eden. Gr. of Hedone, (...), pleasure, where the Saints shall be
filled with joys, Isay 35. ult. etc. But let us hear in what particulars the
Type tells us of the spiritual happiness and glory of Christ and his Churches
in these latter days. See Genesis 2 8.9.10. to 18. first, The Churches ^ypified.
from the Description of the Garden it self. 2 Of Man placed therein. First,
the Garden, v. 8. is said to be of the Lords own planting, The Garden was Gods
own plantation.
(and plantavit (aut plantaverat) Jehova Elohim hortum aboriente) so shall
these Churches (or Gardens enclosed, Cant. 4 12.) in these latter days,
wherein you have these five particulars.

1. That the Lord himself has provided and prepared this place; The
excellency of it, being his work.
the word (...) plantavit implies the excellency of the place above all others,
which the Lord himself by his own hands (as it were,) and with special
wisdom, power, and industry had made, for in Genesis 1.12. the earth is said to
bring forth other fruits, herbs, trees, etc. But Paradise the Lord made, i. e.
to show how far it excelled all other places of the Earth, so in Genesis 1.27. is
God said to take Council as it were and to create man; whilst for other
things he said let them be, and they were so, i. e. to show that Man was the
excellency of all his work and Creation. So will God himself plant his
Churches, as in Isay 5.2. he fenced it, and gathered out the stones, and
planted it, etc. so Mat. 21 33 he planted the Vineyard, hedged it about, dig'd
the Wine Press, built the tower: So he p^omises in these days; as Ezekiel. 36.34
35. the desolate Land shall be tilled, and shall become as Eden, the Garden of
the Lord; for know, v. 36. it is I the Lord that will build the ruined, and
plant the desolate; I have spoken it, and I will do it, says the Lord.
All this is to show the Excellency of his Church in the latter days, which
shall be of his planting, above all others of men's plantting, when we shall be
the Lords own Husbandry, 1 cor. 3.9. and workmanship in Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2.10.

2. It is not called a House or Palace; but a Garden, (...) hortus, 2. His
protection of them.
which comes of (...) a word which signifies to protect and keep; that is a
place which the Lord in especial manner hedges to keep out beasts, and such as
would hurt it. Now, this is a latter days promise, and tends much to the
happiness of the Churches, tha^ the Lord will protect them, Isay 27.3. Zach.
2.5. Jer. 32.40.41. Ezekiel. 28.26. Isay 35.8.9. that they shall be for ever in
one, Joel 3.17.20. and no strangers shall be there; so that Mr. Erberies spirit,
and the Ranters spite to the Churches must, and live and die in their own
breasts.


3. The name of them which takes in of all languages.
3. The name of this Garden is Paradise, so it is in Hebrew, so in the
septuagint, (...), so says Zanchy, it is in the Persian language one and the
same, and in the Germane Lu^tgarten, and in the Latin called Paradisum, and in
several other languages one and the same, Zanch.
viz. a most pleasant place, (...) in voluptate; and to me it signifies much,
that so many languages have one and the same name; for surely the latter days
promise must reach to all Nations,
and this Paradise shall take in of all languages and tongues, Zach. 8.22.23.
Many peoples, and strong Nations in that day shall seek the Lord in Jerusalem,
(i. e. his Churches) and in those days it shall come to pass, that men out of
all languages of the Nations, shall take hold of him, that is a (spiritual)
Jew; saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you: so
Rev. 7.4. four Angels at the four corners of the Earth stood there in their
Offices, whilst another Angel was sent to seal^ (in the sealing day of the
spirit) some of all the tribes, Rev. 21.24. and Nations shall bring their glory
to Zion, and shall walk in the light thereof, or in the light of the Lamb,
who is the light thereof. It is certain, that as the name takes in of all
languages, so the thing will,
and Jews and Gentiles, and Hebrews, and Grecians, Italians, and French, and
Latins, and Germans, and all must be brought in to the Church of Christ, or
this earthly Paradise restored in these latter days, according to Promise and
Prophecy.

4. From the Seat of it; the Questionists have been very busy to know
whe^eabouts in the world this Eden was; 4. The Seat of them in all the World
where the Rivers run.
some say in Mesopotamia, a part of Syria, others about Babylon, (vid. Plin.
lib. 8.^.17.) others in one part of Syria, and others in another: others in the
upper part of Chaldea; others take in Syria, Arabia and Mesopotamia; others
take in Armenia, Assyria, and all Egypt: others say, it was in the torrid Zone
under the Aequinoctiall line, and others make it to comprehend the whole world;
Pareus.
but as Paraeus observes, these discrepant opinions, and perplexable
differences arise from the ignorance of the Rivers, the Head and Branches of
Euphrates; so among the Fathers and Schoolmen, and Academians, with
Ministers, and many others, are there different minds and judgments of the
Seat and place of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. but what need such Cont^stations?
Praestat enim dubitare de occultis quam litigare de incertis: but this is
certain, that where ever the new River, the typified Euphrates runs, in Rev.
22.1.2. I mean the spirit of God (according to the flowings of these days)
comes; a City shall be found,
whose builder and maker is God: there shall be the streets as well as the
streams of the New Jerusalem: and this spirit will be poured out on all flesh;
I mean on all Nations, and they shall come from far: So that it is men's
ignorance of this River (that is clear as Crystal) that makes them question
where Paradise will be found in the world (I say not of the world;) therefore
let none say, lo here, or lo there; but when the spirit is poured out, they will
know and understand.

5. Eastward. (...) the word (...) is properly from before, which is here in
Text, Eastward, or from the East, 5. The East of them, (...). Suidas.
ab Orient, and in the Septuagint, (...), which is very considerable; for Eden
was Oriental, or Eastern, says Lactant. lib. 2. Paradise was then a part of
the East: Lactantius.
So is the latter days Paradise to be; but by the East I intend Christ,
for where the Sun rises, there we say is the East, and where it goes down,
there we say is the West or Occidentall, both East and West, Oriental, and
Occidentall, so called from the rising and the setting of the Sun; for there is
not really a place or point of Earth at the bottom of the Horison, or
Hemisphere, as far as you can see Eastward, that is the East; no, for when you
are there, you are as far off as before, and so you may go round the world
and never come at it, but where the Sun rises I account the East. The later
days promise in the East, whence the Sun shall rise to all the world. Jo. 1.1.2.
Now the Paradise promised, viz. the Churches are to be all Eastward,
Zion-ward, Christ-ward; yea all ab Orient, from Christ; yea (...), all in
Christ, the East, from whence the Sun rises, the Gospel Light burgeons and
breaks out in golden brightness, and light must go forth (as from you the
Churches) in the sight of others, and gild the Air all about, and shine abroad
to the world.
Thus the Churches in the latter days, being all from Christ the East, all in
Christ the East, all for Christ the East, are the Paradise in the East, and are
of Christ as the first of all, whence the Sun of righteousness shall arise and
shine to all the World. Thus far for the thing in general, now to the special
Privileges that appertain to this Paradise, which are under these two Heads.
1. From the Trees. 2. The Rivers.

First, in that Paradise was full of Trees, it did signify the Saints, 2. The
members and ordinances typified by trees of Paradise.
and Members, and Ordinances of the Churches of Christ in the latter days,
which lies to me open out of Isay. 61.3. That they (in Zion the Churches) may
be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord. So in Cant. 2.3.
As the Apple tree among the trees of the Forest, so is my beloved (Christ)
among the Sons (of God, the Saints in fellowship.) So Ezekiel. 47.7.12. So Rev.
7.1. and 8.7. with Rev. 9.4. So Matt. 3.10. and 7.17. and 12.33. So in Psalm.
92.12.13. Those trees that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish,
and Psalm. 52.8. I am a green Olive Tree in the house of the Lord, and in Psalm.
13. Trees planted by rivers of water bringing forth fruits in due season.
Odinances and Church members trees how
Many other Scriptures prove this, besides the ensuing Parallels, but to the
Particulars.

1. That as every Tree in Paradise, so shall every Member and Ordinance of the
Church be grounded and rooted in Jesus Christ, 1. Rooted.
Ephesians. 3.17.18. Col. 2.6. Job. 8.17. and folded into and wrapped about Jesus
Christ.

2. of the Lords making.
2. Every Tree in Paradise was of the Lords making, so should every Ordinance,
and so should every Member of a Church of Christ, being created a new thereto,
as the Lords Workmanship in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10.

3. The Trees in Paradise the Lord caused to grow, v. 9 Genesis 2. So the Lord by
his Grace and giving of spiritual Sap, 3. The Lord causes them to grow and
flourish.
and Life to the Members of the Churches makes them growing Christians,
spreading and flourishing Members of, and Ornaments to his Garden enclosed, 2
Pet. 3.18. and 2.2. Job. 8.16.17. Psalm. 80.9.10. and this is an especial
promise of ours for the Churches in Hosea 14.5.6.
I (says the Lord) I (by my Doctrine dropping as the rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2. and by
my spirit as the nether Springs and Streams from Lebanon, Cant. 4.13.) I will
be as the dew unto Israel, and he shall grow as the Lilly,
and cast forth his roots, (thick and threefold) as Lebanon, his branches shall
spread.

4. Most fruitful trees of all the earth besides; 4. They are to be the most
fruitful of all the Earth.
and this is expected of the Churches; and their members to bring forth fruits;
not common fruits, but Garden fruits; not ordinary Garden fruits neither, but
Eden Garden fruits, i. e. the fruits of the Lords own planting, grafting,
growing, the choysest fruits, Jehovahs fruits of the spirit, spiritual faith,
spiritual love, spiritual holiness, spiritual obedience, spiritual
knowledge, spiritual prayers, preachings, etc. all of the spirits putting
forth, and blooming, and setting* increasing, and ripening,
Jer. 17.8. then they will bring forth in a time of drought, when all other trees
are withered and burnt up, as Rev. 8.7. and when the third part of the trees
must be burnt up: And why? because they are so well rooted; and the Lord causes
them to grow. Prove. 12.12. these bring forth the fruits of holiness and
righteousness which are in Christ, Phil. 1.11. so that ye shall know them by
their fruits; for,

5. They are pleasant for sight. Genesis 2.9. so must the Saints and all
Church Members, even to the world, 5. Lovely to the sight.
and in the eyes of them without, and shine as lights, Colloquia and
congregationes gratiam spirent. Bernard de Ecc. cap. 412.
and by their conversations attract them, Acts 2.47. Zeph. 3.20. I will make
you a name and praise among all people of the Earth: this will be, as I have
said before, when the Saints shall be a sweet savor to all, 2 cor. 2.14 15.
and amiable in the eyes of all.

6. And their fruits good for food, Genesis 2.9. 6. Excellent to feed upon.
So will it be again, they shall feed the strong and the weak, with such
fruits of love, faith, holiness, obedience, graces, gifts, prayers,
prophesies, interpretations, and exhortations, and such like, day by day, as
shall administer grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29* Col. 4.6. and be full of
refreshings, and juice, and sap, and sweetness; yea, (as Apples) both meat and
drink to many poor hungry souls: O sweet days! when these fruits shall be
ripe, For all sorts and Senses.
and gathered, and given out in due season. So that it appears the Lord has
promised us in these restitution of times the most precious fruits of
imparadised Saints; suaves ad visum and ad vescendum: so excellent, as shall
satisfy all the senses, delightful to hear of, sweet to smell of, most
admirable to feel of, most pleasant to the sight, and exceedingly sweet,
savory, and soule-satisfying to the taste. Lord hasten these happy days* Then
the day of Jezreel will be great indeed, th^n the Churches shall be Paradise,
when their members bring forth, such dainty and diversity of fruits, and that
for all sorts of people; that such as will not taste them, may touch them; or
such as will not touch them;
may scent them; or such as will not scent, resent, nor smell, (the Spices they
bring forth, Cant. 4 16.) may see them amiable in their eyes; as such as will
not see them, may (and so they shall) hear of them. O precious! precious days!
Come running Lord! like the Roe!

7. All sorts of trees that the Lord makes fruitful must grow there.
7. In Genesis 2.9. the Lord made every sort of good trees to grow in Paradise, and
so will he in these latter days; for there shall not be a confining of a
Garden, or Church to one sort of trees only, and no more, unless here and
there one by chance; so to one sort of Judgments* or Opinions, or People; O
no! but of every sort of trees and fruits, of Persons, Professions, and
Opinions that the Lord makes to grow, and to bring forth, shall be in Paradise:
Oh then will there be a glorious day for Sion indeed! and Eden shall be the
Garden of the Lord; and the Saints shall feed upon all those sorts of fruits
judgments, gifts, graces, or whatever they be.

8. The ^r^e of life in the midst of them.
8. The tree of life shall stand in the midst of other trees* Genesis 2.9. as also
the tree of knowledge, in every Church or Garden of the Lord.

The tree of life may be understood two ways: 1. as living, and then, Tree of
life two ways.
2. as life giving; and in this sense I take it, (...) for that it was to give
life; but what kind of life? I conceive that in Genesis it may be life to the
body, as our food does by maintaining the natu^all heat, radical moisture, and
animal spirits, etc. but I think it most of all intends some quickening power,
and vital strength (if I may so say) which was given by this fruit to the
Eater,
(above all other) that he could not be sick, nor wax o^^, nor weak, nor
infirm, nor dye; but should live in perpetual health and strength, and vigor
of spririt. But however, as that tree of life stood in the midst of the rest,
(...) and was more worth then all the rest* Cant. 2.3. So does Christ in the
midst of his Saints; in the midst (Rev. 1.13. and 2.1.) of the seven golden
Candlesticks, in the midst of his Brethren, Hebr. 2.12. his fellow trees, in
the midst of the Brethren, in the midst of the Church will I give praises,
says Christ, so is his Promise to be in the midst of them Mat. 18.20. so Psalm.
46 5. Hosea 11.9. Joel 2.27. So Zeph. 3.5.15* the King of Israel in the midst
of thee. So has the Lord promised us in Zach. 2 5. he will be our glory in the
midst of us: and so v. 10.11. sing, rejoice, O daughters of Sion (every
particular Church and Assembly of Sion) for lo! I come, and I will dwell in the
midst of thee; and many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day and shall
be my (joined or gathered) people, and I will dwell in the midst of thee: Oh
this is a singular happiness!
for then one member, and one Church, and one tree, and one Ordinance will be
as near to him as another, and receive from him as well as another, and all
alike will fetch power and glory, and grace, and spirit, and light, and life,
and whatsoever else is communicable from him. Some there be that make this tree
a Symbol, and the two trees, the two Sacraments; Diodate.
so far I agree with them, as to say, The two Sacraments within the Church kept
these special Ordinances are in the midst of the Churches, and must not be
dispensed without neither Baptism, nor the Lords Supper, (so called) of
breaking bread, and they break the Command that dare to give them, or receive
them without, for they are to be in the midst of the Churches, and will be so
ere long, and kept there by the flaming sword, from the sons of Adam, And not
to be carried out.
that run greedily (according to the Serpents insinuations, 2 Cor. 11.3.) to
eat of the forbidden fruits. But this tree of life which shall stand in the
midst of the gatherd Churches in the restored Paradise, is meant Christ,
and so he shall stand, as Rev. 22.2. and in the midst of the street of the
holy City, (every Church that helps to make up the great City) the tree of life
which bare twelve manner of fruits, etc. Christ will be in the midst not only
to give fruits (both meat and drink) for other trees (the Saints and members)
will do so too; but he is there living and giving life, 1 Cor. 15.45. a
quickening,
i. e. life-giving spirit, having twelve manner of fruits for twelve months, of
diverse sorts, for all sorts and conditions of souls, and for as often as you
will have of him; and those that eat of him shall never dye, Jo. 6.50. but grow
livelier, and lustier, and stronger, and healthfullier every day: So that
Christ has promised to be a tree of life in the midst of the Churches to make
them up an earthly Paradise, which else cant be.

9. Other trees, and this tree of life were much alike, for every tree has the
same wood (...) lignum, 9. The tree of life, and other trees alike.
and this foretells me how much the Saints (the true Members of the Churches)
shall look like Christ, and bring forth fruits like Saints, and walk as he
walked,
1 John 4.17. And represent him as pertaking of divine and humane nature, and
being filled with the same spirit, and we know when he shall appear we shall
appear like him, 1 Jo. 3.2.

The second special privileges of Paradise, were in the River which watered
the Garden; and that this was also very significant, 3. The Spirit and Word
typified by Rivers and streams
as to these latter days, will easily appear by the spirit which is promised
to the Saints and Churches in these latter days, as a River, and the Graces as
Streams, and the Ordinances as Brooks etc. Isay. 30.25. Isay. 33.21. Isay.
32.2. and Isay. 41.18. I will open rivers in high places, and in the dry land
springs of water, and Isay. 43.19.20. Behold I will do a new thing, and ye
shall know it, I will even make a Way in the Wilderness and Rivers in the
Desert: I will give Rivers in the Desert to give drink to my people, my chosen:
So Ezekiel 34.13.14. I will feed you upon the Mountains of Israel by the Rivers,
in fat pastures: So Psalm. 46.4. There is a River the streams whereof make glad
the City of God: So Psalm. 65.9. Thou enrichest it with the River of God which
is full of water, Psalm. 1.3. and besides many other Scriptures that in Rev.
22.1. He showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal,
proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, i. e. the spirit powered
cut in the latter days flowing from the Father and the Son: but to some
Particulars: 1. Whence and whither the River flowed: and 2. for what end? See
v. 10. A River went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it parted
into four Heads. 1. From whence the Rivers came aborigine, viz. from the East.


1. The River ran out of Eden; Eden that lay in the East; so that River ran
from the East; (...), the word is a currere perpetuo cursu, the River ran
continually. Some say the Fountain was in the midst of Paradise, but the Text
says, non Fontem sed Fluvium, it came out of Eden from the East; the East we
said before was Christ, and from him out of God, this River (of the spirit)
continually runs, Rev. 22 1. and shall flow ere long with mighty streams in
midst of the streets or Churches.
The East was said to have two parts (as Zanchy notes) the first is clear in
the Scriptures which we read much off, as of Arabia, Babylonica, Persiae,
Chaldea, etc. in this part was Mesopotamia, and the Garden of Paradise; but
secondly the other part of the East lay obscure, and hidden to us, unknown and
unshown in the Scriptures; Two parts of the East.
and from that part some say the River ran; whether it be so or no in the
Letter, yet this is certain that so much of the Will of God in Christ as is
revealed, declares to us Eden, (the Garden of the Lord) the Churches of Christ
in the latter days, will be large, and the Scriptures speak much of it, and
show it clearly; 1. Known.
2. Hidden, but only the River runs from it.
but that part of the Will of God which is secret and in mystery; hidden and
obscure this River runs from also, into the Churches;
by which River the secret and hidden mysteries may and must be found out, and
that which is not yet discovered of God and Christ must be revealed, and the
whole Book of Revelation; and whatsoever is as yet sealed up must be laid open,
and made common to the Churches. This River it ran into Paradise, partly by
secret, close occult conveyances, and partly by open ordinary courses and
flowings (says Pliny lib. 5. c. 24.) So does the spirit, and so it will come
flowing into the Churches to water them, and fill them as Waters fill the Sea,
Isay. 11. partly by Means, Ordinances, Promises, Providence, and such
ordinary Passages and Currents of the spirit; and partly by secret ways, under
ground, mysterious occult conveyances; but what with one way, and what with
another, the Gardens of the Lord the Churches will be well refreshed and filled
with this River which arises out of the East:
And to finish this Particular, this River ran (as with one stream) into the
Garden, but from thence divided several ways abroad; so will the spirit as
with one mighty rushing Sea into the Churches; and from them be divided about,
and spread abroad. But,

2. For Churches, to what end?
Secondly, for what end? to water the Garden: So the Churches will be abundantly
more fructifying and fresh, when this spirit is poured out, than now they are,
Cant. 4.15. And they shall be like a watered Garden,
whose waters fail not, Isay. 58.11. they cannot fail, Heb. 2.14. they are
already green and growing, and shall no more be like a parched Wilderness.

Thirdly, a word more about the Division of this River, v. 10. 3. The River
divided into four heads.
From thence it parted into four Heads. From thence, inde, Hebr. (...), de ibi;
it is a question among some, where this Division is made; (...)
whether before it came into the Garden, and after it went out, or in Paradise;
now it appears to me, although it came into the Garden, uno influxo, as by one
stream, yet it went out by four, in v. 10.11.12 13. etc. So that the Division
was within the Garden, Diodate.
and by this Division every part of the Garden was watered: So the spirit
though it is one and the same (as from Christ) yet in the Church it flows
several ways, Habes Paradi sum conclusu^ and Paradisum e m^ssum. Beru. de
Sermon. Cant. 35.
in several Gifts, Graces, and Administrations, 1 Cor. 12.4. So that every
part of the Church may be watered, and every one have according to his measure,
some more, and some less: And from the Church it flows abroad to the World;
and this foretells us the spirit shall come flowing in such an ample manner into
the Churches in these last days, To take in many Nations.
and that it shall flow from them and out of them, run out to others several
ways in several streams; yea four Heads into the four Parts of the World,
East, West, North and South; and as the four Heads encompassed and took in
many Lands v. 11.12.13.14. as Arabia, Syria, Chaldea (Chus) Aethiopia, Egypt,
etc. So shall the spirit that goes out of the Churches (in that Great Day of
the flowing of it in,
and pouring of it on them) I say, that spirit shall go out of the Churches,
round about several ways, into all Parts of the World to fetch in, and to
compass about, and to gather up of many Nations, and Tongues; and Languages,
and Lands, to the Lord, and his Christ, who is the East. Yea, and many
precious stones and gold of Havilah shall be fetched in too, Where Gods great
work first begins. as in the pouring out of the spirit.
as fit matter for the Lords house, in those his latter Golden Days: So that
the great and glorious Work that God has to do by his spirit, in these days,
is in the Churches, and then by the Churches abroad many ways in the world;
but thus far for the second special Privileges of the Churches (typified by
Paradise) in the Rivers that shall run in the midst of their streets, and run
from them to others: See Zach. 14.8. And in that day shall living water go out
of Jerusalem, the half of them one way, and the half another, etc.

Now we come to the last Description of the Type, The last discovery of the
Type.
which is so full for these latter days, and which relates so eminently and
evidently to the Churches; and that is in ver. 15.16.17. The Lord God took the
Man and put him into the Garden, etc.

1. The Man, to show that it was no place for Beasts; 1. No place for Beasts.
the Lord has promised no ravenous beasts shall enter into this earthly
Paradise, that is to come in these last Ages, Isay. 35 9.10.

2. The Lord took him (and tulit Jehovah Elohim) to show that he came not
thither by nature, and was not born to it, 2. It is not for mere natural men.
or created in it, but translated into it, by the spirit of the Lord; the Lord
put him in; so none are to be in the Churches, as Members that be in their mere
natural Condition; or as if born to it, or born in it; O no! only such as are
brought in by Grace, For none but whom the Lord adds and brings in.
whom the Lord has brought in and fitted for Church Communion, by his spirit,
that must be Members; such as the Lord adds, and he adds none but such as shall
be saved, Acts 2.47. Too too many natural carnal men have crept into the
Churches, and have added themselves; or else others have added them; but the
Lord will out them, and rout them ere long; These Churches must be purged.
he has not added them: And therefore the fiery trial will purge them off,
and over with a powder; And that Day will burn up the third part of the trees,
Rev. 8.7. with Zach. 13.9. and after that,
there shall be no more the Cananite in the Lords house, Zach. 14.21.

3. The Paradise was of use in man's innocence, as an Academy, 3. Of the
greatest Use, as Universities for others to resort unto, and to learn in, and
to go from to teach others.
or the University (says Pareus) to which men from all Parts might resort to
praise the Lord, and to learn of him, and to behold his most excellent works,
and to feed of the best fruits; And from thence others might be sent abroad (as
the Rivers went) to give knowledge to the people; and of such excellent use
will the Churches of Christ be in these latter days; for all sorts of Saints
to resort to them; to praise the Lord in them; to be instructed by him; to be
acquainted with his most gracious workings in us, and for us, and to feed upon
the best privileges, and choicest fruits of restored Paradise, and to be sent
out thence to go abroad all along with the Rivers,
I mean with the rich measures of the spirit, to teach the World; and to
instruct them without, that are ignorant of the truth and mysteries of the
Gospel, as they are revealed to the Saints in fellowship. Such Churches will
prove the usefullest Universities in the World to stock and store,
Universities; of what sort in the latter days.
the Nation with able Spiritual Teachers; and such as shall speak the things
they hear and see, being all taught of the Lord by the Anointing from on high
so to do; and this is promised at large in these latter Days. Jerem. 32.40.
Isay. 46.13. and 54.13.14. For his Law shall go forth from Zion, Isay. 22.
Micha. 4.8.

4. God would not have man (no not in his innocence) to live (no not in
Paradise) without Law; 4. Such as are placed in this restored Paradise, are
under the strictest Laws of the spirit.
but he kept him under strict Law, v. 16. the Lord God commanded the man
(praecepto singulari obstrinxit, the Hebrew notes the Word (...) with the
Proposition or Particle (...) to signify more then (simply) to command, viz.
to command with an Interdiction and Prohibition as follows in v. 17. thus is
the Word (...) vajesau read in Scripture, and this is very significant; for God
does not promise us a lawless liberty, or licentious days in these latter
days; but that we shall be under his Laws and Ordinances, which he has
appointed in the Church: The Saints shall be exact walkers up to the rule of
perfect righteousness in Christ Jesus; The Law in love.
not destroying but fulfilling the Law, and that in Love which is the bond of
perfection, only this obedience shall be more in and by the spirit of the Lord,
John 4.25.24. But God is very exact (as appears by the strictness of the wo^d)
to have his Saints, the Churches and Members thereof subject to his Laws (even
in Paradise) even in the best reformed and restored days, Heb. 8.10. Ezekiel.
43.11. and 44.5.24. Yea, the Royal Law, James 2.8 And Law of truth, Mal. 2.6.
Yea, the Law to go forth out of Zion to others, The Churches have their law
from the Lord
Mich. 4.2. And seal the Law among my Disciples, Isay. 8.16. So that God
especially looks for it from them, for they have more reason to live under the
Order and Law of God then any others; Others from the Churches.
for they are to be Examples to others as lights on a hill, and as the Salt to
season others that are without; They have it first that are in Churches (most
excellently as from the Lord) and others as from them; Micah 4.2. Adam had the
Law first in Paradise as from the Lord (most excellently of all) and Eve
afterward as from him:
Besides the Majesty and Authority of God is promised (hereby) especially in
the Churches; as Paul said 1 Cor. 11.23 For I have received of the Lord that
which I delivered unto you, etc. so it shall be especially in the last days, as
Micah 5.4. He (Christ) shall stand and feed (and rule) in the strength of the
Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God, and they (the Churches)
shall abide: We have first Life and then Law, first a Principle, and then a
Precept
For now (after this) shall he ( Christ) be great unto the end of the Earth:
But yet mark this, that the Man was first made, and then commanded; he had
first a Principle, and then a Precept; the first is to the adesse, and then the
other to the been esse: So that to the singular Comfort of Saints, and all
Church Members, here is much promised; that he will first create, and then
command;
that he will first give them a power to do it, and then give them a Precept to
do it; And then they shall be upon the Chariots of Aminadab. First, he will write
his Law in them, and then receive his Law of them ( i. e. that which is written
in them) in these latter days; so that the Churches and Saints shall not be, yea
cannot be without Law, nor without liberty, nor without the perfect Law of
liberty, Jam. 1.25.

5. Man, though in Paradise must not be idle, 5. Those therein are never to be
idle, but every day dressing and keeping it.
therefore v. 15. God put him in to dress it and to keep it, viz. it, Garden;
for the word is hortus, which is (...) of the Feminine Gender, with this (...)
affixed, and it is not without signification to all the Churches and Saints;
for as Zanchy says, Paradisu^ illa, typus fuit Ecclesiae, ergo, qui in
Ecclesiam positi sunt, Zanch.
disca^t se non esse hic positos ut otiosi vivant, sed ut pro sua quisque
virili, colat Ecclesiam, camque custodiat and Paradise was a Type of the
Church, and it concerns every Member of the Church, to remember he must not be
idle; but up and about, to work in the Vineyard, to dress and keep it; for the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12.7. To do something or other to the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12.
Romans 14.19. to instruct, exhort, build up, and dress it, Ephesians. 4.29. 1 These.
5.11. Jude 20. Heb. 10.24.25. Yea, and to keep it too, from the Foxes of the
Field, and the Wild Bores of the Wood; yea, to keep out all Beasts and such as
would hurt this Paradise, and to keep in good Orders, the Fences and Hedges,
the Laws and Liberties of the Church, Jude 3. Gal. 5.1. Heb. 12.3.4. Ephesians.
4.3.4. Phil. 2.1.2.3. 1 Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.11. This Care lies upon all the
Churches and Members thereof; the Lord make them good Husbandmen, careful,
and watchful, and painful as he has promised for the benefit of the Church,
and the good keeping of this (Typified) Paradise, as Hosea 10.11.12.

Obj. But Labor and Work was ( poena peccati) a Curse, Genesis 3.17. and a
Bondage.

Ans. Not every Labor and Work, but anxious, vexatious, What labors are
accursed, what not.
grievous pains and labors; but not to labor in Paradise, in the Lords Garden
or Vineyard; to such as the Lord has set therein, his Yoke is easy; and his
Service is sweet to them, Prove. 3.17. The Ways of wisdom are pleasantness to
their Souls; they delight to be doing for the Lord, for Christ, for the
edifying of his Church, Psalm. 1.2. and 16.3. and 40.8. Psalm.
119.16.24.35.47.70.77.174. Duties are a Delight, and Ordinances a Delight to
them, Cant. 2.3. Isay. 58.13.14.

6. Man though in Paradise, yet upon open Breach of Gods Law he was cast out
and excommunicated, 6 Such as are sinners, though in the Church, must be cast
out.
Genesis 3.23.24. Therefore the Lord sent him out from the Garden of Eden, to till
the ground, from whence he was taken, and he drove out the man, or expelled,
cast, and shut him out; which is (...) a hard word, and a clear
Excommunication; whilst the former word he sent out, (...), is but a kind of
command to him to pack away; but now he is thrust out and banished Paradise; for
indeed his offense was the greater, that it was in Paradise after he was so
blessed, and had tasted the fruits of it, etc. So must Offenders (though
Members of the Church,
1 Cor. 5.45.) be dealt with, and their sins are of the greater aggravation, by
how much the longer they have been Members, and by how much the more they have
tasted of the Fruits, and found of the Benefits of being enclosed, and in the
Garden of the Lord, viz. Church Fellowship; wherefore let Members beware of the
forbidden Fruits; and they may live ( diu and die) long and happily in the
Churches of Christ in these last days.

7. Man in Paradise might eat of every tree, 7. Such as are therein may eat
freely, yea must of every tree.
v. 16. of every tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, that is of the
Fruit of every Tree, (...), ex quavis arbore (except as v. 17. of the tree of
knowledge) thou must eat freely, is an excellent Hebraisme, (...), eat and eat
again, yea comedendo comedes, you may eat by eating; there be some that say
under these words lie a Command upon the Man, (...), that he must eat of the
Fruits of every Tree, without making difference of clean and unclean, etc. This
shows the great advantage and privileges of Saints and Members of the Churches
in these last days; they feed upon the Fruits of every Tree in the Garden (not
out of the Garden) of every Ordinance, of every Administration, of every Gift,
Grace, of every Saint or Member; not putting of Differences, making
Distinctions, or having of the Faith with respect of Persons or Opinions, Micah
4.5. And they shall sit every one under his own Vine,
and they shall walk every one in the name of his God, etc. Yea then as every
Tree shall be fruitful, Col. 1.10. Hosea 14.8. So every Saint and Member must
eat of the Fruits of all, out of all, i. e. that grows out of every one; yea of
the least, lowest, darkest (and most undershadow) and meanest Member or Brother
of the Church; for every one shall bring in of his Fruits (and none be hindered)
and every ones Fruits shall be in due season, Ripe fruits*
Ps. 1.2.3. and none before the time, Mal. 3.11. but all ripened by the Sun;
and then every one will be desirous of them, Micah 7.1. My soul desired the
ripe fruits, says the Prophet himself.

8. Man in Paradise was forbidden the Tree of Knowledge, 8. Such forbid the
Tree of Knowledge before the tree of Life.
v. 17. But of the tree of Knowledge thou shall not eat of it; for in the day
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye; which words are full in Hebr. you
shall not eat of it, that is, not eat out of it, (...), as if the Lord should
((...)) point out with his finger the Tree he forbad; if thou eatest thereof
thou shall not fail to dye; thou shall surely dye, which is in Hebraisme too
(...), moriendo merierie, (...), thou shall dye with dying, thou shall dye the
death; that is necessarily, and unavoydably, and most miserably, thou shall
know it is a fearful thing to sin in Paradise (so in Church Fellowship)
therefore the command is interdicting, and prohibiting the tree of Knowledge. So
are the Saints and Members in the Churches, forbid the tree of Knowledge, that
is humane Wisdom, carnal Reason and Policy, affectation of Word, Gifts,
habitual Parts of Learning; subtle Sophistry, and all such forbidden fruits
(in Paradise,
so) in the Churches, Col. 2.8. That none spoil you through Philosophy, Arts
and Sciences, nor corrupt you with humane Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.20.21. 2 Cor. 1.12.
which Egypt and Babylon did, and yet do abound in; but the Lord has promised
to destroy and bring this Wisdom to naught,
Isay. 29 14. And that the deaf shall hear, and the blind see, Isay. 29.18.
The things and visions of the book which the learned cannot read, in v. 11.
Because it is sealed to him; but the spirit of the Lord shall reveal them to
Babes; And those that see not shall see, whilst those that see shall be made
blind: Therefore let the Saints take heed of that Tree whose Fruits (if they
live upon them, and prefer them (for so Man did) will be accursed to them, Jer.
17.5.6. For cursed is the man that makes flesh his arm, Expos.
whose heart departs from the Lord; for he shall be like the heath in the
desert, and not see when good comes: This is a Curse indeed, as full as the
Fig Tree had, and this dreadful Curse is full of wrath for, and to them that
prefer and feed (altogether) on humane Parts, habitual Gifts, Wisdom,
Learning, or the like; for by these the Old Man (who must fall) gets to be
enthroned, and Christ and Truth justled out of doors; not that we deny an use
(yea and sometimes a great use too) that may be made of Parts, Learning, humane
Knowledge, habitual Gifts, etc. For if there were no use at all to be made of
them, An use of humane Wisdom, Learning, and knowledge in the Churches.
then they were not to be there; then this Tree of Knowledge should not have
been set in Paradise at all, much less in the midst of the Garden; but this we
say, that though they may be suffered, yea seen, heard, handled; yet they must
not be eaten, fed on before the Tree of Life, to live on, or to be nourished by
them: O no! but feed on the Tree of Life! Eat down the Fruits of the spirit!
the Graces! Learning! Wisdom of the spirit! to live on! to be quickened,
nourished! But not to be preferred first.
comforted by, and to have them consubstantiated into you! So that the other
fruits are not first to be feed on! but to be looked on! and to be used as
Servants to the Tree of Life, and by the bye! therefore woe be to them! that
prefer the tree of knowledge before the tree of life! it is that which is here
forbid, and is accursed with a most dreadful sentence and doom upon it! and
they fall fowlest and most irrecoverably,
that fall by eating the fruits of the tree of knowledge! viz. selfe-wisdome
and parts, etc!
in preferring of these (by Sathan's subtle insinuations) before the tree of
life! Let all Churches and Members look to it then! For they are under a
desperate curse that do so! and when they do Julian like Apostatize, they are
the most hurtful! unholy! violent! and unexecrable Enemies to Christ and his
Gospel.

9. The Serpent got even into Paradise it is self, 9. The Serpent got in and
tempted by the fruits of the tree of knowledge.
and presently pitched upon the tree of knowledge, to tempt the Woman (and so
the man) with the fruits of that tree, and the Woman seeing 'twas to be desired
to make one wise, Genesis 3.16. Says the Text, took it, etc. So Satan, that
subtle Serpent, creeps into the best Churches at some hole or other, and
appears in their Congregations, as Job 1.6. (where God sees him when men cannot)
and so even in Judas in Christ's little fellowship he crowded in, and so in Jude
4 Gal. 2.4. and when they are at the best and busi^st duties, he will be sure to
te^pt them, and that subtly with wondrous art and cunning winding himself
into the heart of one or other, to tempt them to forbidden fruits; and he
usually gets up into the tree of knowledge, i. e. by carnal reason, humane
wisdom, etc. to do it. He oftentimes presents the fairest side of the fairest
fruits of this Tree to tempt poor souls with: And he sets upon the weakest
vessels to seduce them with a supposition of Gifts, Parts, humane Wisdom,
Learning, and the like; that these will make them wise and as Gods, etc. O sad!
miserable sad souls!
that are so deceived by the fair shows of Gifts, as to prefer them before
graces: Wherefore let all Members and Churches be warned hereby; He tempts the
weakest with Gifts, Parts, etc.
For Satan is got in to tempt some of the weakest of them: Therefore said Paul
to the Church of Corinth. 2 Epist. 11.3. I fear least by any means as the
Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted
(by his cunning Acts (...)) from the (plain) simplicity that is in Christ;
Wherefore let us all beware! and believe graces more then gifts; the tree of
life is better for food then the tree of knowledge; the spirit is better then
the flesh; and Christ to be preferred before the Creature, or creature-parts
and appearances: And know that none are wise but the Saints; the Churches and
Saints are able to out-see all the Universities of the Earth, Churches beyond
Universities.
in altissimis causis rerum. Christ is their Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. Et
dignoscitiva and directiva in him they are wise, 1 Cor. 4.10. and learned; the
learned of God are brought up in the Universities of Christ, Saints are the
most and best learned ones.
the Schools of the Prophets indeed excelling all in Knowledge, Phil. 3.8. Jo.
7.3. and learning as the taught of God, Isay. 29.11. and Isay. 50.4. John 6 45.
Rev. 14 3. Rev. 5.5.6. and excelling all in the truest, purest, fullest,
sweetest, and profitablest original tongues and languages, Dan. 1.17. Jo.
7.15. Viz. the language of Canaan, the tongue of the spirit, the purest
original; Wherefore let not Satan deceive us with his fair sides of Gifts and
Parts, so as to make us eat of them,
and choose them before the tree of life: And yet God forbid but that we should
have gifts, and parts, and learning, and languages, in the Churches too, for
the service of the Church, and to be under the spirit; so that there is great
reason that the tree of Knowledge should stand there, though the Serpent do
make it his Den, and Tree of Temptation.

10. It was the sixth day that man was put into Paradise by God; 10. Man put in
on the sixth day.
and now a day is as a thousand years, so that we live in the sixth day since
the Creation; and now God is restoring Paradise apace, and he has gathered
some Churches, his Garden is enclosed, and he has caused trees to grow there,
and the River to run there; now it remains, that he by his own spirit do put
man in, we live in this day wherein he will do it, as Ezekiel. 36.33.35.36.37.
Jer. 32.37. By the Lords own hand.
And I will gather them, and I will bring them again into this place, Micah
7.9. He will bring me forth to light, and I shall behold his righteousness.
Zach. 8.8. I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem,
and they shall be my People, and I will be their God in truth and
righteousness: the Lord undertakes it himself, by his own hand to put men
into his Churches, and to bring in the sons of strangers, and the outcasts of
Israel, Isay 56.6.7.8. and he will plant them, Jerem 32.40.41. and bring all
the good that he has promised in his word upon them, Jer. 32.42. and cause
them to walk by Rivers of waters, Jerem 31.9. Ezekiel. 34.13. etc.

11. But to conclude the Type, 11. Gods special presence there.
Paradise is the place wherein God did most familiarly appear, and acquaint
himself to Man, and manifest his love and glory. Three ways we read of by
which God spoke to men, by dreams, by visions, or else face to face; and in
this manner, whereby his Love, and wherein his Glory did most appear, viz. face
to face did the Lord manifest himself in Paradise, Justin, Irenaeus,
Ter^ullian, Eusebius, Ambrose, and alii in lec.
although his face was seen but as in a Glass. 2 Cor. 3.18. under the
similitude of an Angel, or some other bodily appearance. This signifies the
singular appearances and presence of God, which the Churches shall enjoy above
all the world besides, in these last days; his presence is especially promised
to appear, and his Love, and Glory to be manifested in the Churches. (...)
etc. Such a special manifestation as is mentioned in John 14.21. which is
promised in these last days shall be (...), by the brightness of his glory,
Heb. 1.2.3. Jo. 2.11. Ephesians. 3.3.4. so is it in Psalm. 102.16. when the Lord shall
build up Zion, then he shall appear in his glory. So Habak 2.14. Then shall
they be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord. So Zach. 2.5. Rev.
21.11.23. The glory of God shall lighten the New Jerusalem, viz. the glorious
presence of God in it. Then the Saints in the Churches shall have the most
familiar presence of God, discourses with him, discoveries of him walking in
the Garden, as Cant. 8.13. and Cant. 7.11. So Cant. 6.2. my beloved is gone
down into his Garden, to the beds of spices, (particular Churches) to feed in
the Gardens, to gather lillies. There is Christ most and best to be found. So
Cant. 4.16. and 5.1. etc. Psalm. 63.2. and Psalm. 27.4. yea the Angel of his
presence shall be there, Isay 63.9. and the name of them from that day, shall
be Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there Ezekiel. 48.35.

Thus we have done with these Types that foretell the happy state of Saints in
Gospel-fellowship, and the Glory of the Churches of Christ in these latter
days, sparkling through many more Types then I have mentioned, but these are
sufficient for present proof, though every day will bring forth more, and more
excellent matter of praises and rejoycings; whilst the Church comes out of the
Wilderness leaning on her beloved, persumed with mirrh and frankincense* and
the Saints shall have beauty for ashes, and be called trees of righteousness,
the Lords own planting, that he might be glorified, Isay 61.3.

But lastly, that the Churches of Christ are to stand apparently distinct from
all others; 3. The Churches of Christ distinct from all others.
we have already proved it, Chap. 6. lib. 1. etc. besides several Prophesies
and Types we might bring forth, but that it is time to conclude and rest me, as
Numb. 239. Lo they shall not be reckoned among the Nations, and Rev. 18.4. Johu
15.19. Hosea 4.15. and 14 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with
Idols? yea so, as an apparent difference shall be known and owned betwixt them
and others, Mal. 3.16.17. Jer. 15.16. for the Lord has made the difference as
from the first, s Genesis 1.4. God saw the light was good, and therefore divided
the light from darkness, to be distinct. (...) in the Sept. (...), And shall be
so apparently to a^l.
i. e. by an apparent difference to be known by all; and so will he make the
Churches of Light distinct from them of darkness, so as it appears in the
Chaldee Paraphrase and tongue: (...) and so in the Samaritan tongue, that God
made a manifest and bounded separation between them. And this distinct
separation, or division of Gods make, must stand. It is then no new thing to be
distinct from Parishes, and all false Antichristian Churches, wherein there is
a mixture, 2 Cor. 6.1415. and is not so distinct a separation as is and ought
to be in all true Churches from false ways and worships. We find this too
typified by Israel separated from all others Numb. 16.9. and they were not to
join in Religion and worship with the other Nations, 1 King. 11.3. Joshua 2.3.
Exodus 23.16. Deuteronomy. 10.8. and 32.8. but separated from the mixed multitude,
Nehem. 13.3. Ezra 10.16. yea in Deuteronomy. 23.1, 2.3. etc. you will read who might,
and who might not enter into the Church; Expos.
which much concerns us now v. 1. not such as cannot retain the seed of the
word, as it is in Heb. Shophcah, which sheds and loses that precious seed; how
can they beget others to the faith that lose the seed? Not Enemies. Who?
such are not to be received into the Congregation of the Lord: O precious
promises! which will produce and procreate a most excellent distinction in the
latter days! when the Lord shall add to his Churches such as have a fullness
of his seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 Io. 3.9. remaining in them; and then as v. 2. Nor
Bastard^* Who?
Bastards shall not be received, i. e. Hebr. Mamzer, one that is of an Whore,
viz. the Whore in Rev. 17.5. the fruit of uncleanness. Too too many of them,
it is to be feared enter in as yet, that have relation to the Whore, and that
don't heartily hate her and all her trumperies and toys; but then it shall be,
that none but those that hate the Whore. and that shall labor to lay her open
to all the World, and burn her with fire, Rev. 17. And such as shall be glad of
the day, wherein they may dash her little ones against the stones, Psalm
137.8.9. and may serve Babylon as she has served Sion, that shall enter
indeed,
in that day (and not the bastards that are born of the Whore;) But such as
have gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and his marks, and
over the number of his name, Rev. 15.2. Then will be the great and apparent
distinction indeed. Yea then v. 3. Nor Ammon nor Moab shall enter in.
The Ammonite and Moabite must not enter in, etc. yet the Edomites shall, v 7.
being turned Proselites, and received into the faith; by Idumea or Edom, I
would understand the red people (as the Word signifies) and as it relates to
the latter days; I do believe it may take in the bloody Jews, who have so
^ong lay under the guilt, But the Edomits shall, or the Jews.
who will e're the third generation enter apace into the Churches, in the mean
time; Remember O Lord these children of Edom (the Jews) in the day of
Jerusalem (the gathered Churches, in the day of Jezreel) who said (and so they
shall say as zealously as any of Babylon) raze it, raze it, even the foundation
thereof: O Daughters of Babylon, who ought to be destroyed! happy shall he be
that rewards thee as thou have served us, Psalm. 137.7.8. In that day every
eye shall see, and every ear shall hear that ^srael is a people distinct from
all others,
and so made by the instinct of the spirit, which leads them out of Babylon
into Zion, and into all truths. To conclude, all the Prophesies Promises,
Precepts, Practices of Primitive Saints, Preachings, and Epistles, and Acts of
the Apostles (which is our Directory) yea all the Types and Titles of the
Church, Exhort.
as Mount Zion* Jerusalem, Temple, Tabernacle, spiritual house, peculiar
people, royal Priesthood, To strive against National and parochial Church^^
and why?
City, Spouse, Vineyard, Paradise and Garden of the Lord, and golden
Candlesticks, and Kingdom of Heaven, and all other titles that belong to her,
do call aloud in our ears to come in unto her, and out of false adulterine
ways of worship. Wherefore Hosea 2.1.2.3.4. Say to the brethren, come my
people, and to the Sisters (we will join with you) arise, sing, for there is
mercy offered us: Wherefore let us all plead; Plead with your mother, plead,
for she is not my wife, neither ^^n I her husband (says the Lord) Wherefore
let her put away her whoredoms out of her face, Expos.
and her adulteries out of her breast: Plead, Zanch.
strive against her. Litigate. Et rixamini. Zanc. in loc. viz. your mother, the
National Church (so called) and her children. v. 4. viz. parochial
Synagogues, which are full of whoredoms and adulteries, and are not the Lords
Churches, or his Spouse, but Adulteresses and (as Churches) the Daughters of
the Whore, the Queen, the soul strumpet, who shall be burnt up: Therefore
awake, A word to England, Ireland, and Scotland about Na^ion^ll and P^rochiall
Churches.
O ye people of England! Ireland! and Scotland! and plead and expostulate in
good earnest with them! For their Whoredoms are in their faces, and their
adulteries in their breasts; in their face, that is their external worship and
ordinances, and discipline; And in their breasts, that is in their hearts. For
Parish Church Members are full of whoredoms, uncleaness, idolatry,
superstitions, and adulteries in their hearts: They, love the Whore in their
hearts. Yea furthermore most impudently and imprudently (like the most brazen
faced Whores) they will commit sin, The standing impudence of P^r^sh Church
Members!
incest, adultery in open sight, and without blushing for shame call for their
Lovers in the open congregations, and will have their Sacraments, their
Services, their Idols, and will worship in their Synagogues; yea and they have
their Priests too, to preach up and paint out their idolatry (as Whores are
painted) and to give them the Sacraments in their sins.
O sad days I like Sodomes! but the Lord will judge her! I remember Mr.
Cawdrey in's storehouse and similles, Cawdrey, p. 83.
says to this, that his high felony, Sim.
as it is for a subject to counterfeit his Kings Letters or Seals; so for men
to make new Laws and Orders, and not to take Christ's; but to alter the word,
About the Sacraments.
to counterfeit the Sacraments, and most impudently with the Whores forehead to
maintain traditions, Customs (though of long standing) which are not Christ's,
but Anti-Christ's, and to administer the Sacrament and Seals otherwise then
the Lord has appointed, and then Christ has instituted in his Gospel, They
are guilty of Treason, Felony, and Whoredom.
yea and to aggravate their wickedness too, to do it in the Kings (Christ's)
name too; and to pretend his Commission (which they have counterfeited and
invented) is horrible felony, and high treason, and renders such as so receive
them from their Ministers, an Harlot of Antichrist. What can the Parish
Ministers and Presbyterians then say for themselves?
or any that receive from them? Seeing it is Felony, Treason, and Harlotry. Her
Whoredoms and adulteries are so open, as makes a modest man to blush and
detest her; whilst other lewd ones and her Lovers (that seem yet to carry a
fair face) do defend and profess her to be honest and honorable: Aye,
it is for their credit so to do^ who trade with her, as long as they can keep
it, which will not be long now. For the Lord says, v. 3. Let her put away
th^se her (stinking) whoredoms, lest I strip her naked, and set her (...) in
the day that she was born, etc. The Lord has promised to strip these
strumpit-Churches, and Temples of Dagon; The whore and her children, the
Daughters of Babylon, viz. National and Parish-Churches as naked as they were
the first day they were born;
they shall be as poor and miserable as ever they were; yea as in the time of
their nativity, how is that? Why thus.

First, How the Lord will strip them naked.
They shall be quite stripped of clothes for covering and ornaments, and not
have so much as men of gifts, (i. e. Learning that is graced) or abilities of
the spirit that shall plead for them, but all against them, 1. Take away all
their Ornaments, and leave them naked.
even those that are as yet the Whores Lovers, and commit adultery with her,
they shall loath her when they see her l^wdnesse and nakedness; so that she
shall be stripped of all, and be as naked as ever she was borne.

2. When these Parishes and Sinagogues, 2. Show them in their blood and f^^th.
and false Churches were borne as they were naked, so they were besmeared in
blood, begun in blood, and born in blood; so the Lord will show their
abominable filthiness in the very eyes and sight of all her Lovers, v. 10. and
lay her crimes and iniquities, and contamination open to all the world.

3. When they were born at first, why alas! they were poor feeble things, 3. In
their imbecility.
and not able to help themselves; and so it shall be in these latter, days,
none shall be able to deliver them, Hoseae 2.10. or keep them up, Dan. 11. ult.

4. When borne at first they arose with a cry; they made the poor Saints to
cry, 4. With a loud cry.
and to suffer death and martyrdom; but they shall be stripped into that
condition,
that they shall fall with a cry, Rev. 6.16. Rev. 18.11.18. Isay 15.5.8. Jer.
48.5.20, and howling.

5. Little.
5. When borne at first but little, and so shall they be crowded out and be no
more; as the Kingdom of Christ, and true Churches grow greater and greater.

6. In utter darkness.
6. When borne at first they were without knowledge, in darkness (in
themselves) and could not see, and thus shall they be spoiled and stripped
again, and thrown down into darkness, never more to rise: as Mat. 8.12. The
Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness: So the children of
the national Churches, viz. Parish Churches. Thus, Hos. 2.4. I will not have
mercy on her Children, for they are Children of Whoredom, i. e. Parish
Churches, the Children of the Whore shall fall without mercy.
Corrupt, superstitious, and Adulterated (even in sight of all Saints) like
Rome the mother, whence they came, as we proved fully in the first Book: They
are not ligitimate Children, borne of God, but of base blood, adulterine seed,
whorish Romish principles* wherefore I will have no mercy on them, says the
Lord, but they must fall with Babylon that belong to Babylon, unless they put
away their Whoredoms, Superstitions, and unlawful Worships, and no longer,
like impudent Strumpets, to paint themselves over with Spanish, yea Romish
Paintings, and alluring outsides:
Away with those black patches ^ and alluring arguments used to get people in
to those Idol Worships! of their Sacraments! Burials! Baptizings! or the like
(as they are their inventions,) that are unwarrantable, and declared
Whoredoms, and Adulteries in the Word of God! which the Lord will judge with
fire from heaven!

In the mean time, the day of putting a difference is upon us, happy are they
that see it and do it: It is as yet in our Nation as it was in Athens, there
were two sorts of Congregations, viz. Ecclesia and Agorae, Churches and mixed
Congregations; Churches and Parishes differ much, Flaccus, Illiricus, vide
Bernardus Cant. and Beda Sermon. 14.
in the Churches none but such as appeared Saints had communion and entrance;
but the other Congregations (says Flaccus Illiricus) were made up of any
consisting of a confused and promiscuous multitude, which made a mere
Political meeting. And such are your Parishes and national Churches, which
are far from being Churches (as is proved in all the Essentials that appertain
thereto lib. 1.) thus Churches differd from Synagogues as they do from
Parishes, vide Vrsin, de Eccles. 1. Quest. Parishes (at the best) are but like
the great Chamber, Sim.
whereinto all may come and walk that will; but the Churches of Christ are his
Chambers of presence, the King is there, But out of the Churches are great
things to be done these latter days.
his Council there, and thence will come forth his great Acts and Laws, and
Declarations to all the World. And although the Ship is tossed, and the
Disciples that want faith cry out for fear, let the storms rise higher, as
long as Christ is imbarqued with us in the same Seas, and in the same storms.
Wherefore as Caesar said to the trembling Mariner, Confide nauta, Sim.
Caesarem vebis: fear not, (honest friend!) for ye carry Caesar! So I say to
the Churches, and to all the Members, friends! fear not! for the Lord is with
you, you carry Christ; it is he that is in you,
and holds the stern for you; Fear not! only be careful of some corrupt boards
and members of your Churches who will fly in a storm, and so the ship may
spring a leake, A good caution.

and thereby let in too much of the raging Sea; but be so much the carefuller
to stop the leaks, and every day to be pumping out the corrupt black and
stinking waters which get in, and go on with the fairest gales and wind of the
spirit; and as the waters abute, so the Ark, i. e. the Church (long and broad,
and made of many pieces of Wood that will never rot, which) shall rest on Mount
Ararat, Genesis 7.6.7. till the waters be all dried up,
and the Sea be no more, Rev. 21.1.2.

And thus I have done with this Chapter, and this second Book, wherein you
have had the totum homogeneum of the true Church of Christ, according to the
Gospel institution, and true Primitive practice and Christian constitution. We
have heard what is to be done before and what in an orderly knitting and
imbodying together. The next Book, (the third) if the Lord will give
encouragement, will be very large and profitable, to show what is to be done
after this orderly imbodying Wherein the Church will be considered, as the totum
organicum in all her Officers, and Offices, and Orders, and Ordinances, (some
of which we want in these days and means maintenances, and even round about her
very borders. Sim.
For as the Body is blind that wants Eyes to see, and deaf that wants Ears to
hear, and lame that wants Feet to walk, and Hands to act, etc. but yet it is a
Body: so the Church is a Church that wants Organs and Officers, but not so
perfect and entire without a Pastor, as a Mouth;
and Tongue i. e. Teachers; and Overseers, as Eyes; Elders, as Ears; Deacons,
as Hands to distribute to the poor and needy, etc. Messengers, as Feet; and
such like instruments as these. A Church is not so entire without Officers and
Organs.
But yet much care must be had in choosing, and calling, and confirming them in
their services and places to execute as by Authority, and virtue and the whole,
from, and for the wlole: but of that hereafter, and

Thus far for the Essentiali^ Ecclesiae. I purpose now to lay by my pen for a
little while, till I walk about Sion, and have gone round about her (even her
borders) and told the Towers thereof, Psalm. 48.12.13.
and marked well her Bulworks, and considered her Palaces, The Authors resolve
to go the rounds, and to make a further and fuller search of Sion.
(as they are now, and as they have been of old, and as they will be in these
later days) and then I will (God willing) arise again, in the Name of Jehovah
Elohim, to tell (what I have marked and met with in my rounds) to the
generation that is to come: Sic nunquam metuant Res Magn^ oblivia magni
Temporis, etc.

(...).



Fiat Finiat.
(...).
THE FIRST TABLE, Of the Eminent (Orthodox) Writers, Councels, and Martyrs, in
all ages, that have bore testimony to the truths asserted in this Tract, and
that are Quoted in the Tract, 1. Lib.
A
A Insworths Communion. Ainsw. against Bernard. Alphoneus. Ambrose's Epist's.
Ames Medull. Theol. Aquinas. Aretius. Arias Montanus. Askew, ( Martyr.)
Augustinus.
B
BAines's Diocesan Trial. Baines on Colloss. Bartlers Model. Benson on Hosea.
Bernard in Cant. Bernard to Pope Eugenius. Beza. Bilson, ( Martyr.) Bolton.
Brightman. Bradford, ( Martyr.) Burton's Vindication. Bullinger. Burrough's
Heart Divisions. Burrough's against Edwards. Burrough's excellency of a
gracious spirit. Buxtorph.
C
CAlvin. Cameron. Cartwright on Eccles. Policy. Cartwrights Reply to Whitgift
Chrysostom. Chamier. Cotton's Koyes. Cotton's holiness of Church Members.
Cyprian.
D
DAmport, or Davenport. Dell's Way of Peace. Dike. Diodate. Dixon.
E
ERasmus. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. Euseb's Prepar. to the Gospel.
F
FEnner. Ferus. Fox's Martyrs. Fulke against Rhemists, etc.
G
GOodwin, I. and T. Gregory Epist. Grotius. Gualther.
H
HAll. Hart's Char. Harris. Hermes. Hierome. Hooker's Policy. Hooker's Survey
of Discipline. Hobson. Hooper, ( Martyr.) Husse, ( Martyr.)
I
Jacob's Attestation. Iarchi Sol. Jerome in Hierome. Irenaeus. Iunius.
Justinian.
K
KEckerman Theol.
L
LUTher Epist.
M
MArlinus Epist. Marlorat. Peter.
Martyr. Marsilinus Patavinus. Mayer. Melanchton. Montanus. Methodius. Moulin.
Musculus.
N
NOyes Temple.
O
OEcolampad. Owen's Essay. Owen's Eshcol.
P
PAreus. Parker. Paul Baines. Paul Hobson. Patavinus. Par. Peter Martyr.
Peter's. Phillips Answer to Lamb. Perkins. Polidore Virgil.
R
RAwlinson. Robinson's Reasons discussed. Robinson's Essays. Rutherford.
S
SAltmarsh. Sasbont. Seldom de decimis. Smith on the Creed. Sheindler. Sibbs.
T
Tailor. Tailor, ( Martyr.) Tertullian. Tilenus. Trap.
V
VEnning. Ursin.
W
WHittaker, Willets Synops^s. Wilson's Cases. Willi^m's Elijah's Wish.
Z
ZAnch. de Eccles. Zanch. in Hosea. Zuinglius.
Finis 1. Libri.
The first Table, 2. Libri.
ADams on Pet. Ainsworth Communion of Saints. Ames Medul. Theol. Ambrose in
Romans Ambrose in Genesis Ames on Peter. Ames de Anti Bellarm. Anselme. Apology of
N. Eng. men. Aquinas. Ardeus. Augustine in Joan. Augustine in Romans Augustine
Epist. 19. ad Hier. Augustine in Psalm. Aurelians. Council. Auspurge.
B
BAines in Col. Ball. Bartlet's Model. Bailey. Beda. Bernard in Paschal.
Bernard in Cant. Bernard in Ezekiel. Bernard de Consid. cum multis aliis. Beza in
Mat. Beza in Romans Beza's Confessions. Beza's Annotations. Bohemia Confess.
Bolton's Bounds. Bolton's tossed ship. Bradford ( Martyr.) Brightman. Brute, (
Martyr.) Bucan. Bucer de Gubern. Eccles. inter alia. Bullinger de Eccles. inter
alia. Budaeus.
C
CAlvin in Romans Calvin's Instit. inter alia. Cartwrights Eccles. Discip.
Cartwrights against Whitgift. Cawdrey's Sim. Centurists. Clement. Chrysostom
Hom. in Romans inter alia. Cooper. Council. Carthag. Council* Aurelians. Council.
Tolet. Cottons Keys. Cradock's Gospel-holinesse, and Mount-Sion. Culverwells
White-stone. Cyprian Epist. Cyprian. inter alia.
D
DAmascene. Dell's Way of Peace, Dike on Sacrament. Diodate. Dr. Donn.
E
NENgland's Apology. Epiphanius in Haeres. Eusebius. in Genesis Eusebius. Eccles Hist.
F
FArrar, ( Martyr.) Featly. Fenner de Sac. Thol. Fenners Alarm. Feurus, (
French Martyr.) Flaccus Illiricus. Fox Martyrs. Fulke against Rhemists.
G
GAtaker. Glover, (Martyr.) Goodwin, I. and T. Gregory Magn. Gualther.
H
HAymo. Hawks, (Martyr.) Hierome de Unit. Eccles. inter alia. Helvetia.
Confess. Dr. Homes. Hooker's Survey of Discipline. Hooker against Hudson.
Hooper, (Martyr.) Holland ( Martyr.) Hudson. Jo. Husse ( Martyr.)
I
IEssey, alias Jacie. Irenaeus in Genesis inter alia. Junius. Justin.
K
KEckerman. Theol.
L
LAmbert, ( Martyr.) Latimer, ( Martyr.) Luther in Joel. Epist's; inter alia.
M
MAgdeburgenses. Mayer. Melanchton Com. Loc. inter alia.
N
NAzianzen. Nilus de Primat. Nelphilas. Noyes Temple. Novatus.
O
OLevian in Romans Origin in Mat. inter alia. Owen's Eshcol.
P
PAnormitane, a Romano Lawyer. Par. Paraeus in Genesis Joel. Romans inter alia.
Parisian School. Papismi Synopsis. Perkins Problem, Cases of Conscience.
Perkins in Gal. Rev. inter alia. Peter's Discourse of Covenant. Philpot, (
Martyr.) Pliny. Polanus in Ezekiel. Dan. etc. Preston on N. Covenant. Prinn's
Quaries, etc. Prosper.
R
RAndall's Star leading to Christ. Ridley, ( Martyr.) Rivetus. Robinson Justif.
Robinsons Essays. Rogers on good Samaritane Parable. Rogers's Right Way to be
saved. Rogers ( Proto-Martyr.) Rutherford.
S
SAdeele. Saltmarsh's Flowing^ of Christ's blood. Sibb's Marriage Feast. Sibb's
Soule-Conflicts. Sibb's Founta ne sealed. Sibb's Excellency of Gospel above
Law. Sibrandus. Dr. Peter Smith. Robert Smith ( Martyr.) Socrates Eccles. Hist.
So^omen. P. Sterry. Dr. Stroughton's Right Plea. Synopsis Papismi.
T
Dr. Tailor in Psalm. Tailor, ( Martyr.) Tertullian de velandis virginibus,
inter alia. Theodoret in Epist. inter alia. Tichbourn on Io. 13. Tilenus.
Tindal ( Martyr.) Trap in Evang. Trelcatius. Dr. Troisse.
V
VIndiciae Clavium. Vines Sermon. before Parl. October 22. 1644. Ursinus
Chatechis. inter alia.
W
WArr's Dispute 'twixt Form and Power. Whittaker de Eccles. Council. and Pontif.
inter alia. Willet. Wilsons Cases. Wittemberg. Confess. Woodman ( Martyr)
Z
ZAnchy de Eccles. de Hom. creat. in Genesis Hos. etc.
Finis 1. Tabuli.
THE SECOND TABLE. Of those Choice Scriptures which are Expounded rescued and
defended from the Adversaries in this Treatise.
GENESIS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 8.9 to 18. 529 530 etc. chapter 9 l. 2 EXODUS.
Chapter Verse. Page 20 24 116 chapter 9. l. 1 23 1.2 112 chapter 8. l. 1 25 40 120 chapter 10.
l. 1 1. KINGS.
Chapter Verse. Page 10 6.7 383 chapter 6. l. 2 10 9.10 242 chapter 1. l. 2 1. CHRON.
Chap. Verse. Page 13 9 173 chapter 13. l. 1 15 23 280 chapter 3. l. 2 JOB.
Chap. Verse. Page 31 14.24 26 27 161. 162. chapter 13. l. 1 36 10 1 chapter 1. l. 1
PSALMS.
4 v. 3. p. 267 chapter 2. l. 2 18 30. 356 chapter 6. l. 2 22 1.2.4 5. 367 chapter 6. l. 2
26 6.7. 356 chapter 6. l. 2 27 4 334 chapter 5 l. 2 36 9. 1^7 ch 9 l. 1. 44 10 11.14
17.18 etc. 266 chapter 2. l 2 45 10. 240 chapter 1 l. 2 51 12 13. 356 375. ch 6 l. 2 55
6 8.11. 80 ch 6. l. 1 60 6. 119. ch 10. l. 1 63 1 2. 116 ch 9 l. 1 65 1. 133
chapter 12 l 1 66 19 356 ch 6. l. 2 74 19.20. 34 35 chapter 3. l. 1 83 11.12 13 171 chapter
13 l. 1 84 10 118 chapter 9. l. 1 87 2.3.4 209 ch 15. l. 1 110 3 3 chapter 1 and 124
chapter 11. l. 1 114 4 26 ch 3. l. 1 126 5.6 365 chapter 6 l. 2 127 1.2 140 ch 13 l. 1
PROVERBS.
Chapter Verse. Page 1 8 1 ch 1. l. 1. 7 1 119 120 c 9 l. 1 9 1.2.3 4 32.34 etc. 198
199 c. 15. l. 1 ECCLES.
Chapter Verse. Page 5 1 239 chapter 1. l. 2 7 18 340 chapter 5. l. 2 CANT.
Chapter Verse. Page 2 11 12. 28 chapter 3 l. 1 3 9 50 chapter 5. l* 1 4 1 2 3.4 etc. 96.
chapter 8. l 1 and 43 ch 4 l 1 8 44 chapter 4. l. 1 5 9 etc. 285 ch 3 l. 2 11 150 chapter
13. l. 1 6 1 285 ch 3. l 2 9 337 chapter 5 l. 2 10 282 chapter 3. l. 2 12 253 ch 2 l. 2
8 2 132 chapter 12. l 1 6 266 ch 2 l. 2 5 376 ch 6. l. 2 ISAIAH.
Chapter Verse. Page 1 3 241 chapter 1. l. 2 2 2.3 4 chapter 1 l. 1. 5 2 43 chapter 4. l. 1 14
32 183 chapter 14. l. 1 22 21, 22 138 chapter 13. l. 1 27 6 44 chapter 4. l. 1 28 15 63 chapter
5. l. 1 30 21, 22 33 chapter 3 l. 1 33 17, 20 117 chapter 9 l. 1 108 chapter 8. l. 1 21 203
ch 15. l. 1 34 11 35 chapter 3. l. 1 40 11.38 329 chapter 5. l. 2 42 11 46 chapter 4 l. 1
51 311 132 ch 12. l* 1 54 11.12.14 510 chapter 9. l. 2 60 5.6 521 ch 9. l. 2 13, 14
51 ch 5. l 1 17 181 chapter 13. l. 1 JEREMY.
Chapter Verse. Page 7 9 52 chapter 5. l. 1 15 19 132, 133 chapter 12 l 1 30 17, 19 133 chapter
12 l. 1 33 7 524 chapter 9 l. 2 50 5 84 chapter 7 l. 1 209 chapter 15 l. 1 124 chapter 11 l. 1
EZEKIEL
Chapter Verse. Page 13 14 191 ch 14 l. 1 20 38 562 chapter 7 l. 2 36 37, 38 29 chapter 5 l.
2 37 7 506 chapter 9 l. 2 43 10, 11 82 chapter 7 119 chapter 10 l. 1 44 6, 7 52 ch 5 l. 1
DANIEL.
Chapter Verse. Page 2 32 154 chapter 13 l. 1 11 44, 45 525, 526 chapter 9 l. 2 12 11, 12,
13 21 chapter 3 l. 1 HOSEA.
Chapter Verse. Page 1 11 509 ch 9 l. 2 2 1 510 chapter 9 l. 2 14 5, 6 44 chapter 4 l. 1 8
146 chapter 13 l. 1 JOEL.
Chapter Verse. Page 2 29 464 chapter 8 l. 2 AMOS.
Chapter Verse. Page 3 2* 3, 4 303 chapter 4 l. 2 8 11, 12 35 chapter 3 l. 1 MICAH.
Chapter Verse. Page 4 2 199 chapter 15 l. 1 4 5 329 chapter 5 l. 2 ZEPHANY.
Chapter Verse. Page 3 9 133 chapter 12 l. 1 330 chapter 5 l. 2. HAGGAI.
Chapter Verse. Page 1 2.4 194 chapter 14 l. 1 2 18 189 chapter 14 l. 1 ZACHARY.
Chapter Verse. Page 2 11. 124. chapter 11. l. 1 330 chapter 5. l. 2. 4 6. 193. chapter 14. l. 1
524. chapter 9. l. 2 6 13. 257. chapter 2. l. 2 8 23. 330. chapter 5. l. 2 MALACH.
Chapter Verse. Page 3 16.17. 70. chapter 6. l. 1. 273. chapter 3. l. 2 MATTHEW.
Chapter Verse. Page 4 33. 43. chapter 4. l. 1. 20.22. 125. chapter 11. l. 1 7 11.12. 259.
chapter 2. l. 2 26.27. 183. chapter 14. l. 1 190. 6. 54. chapter 5. l. 1 10 27. 283. chapter 3.
l. 2. 16 15.20. 287. chapter 4. l. 2. 13 38.39. 56. chapter 5. l. 1. 15 13. 109. chapter 8.
l. 1 16 16. 53. chapter 5. l. 1 16 18.19. p. 4. chapter 1. lib. 1 p. 4. chapter 7. lib. 1
138. chapter 13 lib. 1 284. chapter 14 lib. 1 18 17.18. p. 4. chapter 1. l. 1 and 465. chapter
8. l. 2 21 33 42. chapter 4. l. 1 22 9 129. chapter 11. l. 1 12. 55. chapter 5. l. 1. 21.
181. chapter 13. l. 1 29. 374. chapter 6. l. 2. 24 45. 3. chapter 1. l. 1 25 37. 382. chapter
6. l. 2 28 18. 121. chapter 10. l. 1 19.20. 303. chapter 5. l. 2 331. MARK.
Chapter Verse. Page 12 1. 42. chapter 4. l. 1 LUKE.
Chapter Verse. Page 9 4.5.6. 128. chapter 11. l. 1 55.56. 159. chapter 13. l. 1 23. 124.
chapter 11. l. 1 12 13.14. 160. chapter 13. l. 1 14 23. etc. 128.129. chapter 11. l. 1
28.29. 136. chapter 12. l. 1 21 25.26. 26. chapter 3. l. 1. 22 15. 204. chapter 15. l. 1
JOHN.
Chapter Verse. Page 3 19. 282 chapter 3. l. 2 4 28.29. 367 chapter 6. l. 2 6 37 362 chapter 6.
l. 2 44 253 chapter 2. l. 2 14 17.26 264 chapter 2. l. 2 15 2 109 chapter 8. l. 1 45 44 chapter
4. l. 1 27 357 chapter 6. l* 2 JOHN.
Chap. Verse. Page 16 13 264. chapter 2. l. 2. 17 21.22. 523. chapter 9. l. 2. ACTS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 14 566. chapter 8. l. 2 2 37 53. chapter 5. l. 1 125. chapter 11. l. 1
365. chapter 6. l. 2 41.47. 67. chapter 5. l. 1 261. chapter 2. l. 2 39. etc. 72 chapter 6. l.
1 3 22. 121. chapter 10. l. 1 5 13. 283. chapter 3. l. 2 38.39. 340. chapter 5. l. 2 6 2.3.
465. chapter 8. l. 2 9 26. 84. chapter 7 l. 1 11 23. 124. chapter 11. l. 1 456. chapter 7. l. 2
14 23. 456. chapter 8. l. 2 15 12.3. etc. 22. 109 110. etc. chapter 8. l. 1 17 23. 241*
chapter 1. l. 2 18 28. 281. chapter 3. l. 2 ROMANS.
Chap. Verse. Page 8 16. 372. chapter 6. l. 2 9 1. ibid. 14 5.6. 243. chapter 1. l. 2.
14 1.2.3.5.6 7 10.13.16.18 19 20.21 etc 329.330. etc chapter 5. l. 2. 1. Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 3. 43. chapter 4. l. 1 8. 31. chapter 3. l. 1 10. 142. chapter 13. l. 1
11 2.23. 120 chapter 10. l. 1 12 6. 89. chapter 7. l. 1 13. 307. chapter 4. l. 2 14
1.2.3.31.32.34.35. 37.39. 475. chapter 8. l. 2 33.40 271. chapter 3. l. 2 2. Corinthians.
Chapter Verse. Page 5 11. 356. chapter 6. l. 2 6 16.17. 72. chapter 6. l. 1 117. chapter 9. l.
1 403. chapter 9 l. 2 8 35. 125. chapter 11. l. 1 10 45. 140. chapter 13. l. 1 12 9. 268.
chapter 2. l. 2 12 5.11. 381. ch 6. l. 2. GALAT.
Chapter Verse. Page 3 1 39. chapter 3. l. 1 28. 471. chapter 8. l 2 4 6 337. chapter 5. l. 2 9
77. ch 6. l* 1 6 1.2. 83. chapter 8. l. 1. EPHESIANS.
Chap. verse. page 1. 10. 338, 339 c. 5. l. 5 2. 21, 22. 84. chapter 7. l. 1 189. c.
14. l. 1 3. 17. 196. chapter 14. l. 1 4. 4, 5. 307, 308. c. 4. l. 2 5. 11. 42. chapter
4. l. 1 72. chapter 6. l. 1 PHILIPPIANS.
Chap. verse. page 2. 12. 187. chapter 14. l. 1 3. 15, 16. 330. chapter 5. l. 2 4. 3.
566. chapter 8. l. 2 COLOSSIANS.
Chap. verse. page 1. 18. 148. chapter 13. l. 1 2. 6, 7. 144. chapter 13. l. 1 196. chapter
14. l. 1 9, 19. 148. c. 13. l. 1. 150. c. 13. l. 1. 182. c. 13. l. 1. 17. 337.
chapter 5. l. 2 18. 317. chapter 6. l. 2 2 THESSALONIANS.
Chap. verse. page 2. 8. 154. chapter 13. l. 1 1 TIMOTHY.
Chap. verse. page 6. 3, 4, 5. 120. chapter 10. l. 1 2 TIMOTHY.
Chap. verse. page 2. 24, 25. 128. chapter 11. l. 1 3. 3. 72. chapter 6. l. 1 HEBREWS.
Chap. verse. page 1. 1, 2. 366. chapter 6. l. 2 3. 10, 11, 13. 207.208. chapter 15. l.
1. 4. 12. 257. chapter 2. l. 2 6. 8. 208. chapter 15. l. 1 11. 10. 189. chapter 14. l. 1
13. 7. 136. chapter 12. l. 1 1 PETER.
Chap. verse. page 2. 3. 357. chapter 6. l. 2 9. 133. chapter 12. l. 1 4 14. 267. chapter 2.
l. ^ 5. 2. 255. chapter 2. l. 2 2 PETER.
Chap. verse. page 2. 10. 187. chapter 14. l. 1 APOC. or REV.
Chap. verse. page 2. 2, 14, 15, 20. 101. c. 8. l. 1 207. c. 4. l. 2 5. 9. 134.
chapter 12. l. 1 11. 5. 90. chapter 7. l. 1 6. 19. chapter 3. l. 1 8. 342. chapter 5. l. 2 16.
382. chapter 6. l. 2 12. 1, 2, 14, etc. 9. chapter 2. l. 1 14. 4. 134. chapter 12. l. 1 18.
4, 8, 9, 10. 525. chapter 9. l. 2 20. 8, 9. 90. chapter 7. l. 1. 21. 17, 18, 19, 20.
511. chapter 9. l. 2.

The third Table: Fully and Alphabetically declaring the chief things handled
in the whole Treatise. p. is for page, c. for chap. and l. for lib.
A.
ABimelechian destiny nigh them that usurp Christ's Seat, page 172. chap. 13.
lib. 1 Ablest, Embody first, and in public, p. 278. c. 3. l. 2 Account of
faith at Dublin, p. 350 c. 5* l. 2 Accusations against Saints and
Gospel-discipline, p. 13 c. 2. l. 1 Acts of the Apostles* Churches Directory,
p. 123. c. 10. l. 1 Acts of Providence often read (Hebrew-like) backward, p. 47.
c. 4. lib. 1. and epist. p. 6 Acts of the soul, reflex and direct, p. 376, 377.
c. 6. l. 2 Adjunct to a true Church, is the word preached, and no more, p. 79.
c. 6. l. 1 Admission of Members, of whom, by whom, how and when, p. 288, 289 c.
4. l 2 Admission of the least and lowest Saints, p. 339, 340, 348. c. 5. l. 2
Admission of all opinions that differ in things doubtful and indifferent, p.
311, 312. c. 5. l. 2 Advantage to Churches by experiences of Saints, p. 358 c.
6. l. 2 Advowsons and presentations wicked, and how, p. 7. and 29. of Epist.
Adullamites are many, p. 93. c. 7 l. 1 Egypt, Churches of Form, how? p. 342.
c. 5* l. 2 Egypt a type of Antichrist, p. 525. c. 9. l. 2 Egyptian plagues on
Parish Churches, p. 92, 93. c. 7. l. 1 Egyptian Taskmasters, who now? p. 342
c. 5. l. 2 Aegle-Saints nested in the Rock, p. 198. c. 14. l. 1 Affections held
with difference of opinions at first, p. 333. c. 5. l. 2 Affections of women
above men's, p. 474.475. c. 8. l. 2 Afflictions, converting Ordinances, p. 403,
413. c. 6. l. 2 Afflictions of (spiritual) Israelites under hard taskmasters,
how? p. 342. c. 5. l. 2 Afflictions on the Author great, p. 432. c. 6. l. 2
Agates (precious stones) who? p. 510. c. 9. l. 2 Age; in the last was to know
Christ the Head, in this Christ's body, but in the next, both, viz. whole
Christ, p. 147. c. 13. l. 1 All ages Eminent Independents, p. 114* c. 8. l. 1
All Languages and nations must make up one Church ere long, p. 530. c. 9. l. 2
Ambition, what it brought the Bishops to, p. 106, 156. c. 8, 13. l. 1 All of
different opinions, etc. one, p. 329. c. 5. l. 2 All in one, the beauty of
Sion, p. 337. c. 5. l. 2 Amethysts (precious stones) who? p. 519, 520. c. 9. l.
2 Ames left his Professorship for Church Fellowship, p. 118. c. 9. l. 1 Amiable
Tabernacles are the congregational Churches, p. 87. c. 7. l. 1 Anabaptists in
Ireland too bitter, unsound in judgment, wresters of the Scriptures,
uncharitable and censorious. A lesson for them, p. 299, 302, 305, 307, 309, c.
4. l. 2. p. 453. c. 7. l. 2. p. 334. c. 5. l. 2 Angels cannot teach so well as
experiences do, p. 384. c. 6. l. 2 Anger of God against such as company with
Christ's enemies, p. 76. c. 6. l. 1 Antichrist destroyed and tormented, how? p.
23 c. 3. l 1. Antichrists sauciness, whether in Episc. Presbyt. or Indep. to
usurp Christ's power, p. 105. c. 8. l. 1 Antichrist falls the same way he rose,
p. 156. c. 13. l. 1 Antichrist arrogates both powers, viz. Eccles. and Civil,
p. 176. c. 13. l. 1 Antichrist the first that made difference of opinions,
difference of affections, p. 333 c. 5. l. 2 Antichrist typified by Egypt,
Sodom, Babylon, etc. p. 525. c. 9. l. 2 Antichrist, how he resembles, or rather
dissembles Christ. p. 25. epist. Antichristian-Chur. parish-Churches, p. 61. c.
5. l. 1 Antichristian-Churches we must separate from, page 78. chapter 6. lib* 1
Antichristian to rob Sisters Right, p. 469. c. 8. l. 2 Antiochus Epiph. a
figure of the Pope, p 526. c. 9. l. 2 Antiquity for the Independents, p. 60.
epist. in Apostles-daies Church Discipline was glorious, and how? p. 910. c. 2.
l. 1 Apostles not Heads, but Helpers, p. 120. c. 10. l. 1. p. 107. c. 8. l. 1
Appeals never any to Jerusalem about Church government, p. 110. c. 8. l. 1
Appearance of Christ the ruin of Policy. p. 170. c. 13. l. 1 Archbishops
(third) Head of Brass, p 156, 157. c. 13. l. 1 Arc on the waters yet for
forty years, p. 24. c. 3. l. 1 Arc overturned by Beasts carrying it, p. 36. c.
3 l. 1 Arc on which the Spirit rests, p. 268. c. 2 l. 2 Arms which the Lord
draws with, are Spirit (his right hand) and Word (his left) p. 253. c. 2. l. 2
Army of Christ, who? p. 85 c. 7. l. 1 Armor of light for Saints of all
judgments and opinions. p. 335. c. 5. l. 2 Armoury for swords for Saints, p.
99. c. 8 l. 1 Assembly of Divines a (fourth) Head of Brass, p. 158. c. 13. l.
1 Assemblies of Ministers must down: which are allowable, and which not, p.
109. c. 8. l. 1 in Assemblies of Sion, God is glorious, p. 118. c 9. l. 1
Assurance requisite before entrance, p. 248. c. 1. l. 2 Assurance brought to
light, and how to know it, p. 372, and 451. of exper. c. 6. l. 2 Authors
judgment of the Restoration: 1 Gradually now; 2 Universally to come, p 20. c.
3. l. 1 Author prays he may be as a light to give others light, though he be
spent for it, p. 50. c. 5. l. 1 Author abused at Dublin for Mr. Bartlet, p. 88.
c. 7. l. 1 Author's warning to the Parliament, p. 172. c. 13. l. 2 Author
expects a world of Antagonists, but he calls for reasons, not railings, p. 226.
epist. l. 2 E. A very, her Experience, p. 402, 403. c. 6. l. 2 Author's
Experience, p. 419, 420, etc. ibid. Author's assurance how attained, p. 431,
438. ibid. Authors call to the Ministry how, p. 436, 437. ibid. And his order
in teaching School p. 438. ibid. Author's Resolution and Motto, p. 3. His
sufferings in Essex, p. 231, 232. epist. l. 1
B.
BAbes have full breast^, page 100. chap. 8. lib. 1. Babes of Christ tenderly
received, p. 331. c. 5. l. 2 Babylon a type of Antichrist, p. 525. c. 9. l. 2
Babel has the hearts of millions, p. 40. c. 3. l. 1 Babylons fall bewailed by
many, p. 37. c. 3. l. 1 Babylon in Parish Churches, p. 64. c 5. l. 1 Babylon
falling and all that traded with her, p. 94. c. 7.1 the Baptist put by
scandalous, p. 56. c. 5 l. 1 Baptism, how Presbyt. and Papists agree in it, p.
466. c. 9. l. 2 Baptizing again, unlawful, page 295. chap. 4. lib. 2 Baptism
of Christ, is with holy Ghost, p. 296, and how it differs from John's, p. 300.
c. 4. l. 2 our Baptism true for matter and form, p. 296. ibid. Baptism which
signifies most is best, p. 298. ibid. Baptism of Anabaptists unlawful, and
why, p. 299. ibid. Baptism constitutes not a true Church, p. 308. ibid. Bare
profession not enough for Church fellowship, p. 56. c. 5. l. 1 Barren Clouds
who and when? p. 203. c. 15.1 M. Barkers Experience, p. 413. c. 6. l. 2 S.
Barnwel's Experience, p. 415. c. 6. l. 2 Bastards, who? p. 549. c. 9. l. 2
Beast (seven-headed) politic in all ages, p. 10. c. 1. l. 1 Beasts made their
Stie of the Church, p. 36, 37. c. 3. l. 1 Beasts carried the Arc till they
overturned it, p. 36. c. 3. l. 1 Beasts meet together in Parish Churches, p.
93. c. 7. l. 1 Bed of Christ, where? p. 50. c. 5. l. 1 Believers bound to walk
together in Christ's way of Church Fellowship, p 198. c. 15. l. 1 Benefits in
Churches, p. 201, 202, 203, 204. c. 15. l. 1 Believers of all sorts to be
received, p. 312. c. 5. l. 2 Beauties of holiness p. 3. c. 1. l. 1. and p. 69.
c. 5. l. 1 Beauty of Saints embodied, p. 87. c. 7. l. 1 Beautiful object of
the Churches is attractive, p. 177. c. 9. 1 Beauty of Gospel-fellowship appears
in public embodying, p. 282. c. 3. l. 2 Beauty of Sion is all in one, p. 337,
338. c. 5. l. 2 Beryls (precious stones) who? p. 517. c. 9. l. 2 Bishops how
they got to be so big as Lords, Judges, Barons, etc. p. 106 107, c. 8. l. 1. p.
166. c. 13. l. 1 Bishops with their Diocesses, how they got in; and how Heads
of brass. p. 156. c. 13. l. 1 Bishops Lands belong to the poor, p. 167. c. 13.
l. 1 F. and A. Bishop's Experience, p. 398. c. 6. l. 2 Blossoms of these
days, and Blessings promised us, p. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, etc. c. 3. l. 1 Blow
to Parish-Churches fatal, p. 94. c. 7. l. 1 Body of Christ, his Church, p. 83
ibid. Body together consults in Church Affairs, p. 110. c. 8. l. 1 Bondage of
works, p. 420. c. 6. l. 2 Book of the lamb, ere long out, p. 217. epist. l. 2
Bosome-love to Church of Saints, p. 103. ibid. Breach upon some Churches, p.
280 c. 3. l. 2 Brazen faced men set up Brazen head, p. 151. c. 13. l. 1 Brazen
head compels by force, is a mixed metal, best in outside, has an ill savor,
and is, man's creature, etc. p. 152, 153, 154, 155. c. 13. l. 1 2 Breasts of the
Churches, p. 99. c. 8 l. 1 Bride calls to her friends, p. 40. c. 3 l. 1 Bride
coming forth in these days, p. 46, c. 4. l. 1 Building of Christ, is his
Church, p. 4. c. 1. l. 1 Builders are yet unskilful, and not such spirited
Aholiabs as will be, p. 123. c. 10. l. 1 Builders wise who and how, p. 142 c.
13. l. 1 Build first in Christ, then into Churches p. 188. c. 14. l. 1 Builders
foolish how they differ from the wise, p. 190. c. 14. l. 1 Builders most of
them reject the right stone, p. 193. ibid. Builders warned of Christning
Churches into their own names, p. 197. ibid. Burial of all ceremonies when?
and how? p. 313, 314, c. 5. l. 2 M. Burrels Experience, p. 413. c. 6 l. 2. J.
Bywater Preacher his Exper. p. 394. c. 6. l. 2
C.
CAll into Christ's Gardens these days, page 45. chap. 4. lib. 1 Call to
convert all, p. 55. c. 5. l. 1 Called number the Church, p. 73. c. 6 l. 1 Call
of Christ makes us volunteers, p. 124. c. 11. l. 1 Call, when, and how;
extraordinary and ordinary, legal and evangelicall p. 394, 403, 406, etc. c.
6. l. 2 a Call most orderly when, p. 450. ib. a Call to the Ministry how, p.
436, 437. c. 6 l. 2. Callings to be followed, p. 75. c. 6. l. 1 Canons (though
ere so charged) the Church fears not, p. 185. c. 14 l. 1 Care God has to
provide a Gospel^Discipline, p. 3. c 1. l. 1 Care of Christ, greatest to his
Churches, p. 204. c. 15* l. 1. and 44 4.1 Captivity of Babylon in Parish
Churches, bondage, page 64* c. 5. l. 1 Carnal Reason keeps off of
Church Fellowship, page 80. chapter 6 lib. 1 Castle of defense Christ to's
Churches, p. 185. c. 14. l. 1 Cause judged by the Effects, p. 361 c. 6. l. 2
Catholic Church what, p. 480. c. 9. l. 2 Caution to the Churches of the
Church-destroying ranting spirit which is abroad, p. 553. c. 9 l. 2 and p. 502.
ibi ^. Censuring taken off, how? p. 364. c. 6 l. 2 Censurers admonished first,
p. 418 c. 6. l. 2 Ceremonies dead when, and how? p. 314. c. 5. l. 2
Chalcedonies (precious stones) who? p. 514. c. 9. l. 2 E. Chambers her
Experience, p. 406, 407. c. 6 l. 2 I. Chamberlains Experience, p. Exp. 6. l. 2
Champions for Christ who best, p. 245. c. 1. l. 2 Change for the Churches, p.
42. c. 4 l. 1 Character of Wildernesse-ones, p. 38. c 3. l. 1 Character of
Hypocrites that crowd into Churches, p. 211. c. 15.1 Chariot of Sol. typified,
p. 50. c. 5 l. 1 Charity a standing rule, p. 58. c. 5 l. 1 Cherubims the Saints
how? p. 47 epist. l. 1 Children not necessary to be baptized, p 466. c. 9. 2
Christ the Churches fullness, p. 17 c. 2. l. 1 Christ's reign 40 years hence,
p. 24 c. 3. l. 1 Christ's own planting, who? p 43 c. 4. l. 1 Christ commands
Saints to enter, p. 54. c. 5. l. 1. and to separate from them without, p. 75.
c. 6. l. 1 and 94. c 7. l. 1 Christ's Rule for building Churches, p. 120, 121.
c. 10. l. 1 Christ alone institutes, instructs, builds and orders his Churches,
p. 139. c. 13. l. 1 Christ alone Lord, how and why? p. 143, 144. c. 13. l. 1
Christ a most absolute Independent p 147. c. 13. l. 1 Christ and Church (Head
and Body) make up a whole Christ, p. 147. c. 13. l. 1 Christlesse Church is a
headless body, p. 148. c* 13. l. 1 Christ Head, and yet Member, p. 148. c. 13.
l. 1 Christ Head, is highest ore Churches, p. 148. c. 13. l. 1 Christ Head is
excellency of gives virtue to governs all in sympathy with
Churches p. 149. ibi Christ our Head, has our eyes, ears, tongue, all, p.
150. c. 13. l. 1 Christ alone lawful Judge in Religion, p. 151. c. 13. l. 1
Christ, Head, Builder, and yet Foundation, p. 184. c. 14. l. 1 Christ always
the same to Saints and Churches, p* 186. c. 14. l. 1 in Christ first, and then
get into Churches, p. 188. c. 14.1 Christ the Fountain of Gardens, p. 203. c.
15. l. 1 Christs-memb. more then Church Members. p. 209. c. 15. l. 1 Christ
in's fleshly-form and Church-form alike, p. 244. c. 5 l. 2 Christ crucified in
spiritual Egypt, where? p. 342. ibid. in Christ the nigher, the more all in
one, p. 339. ibid. Christ found after lost, how? p. 407 408. c. 6. l. 2 Christ
Head in Churches, King in Nations, p. 509. c. 9 l. 2 Christian Liberty in
opinions, p. 318, 328. c. 5. l. 2 Chrysolites (precious stones) who? p. 516. c.
9. l. 2 Chrysoprasus's who and how? p. 519. c, 9. l. 2 Church in wilderness,
when and how? p. 10. c. 2. l. 1 Church how out of the Wilderness into Gardens,
p. 42. c. 4. l. 1 Churches most fruitful Gardens, p. 43. c. 4. l. 1. p. 204 c.
l. 2 Churches must be well weeded, and many plucked up by the roots, p. 49. c.
4. l. 1 Church is Christ's Bed, Throne, Palace, Couch, Chamber of presence, p.
50. c. 5. l. 1 Church Christ's Body and Building, p. 83, 84. c. 7. l. 1 Church
Christ's City compact, p. 85 c. 7. l. 1 Church Christ's Army, Kingdom, Heaven,
p. 85, 86. c. 7. l. 1 Churches all equal Independent, p. 100, 101. c. 8. l. 1
Church (wholly of Brothers and Sisters,) all to conclude on Church Matters, p.
110. c. 8 l. 1 Church if whole erres, what to do? p. 111, 112. ibid. Churches
join together to recover an erroneous Sister-Church, ibid. Churches object
what, p. 116. c. 9 l. 1 Churches Rule for the building, p. 120. 121. c. 10. l.
1 Churches end ever one, p. 131. c. 12 l. 1 Churches Head, Christ alone, p.
137* 140, 151, c. 13. l. 1 Churches true and false differ about the Head, p.
152. c. 13 l. 1 Churches cannot deliver up to secular powers, p. 176, 177. c.
13. l. 1 Churches built on Christ the Rock, p. 193. c. 14. l. 1 Churches enjoy
more then all the world from Christ, p. 203. c. 15. l. 1 Churches greatest
enemies to errors, ibid. Churches to be members of; which are the best, p. 212.
c. 15. l. 2 Church Members must be brought in by the Word and Spirit, p. 263 c.
2. l. 2 Church (here) a picture of her above, p. 337, 337. c. 5. l. 2 Churches
of form, Spiritual Egypt, p. 342. c. 5. l 2 Churches formal, and why? p. 348
c. 5. l. 2 Churchmembers warned, p. 445. c. 6 l. 2 Church who? and who not? p
465. c. 8. l. 2. and taken diverse ways, p. 479* 480. c. 9. l. 2
Church Covenant necessary, p. 455 c. 7. l. 2 Churches in Unity a terror to
enemies, p. 504. c. 9. l. 2 Churches when they shall excel, p. 5^2. c.2 l.2
Churches exhorted to live above form, p. 46. epist. l. 1 Churches in the last
day, and in the east, i. e. Christ, and from thence the Sun rises, p. 531. c.
9. l. 2 Churches and Parishes how they differ p. 553. c 9. l. 2 Citizens of
Sion how many privileges* p. 85. c 7. l. 1 Civil. converse to be kept up, c.
6. l. 1 Civil Rulers are uncivil beyond civil rules, p. 127. c. 11. l. 1
Civil and Ecclesiastical, Caesar's and Christ's, how they came to be jumbled
together, page 168 chap. 13. lib. 1 Civil powers commit sacrilege and when?
p. 172. ibid. Classes none in Scripture, p. 61 epist. l. 1 Classes,
High-Commission-Courts, and Popes-Mother-Church of Cardinals; are all of the
same nature, and for the same ends, p. 105, 106. c. 8. l. 1 Classes are the
(fifth) Head of Brass, and the unsavory fruits of them, p. 158, 159. c. 13. l.
1 Colleges and Committees too full of stately Ministers, p. 168, 169. c. 13.
l. 1 Compulsive powers do more hurt then good, p. 126. c. 11. l. 1 Comforts to
all Churches to come, p. 524. c. 9. l. 2 Coming of Christ but a tale to many,
p. 18. epist. l. 1 Commonwealth when flourishing, p. 6. ibid. Comfort and
salvation hindered by disobedience to Christ's calls, p. 207. c. 15. l. 2
Confidence in the flesh to be cast off, p. 247. c. 1. l. 2 a Confession of
Faith, p. 350. c. 5 l. 2 Congregationall Churches are the right Presbytery, p.
313. c. 8 l. 2 Congregationall Churches some will fall, and some stand the
trials that are coming, p. 189, 191, 192. c. 14. l. 1 a Congregationall Church,
what, and how it gives being to the Catholic, p. 481. c. 9. l. 2 Conscience*
what it is, p. 114 c. 8. lib. 1 Conscience not to be compelled, p. 128. c. 11.
l. 1. and p. 262. c. 2. l. 1 Consciences have liberty in opinions, page 312.
chap. 5. l. 2 Consciences Golden Rule, p. 337 c. 5. l. 2 Conquest follows
fighting, p. 365 c. 6. l. 2 Consequences of doubtings, p. 251 c. 1. l. 2
Consequences sad, upon the wilful neglect of entering into Churches, when
Christ calls. p. 200 c. 15. l. 2 Consideration must be serious, p. 240. c. 1. l.
2 Consideration in four things before entrance, p. 242. c. 1. l. 2 Constitution
of Parish Churches opened a box of plagues ever since, p. 92. c. 7. l. 1
Contrary means bring forth Gods ends, p. 47. c* 4. l. 1 Covenant one to all
Saints, p. 86 c. 7. l. 1 Convert discovered two ways, p. 354 c. 6. l. 2
Converting means by experiences, p. 367, 368. ibid. J. Coopers experience, p.
400, 401 ibid. Covenant in the Church, indifferent, p. 451. c. 7. l. 2
Covenant, what kind is necessary, p. 456. c. 7. 2 Council of Lateran the
first since Christ that ratified tithes and Presentations, p. 28. ep. l. 1
Councels the (second) Head of Brass, p. 157. c. 13. l. 1 Critics many promised
to be Readers of this Book, p. 218. ep. l. 1 F. Curtis Experience, p. 10, 11.
exper. c. 6. l. 2.
D
Danger to Churches past ere long p.34 c.3 l.1 Dangerous Rock (Christ is) to
some. p.187 c.13 l.1 Daniels, who are 35 Ep. Dangerous to raise up Ceremonies
again, and why? p.315 c.5 l.2 Danger of Church Covenant, when? p.452 c.7 l.2
David's, who are such? 34 35 Ep. 1 David's days now, how? 26 Epist. 1 Dark
things must not be urged on the Saints p.335, 336, c.5 l.2 Day of Judgment,
then Saints of all Judgments all alike, p.338 c.5 l.2 Day of Embodying
together, how? p.276, 277, c.3 l.2 Death to be inflicted on none for not
believing or misbeleeving p.177 c.13 l.1 Decency and order in all Churches
p.272 c.3 l.2 Declaration of all that enter into Church Fellowship p.237 c.3
l.2 Definition of Christ's and Antichrists Church p.137, 138, c.13 l.1 Delight
the Lord takes in his Churches p.44 c.4 l.1 Deliverance of the Church out of
the wilderness is as yet gradual, but will be universal 19, 10, 21, 3 1
Dependency upon Diocesan, and National Churches Antichristian p.105 c.8 l.1
Description of the best Church-fellowships p.212 c.15 l.1 Description of the
visible members of the Church 96, 97, 98 8 1 Despair the effect of doubtings
p.252 c.1 l.2 Despair the Author was in, and how? p.427, 428, c.6 l.2 Despair
what is the cause of it p.431 c.6 l.2 Despair causes howling and r^aring in
hell p.441 c.6 l.2 Different opinions in things indifferent are all to be
received p.311, 312 c.5 l.2 Difference of opinions may, and must be p.234, 327
c.5 l.2 Differences about things unnecessary, is lamentable p.325 c.5 l.2
Difference in light not in love in primitive times p.333 c.5 l.2 Differences
how all may be reconciled p.471 c.8 l.2 Dipping lawful, but not Diving p.297
c.4 l.2 Dipping is no fundamental Ordinance p.300, 308, 305 c.4 l.2 Discipline
of the Gospel God has designed, and why? and how it differs from carnal and
Ecclesiastical Polity p.2, 3, etc. c.1 l.1 Discipline in Apostles days
glorious p.10 c.2 l.1 Discipline best at last p.16 c.2 l.1 Disciples of Christ
Separates p.74 c.6 l.1 Directories and Canons useless p.7 c.1 l.1 Disobedience
of some that will no come, when convinced, amoun^st to a resisting the Holy
Ghost p.200 c.1^ l.1 Disobedience to parents grievou^ p.296 c.6 l.2 Disorder of
Saints till embodyed p.88 c.6 l.1 Distinction, as of Clergy, and Laity
Presbytery and Prelacy p.487 c.9 l.2 Distance to the first Institutions, search
p.246 c.1 l.2 Divinity in a new dress every day p.1 c.1 l.1 Divisions in the
Churches give Satan, and his Surrogates great advantage p.503 c.9 l.2 Doctors,
Fathers, Councels, etc. useless p.264 c.2 l.2 Doctrines of Devils, what? and
when? p.454 c.7 l.2 Doctrine of Papists and Presbytery alike, wherein? p.473
c.9 l.2 Doubtings hinder the effects of Church Fellowship p.252 c.1 l.2
Doubting dangerous and what it is to doubts it soon makes us give up Buckler
p.243, 244 c.1 l.2 Doubtful things, what are so p.313, 314 c.5 l.2 Doves eyes
of the Churches p.96 c.8 l.1 Dove that rests on the Ark, what? p.268 c.2 l.2
Dreams may be of use to confirm p.413 c.6 l.2 Dream the Author had confirmed by
the word p.430, 431, 436 c.6 l.2 Dreams extraordinary and useful to convert
sometimes 397, 400, 430, 436 6 2 In Dublin Churches, Hypocrites many p.64, 65,
66, c.5 l.1 Dublin Church experiences, and examples of many p.368 369 c.6 l.2
Dublin Church Covenant p.450 c.7 l.2 Duties must be kept to Callings and
Relations p.75 c.6 l.1 Duties of Christians not done till embodied p.88 61, 202
c.15 l.1 Duties formally and Pharisaically p.424 c.6 l.2
E
Eat of every typified tree of Paradise p.543 c.9 l.2 East where the Sun rises
who, and where p.551, 537 c.9 l.2 East, where (typified) Paradise shall be
p.531, c.9 l.2 Eden a most excellent type of the Church p.528 c.9 l.2
Ecclesiastical Polity differs from Gospel p.6, 7, 8 c.1 l.1 Ecclesiastical and
Civil how they came jumbled together p.168 c.13 l.1 Edification one end of
Church Discipline c.2 l.1 p.60 Edomites shall enter into the Churches p.549 c.9
l.2 Effects discover the cause p.361 c.6 l.2 Effects of some dreams are great
p.409 c.6 l.2 Elders have but a derivative power and are to be servants, not
Lords p.110 c.8 l.1 Elders have not the power of admitting p.287, 288, c.4 l.2
Electing requires two things p.258 c.2 l.2 Election is a mystery, and from
Eternity, but vocation is in time p.358, 359 c.6 l.2 Elements of Baptism how
passed away p.310 c.4 l.2 Embodyed Saints excel, and wherein p.87 c.7 l.1
Embodying follows due preparation p.273, 274 c.3 l.2 Embody how? and when?
p.276, 277 c.3 l.2 Embodying rashly (as some have done) fatal and evil, but
in public is best p.280, 281 c.3 l.2 R. Emersons Experience p.411 c.6 l.2 D.
Em^ts Experience p.412 c.6 l.2 Emeralds who, and how they excel p.515 c.9 l.2
Emptiness in all other ways, p.250 c.1 l.2 Ends of Church Fellowship, none
but Saints can answer p.59 c.5 l.1 End of all Churches one and the same p.131,
132 c.12 l.1 End of Parishes is for their own Ends p.135 c.12 l.1 Ends are
base which bring many into the Churches, as Hypocrites p.211, 212 c.9 l.2 End
how Presbyters and Papists agree in it p.476 c.9 l.2 End, su^ts with the
Principle p.255, c.2 l.2 End of Church fellowship answered by all Saints though
differing in opinions p.318, 319 c.5 l.2 Enemies of Christ ground to powder
p.25 c.3 l.1 Enemy to Errors, are the true Churches p.206 c.15 l.2 Enemies to
Spirit, men of form p.341 c.5 l.2 Energy of Church fellowship how hindered
p.252 c.1 l.2 Enemies afraid of Churches in unity p.504 c.9 l.2 Entrance of
Saints and Hypocrites different p.40 c.3 l.1 Entity and Unity convertibles p.87
c.7 l.1 Entrance into Churches, what to do first p.239, 240 c.1 l.2 Epistle to
Purleigh in Essex 229 Equality of all Ministers p.97 c.8 l.1 Equality of all
Churches p.110 c.8 l.1 Erring Church how reformed p.111 112 c.8 l.1 Errors to
be killed by the word (not the sword) p.164, 175 c.13 l.1 Errors may, and must
be in the Churches p.206 c.15 l.1 Erro^s the Excrements of older truths how? 25
Ep. 1 Essentials of Church Fellowship, must be known before we enter p.242
c.1 l.2 Essentials of the universal Church p.481 c.9 l.2 Examples of
Gospel-Churches p.5 c.1 l.1 Examination of self when? p.240 c.1 l.2 Examples
work much p.8 c.6 l.2 An Example for all sinners p.447 c.6 l.2 Excellency of
Saints in one body p.88 c.7 l.1 Excellency of Churches is (Christ) the Head
p.148 c.13 l.1 Excellency of Women above Men p.473, 473 c.8 l.2 Excellency of
such Church members as are promised in these latter days p.520, 529, 530 c.9
l.2 Excellent ones who? 23 Ep. Excommunication begun in Paradise p.542 c.9 l.2
Execution of Gods eternal Decree in what order p.359 c.6 l.2 Experience proves
Principles p.355 c.6 l.2 Experiences to be declared, and why? p.356, 357 c.6
l.2 Experiences declared in what order p.361 c.6 l.2 Experiences of some, warn
others p.363 c.6 l.2 Experiences take men off of censures p.364 c.6 l.2
Experiences show G^ds various working p.366 c.6 l.2 Experiences teach to trust
in God and are means of conversion; teach, us best of all, bring our Assurance
to light, etc. p.367, 383, 384 c.6 l.2 Experience humbles us p.379 c.6 l.2
Experiences show sweetly what we are, from what we were p.376, 377 c.6 l.2
Experiences to come are the choysest p.449, 450 c.6 l.2 Explicit covenanting
may be; but how? p.455 7 c.2 l.2 Eucharist, how Papists and Presbyters agree in
it p.468 c.9 l.2
F
Fact (not Faith) Magistrates Judges of p.164 c.13 l.2 Fair without, and not
within, Hypocrites p.66 c.5 l.1 Fair all over, the Church of Christ p.100 c.8
l.1 Faith never forced three hundred years after Christ p.160 c.13 l.1 Faith
more urged then Form p.208 c.15 l.1 Faith in prayer forces out a quick answer
p.370 c.6 l.2 In the Faith all are to be received p.348 c.5 l.2 Fall suddenly
to some Churches p.188, 189, 191 c.14 l.1 False persuasions dangerous, and how
to know them p.249 c.1 l.2 False friends flatter most 2 Epist. Familiarity with
Christ's enemies declined p.76 c.6 l.1 M. Fanshaws Experience p.414 c.6 l.2
Fatal blow to Parish Churches when? p.94 c.7 l.1 Father one to all Saints p.86
c.7 l.1 Feat of hell makes hypocrites serve God p.477 c.9 l.2 Felony to give
and receive Sacraments as most do in Parish Churches p.551 c.9 l.2 Fellowship
Christ was Pastor of, our pattern p.57 c.5 l.1 Fellowship with men, not out of
Christ's way p.77 c.6 l.1 Few at first embody, and who they be? p.278 c.3 l.2
F^ghters against God wh^? p.340 c.5 l.2 Fighting-time for all, before the
conquest p.365 c.6 l.2 Final cause, first in eye, last in act p.131 c.12 l.1
Final cause of Churches promised what? p.522 c.9 l.2 Fire goes out of the
mouths of Saints and Churches to devou^e all their Adversaries p.90 c.7 l.1
Firm foundation of all true Churches p.184 c.14 l.1 First into Christ, and
then into Churches p.188 c.14 l.1 Fittest to lay a Churches foundation, who?
p.192 c.14 l.1 Fit for Church Fellowship who? p.210 c.15 l.1 Flowers tied up in
a Nosegay, and presented to the Saints, what they are? p.450 c.6 l.2 Forcing
powers must be p.126, 127, 128 c.11 l.1 Folks run mad, and why? p.150 c.13 l.1
Foolish buildings will soon fall, and why? and so will many in our days p.191
c.13 l.1 The Form of the Church, and how promised? p.70, 61 522 c.9 l.2 Form
wanting makes deform p.88 c.7 l.1 Form of the Church is (partly) Independent
p.100 c.8 l.1 The Form by Christ's Rule measured p.121 c.10 l.1 Form of
Embadying, not set, but fit p.272, 273 c.3 l.2 Forms must put none by Admission
p.292 c.4 l.2 Forms childish things, but how? p.341 c.5 l.2 Forms Idolized
soon tumble p.343 c.5 l.2 Form of Christ in the flesh, and Churches parallel
p.344 c.5 l.2 Forms not to be forced, but left to liberty p.345 c.5 l.2 Forms
of Gods own ordaining laid aside for peace-sake, much more ours p.345 c.5 l.2
Forms how occasioned? and how useful? 345 5 Forms of Church covenant p.457,
459 c.7 l.2 Formal Professors Time-servers p.115 c.8 l.1 Formalists most
furious against the Spirit p.305, 308, 309 c.42 52 Formality delineated p.420
c.6 l.2 Formal Righteousness p.393 408 410 c.6 l.2 Foundation of the Church,
is Christ alone p.53, 183, 51 c.13 l.1 Foundation is first of all laid in sound
buildings 189, 524, 14 19 2 Foundations are rotten which many have built, and
which will be suddenly discovered p.191 c.13 l.1 Foundation of some
Anabaptists is as weak as water, that making an Idol of it p.301, 302, 305 c.4
l.2 Fountain in the midst of the Gardens is Christ p.203 c.15 l.^ Free-willers
all Saints, but how? p.125 c.11 l.1 Fruitfulness of the Churches above All 32
43 3 4 1 Fruits of the Trees of (typified) Paradise p.5^3 c.9 l.2 Fullness of
all the Body is Christ the head p.148 c.13 l.1
G.
Gardens of Christ his Churches p.42, 43 c.4 l.1 Gates of Sion are the
Congregational Chu^ches, and the way into Sion. p.204, 209 c.15 l.1 Gathered
out is before Gathered in p.71 c.6 l.1 Gathered Churches many must fill, p.188,
189 c.14 l.1 Gifts, Parts, etc. qualify not for Church Fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1
Glory of the latter house Greatest p.4 c.1 l.1 Glory of God the end of
Church Fellowship p.132 c.12 l.1 Glory of the Churches is All in One p.339 c.5
l.2 Glory of God much by Experiences, etc. p.357 c.6 l.2 God is the universal
Good 260 2 1 God (in us) the Principle (to us) the Object, and (with us) the
End p.261 c.2 l.1 God and Saints seal by the same Spirit p.227 c.2 l.2 God
receives Saints of all judgments p.316 c.5 l.1 Gods great design is All into
One p.330 c.5 l.2 A G^d-like Principle moves the Saints p.254 c.2 l.1 Godly
wrong their souls to abide in Parish Churches p.95 c.6 l.1 Golden Rule of
Conscience p.337 c.5 l.2 Good must separate from the Bad p.71 c.6 l.1 Good (in
this Church State) the Wills object p.259 c.2 l.2 Gospel-Discipline proved from
Polity p.3 5 c.1 l.1 Gospel-Hedges and Fences p.42 c.4 l.1 Gospel Order in the
Institution to be known p.246 c.1 l.2 Gospel way of worship is the great
promise p.508 c.9 l.2 Gospel full of blessings to all 33 Epist. A Gospel call
p.410 c.6 l.2 G^vernours in Kingdoms of Saints, and of Families alike p.180
c.13 l.1 Governors of the Nation warned of Lawyers 225 Ep. 2 Government of
Christ, and civil Magistrates distinct p.127 c.11 l.1 Graces saving and
sanctifying to fit for Church Fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1 Grace in a convert taken
two ways p.355 c.6 l.2 Gradual recovery of the Church (now) p.20 c.3 l.1
Grounds of true persuasion is Gods word p.245 c.1 l.2
H.
Hair of the Church p.96 c.8 l.1 Hairs grown on the Head, so Saints on Christ
p.151 c.13 l.1 Halcyon days 32 Epist. A Hanly's Experience p.414 c.6 l.2
Happiness and Honor to have Christ our Lord p.145 c.13 l.1 Happiness of
Saints in Christ's Churches p.95 c.5 l.1 Harbor in these days in Gathered
Churches p.29 c.3 l.1 Hard to have Foundation in the Rock (Christ) p.186 c.13
l.1 Haste! Haste! Haste! words to England, Ireland, and Scotland p.40, 41 c.3
l.1 Haste to embody, must be with good speed p.280 c.3 l.2 As Head is, members
must be p.69 c.5 l.1 Head (Christ) to all Churches alike p.103 c.8 l.1 Head
and Body (united) make up whole Christ p.1^7 c.13 l.1 Head is the highest over
the body, and the Excellency of the Body, and gives influence to all the Body,
and governs the Body, and sympathizes with it; so Christ p.37, 148, 149 c.13
l.1 Head and Member both, is Christ p.148 c.13 l.1 Headless body is a
lifelesse body p.148 c.13 l.1 In our Head (Christ) our Eyes, Ears, Tongue, all
should be p.150 c.13 l.1 Head well, All is well p.150 c.13 l.1 Head of Gold
(Christ) how he differs from Heads of Brass 151 148 153 181 13 1 Harvest
follows the seed time of sorrow p.365 c.6 l.2 Heathens are Volunteers to their
gods p.126 c.11 l.1 Heaven in the Churches of Christ p.86 c.7 l.1 Heaven in
hell what? p.405 c.6 l.2 Hell was Christ's, and is our way to heaven p.361 c.6
l.2 Hell how one may be in it, and how out again 394, 447, 448, 398, 403 etc 6
2 Colonel and A. Hewsons Experiences p.395 412 c.6 l.2 Hermes visions of the
Churches in these days p.46 c.4 l.1 J. Heywards Experience p.415 c.6 l.2
Heretics (as such) not to be put to death p.177, 178 c.13 l.1 Heretics have
put to death Saints for Heretics p.177 c.13 l.1 Hidden number who they be 14
Ep. Jerusalem vide Jerusalem. E. Hoar's Experience p.4 c.6 l.2 Hold fast the
Head (Christ) p.182 c.13 l.1 Hollanders how to be dealt with now 12, 13 Ep. 1
Holy Ghost must fall upon men before they be fitted to build the Lords house
p.192 c.13 l.1 Hopes of Churches Recovery how lost again p.12 c.2 l.1 Honor
and praise of God the End of Church Fellowship p.60 c.5 l.1 House of God fitly
framed how? and who? p.84 c.7 l.1 How^ing under sense of damnation p.441 c.6
l.2 T. Huggins Experience p.393, c.6 l.2 Humility taught by experience p.379,
380 c.6 l.2 Husband of the Churches is Christ p.56 c.5 l.1 Husbandry of the
Lord, his Churches p.31 c.3 l.1 Hyacinths or Jacinths, who? p.519 c.9 l.2
Hypocrites (so known) kept out p.57 c.5 l.1 Hypocrites not of, though in
Churches p.64 ibid. Hypocrites hinder the Churches growth, and will all be
discovered ere long 65 67 ibid. Hypocrites soon made by compulsive powers 127
11 1, 263 2 2 Hypocrites character and conditions p.211 c.15 l.1 Hypocri^e,
what he is p.373 c.6 l.2 Hypocrites puffed up by experiences p.379 ibid.
Hypocrites warning-peice indeed p.442 443, etc. ibid.
I.
J^spers (precious stones) who? p.510 512 c.9 l.2 Idleness not allowed in
Paradise p.541 ibid. Idols of brass must down presently p.159 c.13 l.1
Idolizing water baptism, which was before by Papists, Prelates; and is now by
Anabaptists p.303 305 c.4 l.2 Idols made of forms, have their fall p.343 c.5
l.2 Idols of forms several ways p.345 ib. Idolatry in many professors p.346 ib.
Idolizing a Church-Covenanting p.454 c.7 l.2 Jew, every spiritual Saint p.74
c.6 l.1 Jew and Gentile all one in Christ p.392 c.5 l.2 J. Jecocks Experience
p.399 c.6 l.2 Jerusalem a type of the Church p.527 c.9 l.2 Jews when precious
Church-matter p.54 ibid. Ignorance of Churches object hinders affection to them
p.118 c.9 l.9 Ignorance is the mother of false worship p.241 c.1 l.2 Implicit
faith not enough p.244 ibid. Impartiality as to opinion necessary p.247 ibid.
Impudent whoredoms of Parish Churches, Minister, and People p.550 551 c.92
Independent Church, every Church of Christ p.100 c.8 l.1 Independency
Prelatick, as bad as any p.105 ibid. Independents of long standing p.113 ib.
Independents walk by Rule, i. e. the Word 122 10 1, 113 8 1 Independents many
called so that are not so, but are persecutors of true Independents p.115 ibid.
The Independent Lord is Christ alone 144* 13 1* Indifferent things what are,
and what not p.313 c.5 l.2 Indifferent things all lawful in themselves p.324
ibid. Indifferent^ dangerous* when and how p.451 c.7 l.2 Enclosed number of
Saints make Churches p.42 c.4 l.1 Infant Baptism idolized, how p.300 c.4 l.2
Infant Baptism true, for matter and form p.299 ibid. Engagement for and against
Churches, how? in Epistle to Churches. Enjoyments highest to Saints in
fellowship p.202 c.13 l.1 Inl^v'ning and inlightning the spirits work p.265 c.2
l.2 Inquiry of members to be admitted strict p.288 289 c.4 l.2 Interest of
Gospel polity differs from interest of carnal polity p.7 c.1 l.1 Integrum, what
it is p.482 c.9 l.2 Interests National and Antichristian fall backward 5 Ep.
Entire Church every particular Church p.483 c.9 l.2 Intruders into Churches,
are many p.271 c.3 l.2 Inward truth must be in Church Members p.69 c.5 l.1
Inward melancholy p.429 c.6 l.2 Inward Baptism qualifies for Churches p.300
c.4 l.2 Joynt-powers, joynt-prayers, and joynt-praises of Saints embodied, fill
Heaven and Earth p.90 91 c.7 l.1 Joy at laying the foundation great p.193 c.14
l.1 Joy, if true, follows sorrow p.365 366 c.6 l.2 H. Johnsons Experience p.408
c.6 l.2 Joy to Christ's Churches in his day which is nigh p.25 c.3 l.1 Ireland
warned of persecutors for forms p.17 c.2 l.1 Ireland calls and incourages
Ministers 28. Epist. Iron-hearted men set up the head of Iron p.151 c.13 l.1
Israel a separate people p.71 c.6 l.1 Israel afflicted by Egyptians, how now
p.342 c.5 l.2 Ireland springing with variety of flowers p.417 c.6 l.2 Judas in
every Church, he went out after the ^op at Dublin p.66 c.5 l.1 Iubilee hard by
p.26 c.3 l.1 Judge of Religion, Christ alone in Commission p.151 c.13 l.1
Judges of Doctrine of Faith, not Magistrates, and why 173 175 ibid. Judges
shall be judged by Saints p.177 ibid. Judgment must be sound p.242 c.1 l.2
Indicature in what Christ is Judge p.160 c.13 l.1 Judgments or opinions in
things indifferent of all sorts to be received p.312 c.5 l.2 Judgment of the
Church is charitable upon the declaring of Experiencies p.358 360 c.6 l.2
Justification, how Presbyters and Papists agree in it p.474 c.9 l.2
K.
Key of Christ's shoulders, what it is? p.138 c.13 l.1 Keys, who pretend to
them, 58 Ep. T. Kelsals Experience, second Experience 6 2 King, and King alone,
Christ 19 20 21 22 23 Epist. King in his Beauty, most in Churches p.117 c.9 l.1
King the first, a Tyrant 22 Epist. Kings never more in England 23 Ep. Kingdom
of Christ p.85 c.7 l.1 Kingdom of God consists not in outward things p.324 c.5
l.2 Kingdoms of God of several kinds p.325 ibid. Knowledge of Christ
spiritual, is one end of Church fellowship p.60 c.5 l.1
L.
Lambs Book of life p.55 c.5 l.1 Lambs Book will be out ere long 217 Epist.
Last days, best days p.26 31, 46 c.4 l.1 Latter days Churches filled with glory
p.537 538 539 c.9 l.2 Lawgiver, Christ alone p.144 145 c.13 l.1 Lawyers
corrupt and live by sin 220 221 Epist. Lawyers mock at the word, and hinder
Reformation 222 Epist. Lawyers ere long will appear the greatest Oppressors,
Tyrants, and Traitors that are 224 225 Epist. Laws of the Nation, not
regulated, and why 222 Epist. Laws and Lawyers must be purged from lusts 223
Epist. Laws of Christ in paradise p.540 c.9 l.2 Law to go forth from Churches
to the World p.541 ibid. Learned men so called, most enemies to Christ p.78 61,
205 c.15 l.1 Learned in all Ages for the Independent Church way p.205 ibid.
Learned, who are truly so p.205 ibid. Least garden plants Gods greatest care
p.44 c.4 l.1 H. Lecsons Experience, 10 Exp. 6 2 Legal Righteousness, 4. Exp.
ib. Lessons for Anabaptists in Ireland p.334 335 c.5 l.2 A letter from
Waterford answered p.302 303 304 c.4 l.2 Levitical law required separation p.72
c.6 l.1 Liberty of sisters in Churches p.466 471 472 c.8 l.2 Liberty of Saints
in things indifferent 318 5 2, 328 ib. 333 ib. Life is first, before law p.541
c.9 l.2 Light and increase of knowledge, one end of Church Fellowship p.60 c.5
l.1 Light shining gloriously p.400 c.6 l.2 Light goes forth from Churches round
about p.531 c.9 l.2 Lips of the Church, what p.97 c.8 l.2 Lord, Christ alone,
by power, purchase, conquest, gift, and choice, Independent, spiritual,
universal, sole-soveraign, Lord chief Justice, most Excellency and Everlasting
78 6 1 143 144 13 1 Love original to all Saints a like p.86 c.6 l.1 Love of God
in Christ, ground of comfort p.375 c.6 l.2 Love of God taught by experiences
p.383 ibid. Love of God calls home p.412 ibid. Love of Heaven, and yet but
Hypocrites p.477 c.9 l.2 Love to God out-lives all Graces p.405 c.6 l.2 Love to
all Saints, one end of Church Fellowship p.60 c.5 l.1 Love to all Saints that
differ in opinions p.333 c.5 l.2 Love and sweetness to restore a fallen Member
p.83 c.7 l.1 Love is absolute, for which all indifferent things must be laid
aside p.453 c.7 l.2 Lust is set up in the room of Law 223 224 Epist.
M.
Mad folks in Churches, and why? p.150 c.13 l.1 Maidens of wisdom now calling
in the streets p.198 199 c.15 l.1 Mary Magdalen the first preacher of Christ
risen p.474 c.8 l.2 Magistrates, what they must do, and what they must not do
in matters of Religion 262 2 2, 179 185 127 128 13 11, 164 13 1 Magistrates
must not head it over Churches and Saints p.159 ibid. Magistrates Tyrants, when
they do so, and sacrilegious 160 172 ib. Magistrates meddle not with faith, but
with fact p.163 ibid. Magistrates struck with judgments that meddle beyond the
orb God has set them in 166 173 ibid. Magistrates when in, most danger p.171
ibid. Magistrates are servants to, not Judges of, no^ Lawgivers to Christ,
Churches, or Saints 179 180 ib. Magistrates in their places owned and honored,
by the Churches p.129 c.11 l.1 Magistracy and Ministry ever distinct p.1^5 c.13
l.1 Magistrate, what he may do about Ministers 11 Epist. Magistrates must do
all they can by their powers, and persons to countenance the Churches 13 Epist.
26 ibid. Magistrates must study Scriptures p.36 ibid. Magistrates, Presbyter,
and Papists agree about them p.480 c.9 l.2 Maintenance to Ministers is moral,
but the manner of it is civil, and left to liberty p.489 ib. Man not able to
undertake Church Government p.139 c.13 l.1 Man's rule too long, or too short
p.121 c.10 l.1 Man of form most enemy to Christ p.341 c.5 l.2 Many fall to
Rantism, etc. and why p.322 ib. Many Members polute the Lords sanctuary p.69
c.5 l.1 Man^a must fall a pace in these days p.35 c.3 l.1 A. Manwarings
Experience, 2, 3 Exp. 6 2 E. Marrows Experience p.424 ib. Martyrs in the flames
have witnessed against putting to death any for Errors of Heresies p.179 c.13
l.1 Master Builder Christ alone, and how 140 141 ib Matter of the Church,
visible Saints p.51 52 c.5 l.1 Fit matter is of the Lords own adding 67 68 ib.
Materials for Christ's Churches must be the best p.63 ib. Fit matter is ^ryed by
the Hammer and Saw p.68 ib. Matter, and form of the Church, fitted by Christ's
rule p.121 c.10 l.1 Matter of Churches in these last days p.510 512 c.9 l.2
Matter for foundation is the most precious p.192 c.14 l.1 Means to make us
voluntary, what and how p.264 265 c.2 l.2 Means to convert by Experiences p.367
368 c.6 l.2 Means to convert one, converts not another p.367 ib. Measure for
the Temple is Christ's rule p.121 c.10 l.1 Meeting places made Churches, when
p.11 c.2 l.1 Meeting often together before embodying p.273 274 c.3 l.2 Meeting
places called Churches, Presbyters and Papists agree in them p.492 c.9 l.2 I.
and A. Megsons Experience p.416 c.6 l.2 Members of Church Fellowship, who fit
p.56 57 c.5 l.1 All members make up but one body p.8^ c.7 l.^ A member amiss,
how to be restored ibid. Members of foolish buildings in danger of falling the
next storm p.191 c.14 l.1 Members, many come before called, who p.269 c.2 l.2
Members of other Churches, how received p.294 295 c.4 l.2 Members causal and
constitutive to the whole Church universal, are the Congregational p.481 c.9
l.2 Memory for Sermons how helped p.421 c.6 l.2 Merit of works, de congruo
p.477 478 c.9 l.2 Middle things must not be urged p.327 c.5 l.2 H. Mills his
Experience p.409 c.6 l.2 Ministers, and the most eminent, guilty of those
Errors they most complain of 82 7 ^ Ministers of the Gospel, Teeth of the
Church p.97 c.8 l.1 Ministers of State succeed Lord Bishops in their actions
and stations, which is bewailed p.168 c.13 l.1 Ministers must not meddle with
state matters p.173 ib. Ministers, why against Independency p.82 c.7 l.1
Ministers turned politicians fall into great places, Colleges, Committees,
etc. which is very fatal and ominous p.168 169 c.13 l.1 Ministers cannot be
sequestered ab officio p.180 ib. Ministers all over the Nation warned p.208 c.15
l.1 Ministry, the Author called to it, and how p.436 437 c.6 l.2 Ministers for
long preaching despised, and what followed it 4, 5 Experiences ibid. Ministers
must have maintenance 27 28 Epist. Ministers who are made the people^ 233 234
Ministry, when most corrupt 7 8 Epist. Ministers much encouraged in Ireland 28
Epist. Miscarriages of Church Members eyed by all p.68 c.5 l.1 Mischief to
Churches by proud prelatick lording Pastors, and by ruling Synods and Classes
p.104 108 c.8 l.1 Mixed congregations, not Gospel Church states p.5 c.1 l.1
Mitre-mongers and Prelates, ever opposers of the true Churches p.12 c.2 l.1
Mixed congregations, Christ not the husband of p.56 c.5 l.1 Monks and priests,
when they arose p.11 c.2 l.1 Morality is Divinities handmaid p.1 c.1 l.1
Mortal blow to mortar Churches last year p.208 c.15 l.1 Motion, life, action,
all from (Christ) the Head p.149 c.13 l.1 Motions of Hypocrites, and true
Church Members differ p.268 c.2 l.2 Mountains made plains, who and how p.24 c.3
l.1 Mystery of whole Christ, i. ^. Head and Body p.147 c.13 l.1
N.
Nakedness that parish Churches will be stripped into p.551 c.9 l.2 Names of such
as would imbody given up, and how p.274 c.3 l.2 Names of Heathenish and popish,
presbyters and papists, agree in p.491 c.9 l.2 National Ministry and Churches,
how routed 28 Ep. Nations of all sorts to make up one Church p.538 c.9 l.2
National Churches, what they are, and how to fall 550 551 552 ib. Nature of
things doubtful and indifferent p.314 315 316 c.5 l.2 Necessity of Gospel
polity p.3 c.1 l.1 Neck of the Church, what it is p.98 99 c.8 l.1 Necessity is
shown by the Spirit, and the word p.129 c.11 l.1 Necessity of Churches well
grounded and well-united p.193 c.14 l.1 Necessity of serious consideration, and
self-examination of all that would be Church Members p.240 c.1 l.2 Necessity of
a free principle in all Church Members p.255 c.2 l.2 A necessity put upon
indifferent forms is pestilent p.341 c.5 l.2 Necessary is threefold p.461 c.7
l.2 Nobility, who be the best 21 22 Ep. Norman yoke most heavy 6 Ep. Novelty in
presbyterians 60 Ep.
O.
Objections for Parish-Churches answered p.61 c.5 l.1 Object of true Churches,
what it is p.116 117 c.9 l.1 Object of the will, what it is p.259 260 c.2 l.2
Obstinacy to Christ's call out of Babylon is dangerous p.207 c.15 l.1 Occasion
of form p.347 c.5 l.1 Officers of the Church have a derivative power p.288 c.4
l.2 Officers to the church, how women have been p.470 c.8 l.2 Officers of the
church, make the body more entire p.554 c.9 l.2 Officers of the church, must be
kept under as servants p.110 111 c.8 l.1 Offenses what, and how offered p.321
c.5 l.2 Occasions of Brethrens fall into errors p.322 ib. Old formal
Protestantism is not enough for church fellowship p.69 c.5 l.1 One in another,
and every one (of members) in Christ ^4 7 1 Oneness of all, Christ paid and
prayed for 86 87 ib. Oneness of all Saints p.319 320 c.5 l.2 One of all, is
Gods great work p.330 c.5 l.2 Oneness of Churches, when more then ever p.506
c.9 l.2 Onions and Looks for Parish-members p.207 c.15 l.1 Opinions out of
Magistrates powers p.174 c.13 l.1 Opinions ought not to bias us p.247 c.1 l.2
Operation of the will carries into the object p.260 c.2 l.2 Opinions in things
doubtful and indifferent, may and must be diverse p.312 314 c.5 l.2 Opinions
different, allowed with love two hundred years after Christ p.332 ib. J.
Osborn, a strange relation of him 440, 441, etc. 6 2 Opposition against the
Churches make for them p.205 206 c.15 l.1 Order requires Gospel-Discipline p.2
c.1 l.1 Order in building Gods house p.84 c.7 l.1 Order of Church-fellowships
best, that begin first with Christ the foundation 1^8 13 1 Order of the Gospel,
as at first must be known p.246 c.1 l.2 Order in the true Church, is Gods
Ordinance p.271 271 c.3 l.2 Order of the true Church, agrees best with
different opinions p.326 c.5 l.2 Order of telling Experiences p.361 c.6 l.2
Order of the Gospel, a great latter days promise p.508 c.9 l.2 Orders and
Ordinances out of Christ's way, to be waved p.77 c.6 l.1 Ordinances of Christ,
dispensed in order of Christ p.80 ib. Ordinances neck, Christ head, Saints
body of the Church p.99 c.8 l.1 Ordinances prisoners in some Churches p.123
c.10 l.1 Ordinances energy obstructed by doubtings p.252 c.1 l.2 Ordinances
here, a shadow of them to come p.337 c.5 l.2 Ordinances and Members, Trees of
Paradise p.532 c.9 l.2 Ordinances of breaking Bread, many ignorant of 472 473
ib. Ordinance of prophesying one by one, means of converting and confirming
p.412 c.6 l.2 Ordination of Ministers, Papists, and Presbyterians, agree in
p.482 483 c.9 l.2 Original love to all Saints a like p.86 c.7 l.1 Original of
Scriptures is the Spirit p.463 c.9 l.2 Orthodox Expositor of Scripture who only
ibid Others stirred up into church fellowship by public imbodying p.284 c.3
l.2 Outward things make not the kingdom of heaven p.324 c.5 l.2 Order in
ordination of Ministers, which is right p.485 c.9 l.2
P
Palaces of Christ, true Churches p.50, 63 c.5 l.1 Papists and Prelates too
alike in Discipline and practice p.13 c.2 l.1 Papists, Prelates, and
Presbyterians would have all their high courts over the Churches p.105 c.8 l.1
Parish churches antichristian p.61 78 c.5 l.1 Parish churches when they began
first p.62 ibid. Parish churches Satan's Synagogues p.79 c.6 l.1 Parish churches
no churches 77, 78 6 1 neither matter nor form 91, 92 ib. Parish churches
plagues from the first p.92 ibid. Parish churches confused chaoses p.93 ib.
Parish churches want the form of Independency p.105 c.8 l.1 Parish churches
sties for beasts p.93 c.7 l.1 Parish churches in nothing accord to Christ's rule
p.121 c.19 l.1 Parish churches uphold by carnal powers p.126 c.11 l.1 Parish
churches fail in the final cause p.135 c.12 l.1 Parishioners opposite to
Churches, p.79 c.6 l.1 Parish Churches get out of, and why? p.207, 208 c.15 l.1
Parishes, and Churches how they differ p.553 c.9 l.2 Parish Churches stripped
naked as at first how p.552, 553 c.9 l.2 Paradise a type of the Church in the
last days p.528, 529 c.9 l.2 Paradise restored in the latter days in Trees,
Rivers, and all 530, 531.9 2 Paradise in these days entering where it shall be
p.530 c.9 l.2 Parallel of Churches taken from Gardens. p.42 c.4 l.1 Parallel
fetched from the Wilderness p.30 c.3 l.1 Parallel of Christ in the form of his
flesh, and form of his Church Way, p.244 c.5 l.2 Parliament warned p.172 c.13
l.1 Partakers of Babylons sins, partakers her sorrows p.75 c.6 l.1 Pastors
Lord like, most mischeivous p.104 c.8 l.1 Pastors should gather Churches
Experiences p.150, 151 c.6 l.2 Patrons (so called) their fearful sins 29
Epist. Paul a great Separatist p.77 c.6 l.1 Peace of the Church agrees with
different opinions p.326 c.5 l.2 For Peace sake Gods own forms (much more ours)
must be laid aside p.345 c.5 l.4 People bewitched in these days p.39 c.3 l.1
People not profiting under the ministry, great heart-sores to faithful
Ministers 330, 331, Epist. Performance of Promises at last pinch 47. 4 1
Perfection of all in one, is Christ p.339 c.5 l.2 Persons entering into
Churches, what to do first p.239 240 c.1 l.2 Persecutors Sampsons Foxes that
^u^n up themselves p.18 c.2 l.1 Persuasion, how to attain it p.245 c.1 l.2
Persuasion (which all must have that would enter into Churches) how to know
true from false 249. ib. Piety must not dance after policy p.160 c.13 l.1
Plantation of Christ's own hands i. e. his Churches p.43 c.4 l.1 Pledges given
in at Dublin Church, p.371 c.6 l.2 Policy, carnal, and Gospel policy bow they
differ p.6, 7, 8 c.1 l.1 Policy must serve piety, not piety policy p.160 c.13
l.1 Policy what it is p.169 ib. Policy ruined by Christ's coming p.170 ib The
polick Beast s^t in the temple 8 11 Politicians described p.170 c.13 l.1
Politicians Religion p.194 c.14 l.1 Pope, Prelates, Primates, etc. whence they
came p.10 c.1 l.1 Popery to take away Church Power and give it to Clergy or
Classes p.102 c.8 l.1 Pope is the head of brass, and how he came in p.155 c.13
l.1 Popish Discipline swam in blood p.12 c.2 l.1 Porters appointed to keep out
the unclean p.52 c.5 l.1 A posie presented to the Saints and Churches p.450 c.6
l.2 Power in all Churches equal p.101 c.8 l.1 Power of men over any Church of
Christ is usurped p.113 ib. Power to admit Members is the bodies p.286 c.4 l.2
Power civil subservient to Christ and his Saints p.127, 128 c.11 l.1 Pouring
out of the Spirit hard by us p.506 c.9 l.2 Practice of primitive Saints,
Prophets Apostles, etc. was to separate from the mixed multitudes p.74 c.6 l.1
Power and prayers of churches p.91 c.7 l.1 A praevision p.425 c.6 l.2 Praises
to God a peculiar end of Church Fellowship p.133 c.12 l.1 Praise is public of
the Church imbodied p.279 c.3 l.2, Prayer must be much before imbodying p.275,
276 ib. Prayer eminently answered, p.368, 369, 370 c.6 l.2 Prayer converting
and confirming 415 ibid. 399 3 2 Preaching, a call thereto p.437, 438 c.6 l.2
Precepts for Separation p.72 c.6 l.1 Precious separate from the vile p.70 ib.
Precious stones gathered in latter days p.519, 520 c.9 l.2 Prelates ever
opposers of the Church of Christ p.12 c.2 l.1 Prelacy and popery, Ter^ani
Convertibiles p.105 c.8 l.1 Prelacy ready to be turned off the Ladder p.104
ibid. Prelacy and Papacy live and dye together p.14 c.2 l.1 Prelates in pomp
p.107 c.8 l.1 Preparation before imbodying p.273 c.3 l.2 Presbyterian way falls
with Prelacy p.14 c.2 l.1 Presbyterians too bold Usurpers of Christ's power
p.105 c.8 l.1 Presbyterians and Independents greatest difference p.104 ibid.
From Presbytery to Independency p.396 c.6 l.2 To Presbyterians a word in love
p.479 c.9 l.2 Presbyterians how Churches, and how not p.480 ib. Presbyterian
Churches (as such) not true Members of the church of Christ Catholic. p.481
ib. Presbyterians whom we own and honor p.483 ibid. And whom we dare not close
with 57 Epist. Some Presbyterians and Papists look too alike in the Head, Body,
Eyes, Mouth, Hands, and Feet, yea, and whole effigies of their church p.484 c.9
l.2 Presbyterians monopolize the Churches, so called p.494 ibid. Presbyterians
design against the Author and Book 55 Epist. Presbyterian way novelty, and
Heterodoxie 60 Epist. Presbytery Congregationall is the right p.113 c.8 l.1
Presence of God is special in Churches p.547 c.9 l.2 Presence of God in
Churches is the adaequat object p.116 c.9 l.1 Presence of Christ sweetest in
Churches 45 4 1 202 15 1 Pride in Pastors God abhors (of all men's) 109 8 ^
Primitive times Saints were all volunteers p.124 c.11 l.1 In primitive times
Ministers (people and all) equal in honor and dignity without Prelacy p.151
c.13 l.1 In Primitive times Saints longed for church fellowship p.204 c.14 l.1
In Primitive times no respect of opinions p.331, 333 c.5 l.2 In Primitive times
Saints told their Experiences p.356 c.6 l.2 In Primitive times Sisters had
their liberty, as church members, in church matters p.465, 466 c.8 l.2
Principle of a Saint is above self, and God like p.254 c.2 l.2 Propagation of
the Gospel how p.485 c.9 l.2 Privileges of Saints imbodyed 89 7 1 202 15 1
Professors who fit for church fellowship p.35 c.5 l.1 Many Professors not
Christians, ib Professors who are best, and tried, p.326 c.5 l.2 Professors in
primitive times p.53, 54 c.5 l.2 Professors fall to Familism, Rantism, etc.
why? p.81, 82 c.7 l.1 Promises performed by contrary means p.47 c.4 l.1
Promises to anchor at in a storm p.28 c.3 l.1 Promise of Gold for Brass,
Silver, for Iron p.181 c.13 l.1 Promises of restitution of times to be eyed.
246* 1 2 Proofs of Sisters right^ in* Churches, p.467, 468, 469 c.8 l.2 How to
prophecy, or foretell things to come ^27 3 1 Prophesies of these last days
ready to be delivered p.30 c.3 l.1 p.46 c.4 l.1 Prophesies of Hermes and
Methodius p.46 47 c.4 l.1 Prophesies of three things that will suddenly fall
upon the Churches p.505, 506, 507 c.9 l.2 Prophesying one by one a special
ordinance p.412 c.6 l.2 Proud prelatick Pastors in Independent Churches as bad
as any p.104 c.8 l.1 Providence is to be observed p.247 c.1 l.2 Public
imbodying convinces the world of the way, prevents scandal, agrees with Christ's
practice, and precepts, and the way it self, etc. p.281, 282, 283 c.3 l.1
Public meeting places how they should be dedicated to Saints (living) p.494
c.9 l.2
Q
Qualifications in Church Members must be known as to satisfaction before they
enter p.248 c.1 l.2 Qualification a second part of Experience p.262 c.6 l.2
Questioning of Forms p.346 c.5 l.2 Questions as^ed in admitting of weak lambs
of Christ must be accordingly p.291 c.4 l.2
R.
Ranters must not be received into Church fellowship p.69 c.5 l.1 Ranters, why
many are so p.322 c.5 l.2 Ranter, what he is p.373 c.6 l.2 A Ranter recalled 2
Exper. 6 2 Ranters spirits Church-destroying spirits p.502 c.7 l.2 Rash
judgment fights against God, and wh^t it is? p.340 c.5 l.2 Ranters
blazing-starts, ever po^^ending evil p.59 c.5 l.1 Rash Embodying will soon be
broken p.280 c.3 l.2 Readers of diverse sorts 218 Epist Readers what sort the
Author wishes for 227 Epist. Reason keeps many out of Church Fellowship p.80
c.5 l.1 Reasons why Primitive Saints longed after Church Fellowship p.204 c.15
l.1 Reason that is carnal must be laid aside 219 Epist Readers what sort have
promised 219 Epist. Reason as it grows must mend the Laws 223, 224 Epist. 2
Reason (divine) the Rule of Saints Will p.257 c.2 l.2 Rebaptizing is unlawful
p.295, 296, c.4 l.2 Redeemed are the readiest to praise God p.134 c.12 l.1
Refuge of the Churches of Christ p.185 c.14 l.1 Refuge for England where? 13,
14 Ep. Registers in the Church p.279 c.3 l.2 Reign of Christ visible ere long
p.24 c.3 l.1 Relation betwixt God and his Saints, Christ and his Churches, is
inseparable p.56 c.5 l.1 Reign of Christ over all Churches as Head, and Nations
as King p.508 c.9 l.2 Religion is out of the Civil or be p.127, c.11 p.173
c.13 l.1 Restoration promised p.27, 28, 29 31 Restitution of times to be
inquired into p.246 c.1 l.2 Revelations of John must be searched by all in
these times p.465 c.9 l.2 Remedies to spiritual evils, are spiritual p.111 c.8
l.2 Remembrance every day of the Church in the Wilderness p.41 c.3 l.1
Retrograde motions of Hypocrites p.65 c.5 l.1 A Riddle for Hypocrites unfolded
p.65 c.5 l.1 Right hand of Fellowship 275, 3 2 293 4 2 Rituall order in true
Churches p.272 c.3 l.2 Rites or Forms not to be urged, so as to put any by
admission p.292 c.4 l.2 R. Riches Experience p.412 c.6 l.2 Rivers of Paradise
what? running from the East, and why? p.536, 537, 538 c.9 l.2 Righteousness
inherent and imputative p.475 c.9 l.2 Rock (Christ) the Churches Foundation
p.184 c.14 l.1 J. Rogers Experience p.412 c.6 l.2 Rotterdam Church Covenant
p.457 c.7 l.2 Rubbish abundance to be removed, and by whom p.139, 140 c.13 l.1
Ruin cannot be when the Rock is the Foundation p.185 c.14 l.1 Ruin of the
late Civil Powers what? 13 Epist. Ruling Synods and Classes unlawful p.107,
108 c.8 l.1 Rules to prophecy of things to come p.27, 28 c.3 l.1 Rule Christ's
Church is built up by p.119 c.10 l.1 Rules of men make mad Churchwork p.120
c.10 l.1 A Rule for the Will which is twofold p.257, 258 c.2 l.2 Rule of
admission of Members p.339 c.5 l.2 To Rulers of Civil affairs a w^od and a
warning p.127 c.11 l.1 Rulers run the hazard of ruin when Phacton like they
think to rule the Sun, in meddling with matters of Religion 130, 11 1 171 13 1
Rulers of Parliament warned p.171, 172 c.13 l.1 Ruler of Nations goes out of
the Churches 38 Epist.
S.
Sacraments no where but in true Churches 6 1 Sacraments p.535 c.9 l.2
Sacraments disorderly given by Presbyterians 470 9 Sacrilege for Magistrates
to meddle with matters of Religion as Judges 172, 13 1 Safety of Churches in
all troubles as p.187 c.14 l.1 Saints shall have enough, and to spare ere long
p.36 c.3 l.1 Saints separate from other p.42 c.4 l.1 Saints in Churches should
surpass all p.43 c.4 l.1 Saints live above sense p.47 c.4 l.1 Saints sound,
upright, etc. are fittest matter p.51 c.5 l.1 Saints of sweet savor, and for
such to be members of the Churches is a latter days promise p.51 55 c.5 l.1
Saints, best answer the Ends of Church Fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1 Saints all hewn
from one Rock, of one seed, in one womb, bearing one image, lead by one Spirit,
called into one hope, having one joy and glory p.86 c.7 l.1 Saints united, too
hard for all the world p.90 c.7 l.1 Saints happiness, and honor in Christ
their Lord, and cannot want preferment p.145, 146 c.13 l.1 Saints Privileges,
in Christ the Head, and as his Hairs, they grow from him p.151 c.13 l.1 Saints
in all ages under all Forms make all but one Church p.151 c.13 l.1 Saints are
best taught by Experiences p.384 c.6 l.2 Saints shall judge their Judges p.177
c.13 l.1 Saints of old longed for Church Fellowship, and why? p.204 c.15 l.1
Saints directed to the best Church fellowship p.212 c.15 l.1 Saints that would
enter, must consider; and what else p.231, 242 c.1 l.2 Saints of all judgments
to be received p.311 c.5 l.2 Saints not tied to any one Church, p.274 c.3 l.2
Saints the same in Faith, though not in Form p.348 c.5 l.2 Saints of old told
their Experiences p.356 c.6 l.2 Saints called Antinomi^ns, and why? p.475 476
c.6 l.2 Saints glorious Cherubims how 14 47 Epist. Salvation before
Sanctification in the Decree, but sanctification before salvation in the
execution of it p.359 c.6 l.2 Samaritans brought in by the Experience of a
woman declared p.367, 368 c.6 l.2 Sandy foundations will fail many Churches
that are built on them p.190 c.14 l.1 Sanctuary of the Lord filled with
Volunteers p.125 c.11 l.1 Saphires (precious stones) who they be? p.513 c.9 l.2
Sardiuss's (precious stones) who? p.516 c.9 l.2 Sardonix's (precious stones)
who? p.515 c.9 l.2 Satan renews Temptations every foot p.432 c.6 l.1 Satan's
syn^gogues in Parish Churches p.79 c.6 l.1 Saving sanctifying graces fit us for
Church Fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1 Saul is slain, David's days entered, and
Solomon's entering very speedily 26 Epist. Scandal upon Churches and Saints*
whence vid. Epist to Churches, and p.321 c.5 l.2 Scandal to Christ, Saints, and
Gospel, to put any by for their bare opinions in things indifferent p.321, 322
c.5 l.2 Scandal of this age, and of the Gospel is so many Hypocrites in
Chu^ches p.68 c.5 l.1 Scripture-comforts are sure, and will last p.309 c.6 l.2
Scriptu^es how Presbyterian^ and Papists agree in them p.461, 402 c.9 l.2 Seal
of the Spirit, what it is p.266 c.2 l.2 Sealing of the Spirit how? p.372, 373
c.6 l.2 Secular powers in matters of faith are tyranny and persecution p.160
c.13 l.1 Seed time a sad-time before Harvest p.365 c.6 l.2 Seekers sins. p.194
c.14 l.2 Selfe-examination of all that comes into Church Fellowship p.240 c.1
l.2 Selfe-murther the Author said from p.429, 435 c.6 l.2 Separation from them
without Christ calls for p.45 c.4 l.1 Separation a part of Church-form p.70 c.6
l.1 Separation what it is? p.75, 76 c.6 l.1 Separates from Parish-Churches no
Schismatics, but who are so? and who are not? p.77, 78 c.6 l.1 Sense makes us
look and live so low as not to see things that are coming p.47 c.4 l.1
Sequestration of Ministers of Christ cannot be from their preaching by any man
p.180 c.13 l.1 Sermons how to be remembered p.421 c.6 l.2 Serpent tempts with
the tree of knowledge p.545 c.9 l.2 Servants of Christ (the Masterbuilder) who?
p.141 c.13 l.1 Servants of the Church, officers p.288 c.4 l.2 Servants of God
differ in opinions, and yet the Lords p.317 c.5 l.2 Set form in Churches must
not be p.272 c.3 l.2 Shield to Saints who are to be 27 Ep. Shadow, what it is,
and what are so? p.338 c.5 l.2 Sin in things indifferent p.324 c.5 l.2 Sisters
(as well as Brethren) have their Right as Church Members to vote, etc. p.463,
464 c.8 l.2 Sisters joined in choosing an Apostle p.466 c.8 l.2 Sixth day (now)
man put into Paradise p.446 c.9 l.2 Sodom a type of Antichrist p.525 c.9 l.2
Slanders the Author suffers 43 Epist. Sleeping at Church how to avoid it p.521
c.6 l.2 Solemn Order must accompany solemn Ordinances p.280 c.3 l.2 Solemnity
of Embodying is in public p.281 c.3 l.2 Souls flashed for sin, exalted in
Christ p.381 c.6 l.2 Soldiers of Christ are best in the Churches p.90 c.7 l.1
J. Spilmans Experience 4 Expe. 6 2 Speech of Christ what? p.98 c.8 l.1 Spirit,
and Truth inwardly and outwardly God to be worshipped in p.1 c.1 l.1 Spirit
least, when Form most p.33 c.3 l.1 Spirit calls to come away p.40 c.3 l.1
Spiritual means against spiritual evils p.111 c.8 l.1 Spirit qualifies us by
convincing and making us voluntary p.126 c.11 l.1 Spirit is the Key that opens,
and none shuts p.138 c.13 l.1 Spirit agreeing with our spirits, how p.373 c.6
l.2 Spirit is the sweetest compulsive power p.129 c.11 21 Spirited for the
work of the Temple little yet, to what will be ere long p.123 c.10 l.1
Spiritual Ah^^iabs, and none else, should go about to say the true Foundation
of the Church p.192 c.14 l.1 Spiritual worshippers in the Churches p.209 c.15
l.1 Spirit and Word are the Lords Arms be draws with p.253 c.2 l.2 Spirit of
Christ the interior working Instrument p.264 c.2 l.2 Spirit is Gods strongest
and right Arm p.269 c.2 l.2 Spirit how it is known, and how it convinces
p.264, 265 c.2 l.2 Spirit how one in all p.268 c.2 l.2 True Spirit how known
p.373 c.6 l.2 Spirit carries through thick and thin p.266 c.2 l.2 Spirit
powered out, hard by us p.506 523 c.9 l.2 Spirits pouring out where it will be
first p.538 c.9 l.2 Spirit is the only orthodox Expositor p.463 c.9 l.2
Spiritual Covenants are best, and bind m^st p.462 c.7 l.2 Spiritual Egypt*
many Churches, how, and why? p.342 c.5 l.2 Spirit-Baptisme a principle of union
p.307 c.4 l.2 Spirit-Baptisme by which we enter Christ's Body p.308 c.4 l.2
Spouse of Christ fair p.87 c.7 l.1 Spring time is entered for the Churches p.28
c.3 l.1 Sprinkling, and washing, all one with dipping p.497 c.4 l.2 Strength of
Saints embodyed, invincible p.89, 90 c.7 l.1 Storm which the Author was in 48
Epist. A. Strongs Experience 9 Exp. 6 2 Storms the Churches must meet with yet
p.28 c.3 l.1 Subjects to Christ the Lord and Lawgiver p.143, 144 c.13 l.1
Substance of all shadows, is Christ, p.338 c.5 l.2 Sun must rule the day that
is coming 528 92 37 Epist. L. Swinfields Experience 396, 397, and 4 Exp. 6 2
Sword of Christ that slayes sin and errors, is the word of Christ p.261 c.2
l.2 Sympathy with the least member of Christ the Head p.149 c.13 l.1 Synods
ruling unwarrantable 107 8 1 497 9 2
T.
Tabernacles, i. e. Churches, their benefits p.94 c.7 l.1 Tabernacles of David
types of Congregational Churches p.526 c.9 l.2 Task masters of Egypt, who, and
where now p.343 c.5 l.2 Teachings are best by best Experiences p.382, 383 c.6
l.2 Teeth of the Church, who p.97 c.8 l.1 Temples of the Church, who p.98 ib.
Temple stones hewn and fitted, etc. p.52 c.5 l.1 Temple of Solomon, a Type of
New Jerusalem p.528 c.9 l.2 Temptations are strong, and many; after Calls p.416
c.6 l.2 Temptations incredible, the Author met with 427 428 ib. Temptations are
diverse ways 433 434 1 Exper. ib. Temptations, to deny Ordinances 404 2 Exp. ib.
Terminus, the Lawyers God 221 Epist. Terror to all the world, Churches united
p.90 c.7 l.1 Tenderness, in admitting Members p.291 c.4 l.2 Testimony,
threefold of all admitted 290 294 ib. Things indifferent and doubtful, what are
so p.313 314 c.5 l.2 Things of a middle size left to liberty p.327 ib. Thoughts
of Hell, scaring at first p.419 c.6 l.2 Twin-Testimonies give assurance p.372
ib. Single testimony, how enough, and how uncertain 374 377 ib. Throne of
Christ usurped by some p.320 c.5 l.2 Times of restitution tumbling in a pace
p.28 c.3 l.1 In times of popery, Experiences were told to convert p.368 c.6 l.2
Times of assurance p.378 ib. Time of trial, sharp to the Churches, is coming
p.505 c.9 l.2 Topaz's (precious stones) who they be p.518 ib. A Trance 404 62
Travel in souls before birth of joy p.366 ib. Trees of Christ's own planting,
fruitful p.43 c.4 l.1 Trees of typified paradise, who and what p.532 533 c.9
l.2 Tree of Life, who it is p.534 ib. Troubles in mind and conscience 410 7
Exp. 6 2 In troubles experiences, are cordials p.367 ib. Truths occasion
errors, but how 25 Epist. Trust in God, is helped by experiences p.367 c.6 l.2
Turks (and fit for none else) that will not have their forms questioned p.346
c.5 l.2 M. Turrents Experience, 11 Exp. 6 2 Types of Church-matter p.51 52 c.5
l.1 Types which foretell the ruin of false Churches, and the rising of the true
Churches p.525 526 527 c.9 l.2 Tyranny and persecution to have secular powers
over us in matters of faith p.160 c.13 l.1 Tithes a heavy yoke 6 Epist. Tithes
when, and how confirmed to Ministers 28 Epist. 491 9 2 Tithes, how
Presbyterians and Papists agree in them p.488 ib. Tithes how judaical, how
ceremonial, how moral, and how that maintenance must be altered, when they keep
up sin and superstition, etc. 489* 490 ib.
V.
Variety in unity is most beauteous p.337 338 c.5 l.2 Variety of Gods workings
appear by the Experiences of Saints p.366 c.6 l.2 Violation of Christ's Laws to
take into Churches any but visible Saints p.55 c.5 l.1 Vindication of
Congregational-Churches for matter p.64 ib. Violence and voluntariness
repugnant p.269 c.2 l.2 Visions of various conditions of the Churches in all
ages, and how in these days, by Hermes p.46 c.4 l.1 Visible and invisible, no
Scripture distinction p.61 c.5 l.1 A vision 423 425 398 409 6 2 Vision, what it
is, and twofold p.449 ib. Vital spirits, all from Christ the Head p.149 c.13
l.1 Unfitness of men for Church work p.120 c.10 l.1 Uncircumcised and
circumcised all one in Christ p.306 c.4 l.2 Unholy, unclean ones, not to enter
the Temple p.52 c.5 l.1 Uniformity when it began to be forced p.332 c.5 l.2
Union of Saints unconquerable p.90 c.7 l.1 Union with Christ the Head,
qualifies for communion with Saints in Churches p.59 c.5 l.1 Union of all
Saints and Churches necessary p.195 196 c.14 l.1 For unions sake, all that
makes difference laid aside ibid. Unity and entity convertibles p.87 c.7 l.1
Unity, where is not uniformity p.1^6 c.14 l.1 Unity urged amongst all Churches,
and why p.501 c.9 l.2 Unity with variety agrees very well p.498 ib. Unity of
Churches, when it will be most p.506 ib. Unispirituality keeps up the Churches
p.196 c.14 l.1 Universal deliverance of the Church, when p.20 21 25 c.3 l.1
Universities of what sort at the last days p.540 c.9 l.2 Unnecessary things
make most difference p.325 c.5 l.2 Unsavory fruits of the Head of Brass p.159
c.13 l.1 Unskilful builders abundance, as yet p.12^ c.10 l.1 Vocation lays
open election p.358 c.6 l.2 Vocation legal and evangelical 403 404, etc. ib.
Vocation in time, election eternal p.359 ib. Voluntary submission to the ways
of Christ p.123 124 c.11 l.2 Volunteers, and none else in Christ's Churches
p.253 254 c.2 l.2 How we are volunteers, different from false members p.270 ib.
A voice of God 1. Exper. 406 409 415 ib. Votes in Church concern all alike,
viz. Sisters as well as Brothers p.470 c.8 l.2 Use of forms may be p.34^ c.5
l.2 Usurpation of Christ's power p.105 c.8 l.1 Usurpation of Christ's throne
p.320 c.5 l.2 Usurpers both Ministers, and Magistrates, and how p.169 c.13 l.1
W.
Wants none to the Churches ere long p.35 c.3 l.1 Waiting is a special latter
days disposition p.47 c.4 l.1 Warning to Hypocrites p.67 c.5 l.1 Warning piece
to Ministers, last year p.208 c.15 l.1 Warning to formal Anabaptists, that
idolize dipping p.343 c.5 l.2 Warning to some, by experiences of others p.363
c.6 l.2 Warning to them that take Gods name in vain 423 ib* W. Walkers
experience, 6 Exp. ib. A special warning to Purleigh in Essex 237 Epist. E.
Waymans Experience p.409 ib. Water Baptism, how passed away as to us p.310 c.4
l.2 Way of the Churches in latter days best discovered p.33 c.3 l.1 Watch and
pray for the promises p.47 c.4 l.1 Ways God works in strange, and by contraries
p.47 c.4 l.1 Way of Gospel-fellowship, Christ left behind for Saints to follow
him in p.199 200 c.14 l.1 The way much honored by public embodying p.282 c.3
l.2 Weak Lambs how to be taken in p.293 c.4 l.2 Weakness, God most and best
seen in p.418 c.6 l.2 Weakest sex, most exalted p.464 c.8 l.2 Weather for
Ireland promises fair p.417 c.6 l.2 Well-grounded, and well-united, necessary
for Churches p.193 c.14 l.1 Westminster Assembly of Divines abominable 57 58
Epist. Wicked patrons. In Epist. to L. Genesis and Com. A wife wrought upon her
husband, 10 Exp. 6 2 Wilderness the Church was in 10 30 31 1 3 1
Wilderness-creatures no more our companions p.36 c.3 l.1 Wild Beasts shall not
hurt us ere long p.34 ib. Wilderness-ones characterized p.38 ib. Willing to
enter into Churches, not forced p.125 126 c.11 l.1 Will has a principle p.254
c.2 l.2 Will must first be wrought upon by the spirit p.129 c.11 l.1 Will has
an end, and what it is p.255 c.2 l.2 Will has a rule, and what it is 256 257
ib. Will has an object, and what it is 258 259 ib. Will has its operation
into the thing willed p.260 ib. Wisdoms polity p.1 c.1 l.1 Wisdom weighs the
end first p.136 c.12 l.1 Wisdom has sent out to all p.198 c.15 l.1 Witness of
the Spirit on his own knowledge p.266 c.2 l.2 Witness what it is p.353 354 c.6
l.2 Witness, if without it, what we must do p.375 ib. Wives and children of
faithful Ministers must be provided for, after the death of those Ministers 30
Epist. Wintertime is nigh over to all the Churches p.28 c.3 l.1 Whores
children, Parish Churches, and how p.552 553 c.9 l.2 Wolves look upward when
they howl for prey p.65 c.5 l.1 Women may, and must speak in the Churches
subjective p.294 c.4 l.2 Women's right in Churches proved p.464 465 466 c.8 l.2
Women have a good example p.407 c.6 l.2 Women have preached p.468 474 c.8 l.2
Women how, and why they have equal liberty with men as Church Members 472 473
ib. Women excelling men p.473 474 c.8 l.2 Women, how and when they are not to
speak 475 476 ib. A word to the three Nations p.15 c.2 l.1 A word to the
Churches p.29 49 3 c.4 l.1 A word to all to come into Christ p.80 c.6 l.1 A
word to Saints to begin their Hallelujah apace p.135 136 c.12 l.1 A word to
Magistrates p.1^9 c.13 l.1 A word both to Magistrates, and Ministers p.174 ib.
A word to the builders of these days p.197 c.14 l.1 A word to the Anabaptists
in Dublin and Waterford^ p.334 c.5 l.2 A word to the wicked indeed p.430 c.6
l.2 A word more to Church Members p.455 c.7 l.2 A word to women p.476 c.8 l.2 A
word more to the Churches p.510 511 521 c.9 l.2 Word preached, makes not
Churches p.63 c.5 l.1 Word preached, is not the indelible note of a true Church
p.79 c.6 l.1 Word of God must be the ground of our persuasion p.^45 c.1 l.2
Word of God, the instrumental cause of the will p.261 c.2 l.2 Word converting,
and confirming 404 414 11 Exp. 6 2 Word awakens 397 411 419 420 422 426 ib.
Word and Spirit twin testimonies p.374 ib. Work of Churches too hard for men
p.139 c.13 l.1 Work of Ministers and Saints, is by the Word to ruin errors
p.175 ib. Work of God in these days, is to bring all into one. p.330 c.5 l.2
Workings under the Law, heavy p.415 c.6 l.2 Works, how Presbyterians and
Papists agree in them p.473 477 478 c.9 l.2 Worship of God is in Spirit and
Truth p.1 c.1 l.1 Work that God is about in these days p.24 25 26 c.3 l.1 The
world will find Churches too hard for them p.90 c.7 l.1 World much convinced
by public imbodying p.281 c.2 l.2 Worships that are false, we must separate
from p.76 c.6 l.1
Y.
Forty years hence of Christ's coming to reign p.24 c.3 l.1 Enough and to spare,
we shall have ere long p.36 c.3 l.1 Iron heads p.160 c.13 l.1 Iron vide Iron
Z.
Zeal, that is false, fights against God in his Saints and Churches p.340 c.5
l.2
One word for the Printer.
Honest friends!
FRown not! for who shall throw the first stone? you or I? You that are without
faults, find faults, but make not faults; I fear we shall meet with more
Errata's at the end of our lives, then at the end of these lines, though here
be many, and more then my leisure can enter together into the list; but being
they are baggage, it shall cost the less care; only this, I believe that the
miscarriages of the Press, and men's practices (with some men's malicious
misconstructions) will have alike look and language, and may express. Light a
Lie, Truth, Ruth, Mystery, Mysty, etc. For, for the most part their fault is to
diminish and detract. But it may be, some men will read with a Romish gloss or
glance (as the Prelate or Presbyteer) and then I look, they that will
(willingly) read as in Luke 15 8. for domum everrit* domum ever^it; for when
they should sweep the house, they would pull it down: So that instead of
me^ding worth I must look for some to be rending words till they make them
worse then they are, and it (may be) as bad as themselves a^ last. But to thee
Honest Reader! I wish with all my heart that I had more leisure to direct, and
you lift and light to correct. I hope we shall meet with some candid
Christians, and honest men, who will amend in the life what is amiss in the
leaf; and with some patient well-minded Readers who will turn the other side
to make it true sense for the Printers sake, and sentence for the Publishers
sake; Pass by the Typographick errors, for his sake, and the Hypographick
errors for mine; For I could not follow the Press, and the Press would not
follow me. And to be ingenuous, I shall find out some faults for you; many
from you; but most in you, that are ever and most finding fault.

Errata's in the Epistles.
PAge 17. read (...) fourth month p. 30. line 27. r. deeply incumbent upon
Magistrates, p. 26. l. 1. r. Christ's p. 29. l. 29. r. you know what I, p. 37.
l. 18. margin r. redire i^ principium, p. 55. in margin against l. 6.
obliterate the p 70. l 9. in margin r. the way to make it, p. 64. l 19 r. him
in, i. e. in one, p. 63 l. 37. r Churches, p. 73. l. 37. r. do save. p. 79. in
verses l. ult. r. (...).

In the Book, p 5. l. 27 r. Policy, p. ^4 in margent against l. 16. r. loose,
and l 24* r. because that they. p. 15. l. 32. r. cheat us, p. 16. l. 1. r.
Discipline, p. 17. l. 15 r. viz. in the Church, p. 23. l. 7. r. and five and
thirty days, l. 29. r. that it is in. p. 30. l. 3. r. that holds, p. 34. in
margent against, 17. and 18. l. r. Form, are least in Spirit, p. 39. l 6. r.
Sun, p. 46. l. 21. r. Hermes, p 50. l. 37. r. others, and obliterare all, p.
54. l. 14. r. (...) p. 56. in margent under object, r. is not, p. 63. l 7. r. p
59. and in p. 65. against l. 16 margent. r. Churches, which they have, in p.
66. l. 14. r. sorts, p 67. l. 28. r. they, obliterate ye, p. 69. l. 9. r. new
Ranters or old Protestants, p. 72. l. 23. r (...), p. 109. l. 1. r. (...), l.
23. r. undeniable. p 86 in margent against l. 25. r. love p 96. l. 1. Contents
r. The second part of the second, etc l. ^ast Contents r. any Church, p. 139.
l. 24. r. and oblit. as, and in marg against l. 30. r. not able, p. 141. l. 36
mar. r. force, p. 152. r. ^ron sides, p. 217. l. 20. r. Esau, p 320. l. 3. r.
that, p. 253. l. 14. r. Sun, p. 255. l. 13. oblit. seu before motum, and put in
seu before m^ve^tur, l. 33. r. men* p 261. l. 21. r. approbatione, p. 264. l.
31. r. (...). marg. l. 24 r. Interior, p. 268. l. 3. r. found no rest, p. 304.
l. 11. r. here, p. 305. l. ult. r. thou before that, p. 308. l. 12 r. is
called, p. 301. l. 4 r. judgments, p 316. l. 30. r. they, p. 320. l. 12. r. be
the cause of a pale, p. 328 l. 3. r subscriptions p. 334. l. 32. r. Psalm. 36.9.
p. 336. l. 1. r. a tenondo, p. 358. l. 14. r. they, p. 319. l. 9 r. a poor
wretch, who says, p 418. l. 38. r unrighteous ones, p. 419 l 2. r. full of
variety, p. 739. marg r. dum sursum sursim, p. 453. l. 22. r. those, p. 457. l.
19. r. by there, p. 465. l. ult. but one, r. Act ^4. p. 466 l. 4 r. re-admitting
of one, l. 5 r. to hold off, p. 482. l. 8. r. Intigrale, marg against l. 20. r.
no Diocesan, 467 marg. against l. 20. r. duobus locis, p. 469. l 33. oblit.
the, p, 470. l. 16. r. 1 Cor. 5.13. p. 4^0. l. 7. r. and as are, p. 507. line
37. read Forms of it, page 511. l. 35. oblit. to be, p. 519 l 26. r. an
Amethyst, p. 523. l. 17. r. presence, p. 531. l. 5. r. autem, p. 464. l. 31. r.
Scriptures, p. 468. l. 1. r. to be baptized, p. 472. l. 9. his ha^^ l. 25. r.
bread, p. 478. l. 34. r. grant it, p. 484. l. 37 r that they, 480. l. 1. r.
about Civil powers, p 442. l 5. r For etc. Other faults I believe there be that
have given me the slip, but I am not at leasur^ (...) pursue them.


