A Posie for Lovers: OR THE Terrestrial Venus Unmaskt. IN FOUR POEMS, VIZ I.
The Tempest, or Enchanting Lady. II. The Luscious Penance, or the Fasting
Lady. III. The Feigned Innocence, or the Jealous and Whining Lady. IV. To an
Old Gamesome Madam, who Twittingly Asked the Author, when he Designed to Settle
in the World.


Add quod insidia sacris a vatibus absunt,
Et facit ad mores ars quoque nostra bonos.
Nec nos ambitio, nec nos amor urget habendi:
Contempto colitur lectus, and umbra foro.
Ovid. de Art. Amand. lib. 3. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Sign of
the Three Crowns in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1694.

To the Little Crooked, yet Sweet and Lovely Rosania.
A Great Pretender to History tells us, That Ann Bulleyn had an Ill Shape, a
Yellow Color, a Gag Tooth, and a Lump under the Chin; but had withal a most
Delicious Wit, a Graceful Mien, an Obliging Air, and Good Humor: Now, although
this may seem but an indifferent Picture to gross and vulgar Discerners, yet it
will pass for a Beauty in a true Platonical sense; since internal Comeliness
supplies all other Defects. Accordingly the lesser Irregularities of your Frame
can be no matter of Reproach, since your Intellectual Graces are so conspicuous
to the World. Your Soul in her narrow Lodging (like an honest Dear Friend in a
little homely Tenement) is unaccountably entertaining: And your Wit and
Perfections may justly put Mankind to the blush, as they do me to a stand, when
I consider my Insufficiency to describe them.

I hope, Madam, You will never fail to bear witness before the World, that I
have ever been a just (though not blind) Admirer of the good Ones, or (which I
hope is all one) the greater part of your Sex: I hate the poynted and
licentious Lampoons, that seem levelled at Womankind without any sort of
distinction; and which look more like the Rudeness of Porters, than the just
Raillery of a Gentleman: To rake into the Wounds, or expose the Frailties of
Ladies, is barbarous and inhumane; and for a Man (because he is of a dull and
earthy Complexion, or has been cast off by his Mistress for want of agreeable
Merit) to rail at the Sex, or blast a Woman of Honor, is abusive and
lamentable Cant, and deserves a greater Castigation than that of the Pen. I
know, they that are studiously wicked, or vicious upon Principle, are commonly
most severe upon the little Frailties of those, that are designedly virtuous,
and generous in their Aims, but want a uicer Regulation of themselves: And how
easy is it for any despicable Wretch (that has but an invincible Forehead) to
snicker or shake the Head over the little Lapses or Misfortunes of their
Betters; and with a solemn Nod, or decorous Management of Fact, to pity Persons
of Worth and Reputation.

My Design therefore, in the following Essays, is not in the least to fully the
Glories of the Sex, (for why should the sweet Nightingales and innocent Turtles
suffer with the obscene Birds?) but to make an agreeable and just
Discrimination; and to contribute a little toward the Easiness of Humane Life,
the Peace of Families, and generous Freedom and Gaity of Conversation. I do
freely own, that Woman, while she glitters in her native Innocence and Charms,
is the Fair side of Nature, and prettiest brightest Ornament of the Creation:
She is more welcome than the Morn, more beauteous than the Spring, and more
refreshing than the Light: And yet if she Degenerates into an Habitual Exercise
of Black and Ill natured Passions, (for ashort Fit may be useful and becoming,)
she presently falls from her Sovereignty and Graces, loses all her Charms, and
the foulest Vizor a Poet can contrive will rather mend, than heighten her
Deformity.

The following Lectures were at first hastily composed, for the satisfaction of
some private Friends; and are now Published at the earnest desire of some of
your Admirers, who are Persons well affected to your Sex: Whether I have
transgressed the Limits of true Decorum, I leave to you Impartially to
determine. With all Submission and Gratitude I own your Endearing Favors and
Charitable Smiles: And do here lay my self as well as the Hopeless Lausania at
your Feet. I am,

Dear Madam, Your Servant and Admirer, Musophilus.

THE TEMPEST, OR, Enchanting Lady.
BOLD are those Men, that with adventurous Toil
Put forth to Sea, and leaving Native Soil,
By Gusts and Waves around the Globe are whirled,
Like flying Posts, or Carriers of the World;
That with weak Oar advance and force their way
Through the unfrequented Deserts of the Sea,
The Scaly Monsters of the Deep engage,
And with frail Vessel tempt proud Neptune's Rage:
Yet bolder they, and somewhat more than bold,
That spend their days with an Imperious Scold;
That for their bosom Friend loud Woman have,
More Wild than Storms, more Ravenous than the Grave:
For Graves are glutted, Storms are reconciled,
Waves listen to a Peace, and soon grow mild;
But Shrew, the Monster of the World, does never
Hearken to Charms, to Reason lends no Ear,
But drives to endless Horror, and Despair.
Old Sodom's burning Piles, and Noah's Flood,
Joined with all Aegypt's Plagues,
Compared to this were the light Wrath of God;
That only doomed the Wicked, spared the Good.
But here the brightest Souls, that e're did wear
Mortality, the common Vengeance share;
The Wise in this black Catalogue we find;
Shrew's the Corruption of Fallen Womankind,
The last and greatest Curse on Humane Race designed.
O the hard Fate of Socrates and Job!
How blessed was he, that lived alone in Tub?
Happy he spent his silent flowing Days
In Sacred Solitude, and Golden Ease:
Free from Domestic Toil, and Bosom Strife,
And that dire Comfort, called a clamorous Wife.
If ever Mortal merited this Fate,
'Twas Pedro, of all Men the scorn and hate:
Pedro a Tiny Wight, but proudly blind,
In his own thoughts the rarest of his kind,
Placed all his Bliss in Honorable Gain,
Title and Pelf supplied the want of Brain:
TO Augment his Store, dull Comfort of his Life,
The Fop at length would needs trump up a Wife;
And, without Nature's call, his Thoughts did bend
To Nuptial Banquets, and a Female Friend.
His wiser Friends for Cloe did appear,
Cloe the Kind, the Virtuous, and the Fair;
But all persuasions on the Sot were spilt,
For he had vowed to have a Woman gilt.
The Fame of Rich Dorinda reached his Ear,
All his Devotion was laid out on her;
Fortune she had enough for Womankind,
And this had struck the Aspiring Lubber blind:
True, at first view he gazed, as in a Fright,
And shrank, as at some Vision of the Night,
Her very Form did wound his tender Sight.
But Gold, Almighty Gold, (that with its Charms
Translates the Dowdy to the Hero's Arms;
That Consecrates a Dunghill, Haggard Race,
Gilds the Deformed, and smooths the Wrinkled Face)
Soon brought the Miser to himself again;
The Brightened Marmo soon appeared a Queen.
In short, with Holy Words the Fiends were joined;
Their Souls and Bodies decently entwined:
And sure the World henceforth will be so Civil,
To own a Carnal League 'twixt Witch, and Devil.
Thus far her Tongue lay close in Ambuscade,
And did not Pedro's Noddle yet invade;
That Mist'ry was reserved for aftertimes,
Women in days of Courtship shroud their Crimes:
And wisely for a while their Faults conceal,
Which days of Wedlock do too soon reveal.
Scarce had the Moon her Second Round began,
When first with Voice she Thunderstruck the Man:
Whether inspired with Insolent Disgust,
For want of Bridal Fuel to her Lust,
Or sent by Heaven to plague the Niggard Clown
For his Enormous Vices, is unknown;
But sure no Mortal Wight below the Sphere,
Did e're so great a Storm of Vengeance bear.
Her Mouth like Bay of Biscay seemed designed,
When all things else were Calm, there blew a Wind:
And all the Barristers of Billingsgate
Seemed but dumb Orators when she did prate.
As when Pandora's Box did open fly,
Plagues and Infection gathered in the Sky;
So from her Mouth expanded wide did rise
Such Storms, as did the Neighborhood surprise.
No Bell-Mans Midnight Cry, when Sleep invades,
Nor an Old Madam scolding at her Maids,
Nor grunting Spouse which through the House does bound,
E're raised so fell, and terrible a sound.
The ill-boding Owls, and Dogs that bark at Moon,
And Cats that scream, when the Love-fit comes on,
Never raised such grating Echoes to the Ear;
'Twas Test enough to make a Quaker swear.
In vain did Husband Pray and Sue for Peace,
And offer all his Gold for one Days Ease:
With Holy Words to appease her he would try;
In Holy Phrase she loudly would reply,
And storm his Ears with hallowed Raillery.
Sometimes She Would Hieroglyphically Preach,
And with Strange, Antic, and Dumb-Figures teach;
The House did then a silent Meeting seem;
She Would turn up Whites, like Prophetess in Dream;
Sit as becalmed, not moving Hand or Voice,
Till blustering Spirit rising made a Noise:
When raised, it grew again as troublesome,
As the famed German Pipe, or Devil's Drum:
So Men in Lapland, when Hag proves unkind,
Wait many hours for a fair Gale of Wind.
Of all those Ills, that e're came winged from Hell,
This Plague oth' Tongue's the most incurable:
A Magdalene in time may prove a Saint;
But none e're cured a Woman prone to cant:
This was Dorinda's Case; and, when grown Old,
She still appeared true Conscientious Scold:
When half deprived of little ^ense and Wits,
She Raved like Woman in Histerick Fits.
She cough'd out Choler; and railed on of Course;
The Godly Bedlam grunted out a Curse:
Mump't out her Scorn, and grumbled Holy Words;
A Cutler's Shop stuck round with glittering Swords
Was not so dangerous as her Empty Mouth;
For Zeal and Grace supplied the want of Tooth;
With Jaw disarmed, but edged with Godly Spite,
She Would worse than the famed Turkey Granum bite:
So long, so solemnly she would scowl, and cant,
Job's Wife compared to her, may seem a Saint,
Who did but once, though with a Vengeance, rant:
Like Pliny's Fish, she was profusely hung;
You Would think she wore sharp Teeth within her Tongue.
Thus loudly did She Reign to the last Day,
And punish Pedro with her Tyrannous sway;
Her Wakeful Engine could no silence keep;
Others may Talk, She Scolded in her sleep,
Hag-rid his Soul by Night, and all Day long,
Blasted his Senses with her fiery Tongue:
She lash't the timorous Slave without Remorse,
Till the dull Creature groaned like Trojan Horse;
Then left him bleeding, panting maimed, and tired,
And as she lived in Storms, in Storms Expired.
Anacreon sure was drunk, when Beauties Charms
Were made, by him, Mysterious Woman's Arms;
For certainly Horns, Talon, Beaks and Wings,
With all the Artillery of Teeth, and Stings;
Those Weapons which to Birds, and Beasts belong
Are harmless Toys compared to Woman's Tongue:
If e're my Fate, unknown to me, decreed
That I must share the Joys oth' Nuptial Bed;
If e're I must, for Love of Womankind,
Freedom and Philosophic Ease resign;
I only beg the ventrous She may prove
A Gentle, Sweet, Good-natured, Household Dove:
Though She be Crooked, Squint Eyed, Poor, and Blind,
She Is welcome, if she is Pleasant, Calm, and Kind;
I Will know no Ugliness but that oth' Mind:
I could without the least Convulsive pain,
The shock of Honest Poverty sustain,
If she but silent prove, I Will never complain.
I could methinks,
For my Dear, tender Spouse, as yet unknown,
Part with a mangled Limb, without a Groan:
I could without the least reluctant fear
The voice of Thunder and of Earthquakes bear,
And face the grimmest Death without Despair.
But to be doomed to loud Domestic Strife,
To that Rank Blessing, called a Clamorous Wife, (of Life;
That with her cant and tears sow'rs the whole draught
To fall a dull, unpittyed Sacrifice,
To a false Woman's Scorn, and dreadful Voice;
Just Heavens forbear, as you are kind and good,
It Is too severe a Test for Flesh and Blood:
It Is Gibbet, Vultur, Wheel, and Rowling-Stone,
All the Ten Persecutions crammed in one.
It Is such a signal, and Transcendent Curse,
That nothing, but Damnation, can be worse.
THE Luscious Penance: OR The Fasting Lady.
LONG had Lausania, flush't with hot desire,
Been the Pastime of many a Knight and 'Squire;
Long had she in their presence wished and sighed,
Looked eagerly, and been as often denied:
Next, with a moving Grace, she did relate
Her handsome Fortune, Alamode Estate,
Her beaut'ous Jewels, tempting Gold and Plate.
These scorned to help her Importuning Wants,
She seemed to List her self among the Saints;
Many long hours distressed she would dwell
In Lonely Closet, her Disconsolate Cell,
(Well stored with Biskets, Wine, and Godly Books)
And thence peep forth with Comfortable Looks;
Thus a long while she wantonly would pray,
Fast sweetly, and indulge it every day.
This done, to the rame sleek Chaplain she complained,
With begging look; but was by him disdained:
He scorned to soil a Consecrated Hand.
Unhappy state of poor afflicted Maids!
When vigorous warmth, or gay desire invades!
How did Lausania try with wearied Hands
TO Enrich her Face, as Farmers do their Lands;
And dung with Paint her wrinkl'd, shrivel'd Brow,
A Barren Soil, where Beauty never must grow?
Much better; had she drained the wanton Flood,
Or with Infusions chilled her sulfurous Blood;
She should have shunned all Hot provoking Meat,
And laid aside cold Tea, and Chocolate;
Fasted and prayed in earnest all day long,
And cooled at once her Liver, and her Tongue;
Happy she might have been had this been done;
And out of her the Devil of Lust had gone.
Now, thanks to her dear self, alone she is left,
Of Consolation, as of Charms, bereft:
The Finger-butt of Grooms; abhorred, and feared,
Like Blazing Star, or Woman with a Beard.
Her old Despair is now to Madness grown,
She bites each Man she meets, raves up and down,
The celebrated Scold of all the Town.
And she, whose Talent 'twas to court and woo,
Does all Mankind with Raillery pursue.
The silliness of Man she does expose,
And vows she would sooner take a Dog for Spouse,
Her amorous Shock, or darling Monkey choose.
And sure a fitter Match was never seen;
A Puss with Top-knot wedded to La Chien.
Blot of her Sex! All over deformed and foul!
Her Body's a true Emblem of her Soul:
Lansania! Thy Graces shall outshine
The glorious Pranks of much famed Messaline:
What she once acted, thou in though have done;
May all her Praise and Merit be thy own.
Fair Rosamond, Jane Shore, and all the Fry
Of such rare British Worthies yield to thee;
Their Vice, were in a fair form Enshrined;
But thou art blasted both in Shape and Mind.
Thou art not fit for Nunnery; at best
Art not a Bait for an Hot blooded Priest:
He Is cursed that with thee in a Church shall stand,
And penance do with Woman in his Hand.
Without a Blot I should not write thy Name,
Nor without Scorn thy Pedigree proclaim:
Thy Nose from Mother Shipton speaks thy Race,
And stands like Pallisadoe on thy Face;
As if 'twere meant from thy Embrace to fright
Mankind, If ever Incubus by Night
On thy Foul Body should design a Rape,
He ought t'assume some new Enormous Shape;
Else with thy uglier Form, and equal Soul,
Thou will o'er-match the poor Infe^nal Fool.
The Northern Bear, that did a Maid compress,
Had fled at sight of thy Tremendous Face;
Pygmalion too had shunned thy loathed Embrace.
Wast thou but landed on the Eastern Shore,
Thy very Looks would all Arabia sour;
And had the Pontick King but met thy Breath,
Though Poyson-proof, he might have sucked in Death.
Whenever Nymph, whom Thought could never stain,
Shall be assaulted by some lustful Swain,
Whom Thoughts of Hell or Gibbet never could scar;
O that thy monstrous Image but appear!
The sight would dash his villainous Intent,
And strike the insulting Letcher impotent.
Hence, to some rude wild Indian Climate fly,
Where Men to Devils do Allegiance pay,
There some Respect perhaps may light on thee.
Fly to some Barbarous Coast, to Affrick's Sand;
Thou have no hopes in any Christian Land;
Unless some Puny, Cast-off, Tawdry Fool,
The Sport of Womankind, and Nature's Tool,
Grow desperate, and in sad pensive Case
Wink hard, and boldly rush to thy Embrace.
Like moody Saul, who, thrown from all his Bliss,
Rent from all Hope, and sunk into Distress,
At Endor Courted an Infernal Bitch,
And made his last Appeal unto a Witch.
Pardon ye Nymphs of a Superior Sphere,
Whom shortly I Will accost with awful Fear:
I love your Sex; and at your Shrines adore,
And next to Heavens, your Blessings I implore.
I feel your Glittering Charms, partake your Joys,
And wish you Blessed with pretty Girls and Boys.
In all your Toils I bear a mournful part,
And each sad Accent strikes my Tender Heart:
When I hear a forsaken Virgin's Cries,
My Mother's Softness comes into my Eyes;
Alas! poor Soul, look how she pines and dies.
When a Young Widow by the Grave does stand
Of her Departed Dear; I catch her Hand,
And willing am the fading Bloom to save;
And fear least she should drop into the Grave.
At Dido's Fate I Have often wept, and bled;
Nor can I Patient Grisle's Story read
Without a Sigh; Nay I could never blame
The uncommon Ardours of the Ephesian Dame.
Those Errors, which from generous Love proceed,
To me but small Apology can need:
While others Laugh or Rail, I beat my Breast;
I cannot turn Misfortunes into Jest;
But count 'em Spots of Humane Race, that dare
Blaspheme the Glorious Frailties of the Fair.
Yet if the Incarnate Angels choose to fall;
If their Love sowrs to Vanity and Gall,
Their Pangs and Throws without concern I see;
All such proud She Is Lausanias are to me.
And may Lausania's blasted Pride and Scorn
A lasting Terror prove to Nymphs unborn.
O that she could beg Pardon and Relent:
But that is too much to hope: If she Repent,
Furies will put on Mourning, Hell was never
So cheated, since the Death of R -- r.
THE Feigned Innocence: OR The Jealous and Whining Lady.
Horatio a Person of Honor, of a Free but Virtuous Temper, Marries Lucinda; a
Lady of good Descent and Celebrated Beauty, but a little too Affected and
Demure: After the satisfactory Enjoyment of a few Years in her much loved
Conversation, be Deserts her Bed, and denies all Nuptial Communion with her,
upon too apparent Evidence of her Dishonorable Conduct. After some Days of
Absence, the now Distressed Lucinda sends him this Complaining Epistle.
OFTEN have I in my Tender Nonage cried
And with a bleeding Heart sat down and sighed,
At the sad Story of Octavia's Fate,
Deserted by her Antony the Great:
Though he with sullen brow from her withdrew,
And winged with Charms to Cleopatra flew,
Urged by the Fates against Octavia's Will,
Yet She, kind She, Loved and Enjoyed him still:
(For Lovers live not where they sigh and move,
But where their Passion's fixed, and where they Love.)
Her Fortune changed by Cleopatra's Face,
She bore the Affliction with a moving Grace;
Loved on with equal constant Strains, and never
Spoke his Dear Name without a Hymn or Tear:
In all the Soldiers Toyls she bore a part,
Kept his Surviving Image in her Heart:
Astrea could not hold the Scales more even;
She Would never recall a Love once Sealed in Heaven.
Sometimes indeed she wrung her hands and cried,
Her pretty Children weeping by her side;
Into Complaints and Transports she would fly,
Call the Fates Cruel, but not Antony:
Her glowing Breast did with kind Wishes burn,
And Love within still whispered he would return.
But Antony Perfidious and Unkind,
With a Steeled Heart, and a False Perjured Mind,
Slighted her generous Faith, her boding Fears,
Her Melting Wishes, and endearing Prayers;
And when from her cold Solitary home
With longing Arms she was to Athens come
To meet lier Lord, he forced her back to Rome.
I little thought,
When I at first to your Embrace did run,
Too Fond alas! And Proud to be undone!
That my Malignant Stars would thus combine;
That poor Octavia's Fortune should be mine.
I languishing and hoping Innocence
Took all your Words for Oracle and Sense:
When you first vowed I secretly complied,
Though by fond custom urged I often denied:
My Passion was too strong to be concealed,
Each treacherous Glance the Mystery revealed:
Though my officious Tongue did act its part,
My Looks still spoke the Language of my Heart:
Somewhat I felt that did strange Heats inspire,
My Blood was kindled, and my Soul took fire:
I thrust you from me, flew from your Embrace;
Yet wore Love's kinder Signal in my Face:
I bid you go, and chid at your Delay,
But as you went with Smiles I bid you stay:
When e're you spoke or looked my Heart was moved,
And though I frowned and scorned, yet still I loved.
I scarcely could the pleasing Shock sustain,
You looked like Cupid grown up to a Man:
You seemed all over Intelligence and Flame,
Love was your Center, your Circumference Fame.
I praised (Ah! those soft Hours I cannot forget)
Your Form and Mien, but above all your Wit;
When I was most displeased, I was most true,
To every Object blind and deaf but you:
When ever I wak't, or laid me down in Bed,
Horatio's Lovely Image by me played:
When I alone did walk, you close did stand,
Methought I felt you snatch and kiss my Hand:
And then such kind and pretty things you said,
Would from a Deathbed raise a drooping Maid:
Thus for a while my soft and yiedling Breast
Was with transporting Images possessed;
My Virgin Fears with warm Affection strove,
Till at last blushing I confessed my Love.
But Oh! With what a sudden furious Joy
You did your Lips, and innocent Arms employ!
You melting spoke, then panting stood amazed,
And without breach of Honor clasp't, and gazed:
You softly press't me, and sweet Kisses joined,
Our very Souls did meet, and were entwined:
You vowed by all the Witnesses above,
Nothing should ever allay so pure a Love:
In your kind loving Arms you held me fast,
And said we never should part while Life did last;
That nothing but the unkind Destinies
Should ever divide our Arms, our Lips, and Eyes;
Nothing but Death should tear us from our Joys.
But Ah! how dim and like a Winter Sun,
In a few Years is your Lucinda grown?
How changed from her, whose charming Grace and Mien
You once so much admired, and thought Divine?
No Luster streams from her forgotten Face;
No sweet Endearments flow from her Embrace:
No, Leonora now has all the Charms;
And cold Lucinda's banished from your Arms:
She Is the new dazzling Object you adore,
And pale Lucinda's Right must be no more.
Now Sighs alone employ my fainting Breath;
I no Companions have but Care and Death:
In a dark Cell I pensive sit and moan,
Since you, and all the Bribes of Life are gone:
Or if I walk to the Melancholy Groves,
The former Scenes of our once envied Loves,
Methink the Birds like silent Mourners gaze,
Or with sad Notes falute me as I pass:
Nothing from you arrives to ease my Grief,
Not one kind Letter comes to my relief:
The kindest Words cannot your Heart incline;
Sure there is no Balm for any Wound like mine.
Just Heaven! What have I merited or done,
To be thus sentenc't to be left alone?
Chaste I have been as e're Penelope,
Or any Grecian Dame was famed to be;
Or as Lavina was before she went
To the wanton Baths with innocent intent:
If e're I have profaned our Nuptial Bed
With one Adulterous glance; if ever I did
Cherish one Wish obscene, or Thought untrue
Since the first time I mingled Arms with you;
May Midnight Wolves tear out my bleeding Heart,
May I dye piecemeal, or feell all the smart
Grim Tyrants ever designed; may I live on
To a long dreadful space, yet loved by none:
Then die a branded, unlamented Slave,
Hiss't through the World, and spurned into my Grave.
Why will you then ingulph your self in ill?
Why should you thus a Heart-sick Woman kill?
How can you thus with bleeding Honor rove,
And wildly Revel in unlawful Love?
Where this sad Change will end I cannot foretell;
But my poor Soul divines it cannot be well:
Since no Successful Fate, or Peaceful End
The Dissolute Hero's Life did ever attend:
Though for a while grown obstinate in Sin,
He may outface the Monitor within;
Yet at the length dark and ill-boding Fears
Haunt and torment him wheresoe'er he steers.
Remembrance of past Crimes his Soul does fright
By Day, and Hag-ride all his Dreams by Night;
And how shall he Heavens mighty Vengeance stem,
Who cannot bear its Image in a Dream?
Each Wind or Echo his sick Fancy wounds,
And makes his Spirits shoot beyond all bounds:
The noise of Thunder makes him start and rave;
Seems a shrill Ghost to call him to his Grave;
And all the Charms of Music, Friends, and Wine
Cannot allay the storm he feels within:
In his own Breast are placed in open View
Tribunal, Witness, Judge and Sentence too:
And thus, though late, he will confess with shame
What it is to violate the Nuptial Flame;
What it is to wrong a spotless Woman's Fame.
Pardon this Passion of a Heart that bleeds;
Pardon this freedom which from Love proceeds.
My Soul already hastens to relent;
Forgive me, and I Will teach thee to repent:
I Will never accuse thee more; No, first I Will lay
The blame on Fate, or any thing but thee.
But sure the Injuries to me are given,
Are big enough to shake a Saint in Heaven:
O my vast wrongs! Pity ye Powers above
My injured Faith, and my neglected Love:
Help my poor tottering Bark; Conduct me over,
For pale Lucinda shortly is no more.
To the Golden Strand, and Everlasting Shore.
Farewell my much abused, and much Loved Lord!
Ah! that I live to speak the dreadful Word!
The Blessings of this Life wait on you still,
When I am lodged in Dust, or some cold Cell:
I, like a plundered Traveller, stripped and bare,
Exposed to horrid Damps, and blasting Air,
Lie unregarded here without Relief,
Feel naught but want, and nothing taste but grief:
The Doleful Tale of Wretched Niobe,
Was sure some Dream, or Prophecy of me;
For I with Midnight fears am almost grown
As stiff, as cold, and senseless as a Stone.
Ah, that kind Heaven would in soft sounds impart
And bear my Sorrows to your yielding heart;
Or that I might but in your presence die;
And there begin my Immortality:
With willing Arms I Would hang upon your Knees;
Breath out my Soul in a dear Rapturous Kiss:
But sure the World will think my Wrongs but small,
When one kind parting Kifs attones for all.
Once more Dear Object of my Soul farewell:
To thee who did -- To thee who dos't excel,
Once more, I bid adieu.
Yet sure ever long, even while time forwards rowls,
Before the general Rendezvouze of Souls,
We shall again Embrace, again Appear
All Love, and with a Form more bright and clear,
Like Dying Martyrs Kind, and like an Angel Fair.
TO AN Old Gamesome Madam, Who Twittingly Ask't the AUTHOR When he Designed To
Settle in the World.
MAdam, I must not from my Reason fly
With the Dull World's Opinions to comply;
Nor can I think a Woman's Excellence
Consists in Noise, fine Dress, and want of Sense:
The Answer's near at hand; when I can tame
Those Rising Passions which divide my Frame,
And stem the Sallies of undue desire,
Then shall I to true Settlement Aspire:
For Settlement supposes Calm and Ease;
Even Heaven consists in Temper, not in place.
Angels are settled, while abroad they fly,
And with swift Wings cut the soft yielding Sky:
And, though coarse Vulgar Souls may count it strange,
They rest at their Bright Home, when wide they range.
But he is never settled that feels bosom pains,
Though tied at home by Matrimonial Chains:
Nor can that Mortal a fixed State e're find;
That wears a Restless and Aspiring Mind:
Else, Men in Bedlam may be said to have
A Settled Blessed Condition while they Rave.
Happy's that Man, whose Soul is not confined
To Time or Place; who owns a freeborn mind:
Who Blessed with Friends, and Intellectual Peace,
Is Nobly Active, and yet lives at Ease.
That Loves, but does not Fear a Lady's Eye,
Feels the sweet Wound, but bravely scorns to dye.
While Lab'rers rest and Guardian Angels wake,
Of Nature's Works he can a Prospect take:
And while he treads the quiet, thoughtful round,
Eternity alone his thoughts can bound:
While others idle sit at home, abroad
He can be Entertained, and well Employed;
Unmoved be'll be, even while he seems to roam,
And where he meets his Friend, he is at home.
But Madam, can you talk of Settlement,
Whom neither God, nor Man could ever content?
Of Wealth you have had, of Husbands too good Store;
Thousands oth' one, and of the other four;
And yet you daily pray, and pine for more.
Glutted with Humane kind, again you crave,
Nor can you settled be, 'till lodged in Grave.
Your gloting Eyes more wantonness reflect,
Than any high-fed Concubine can act:
Your wrigling Soul by working frets its way,
Through Flesh and Blood, and does it self betray.
Your restless Thoughts from Man to Man still roll;
A B essed Symptom of a Settled Soul.
When dreadful Fourscore Years are past and gone,
When breath grows short, and the last hour draws on;
It Is wondrous pretty in Love's Toils to Engage,
And to be Married in a good Old Age:
Wedlock which Youth Adorns, in you's a Sin:
Yet you will on; as if you did design,
By your Stale, withered Matrimonial Face,
To bring the Dear Loved Thing into Disgrace.
For shame, Old Chronicle, no longer rove
In the wild Mystic Maze of Lawless Love:
Hence, and that Venerable Limber lay
In some dark Vault unknown to Light and Day:
There sigh the short Remains of Life away.
There Mourn, confess, tell over the numerous Scroll,
Ransack each secret Corner of your Soul.
Shake, turn it outward, rub out every stain;
Let your Repentance be oth' Nobler strain.
And when your Funeral Pomp, and Rites are paid,
Over Tomb let your Effigies be displayed,
And do some good, at least when you are dead.
Your Looks perhaps may to Devotion call;
Like Picture of Old Time upon a Wall.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1694.
THE Loyal and Impartial Satyrist: Containing Eight Miscellany Poems. Price 6
d. Thirty Six Sermons, viz. 10 Ad Aulam. 6 A Clerum. 6 Ad Magistratum. 8 Ad
Populum. With a large Preface. By the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert
Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln. The Eighth Edition, corrected and
amended. Whereunto is now added the Life of the Reverend and Learned Author.
Written by Isaac Walton Folio. Price 15 s. A Sermon at the Funeral of the
Reverend Mr. Thomas Gray, late Vicar of Dedham in Essex; preached in the
Parish Church of Dedham, Feb. 2. 1691. With a short Account of his Life. By
Joseph Powell. A.M. Rector of St. Mary on the Wall, in Colchester. Price 6 d.
An Anatomy of Atheism: A Poem by a Person of Quality. Price Six pence.
Conversation in Heaven: Being Devotions; consisting of Meditations and Prayers,
on several considerable Subjects in Practical Divinity. Written for the Raising
the Decayed Spirit of Piety. By Lawrence Smith, LL. D. Fellow of St. John's
College in Oxford, 12 mo. Price Two Shillings. Lusus Amatotius: Sive Musaei
Poema de Herone and Leandro, E Graec a in Latinam Linguam Tranllatum. Cui Aliae
(tres scilicet) accedunt Nugae Poeticae. Authore C. B. e Coll. Di Jo. Bapt.
Soc. 4 o Price 6 d. Tachygraphy: The most Exact and Compendious Method of Short
and Swift Writing, that has ever yet been published by any. Composed by Thomas
Shelton, Author and Professor of the said Art. Approved by both the
Universities, 8 o. Price 4 s. Zeiglographia: Or, a New Art of Short-Writing,
never before published; more Easy, Exact, Short, and Speedy than any
heretofore. Invented and Composed by Thomas Shelton, Author and Teacher of the
said Art. Allowed by Authority, 8 o. Price one Shilling.

