Upon Nothing. A POEM.
By a Person of Honor.
NOthing, thou Elder-Brother, Eve to shade,
Thou had a Being e're the World was made,
Well fixed alone, of ending not afraid.
E're Time and Place were, Time and Place were not,
When primitive Nothing, Something strait begot;
Then all proceeded from the great united What!
Something, the General Attribute of all,
Severed from Thee its sole Original,
Into thy boundless Self, must undistinguisht fall.
Yet Something, did thy Nothing Power command,
And from thy Fruitful Emptinesses Hand,
Snatch Men, Beasts, Birds, Fire, Water, Air and Land.
Matter, the wicked'st Offspring of thy Race,
By Form assisted, flew from thy Embrace,
And Rebel Light obscured thy Reverend dusky Face.
With Form and Matter, Time and Place did join;
Body, thy Foe, with these did Leagues combine,
To spoil thy Peaceful Reign, and ruin all thy Line.
But Turn-Coat Time, assists the Foe in vain;
And bribed by Thee, destroys their short-lived Reign,
And to thy hungry Womb, drives back the Slaves again.
Thy Mysteries are hid from Laick Eyes,
And the Divine alone by warrant pries
Into thy Bosom, where thy Truth in private lies.
Yet this of thee, the Wise may truly say,
Thou from the Virtuous, nothing takes away,
And to be part of thee, the Wicked wisely Pray.
Great Negative! how vainly would the Wise
Enquire, Design, Distinguish, Teach, Devise,
Did not thou stand to point their Blind Philosophies.
Is, or is not, the Two great Ends of Fate,
Of True or False, the Subject of debate,
That perfects or destroys designs of State.
When they have wrackt the Politicians Breast,
Within thy Bosom most securely Rest,
Reduced to Thee are least, tho safe and best.
But Nothing, why does Something still permit,
That Sacred Monarchs should at Council sit
With Persons thought, at best, for Nothing fit?
Whilst weighty Something, modestly abstains
From Princes Courts, and from the States-mans brains;
And Nothing there like stately Nothing Reigns.
Nothing, that dwells with Fools, in grave disguise,
For whom they Reverend Forms and Shapes devise,
Lawn Sleeves, and Furrs, and Gowns, when they look Wise.
French Truth, Dutch Prowess, British Policy,
Hybernian Learning, Scotch Civility,
Spaniards Dispatch, Danes Wit are seen in Thee
The Great Man's gratitude to his best Friend,
Court' promises, Whores vows, toward thee, I bend
Flow Swift, Fly into Thee, and severs in the End.
FINIS.

