The Rich Fool: Set forth in an EXPOSITION ON THAT PARABLE

Luke 12.16, -- 22. And he spoke a Parable unto them, saying, The Ground of a
certain Rich man brought forth plentifully, etc. By Nehemiah Rogers, Minister
of the Gospel.

And being dead, He yet speaks.

Optimi Consiliarii, Mortui. Nihil cuiquam nisi Mors certum; tamen de eo
queruntur omnes, de quo uno nemo dec pitur. Senec. Vive pius, moriere tamen;
cole Sacra colentem
Mors tamen e Templis ad sua busta trahet.
LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate Hill. MDCLXII.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. TO The Right Worshipful and truly Religious Gentleman,
Anthony Luther, Esquire of Dodding-hurst in Essex.
A Happy Life in this World, and Glorious in the World to come.
Worthy Sir,
I Imagine it altogether frivolous to make any Apology either for publishing
this ensuing Treatise to the World or Dedicating of it to your self, since (to
my knowledge) had my Father lived some few Months longer, he would have done
(though more accurately) both the one and the other. And truly Sir, I should
have been very injurious both to the Manes of the Author (though Spirits are
impossible) and to Your self also, should I have detained from you that Legacy
which was bequeathed to You by my deceased Father. The Storks gratitude is
expressed at their coming into the World: let His Victime be accepted at his
going out.

In short, Sir; I cannot, without a deep resentment of my Infelicity accruing
by my Fathers Death, sufficiently acknowledge and delineate your super-abundant
favors conferred on him in his life, the least, of which might justly
challenge a Public Dedication; for all which (besides private Obligations to
us all) I commend these Sermons to your serious consideration, knowing that the
memory of the Author (which is still precious to you), and your own natural
propensity to goodness and clemency (in giving candid Interpretations of
dubious actions), will be inducements sufficiently prevalent to cause you to
excuse Errors not wilfully committed, and to cast a favorable Aspect upon this
somewhat uncompleated plece.

Acccept therefore (I beseech you) these (...), which (though but dead
Sacrifices, yet) I hope will be so far from putrefaction, that they will be
pleasing to the Nostrils both of God, and all good men. I conclude with that of
Ruth, 1. v. 8. The Lord deal kindly with you, as you have dealt with the dead
and with me, which is the hearty Vote and unfeigned Desire of him, who is and
ever shall be

Yours in my best Services. H. Rogers.
Kelvdon-Hatch, July 18. 1662.
To the Reader: And more particularly to the Congregation of Doddinghurst the
constant Auditors of these following Sermons; Peace be multiplied.
Courteous Reader,
AFter some more than ordinary, business, and fluctuating thoughts (occasioned
by my Father's Death), I have found so much leisure as to present to your View
this following Treatise, which has been so long expected and desired: And the
rather,

First, Because that those who have the World coming in upon them, and are in
danger of being Rich, may learn to be Rich in good Works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Secondly, That those who are of a mean Estate, being above the Foot of Scorn,
and below the Eye of Envy, may contentedly submit themselves to be dyeted by
the Almighty, who sees what a Proneness there is in us to surfeit upon
Superfluities.

Thirdly, That the Poor may not emulate the Rich, nor murmur at God's
Transactions, knowing that Wealth is no discriminating Sign, or infallible
Token, of God's Favor or our Goodness. All which are amply demonstrated and
eagerly pressed in this Parabolical Discourse of The Rich Fool.

It is very certain, that all the Faculties of the Soul are much deteriorated,
weakened, and decayed, since the Apostasy of the old Protoplast Adam; and that,
amongst them all, the Memorative does first Senescere: Therefore I cannot
imagine it altogether impertinent to stir you up by way of Remembrance, 2 Pet.
1.13. most of our Auditors being like unto Sievs, which in the Water are full,
but out of it, empty; so in the Church our Ears are full of Doctrine, but it is
suddenly scatttered in the Churchyard: Ne apicem tenemus, we carry little or
nothing home.

It is a Philosophical Question, Whether of the Senses, the Ear or the Eye, be
the better in it self, because that Grace is conveyed into ^he Soul by Hearing;
yet certainly, according to Nature, the Eye is most excellent, both for
celerity and perspicacity.

First, It is Sensus efficacissimus, the quickest of Apprehension, exercising
it self intromittendo, by bringing the Object home (according to Aristotle),
and so carries it to the heart with a more forcible Impression. No Sense does
so firmly imprint forms in the Imagination; and what it sees one day
intentively, it sees many days after.

Secondly, It is Sensus certissimus, the most certain of all the Senses. Vidi,
I saw it, is an evident Testimony; and, Seeing usually is Believing: Homines
semper amplius oculis quam auribus credunt, Men always will give more Credence
to what they see than to what they hear.

In a word, No Sense has such variety of Objects, and continual Business, as
the Eye: none so often put in Action; none so quick of Motion; none so
serviceable to Reason, and commodious, if it be well guided.

All which considered, I could do no less than set this Glass before you (which
has formerly been promised to you) which is free from all manner of Flattery
and Adulation; and which (being diligently and seriously perused) will make you
Vobis notos, known unto your selves.

I confess, it is not for me (being so nearly related) to extol the Author's
worth; and indeed were I ascertained of a (...) or Pythagorical Transmigration,
that his Divine Soul did strenuously operate in me, and actuate my duller Body;
were I blessed with the same Invention, Memory, and Elocution I would never
undertake it.

Nor shall I boast of this ensuing Treatise, Nemo gloriari nisi sua deb^t: The
whole World, and your selves, are competent Judges of his indefatigable pains in
Preaching, Expounding, Catechizing, and also Printing of several other Books;
among which, this (if it does not excel, yet it) may run in an equal and
paralleled Line. The Style is plain and familiar without affectation, the
matter profitable without exception; and I am sure, Non quaerit ager Medicum
cloquentem, sed sanantem.

Did you hunger after the Bread, or thirst after the Water of Life, you would
not say the Bread was too coorse, or the Well too deep, but be thankful to the
Sender and Bringer, the Donor and Dispenser of them both.

My desire is, what was intended for your good may be so accepted and
acknowleged, that I may not repent of the pains I took in transcribing the
Major part of it, and preparing it for the Press. Faults there are many, I wish
thou had none: Besides, if we may judge Ex pede Herculem, it wants about a
Sheet of it is Completion; yet let us in no wise call it altogether imperfect,
because God himself made a full Point or Period by the sudden Death of the
Author, and with his own hand inscribed

FINIS.
Thine, For thy Soul's advantage. H: Rogers.
Kelvdon-Hatch, July 18. 1662.
The Text. Luke 12.16, -- 22. Ver. 16 AND he spoke a Parable unto them, saying,
The Ground of a certain Rich man brought forth plentifully. Ver. 17. And he
thought within himself, saying What shall I do, because I have no room where to
bestow my fruits? Ver. 18. And he said, This will I do, I will pull down my
Barns and build greater, and there will I bestow all my Fruits and my Goods.
Ver. 19. And I will say to my Soul* Soul, Thou have much Goods laid up for many
years, take thine ease, Eat, drink, and be merry. Ver. 20. But God said unto
him, Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee: then, Whose
shall those things be that thou have provided? Ver. 21. So is he that lays up
Treasure for himself, and is not Rich toward God. A Summary of all the
principal Doctrines (both Literal and Mystical) Collected and Illustrated this
Commentary, upon the Parable of The Rich Fool. With the several Uses and
Applications thereof made.
Verse. 16. And He spoke a Parable unto them, saying, The Ground of a certain
Rich man brought forth plentifully.
Doct. 1. GOd has spoken to us by his own Son. Page 6. Use 1. To admire the
wonderful Love of God to us under the Gospel, above those who lived under the
Law. ibid. Use 2. Not to despise him that speaks from Heaven. 9 Use 3. To
honor him above those that lived in those days. ibid.
Doct. 2. A Sermon against Covetousness is of general Concern. 10 Reas.
Naturally every man i^ earthly minded. ibid. Use 1. To reprove those that think
it concerns them not. 13 Use 2. To require the Attention of every one. 15 Use
3. None to be offended with God's Ministers, for Pressing of it. 16
Doct. 3. Doctrines delivered may be illustrated by Similitudes and Parables.
18 Reas. No Teaching conveys the Truth unto us with more delight. 19 Use 1. Not
to censure Ministers for using helps of Art. ibid. Use 2. To bless God that we
are taught in so delightful and familiar a manner. 21
Doct. 4. Ministers ought so to speak as that they may be understood. ibid.
Reas. The End of Preaching is the People's profit. 22 Use 1. To reprove those
Ministers who have mouths but speak not, and who speak but say not. 23 Use 2.
To condemn the Itching ear: 25 And the Rustical ear of Hearers. 26
Doct. 5. A Worldly man is a worthless man. 30 Use 1. To discover the Folly of
those who think to gain Reputation by Riches. 31 Use 2. To tax those who bless
the Covetous in their hearts. 33 Use 3. To teach us to look up, and leave
grovelling here, like Swine upon the Earth. 34
Doct. 6. All men are not alike for outward Estate. 36 Reas. 1. God's Wisdom
appears in this inequality. 37 Reas. 3. Confusion would follow upon equality.
38 Use 1. To praise God for this provident hand of his. ibid. Use 2. To beware
of murmuring against God's Providence. ibid.
Doct. 7. A man may be very Wealthy, and yet very Wicked. 40 Reas. 1. God is a
bountiful and liberal Donor. 42 Reas. 2. Riches are not absolutely and
immutably good. 44 Reas. 3. They become hindrances of much good, and occasions
of much evil. 45 Use 1. Of information, That Man's Happiness lies not in
earthly enjoyments. 46 Use 2. To reprove those who take Riches for infallible
tokens of God's Love. 47 Use 3. To restrain us from an over-eager pursuit of
them. 50
Doct. 8. The Wicked have a Right to Earthly things, as well as the Godly. 51
Reas. 1. The Earth is the Lord's, and he gives it to the Children of Men. 52
Use 1. To overthrow the Anabaptistioal Community, and that of the Family of
Love. 53 Use 2. To convince that dangerous Tenet, of holding no Tenure but of
Grace. 54 Use 3. Of Admonition, To take heed how we incroach on other men's
Proprieties. 55
Doct. 9. The Earth is a fruitful Mother, 59 Reas. God ordained it to be
fruitful at the beginning. 60 Use 1. Of Information, Where to lay the Blame of
the Earth's Sterility. 61 Use 2. To acknowledge God's Goodness to us, in the
Earth's Increase. 62 Use 3. To instruct us that we are Earth, and stand in need
of the Rain of Heaven. 65
Doct. 10. Earthly Blessings are given to the Wicked out of a general way of
Providence. 65 Use 1. To learn to distinguish between Blessing and Blessing. 66
Use 2. To look to the Tenure of our Estates. 67
Doct. 11. Goods ill-gotten may prove pernicious to the Soul in their
Enjoyment. 68 Reas. The best things abused become evil to him that uses them,
much more things of an indifferent nature. 69 Use 1. To reprove the folly of
those who think there is no danger in Riches well-gotten. ibid. Use 2. Not only
to take care of what we have, but how we hold what we do enjoy. 70

Verse. 17. And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I
have no room where to bestow my fruits?
Doct. 1. A Worldly man is a great Accomptant. 72 Use 1. To persuade the Godly
to cast up their Accounts, as well as the Wicked do theirs. ibid. Use 2. To
persuade Worldlings to cast up their Accounts in good earnest. 73
Doct. 2. Sin of Thoughts are displeasing unto God as well as Sins of Act. 74
Reas. 1. God's Laws and Precepts are violated by them. ibid. Reas. 2. They were
the first Evils that were committed against God both by Angel and Man. 75 Reas.
3. From the Thoughts of the Heart proceeds the mischief of the Hand. ibid. Use
1. To blame the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, who hold that Thoughts are
venial. 76 Use 2. To convince the Opinion of free Thoughts. ibid. Use 3. To
cause us to repent of them, and be humbled before God for them. 79 Use 4. To
reform our Thoughts, otherwise our Lives cannot be reformed. 82 Motives, to
stir up our Care about our Thoughts. 83, 84, etc. Means, whereby our Thoughts
may be subdued. 91, 92. etc. Use 5. Comfort for those that sincerely make
Conscience of their thoughts. 101
Doct. 3. Wicked men proceed with good Advice and mature Deliberation about
their Actions. 115 Reas. They are Reasonable Creatures, and have a Discoursive
Faculty. ibid. Use 1. To reprove, not only the Worldling, but the Children of
the Light, who come short (in this business) of the Children of the World. 116
Use 2. To learn Wisdom of the Worldling. 117
Doct. 4. Self is a Worldly man's chiefest Counselor. 122 Reas. The way of a
Fool is right in his own Eyes. ibid. Use 1. To reprove the Folly of the
Self-conceited Person. 123 Use 2. To beware of harkening to that evil
Counselor, Self. 125 Motives, to take Advice. 117, 128
Doct. 5. What the Heart thinks, that it says. 128 Use 1. To make us careful
in thinking as well as in wording. 129 Use 2. To comfort us in our greatest
streights. ibid.
Doct. 6. Wealth has its Distractions as well as Want. 130 Reas. A Worldly man
is wedded to the World. 132 Use 1. To inform our Judgments concerning the
Estate of Worldly wicked men. 136 Use 2. To reprove those who distract
themselves with carking Cares about things of this life. 137 Use 3. To moderate
our Care about things of this World. 139 Motives to it; some respecting God,
some in reference to others, and some in relation to our selves. 140, 141, etc.
Rule threefold to be observed for the Cure of carking-Care. 144, 145, etc.
Doct. 7. The Rich man's Store proves many times his Sore. 151 Reas. 1. It may
happen through Man's Corruption. 153 Reas. 2. Through the Wickedness and Malice
of other men. ibid. Reas. 3. God in Judgment follows many a Rich man's
abundance with a Curse. 154 Use 1. Not to fret because of the prosperity of the
Wicked. 155 Use 2. To be contented with a mean Estate. ibid. Use 3. For Rich
men to learn how to abound (as well as the Poorer sort have been taught how to
want). 157
Doct. 8. Worldly Wealth cannot keep from Want. 159 Reas. 1. In regard of the
Nature of all Worldly things. 160 Reas. 2. In regard of the Nature of the
Disease (that (...)) which Worldly men are troubled withal. 162 Use 1. To
rectify our Judgments concerning Rich men and Riches. 163 Use 2. It should tend
to the reforming of our Practice. 167
Doct. 9. Want of room is a great Want to a Covetous Worldling. 170 Use. To
rebuke the covetous and ambitious Brood. 173 Doct. 10. A Worldly man may have
so much that he knows not where to bestow it. 176 Reas. There is a price put
into the hand of a Fool, to get Wisdom, but he has no Heart. ibid. Use. To
blame merciless men, who suffer so many to perish, when they have so much as
that they know not where to bestow it. 177

Verse. 17. And he said, This will I do; I will pull down my Brans, and build
greater, and there will I bestow all my Fruits and my Goods.
Doct. 1. The Wicked are presumptuously wilful. 180 Reas. 1. Pride naturally
abounds in the Heart of a Wicked man, so that good Counsel is rejected as
contemptible. 181 Reas. 2. They are wholly led by sensuality. ibid. Use 1. To
inform us whence it is, that Ministers do no more prevail with us in their
Callings; they having the Will of Man to deal with. ibid. Use 2. This
wilfulness in unregenerated Persons ought to be lamented. 182 Use 3. To teach
us to subdue our Wills, and bring them into Subjection. 188 Directions that we
may not be made miserable by our Wills. 191, etc.
Doct. 2. The Covetous pull down their own Barns with their own hands. 193 Use
1. To inform us what Vermin do most mischief our Barns. ibid. Use 2. It deserves
the serious thoughts of the wickedly-wealthy, who by indirect means increase
their Riches, fill their Barns, and enlarge their Buildings. 194
Doct. 3. Worldlings lavish out their Wealth to satisfy their Lusts. 194 Use 1.
To reprove the lavishing out of Wealth in these our days. 196 Use 2. To detect
the end they have in their wasteful Expenses, viz. Self. 198
Doct. 4. Worldlings are much delighted with variety and Change. ibid. Reas. 1.
The Appetite of the Will is common unto all. ibid. Reas. 2. In regard of a
loathing satiety of all Sublunary Contentments, which occasions this desire of
Change. 199 Use 1. The misery of Worldly men does hence appear, who find no
content in what they do enjoy. 200 Use 2. Not to be too confident in those who
are given to Change. 201
Doct. 5. Worldlings, though lavish in some things are sparing in others. ibid.
Use. To discover the misery of Worldlings in serving two Masters. 203
Doct. 6. The Barn is the Worldlings Bulwark. 204 Use 1. To show their folly
who venture all in one Bottom. 205 Use 2. To follow our Savior's Advice, and
lay up Treasure in Heaven. 207
Doct. 7. Great means breed great minds. 209 Reas. Some from without our
selves, others from Satan, but most from within out selves; as, Reas. 1. Man's
mind is leight through the Fall, and soon blown up with the Reed of Riches. 211
Reas. 2. They perceive that Riches rules all. ibid. Reas. 3. In regard of
carnal Self, which teaches men to turn the Glass, and so to see themselves
bigger, and others less, than indeed they are. ibid. Use 1. To charge those are
Rich, that they be not high-minded. 212 Antidotes against Pride. 213, 2^4, 215
Use 2. To bless God for his restraining Grace, if thou art Rich and humble. 215
Doct. 8. Worldlings prescribe what they have unto themselves. 216 Use. To
advise the wretched and ungrateful. 217

Verse. 19. And I will say to my Soul; Soul, Thou have much Goods laid up for
many years, Take thine ease; Eat, drink, and be merry.
Doct. 1. To hold a Conference with our Hearts is good. 218 Use 1. To reprove
those who come short of this Fool. 219 Use 2. To persuade us frequently to
confer with our Hearts and Souls. 220
Doct. 2. Much Love is pretended to the Soul but little or none is showed.
ibid. Reas. In regard of the lights of Conscience whereby we are convinced of
it is Immortality. 221 Use 1. To convince Worldlings how little their Souls are
beholding to them for their Love. 222 Use 2. To persuade us to Love, not in
Word and Tongue only, but in truth and in deed. 223 Arguments, to bestow the
Major part of our Love upon our Souls 223, 2^4
Doct. 3. Wealth is the Worldling's chiefest good. 225 Use 1. To admonish us to
free our selves from the false Opinion which Worldlings have of Riches. 227 Use
2. To advise us not to make them hurtful to us through our own default. 231
Doct. 4. Worldly men think they possess Riches, when they are possessed by
them. ibid. Reas. The Worldling is overcome of his Riches. 232 Use 1. To
rectify the Judgment of the Worldling. ibid. Use 2. To keep our Goods in
Subjection. 233
Doct. 5. Worldly men, think that riches consist in having much laid up and
not in the use thereof. 234 Reas. It is the right Use of any thing that makes
it good unto us. ibid. Use 1. Not to think our selves Rich, unless we have the
fruition of our Riches. ibid. Use 2. To teach us wisely to disperse our Riches
abroad, which otherwise will yield a loathsome Savor. 236
Doct. 6. Worldly men promise to themselves long Life, when they have not many
days to live. 237 Reas. 1. They foolishly imagine Time to be in their hand.
238 Reas. 2. They have a false Opinion of their Wealth. ibid. Use 1. To reprove
this great Evil under the Sun, in dreaming of a kind of Eternity. ibid. Use 2.
To persuade us to amend this Folly, and reckon, not upon many days but upon
few. 240
Doct. 7. Worldly prosperity breeds Sloth and carnal Security. 244 Reas. It
happens through the Abuse of man. ibid. Use. Of Caution, that Rich men would
beware of being rocked a-sleep in this Cradle of Security. ibid.
Doct. 8. A carnal Man delights in a voluptuous Life. 248 Reas. 1. The Soul is
made a Slave to Sense. 252 Reas. 2. They have no hope of a better Life. ibid.
Use 1. To condemn the Riot and Luxury of this Age. 254 Marks to know a
voluptuous person by. 257 Use 2. Not so suffer the delights and pleasures of
the World to prevail over us. 259 Motives to stir up this Care in us. 260 Rules
to direct us in the Use of God's Blessings. 275

Verse. 20. But God said unto him, Thou Fool, this Night thy Soul shall be
required of thee; then, Whose shall those things be which thou have provided?
Doct. 1. Purposes of Sinners are oftentimes disappointed by God. 283 Reas. The
way of Man is not in himself. 285 Use 1. To show the Presumption of those, who
open their Mouths against Heaven. 287 Use 2. To convince the Practical Atheist.
287 Use 3. To take God with us in all our purposes. ibid. Use 4. To encourage
the Godly against the rage of men. 289
Doct. 2. They that place their Happiness in Riches are egregious Fools. 291
Use 1. To convince the Worldling of his Folly. 297 Use 2. To take heed of
befooling our selves. 298
Doct. 3. God will have a saying to Sinners. 299 Doct. 4. God's Rods are
speaking Rods. 300 Reas. God's Works are a manifestation of his Will as well as
his Word. 301 Use 1. To discover unto us our stupidity. ibid. Use 2. To
persuade us to hear God speaking in his Judgments. 302
Doct. 5. A Night of Sorrow succeeds the Day of Pleasure to a Sinner. 305 Reas.
1. In respect of the Cause of Night. 306 Reas. 2. In regard of the effects that
are produced by Night, viz. Error and Terror. ibid. Use 1. Of consideration for
voluptuous Livers. 309 Use 2. To pray God that our flight be not in the Night.
310 Use 3. To comfort the Godly. 311
Doct. 6. Night comes suddenly upon a Sinner. 312 Reas. 1. God has called, and
Man has refused. 314 Reas. 2. He gives Evidence thereby of his implacable
Wrath against impenitent Sinners. ibid. Reas. 3. God has respect herein to the
good of others. ibid. Use 1. To inform our Judgments how far sudden Death may
lawfully be deprecated. 317 Use 2. To reprove those who run into ill Courses in
their Health, and allow unto themselves a time of lingering Sickness. 318 Use 3.
Instruction to the Good. 320
Doct. 7, The Loss of the Soul is the greatest Loss. 322 Reas. 1. In regard of
the Worth of it, which is unmatchable. 323 Reas. 2. The losing of it, is an
universal Loss. 324 Reas. 3. It is irrecoverable. 325 Use 1. To reprove those
who do little regard it. ibid. Use 2. To endeavor the safety and preservation
of it. 336
Doct. 8. The Soul of a Sinner is a due Debt, and must be paid. 340 Use 1. To
discover unto us the Carelessnesse of impenitent Sinners. 341 Use 2. To advise
us to make our Peace before we are arrested by Death. 341
Doct. 9. Sinners part with their Souls unwillingly. 342 Reas. When a Wicked
man dies, his Expectations perish. 344 Use 1. Information, how the Godly and
Wicked differ in Point of Dying. 345 Use 2. As God has made us unlike in the
Issues of Death, let us be careful that we be unlike them in the way to it. 351
Means to be used. 352, etc.
Doct. 10. The Soul of Man remains still in Being, after its departure out of
the Body. 358 Reas. 1. Because God is just. 360 Reas. 2. If the Soul dyed,
Religion were of no Effect. ibid. Use 1. The Knowledge of this Point, and Belief
of it, is a means to make a man a good Christian. 361 Use 2. The Assurance of
this will comfort us at the hour of Death. 364 Use 3. Be we exhorted hence, to
be most careful of our Souls. ibid.
Doct. 11. Worldly things are Movables. 365 Reas. The World it self is no
other than a flitting Island. 370 Use 1. Not to be deluded by Names and Titles.
ibid. Use 2. To set our hearts upon things truly immovable. 371
Doct. 12. The things of this life are ours but during life. 372 Reas. Poverty
is the Porter of a man's Life. ibid. Use 1. To discover their blindness, who
deprive themselves of the comfortable Use of the things of this Life. 373 Use
2. To advise us rightly to use those things which are truly Ours. 374
Doct. 13. None knows who shall enjoy what the Worldling provides. 376 Reas.
It is not ours to dispose of. ibid. Use. To reprove the Worldly Miser. ibid.

Verse. 21. So is he that lays up Treasure for himself, and is not Rich
toward God.
Doct. 1. Doctrine and Use is the best Method of Preaching. 378 Use 1. Why then
should any be offended at this Method. 379 Use 2. Ministers should be faithful
in this part of their Ministerial Function. ibid. Use 3. To bless God for this
plain and profitable Method. 380
Doct. 2. We must not be Personal in applying of our Doctrines to our
Auditory. 382 Use 1. To blame are those who turn their Sermons into
Philippicks, and so rather act the part of a Betrayer than of a Rebuker. 384
Use 2. To blame are those Auditors who do not apply or mis-apply, because they
are not named. ibid.
Doct. 3. Ministers are to reprove Sin impartially. 385 Use. To blame them who
can see Sin in one, and overlook it in another. ibid.
Doct. 4. The Worlding is a Treasurer, and the World is his Treasure. 387 Doct.
5. The Covetous are for themselves altogether. 390 Reas. They are full of
Self-Love. ibid. Use 1. To take heed how we trust a Worldling too far. ibid.
Use 2. To admonish all to mind the Welfare and good of others as well as they
do their own. 391
Doct. 6. A good man is a Rich man. 392 Use 1. It makes against them who are of
Opinion, that Christianity is the way to Beggary. 393 Use 2. Of Trial, whether
we are truly Rich or no. 394 Use 3. To learn to know where are true Riches. 396
Means to obtain true Riches. 400 Use 4. Comfort to the Godly, though they have
not a Ragg to their back. 401
Doct. 7. Folly may be argued by Worldliness. 402 Reas. Such have rejected the
Word of God, and cast off his fear. 403 Use 1. Not to be offended if the whole
World may be drawn within the Compass of a Fool's Cap. 403 Use 2. Take heed how
we hearken to their Counsel, or regard their Censure. 406 Use 3. To receive
Instruction rather than Silver, and to get Knowledge rather than Gold. 407
Doct. 8. Worldly Riches, immoderately loved, expose a Man to God's heavy
Wrath. 408 Reas. It is a Breach of God's Law, and cannot escape his Curse. 409
Use 1. To inform our Judgment concerning the World, and Worldly things. 414 Use
2. To persuade Worldlings to spend some serious Thoughts upon their present
condition. 415

Charitable Reader,
EXpect nothing absolutely complete and perfect under the Sun; if thou do,
thou art not acquainted with thine own Erraticall Actions. Books have their
blemishes as well as men; and in this thou may find these following (being
the most material) Errors.

Page. Line. Error. Correction. 50 8 overe ager over-eager 52 1 put you mind
put you in mind 57 28 No^ (...) neither hurt us; have take ought etc. Neither
have hurt us; neither have taken ought etc. 65 18 Herbs meet, for the Dresser
the Comma being mis-placed. Herbs meet for the Dresser, the Comma being
mis-placed. 68 19 Is Danger Is no danger. 71 32 every one of them; every one of
them are thoughts; 70 Marg. Ille amarus est. Ille avarus est. 72 27 Country
House Counting House 76 8 of Pin Of Sin 121 8 take he take heed i^^d. 28 denied
only; the Colon being mis-placed. denied; only etc. the Colon being mis-placed.
141 12 Murtherings cares Murdering cares 159 19 Outward want Inward want 161 4
deliated, dilated, 195 13 a rich Churl on, the Comma mis-placed. a rich
Churl, one the Comma mis-placed. 199 10 not obtain it but obtain it 205 37
Righteousness righteous 209 10 be spoken being spoken 223 17 within Devotion
with thin Devotion 243 7 Prosopaia Prosopopaia 258 26 Vogue Vote 259 24
Enamples Examples 262 13 touch the Palate touch of the Palate 264 32 laden
wits laeaden wits 321 8 and let us, and let us flee, 344 3 or a Sinner of a
Sinner 366 1 as the Soul is as the Sail is 392 Marg. in perpetum in perpetuum
397 12 are necessary are not neccessary

Vale.
THE PARABLE OF THE Rich Fool.
LUKE 12.16, -- 22. And he spoke a Parable unto them, saying, The Ground of a
certain rich man brought forth plentifully, etc.


THis Parable was propounded to a very great Audience, as appears, ver. 1. When
there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of People, he began to
say unto his Disciples. And the occasion of propounding it unto that multitude,
was this;

Two Brethren were at Variance about their Fathers Lands: The Occasion. Ver. 13.
one (as it seems) who had the Possession would have all, and part with
nothing, or very little, to the other. He, who thought himself wronged, (but
whether he were or no, is very questionable) applies himself unto our Savior,
whom he conceived to be a wise and understanding man, entreating him to compose
and take up that difference which was betwixt them, that an equal division
being made, Lawsuits might be stayed, and expense of money spared, which
otherwise in all likelihood could not be avoided.

An honest motion in it self, and commendable, had it been as seasonable. 1
Cor. 6*4 5.
St. Paul was of the Opinion, That it is better to refer differences concerning
the things of this Life to the Judgment of wise and understanding men than to
the Lawyer; for if the Tide of Contention be up, those stirring Winds do
oftentimes make the Waves more rough and raging.

But his mind at this time should have been taken up with better matters.
Christ was discoursing on matters of a higher nature; and was it fit that he
who came to hear the Word preached, should have his heart run after worldly
things? and possessed with carnal thoughts? Much more unfitting was it, and
unbeseeming him, to take the Liberty to interrupt our Savior, whilst he was
Preaching to the People, with so bold and saucy a Request as this, Master,
Speak to my Brother that he divide the Inheritance with me.



The Scope. And this he illustrates by this (Parabolical Narration* There was a
very Rich man, the richest in the Country; for the whole Country was his, and
that Country did bear and bring forth unto him a very great Crop of Corn,
insomuch that this Rich man did take great care where to bestow it; he enters
into a Consultation with himself, what to do in that Case, and thus determines,
To pull down his old Barns, and build others far more large and spacious, and
in them he will bestow his Goods for their security; which being done, he sits
down and sings a Lullaby to his own Soul, (as if he were) sufficiently provided
for many years after. But the Issue was, that the same very Night wherein he
did thus solace himself, his Soul was taken from him, and he suddenly snatched
away from the Fruition of all those worldly things, and they bestowed on those
that would give him small thanks for them. Lo, even such a Fool as this Rich
man was, and so sure of the revenging hand of God, is that man, whosoever he
be, that sets his heart upon earthly Riches, having no care of procuring true
Grace, which only is able to enrich his Soul, and make him happy. Now, that we
may not lose our selves for want of Method, let us come to the Parts.

The Parts. In this Parable we have considerable; The Introduction or Preface
to it: and the Narration or Body of it.

The Introduction in these words, He spoke a Parable unto them, saying, Ver.
16. Where we have, 1. The Persons. 2. The Doctrine to take notice of.

The Persons are, speaking, and spoken unto; speaking [He], spoken unto [them];
He spoke unto them.

The kind of Doctrine: He spoke a Parable, saying: Where 1. The Matter. 2. The
Manner, is observable. The Matter, A Parable: The Manner of Delivery, He spoke,
saying.

The Narration follows, Ver. 16, -- 22. The Ground of a certain Rich man, etc.
Where we have the (...) or Part propounding, to Ver. 21. and the (...) or Part
applying, Ver. 21.

In the propounding Parts we have the Person spoken of, and the Relation that
is made of him.

The Person is set forth, 1. By his Titles, Common, A certain man; proper, A
Rich man. 2. By his Possessions, or outward Estate, he had Ground which brought
forth plentifully. And there we have, First the Interest or Propriety that he
had, The Land was His. 2. The Fertility of the Soil, It brought forth Fruit
plentifully. He was a landed Man, and had a great Crop, a whole Region of Corn,
Ver. 16.

That which is related of him, follows Ver. 17, etc. and it respects his Life,
Ver. 17, -- 20. and Death, Ver. 20. In the former we have his Comic, in the
latter his Tragic parr.

In his Lifetime we find him, First, casting up of his Estate, Ver. 17, 18.
And he thought within himself, saying, etc. Secondly, disposing of Himself and
Goods, And I will say unto my Soul, etc. Ver. 19.

In the former we have him; First, Consulting, He thought within himself,
saying, etc. In which Consultation is made known unto us, his Thoughts and
Cogitations which were very secret; for, He thought within himself, and was
much perplexed, What shall I do? And then the Ground or Reason of that Anxiety
of Spirit, Because I have no room where to bestow my fruits; intimating unto us
both his Indigence, in that he wanted Room; and his Abundance, for his Crop was
so great that he knew not where to lay it.

Secondly, We have him resolving and determining of the Course which he would
take, Ver. 18. And he said, This will I do, etc. This his Determination is
generally notified, This I will do. And more particularly specified, I will
pull down my Barns, etc. expressing his Method, which was first to undo and
then to do, he would pull down and then build bigger. And then his Meaning,
There will I bestow all my Fruits and my Goods, discovering thereby much
Confidence in the Creature, he promises all to the Barns; and Pride in
himself, which appears by the manner of his speaking, All my Fruits and my
Goods.

Thus having cast up his Estate, he proceeds to dispose of his Goods by
Will-Paroll; And I will say to my Soul; Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years, etc. Ver. 19. I will say, there is the Preface; Soul, there is the
Solace; so that this Will is Prefaced with a Soliloquium* and Perfected with a
Stulti-loquium; and there we may take notice,

1. Of the Legated* Soul. 2. Of the Legacy, I will say, Soul, thou have* etc.
Where,

First, The Matter bequeathed, which was both Stock and Store.

His Stock: for Quality, [Goods]; for Security, [laid up].

His Store: much Goods, for many years; there, the Quantity, much; the
Continuance, many years.

The Manner of drawing up his Will, I will say, Soul take thine ease. There,

A Gratification of his Soul; and

A Ratification of his Will, I will say to my Soul, Soul take thine ease, Eat,
drink, and be merry; manifesting therein his Security and Sensuality, as in the
Enlargement of these things we shall hereafter more largely show you.

His Death and Tragic part, But God said unto him, Thou Fool, this Night thy
Soul shall be required of thee, etc. Ver. 20. And here we find, 1. His Wit
questioned; 2. His Will disapproved and disanulled.

His Wit, that is questioned; But God said unto him, Thou Fool: Where we see,
1. Who questions him, God, who best might. 2. How he questions him, He said
unto him, Thou Fool: Plainly and Positively.

His Will is disapproved; This Night thy Soul shall be required of thee. Where
we have,

First, A Revocation of his Gift given to his Soul. This Night, thy Soul; there
the Time is fixed, it shall be this Night, before the Morning, required of
thee; noting both the Sadness and the Suddenness of the Judgment. Repetunt,
they shall fetch it away; who, we are not told, but we may imagine, and that is
the means whereby it shall be effected; Where, 1. The Judgment inflicted. 2.
The Manner of it.

Secondly, An Administration granted to others of his Goods. Then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? Where we have the Goods specified
which shall be administered upon, Those things which thou have provided for the
satisfying of thy Soul. And the Parties to whom the Administration is granted;
Whose shall those things be? As if he should say, They shall enjoy them whom
thou little think of.

The Apodosis, or Applying Part of the Parable, follows, Ver. 21. So is he that
lays up Treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God. Where consider we,
First, The Persons whom this Parablc does especially concern: Secondly, Their
Condition.

The Persons are Indefinitely propounded, [He] be he what he will be. And then
more Particularly described, and that Affirmatively, showing what they are,
they are rich in themselves: And then Negatively, showing what they are not,
they are not rich toward God.

The Condition and State of such men is set forth; First, As it is for the
present, which is expressed: So it is, that is, as it was with that Fool before
spoken of. Secondly, As it shall be for the future, even so as that Man went
out of the World with a lost Name, and a lost Soul; so shall he: And these are
the Parts and Branches of this Parable; of which we shall, God assisting, speak
in Order: We begin with the Preface or Introduction, wherein we shall be brief.

Text. And he spoke a Parable unto them, saying]

The Person propounding this Parable was Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as is
evident from the words precedent in the beginning of the Chapter: So that which
the Author to the Hebrews tells us is a Truth,

God has spoken unto us in these last times by his own Son. Heb. 1.2.
And so fulfilled that Promise long since made of raising up a Prophet amongst
our selves, whom we are to hear, Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18. Act. 3.22. Mat. 17.5.
confirmed Act. 4.18, 19. and by that Parable, Mat. 21.33, -- 39. And no better
Reason can be rendered of this than that of our Savior, Mat. 11.25, 26.

Heb. 1.1, 2. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times
past unto the Fathers, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. In
the old time God revealed his mind to our Forefathers, (...), u^ si dicas,
mul^ipartue. Estins. D^. Jones Comment. in loc.
multis vicibus, as Beza renders the words, at many or sundry times, as our
Translation has it is It was divided into many parts, and given them by
piecemeal, how a part and then a part; it was parcelled out unto them, as the
Capacity of People in sundry times did require. One part they had in Adam's
time, another in Noah's; one in Abraham's time, another in Moses time; one part
in David's time, another in the Prophets: Isay had one part of it revealed
concerning Christ's Conception and Birth: Jonah another, concerning his
Resurrection: Daniel another, of his coming to Judgment. But we have the
Doctrine of Salvation at one Lump, propounded to us in one whole and entire
Sum: St. Jude speaking of the Christian Faith, says, that it was once given to
the Saints; once for all, so perfectly, that we need not another Gospel. The
whole Magazine of God Almighty is now opened unto us which was not unto them;
the Lord was in the way only of revealing his whole mind to them before Christ
came, letting forth Light by little and little, before the Sun of
Righteousness, Jesus Christ, arose with Healing under his Wings.

And as he spoke to them at sundry times, so in diverse manners or forms; either
by Angels, as he spoke to Abraham; (...), Multiformiter.
or by Vision, as he made known his mind to Ezekiel; or by Dreams, as to
Samuel; or by Urim and Thummim, as to the Priest; or by Signs from Heaven, by
Types and shadowing Ceremonies, and such like. But the Doctrine of Salvation is
taught after one sort, even by the Preaching of the Gospel, which is the Power
of Salvation to every one that believes; which one manner of speaking far
surpasses all those manners of speaking, whereby God spoke to them, and
works more powerfully, and pierces into the heart of Man more deeply than
any other manner of Persuasion, yea though one should rise from the dead and
speak to us.

Then he spoke only to the Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their Posterity;
to some few, and but one Nation. He showed his word unto Jacob, his Statutes
and his Judgments unto Israel; He has not dealt so with any Nation, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 147.19, 20. and as for his Judgments, they have not known them.
But now in these last days, God by his Son has spoken to all indefinitely, to
Jew and Gentile, to Male and Female, to bond and free, all being one in Christ,
Gal. 3.28. and through Faith has one entrance unto the Throne of Grace. So
that, as one speaks upon that Text, We need not say, Now O Lord, remember
David and the Covenant made with Abraham; but, O Lord, remember me, and the
Covenant which thou have made with my Father's House: For, unto all, both those
that are nigh, and those that are far off, there is but one Covenant in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2.13, 17.

Lastly, Then God spoke to the Fathers by the Patriarchs and Prophets; that is,
the continual Succession of the Prophets in all Ages, not by one alone but by
all; from the beginning God used the Ministry of the Patriarchs to instruct
their Families, but that did not satisfy him. By the Ministry of Moses he
instructed his People under the Law; yet that did not content him* He used the
Ministry of Priests and Prophets, yea, of one greater than a Prophet, John the
Baptist, to teach and instruct his Church; yet he rested not therewith
satisfied: But last of all, he sent his Son, that eternal Word which is God,
whom he has made Heir of all things, by whom also he made the World. Rare and
singular men were those by whom God instructed and taught his Church in elder
times; yet not worthy so be named with Christ, by whom he speaks unto us:
They were men, Christ is God and Man; they had excellent Gifts of Wisdom and
Knowledge, yet all their Wisdom and Knowledge was but borrowed; Christ was wise
of himself, the Fountain of all Wisdom and Knowledge, and of his fullness we
receive Grace for Grace: They were mortal, and saw Corruption; nor was any
Prophet, when he was taken away by Death, able to give Grace to others that
should come after, or of his fullness to make other learned in the Mysteries of
Salvation; but Christ abides for ever, he still lives to appoint us Teachers,
and of his fullness he gives all others their continual increase of Grace: By
all which you see how wonderfully God has honored us above those who lived in
the time of the Law: Many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things
which we see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which we hear,
and have not heard them, Luke 10.24. The Gospel is a Mystery, and a great
Mystery too, which was hidden in the secret Closet of God's own Breast; not
possible to enter into the heart of Man, till Christ brought it out of the
Bosom of his Father and discovered it unto Mankind. Nor could Men or Angels do
that: he only had Power to open the Book, who was both God and Man in Union; by
virtue of which Union those divine Truths and heavenly Mysteries which were,
Joh. 1 18. Mat. 1^.27.
and could live no where but in the Divine Nature, were drawn out of the depth
of it into the Humane, and in that Nature discovered unto us. No spiritual
Discovery of those high Mysteries could be, or can be, but in Christ and by
Christ, because in him alone is the Divine and Humane Nature united.

Now the greater Love that God has showed us, Mat. 21.33, 41.
the soarer Vengeance in case of Contempt and Disobedience. See then that you
despise not him that speaks from Heaven, says the Apostle Heb. 12.25. For if
they escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we
escape if we turn from him that speaks from Heaven to us. He that despised
Moses Law dyed without Mercy, under two or three Witnesses (that is, being
Legally convicted), Heb. 10.28. now of how much soarer Punishment shall he be
worthy, who despises the Gospel whereof the Son of God is the Minister? Christ
is far greater than Moses; in despising him, they did but despise the Servant;
in despising Christ, you despise the Son: (...), Look to it therefore, says
the Apostle, that you do it not; for it is as much as your Souls are worth.

And yet how little is God's Speaking to us by this his Son regarded? Many of
the Pharisees knew him to be the Son of God; This is the Heir (say they), come
let us kill him Mat. 21.38. They were not altogether ignorant that he was the
Lord of Life whom they slew. Were Christ now living upon the Earth, Do you not
think that there are some so maliciously bent against the Gospel and the
sincere Preaching of it, as that they could find in their hearts to kill Christ
himself? You (it may be) will say, as they did who heard Christ propounding
that Parable unto them, and foretelling them of that Cruelty which they would
show in putting him to Death, God forbid Luke 20.16. We cannot persuade men
that their hearts are half so bad, or their ways so dangerous, as Preachers
would make them; but when men will persecute the Ministers of the Gospel for
their Fidelity in dispensing of the Word, and murder the Servants, they will
never stick to murder the Master; he that hears you hears me, says Christ,
Mat. 10.40
and he that despises you despises me, etc. So they who persecute them,
imprison them, put them to death, as Herod did John Baptist, Jol. 13.20.
will not spare Christ himself if they had Power.

Lastly, If God have so honored us that live in the time of the Gospel, above
them in the time of the Law; Should it not be our care to honor him, love him,
fear him, and obey him, above those who lived in those days? He spoke to them
in old time, in the eldest Age of the World, he speaks to us in a new time,
when all things are made new by Christ. It was said to them old, but I say unto
you, says our Savior Math. 5.21, 27. Oh, how happy were it for us if we did
not come far behind them in Faith, Obedience, etc. They believe, and had less
means than we; they obeyed, yet had less Encouragements than we. The Lord
pardon our failings, and quicken us to holy Duties! But thus much of the Person
speaking: now of the Persons spoken unto, (...)

Text. Unto them.]

Not to the Disciples alone, as Ver. 1. but to the whole Multitude: One of the
Company occasioned the Text, Take heed and beware of Covetousness; but all the
rest heard the Sermon, He said to them, amplifying, enlarging, and applying his
Doctrine to all and every one. You may learn from hence,



We need not spend time in the further Proof of this. It was a very great
Audience that Christ now spoke unto, as appears Ver. 1. and a mixed Company; it
was of all sorts and conditions, rich and poor, old and young, men and women;
and he speaks to them all, one as well as another; and applies his Doctrine, to
every one as well as any one, as we find in the Close of the Parable, as
hereafter you shall hear more fully. Those Dehortations given in Scripture
against Worldliness and Earthly-mindedness are of general Concernment, they
concern all professed Christians, and are not to be restrained to any one Rank
or Calling, Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5. Heb. 13.5. Jam. 4.4. 1 John 2.15.

Joh. 3.31. 1 Cor. 15.47. Not only dusty and slimy, but like Ducklings we have
always our Bills in the Mud; and so soon as ever we can understand, we begin
to grovel in the Earth (as we see it experimentally in little Children: And in
so doing, we seem wilfully to draw on our selves that Curse which God never laid
upon us. It was the Serpent's Doom to crawl on her Belly and eat Dust; yet,
that we may have Earth for our Food, we crawl on all four, if not in Body yet
in Desire, Amb. Hexam. l. 6. c. 3
as Ambrose speaks on this Subject.

Nor are we only addicted to it, but generally infected with it: Covetousness
(says one) is an Epidemical Disease, an universal Plague, from which no sort
is free: And, Says not the Scripture the same also? From the least of them
even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to Covetousness. Jer. 6.13.
Some Sins are peculiar to some Vocations and Callings; as, for the Judge to
pervert Judgment for Fear, Favor, or Reward: The Minister to sooth up men in
their Sins, and to forbear Reproof for fear of Man's Face, etc. Other, to some
Estates and Condition; as, for the Rich to oppress the Poor, and the Poor to
envy the Rich, and to be discontented with their Estates: And other-some, to
men's Complexions and natural Constitutions, as to the Melancholy, Choleric,
etc. But this Poison has infected all Callings and Conditions, Sorts and
Rancks of Persons; Magistrates, Ministers, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Citizens, and
Countrymen; Rich and Poor, Old and Young, Male and Female. Therefore we may
conclude, It is a Doctrine of great concernment to dehort you from this Sin of
Worldliness and Covetousness.

Mat. 19.27 Act. 20.33.
We have forsaken all and followed thee, said Peter: I have coveted no man's
Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel, says Paul. Luther sometimes said, that he
never found himself tempted to Covetousness; and his very Adversaries, Germana
illa Bestia non curat Aurum.
who would have tempted him with Gold, testified for him, that he cared not for
it. Besides, many Philosophers and Heathens Natural and Civil Persons, have
contemned Riches; How then can it be said that all are infected with that Vice?



And yet though it be in all, yet it is not in the like manner, nor in the like
degree in all. In the wicked Worldling it rules and reigns, he is a Servant and
Slave to it; In some of the wicked it is the chief Lord and Sovereign, bearing
Rule and commanding for it self; many other Vices are in them, but that is the
Capital Vice, other Vices are subservient to it; his Pride and his unjust
Practices, all are but Servants to this his Covetousness. Thus this Rich Fool
the Parable speaks of, prided himself in his great Estate, and made it his
Glory; His Pride issued from the great Crop that he had, and this does
apparently denominate a man to be a Worldling.

Sometimes it is subservient, being under the Command and Service of some other
Lust, like an under-Officer; and is (as one terms it) the Purveyor or Taker for
Ambition, Prodigality, Idleness, without the Service of which their Lusts could
not be maintained. But whether it be in a wicked man whole Master or
Quartermaster, it rules in him and brings him into Bondage: Nor is there a
wicked man under Heaven, but either in Predominancy or Subserviency he is a
Slave to the World; and albeit there may be restraining Grace in him to keep
him from exorbitancy, yet Covetousness retains it is own Nature still, as a Lion
does the Nature of a Lion although he be chained.

In a godly Christian, albeit there be a natural propensity remaining in him
toward worldly and earthly things, yet the Love of the World is not such as
that it does bear sway in his heart, (albeit it may discover it self in some
Acts more or less toward predominancy.) It is a bad Tenant, Mr. Wheatly's
Sermon on Covetousness.
often warned to be gone (says a Reverend Divine) but will not out; yet it is
resisted, opposed, complained of, and has many a Suit commenced against it in
the Court of Heaven for Usurpation. In a word, some give this Vice Physic, but
no Sustenance; thus does the Godly: Others give it Sustenance but no Physic,
thus do the Wicked. One would destroy it, these it molests but kills not; The
other maintain it, these it kills but molests not. Thus it is in all, but yet
in a different State and Degree: As for that Saying of Luther beforementioned,
it is probable that his meaning was, That of all Sins he found himself least
addicted to that of Covetousness, (if otherwise, it may be questioned, whether
it were advisedly spoken;) if so, it were to be wished (says a learned Doctor
of our own) that there were more Lutherans in that Point than there are. Dr.
Bois in his Remains on Hab. 2.9.


The Soul of the Sluggard lusts (says Solomon) and has nothing. Prove. 13.4.
They have strong Affections to Wealth and Riches, and all things else which are
in Request, and Estimation with men; but yet they are poor enough, they are
kept fasting from Wealth albeit they covet it, and that evermore greedilp, as
the wise man has it Prove. 21.26. Such men are most desperately covetous; for,
in that their Sloth will not suffer them to take the pains so get it, therefore
their Lusts drive them to hunt and seek for it in the ways of Couzenage and
Villainy. The best Be in the Hive is not more desirous of Honey than the idle
Drone. Confine not thou this Sin to rich men's Houses; it may find Harbor under
the Roof of thy thatcht and smoaky Cottage: A barren Turf may yield as much
smoother as the Oaken Logg; and a rotten piece of Timber as much Saw-dust, yea
more than a sounder piece: Thou may be earthly-minded, albeit thou have none
of it in thy Possession.

The Prodigal and Unthrift, that spends wastfully upon his Lusts, he thinks
himself shot-free and unconcerned in this Story; for all the World (says he)
knows that I am far enough from Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness; he has
cast away many of those Chips which the Covetous adore, in one Night, at one
Cast with Bones, and indeed spent himself into Poverty; but how? by Pride and
Luxury. And will this prove you to be a Freeman? Sometimes indeed Covetousness
preys upon Unthriftiness, God giving one Sin leave to lash another to Death;
but how often do they meet together in the same Person, and beget the one the
other? Some scrape to keep and look upon; others, so scatter and mispend: Some
desire Riches that they may have them; others are covetous that they may
maintain prodigal Expenses with them. So St. James tells us, You covet and
lust, that you may consume upon your pleasures, Jam. 4.2, 3. Men as well as
Women being with Child of Riot and Excess in Diet and Apparel, and other
worldly Vanities, long for Riches to nourish the Child they go withal; without
which (says one) they are in danger to cast their Calf. Robins. Essay of
Liberality Obs. 31.
It was said of Catiline, that he was prodigal of his own and covetous of other
men's; so the greatest Mispenders for the most part are constrained to be as
great Mis-getters, to feed one Vice by another; and their end is this commonly,
A young Spend-thrift, an old Cheater: Little Cause then have such to laugh in
their Sleeve upon the hearing of this Doctrine; for if thou had the Grace to
examine thine own heart, thou would find this wicked Vice of Covetousness to
be as great a Doer in thy Soul inwardly, and as busy in thy Carriage outwardly,
as in theirs whom with greatest Scorn thou termest, Miserable Misers.

Rich men, they are apt to think that they are no such manner of Persons as
this Rich Fool was; their Crops are not so great, nor their Barns so small, but
they know well enough what to do with that they have, and how to dispose of it
had they more: And yet you may be worldly and Covetous, and have your hearts
upon the Earth, and so this Doctrine concerns you. Avarice breeds with Wealth,
as they say of Toads that have been found in the midst of great Stones; The
having of much increases commonly a desire of having more, as I shall
hereafter show you: In short, let not any present think that what is delivered,
or that shall be delivered, concerning this Vice of Worldliness and
Earthly-mindedness, concerns not them; Christ spoke to all that heard him, and
in his Name I speak to all you that hear me this day; for it much concerns you.

You that are young, hear it; for, albeit it may be thought that this Vice is
not so proper to Youth; yet Prodigality is, and Worldliness must be,
subservient to it, as you have heard. Kites and other ravenous Birds are ever
watching for a Prey, and yet remain still Cartion-like; the Reason is, for that
they convert the greatest of their Nourishment into long Feathers. So is it
with Youth, their Earnings and their Wages turn (if they be Servants) into
Points and Laces; and then they covet still for greater Wages, a better place
for profit: If not Servants, yet there is not enough (they think) to maintain
the Lusts of Youth; Preston on Covetousness. p. 47.
It is therefore a seasonable Doctrine for you to attend unto,

Old men attend you hereunto; for this is especially the Sin of Old Age;
Worldliness loves to dwell in an old ruinous Cottage, and when all other Vices
are old, than Couetousness waxes young. Hall. Med. Cent. 3.^ Med. 7 4.
Lop off all the Branches from a Tree but one, and that one will shoot up the
faster; for the Nourishment that should seed the rest, runs into that. Many
other Vices are cut off by Age, but the Strength of Corruption augments this:
And Old Age seeing it is likely to lose the World, spits on the hand and takes
better hold. Therefore this Doctrine calls on you for Attention.

But what have Women to do to attend? As much as Men for, as they are more
Impotent, so usually their Affections are more inordinate to earthly things:
Therefore I speak to all.

Psa. 49.12.
and call upon you with the words of the Psalmist, Hear this all ye People, and
give Ear all ye Inhabitants of the World; both low and high, rich and poor
together, hear what our Savior says of this Rich man, what he did, and what
he said to his own Soul, out of a Conceit of his great Abundance, and what was
the Issue of it, and how our Savior applies it. Hear, so as to hear for thy
self; not to accuse another nor judge another, but to accuse thy self and judge
thy self for it, and to be humbled under a sight and sense of thy own Guilt;
and what thou do in this way, do it conscienciously as in the presence of
God, and not as you stand with the Judgment of men by outward appearance.
Worldliness and Covetousness is a sly and subtle Sin, hardly discerned by
every man, neither in himself nor others: All Vices can dress themselves in the
habit of Virtue; Pride shall be Handsomness; Drunkenness, Good-Fellowship;
Riotousness, Liberality; and Covetousness comes not behind any of them all, in
her Disguises: That shall be Frugality and Good-Husbandry in providing for
Posterity; it has more Pleas than any other Sin in the World has, more
Colors put upon it, more Cloaks to cover it. The discovery whereof I shall (I
hope) make unto you in our opening of the Parable. There is indeed a sordid
base Covetousness in many men of this World, which is written as it were in
great Characters in their forehead, so that he who runs may read it in every
Act they do; in their whole course and carriage they discover it, and yet they
cannot endure to be accounted worldly and covetous; and therefore that Vice is
aptly resembled to the Plague, which, if a man's House be infected with, yet he
desires to keep it close and have it accounted any other Disease than that; but
we should deal more ingenuously with God and our own Souls, and finding the
Marks and Tokens to be upon us (which, what they are, you may hereafter hear)
beg heartily, that he would have Mercy on us, and incline our hearts unto his
Testimonies and not to Covetousness: Psalm. 119.36.
Questionless Christ would not have spoken thus to all, both to Disciples and
others, if all were not subject unto it; and if we be subject to it, what can
we do less then than take notice of the sinful Corruption of our Nature and be
humbled for it.

Austine seemed to be at a Nonplus once, about the choice of his Text, not
knowing what Text to choose or what subject to preach upon; For when I did
behold (says he) the Lovers of the World, I knew not how to preach to them;
for the Rich disdained what I said, and the Poor had rather have Bread than
Manna that I brought. Such is the humor of People in this our Age: Neh. 8.10.
Mat. 25.27.
The Epicure likes that Text well, Go eat of the Fat and drink of the Sweet:
The Usurer likes that better, Thou ought to have put my Money out to the
Exchangers, etc. The Lawyer would willingly hear that Text pressed, 1 Timothy 1.8.
1 Cor. 6.7.
The Law is good, if a man use it lawfully: The Poor Client, that, There is
utterly a fault amongst you, that you go to Law one with another: The Rich
Creditor makes choice of that Text, Owe no man any thing but Love. Romans 13.8
Luke. 6.35
And the Poor Debtor, that, Lend, looking for nothing again. Some would have
long Texts: Some would have short: In the very choice of our Text we can hardly
please; but die Sermon made upon that Text is usually more offensive; great
fault shall be found with Matter or Form: Sometimes the Matter is too high, and
at other times too low; Some would have us climb up the Mountains, or launch
out into the deeps of Election, Reprobation, Free Will, etc. Others advise to
keep below in the Valley, and beat constantly upon those Highway Points (as
they please to term them) of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, which indeed are
most necessary. Some would that the common places of Scripture should be
decided: Others would have the Sins of the Times rebuked; and yet they are not
agreed how that should be done: Some like it best when it is done generally and
coldly; others, particularly and zealously: Some would have the Vices of
Magistrates, Ministers, and other Superiors, discovered; others, only the
faults and failings of common People and Inferiors, lest Superiors should be
contemned and despised: All men, other men's Vices; but few or none, their own.
These disagree in Matter very ill, but in form much worse: Some like well that
a Text should be Logically handled; Others cry out upon it, as being Man's
Wisdom: Some would have the Sermon adorned with Rhetorical strains; Others call
that Perswasibleness of words: Some would have all confirmed by the Testimony
of Councils, Fathers, and Doctors of the Church; Others esteem that but Man's
Doctrine, and would not that they should be once named in a Pulpit: Some would
have all said without Book; Others think that Minister tempts God that trusts
to his Memory and uses no Notes: Some love Gesture and Action; Others like
none: Some are for short Sermons; Others for long, and it will be long enough
ere we please all. But it is not for us so feed every ones humor: It is
Christ's Example that a Minister must follow; He spoke so all, and so must we
as near as we can. Sometimes indeed what he spoke was not intended to all, but
so some particular Persons, as Matthew. 23. Luke 11.45, etc. But usually what he
said unto one was spoken to all, as Mark 13.37. What I say unto one, I say unto
all, Watch. Thus, upon some Occasion, a Text may be so chosen, and the Sermon
preached thereon so intended by him that preaches it, as that the main
Passages thereof concern not every one: But this Text which we have now in hand
concerns the whole Auditory, and therefore there is no Cause for any one to
take offense thereat. And so we pass from he Persons teaching and taught, to
the kind of Doctrine delivered,

A Parable.]

How the word is taken and used I have elsewhere showed; now, in short: It is
sometimes taken in a more large sense for any Similitude or Comparison, fetched
from things earthly and in common Use, to help our Understanding in things
spiritual and divine, so Math. 13.31, 33, 34. Sometimes a dark Speech and
obscure Saying is termed a Parable, as Psalm. 49.4. yea, every grave, pithy, and
short Sentence has that Name given to it: The Proverbs of Solomon are called
Parables, Prove. 1.1.

More strictly: It is a Figurative Uttering of the Intention of the mind, whose
proper Nature is to make show of one thing and aim at another; and usually the
Comparison is taken from men actions and manners, as Luke 8.5, etc.

St. Luke calls this a Parable; otherwise we might take it for a bare Narration
of something done; However, it is so feigned, as that daily and experimentally
in the World we have it verified. Nor is it of the Nature of some other
Parables, whose Shell was so hard as that Christ himself was enforced to break
it before the Kernel could be tasted; and show the meaning, before his Hearers
could understand it. It seems to have no Shell at all, being one of those that
Gregory speaks of, which requires rather a good Practitioner than Expositor:
Yet being a Parable, and brought by Christ for the Illustration of his
Doctrine, we may thence learn: That



How abundant Christ was in this Parabolical and Similitudinary way of
Teaching, See my Exposition on the Parable of the Figgless Fig Tree. Luke 13.6.
I have showed you in my Exposition on the Parable of the Fig Tree. Had it not
been profitable, Christ (without Question) would not have used them so
frequently: Nor would the Prophets and Apostles have illustrated their Sermons
therewith. But this they were directed by the Spirit of God to do, Ezekiel. 17.2.
and 24.3. And it is reckoned as a great Favor from God to teach us by his
Prophets and Ministers, after such a way and in such a manner, Hos. 12.10.

Mat. 13.13. How then can this be said to be a profitable way of Teaching?



First, to punish them for their wilful Blindness; They seeing saw not, and
hearing heard not, that is, They would not see, they would not hear; and so
they wilfully brought this Judgment on themselves, insomuch that plain Doctrines
were to them as Parables.

Secondly, That the Scriptures might be fulfilled which had so foretold, Isa.
6.9. Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not:
And in them, the saying of the Prophet Isaiah was fulfilled.

But to the Godly, and such as are desirous to learn, it is otherwise: To you
it is given (says Christ) to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom, but to others
it is not given, Matthew. 13.11. As if He should have said, Albeit I speak in
Parables unto you, yet the Illumination of the Spirit is given to you, whereby
those things shall be sufficiently cleared, and the Veil taken away; which
being done,

Sam. 12.7. 1 King. 20.39. Mat. 21.26, and 33.



Tim. 3.16, 17.

is perverted, to men's Destruction, 2 Pet. 5.16.

Again, although Divinity be Lady and Mistress, yet Humane Arts and Sciences
are as Handmaids that attend upon her; and by the Help of these Maids the
Mistress is many times the better courted and sooner wooed. It was Ambrose his
Eloquence that caused Austin to be so much affected with his Preaching, and
under that Bait was hid the Hook that caught him. See the life of Gall. Carac.
written in English by Mr. Will. Crashaw, p. 5. c. 3.
So Galleacius Caracciolus was taken by a Similitude which he heard Peter
Martyr use; by which if his Conversion were not wrought, yet his Sanctification
was furthered thereby: And who sees not, that plain People are better taught by
Similitudes than by Syllogisms?

Such sacred Parables and Similitudes as we find in Scripture are not only
Ornaments, but special Arguments of a Discourse, if rightly used; for they may
not be pressed beyond the Scope of the Holy Ghost in using and applying them;
nor may any Point of Faith be gathered from them, it not being backed with some
plainer Proof from other Scripture; yet may a Point of Doctrine be as
substantially confirmed, and Error as strongly reproved and convinced by those
Scriptures which are set down in Similitudes and borrowed Speeches, as by any
other Scripture; so far forth as the Scope reaches.

As for those that are humane, being woven out of Man's Brain and Bowels (as
the Spider does her Web) by the help of Art, care must be therein had that they
be not used for Ostentation of Wit, but for Edification and Profit; these
Handmaids to Divinity may not flaunt it out in their Dress, but keep their
distance: Should we make our Scripture-Texts (says one) verve to vent our
secular Learning, we do not apply our Art to Divinity, but our Divinity to Art,
Basil Epist. 62.
and so compel the Mistress to attend upon the Maid; and in so doing we
deservedly incurr that sharp Censure which Basil past upon some Preachers in
his days, that they preached Art, and Wit, and not Christ crucified. But
moderately and modestly to make use of Secular Learning, for the explicating
and illustrating of Divine Doctrine by Allegorical Allusions, Comparisons, and
Similitudes, etc. is not only lawful, but very expedient, and profitable, for
the benefit of them that hear us.

Nicodemus would be remembered, Joh. 3.12. If have told you Earthly, and ye
believe not; how shall you believe if I tell you of Heavenly? that is, If
having discoursed unto thee of these spiritual Matters, and illustrated and
explained them by earthly Similitudes of Wind and Water, thou yet find such
difficulty both in Apprehension and Assent; What likelihood is there that thou
would believe me, if I should tell thee of the greatest Mysteries of
Salvation and the deep things of God, of those high and incomprehensible
Matters of another World? This was a high Aggravation of Ephraim's blockishness
and stupidity, that God used Similitudes unto them by the Ministry of his
Prophets, and yet they would not be instructed, Hos. 12.10. And thus much of
the Doctrine taught; now of the Manner of Teaching,

Text. He spoke, O^otoris est dicere, Vulgi loqui.
saying]

There is a difference to be made betwixt Speaking and Saying: Speaking comes
by Nature and Custom; Saying, by Art and Study: Children speak, but the Learned
say. Our blessed Savior did so speak as that he said, which implies a
distinct, audible, and teachable kind of Speaking unto his Auditory: So that
all that heard him might understand both Words and Meaning. And herein may
God's Ministers be taught after the Example of their Lord and Master,



God commanded Habakkuc to write the Vision, that is, what God was about now to
declare unto him, and to make it plain upon Tables, so that he who might read,
Hab. 2.2. It is storied of that Tyrant Caligula, that upon Suit of the People
to have the Law written and set up, that it might be known, and so none
ensnared through the Ignorance thereof (which was a thing very ordinary under
his Tyrannical Government); he condiscended to their Request, but withal he
caused it to be written in so small a hand, that none could read it. But this
is not God's way; It was his Command to his Prophet so to declare his mind unto
the People, and after such a manner, that every one might receive Information
thereof; he must not only write it, but so write it, and in so fair and legible
a hand, that although a man were upon the speed, and did run by, yet he might
read as he runned; intimating thereby after what manner he would that his
Servants, the Ministers of his Word and Gospel, should deliver their Message to
whom they are sent. And thus the Levites in the days of Nehemiah did so read
the Law unto the People, as that they caused the People to understand it, Neh.
8.7. So it was prophesied of John the Baptist, that he should go before the
face of the Lord to prepare his way, Luke 1.76. and how he should do that, is
further declared, by giving Knowledge of Salvation unto the People, Ver. 77.
which was done, not by Infusion, (as those four Children had their Knowledge and
Skill in all Learning and Wisdom, Dan. 1.17. for that is proper to God alone);
but by Instruction, publishing the Doctrine of Salvation in so plain and
familiar a manner, that all that heard him might understand the meaning. And
thus Philip preached Christ unto the Eunuch, he caused him to understand the
meaning of that which he was reading out of the Prophet Isay, Acts 8.28. So all
faithful Pastors which are after God's own heart, and of his giving and
sending, they feed their People with Knowledge and Understanding, Cavea for
Archippus by Jer. Dike.
Jer. 3.15. How with Knowledge (says a noted Divine) unless with Understanding?
and how with Understanding unless they could be understood?

The End of our Preaching is our People's Profit, as the Apostle speaks 1
Cor. 7.35. This I speak for your own Profit: Yea, and thus too, For if I come
unto you speaking with Tongues, such as you understand not, What shall I profit
you? 1 Cor. 14.6, It is no other than to speak in the Air, in respect of any
Fruit or Profit that can follow thereupon to the Hearer, as the Apostle there
shows at large by many excellent Similitudes. For the Will follows the Act of
Understanding: Without Understanding there can be no Assenting; without
Assenting, no Believing. To believe a thing further than we know it, is
impossible; to love it, is Leightness; to hate it, is Injustice (forasmuch as
it may deserve the contrary, for ought that we know); therefore, as the Apostle
concludes in that Chapter, 1 Cor. 14.19. Five words spoken to the
Understanding, do more good in the Church of God than ten thousand spoken in a
strange Tongue, such as you understand not without an Interpreter; or in that
Language which you well enough understand, but yet it is spoken in such a
manner, and the Phrase so sublime, that plain Englishmen cannot understand it.

Synesius) as soon part with their Hearts as with their Meditations: But they
also deserve Reproof who speak but say not, no way applying themselves to their
People's Capacities; seeking rather to show themselves Scholars unto their
People, then to make their People the Scholars of Christ.

This we never learned of our Lord and Master; He has set us a better Copy by
his own Example, He spoke the Word unto his Hearers, as they were able to hear,
says St. Mark, Chap. 4.33. not as He was able to have spoken unto them. And so
Christ tells his Disciples, I have many things to sa,??y but you cannot bear
them now, Joh. 16.12. He had respect to the Capacity of his Auditory.

Nor did we ever learn this of his faithful Servants who have been before us.
Who can say that be is better gifted than St. Paul? He was not inferior to the
very chief of the Apostles for Tongues, 1 Cor. 15.18. 2 Cor. 11. 5* 6.
Learning, and Eloquence. Indeed he speaks of himself, as rude in Speech
though not in Knowledge, 2 Cor. 11.6. not that he was so indeed: But admit I be
such a one as some false Apostles in the Church of Corinth say of me, an Idiot,
a plain, downright, homely-spoken Person; or say, that I be not so eloquent in
my Speech as some of them, my words not so picked, my Phrase so choice, my
Compositions so smooth, my Cadences so sweet, my Style so flourishing as
theirs, for want whereof they condemn me; yet, says he, my Knowledge is not
short of theirs, who are rude in Knowledge though not in Speech, the Truth is,
St. Paul was able to play the Orator when need required as excellently as any
of those that did oppose him; as appears by sundry passages in the Acts, as
Chap. 24.10. and 26.2. He was a Master of Speech, insomuch that the Lycaonians
called him Mercury, Acts 14.12. And undoubtedly they deal very injuriously with
the Apostle, who censure him for rude Elocution, and Unskilfulness in
Grammar-Learning. He was indeed a downright Minister; Heir. Epist. ad Ages.
Perer. Disput. 2. in Epist. ad Roman. Orig. adver. Cellius. lib. 3.
he preached plainly as well as powerfully; his Matter was lofty; his Language
low and ordinary. He that reads the Apostle well (says Origin) will wonder
that such excellent matter is found in such plainness; or, if he wonder not he
will show himself ridiculous. The Reason why he used such plainness in
Preaching, he himself gives, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me to peach the Gospel,
not with Wisdom of words; that is, not in the Pomp and vain Ostentation of
eloquent Speech, which false Teachers so much affect, lest the Cross of Christ
should be of none effect; that is, lest thereby he should obscure the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and seem rather to gain that way than by the plain Simplicity of
the laying forth of the Sufferings of Christ: And this was St. Paul's manner of
Preaching; which Austin wished, that he had lived to have heared.

And now that we have mentioned that ancient Father, let us hear what his
Judgment was in reference to the Point in hand, of a Minister's applying
himself to the Capacity of the Hearer; for he affirms, That for the avoiding
of Ambiguities, and the better Understanding of the People; vulgar Speech is
more profitable than an eloquent Style: Aug. de Genesis ad Manich.
For that the usual and common Phrase of Speech learned men understand; but the
other, unlearned men many times understand not. In regard whereof it was, that
he himself used sometimes barbarous Latin, Aug. de Doct. Chr. lib. 2. c. 11.
Aug. in Psalm. 138. M^lius est ut nos reprehendant Grammatici, etc. Aug. de
Doct. Chr. l. 4. c. 14. Vives l. 2. and ^. de tra. Discip.
and sometimes words not Latin, to the end that those to whom he spoke or
wrote, might understand him; as where the Text is, Non est absconditum a te Os
meum, he had rather say Ossum meum than Os, desiring his People's Profit more
than his own Credit: And it repented him much, for that when he was young he
had preached more, ut placeret quam ut doceret, to please than profit; and
advises that it might be the work of an eloquent man, so to preach that he may
be heard with Understanding, Willingness, and Obedience.

Hierom is much commended, quod ubique non sit aeque Latinus, that he is not
always alike choice of his words. Bernard says, that it is better apta than
alta sapere: And Luther was wont to say, that he is the best Preacher that
preaches vulgariter, trivialiter, maximeque ad populi captum, vulgarly,
plainly, and descends chiefly to the Capacity of his Auditory; otherwise, if
the Hearer believe not, the fault is to be laid more on the Preacher's Tongue,
than on the Hearer's Ear.

Yet his may not so be understood, as if Ministers were to be careless how they
deliver their Master's message; for as they may not dote on Curiosities, so
Barbarism is to be detested: Eloquente well becomes a Preacher, so it be
maternal, and such as becomes the Gravity of the Word: Who was more eloquent
than Job. Solomon, Isay? as appears by their Writings: And what Writings are
more sublimely elegant than the Sacred Scriptures? Acts and Monum. fol. 1782.
Mr. Fox speaking of Rogers and Bradford (those blessed Martyrs) says, that it
was hard to say whether there were more force of Eloquence and Utterance in
their Preaching, or more Holiness in their Life and Conversation. And yet we
may not put too high an Estimate on humane Eloquence, or make any show thereof,
to the obscuring of the Gospel. It is a good Art to hide Art (as one speaks),
and so to deliver deep Points in a holy plainness; Artis est celare Artem.
and plain Points in a holy Delightfulness; that the weakest Understanding may
comprehend the highest Points, and gain some Knowledge; and the highest
Understanding may not be weary to hear ordinary Doctrines, nor think their time
ill-bestowed that is so spent. Thus the Tongue of the Wise shall use Knowledge
aright, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 15.2. and the whole Audience shall be
served, as were Joseph's Brethren in Pharoah's House, the Eldest according to
his Age, and the Youngest according to his Youth, Genesis 43.33. And thus you have
heard something of what concerns us: Now hear a little of what concerns you.

There is utterly a Fault amongst you, 1 Cor. 6.7. Herod in Melpon.
as the Apostle says in another Case, so say I in this; for some of you, when
you come to the hearing of the Word, bring with you so curious and delicate an
Ear, that if the Preacher fill not the Pulpit with fine words, garish and gaudy
Paintings, if he enter-lace not every Sentence in his Sermon, with other
Tongues than plain Englishmen can understand, and stuff them not with
extraordinary conceits and tricks of Wit, then is that man it their esteem an
unlearned Man, a homely Teacher, an English Doctor: No Sermons are esteemed
Sermons with them, but those that are indeed no Sermons; for, of such Sermons
that are so stuffed with soaring Phrases, and numerous Poets, and Fathers Greek
and Latin, we may say, as Herodotus does of the head of Onesilus, that it is
empty of Brains, and sound solid matter which makes to the Edification of the
People, and instead thereof, of, it is filled with Hony-combs to please a
wanton Palate. These think themselves no small Babes; yet like Children, they
take more delight in the gilded outside of a Book, and to look upon the Gayes
and Pictures that are therein, than to learn the good Lessons and wholesome
Instructions thereof: They are childish, like Children, who respect more the
Lace on the Goat than the Cloth which must hide their Nakedness, and keep them
warm. But, as to the one, the Coat is no Coat without Lace upon it; so to the
other a Sermon is no Sermon without Inventions of delectation, being more
desirous to have their Ears tickled than their Souls edified.

We read, that when Jacob's Sons returned with their Sacks full of Corn from
Egypt, as they emptied their Sacks, every man's Money wa found in the mouth of
their Sacks, and when both they and their Father saw the Bundles of Money, they
were afraid, Genesis 42.35. Questionless, they would have been better pleased and
less astonished, if they had not found these Bundles amongst their Corn; not
would Jacob disliked that Corn which his Sons brought any whit the more, had
not Silver been in the Mouth of the Sacks: Why then should any Hearer dislike
wholesome Doctrine that is brought to feed hungry Souls, albeit there be not
Gold in the Minister's mouth, to feed the humor of a wanton Auditor? I could
wish that you would be more in Love with plain Song, and less with Crotchets.

There are others amongst us in the other Extreme, who bring to the hearing of
the Word a rude Rustical Ear; no Preaching shall be liked by them, wherein
there is any thing smelling of the Lamp; no Preacher approved that makes any
Show of Wit and Art in any of his Labors, thinking it impossible for the
Mistress and the Handmaid to agree together: All must come without Study or
Meditation. A Sermon premeditated, is, in their Judgments, to tie the Holy
Ghost unto an Ink-horn, and to confine it within the bounds of a sandy
Hourglass; Let them hear a Sermon of God's own making, and not of Man's
composing; Turn the Cock and let it run: Such as so preach (they say) preach in
the Evidence of the Spirit and Demonstration of Power. But will you call those,
Sermons, that come forth like untimely Births, from rude and uncircumcised
Lips? Every Sound is not Music; nor all Speaking Preaching, (as those seem to
hold, who will ask of their Nighbour, Who spoke to day?) Christ spoke, and
said: It is one thing to speak (as was showed you), and another thing to say.
As there is a difference betwixt saying a Prayer and praying a Prayer; a wicked
man may do the one, but not the other: So there is a difference betwixt
Speaking a Sermon and saying of it; he that preaches rudely and rawly, speaks;
but he that delivers his Message plainly and gravely, and explicates his
Doctrine profitably and perspicuously and applies all wisely and solidly to the
Capacity and Understanding of his Auditory, as our Savior did here, he both
speaks and says.

Solomon, who was the wisest and learnedest Preacher of all Mortals, confesses
(and that without disgrace unto himself), that he studied for his Sermons, and
sought out acceptable words, or words delight (as the Hebrew has it); and that
because the Preacher was wise, Eccles. 12.9, 10. He says not, The wise
Preacher sought out acceptable and pleasing words; but, in his Wisdom he sought
them out, because he was wise: As who would say, he had been, and others would
show themselves to be, no other than foolish Preachers, if they imagined that
any other would be words of Salvation, besides those which were words of
delight; that is, such words as may procure an Understanding, and beget a
willing and obedient Attention; otherwise no delight can be taken in them: And
such words must be sought out by Study, Meditation, and Prayer. Daniel was a
great Prophet, and one of the Worthies of the World; yet he desired some time
for the Interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, Dan. 2.16. Is the Scripture
leighter than a Dream, that it should be interpreted without Meditation and
Study? John Baptist went before Christ, to prepare His ways: so must our Heart
go before our Tongue, to prepare our words: And yet with these men, every
sudden, confused, and undigested Discourse, is the downright and simple
Preaching of the Gospel, when it may be rather termed, downright Profaness. To
preach simply, in St. Paul's sense, is not to preach rashly, and unlearndly,
but plainly and perspicuously, which cannot be without Study.

as appears by their Homilies and Sermons extant: Yesterday you heard this or
that; so Chrysostom begins many of his Homilies upon Genesis: And Bernard ends
many of his Sermons with Cras, To morrow we shall proceed, etc. Austin preached
thrice in one day, Aug. Tom. 10. Part. 2. ad fratres in Eremo. Ser. 33. Basil
Hom. 2. de Baptismo.
and one of those Sermons which he then preached was preached upon a sudden
Occasion, an heavy Accident, which that day had happened. Basil preached his two
Sermons upon the six days Work, and had but that Morning for Meditation; and
sometime he preached extemporally: What time then had these men for Meditation?

Bolton his Saints sure and perpetual Guide p. 210.
and so enriched themselves with a heavenly Store, that they were able to bring
out of their Treasury things both new and old, upon very short warning, upon
any Occasion. Yet there is somewhat more to be taken notice of; for as the
Persons were very able that then preached the Word, and could say much; so the
People in those times were very ignorant, and were capable but of little: Dr.
Donn, 1 Vol. Ser. 33. oun Whi^^ond.
But in these days the Capacity of the Hearer requires matter of more Labor
and Study. Then the Sermon that were preached were ordinarily very short and
the Texts which they made choice of, were many times very long: Sometimes the
Epistle for the day, sometimes the Gospel, and sometimes the Psalm before the
Sermon, was made choice of for the Text; so that a Paraphrase upon the Text
would make a Sermon, and that required not much Study. No man (said a learned
Doctor of our own) will think that we have abler Preachers than they had in
those times; yet no man will doubt but that we have learneder and more capable
Auditories and Congregations than theirs were: Nor will our Auditories and
Congregations rest satisfied with such Preaching, as Hearers in those times
were well-contented with; so that their practice is no president nor pattern,
for our times to do the like: And so we pass from the Introduction to the
Parable it self.

Text. The Ground of a certain Rich Man brought forth fruit plentifully, etc.]

In this Parabolical Narration (for so we may conceive it to be), we have, the
part Propounding, and the pare Applying, considerable.

In the Propounding part we have, the Person spoken of, and the Relation that
is made of him.

The Person is set forth, 1. By his Style or Titles. 2. By his Lands and
Possessions.

His Title are, 1. Common, A certain Man. 2. More proper, and belonging to him;
He was a Rich Man, as all other were not: Of these first.

A certain Man,]

Man, is an Appellative common to all, both of better sort and inferior Rank.
In put English Tongue, we have but that one Name for both sorts; but in other
Languages, as in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, we have two. The Hebrews style Man,
sometimes Adam, and sometimes Ishi, and Ish is more than Adam; Adam signifies
a Man of Earth, but Ish imports such a one as has in him Fire, Life, and
Spirit. The Greeks style Man, sometimes Anthropos, and sometimes Anir, and they
differ much; for Anthropos signifies, an ordinary man, and one of no Account;
but Anir notes one of more than ordinary Place and Worth. The Latins likewise
have two words, whereby they distinguish between one and another, Vir and Homo;
and Vir is more than Homo, it notes one of Virtue und Prowess; but Homo, a man
of mean descent and Parentage one of low Condition. Now the word here used in
the Greek is not (...), but (...), as if he were a man of the Vulgar sort, and
one of no esteem or account: A Style, (...).
however it may be thought too far beneath him, being so very Rich, yet it is
better than he deserved; for his words and carriage discovered more of the
Beast than Man in him (as hereafter you may hear). What other particular Name
this man had is not discovered unto us, nor yet his habitation and place of
Dwelling. A Worldling he was; and the World is resembled to the Moon, Revel.
12.1. and, Why may we not imagine him then to be the Man in the Moon? Sure it
is, that he was over Head and Eats in Love with it.



thus and thus, etc. And thus understanding it, it would make little or nothing
to our Savior's drift and purpose, to tell his Name of place of Dwelling.

If we take it as a Real, Historical Parable, as we safely may, that such a one
there was indeed, a notable Worldling, who did bless himself in the Multitude
of his Riches; and, in the midst of his abundance, whilst he cried, Peace,
Peace, unto his Soul, had that Soul taken from him by sudden Death: then we may
conceive, he is not named; for that, being a wretched Worldling, Christ holds
him not worth the naming. Putting all together that has been said, this will
be the Result.

A Worldling is a Man worthless, and of no esteem with God.

There is an observable Passage to this purpose, Ruth. 4 2. Ruth had a very
near Kinsman, who was moved by Boaz concerning the Redemption of Elimelech's
Land (who was Naomi's deceased Husband), and he, according to the Law, in
redeeming of the Land was to take Ruth to Wife, who was the Widow of one of
Naomi's Sons. The Land indeed did belong to Naomi, and whom the Kinsman by the
Law of God should have married, Deuteronomy. 25.6, 7.
to preserve the Name of the dead; but Naomi being too old to marry, and to
bear Children, Ruth her Daughter in Law, being young, was to supply the defect
of Naomi; and she, when the Land was to be redeemed, must also be married to
the Kinsman; The business is propounded by Boaz (who was another of Naomi's
Kinsman, but farther off) unto him; but observe how the Holy Ghost expresses
it, The Kinsman of Boaz came by, as he was sitting at the Gate, unto whom he
said, Hoc, Such a one, turn aside, sit down here. It cannot be thought but that
Boaz gave him his Name and Title, when he called him; but, whatever Boaz, did,
the Spirit of God will not mention his Name; for that he was a covetous
Worldling, and loved his own Inheritance better than God's Command; refusing to
redeem the Land which he was able enough to do (yea, and willing too, so that
he might not marry the young Woman, lest his Charge should be increased):
Therefore the Scripture only makes this mention of him, Hoe, Such a one. God
would not that his Sacred Leaves should be blotted with the Name of such a
Covetous Wretch.

And our Savior in that Parable which he propounded of the rich Glutton and
poor Beggar, (which was not a Parable only, but a Narration or Story of a thing
real, albeit something therein is Parabolical); in speaking of the Epicure, he
name him not; home quidam is his style, albeit he was clothed in purple and
fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day? When the Beggar mentioned, albeit
he was full of Soars and Botches, has his Name recorded in words at length;
he is named Lazarus, Luke 16.19, 20. intimating thereby, the high respect that
God has of a godly Beggar, above a rich Worldling, be he never so great.

Dedignation and Indignation, Scorn and Anger, we know will not give a man his
Name: The Son of Jemini, says David of Shemei, in contempt and scorn. The Son
of Jesse, said Saul of David, 2 Samuel 16.11. 1 Samuel 20.27. Genesis 37.19 Matthew.
12.24, and 26, 61. Joh. 7.11. Luke 6.22. Acts and Mon* fol. 82^.
in anger and indignation. See this Dreamer comes, said Joeph's Brethren of
him; such was their spite and spleen toward him, that they could not call him
by his name. The Pharisees termed Christ, This Fellow: And the Jews seeking
Christ at the Feast, ask, Where is He? they could not find in their hearts to
say, Where is Jesus: So Christ tells his Disciples, That men shall, in hatred
of them, cast out their Names for evil for his sake. Thus the Persecutors of
Stephen Brune, Martyr, after his Death made Proclamation, that none should make
any mention of him under pain of Heresy: And so do the Papists at this day deal
with the Name of Calvin. Now God does abhor and hate the Covetous, Psalm. 10.3.
And is angry with him, every day he smites his hands at him, Ezekiel 22.13.
ubicunque invenitur nomen. Calvini, deleatur. Index Expurg.
alluding to men's practice, who use to smite their hands together when they are
much incensed and provoked; nay, he smites him with his hands, Esaias 57.17. For
the iniquity of his Covetousness, I was wroth and smote him. Thus God being
angry with them, and scorning of them, it is no marvail if he vouchsafe not
once to name them.

Nomen potius quam omen quaeritur (says one), by their wealth and riches they
think to advance their Names, and heighthen their Reputation, which is the
greatest comfort and content that they can take in their superfluous abundance,
or hope to have. And hence it is, That many will seem to the World to have them
that have them not: They will be sure to make a fair outside, and appear to be
rich, albeit they be nothing less; according to that of Solomon, Prove. 13.7.
there is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing.

Hence it is, that they will be fishing in all Waters with a golden hook, and
try all Baits: And with the expert Fisher (that fisheth with the fly) have
flies of all sorts, that may suit with every season; Nabal's fly shall be the
great Feast he makes at his Sheep-Shearing, that he may be reputed bountiful
and liberal; Absolom's sly shall be the flattering of his Fathers Subjects,
that all might extol the young Prince, and wish him in his Fathers Throne.
Jesabel fisheth with a painted fly, Acts 12.21, 22.
to allure her Lovers: Herod with a gay golden fly, royal Apparel Cloth, of
Silver, says Josephus; which being beaten upon by the Sun beams, so dazzled the
Beholders eyes, that it drew from them that blasphemous Acclamation; It is the
Voice of a God, and not of a Man. And when they have taken with these Baits,
and have best sport; may we not truly say, They have fished and caught a fool?
for, wise men cannot be taken with such flies as these.

There are indeed a company of Sycophants and Flatterers in the World, who will
fawn upon the wealthy, and follow after with cap and knee, and crouch and
crindge before such, as the Spaniel does unto his Master for a bone, etc. But
will you count this Credit, to be licked with a Sycophants rankling Tongue,
says One? and to be followed by a company of Hangbyes, that run after you with
cap in hand crying out, Good your Worship, etc? If you call this Credit, and if
this be the repute you speak of and seek after, it may indeed be obtained by
wealth. But yet know, that the Flame that is derived from Fools, is in Fancy;
Nor is that Pageant of crindges and faces which is acted by them, intended to
thee; but to thy gay Coat, and stuffed or well-lined Pouch: which is a Credit
and Honor, much like to that which the Egyptians showed to the Ass, that
carried their gods upon his Back, which when the silly Ass grew proud of, he
was told, That it was to Us, not to Thee, that this Honor was given; Non ti^i
sed Isidi.
when these trinkets are taken off, thou must look to be turned into a dirty
Stable with a kick in scorn; Jer. 22.18, 19.
when death comes, all thy wealth must be left behind, and thou buried with the
burial of an Ass, without any lamentation made for thee; thy Name shall rot,
and be no more had in rememberance; o^ if it be mentioned, it shall be with
loathing and detestation: yea, and of those thou think thy self now to be
had in Honor, thou will in the end be esteemed vile; none will be more ready
to blaze thy faults to thy disgrace, and to deride and scorn thee, than those
who now slatter thee. And this is all that thy wealth can procure to thy Name;
Neither God, nor good Men, will esteem ever the better of thee, simply for thy
riches.

whom the Lord abhors. It is strange to see how apt men are, Psalm. 10.3.
Exodus 32.
with the Idolatrous, to fall down and worship a golden Calf; Let a man be as
very a Churl, as Nabal of mount Carmel; As foolish as Rehoboam, who was the
foolishness of the People; As vainglorious as Haman; As basely covetous as
Vespasian, who laid an Impost upon the Excrements of the People of Rome: Let
him be as full of ill qualities, as Naaman was of the Leprous spots; yet if he
be rich and wealthy, him we Idolize as a god, him we bless, him we magnify and
extol; nay, are ready to say, with those to Christ, Blessed is the Womb that
bare thee, and the Papes that gave thee suck. Albeit the Eye of Heaven scorns
them, and esteems them vile, preferring the poorest Beggar full of Boyls and
Botches, having Grace in his heart, before such worldlings with their Golden
Fleeces.

Say no more of a wicked worldling, He is a man of great worth and worship, his
Rents, Revenews, and Commings-in, are so much by the year; He is a great monied
man, a landed man, one of the best of his Rank and Quality in the whole
Country; A Gentleman's, or an Alderman's Fellow, a Knight's Companion, etc. All
this may be, yet if he be graceless, he is worthless in God's esteem, and in
the esteem of all good men: And the Scriptures which put a just Valuation upon
things, esteem of all these things but as dross, and puteth such men in lowest
form, and amongst the meanest rank of men, and tell us whose Fellows they are,
1 Cor. 6.9, 10. There you have them placed, that are worldly and covetous, in
the midst of a damned Crew, and crowded upon both sides with Fornicators,
Idolators, Adulterers, Abusers of themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Drunkards,
Revilers, Extortioners, and such Companions as the World cries shame upon, and
with whom we are charged to keep no Company, 1 Cor. 5.11. Covetousnesness is
such a Vice, that it should not be once named amongst us, says the Apostle,
without detestation, Ephesians. 5.3. When we speak of filthy and uncomly things
(says a judicious and grave Divine of our Time); Dr. Jones Com. in Heb. p. 616.
we use to do it with a Preface, saving your Reverence, etc. So in speaking of
these earthly muck-worms, and worldly-minded persons, be they never so great in
the World's Eye; it will not be amiss to use the like Preface, such a one is a
very rich man: yet, saving your reverence, he is a very Earth-worm, and a
covetous Miser. Being graceless, they are worthless in God's esteem, so let
them be in thine.

Man, from looking up on high, says Plato: (...) a sur sum aspiciendo. Os
homini sublime dedit caelumque tueri. O vid.
and there are four Causes as he shows of man's upright Posture. The Efficient
is God, The Formal is the power of the Soul, The Material is the straitness of
the backbone, The Final is to contemplate high and holy things. The very aspect
of Man being made and fitted to look upwards toward Heaven, does demonstrate
to what end the Soul was given; Every animated Creature bea^s, in the Figure of
the Body, the mark of the value of its Soul: Amongst Beasts, they that are made
of moist matter, and are most earthly, hang their heads most downward; the Soul
of a Hogg is earthiest, being extended in the Body, not to fit him for any
handsome action, but only serves as brine so keep him from putrefaction: and
his look also is most debased and dejected, having his eyes under his belly, as
it were, and his Nose is always rooting in the Ground. So that, as Plutarch
says, If he should be turned upon his back, and constrained to see the Sky, he
would be amazed at the novelty of the sight: If there be any spark of
ingenuity left in thee, this consideration should move thee to mind Heaven
more, and the Earth less: Is it not a shame, that whilst the eyes of thy Body
survey and peruse the Sky and glorious Lamps of Heaven, the eyes of thy Soul
should see nothing but dirt and dung: Like the Kite, which whilst she soars
aloft, has her eye still upon Carrion, that is cast out upon the Dunghill: Or
as Bernard speaks, To have a crook-backt Soul in a straitbackt Body? Lo this
only have I found says Solomon, that God made man upright (or strait both in
body and mind), Eccles. 7.29. Is qui ficlitus est homo differt ab eo quem Deus
f^cit. Philo l. 1. legis Allegor.
but he has sought out many inventions (or fictions of his own). That man
which is fained, differs from him which God made, says Philo; Man is made of
himself a fained man, it consisting in the fained invention of his own ways:
And amongst all imaginary fictions, there is none that does discover more Beast
in Man, then this base sordid and covetous fiction, Psalm. 49.6, 11, 12, 17, 20.
2 Pet. 2, 12, 14. Beasts they are that exercise themselves in covetous
practices; and such Beasts as are to be taken and destroyed, whose throats are
for the knife, as the Hogg and Swine, which Beast of all other the Worldling
does most resemble, both for his feeding, rooting, and unprofitable living; It
is never good, we say, till the knife comes to the throat. But we shall say no
more at present of that: Come we now to the more proper title belonging to this
Man.

A Rich Man.]

There are two sorts of rich men; some rich in this World, rich in Goods, yet
poor in Grace: Others rich in reference to another World, that are poor in
this. This the Apostle intimates, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in
this World: which the Apostle would not have said (as Austin shows), Aug.
Sermon. de temp.
if there were not some truly Rich that are not Rich in this World. And our
Savior thu^ distinguishes of them in the Reddition of this Parable, ver. 21.
(of which we shall speak more in due place). This Rich man here spoken of, was
a worldly Rich man: And of these that are worldly Rich, there are several
degrees.

Some are Rich in Superfluity, these are called in Scripture mighty men of
Wealth, as 2 Kings 15.20. and said to be men of great Estate, Eccles. 1.16. and
to possess multitude of Riches, Psalm. 49.6. and to have abundance of them,
Psalm. 52.7. and great Revenues Prove. 16.8. Of this rank of rich men were those
mentioned, Luke 21.1, 4. who out of their abundance cast in Gifts into the
Treasury.

Others are Rich in Competency, having enough, not only for necessities of
Nature, but likewise to maintain their Place, and State, Quality, and Calling;
a sufficiency they have of all Temporal Blessings, albeit not that infinite and
overflowing superabundance which the other have. And of this rank, those
wealthy men may be thought to be, who in the Gospel are called Rich Neighbors,
Luke 14.12. who being invited to a Feast, are able to invite again.

And others there are who are rich in Mediocrity, living in a golden mean,
between plenty and penury, being neither eminently rich, nor miserably poor
(the estate that Augur desired of God, Prove. 30.8, 9.) These have a sufficiency
whereby to subsist, and to support themselves in regard of necessity of Life;
but sometimes in respect of the necessity and exigence of their state, they may
stand in need of their wealthy Neighbor, who has abundance and superfluity;
and borrow assistance and supportation from him at a pinch, 1 John 3.17. (...).
whereby they may be upheld in their honest Course and Calling. And to this
rank may be referred those who have some small Cottage and Tenement of their
own, and a little Stock, and an honest Calling to live by; these enjoy the
World's Good, though not in such abundance as either of the former sorts, and
may be truly said to be rich; for that they have wherewith to maintain
themselves and theirs comfortably, in that Calling and State of Life in which
God has set them: This says Seneca, Pauper e^im non est cui rerum suppetit
usus.
is the first degree of Riches, To have what is necessary: The next is, To have
what is enough: The last, To have superfluity, and more then enough; and of
this rank was this rich man here mentioned. Give me leave to stop a little, and
commend hence unto you this general Observation.



Men's outward estates are so ordered by God's providence, that some are rich
and some poor: And amongst the rich, some are wealthier than other, and of
greater estate than others.

It is a Point that needs not much confirmation; yet we shall produce a Text or
two to back it, 1 Samuel 2.7, 8. The Lord makes Poor and makes Rich (says
Hannah); he brings low, and raises up; he raises up the Poor out of the
Dust, and lifts up the Beggar from the Dunghill, to set him amongst Princes,
and to make them inherit the Throne of Glory. All this He does; So Prove. 22.2.
The Rich and the Poor meet together, The Lord is the Maker of them alt. A
difference in Estate there is betwixt men in this World; yet the disparity is
not such, but that in many things they meet and are alike; as, in the Womb they
meet, being alike conceived, formed, and brought forth; in Nature they meet,
being both reasonable Creatures, consisting of Soul and Body; in Life they
meet, both breathing the same Air, and nourished in the same manner; they
meet, sometimes in the Church, sometimes in the Street, sometimes about this
business, sometimes about that; and in God they meet, He being the same Lord
who gives them both that Form and Shape, that Nature and Life they have; for
he is the Maker of them all: It is He, and not their care and pains, that has
made the Rich: It is he, and not their hard Fortune, that has made the Poor;
and that God, who has made all men, can make any, though never so distant in
Condition, yet to meet in the same Estate.

This Variety of Estates and Conditions David mentions, Psalm. 49.1, 2. Hear
this all ye People, give ear all ye Inhabitants of the World; both low and
high, rich and poor together. And that Parable propounded by our Savior, Luke
14.8. confirms the Point, When thou art bidden of any man to a Feast, sit not
down in the highest place, lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden of
him, etc. that is, one of higher Rank and Quality; so then, there are degrees
amongst men, and amongst Rich men too; some in higher place than others, and
had in more honorable esteem than others, in respect of their outward State
and Condition.

Mat. 25.
not dealing herein as the Tyrant Procrustes did, who made but one Bed to fit
all Passengers (for if they were too long for his Bed he would cue them
shorter; and if they were too short for it, he would lengthen them out with
their own Flesh): But He suits each one with a Bed according to his stature,
disposing of these outward things after such a manner, and in such a
proportion, that men maybe enabled to do good to others, and receive good from
others; and that the Rich (as Ambrose says) might have Praemium Benignitatis,
the Recompense of their Bounty, in supplying the Wants of the Poor; and that he
might crown the Poor Merce de Patientiae, with the Reward of their Patience.

See my Exposition on that Parable of Luke 7.40. p. 38.
etc. Were all the Strings of an Instrument of the same bigness, and wound up
to the same height, you can expect but sorry Music. God is the God of Order,
and not of Confusion, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.33.

Cor. 12. As for those Rhymes, so usual in the Mouths of many, When Adam
dug and Eve span, Who was then the Gentleman? They were in all likelihood
(says one) made in Watt Tyler's Camp; Dr. John White, at the Cross on 1 T^m.
2.1.
and there wants not some of the same Camp at this day amongst us, who like no
Tune so well as that. The Lord keep us from coming under their Oak of
Reformation, and falling into Leveller's handling; who, when they have done all
that they can, yet neither they, nor all men in the World, shall be able to
make all equal, unless they can make all men of like Stature in Body; A tall
Saul, to be equal with little Paul.



We read in the Gospel of some Laborers, who having received their full pay
for their day's Work, yet murmured against the Master of the House; for that he
had given unto some who labored but one hour in his Vineyard, as he had given
unto them, who had born the burden and heat of the day, Mat. 20.11. And such
there are amongst us, who g^udg to see their Neighbors thrive and prosper in
Wealth, when they themselves, who take more pains, rising up early; and going to
Bed late, eating the Bread of Sorrow, and drinking the Wine of Care; yet go
slowly on, and can hardly subsist and maintain themselves and Families by their
Labors. But for the quieting of the Spirits of these, and suppressing of all
such murmuring and repining thoughts, let these things be pondered on.

First, It is the wise God that does thus order things: They fall not out by
Fortune and Chance, as some imagine, who tell us, that such or such a one was
born to a good Fortune, and that a good Fortune has befell him; but it is by
the Will and Providence of God that these things thus fall out. We are all like
Counters upon a Table, which he makes use of in casting up his Accounts, and
effecting his own Ends. If one man be in the place of Hundreds, yea, Thousands;
and another in the place of Pounds, yea, Pence; 1 Cor. 4 7.
God had the principal hand in laying of us there: And it must be the same
hand, that there laid us, that must remove us, or else it will never be to our
Comfort. When the most wise God has made up his Reckonings, we shall all meet
as Counters put into the Bagg after the Account is ended; then shall there be
no difference hetwixt Counter and Counter, that which stood high and that which
was low. The Sickle of Death will make the Stubble eeven and level, albeit
whilst the Corn grew in the Field, one Ear might be higher and weightier than
another; and this may keep us from murmuring and repining.

Secondly, God, who gives to one more, and another less, gives none of thine;
he disposes of his own: And as the Householder said to the murmuring Servant,
Is it not lawful for me to do with my own what I will? Mat. 20.15. So, Is it
not lawful for God to dispose of that which he has infinitely more Right unto,
than thou have, or can have to any Penny in thy Purse? And in desiring a
greater Estate than thou have in this World, thou desire that which thou have
no right unto: Thy eye may not be evil because His is good.

Thirdly, Whatsoever thou have is God's free-Gift, and not by thee deserved:
Now, Would thou not think him to be a presumptuous Beggar, who craving an
Alms, will yet prescribe his Benefactor, what, and how much, he shall bestow
upon him? Such is thy Case, who repinest against God; for that he has given
other men more, and not thee as much as they. What have thou that thou have not
received, says the Apostle, 1 Cor, 4.7. and that freely.

Fourthly, God give^ thee that which is comfortable and most fitting for thy
Condition; thy Meat and Drink, though coorse, yet it satisfies thy Hunger, and
quenches Thirst, as well as the daintiest; that Raiment which thou wearest, it
hides thy Shame, and keeps thee warm, as well, if not better, than finer and
gayer: Upon thy hard Bed, thou sleep as soundly and safely, as if it were
upon a Bed of Down. Will nothing satisfy you, unless you have some Great Man's
Place or Palace, thy wealthy Neighbor's Lands and Means? God sees thy little
to be best for thee, seeing thy Ability and Opportunity is but to make Use of a
little.

Fifthly, Thou have never a whit the less, for that others have more; had they
a far less Portion of worldly Goods than they have, thy Stock and Store would
not at all be increased thereby: For it is not for any want in God that he
gives so unequally, he has enough for all; but he knows what is best for
every one. Wherefore, Psalm. 37.4. and 39.6.
murmur not at God's providential Administrations in these outward things,
neither repine at the prosperous Estate of others, but learn so be thankfully
contented with thy present Condition, as St. Paul was, Phil. 4.12. This will
make our Lives comfortable, and without it there is nothing but trouble and
vexation of Spirit, Prove. 13.15. And so much in General.

More Particularly, This Rich Man, notwithstanding his great Riches, was a very
Wicked Man, as appears by the whole Relation that is made of him; and thence we
may safely infer,

A man may be very Wealthy, yet very Wicked.

I do not say, that of necessity it must be so; (for a man may be very rich and
very good withal, as was Abraham, in whose bosom poor Lazarus lay; so Isaac,
Jacob, and other of the Patriarchs; so Job, Solomon, Obadiah: And, in the New
Testament, Matthew, Zachaeus, Joseph of Arimathea, and others.) But this is
that I deliver for a truth unto you, That it is possible for a man to abound
with earthly Riches, and vet so be a very wicked man. Many places in the Old
Testament and sundry Texts in the New do speak as much. I shall content my
self, and I hope to content you, with naming some few of those many.

Job tells us, That the Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and they that provoke
God are secure; into whose hand God brings abundantly, Job 12.6. and speaking
elsewhere of their great Prosperity, which he sets forth at large; he
confesses ingenuously, that it was such, that the very consideration thereof,
did so vex and disquiet him, as that his very Flesh trembled thereat, Job 21.6,
-- 16. David speaking of the wicked of the World, (such as he puts into his
Letany, desiring God to deliver him from) tells us, That they have their
Portion in this Life, and that God fills them with his hid Treasures; that is,
the Riches of the Earth, Gold and Silver, which are hid in the mines of the
Earth; and that they are full of Children, and leave their substance to their
Babes; they did abound with the choysest of all temporal and outward Blessings,
for their future Judgment, Psalm. 17.14. And in another place Psalm. 73.2. he
acknowledges that he could hardly keep his feet from slipping, and himself
from falling, when he beheld the great prosperity of the Wicked, who were so
pampered with the Pleasures and Delicacies of this Life, as that their very
eyes stood out with fatness, ver. 7. Their prosperity he sets forth at large,
together with their wicked Lives, and then concludes, Behold, these are the
ungodly who prosper in the World, they increase in Riches, ver. 12, To these
Proofs, we may add other; as, Psalm. 49.6, 14. Mich. 6.12.

Proofs of the Point from the New Testament are not wanting, if the Old
dislike. St. James speaks of some that were Rich, yet they were great
Oppressors in his Days, Jam. 2.6. And he calls upon rich men to weep and howl
for the miseries that should befall them, Chap. 5.1. St. Paul tells us, That
not many Noble, not many Mighty, etc. are called: 1 Cor. 1.26. He does not
exclude all; but the greatest part of the Rich and Mighty of the World seems to
be excluded, by the Saying of our blessed Savior himself, denouncing a Woe
against many that were Rich, Luke 6.24. and tells us plainly, That it is a very
hard matter for a rich man to be saved, Matthew. 19.23, 24.

Now for Examples that might be brought both out of the Old Testament and New,
whereby the Truth may be yet farther cleared; they are very many, as of Esau,
Nabal, Ahab, Saul Herod, Demas, and that rich Glutton, mentioned Luke 16.19.
All Rich, yet Wicked.

Humane History, as well as Sacred, does abound with Examples; as of Nero,
Commodus, Heliogabalus, Croesus, and many other Roman Emperors. And who at
this day does more abound in worldly Riches than Turk and Pope? But I shall not
husband my time so well in being large in the Proof of what will be readily
granted and experience verifies, as in laying down the grounds of the Point,
and applying of it; which I now hasten unto.

The Grounds or Reasons of the Point are many: I shall acquaint you with three
which are the principal. The first, respects the Donor or Bestower of earthly
Riches; The second has respect to the Nature of these things bestowed; The
third arises from the effect which these earthly things produce: Of each,
briefly.

Tim. 6.17. He gives us all things richly to enjoy, to one as well as to
another: He gives to the godly as well as to the wicked, and oftentimes to them
more abundantly.

And this he does, that his bounty may be made known to all; yea, even to the
very worst: and how ready is he to recompense Temporal Service with Temporal
Blessings? (as he recompensed Jehu): he will not give any occasion to a wicked
person to say that, he dies in his debt.

Sometimes indeed they are given in anger, and they are reserved to the hurt of
the Owner, as Solomon tells us, Eccles. 5.13. And indeed that which God speaks
of some wicked men, may be understood as spoken of all Mal. 2.2. I will curse
your Blessings. Yet in themselves they are evidences of God's bounty, and God
would that we should so apprehend them. Some Jews have a tradition of Joseph,
that when he was advanced in Pharoah's Court, and made Governor of the Land of
Egypt, he caused the Chaff, which arose from the Wheat, which he stored up, to
be cast down the River, to let the Nations know of the abundance of Grain that
was in Egypt: Certainly, God is pleased to bestow plenty of Riches on the
worst of men; Chaff on Sinners, that we may from thence conclude of the
glorious Recompense that is prepared for his Saints in Heaven, Psalm. 36.6, 7.

But albeit God be the principal Disposer of all, the Devil is oftentimes
instrumentally active in conferring of them: We read of a Challenge that he
made so the whole World, and the Glory of it, pretending that the right of
Collating and Conferring those things was in him, Luke 4.6, 7. But it was
untrue: for when or where did God ever pass over his Right to him? Indeed God
is pleased many times to permit him to dispose of Riches, and of the Glories of
the World, for some Reasons best known to himself; as, for the trial of the
Good, punishment of the Bad, and the Glory of his own Name in both: (but this
his Connivence is no Conveyance, his Permission is no Commission granted to
him). Now when Satan has this Permission from God, to dispose of Riches,
Honors, etc. he disposes of them to those that do him the best Service, and
prefers his own Chaplains; as he did Hildebrand, Sylvester the second, and
Eugenius, and many others to St. Peter's Chair: one enters his Seat by murder,
another by conjuring, others by Bribery and Simony And as Platina speaking of
Silvester's the third coming to the Popedom, Vit. Sylvest 3.
says, He which can most prevail in such dishonest Courses, shall be soonest
preferred; good men being oppressed and rejected. And as he prefers his to
Spiritual Promotions, so to Temporal Dignities; as we read, Dan. 11.21. By
Flatteries, a vile person shall come in and obtain the Kingdom; which is
understood of Antiochus. Many Crowns, Kingdoms, and Dignities have been
obtained by such sinful and indirect means. So other worldly Profits must be
obtained from him by fraud and falsehood; Achan shall have a Babylonish Garment
of the fashion, but he must steal it. Ahab a convenient Garden-plat joined to
his Palace, but he must shed Naboth's innocent Blood, and then he shall have
it. Judas, money in his purse, but he must earn it by giving his Master a
treacherous Kiss. Let a man ye, swear, forswear, and Wealth shall flow in upon
him, if the Devil can help it: But if a man will be upright in his ways, keep
a good conscience in all his actions; make scruple of an Oath, of a Lie, of a
Cheat; that man shall never be Rich in this World, if the Devil can hinder it.
This the very Heathens observed, and therefore fained, that when Plutus, which
they held to be Riches, was sent from Jupiter, (...).
he limped and went, slowly; but when he was sent from Pluto, whom they held to
be the god of Hell, he did ever run, and was upon the speed: by which fiction
of theirs, they intended as much as is now delivered. That Speech which a
Senator of Rome sometimes used to Sylla, (who vaunted and boasted much of
himself in the Senate) makes much to this purpose. How can you be (said he) a
good man, who having little or nothing left you by your Father, in so short a
time are become so exceeding rich? This is the first Reason I bring to prove,
that a man may be very wealthy, and have abundance of Riches, and yet be very
wicked.

Psalm. 8.6.
as the Psalmist speaks: showing thereby, that there is not any such worth nor
excellency in them, as some men conceive. Considering then the nature of
Wealth, and earthly Riches, that they are such as do not, cannot, of
themselves, better him that has them; It is not to be wondered at, that, A man
may be wealthy, yet wicked withal.

by them, though not naturally, yet accidentally, through man's corruption; Who
sees not daily, that they become hindrances of much good, and occasions of
much evil? In which respect our blessed Savior compares them unto Thorns,
Matthew. 13.7, 22. and those you know have two special properties. First, they
stop up the way, and hinder the growth of Corn: Secondly, they prick and pierce
the hands of such as have to deal with them, if they be not the better fenced.
Thus Riches they choke the seed of the Word, and of all saving Grace, and bar
up the way, as it were, to God's Kingdom: You have an example of this in
Ezekiel's Auditors, Ezekiel. 33.31. And another, in that young man that came to
Christ, and enquired of him the way to Heaven, Mark. 10.22. Those Guests that
were invited to the great Supper, set leight by it, only out of a respect that
they had to their worldly Pleasures and Profits, Luke 14.18. and that kept them
from tasting of it, ver. 24. And experience shows, that of all men, rich men
and worldlings are most backward to holy Duties. It may well be wondered at,
that they having so long a Teddar, so much Liberty, so many fair Opportunities
to attend upon the means (which poor men want), yet are so rarely converted:
But considering how easily Satan can, by that teddar of Riches, draw them home
again; or if in case they do not break the Rope, yet like some Jades that are
seeding in the Corn, they are willing to be taken and tied unto the Stake, the
wonder cease.

As they are hindrances to Good, so they are great provocations unto Evil:
Chrysostom calls Riches, Absurditatis Parents, the Parents of Absurdities; for
that they cause a man to do not only ungodly, but inhumane things; not only
irreligions, but things uncomely and absurd, which we our selves could not
suspect that we should be ever drawn unto: They cause us to grow proud, secure,
injurious, and put a man upon the practice of those Evils which would hardly
enter into the heart of man, that ever they should be practiced by us. They
wound the Soul with many noysom Lusts, as the Apostle shows; and pierce us
through with many Sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Who shall separate us from the Love
of God, says the Apostle? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, etc?
So says the worldly covetous man (says Austin); They say in their hearts,
albeit they say it not in their mouths, Quis nos separabit cupiditate Auri? Who
shall separate us from the love of Gold? shall Tribulation, or Anguish, or
Persecution, Romans 8.35, 36.
or Life, or Death? Nay they say likewise to their Gold, which they make their
god, Propter te occidimur quotidie, For thy sake we are killed all the day
long; for the love of Riches they stick not to endanger daily both Soul and
Body. In which respect, it is so far from wonder, that a rich man should be
wicked, as that it is to be admired how a rich man should be good. Seeing as
Clemens Alexandrinus says, Clem. Alex. Padag. l. 3. c. 6.
It is a matter of as great difficulty to abound with Riches, and not abuse
them; as to float upon the Water and not be ducked. Let us now make some useful
Application of this Point.

David indeed, in one place, seems to place happiness in worldly prosperity;
as when our Garners are full, affoarding all manner of store; and our Sheep
brings forth thousands and ten thousands in our Streets; when our Oxen are
strong to labor, and there is no breaking in, nor going out, nor complaining,
nor shrieking at the violence of an Enemy; Happy is that People, says he, that
is in such a case, Bellar in loc.
Psalm. 144.15. But that Speech (say some) the Psalmist utters in the person of
a worldly man, who usually says so; therefore the Greek turns it, They count
that People blessed which are so; and is much like that of Solomon, Eccles.
2.24. There is nothing better for a man, then to eat and drink, and to make his
Soul enjoy good in his Labor? Therefo e he corrects that saying, delivering
his own judgment therein, and opposes true Happiness unto it; yea, happy is
that People whose God is the Lord. Others take the words, as spoken by David in
his own person, and in reference to the People that live under a peaceable and
happy Government, who are in some respect happy in the peace of the Kingdom,
and immunity from the misery of Wars by a Foreign or Domestic Enemy. Such a
People are happy, but that happiness is but a deficient happiness, a happiness
that is defective, albeit in some respect a man may call it happiness, but it
comes far short of true happiness; and therefore David adds, yea, happy is that
People, which words are spoken by way of Retractation: he seems to retract
what went before, lest worldly men should wrest it to a mis-interpretation.
It Is as if he should say, Did I say that those were happy who are in such a
case? Mistake me not, for those that are only in such a case, are nor
completely happy, whatever the World conceives: for true Happiness, lies not in
outward things, but in God; no blessedness, no happiness can be had without
God, who is essential Happiness.

That man's happiness does not consist in any earthly thing, as Riches, Honor,
Pleasures, etc. might be confirmed by sundry Arguments: The glorious Angels of
Heaven have not them, yet they are happy. The end of man is better then man
himself, but these are worse then man; for a man for his Life would give the
whole World, therefore his happiness does not ly in them. Riches are not able
to make a man good; how then are they able to make a man happy? They may
denominate a man to be Great and Worshipful, but not to be a virtuous or a
godly man. They are so far from making a man good, that they often make him
evil; and possess the heart with vile affections, and fill it full of carnal
and sinful desires: But I cannot stay upon these things: only I desire you to
rectify your judgments in this Point; think not your selves, nor any other,
ever a whit the more happy simply for Riches. Happiness is the end you are to
aim at: but if all your ayms are at Wealth, and think to be happy in the
enjoying that, you take your aim amiss. Our blessed Savior in his Sermon upon
the Mount, treates of true Happiness, Dr. Harris on the Beat.
and he sets the Crown of true blessedness upon many things, as there you read,
Matthew. 5. he begins with Poverty, Blessed are the poor in spirit, and so
proceeds. But you read not there, no, nor any where else, That he says,
Blessed are the Rich, Blessed are the Wealthy, Blessed are the Mighty, Blessed
are the Witty, etc. Could you read that in any of his Sermons, or in the whole
Book of God, you might have somewhat to confirm yourselvs in your opinion that
you are Happy because Wealthy; but that you do not. If Gold and Silver be your
happiness, then your happiness lies in the Earth, and so your happiness is
nearer Hell then Heaven; for Hell is placed in the Deep, and Heaven is aloft,
as we all know, and so happiness should be nearer to the Devil than to God.

Solomon, Eccles. 9.1. No man can know God's love or hatred by these things.
Yet such there are who hold themselves to be only Darlings of Heaven, because
they are Rich and increased in worldly Wealth. Such was the folly of Ephraim,
as we read, Hos. 12.8. Yet, said Ephraim, I am become rich, I have found me out
substance in all my Labors, they shall find none iniquity in me; And they
prospered wonderously in the increase of these worldly things, and carried the
matter so closely, (like crafty and deceitful Merchants, as they are said to
be, ver. 7.) that in all their Contracts, no man could accuse them of any
unjust dealing; whereupon they blessed themselves in their Estates, as if they
were the higher in God's favor for that. But, in so doing, Ephraim fed himself
with Wind, as God says, ver. 1. and pleased themselves with vain and idle
imaginations of their own; for they might get substance, and by warrantable
means too (which they did not), and yet be never the more in God's love and
favor for that. King John.
What a King of this Realm sometimes said of a Buck which he opened, See how
fat it is, yet it never heard Mass! So it may be said of many that abound in
worldly things, See how Rich they are, and yet they contemn all Piety and
Godliness! To measure God's love by the Acre, or by the depth of the Purse, by
how much Land or Metal, Silver and Gold, he gives this man more than another;
to thee above thy Neighbor; is no other than as if thou should weigh God
with leaden or iron, or stony weights, and put those into the balance of that
Sanctuary that David speaks of, Psalm. 73.

Genesis 24.35, and 26, 12. Job 42.12. Psalm. 112.2. Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2.
But methinks I hear some objects, Is it nor said in Scripture, that God
blessed such and such, and they became Rich? Are not Riches promised as a part
of that Recompense which God gives his Servants, who fear his Name, and obey
his Commandment? And is it not made an argument of God's love to the Stranger,
that he gives him Food and Raiment, Deuteronomy. 10.18? Why then may not a man
conclude, that God loves him, in that he bestows Wealth and Riches on him?

David reasoned, Psalm. 41.11. By this I know that thou favourest me, because
mine Enemies do not triumph over me. A very weak and sorry Argument (one would
think) it was, to prove God's love and favor by; For God does oftentimes as
much as that comes to, for his very Enemies: But David relished God's love
therein, and was provoked to set forth God's praise thereby, as follows, ver.
13. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, Amen and
Amen. When we have a testimony of God's spiritual Blessings in the temporal,
then are these temporal Blessings good evidences of God's special love and
favor.

Secondly, These common and earthly Blessings are fruits of God's love and
good will that he bears unto men, and from them a man may safely conclude,
that God loves him, and bears some good will unto him. Yet this love that
appears in any of these outward things is such, that a man can take no sound
comfort in, if he be a wicked person; for as much as it is but the fruit of a
common love extended to the brute Creature, as well as unto man, Psalm. 36.6.
but no sign of God's special and everlasting love of that love which he be^reth
to them, whom he means to make eternally happy; They are Blessings of the left
hand, not of the right or upper hand* Prove. 3.16. and conferred very often on
those that shall be set at God's left hand at the last day.

If then thou would have comfort in thy outward estate, and gather from
thence some assurance of God's special love and favor toward thee; see that
these Blessings are reached forth unto thee with God's right hand. With that
hand you know we show all our courtesy. And at that hand, we place those whom
we most honor, (which Custom (it may be) we first learned from God himself).
The main difference betwixt the Gifts of God's right hand and of his left, is
this, The one are given in Christ, Romans 8.32. Romans 8 32.
In whom the Promises are Yea and Amen, and in whom, only we are accepted, Ephesians.
1.3, 6. The other in a general way of providence, as you shall hear anon. That
man that is assured he is in Christ, may take comfort even in these earthly
Blessings, and receive them as testimonies of his special love and favor: but
if thou art not in him, and have obtained remission of thy Sin by his precious
Blood, thou deceivest thy self in thinking God loves thee with a special love,
because of thy abundance; and thou will in the end find thy self to be deceived
as Haman was, who apprehended the Queens invitation of him to the Banquet, Est.
5.12.
as a matter of grace and favor, which was but a preparative to his ruin: Thy
state being no other then that of a Traitor, who has a good Lodging and good
Diet prepared for him in his Prison, till matters be ripe, and he ready for his
Arraignment and Execution.

Ambrose), Amb. Ser. 10.
Ut quem nudum matter genuit, etc. That whom the Mother brings forth naked, the
Church receives naked, that is, in Baptism; he should strive to enter Rich,
that is, with abundance of earthly Riches into Heaven: Give me leave to say,
How absurd a thing is it to labor so earnestly after earthly Riches, which are
not able to make us better then we are, neither more virtuous, nor less
vicious? Could these things make us more accepted of God as they do of Men, or
more beloved of him, it were indeed worth the while to seek so earnestly and
eagerly after them; but that they cannot: It is only Faith, Repentance, and the
Gifts and Graces of his Spirit; that can do that. Now, Will a precious Diamond
buy Faith, or a Gold Ring Repentance? or a Bag of Gold buy a Pardon from God
for the least Sin that thou have committed? or a Sure of Silk obtain a Suit
from God any whit the sooner? You cannot but be convinced in your judgment,
that they will not; Will Wealth mortify your Lusts, subdue any inordinate
Passion in you, etc? You know and find by experience, that it does not. How
insufficient earthly Riches are for these purposes, I doubt not but you are in
your judgments sufficiently convinced: And yet it is strange to see the royl
and labor that men take for these things, and the great flothful neglect in
seeking after right-handed Blessings that must make us truly happy; witness our
labors on the week Days, and our laziness on the Sabbath. That Censure which
Guevarra passes upon the Duke of Veiar, who, in his lifetime, had heaped a
great Mass of Wealth together, and, at his Death, dyed very Rich, may be passed
upon some; My judgment is, says he, That he went about to seek Care for
himself, Envy for his Neighbors, Spurrs for his Enemies, a Prey for Thieves,
Travel for his Person, Anguish for his Spirit, Scruple for his Conscience,
Peril for his Soul, Law for his Children, and Curses for his Heirs. Sure I am,
whilst our hearts are set to be Rich, there is many a filthy slough and puddle
that we must pass through: nor can we escape the badge of our Travel; with
whatsoever delight you hunt after Wealth, you will find but a dirty way of it,
as this rich man did; And so enough has been said concerning his Titles. Now,
without any wrong done to him, we will enter ort his Demeans, and take a survey
both of his Lands and Crop, whereby he is further described to us.

The Ground -- brought forth ple^tifully. Or, Text. as it is in the Original
(...), the Region or Country belonging to that man brought forth plentifully;
he had not some little Field or narrow compass of Ground, but a whole Country
that he was Lord of: There seems to be an Emphasis in the word, says Beza,
^cz. in loc.
noting him to be such a one as the Prophet Esaias speaks of* Esaias. 5.8. Who had
laid Field to Field, till he was become the only Land-holder thereabout. But
this I shall not press, we will only take notice of his Propriety, and the
Ground's Fertility.

The Ground belonged to the Rich man before mentioned, as is evident in the
Text. It was his; (we will not question how he came by it), that belongs not to
us; That which we are to take notice of from hence, may be this.

jus proprium, The wicked have a right to earthly things as well as the godly.
Genesis 23 16
a right of propriety in earthly things. A just and lawful right Sinners may
have to the things of this World, as well as Saints; what they have, may be
truly said to be theirs.

We read that Abraham bought a Possession for burial of the Children of Heth,
and paid for it current money of Merchants, Genesis 23.16. And it is said of Jacob,
That he bought a parcel of a Field of the Children of Hamor, Sechems Father,
and paid for it a hundred pieces of money, when he pitched his Tent: Genesis 33.19.
Genesis 33.19
Surely neither Abraham nor Jacob would have bought Land of these, had they
that sold no right to what they made sale of: And when Moses led the Childen of
Israel toward Canaan; being to go by the Country of the Edomites, he sent a
solemn Embassage to the King of Edom, desiring leave to pass through his
Country, promising to do no wrong, neither in his Fields nor Vineyards, nor to
drink the water of his Wells, Numb. 20.17. Numb. 20.17, and 21, 22.
The like did he to Sihon King of the Amorites, Numb. 21.22. By which deed of
his, he acknowledged a right that they had to what they did possess. To omit
many other Instances, I shall only put you mind of that we read; Act. 5.4.
where we find the Apostle determining the point in the case of Ananias, Act.
5.4.
when he sold his Possession; Whilst it remained, was it not thine own? and
after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? David calls Riches and
worldly Possessions, the Portion of a wicked man, Psalm. 17.14. and therefore it
is without dispute, that they have a just right unto them.

The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof, says David, Psalm. 24.1. He
made it, and so his Right unto it is unquestionable; after he had made it, he
gave it to the Children of men, Psalm. 115.16. So we read, Genesis 1.28.



Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. The Civil Right, is that which the Wicked have as well as
the Good; God deals with them, as Princes do by Traitors, who so long as they
give them Life, they give them Meat and Drink to maintain that Life which they
give them. Albeit their Spiritual Right is lost, yet a Civil Right is continued
and maintained by God himself: So God gave to Cyrus, an Infidel* The Treasures
of Darkness, and the hidden Riches of secret places, Esaias 45.3. And to
Neluchadnezzar, an Idolatrous King, says God, I have given all these Lands
into his hands, Jer. 27.6. So Ezekiel. 29.20. I have given him all the Land of
Egypt for his Labor. And Dan. ^.37. The God of Heaven has given thee a
Kingdom, Power, and Strength, says Daniel. God was pleased so divide to the
Nations their Inheritances, and to set bounds so the People, Deuteronomy. 32.8. So
Act. 17.26. He has made of one Blood all Nations of Men for to dwell on all
the face of the Earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their Habitation. And that for the avoiding of Confusion, and to
restrain men's greedy appetites; so that Sin has not deprived wicked men of a
Civil Right to the Creatures: for the ground of that Right, is Reason, which is
in Man, he being able to Command and Rule. A Spiritual Right he has not, the
ground of that being Holiness, which is wanting in him. As Sin takes not away
the Life of Man, no more does it take away his Civil Possessions from him: Both
these Rights (as one observes) are mentioned, 1 Cor. 10.25. Whatsoever is sold
in the Shambles, that eat; that is, after you have bought it of him that is the
Owner, be he who he will, there is the Civil Right, asking no question for
conscience sake, says the Apostle; there is the Spiritual Right.

Love would maintain, is by this overthrown: they would have all things common;
some of them are for such a Community as Plato warranted, Wives not exempted;
Distinction of Lands and Goods, say they, was brought in by Tyranny, and not by
Law; by Violence, and not by Justice: or if by Law, yet no other Original it
had then positive Laws of men.

I have neither list nor leisure to enter the Lists which these men at the
present; but thus much in short, It cannot be denied, but that some Cains and
Nimrods, mighty Hunters of the World, have obtained a kind of property in their
Goods and Lands, either by lying and falsehood, as Mephibosheth's Lands were got
from him, and that was Zibae's tennre ( tenure in cousenage), 1 Samuel 16.3, 4*
Or by might and oppression, and that was the Rich man's tenure mentioned in
that Parable which Nathan propounded to David, 2 Samuel 12.3. (a Tenure in
Tyranny); or by Imposture, and juggling with God's Inheritance, when that is
kept from it, which had bin consecrated unto it; This was Achan's Tenure, Josh.
7.21. ( Tenure in Sacrilege): many such Tenures there are in the World. And
for my own part, were I never so great an enemy to Anabaptists, as I cannot but
be to their Opinions; yet I should as soon admit of their Trojans horse,
Community of all things, as to have properties established in such terms and
tenures as these be.

But however these woolvish and usurping Owners made that peculiar to
themselves (which they had been far better to have left alone) by such sinful
and indirect courses; yet it is no good Inference to say, that because these
properties were gotten and obtained by Cruelty, Oppression, and Fraud;
therefore nothing should be several: no more then it was a good reason to
prove, that no Vines should stand in Lacedemon, because some did abuse the
sweet juice of the Vine to excess and drunkenness.

Were it so, that propriety of Goods, and enclosures of Lands were the device
of Man, and not the Ordinance of God; to what purpose does the Apostle use that
dehortation, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more? There could be no
Theft commmitted under the times of the Gospel; for what is Theft, but
Usurpatio Rei alienae, invito Domino? And why did St. John give that Counsel to
Soldiers, Do no violence to no man, Luke 3.14? What violence could be offered,
were all things common? Wherefore did God forbid under the pain of a Curse, to
remove the bounds and Landmarks that our Fathers have set, Deuteronomy. 27.17. Prove.
22.28. But it is scarce worth the while in spending time in confuting these
absurdities.



Dr. Sibbs his Christians portion. p. 35.
This Opinion is very unsound and too rigorous (says in excellent Divine of our
own.) That spiritual Right and Title indeed, which is the best and most
comfortable Right, the wicked have not, through the want of Christ: Their
Tenure is not in Capite, (which whatever it be amongst men, I am sure, it is
the best Tenure in Religion.) But there is another Tenure besides that, another
Title besides the Spiritual; as you have heard: there is a Civil or Humane
Right, whether by hereditary Descent, or civil Contract, or Gift, or Industry,
whereby they have a Title before men to what they have, and may hold and defend
their own against all Intruders whatsoever; and not only so, but they have a
Right and Title before God as well as before Men, Pemberton's Godly Merchant.
p. 77.
who bestows these things upon them, as he is a Preserver of Nature, a
Sustainer of his Creature, a Maintainer of Callings, a Rewarder of Industry; as
a God of Mercy, alluring by his Benefits; and a God of Justice, to make men
refusing his Mercy excuseless: So that no man can despoil them of those things
they have, without great Sin; nor can it be truly said of a Wicked man, not
being in Christ, that he no otherwise enjoyes the things he does possess, than
a Thief does a true man's Purse: For, the Thief holds what he has neither by a
Spiritual nor Civil Right; he has neither Jus ad Rem, nor Jus in Re; these
have the one at least. Nor shall they be called to an Account at the last day,
for possessing what they have (as the Thief shall), but for their abusing of
what they do possess: And therefore properly they are not Usurpers in regard of
Possession, but they shall render an Account for the Abuse of God's bounty
toward them.

Fallere fallentem non est fraus, To deceive the Deceiver is not deceit; but it
is an ungodly one: For the Rule is, Let no man oppress nor defraud his Brother
in any matter, 1 These. 4.6. Nor will it be sufficient to say, He is not my
Brother; for one God has made us all, Mal. 2.9. and God is the Avenger of all
such things. Had it not been to stint the covetous desires and unsatiable
appetites of greedy Cormorants, (it may be, that) God would not have been so
exact in limiting and bounding of men's Possessions: But knowing Man far better
than himself, he has thought it fit to do by his unbridled desires, as he has
done by the raging Sea, which he has shut up with Bars and Doors, saying, Job
38.10, 11.
Hitherto thou shall come, but no further; and, Here shall thy proud Waves be
stayed: Setting up that in every part of the World, which Hercules was said to
set up in one pare of it, a Mark or Bound as a Nihilultra, beyond which upon
danger of out lives we may not pass a Foot.

Thou shall not steal, is an ancient Fence set up by God himself, to preserve
other men's Possessions and Goods; and he that breaks that Hedge, let him
beware of the Serpent, the Curse of God, which is gone out against the House of
the Thief, Zechar. 5.

Whosoever breaks a Hedge, a Serpent shall bite him, says Solomon, Eccles. 10.8.
The Sting of that Serpent is deadly and mortal; God's Curse does follow such
as encroach upon another's Right, and by unlawful lawful means seek to enlarge
their b^rden, Amos 1.13. Woe to them (says the Prophet Isay) that join House to
House, and lay Field to Field, till there be no place; for, of a truth, says
God, many Houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without Inhabitant,
Ver. 9. meaning the Homes and Families of those greedy Oppressors, as we have
it verified in this rich man, this our Text makes mention of; and see it daily
verified in many, De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius Haeres.
whose Wealth unjustly gotten proved but like unto a heap of Snow in a hot day,
which does not only melt away, but make the way more mi^ey. It will be to the
Soul and Conscience, what ever men conceive, as Jonah was to the Whale; the
Whale had devoured him, but it had no quiet till it had cast him up again upon
the Land: So, when men play the part of that Whale, and devour up all that
comes next, they will in the end be as weary of it as the Whale was of Jonah's
Bones. Will you hear what Zophar in Job speaks unto the Point, Job 20.12, 13,
14, 15. Job 20.12, -- 16.
Though Wickedness be sweet in his Mouth, (that is, in the Mouth of the
Extortioner, who got Goods into his hands by unjust and wicked means, as before
was intimated Ver. 10.) though he hide it under his Tongue, though he spare it,
and forsake it not, but keeps it still within his Mouth; yet his Meat in his
Bowels is turned, it is the Gall of Asps within him: He has swallowed down
Riches, and he shall vomit them up again; God shall cast them out of his Belly.

Mark this well, all you who labor to fill your Houses with the Treasures of
Wickedness, or in whose Houses the Treasures of Wickedness yet are, as Micha
speaks, Mich. 6.10. Wherein, or how far, any man has couzened or deceived
another, his Conscience will tell him, (unless by the long habit of Couzenage
he has also learned to cousen his Conscience;) but let me tell that
Conscience, that a Patrimony of Riches, gotten by fraudulent Courses, will
prove but like that Morsel which the Fox got from the Crow. That crafty
Creature hugged himself, to think how he had couzened the poor Bird of her
Breakfast; but he had no sooner eaten it, but he found himself poisoned
therewith, and then wished the Crow her own again. What is gotten by deceit
and fraud, is like a piece of but ered Sponge (a Trick that the Italians use),
it goes down glib, but it swells in the Stomach, and will hardly, if ever, be
gotten up again: Yet God will fetch it up, he shall vomit it up again says
Zophar; and such a Vomiting shall be little to his Ease or Credit: But, as it
is said of Moab, He shall wallow in his Vomit, and be had in Derision, Jer.
48.26. God will discover to the World thy Extortions, Oppressions, and
injurious Actions, in getting other men's Goods and Possessions into thy hands,
under any pretense whatsoever. As the Physician does by a Vomit in a Basin; he
sees and shows what raw Meat, and what hard and indigestable Meat the sick
Patient had eaten: So will God (when he brings thee so this Vomit) show thee
and the World what thou have devoured; here appears that Neighbor's Land;
there, that Widdow's House, devoured under pretense of long Prayer; and that is
such an Orphan's Legacy; whereof he was cheated: And (as many times it
happens), that Vomiting breaks a Vein within, which is commonly-incurable; Such
a Vein broke Judas, he vomited by confessing of his wicked restoring of the
Silver, for which he sold his Master; but he bled within, a Vein was broke that
could not be stenched, he ended his days in a desperation of God's Mercies.

If then thou be such a one that have any way encroached upon another's
Right, and made a Gap by treading down that Hedge which God has made about
another, remember the Serpent's Sting. If thou have eaten the Bread of Deceit,
or drunk of the Wine of Violence, think of the Vomit which will follow, put thy
finger in thy own throat, fetch up that buttered Sponge which thou have
swallowed, before it swells too much, and restore the Right unto the Owner. It
is a sweet thing, 1 Samuel 12.3, 4.
so to live as that a man may make Samuel's Challenge at his dying day; Whose
Ox, or whose Ass have I taken? To whom have I done wrong? Nor were they his own
Lips only that gave Testimony of his righteous dealing, but the People likewise
witnessed thereunto; Thou have done us no Wrong, nor have neither hurt us; have
taken ought of any man's hand. This Crown set upon Samuel's Silver hairs, was
more honorable than Pompey's Monuments. But, if in Case Conscience does smite
any of you for unjust and injurious dealing; make your peace betimes, give your
selves a Vomit, restore that you have unjustly taken: So did Zacheus, presently
and voluntarily, Luke 19.8. and that brought Salvation with it, Ver. 9. This
day is Salvation come to this House, said Christ. Some restore Goods
ill-gotten, as the Stomach does Meat, for that they cannot hold it: Such a kind
of Restitution is thankless. Bradford (that holy Man and Martyr) hearing a
Sermon of Father Latimer's, wherein Restitution was urged, was so struck at
heart for one dash of a Pen which he had made without the Knowledge of his
Master, that he could not be at quiet, till by the Advice of Latimer
Restitution was made; for which he did willingly forgo all the private and
certain Patrimony which he had on Earth. Where shall we find his Fellow? Yet
the very Turks and Barbarians abhor the Neglect of Restitution to any, though
they judge them never so wicked. I have read of a great Lady, who, being a
Widow, sent for an English Merchant trafficking in those parts, with whom she
knew her Husband had Commerce, and asked him if there were nothing owing to him
from her deceased Lord: He, after much Importunity, acknowledged there was, and
showed the particulars. She tendered him satisfaction; he modestly refused it,
as having been greatly benefited by the dead Barbarian: But she forced him to
take from her hand the utmost Penny; for, said she, I would not have my
Husband's Soul go to seek your Soul in Hell, there to pay his Debts. Here
(says one) there was a great Fire in a dark Vault, great Zeal in blind
Ignorance; they saw by the Candlelight of Nature, that which Austin delivers
for Doctrinal Truth, Aug. Epist. 54.
Non remittitur Peccatum, nisi restituatur Oblatum; where is no Restitution of
things unjustly gotten, there Sins shall never be forgiven. Turk. Hist. fol.
567.
The like we read of the Turk, Sultan Selymus, who leaning his head in the lap
of his Counselor Pyrrhus, being ready to die; Pyrrhus persuaded him to bestow
the great Wealth that he had taken from Persian Merchants upon some Hospital,
for the Relief of the Poor; but the dying Turk refused it, and commanded that
it should be restored to the right Owners, which was done accordingly: And
indeed, to spoil others, and think by some charitable Work to make Recompense,
is no other than to play the Thief, and make God the Receiver. Restitution is
to be made to the Party wronged, if he, or any of his be alive; if not, then
the Poor are God's Receivers: Say a man be dead, yet he is alive to thee if
thou have wronged him; As one said of a Shoo-maker, whom he had couzened of a
Pair of Shoes, The Maker dies, but the Wearer lives to wear that which he
never paid for; after some years, the Conscience of this man is troubled, he
enquires for this Shoo-maker, that he might make Restitution for what he had
deceived him of; he was told that he was dead: Yea, but said the Restorer, He
is alive to me, I am sure. So should the wronged Patty be to thee. To conclude
it, in a word, Let not thy Palate be pleased with that which thou know must
either be vomited up again, or thy Death if it be not; for, if you make no
Restitution to whom you have wronged, of that which you have unjustly defrauded
them of, you shall cough in Hell, said Father Latimer. And so much of the Rich
man's Property: now we are to take notice of the Fertility of the Soil.

Text. It brought forth plentifully.] (...).
Uberes fructus attulit.

It brought forth, even as a Mother brings forth out of a fruitful Womb,
plentifully and abundantly. Let us then take this Note with us.



This is a Point which might profitably be enlarged and applied, but I shall
briefly dispatch it.

Should we examine what is in the Womb or Entrails of this our common Mother
Earth, we should find there is Riches and much Treasure, of which we may read,
Job 28.1, -- 12. Rich Minerals are her Veins; she has a Vein of Silver,
another of Gold, another of Brass, and Iron, which is molten out of her; she
has stones of Saphires, and dust of Gold, etc. Ver. 6. These and the like are
within the Earth; called a hid Treasure, for that it is within the Earth, and
hidden from our Eyes. Adams on Peter. 1172. Our Text leads us to a
consideration of such as are upon the Earth, and brought forth by her, and well
known and seen; and, more particularly, the Vegetables, that is, the Plants
that grow upon the Earth, as Grass, Grain, Herbs, Trees, etc. the Variety
whereof who is able to recount, either for kinds, colors, smell, taste,
greatness, virtue, figure, etc? All which come from the same Womb, and grow on
the same Clod of Earth, and are brought forth for the Use of Man; some to feed
him, as Deuteronomy. 20.19. Job. 28.5. some to delight him, Psalm. 104.10, 15. and some
to heal his Diseases, and cure his Wounds, Isa. 38.21. Jer. 8.22. God has
provided Remedies for all the Diseases of Man, even out of the Earth; there is
scarce any Disease incident to Man, but there is some Plant, or Herb, or other,
that may either ease him or cure him.

And for Proof of the Point, see Genesis 26.12. Isaac sowed, and the Earth
returned him an hundredfold in that Year. So Psalm. 65.12, 13. the Fruitfulness
thereof is excellently set forth unto us. So in the New Testament, that Parable
propounded by our Savior, Mark 4.28. confirms it; It brings forth of it self,
not as if it needed not Man's help, but it brings forth readily and
plentifully; being sowed, it has a propensity to it. So that of the Apostle,
Hebr. 6.8.

Genesis 1.11, 12. he then infused a Seminal Disposition into it, or Power to
bring forth.

Genesis 3.17. And again, Genesis 4.11. How then can it be said to bring forth so
plentifully?

Adam, Genesis 3.18. In sorrow shall thou eat thereof: As if he should have said,
By my only Blessing the Earth has hitherto abounded with all manner of Store,
and I have endued it with a Natural Power to bring forth (of its own accord)
both Corn, and fruitful Trees, and Herbs in wonderful abundance, for the use
both of Man and Beast: But now, in stead of Wheat, it shall be naturally given
to bring forth Weeds, and in stead of Fruit, Thorns and Thistles; which shall
so abound, that they shall serve (not to show the Wisdom of God in the
diversity of his Works, but) to choke better Fruits which of themselves were
ready to decay; Ezekiel. 16.59.
yet I will not withdraw my Blessing wholly from the Earth, as thy Sin has
deserved I should, but so as that thou shall eat thy Bread in Sorrow; the Curse
inflicted on the Earth is for thy sake, not for its own. So Genesis 3.17. Cursed
is the Earth for thy sake: The Punishment inflicted on it was principally upon
him (for whose Use the Earth was made), who by his Sin did subdue it unto
Vanity: Romans 8.20.
But now, upon the labor and pains which thou shall bestow upon it, it shall
yield that Increase unto thee which formerly it yielded without it. In the
sweat of thy Face (or, of thy Nose, as one renders it) shall thou eat thy
Bread, (says God, Genesis 3.19.) So that the Earth is not utterly deprived of
Blessedness; that natural Blessing of bringing forth, plentifully is not
utterly lost, but only weakened, so that it cannot do what before it had done?



Genesis 2.8. M^t. 13.3.
were more fruitful than the rest, as the Garden of Paradise exceeded all the
Earth besides; and no wonder if it be so now. Yet there is no Soil but is apt
to bring forth somewhat for the good of Man; that Earth that has the most
barren Face may have the richest Intrails, as where Minerals are.

And secondly, There may be many Causes of it; as, Neglect of Husbandry, or
Misdemeanour of the Owners, as Idleness, or ill Husbandry, in unesteeming,
unculturing, neglect of meet helps, etc. And Man's daily sinning is none of the
least, Psalm. 107.34. Lev. 26.20
God turns a fruitful Land into Barrenness, sometimes by unkindly Seasons,
sometimes by pernicious Blastings, Inundation of Waters; and all is for the
Wickedness of the Inhabitants that dwell therein, which, considering how great
it is, we may well wonder that there should be any one Acre of fruitful Soil
within this Realm of England.

etc. But we with Balaam many times blame the Ass, when our selves are in fault:
Could the Earth speak to us, as the Ass did to him, it would complain much to
the same purpose: Numb. 22.28, 30.
What have I done unto thee, that thou smitest me, and so often complain of
me? Was I not created for thy Use and Service? Have not, ever since thou
troddest on my Face (for so the Scripture does phrase it often), yielded
increase unto thee? Do thou receive thy Food and Sustenance from me? Is it
not out of my Bowels that thou receivest all thy Riches? And if my Womb prove
dry and barren, or any way miscarry, it is thy Sin and Unthankfulness that is
the Cause thereof. So, that as Jacob said to his Sons, You have robbed me of my
Children; may the Earth say, You have robbed me, and spoiled me of my Births.
Romans 8.19, 20.
The Earth groaneth (says St. Paul), it is as a Woman in pain, and longs to be
delivered, but there is no strength to bring forth. Nor do those that most
complain of bad Crops, and a barren Soil, always play the part of good
Midwives in her Delivery: No place so dry with Sand, or hard with Rocks, but if
well cooked with Industry it will make man's meat, especially for hungry
Stomachs, says one. Pisgah-sight, lib. 4 p. 59.

Bernard on Ruth, 423. Fruitful Countries make full Barns.
Let us acknowledge God's Goodness to us, who notwithstanding our Sins great and
many which brought the Curse upon the Earth, yet he is graciously pleased so to
heal the Womb of it (as he did the Womb of Abimelech's Household), that albeit
it come far short of what it was before the Fall, yet it is both willing and
able by the help of Industry (that good Midwife), to bring forth, and that
plentifully, for the good of Man. And more than this, God has taught Man the
Skill and Power, by setting, sowing, plowing, watering, Insition, Inoculation,
in due season to do the Office of a Midwife to the Earth, that it may bring
forth, as we have it excellently set forth, Isa. 28.23, -- 30. God does
instruct the Husbandman to discretion; he has not this Skill of himself, God
gives him Understanding to do it, This also comes of the Lord of Hosts (says
the Prophet) who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. We are too
prone to magnify out own Power and Skill, our own Pains and Husbandry, little
considering who gave us that discretion; and so we rob him of that Praise which
is due unto him for instructing of us therein.

When Lamech begat a Son, he called his Name Noah (which signifies Rest); and
he gives the Reason, For this Son shall comfort us concerning the Work and Toil
of our hands, because of the Ground which the Lord has cursed, Genesis 5.29.
Peter Martyr thinks that Lamech hoped, that this Son of his should have been
that promised Seed, who should restore the Earth to its former Estate, so that
it should bring forth Fruit without Man's Labor, as it did at the beginning;
but therein he was deceived. But this may be our Comfort, that by our Labor
and Industry we shall enjoy the Fruits of the Earth, and through Holiness; and
Well-doing, the Earth cursed for out Sins shall in some measure recover her
strength to bring forth and yield her increase.

You may think it to be very incongruous to read a Lecture of Husbandry to
Husbandmen, as it was for Phormio a Philosopher to entertain Hannibal with a
Lecture of Warlick Discipline; which being ended, and every one admiring the
old man's Dexterity in so strange a Faculty, Hannibal being asked what he
thought of him, answered, That he had seen many doting old men, but more than
Phormio never any; and merito sane (says Cicero), deservedly enough: For, What
could be a matter of greater Folly than for a Philosopher, who never saw a
Camp, nor beheld an Enemy, to discourse of Military matters before so great a
Soldier and worthy a Captain as Hannibal was. But in keeping myself to the
Rules of Scripture and acquainting you with those Directions which the Word
holds forth for the prospering of the Fruits of the Earth, I shall keep within
the Bounds of my own Calling, in instructing you Husbandmen whom God does
instruct and would have to be instructed how to further the Earth's
Fruitfulness.

God himself has laid down sundry Rules for your Direction herein which I
might by Warrant of my Doctrine press upon you, but I will but point at them.

First, If you would have good Crops, keep God's Commandments, and obey his
Word, Lev. 26.4. Deuteronomy. 11.13. and 28. If you deceive God, the Earth will
deceive you.

Secondly, Be diligent in your Callings, and not sloathful and careless. In all
Labor there is much profit, says Solomon, Prove. 14.23. This the Sons of that
Husbandman found, who being told by him that there was Gold hid in his
Vineyard, after he was dead fell to digging for it, but they found not that
Gold which they expected; yet the next year they had a rich Crop, which brought
them in much Gold, which was that the Father intended. A sloathfull Person
causes the Earth to be sloathfull through his Sluggishness, Prove. 24.30, 31.
God stretches out his hand as we do; we to labor, he to bless our Labors.

Thirdly, By Prayer seek a Blessing from God upon your Labors. I shall relate
to you what I have heard to his purpose, There was a very great Husbandman, who
had a good Farm, yet but mean Crop: Another that dwelt near him had a him had a
mean Farm, nor did he take that pains with his Ground that the other did, yet
had always a rich Crop: The rich Neighbor meeting with the other, asked him,
How he ordered his Ground, that he had such a great Increase, when he whose
Ground was better, and Pains greater, could sometimes scarce see his Seed
again: O Neighbor (said the other), you do not well steep your Seed, as I do,
before you sow it. Steep it? in what (said the rich Farmer)? In Prayer, said
the other: Do but that, and your Crop will be better. And indeed David has
taught us, That it is in vain so rise early, or go to Bed late, to eat the
Bread of Carefulness, unless God bless our Labors: It is God only that makes
the Earth fruitful, Psalm. 127.2.

But in praying to God for a Blessing, limit not God to what season you please.
Bishop Babington relate a Story out of Holcot to this purpose, of a Hermit, who
having sowed Pot Herbs in his Garden, desired sometimes fair weather and
sometimes foul weather, granted, as he desired, but none of his Herbs came up:
Whereupon, he thought that there was a general failing of such Herbs in all
places, till one day walking to another Hermit not far off, he saw in his
Garden a singular good Crop: Then he told him what he had done concerning the
Weather, and what success it had; whereupon the other Hermit answered him, Thou
thoughtest thy self wiser than God, and he has showed thee thy Folly therein;
I, for my part, never desired of God other weather than he should please to
send, Babing in Exodus c. 16. p. 313. I would we would learn of that Hermit and
submit unto his Providence, etc.

Fourthly, Give God the Praise of all, Psalm. 67.5, 6. Let the People praise
thee, etc. then shall the Earth yield her increase, and God, even our God shall
bless us. And how God will be honored and praised, is more particularly
showed, Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and with the
first fruits of all thy Increase. Seeing it is he that gives Increase to all
things, it is the least Tribute we can pay him to honor him with the
First Fruits of them. This brings the Blessing of God upon all our Substance;
For, in so doing (says Solomon) Thy Barns shall be filled with Plenty, and thy
Presses shall burst with new Wine. And what is there promised, you find
performed 2 Chronicles. 31.10. Since the Priests began to bring their Offerings into
the House of the Lord (says Azariah the Chief-Priest to Hezekiah), we have
enough to eat, and have left plenty; for the Lord has blessed his People, and
that which is left, is this great store. To give to God, is not to give away,
as the Worldling thinks, but to receive more: The Jews Proverb was, Tithe and
be Rich. We cannot believe it: But prove it and try it, says God, if I will
not open the Windows of Heaven, and power you out a Blessing, that there shall
not he room enough to receive it. You may read to whom God's speaks this, and
upon what occasion, Malach. 3.8, 9, 10.

Fifthly and Lastly, Beware of hard usage of Servants and Laborers employed
about the Fruits of the Earth. For this will bring up the Thistles in Head of
Wheat, and Cockle in stead of Barley, as we read, Job 31.39, 40.

Job sends us to the Earth to be instructed and taught, Job 12.8. Speak to the
Earth, and it shall teach thee (says he), So say I, And what will it teach us?
It may instruct us what we are, Earth; and stand in need of, the Rain of
Heaven; and what we should be. So Paul urges from the fruitfulness of the
Earth, Heb. 6.7. The Earth that drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth herbs meet, for the Dresser receives blessing from God. The
Apostle reasons from the less to the greater: If the Earth that is painfully
tilled, and has many sweet Showers fallen upon it, brings forth plenty of
Herbs and other Fruits so answer the pains of the Husbandman, and requite the
cost and charges that has been bestowed on it; then much more ought we who are
likewise Earth (though moving) receiving so many sweet Showers from Heaven, and
having all the helps for Fruitfulness. It Is the example of the Earth, to bring
forth Fruit unto God, that we may receive a Blessing from him. O Earth, Earth,
Earth, hear the word of the Lord.

Text. Brought forth plentifully. Cr^g in Ez^k. 16. Ver. 45. Ch^m. in loc. Beda
in Glos. sup. Luc. 12. Doctr.
]

It seems by this, That this man's Wealth came in an honest way unto him; he
got it not by oppression, or forged cavillation (as may be thought Zacheus got
much of his); but even in those things which God by the hand of Nature did
reach forth unto him, he became a mighty man of Wealth. Thence we may infer in
the first place, that,

Outward Blessings are given by God unto the Wicked out of a general way of
providence, and no otherwise.

God's providence is of a large extent, it reaches both to Man and Beast, as
David shows, Psalm. 36.6. And as God preferrs the one, so he does the other,
(even such men, as he had in the former part of the Psalm described wicked and
ungodly men) at which he cannot but admire. But all temporal Blessings are
given unto them only ex largitate, out of that general Providence which causes
the Sun to shine, and the Rain to fall on the good and bad alike, Matthew. 5.45.
The happy influences of Heaven are powered down upon the heads of Sinners, as
well as on the heads of Saints. He is good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his Work, says David, Psalm. 145.9. He gives to the very Beast his
Food, and to the young Ravens when they cry, Psalm. 147.9.

All this in a providential way; As he is the Sustainer of Nature, and the
Preserver of the Creature, as has been before showed you; and it extends to
all Natural things, chained together by a regular order of Succession, as we
read, Hos. 2.21. I will hear the Heavens, they shall hear the Earth; The Earth
shall hear the Corn, Wine, Oil, and they shall hear Iezreel. How should Iexreel
live without Corn, Wine, and Oil? How should Corn, Wine, and Oil be had without
the yieldance of the Earth? How should the Earth yield these, without the
Influence of Heaven? How should Heaven yield these Influences, without the
Command of their Maker? All this is the Scale of providence, whereof no scale
can be missing.

ex promsso, out of God's Promise made unto them in Christ: For Godliness has
the Promises both of this Life, and that which is to come. To the godly they
are sent down the ladder which Jacob saw in his sleep, whereon Angels ascended
and descended; And though the Rainbow, which is said to compass about the
Throne of God Rev. 4.3. But to the wicked they come about another way, the way
of the Common: Now there is a vast difference betwixt these two, to have a
Blessing only ex largitate, out of a general bounty and favor bestowed on us,
and reached unto us by the hand of Nature; And to have it bestowed ex promisso,
by virtue of a Promise. The former is clogged with many encumbrances,
forfeitures, vexations, perplexities; which the latter is freed from. The
Blessing of the Lord, says Solomon, it makes Rich, and he adds no sorrow
with it, Prove. 10.22. Psalm. 69.22.
The drift of which Proverb, is to show the pre-eminence that God's People have
above the men of this World: The wicked usually have more store of Riches then
the godly, and God seems to be more provident for Sinners then for his
Saints; therefore Solomon shows the difference: Troubles and Vexation are
intermingled with the goods of the wicked, insomuch that they were in a manner
as good to be without them, as we find it verified in this Rich Man, Eccl. 2.16.
that our Text speaks of: but God's Servants are freed from those encumbrances;
God gives them Wealth without Woe, Store without Sore. If it be objected, that
many good men have Troubles in their prosperous Estates, and do find much grief
and perturbation in the enjoyment of these earthly things: I must answer you,
that these Cares and Troubles grow merely from their own infirmities; the Cook
is in the fault for making sour sauce to sweet meat. So far as God does give
these things unto them, they are without sorrow. Deuteronomy. 30.9. God gives them for
their good, and would they should have good of them.

Secondly, If any sorrowr be added to them by God, yet it is to make us relish
them the better; He will bless that sorrow to them that are godly; and being a
blessing to them, it cannot be well said to be Sorrow. So that we may conclude
with David, Psalm. 37.16. A little that the Righteous has, is better then the
Riches of many wicked men.

Romans 8.^2. Hereby thou shall improve a comfortable right in all God's mercies,
and preven^ all fear of Intrusion and Usurpation of the same; for if Christ be
thine, all is thine, 1 Cor. 3.23. As has been showed you very lately before
upon another Doctrine.

Yet there is another Observation, which we commend unto you from the words.
This man, you have heard, is not charged to come dishonestly by his Goods, nor
is he reprehended for tilling of his Land, husbanding of his Grounds, nor for
Inning his Crop into his Barns; but, for the abuse of that which God bestowed
on him, he is blamed and branded: Hence we infer in the second place,



Goods may be said to be well gotten, Psalm. 62.10. and 69, 22.
when they are lawfully come by; as by Inheritance, just Purchase, Free-gift
honest Labor, ordinary and conscionable course of Trading, fertility of the
Ground, and the like. Now all these ways a man may come by Wealth, and yet
that Wealth prove pernicious to the Soul of the Owner, as Solomon shows,
Eccles. 5.13, 19. There is a sore Evil which I have seen under the Sun; namely
Riches kept for the Owners thereof to their hurt; he speaks not of the getting
of them, but of the keeping of them: that which they look to have happiness by,
is the occasion of their misery. And that which Solomon saw, may be daily seen
in the World; Riches well and honestly gotten, prove many times an occasion of
mischief to the Owners.

And hence it is, that St. Paul wills Timothy to charge rich men with greatest
vehemence to beware of the abuses of Riches, in being highminded, and trusting
in them, 1 Timothy 6.17. He neither condemns the getting of them, nor the enjoying
of them, nor does he disalow their use; only he advises Timothy to admonish,
yea charge them, that they do not endanger their Souls through the abuse
thereof; which; were it not a thing possible to be done, that charge had been
needless.

St. James holds rich men in a terrible expectation of Vengeance, not for
having Riches, but for the abuse of them when they had them in hoarding of
them up, so that their Silver and Gold was cankred, the rust whereof should be
a witness against them, and eat their Plesh, as it were, with fire, Jam. 5.1,
2, 3. And yet for a more evident proof of the Point (if those produced like
not) I shall commend unto you that Parable of the Guests invited to the wedding
Feast; one excuses his not coming, for that he had bought a parcel of Land, as
St. Luke has it, Luke 14.18. or took a Farm as St. Matthew has it, Matthew.
22.8. another bought five Yoke of Oxen, Luke 14.19. So that they came honestly
by what they had, but their overmuch affection to these kept them from tasting
of that Supper. So again, that other Parable of the Pounds, Luke 19.12. and
Talents, Matthew. 25.14. confirms it: both he that received the Pound, and he
that received the Tallent, came honestly by what he had; yet the non-improving
of that Pound and Talent proved pernicious unto that Servant, and deprived him
of what he might have had, had he used it as he ought.

2 Cor. 2.16.
much more these things which are but of an indifferent Nature, as they are
used; and in such things, Satan soonest overcomes us, wherein we think our
selves safest. This made Agur to make that strange Prayer, Prove. 30.8. Give me
neither Poverty nor Riches. Against poverty every man almost will pray; but,
When heard we of a man that put up a prayer against Riches before? But it was
in regard of the Temptations that did attend upon the estate, that he made that
prayer, as he afterward expresses himself; well knowing the subtilty of
Satan, who lies in ambush to ensnare us in the use of things lawful, (as the
Serpent lies in the greenest grass) and the proneness of our Nature, to pervert
such things to our own destruction.

Judas could say as much as this, I got money by buying and selling, and I made
good my bargain to my loss: But say it was honestly come by, Is it honestly
used? If they can say with that boasting Pharisee, I am no Extortioner, nor
unjust Dealer, I came honestly by what I have; they imagine strait that they
are in a fair way of Salvation. Do we not read of one that bought five Yoke of
Oxen, and so came honestly by them, Luke. 14.19. and of another that bought a
piece of Ground with his penny, and yet both these were kept from the Supper of
the great King; things lawfully gotten, being unlawfully affected, will deprive
a man of Heaven and Happiness. Believe it, God may provide the Meat, but the
Devil may provide the Cook, and dress a very fair Estate to his own Tooth: Thy
Wealth may be well got, thy Riches purchased by thy honest industry, and yet
thou miscarry by them for all that, many ways; but two especially, which I
will but name, for that we may have occasion farther to enlarge the Points in
the prosecution of the Parable, mentioned Prove. 11.24. By scattering profusely,
and hoarding up sordidly.

First, By a sordid tenacity or niggardliness in sparing more then is meet: And
with this Sin were those rich men charged by St. James, Jam. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
which would bring misery upon them, both on Body and Soul, Non solum ava^us est
qui rapit alien^; s^de^ ille amarus est, qui cupide servat sua. Aug.
for which they shall one day weep and howl. It is not enough to clear thee,
that thou did not injuriously get what thou have penuriously kept. God has
made no man the Jailer of his Wealth, but a wise Steward; at least, God expects
he should be so: As hereafter shall be showed you more largely.

Secondly, By a lavish profusion and wastfulness, spending that which is
honestly come by, to the satisfying of their fleshy Lusts in Riot and Excess;
Quicquid dant, dant vel Veneri vel ventri.
as did that rich Glutton, mentioned Luke 16.25. And such as these St. James
likewise reproves, Jam. 5.5. they pampered up their bodies as a Beast that is
fatted for the Slaughter; they were given to pleasures, to satisfy them
withal sensual delights, they lay melting in them, as some render the words.
They are wanton, as was said of the Idolatrous Israelites, They Eat Drank, and
rose up to Play; or carnal Uncleanness may thereby be understood, as Romans
13.13. and they nourished their hearts, as in the day of Slaughter, where, by
their continual study to banquet and make merry, is noted. Such a have Riches,
and use them either way, albeit they came honestly by what they have; yet for
the sinful abuse, they shall have cause one day to weep and howl for their
wretchedness and misery, says St. James; and we may take his word.

have, that you came honestly by it; but likewise to see how you hold that
which you enjoy, and employ it as you ought. The Philosopher could say, That
Riches were like to wild Beasts, a man has much ado to take them; and when he
has them, as much to do he has to keep them from doing of him harm: They are
like a wild and unruly Horse, which, if man does not sit well, and rule with
the rein of Grace, they will be sure to cast the Rider to his ruin. And as we
say of Fire and Water, so may we say of all worldly Wealth, They are good
Servants, but ill Masters; make Wealth thy Slave, and it shall be serviceable
to thee; but if it once become thy Matter, thou have condemned thy self to thy
own Gally-Slave: When a Servant Rules, he soon proves a Tyrant. Let us imitate
Achsah, who when her Father had given her a Portion, Josh. 15.19. Elton, on
Romans 7. p. 221.
desired also a Blessing; so if God has given thee a Portion of these Outward
things, desire a Blessing from Heaven, that thou may use them aright; that so
it may be with us in their enjoyment, as God promised it should be with Israel,
Deuteronomy. 30.9. given us for our good and comfort. And so much of the Person spoken
of, and of the description that is made of him. Now we proceed to the
particular Relation that is made of him.

Text. And he thought within himself saying, What shall I do, because I have no
room where to bestow my Fruits, etc?

The Relation that is made here of this Rich man, concerns his Life and Death:
His Life, from this verse unto the twentieth; His Death, ver. 20. In that which
concerns his Life, we have him; First, casting up of his Estate in this verse
and that following; and then disposing of his Goods, ver. 19.

In the casting up of his Estate, we find him; First, consulting what to do in
this verse. And then resolving and determining what he will do, ver. 18.

In his Consultation, we are made acquainted with his thoughts, they are made
known unto us; He thought within himself, etc. Secondly, The Grounder Reason of
them, Because I have no room where to bestow my Fruits.

His thoughts, were first Serious, For he thought within himself. Secondly,
Anxious and perplexed, What shall I do? We will take notice of these in order,
and begin with his serious thoughts.

And he thought within himself,] (...), what is translated within the mind of
Man, is called the Thoughts of Man; as, Ezekiel 11.5. I know the things that come
into your minds, every one of them; and so are opposed so external words and
actions. And these are of two sorts, First reasonings and deliberations (which
is an act of the practical Understandings) about our actions, whereby after
long debate to and fro, it concludes what to do: of which Zophar speaks, Job
20.2, 3. Or secondly, Musings only in the Speculative part of the mind; when
the Understanding, by the help of Fancy, frames within it self strange conceits
and imaginations, or figments, as they are termed, Genesis 5.6. Omne Figmentum,
Mire convenit verbum, (...), qu^niam istjusm^di homines totam vitam in
subducendis rationibus consumunt. Bez. Annot. maj. in loc.
of the thoughts, etc. And thus the Apostle seems to distinguish, 2 Cor. 10.5.

The thoughts of this man were deliberate; thoughts arising from the reasoning
power of his Soul; he looked into his estate in an intellectual way, and had
sad and serious thoughts about it; he did debate the matter with himself,
Ratiocinabiliter, as Beza renders the word, and observes something from the
word here used, and shows how ape it is applied to men of this man's Make, I
mean, men of this World, who spend the most part of their Life in casting up
their Accounts; and indeed, A worldly man is a great Accomptant.

Avarus semper in rationibus, A covetous man is very much in his
Counting House, they are busily employed in casting up their Reckoning, as this
man was, and as the manner of covetous men is. Ephraim was such a one, Hos.
12.8. as you may there read. And such a one was Matthew before his Calling, and
Zacheus before his Conversion, and others that we might instance in, but it is
a Point that I do but point at by the way, yet I would you would take notice of
it.

Ezekiah was willed by the Prophet Isaiah, to set his House in order, Isa. 38.
Now there are three Houses that every wise Christian (who is resembled so the
wise Merchant) must have especial care of, His Warehouse, his Workhouse, and
his Country House.

The Warehouse is the Heart, wherein ly all those precious Commodities
deposited to us from Heaven; our Knowledge, with all our Graces and spiritual
Abilities, Above all keepings, keep that, says Solomon, Prove. 3.23.

Our Workhouse, is, as it were, our Shop, wherein, by way of Commerce, we
retail those Commodities wherewith we are be-trusted by our Master; With our
Knowledge we instruct the Ignorant; with our worldly Goods we succor the Poor
and Needy; whatsoever Grace we have in the Warehouse of our Heart, we bring it
forth into the Workhouse of our Lives, Matthew. 5.16.

Our Counting House is our Conscience, there we may find all our Receipts, and
all our layings Out; No false Reckonings are in that Book, it will speak truth
to a penny; show us our Receipts and Expenses: in respect of our Receipts, we
cannot there set down 50 for a 100; and in regard of Expense, we cannot put
down 100 for 50. The keeping well of this Book, is of absolute necessity: The
cause why many Merchants come behind hand, is attributed to their carelessness,
in not keeping of their Books well; Next to God's Book, be daily looking into
this Book, study it well: Let not a day pass over your Heads, without casting
up your Reckonings. They that cast up their Accounts daily, have the easier
work to do at the years end: So it will be with you, you shall find it so at
the day of your Death.

Visus in gross, Soul, thou have Goods laid up for many years, Eat, Drink, and
be Merry; but we do not read, that he did exactly look over his Bill of
Parcels, nor do it orderly. The things that you must account for, are your
Receipts and Expenses: which are brought by some to three Heads; Evil
committed, Good omitted, Time pretermitted or mis-pent; M^li commissi, ^oni
omissi, Temporis amissi.
I cannot stand to enlarge upon these: only I desire, that these worldly
Accomptants would spend a little more time then they do about their Accounts,
for they might then find strange Items. Item received Riches, and laid out
Oppression: received Plenty, and laid out Riot: Received Speech, and laid out
Swearing, Lying, etc: Received Sight, and laid out Lusting, etc. Of my Goods,
expended so much in fulfilling the Lust of the Flesh, so much in a year for the
Lust of my Eyes, so much for the pride of Life. But what for Works of Piety,
Charity? Surely, very little; it may be, not one penny. And to what will all
this amount to? what is the summa totalis? Surely, the Curse of God on Body,
Soul, Name, State; O goodly Gains! But we come nearer to the Text.

Text. He thought within himself.]

And for this thinking thus within himself, as he did, he is reproved by our
Savior, and branded for a Fool; Hence we may infer,



For the clearing and confirming of this Point, take notice; First, In that God
straightly warns us to take heed of suffering an evil Thought to be in us, as
Deuteronomy. 15.9. Beware, look to it, there is danger in it. Secondly, That Sinners
are frequently blamed and reproved for their thoughts, as well as for their
words and actions. So Psalm. 36.4. Esaias 29.24. and 59, 7. Ezekiel 11.2. Hos. 7.15.
Matthew. 9.4. 1 Cor. 14.24. Thirdly, They are not only blamed and reproved for
them, but likewise severely threatened: God calls the Earth to w^tness, even all
the World to take notice of his Resolution to punish the thoughts of evil men,
Jer. 6.19. So he threatened to punish the King of Assyria, for that it was in
his heart to kill and destroy, Esaias 10.7. God denounces a Woe against such,
Mich. 2. and Esaias 65.2, 6. So are Hypocrites threatened for what they think,
Psalm. 50.21. And upon this ground Solomon disswadeth all treacherous and
false-hearted persons to beware of cursing the King, even in thought, Eccles.
10.20. For God will discover it, and revenge it.

God will judge men for their thoughts both here, Genesis 6.5. 2 King. 19.35, 36,
etc.
Fourthly, Nor has God only threatened to punish for sinful thoughts but he has
likewise punished them severely: This is assigned as the cause of the drowning
of the Old World; The maginations of the thoughts of man's heart were only evil
continually, Genesis 6.5. And as he threatened the King of Assyria for his stout
thoughts, so accordingly he punished him, 2 Kings 19.35, 36, 37.

Fifthly, Lastly, However, thoughts may escape unpunished here; yet at the last
day Sinners shall be called to an account for them, and hereafter, Eccles.
3.17, and 12, ult. Romans 2.16. 1 Cor. 4.5.
and punished accordingly, Eccles. 3.17, and 12, ult. Romans 2.16. 1 Cor. 4.5.
The inward thoughts conceived in the heart, as well as outward deeds, closely
carried from the knowledge of the World, and drove in dark and remote places,
shall be judged and sentenced.

The Reasons why the Lord is offended with thoughts, as well as with words or
actions, are many.

Exodus 20.17. Thou shall not covet; which must needs be understood of
Concupiscence and lusts of the Heart; and so St. Paul understands it, Romans 7.7.
Where, by Lust is to be understood the very first motions that arise from our
rebellious Nature, whereby we are stirred up to do evil, and do wi^h delight
think on any thing contrary to the Will of God (albeit Consent of heart do not
follow). And our Savior, in expounding of the Law, shows, that the very
Thoughts, Purposes, and Affections, are retrained by it, Mat. 5.22, 28. Now,
the least Aberration or Swerving from the Rule of the Law, is a Transgression
of it, and so a Sin; for, Sin is a Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. And
this is the Conclusion of the Wise Man, Prove. 24.9. The Thoughts of Foolishness
is Sin: Sinners are Fools in Solomon's Language, and all their Thoughts are
Folly and Foolishness: therefore sinful, and so displeasing unto God; yea,
abominable to Him, a^ Prove. 15.26.

Eccl. 7. ult.
All Man's Actions that are voluntary (as Man's Fall was) have their first Rise
from the heart; and Thought is the first Motion of the Heart thereunto; from
which voluntary Act and Choice of his own Will, not before corrupted, but by
that Act in consenting becoming corrupt, he transgressed his Maker's Command.
Therefore, it cannot otherwise be but that Thoughts must be highly displeasing.

Prove. 6.
and Motions of men's Minds, proceeds all the mischief that men work; there is
no evil in the mouth or hand which was not in the heart first, nor can the
Flesh be corrupted unless the mind was corrupted before, says Ambrose. For,
albeit at the first, Man's Sin proceeded not from any previous Corruption that
was in his Nature, but from the voluntary choice and act of his own Will; yet
since his Fall, all the evil of his Thoughts and Actions spring from the
Corruption of his Nature, whereof Thoughts are the firstborn. And from that
corrup^ Fountain they do spring, as our Savior shows. Mat. 15.19. so St.
James, cap. 1.15. So that it is no wonder if God be therewith highly
displeased. And so much for the Confirmation of the Point: Now let us apply it.

Rome is in this Point very unsound; they have this Conceit of Thoughts, that
they are but Venial: Inward Lust and Concupiscence is either no Sin with them,
or so small that it needs no Reproof; and yet themselves confess, it is the
Cause of mortal Sin. St. Paul, as Chemnitius, in his Examen, observes in that
sixth Chapter to the Romans, calls it five times Sin; in the seventh, six
times; in the eighth, thrice. Hierom in 1 Amos thus distinguishes of Pin; the
first degree is in Thought, to think it; the second is, to yield to it; the
third, to perform it in Act; the fourth, not to repent of it. And upon the
fifth of Matthew, he distinguishes betwixt (...) and (...); Pathos, is Passion
with Consent; Propatheia is a tickling of Lust without Consent: Yet says
Tollet, Bellarmin, and others, They all speak unproperly; yet Tollet confesses
plainly, that it is not only St. Austin's Word, but his perpetual Doctrine,
albeit the Papists now wholly depart from it. Vide Cade Sermon. on Roman. 7.24 p.
7. Nor does St. Paul all it only Sin, but deadly Sin, the Body of Death. All
Sin with him was mortal; he knew not these venial, trivial, peccadilia; trivial
Sins with Papists, to mince and make sleight of. But I shall spend no more time
with these, having none to spare.

Ezekiel. 33.32. And others who forbear to act Sin, and speak lewdly; yet they
give Liberty to Imagination to play with the Devil at what Game he will, at
Murder, Theft, Adultery, etc. And when the Mark is out of their mouths, I
mean, they are out of date in respect of the act of some Sin; yet they have
still an unsatiable desire to it, and can please themselves in contemplative
Wickedness, calling to mind their former brutish and lustful practices with
great delight, making their own hearts to be their Brothel-house, a House of
Bawdery and Uncleanness; and all upon this Delusion that their Thoughts are
free; and what is not lawful to act, nor fit to speak, is lawful so think
without Control: Which Atheistical and damnable Opinion arises from these
Grounds;

First, Ignorance of the Law of God, and the Spiritualness thereof, which
commands the Soul with the motions of it, as well as the Body with the Actions
thereof. Heb. 4.12. It pierces even to the dividing asunder of Soul and
Spirit, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the heart, says the
Apostle. Now, they being carnal, and the Law spiritual, it is no marvel if
they cannot understand it (for it must be spiritually understood). They have a
Veil over their eyes, 2 Cor. 3.15. and, which is yet more, the god of this
World has further blinded them, 2 Cor. 4.4. that they shall not discern the
Spirituality of if. So were the Pharisees blinded in their time, and St. Paul,
all the while he was a Pharisee, Rom 7.7. They rested only in the outward Rind
or Bark of the Law, but discerned not the pith and marrow of it.

Secondly, From the Defectiveness and Imperfection of Man's Law, which although
it binds the Hands and stops the Mouth, yet it punishes not for Thoughts:
Cogitationis poenam nemo patiatur.
The Projects of the Heart lie not within the walk of Humane Justice, they are
not liable to earthly Courts, they pay no Tribute to Man's Custom-House, where
they cannot be searched, but as they bewray themselves by some outward Sign,
either by Word or Deed; forgetting, that God sees not as Man sees, He has an
eye into our most secret Thoughts, Psalm. 139.12. He sets our Thoughts in the
Light of his Countenance, Psalm. 90.8. And if men call so account and punish
Words and Deeds, because they see and know them; Why then shall not God call to
account, and punish too, our Thoughts, which he knows far better than any man
can our Actions. That Man's Law punishes not for our Thoughts, proves rather a
Defectiveness in Man's Law, than this Diabolical and Atheistical Opinion, that
Thoughts are free.

A third Ground for this graceless Opinion, is, That they do no hurt to any by
their thinking, Why then may they not think what they please? But indeed they
do the greatest mischief: they fight against the Soul, yea, thy own Soul, as
St. Peter shows, 1 Pet. 2.11. they tend to the Destruction of it. And from the
Motions of thy mind proceeds all other Mischiefs which are wrought, if the
Prophet Michah is worthy to be believed, Mich. 2.1. or the Apostle St. James to
be credited, James 4.1. or if Christ himself may be believed of us, Math.
15.16, 17. Indeed always the Lusts of the Heart are not actually prejudicial
to our Neighbor; for here a man may be an Adulteret, and the Woman chaste with
whom Adultery is committed: a man may be a Murderer, and yet the man alive
whom he is the Murderer of, etc. But many times these Thoughts come into Act:
What Wickedness is committed in Act that was not first in the Thought?

A fourth Ground for this Devilish and Hellish conceit, arises from the
suddenness and unexpectedness of their coming, and impossibility to avoid them.
No Reason many times can be given of them; Therefore there is no Reason (say
some, and more think), why they should be called to any Account for them. But
all the Thoughts that are in the hearts of Sinners, are, either Suggestions by
Inspiration from Satan; or Vapors that fume out of corrupt Nature, and from
our sinful hearts. How can it be otherwise then, but that they should be
offensive unto God?

Besides, their suddenness and exorbitancy proves them evil. All Good is from
knowledge, deliberation, and direction; Did they come in God's Name they would
come a slower pace, as they find by sad experience, who set their minds so
think of matters serious and spiritual.

And what though we cannot avoid those wandering and sinful Thoughts altogether,
Must we therefore set open the door and give them free liberty of Ingress,
Egress, and Regress? No man can keep the Birds from flying over his head, but I
hope he may keep them from making their Nests on that Tuft of hair which he
wears.

Lastly, Men imagine Thoughts to be free, because of the common Opinion of the
World and general Estimate of Religion, which is not by the Heart and Thoughts,
but by our outward Performances, wherein if we approve our selves before men,
it is all that is sought after; forgetting what our Savior says, You are they
which approve your selves to men, Luke 1^.11.
but they who are approved of by men may be Abomination in the sight of God.
Men indeed judge of our Thoughts by our Words and Actions; but God, of our
Words and Works by our Thoughts. No outward Works so good and holy, but
Hypocrites have at some times done them: And few outward Works or none so evil,
but some godly men at some times through Temptation have fallen into them. But
how like soever such Works whether good or bad, have been in the face; yet the
difference is great in the heart of the Doer, which is that God distinguishes
the one from the other by: Of which anon we shall speak somewhat more.

These are the Grounds of this Conceit which men's hearts are possessed with,
That Thoughts are free, and they have liberty to think what they list, which
opens a doo^ to all Impiety; For, if Thought be free, all will be free in the
end. Such show what their Actions would be, if they dared to act them: But, Do
they not err that imagine evil? says Solomon, Prove. 14.22. Which Question is
not put, by way of Doubt, as if it were uncertain whether such erred or not;
but that Interrogation is a confident Asseveration, They do err out of the
ways of Life, that think evil in their hearts. Say not then, That Thoughts are
free; you have heard the contrary proved, and that upon good Grounds and
undeniable Reasons; and withal, the weak Grounds that are brought so this
wicked Conceit, which is in many men's minds; which (I hope) may serve to
convince any of their Error that are so minded. The Truth is, so far are
Thoughts from being free, as that they may in some Cases prove unpardonable, as
St Peter intimates in that Speech of his which he used to Simon Magus, Acts
8.22. Pray God, if perhaps the Thought of thine Heart may be forgiven thee:
There was but a Perhaps in it, no Certainty. As the Thoughts of the Heart have
been more or less active to plot and contrive Sin, the more or less difficultly
is a pardon obtained of it. But to proceed.

God, I thank thee, we are not as other men, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers,
etc. Yet, although we know nothing by our selves, wherewith to charge our
selves, in regard of outward demeanor, we are not thereby justified, 1 Cor.
4.4. For, Who can understand his secret faults? says the Prophet Psalm. 19.12.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my Sin? Prove. 20.9.
There is no Man nor Woman so upright and holy, living upon the Earth, that can
clear himself from evil Thoughts; Let him live never so strictly or precisely,
so that no man can tax him for any outward Crime, yet he shall find a Sea of
Corruption and Filth in himself: And if in Case any one should think himself
perfect, that very Thought would prove him perverse, and that he knew not his
own Soul, Pro. 30.32.
Job 9.20, 21. If thou have done foolishly (as without question thou have often
done, in lifting up thy self) or it thou have thought evil (says Agur), lay
thine hand upon thy mouth; the meaning is, If in case thou have outwardly
sinned through Pride, in word or deed; or, if thou have thought evil and
conceived mischief in thy mind, never so closely and secretly; then, Manum ad
Os, let thine hand be laid to thy mouth, plead not chine own Innocence, but be
humbled before God, and repent thee of thy Wickedness from the bottom of thy
heart; for in that sense the Phrase of laying the hand upon the mouth is used,
Job 40.4.

In the Performance of this Duty whereto you are now exhorted, See, first, That
you take a diligent Survey of your hearts, remembering, That Thoughts of all
sorts are in every man's mind by Nature.

We read, that when God called his Prophet Ezekiel to the Door, and willed him
so digg through the Wall, and enter in at the Door; he was no sooner entered,
but he saw in the Chambers of the House every Form of creeping things, and all
sorts of abominable Beasts, Ezekiel. 8.7, 8, 9. Look into thy heart, that Chamber
of thy Belly, as Solomon phraseth it, Prove. 18.8. and there thou shall espy,
not only creeping things in abundance, such as are all idle, foolish, frothy,
earthly, wanton, and vain Thoughts, which like Motes in the Sun fly up and
down, or, like Ants in a Molehill, run to and fro in thy mind hourly; but many
abominable Beasts, such as are Thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, Murder,
Adultery, Pride, Revenge, and such like, thou may there discover; which
lodge and lie in thy polluted heart, and there revell it day and night, finding
too friendly entertainment. Unless these be discovered (which is no hard matter
to do), they will never be dislodged and unroosted. This is that which must be
done that thou may be truly humbled, as is required Lam. 3.40. Let us search
and try our ways (that is, both our hearts and lives) and so turn again to the
Lord.

Secondly, Lament and bewail the Vileness and Wickedness of thy heart in the
sight of God. So did the Church, We have spoken Cruelty and Oppression,
conceiving and uttering out of the heart false matters, Isa. 59.13. And this is
that which God required of his People, Jer. 4.14. Jerusalem, wash thy heart
from Wickedness that thou may be saved; which is in effect the same that is
required by the Prophet, Isa. 1.16. Wash you, make you clean, etc. and by St.
James, Cleanse your hands you Sinners, and purify your hearts you double-minded
men, Jam. 4.8. where, by hands, the outward Actions, and by hearts, the inward
Cogitations; the one defiled by doing Evil, the other, by thinking Evil, are to
be understood. And that we might not mistake his meaning, in the words
following he shows what a Washing and Cleansing, both of the one and the other,
he intends; Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, Ver. 9. Humble your selves
before God, by godly Sorrow: This Mourning for the Sinfulness of our hearts, is
termed Washing; for that as the Filth of the Body is done away by Water, so is
the Filth of the Heart, by true Remorse and godly Mourning for it. It is true,
that the Blood of Christ, and that only, cleanses the Soul from Sin, (both in
regard of Guilt, which is our Justification; and in regard of Filth, which is
our Sanctification) Zach. 12.1. 1. John 1.7. But this Washing of Sanctification
requires a double Act; the one, of God himself, in the first Conversion and
Renovation of a Sinner, Ezekiel 36.25. and therein Man is merely a Patient: The
other, of Man, cleansing himself yet more and more, through the Power of God's
blessed Spirit, by Repentance; and therein Man is instrumentally an Agent, 2
Cor. 7.1. Christ's Blood is the Cause of the one, for without it there is no
Remission; and by our mourning and sorrowing for Sin, the Soul is qualified and
brought into such an Estate, that it may be capable of the benefit of his Death.

That we may be cleansed then from our spiritual defilements contracted by our
sinful Thoughts, let us wash our hearts; often sweeping the House is not
enough, the Devil with all his unclean Spirits likes well of the House that is
swept, Matthew. 12.44. but he likes not the House that is thoroughly washed. Nor
is it enough to sprinkle our hearts with a little Water, to send forth a Sigh,
or shed a Tear or two: It must be a making clean with Washing. Isa. 1.16. a
thorow-Washing is required. We do as good as nothing in the business, if we
exceed not; weeping bitterly with Peter, Mat. 26.75. washing the very feet of
Christ with Tears, as did Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.38. We use to pour most Water
upon that which most defiles us; and our Thoughts are, if not the only yet the
principal defilers of the inward man, Mat. 15.18, 19.

Let the Wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his Thoughts, says
the Prophet, Isa. 55.7. Unless there be a leaving; and forsaking of them, we
deceive our selves, in thinking that we have truly mourned and repented for
them. Now, in this Work of Reformation, we must begin where our Sin began, and
that is in the heart; wherefore we are called upon to begin with that, Jer.
4.14. That man (says a very judicious Doctor) that takes no notice of his Sin
till it come into Act, Dr. Donn.
does post-date his Sin, and begins his Reckoning too late. It is the first
time (say some, when they are taken in the Act) that I did it, when indeed it
was not the first by an hundred: For, when the first conceived that Sin in the
heart, then they did it; and in every Discourse, Wish, or Dream that conduces
to that Sin, or that rises from the Thought of that Sin, they sin it over
again before they come to the actual Committing of it, which is the Nativity of
it; out you must reckon from the Conception of it. As David did Psalm. 51.5. so
must you do in this Case, and begin Reformation there: Never think to have
reformed Lives, before you have reformed Hearts and Thoughts. It was the
Character of a Pharisee in Christ's time, to make clean the outside of the Cup
and Platter, and leave the inside foul, Mat. 23.25. Christ reproves them for
that, and gives them directions where to begin first, Cleanse that which is
within, that the outside may be clean also, Ver. 26.

Now, That we may carry on this Work comfortably and succesfully, I shall
proceed in my Application of the Point, with an Hortatory Direction, commending
unto you some Motives to stir up your care about your Thoughts; and then
prescribe unto you some Rules to be followed, whereby you may be enabled to
bring your Thoughts under subjection to the Government of Christ. And first, of
the Motives.

Besides what has been already said (when I gave you the Grounds and Reasons
of the Doctrine propounded), I shall commend unto your most serious thoughts,
something in Reference to God, and something in Reference to your selves, and
other some with respect to your sinful Thoughts that are to be repented of and
reformed.

In Reference to God: Let it be first remembered, (...).
that God is the Searcher of the Heart, and the Knower of your Thoughts, as we
read Isa. 66.18. I kn^w their Works and their Thoughts, says God. So Jer.
17.10. I the Lord search the Heart; although no other know it, neither Man nor
Angel, directly; yet I know it, and search it, that is my Prerogative. He
understands our Thoughts very well without an Interpreter, Luke 6.8. John 2.24.
Thou understandest my Thoughts afar off, says David, Psalm. 139.2. We may know
our own Thoughts when they are in the Bud, first conceived by us; and we may
know, at least guess at, the Thoughts of others, when they are in the Bloom and
Blossom. We read of one that had such an admirable Gift (scarce credible) that
by the only Motion of the Lips, without any Utterance, he understood all men.
Ordinarily, Dr. Gabriel Nele, Bart^l lib. 1. de Ver. Oblig. Aug. Conf. l. 10.
c. 27.
we know men's Thoughts by the fruit in Words and Actions. Austin tells us of a
Jester who undertook to tell the People what their Thoughts were, and when they
desired to hear, he told them, Vill vultis emere, and care vendere, Your
Thoughts are, to sell dear and buy cheap; and this their Practice discovered.
But God knows our Thoughts in the Seed or Root, before either Bud, or Blossom,
or Fruit appears. The Gardener, that knows what Seed was sown in the Earth, and
what Roots were set in his Beds, can tell what Herbs or Flowers he shall have
in the Spring, which another that is ignorant thereof cannot discover: This
appears by that Speech of God to Moses, concerning the rebellious Israelites, I
know their Thoughts and Imaginations, even now before I have brought them into
the Land which I swear, Deuteronomy. 31.21. He knew what Principles were within them,
and what they would do when occasion served, and so knew their Thoughts afar
off, better than they themselves, Intus tu eras, and ego foris (said St.
Augustine), Thou were within, Aug. Trin. lib. 13. c. 3.
and I was without: God is within, and knows our secret Thoughts and Hearts,
when we are without, and know them not. He made the Heart (says David), And
shall not he understand what is in it? Artificers know the Nature and Property
of their Works, he that makes a Watch knows every pin that is in it, and is
well acquainted with every Joint of it; and, Can God be ignorant think you of
his workmanship? Hell and Destruction (says Solomon) are before the Lord: how
much more then the Hearts of the Children of men, Prove. 15.11. The condition of
the dead and damned is, of all other things, most hidden from the Eyes of man;
seeing the dead never return, and are in most secret and deep places: we know
not where Hell is, nor what is done there; but although these things are hid
from us, yet they are before the Eyes of God. Job attributes this Praise unto
God, as being peculiar to him alone, That Hell is naked before him, and
Destruction uncovered in hit sight, Job 26.6. How much more (says Solomon) the
Heart of the Children of men: Which though it be as deep as Hell it self, by
devilish devices, and he made a pit of Destruction, by mischievous
imaginations, yet that is manifest to God; If he look upon things, and has an
exact knowledge of them, although they be never so abstruse and hidden* we may
easily be persuaded, that he is not unacquainted with that which is more
conspicuous and appa^a^t. Now suppose that there were an open window into thy
Heart, so that every one that passes by, might see all thy Thoughts, as
transparantly as thy Actions, in an open Market; would it not cause thee to be
as careful of them as thou are of thy outward behavior and carriage? Why, all
things are naked and open before him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. This
should move you to look to your Thoughts, and have a care of your inward
dispositions.

Secondly, Remember that as God knows the thoughts, so he ponders them, Prove.
21.2. The Lord ponders the heart, says Solomon; He weighs them, and discovers
what substance is in them: And for this end he does it, that he may give to
every one the Fruit of them, as Solomon shows, Prove. 24 12. Does not he that
pondereth the heart, consider it; -- and shall not he render to every man,
according to his Works? Thy Thoughts he puts into one balance, and the
Recompense into the other, and gives weight for weight; For good Thoughts, a
good Recompense; as David found, who had it in his heart so build a House unto
the Lord, 1 King. 8.18. And albeit God in his Wisdom saw it not fit for him so
do it; yet for his good Thought, God promised, and performed what he had
promised, to build David a House, and establish his Kingdom for ever, 2 Samuel
16. But if our thoughts be vain and wicked, he will recompense us accordingly,
and answer us according to the stumbling block that is set up in our hearts,
Ezekiel 14.3, 4. So Esaias 65.2, 6, 7. If thou be his Child, and yet harbourest
vain and sinful Thoughts within thee, he will correct thee for them; if thou
be not his Child, he will then judge thee and condemn thee for them, Jer.
6.19. This should make us careful of our thoughts, as well as of our words and
actions.

Thirdly, It would be remembered, that God expects to have his Glory shine in
our Thoughts, as well as in our outward Conversation. It is from him that we
have our Souls, and all the powers of it (as well as our Bodies, with the
members thereof); He has planted them in us, and he looks to taste of the
Fruit of those Trees that he has planted. It is he that has redeemed the Soul
as well as the Body, and looks to be glorified both in Soul and Body by us: He
has a Sovereignty over the whole man, his Law binds both Soul and Body, and
both must be yielded up to be governed by him. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all the heart, with all the Soul, and with all the Mind, is the Law, Luke
10.27. Now in giving way to any evil thought, we turn God out of our hearts at
that time; the heart is not then for God, but taken up for the service of the
World, Flesh, or Devil: we bring not forth Fruit to God, but to his Enemies,
and the Enemies of our Salvation: Christ was angry with that Fig Tree that
grew by the way side, when he, being hungry, coming to it, found nothing but
Leaves upon it, insomuch that he cursed it, Never fruit grow on thee any more,
Matthew: 21.18, 19. So, coming to the garden of thy Soul, and finding little or
nothing growing upon the best Tree there, thy Mind and Understanding, but empty
and loose imaginations at the best; thou may be assured he will be so
provoked by thee, as that he will pass some sore and severe Sentence against
thee. Let this prevail with thee, to look unto thy thoughts that they be not
sinful.

Fourthly, God esteems himself highly honored by us, when care is had that we
dishonor him not in Thought; when we so regard his all-seeing Eye, as that we
will not offend him in taking liberty so much as to offend him in thinking any
thing that may displease him, albeit man can take no notice thereof; this is to
sanctify God in our hearts, 1 Pet. 3.15. And such as do thus, God esteems as
his Jewels, and has promised to preserve them safe, as his special Treasure,
Mal. 3.16, 17. And thus you have heard, how, in reference to God, we ought to
make conscience of our Thoughts and Cogitations: Next, in reference to our
selves, the like care should be taken. For,

First, By admitting of sinful Thoughts into our hearts, we become defiled and
polluted, and are made as loathsome Lepers in the Eyes of God, Matthew. 15.18,
19. Those things which come from the heart, as evil Thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, etc. they defile the man. Where, our Savior
does not speak only of actual Murder and Adultery, but of the sinful
disposition of the Soul; these are they that defile the Spirit of man in God's
sight, who looks upon them with a more hateful Eye, than any mortal Creature
can look upon any thing loathsome with the eye of his Body. The Thoughts of the
Wicked are an domination unto the Lord, says Solomon, Prove. 15.26. Not only
abominable and loathsome, but abomination it self in the Abstract: Nor are all
our actual sins committed by us in the Body, simply considered in themselves,
and committed by the Body, so hateful unto God as the pollution of the Spirit
is. Hear the Judgment of a very judicious and ^arned Divine in the Point, Dr.
Pressed. on the Attrib. 2.7.
I dare be bold to say, (says he) that though the Act contracts the Guilt,
(because the Lust is then grown up to a height, so that it is come to an
absolute will and execution); yet the act of Adultery and Murder is not so
abominable in God's Eyes, as the filthiness of the Spirit. Indeed when
Thoughts break forth into Words and Actions, and command the outward man, it
argues, that Lust has a more full dominion and sovereignty over a man, than
when it rests in the Thoughts and Heart; and in breaking out, it does more
dishonor God, and does more hurt unto Men, 1 Cor. 15.33. in which regard, it
is worse to speak and do evil, than to think evil: But, actual Sins being
simply considered in themselves (as was said before), are not so odious nor
abominable in the Eyes of Almighty God, as is the filthiness and defilement of
the Spirit; for that God is a Spirit, and it is the Spirit that he mainly looks
upon. In which respect, our care should be to keep our Spirit clean from these
defilements by wicked Thoughts; if we would not be nasty, loathsome, and
abominable Creatures in the Eyes and Nostrils of the Lord God Almighty, who is
of purer Eyes than to take any content in the Heart and Spirit of such as are
so defiled.

Secondly, In entertaining sinful Thoughts, we make our hearts a Lodge and
Harbor for Rebels and Traitors, which conspire against the Crown and Dignity of
the King of Heaven. (For, What Sin is committed against the most High God, Romans
7.23.
that is not first plotted in the heart? as anon shall be showed more largely).
It is a Rebel rebelling against the Law of our Minds, so Romans 8.7. It rebels
against God and his blessed Spirit of Grace, Gal. 5.17. Now to act Treason, and
to harbor known Traitors, are alike Capital: It was the Command once of the
King of France, to one of his Lords, That he would give way for one to inhabit
in a House that he had, who had been before found to have a Traiterous heart to
his Prince; The lord replied, That he would at his Command give way; but he
should no sooner leave his House, but he would burn it down with fire: For, my
Ancestors, said he, never built that House to harbor Traitors: God gives no
command to us to harbor any treacherous Thought within us, but forbids it,
Jer. 4.14. Nor did he make our hearts to harbor Traitors in, but to be his own
peculiar, his House and Temple; yea, Bedchamber. How dare we then entertain
such Traitors, as sinful Cogitations are, and lay them in God's, own Bed, and
set them upon his Throne? Can we think, that Treason against God is a less
Crime then Treason against Man? What Sylla said of Caesar whilst he was young,
In this one Boy there be many Marii; so may we say of some one sinful Thought,
In that one, there are many Treasons against God, therefore entertain it not.

Thirdly, There is nothing that does more discover the power of Grace, and
prove the sincerity of the heart, than to make conscience of Thoughts. A wicked
man may watch over his words and actions, in respect of man; But the sanctified
man only is careful to observe the tenth Commandment, which rectifies the
inward motions of the heart. The difference betwixt the Regenerate and
Unregenerate, in respect of Thoughts, Solomon shows, Prove. 12.5. The Thoughts
of the Righteous are right, but the Counsels of the Wicked are deceit. The one
acknowledges God to be the Lord of his Thoughts, as well as of his Words and
Actions, and therefore is careful that his Thoughts may be right; they shall be
ordinarily working for the maintenance and furthering of God's Glory, and good
Causes; for the procuring good to their Brethren, and for the furthering of
their own Happiness and Salvation: but the study of the wicked, and working of
their minds, is, how to deceive God of his Glory, their Neighbors of their
Right, and themselves of Happiness. If we then desire to have the testimony and
witness of a good Conscience, then, we are upright, let us be careful to keep
our thought and Cogitations within compass: And that,

In the third place, In respect of sinful Thoughts themselves (for in that
respect they are not to be leightly set by): which will appear, if we seriously
consider their Nature or their Number.

They are of a vile Nature, being the fruits of the Flesh, which being
unmortified, Primogenita Diaboli. Jerome.
will assuredly bring God's wrath upon us, Col. 3.5, 6. Yea, they are the
firstborn of the Devil. Satan dares not tempt any one to Murder, Adultery,
etc. or any such grievous sin, before he has sent forth an evil Thought, to
try whether he shall be welcome. So that as Jacob styled Reuben, his Might, and
the beginning of his Strength, in that he was his firstborn, and eldest Child,
Genesis 29.3. So may sinful Thoughts be termed the strength of Satan, for that
his strength to do mischief lies in them, as Samsons strength lay in his hair;
for without their help, he could not hurt us. This their Strength is two ways
discovered; First, In their promoting and furthering of all Satan's
temptations. Secondly, In their interrupting and hindering us in every good
performance.

Satan suggests his Temptations into the Heart, and Lust conceives by those
Suggestions of his, giving them admittance in thought; then follows delight,
then consent of will; after consent, execution, or practice of the sin; after
practice, comes custom in practice; and after that, follows Death and
Damnation; This is that which St. James says, Every man when he it tempted, is
entised and drawn away by his own Concupiscence. Aug. in Psalm. 91. Astutiam sua
dendi, non potentiam cogendi habet.
The Devil tempts, but he cannot constrain and make us sin against our wills;
he has a persuading slight, but no enforcing might; our own concupisence
carries the chief stroke therein. Nor will Seed ever grow into a living
Creature, without a Womb to foster it; there must be Partus Cordis as well as
Seminarium hostis, says Bernard, the conception of the Heart, as the
temptation of Satan. Lust gives his suggestions admittance into the Mind and
Thought, by delighting in them, consenting to them, and shaping of them, and so
conceives. And having thus conceived by the Devil, It brings forth Sin, says
the Apostle: The heart grows very big soon after the conception and formation
in the Womb; and as the Mother, in order of Nature, is full of pain till she be
delivered, Job 15.32. so is it here, Psalm. 7.14. And then after Conception and
Birth, in bringing into Act, follows it is Perfection: For Sin when it is
finished, it brings forth Death; It goes on without weariness or murmuring,
without repenting and repining in the ways of Lust, running on still in sinful
Courses, till the measure be filled up; the Thoughts taking great care how to
fulfill the lust of the Heart, till they come to their perfect growth, and are
fit for the Slaughter. Romans 13.13


Nor is the Lust of the Heart only a mother, and a nursing-mother, in bringing
forth and bringing up; but it is likewise a very fruitful mother, bringing
forth many, and those monstrous Births.

1. No part of man can sin without the Heart, the Heart can sin without the
rest. The Hand cannot sin, unless the thought of the Heart has been
consenting; the thoughts of the Heart have many times intended a sin which it
never brought into action, yet sinned in that intention.

2. The Body sometimes waxes weary in committing some sinful act, but the
thought of it never waxes weary: once a day is enough for the Body, it may be
tired out with that; but a hundred times in a day, he mind can commit it
without weariness.

3. No place nor company can keep the Thoughts from sinning: An Adulterous
heart will commit Adultery in the chastest Company: A Theevish heart will rob
and steal in the most sacred place it comes into. But Place and Company, is a
restraint to the Body from acting those sins it has a desire unto.

4. More sins are committed, and far greater by the Thought than by any other
Member. A world of wickedness is committed by the Tongue, says St. James; yet
it comes short of the Heart in sinning. A Thief does not rob every man in the
Town, but a covetous heart may wish, that the whole Town were his, and the next
Town to that, etc. An Adulterer cannot vitiate every woman, good and bad; yet
he may commit Adultery both with chaste and unchaste in his heart; A man may sin
infinitely in his Thoughts, and never have done. And thus you have heard
wherein the strength of this firstborn of Satan lies, in promoting of Evil.
Now let me show you the strength of it, in hindering of us in the performance of
what is Good.

St. James speaks of a man's being drawn aside by his own Lusts, Jam. 1.14.
that is; they move the powers of the Soul out of their right place, they draw
them out of the right path of God's Precepts, and entise them out of the way;
as Thieves do an honest Traveller, that he may rob him of his money. Thus are
our Thoughts drawn away from God, when we are about his Worship and Service; or
else so disturbed and distracted by them, as that we have but little profit or
comfort in the discharge thereof.

God complains of the Hypocritical Jews, that they were a People that drew near
to him with their mouths, but their hearts were far from him, Isa. 29.13. Mat.
15.8. Their false and deceitful hearts were carried away with worldly and
carnal thoughts, as we read, Ezekiel 33.31. Their hearts went after their
Covetousness, albeit their Bodies were present. Now you know what God says of
such as should go about to draw our hearts from him, If thy Brother, the Son of
thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy
Friend, which is as thine own Soul, entise thee secretly, saying, Let us go and
serve other gods. -- Thou shall not consent nor hearken unto him, neither shall
thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare him, neither shall thou conceal
him, but thou shall surely kill him, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.6, 8, 9, 10. The like may be
said and applied to the Point in hand Let our Thoughts and Cogitations be never
so profitable and delightful, yet if they go about to draw our hearts from God
in his Worship and Service, spare them not, but endeavor the mortification of
them, even their utter ruin and destruction.

If, in case the Heart be so over-powred by the Spirit of Grace, as that it
will not be wholly called off from the performance and discharge of Religious
Duties by wicked Thoughts; then they will endeavor to intermingle themselves
with the motions of Grace, dealing herein as the Adversaries of Judah and
Benjamin did with Zerubbabel, and the chief of the Fathers, in offering their
service toward the building of the Temple, saying, Let us build with you, for
we seek your God as you do, Ezra 4.2. This they did not with any purpose to
promote, but to hinder the Building: So, whilst we are hearing of the Word,
some good meditation may come into the mind, or some good thought and purpose
of doing this or that good Work; but such thoughts tend but to distract us, and
deprive us of the Blessings of a profitable Hearer. At the time of Prayer, they
will be ready to fill the head with many holy instruction, that at some other
time we have read, heard, and learned: Thoughts and Purposes in themselves
Divine, but the Spirit that suggests them at this time, is not Divine but
Diabolical; for that it hinders devotion, and draws away the mind from being
intent upon the business in hand, and so deforms the work, as color misplaced
in the face does the beauty; for if the blewness that should be in the Veins,
be in the Lips, and the redness that should be in the Checks, be in the Nose,
we count it a deformity: Or, as Letters misplaced in Printing, and not rightly
composed, (be they never so fair) mar and corrupt the sense. So is it in this
Case, when good Thoughts, but unseasonable, and out of their due time,
interpose in holy actions, be they never so pious seemingly, if they be not
proper and pertinent to the work in hand.

And sometimes we shall find our selves much troubled and annoyed with idle and
vagrant Thoughts whilst we are about holy Duties, which come about as like
Bees, as David speaks of his Enemies, and with their humming noise keep our
minds from being intent upon the work we are about: Genesis 15.11.
Or like the Birds which Abraham drove away from lighting on his Sacrifice,
that it might not be peck't; these must we by our best endeavor chase away:
Indeed, we may sooner drive away the Devil himself, then all wandering thoughts,
at such a time as we are Sacrificing; there is no good Duties that we go about,
no place that we call upon God in, but we shall meet with these impudent
Disturbers of us: When I would do good, evil is present with me, says the
Apostle, Romans 7.21. But this should not dishearten us from using the means that
we may be rid of them, but stir up your diligence the more. Now what the means
are, that must be used whereby our Thoughts may be brought in subjection to the
Government of Christ; I shall in the next place show.

First, See that you be renewed in the Spirit of your minds, wherein thoughts
and imaginations are conceived and framed: This direction the Apostle gives the
Ephesians; Who after he had with a most serious attestation or admiration
dehorted them from walking, as other Gentiles walked, In the vanities of their
minds, Ephesians. 4.17.
by which he understood the vain and impious imaginations that they had of God,
and of his Worship, the mind being the subject in which they are begot and
reside; The Seat of Principles, says the Philosopher, Arist. Ethic. l. 6.
the Mansion House, or dewlling place which Vanities has chosen to dwell in:
He then comes to exhort them to the leading of a new life, which that they may
do, he wills them to have a special care of renewing of the best and divinest
faculty of the Soul of man; Be ye renewed in the spirit of your Mind, Ephesians.
4.23. that is, in that spirit which is your mind: In that, the Apostle directs
to begin the work of repairing; that, being the first mover, the root and
fountain of all our actions: not by way of exclusion, as if the mind only were
to be renewed, for it must be extended to the whole man, but by way of
Principality; if that be renewed, the rest will follow; and if that Spring be
not first cleansed, in vain do we scour the Channels.

This Renewing Chrysostom expresses, by the repairing of an old House: as there
is the same House, the same Rooms, only it is new hung, or new whited; so there
is the same man, the same mind; only the old Corruption is taken away, and new
Grace bestowed: As in a poisoned River, there is the Water, the running, and
the poison; when it is healed, the water and the running remain, only the
poison is taken out of if. So it is in the renewing of the mind, the same
substance, the same faculties of knowing, remembering, etc. abide; only new
qualities are effected and wrought by the power of God's Spirit. Till this be
done, we cannot expect that our thoughts will be altered and changed, or the
other directions that shall be given, any thing available for the subduing of
them: But, this being hoped of you, we proceed;

Secondly, Work thy Heart to a perfect detestation of all wicked and sinful
Cogitations, that thou may say with David, I hate all vain Thoughts, Psalm.
119.113. It is not enough for thee to dislike them only, but that thou must
abhor them and detest them (for a cold dislike may turn at last to an earnest
love); yea, so abhor them, as that thou do abhor and loath thy self in regard
of them: God promises the House of Isreal, That He will save them from all
their Uncleanness, Ezekiel. 36.29. But then says he, You shall remember your own
evil ways, and your Doings which were not good; and shall loath your selves in
your own sight for your iniquities and abominations, ver. 31. intimating, That
when a man begins to look upon himself, and comes once to see the pollution of
his spirit, he cannot but loath himself, and grow into an indignation against
himself for it. Whilst he looks upon his sinful Life, he appears like a rotten
and dead Carkase, loathsome; but when he looks upon his inward spirit, from
whence comes those evil Thoughts and sinful Cogitations of his, he does; as it
were, anatomize and open that rotten Carcass, and then the savor of it is far
more loathsome and odious in his Nostrills; this must be done, before we can
have any comfortable assurance, that God will save us from our Uncleanness,
that is, pardon them in and through the merits of Christ. And thus, if thou
hate thy sinful Thoughts with a perfect hatred, so as to loath them, and
abhor thy self in regard of them, thou will deal by them as Ammon did by his
sister Tamar; who after he had committed folly with her, and satisfied his Lust
upon her, hated her exceedingly, So that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was
greater then the love wherewith he before loved her, says the Text, 2 Samuel
13.15. Insomuch that he thrust her out of Doors, and commanded, that the Door
should be bolted after her, ver. 17, Thou must do what lies in thee to turn
them out of thy heart, and keep them out of thy heart: which thou will never
do, unless thou hate them exceedingly, which thou can not but do* if thou
remembrest effectually what has been before said of them in the Motives.

Thirdly, Furnish thy heart with store of good matter, that thy thoughts may
find employment about that which is good: A good man has a good treasury in
his heart, as our Savior tells us; and an evil man has an evil treasury
there, and out of their treasury Both bring forth accordingly, Math. 12.35. The
good man, out of his habit of heavenly-mindedness, will ever be thinking and
speaking of what is good: The mouth of the Righteous, speaks wisdom (says
David), and his Tongue talks of Judgment: The Law of God is in his heart,
Psalm. 37.30, 31. But the wicked man, or man of Belial walks with a froward
mouth; and, as if his mouth were not open enough to express his wickedness; he
winketh with his Eyes (as Solomon shows), and in so doing, he speaks deceit; he
speaks with his Feet, rage and anger, by stamping; he teaches his Fingers, and
so by his pointings and signs, speaks scoffs and mocks; And the reason of all
this, is, lewd things are in his heart, Prove. 6.12, 13, 14. Out of that evil
treasury that is in him, he brings forth such evil things; His heart is no
other then a Stew of unclean and polluted thoughts; A very Shamble of cruel and
bloody thoughts; An Exchange or Shop of vain thoughts; A very Forge and Mint of
false, politic, and undermining thoughts: yea, many times a very Hell of
confused and black thoughts (as speaks a judicious and godly Divine); Dr. Sibbs
Souls Conflict. p* 273.
now; Who can expect to have any good come out of such a Treasury. Therefore be
sure, that the Treasure in thy heart be a good Treasure: A true Treasure, as
you know, is of what is precious, (we do not esteem Stones and Pibbles, Trash
and Rubbish, to be a Treasure); and there must be good good Store of it too,
else it is no Treasure. How precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O God, and how
great is the Sum of them? Psalm. 139.17. that is, The Meditations that I have of
thee and of those excellent and great Works of thine (which before he had
mentioned), they are in my esteem very precious; the specialties are
innumerable, if I should count them, they are more in number than the Sand:
Here was a Treasure indeed, Great and Good. And God is not wanting to furnish
our hearts with Store of such Treasure, affording us matter for Meditation,
both from his Word and Works. It is his Will that his Word should be in our
hearts to this end, that it might take up our thoughts, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. That
which we read and hear should furnish our Treasury with godly Meditations; that
Chapter is but sorrily and carelessly read, that does not afford us some Mites
for this Treasury; that Sermon is but sorrily preached and carelessly heard on
the Lord's Day, that does not furnish us with some good matter, to meditate and
exercise our thoughts upon, all the Week after. Then the Works of God, of
Creation and Providence, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Winds and Vapors,
Storms and Tempests, contribute very much toward our Treasury, Psalm. 8. and
19. and 107. and 148. There is not a Fowl in the Heaven, a Fish in the Sea, a
Worm crawling on the Earth, but brings a Penny in the Mouth of it, to pay
Tribute to our Caesar: Not a Tree in the Field, a Flower in the Garden, but
affords us matter of heavenly Meditation, wherein some glorious Attribute of
God may be seen: Nor is there any Act of Man's Life, be it never so vicious,
nor any Calling wherein we are employed, but affords matter whereby the
thoughts of those that do exercise it may be spiritualized. Persius.
We read of one who seeing a foul Toad, bitterly lamented his Ingratitude
toward God, who had made him a Man and not a Toad, yet he had not been so
serviceable to his God as that Toad had been in it is kind. And we read of
another, Pambo.
who seeing a leight Woman finely tricked up and curiously adorned to allure
and please her Lovers, burst out into tears, and being asked why he wept, he
answered, For that he did not take so much pains to please his God, and adorn
his Soul, that it might he lovely in the Eyes of his Savior, as that Strumpet
did to please sinful men. And Climacus (a Greek Father) tells us of a
Cook-Servant in a College, a very Religious man, who was very devout in serving
God, and often moved with Compunction to mourn for Sin: This Father asking him
by what means he attained to such a degree of Mortification and Holiness,
answered; I, in this work of the Kitchen, did never think that I served men but
God, who has enjoined me to be faithful in my place; and when I look on this
fire in the Chimney, and consider how intolerable the burning of it would be to
my Flesh, I am put in mind of the everlasting and much more unsufferable
burning of Hellfire, due to all impenitent Sinners; and the thought of that
Torment does cause me thus to shed tears for my Sins. Thus, as the Be can suck
Honey out of that Flower which the Fly cannot, See B. B. Hall's Occas. Med. Dr.
Tayler's Med. from the Creature.
so a good Heart (as we use to say of a good Wit) can make use of every thing,
and bring forth out of the good Treasury of his Heart things both new and old
upon any Occasion. See we then to it, that our Treasury be never empty of good
matters that we may have to find our thoughts employment. The mind is aptly
resembled unto a Mill which is always grinding; and if it have not wherewith
to feed it, it will fire it self: If it has Wind or Water it will go whether
the Miller will or no; yet he may choose what kind of Grain it shall grind,
whether Wheat or Darnel: And as the Corn is, so will the Flower be; If the
Flower be bad, the fault is not in the Milstones, but in thee Miller that fed
them with no better a Grist: So, if thy Thoughts, Words, and Deeds be bad; the
Miller thy Heart is to bear the blame for minding no better matters, when thou
have so many Sacks of good Corn round about thee to feed thy mind withal, and
wherewith thou may set thy Mill on work; God's Titles and Attributes; his
Word and Works, both of Mercy and Judgment; the Vanity of Life; Certainty of
Death; and thy final Account; are necessary thoughts to be minded of thee
daily. Set thy Mill a work with these, feed thy mind with such profitable and
necessary matter, and then Mercy and Truth will be the Flower that thy Mill
will yield, Prove. 14.22.

Fourthly, Turn away thine Eyes from sinful and carnal Objects, at least suffer
them not long to dwell upon them. Cassian relates, that to preserve the
cleanness of the Heart, the Egyptian Fathers taught, that men ought to be
surdi, coeci, muti, deaf, blind, and dumb; that so, the Gates being shut, the
safety of the Heart might be the surer kept. And Epiphanius, speaking of the
Practice of the Israelitesunder the Law, who used when any dead Corpse was
carried by any of their Houses to shut their Doors and Windows, he gives this
to be the Moral Reason of the Law, We are to shut both our Eyes and Ears when
any Sin is proposed; for, that Sense is accessory to the Sin; that opens the
Door and lets the Temptation come in. It is incredible what a deal of Pollution
the Devil conveighs into our minds through our Senses, (which some resemble to
the five Cinque Ports, where all his lading is taken in,) especially by the
Ears and Eyes, the Doors and Windows by which the poisonous Air of Wickedness
is let in, to infect the Heart. By the Ear is received the Poison of scurrilous
Songs, obscene Jests, lascivious Stories, which infect the mind with thoughts
of Unchastity; or false Reports and Slanders, which breed thoughts of Revenge
and Cruelty, and therefore Christ's warning should in this Case take place,
Take heed how you hear, Luke 8.18. A good Christian, as he will not speak
filthy Language, so he will not hear it; as he will not slander with his
Tongue, so he will not receive in his Ears a false Report, Psalm. 15.3. as he
will not murder with his hands, so he stops his Ears from hearing of Blood,
Isa. 33.15. But a special care is to be had of the Eye; for, as God tells
Israel, Their Eyes would cause them to go a Whoring, Numb. 15.39. so it fell
out, Lusting was the Issue of their Looking, Numb. 25. Thus David was betrayed
by his Eyes, in casting an idle Glance on Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.2. and Joseph's
Mistress was ensnared by casting her Eyes upon Joseph, Genesis 39.7. Lust is
quick-sighted, and many thousand Souls have dyed of the Wound in the Eye; for
the Eye is an occasion not only of this Sin of Adultery, but of most others. I
saw a fine Babylonish Garment (said Achan), I coveted, and I took it, Josb.
7.21. Ahaz see^ an Altar at Damascus, and he liked it, and caused another to be
made like unto it, 2 King. 16.10, 11. Thine Eyes and th^ne Heart are not but
for thy Covetousness, and for to shed innocent Blood, and for Oppression, and
for Violence to do it, says God to Shallum the King of Judah, Je^. 22.17. The
Eye poisoned the Heart with all these Infections, and allured the Heart to all
that Wickedness. Job said that he made a Covenant with his Eye, Job 31.1. and
comforted himself in this; that his Heart had not walked after his Eyes, Ver.
7. And Nazianzen gloried in this, that he had learned to keep his Eyes from
roving to wanton Prospects. We cannot b^ too wary of this Organ; for, if the
Flies of Egypt get into our Eyes, the Froggs of Egypt will soon get into the
Chambers of our Hearts, and then the Caterpillars of Egypt will soon destroy
the Fruit of our Land, the Actions of our Lives (as one speaks well). And,
because all our Care is too little for the keeping of so quick a Member, desire
the Lord with David, that he would turn away your Eyes from beholding Vanity,
Psalm. 119.37. If thine Eye spy not Nets laid for thee in every Corner, it is
because it self is become a Net, says Ambrose.

Fifthly, See that your Affections be rightly ordered and set upon good
Objects, and kept in a good Frame and holy Temper, Colos. 3.2. Set your
Affections upon things above, not upon things that are upon the Earth. We must
get not minds only, or thoughts only, but sound affections to things heavenly;
they must be set upon them, and fixed on them. As our Affections are, such of
necessity will our Thoughts be; What we love or take delight in, we cannot keep
our minds from thinking on: Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or the Bride her
Attire, Jer. 2.32. No, they cannot, for that they love them and take delight in
them, and therefore mind them. We usually say to some that mind not their
business, What think you on? sure, you are in Love: As if Love took up all
their Thoughts. So Love to God, and Love to his Word, would take off our
Thoughts from the Love of the World and worldly Vanities. The Godly and Blessed
Man, spoken of Psalm. 1. is said to have his Delight in the Law of God, and
delighting in it he could not but he must meditate therein Day and Night, Ver.
2. Oh, How love I thy Law (says David)? It is my Meditation continually, Psalm.
119.97. His Heart was filled with the Love of God and his Word, and that so
filled his Soul with holy Thoughts and Meditations, as that he had neither room
nor leisure for vain and sinful Thoughts to take place. So Malach. 3.16. the
Fear of God and Thinking upon his Name, are joined together; for what we do
indeed fear, we most think upon. Thus the thoughts that proceed from holy,
affections will eat up and devour our carnal thoughts and cares, as the Apostle
intimates, Romans 13.14. Wherefore keep spiritual Affections hot and lively in
thy Soul, suffer them not to cool, and thou shall soon be rid of many vain and
sinful thoughts that now annoy thee. Flies light not upon what is hot, but upon
that Vessel that has cold Liquor in it.

Sixthly, Begin the day with holy Thoughts and Meditations. It was God's
Command, that the first that opened the Matrix should be his, Exodus 34.19. So
the firstborn of thy thoughts daily are God's, not thine but by Sacriledg:
When I awake (says David) I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.18. that is, I no
sooner open mine eyes but my thoughts are of thee, and I am with thee in
meditating of thy wonderful Goodness, in preserving and keeping of me, and of
thy great Works and Wisdom. So at the instant of you awaking, let your hearts
be lifted up to God in a thankful acknowledgment of his Goodness to you the
Night past, in giving you comfortable Rest; for he it is that gives his
beloved Sleep, Psalm. 127.2. In preserving of you from the dangers of the
Night-past; for it is he that has kept thee, Prove. 6.22. And he it is that
renews his Mercies to thee every Morning Lament. 3.22, 23. This is to awake
with God, and to speak first with him; till then no other thought nor business
is to be admitted. At your first awaking, you shall find multitude of Thoughts
attending on you to speak with you, Dr. Tho. Goodwin's. Vanity of Thoughts.
like Clients (says one speaking of this Subject) at a great Lawyers Door in
the Term time. Now put Case some great Lord should be there amongst the rest;
Would he take it well if every inferior Person should be admitted into the
Lawyer's Closet before him, and he made to wait without doors till every
Country Client were dispatched? Judge then in this Case whether God will take
it well at thy hands, if every base and worldly thought shall be admitted into
thy mind so soon as thou awakest, and he last and least thought of who ought
first to be heard and served. It is good to consecrate a man's first awaking
unto God; In the Morning (says David) I will direct my Prayer unto thee, and
will look up, Psalm. 5.3. In so doing, he knew his Prayer and Meditations should
not be lost; he would look after it (as Suitors do after their Petitions which
they prefer unto their Prince), not doubting but to have a gracious Answer.
Certainly, you shall find, that religious Thoughts let into the heart in the
Morning at our first awaking, will keep it in better tune all the day after;
when worldly Thoughts are admitted, they will but trouble us and distract us
the more the whole day following; or they stand about us but as Chesse-men, to
take up the Heart for the Use of the World, Flesh, and Devil, and to draw away
the Heart from the Service of our Maker. The Wicked give their first Thoughts
to those: let us devote our first Meditations to God's Glory, so if we be ready
to praise him (and till that be done we are unready) he will be ready to bless
us.

Seventhly, Have a vigilant and watchful eye over thy Thoughts the whole day
after; for albeit thou season thy Soul with private and holy Meditations in the
Morning, yet a great care must be had the whole day following to keep them from
Infection, which in regard of our corrupt Nature we are apt so receive. He that
gives way to the suggestion of an evil Thought, can hardly stop the Consent of
a depraved Will, or stay the working of an evil hand. It is Wisdom's Advice,
above all keepings so keep the Heart, Prove. 2.24. Set a strong Watch about
that; which if thou do, thou shall be sure to take in thy Watch many wandering
and roving Thoughts; these must be taken up as Vagrants, and corrected and sent
away with a Pass to the place where they were born: Others are stubborn and
unruly Thoughts, Thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, Infidelity, dishonorable to
God; or Thoughts of Malice, Revenge, Pride, Deceit, prejudicial to thy
Neighbor: These are like your sturdy Rogues that come unto your Doors, and
give ill Language, use threatening words, etc. These lay hands upon, and carry
them to the next Justice, even to the Lord chief Justice of the whole World and
complain of them to him, that they may be brought into Subjection, 2 Cor. 10.4.
Show not the least favor to any of them; and do it betimes, at the very first
appearance of them. These are those Brats which must be dashed against the
Scones whilst they are little ones, Psalm. 137.
if we would be freed from Babylonish Captivity of Sin: Other Thoughts thou
shall apprehend in thy Watch which are lawful but unseasonable: and in
performance of Family Duties or private Devotions (of which something was said
before), be assured that some Thought or other (it may be of thy particular
Calling) will be jogging thee on the Elbow, or pulling thee by the Sleeve, and
will thee to make haste, thy Mother and thy Brethren are without to speak with
thee; let these stay a while, put them by till another time. Say as Abraham did
to his Servants, Abide you here at the bottom of the hill with the Ass, whilst
I and the Lad go to worship yonder, and I will come again to you, Genesis 22.5.
Other thoughts you shall meet withal, that can give you a good, account whence
they come, and what they go about, being good seasonable, and necessary; these
relieve and succor according to Statute, as God has commanded.

And as this Watch much be daily kept, so especially upon the Lord's Day above
all other Days; for then naughty thoughts (like vagrant Rogues) are prone to
do us most mischief. If we can but order our thoughts well this day, we shall
order them the better the whole week after; but if in case you let your
thoughts loose upon the Sabbath (as some careless Masters do their Servants) to
go where they will, and do what they will, you shall not have them at so good
command the six days following. It is a day that God has set apart for this
end, that we may be better enabled to keep our thoughts in order when we come
to follow the works of our particular Calling; and without we do it, we cannot
expect a blessing on our Labor, Esaias 58.13, 14.

Eighthly, Avoid Solitariness and Idleness, I join them, because they are
seldom separated, and the Devil makes a like use of both, taking occasion from
both to fill the mind with dangerous and detestable thoughts. When Eve was
straggling from her Husband (for so it is generally held) curiously viewing the
pleasant Plants of the Garden, then the Devil took an occasion to suggest into
her mind base thoughts of God: Genesis 3.1, 2.
When Dinah, Jacob's Daughter, was wandering alone idly from her Father's Tent,
to see the fashions of the Country, Genesis 34.1, 2. Genesis 39.11, 12.
then Shechem, the son of Hamor, caught her, and defiled her: When Potiphars
Servants were all abroad about their business, and Joseph left alone in the
House, then his lascivious Mistress thought it a fit time to solici^e him to
commit wickedness with her: When David was idle and solitary alone, 2 Samuel 11.2.
walking on the top of his House; then was he tempted to lust, and overcome.
And who finds not this experimentally true, that they are no sooner idle and
alone, but armies of ill thoughts and desires come about them, to offer their
Service about one sinful employment or another? This the Heathen man observed;
the like may we. These, or many of these, might be prevented by Christian
society, Sc^n^c. Ep^st. 10.
and diligence in our Calling.

I know there is a time when to be private and alone; Christianity requires it,
and some men's Calling of necessity enforces it, (as the Student to be in his
Study, the Workman in his Shop, Math. 6.6.
the Traveller by the Way, etc.) B. B. Hall Med. and Vows. lib. 2. med. 60.
And it is a great misery (says one) to be either always or never alone; But
in such a case, when we are alone, wandering thoughts would be carefully
avoided, and the mind kept and employed, either about something belonging to
Godliness, or at least about the Works of our lawful Callings; and not with
Domitian the Emperor, to spend the time of our privacy in catching flies, (for
to Suetonius relates of him, that one hour in a day he was wont to sequester
himself from Company, and all the while he did nothing but catch flies, and
then kill them with a penknife; which caused one, being asked, Who was with
the Emperor? to make answer scoffingly, There is no body with him, no, not a
fly); but Beelzebub, that Master-flye (for so it signifies, say the Hebrew
Writers) will be ever present with such idle and solitary persons, blowing upon
them with his suggestions and temptations. Let us that profess our selves
Christians, be ashamed not to spend our solitary hours better. The Heathen man
professed of himself, Cic. Offic. l. 3.
That he was never less idle, then when he was idle; nor never less alone,
then when he was most alone; For when he was at leisure, he thought of his
busin^s^; and when he was alone, he used to talk with himself. So says that
Learned B. B. aforementioned, In greatest Company, I will he alone to my self;
in greatest privacy, in company with God. And so the Devil shall take no
advantange against us in our Solitariness.

Ninthly and Lastly, Commit thy heart and thoughts to God by earnest prayer;
daily beseech him to preserve thee from secret sins (such are thy sinful
thoughts), Psalm. 19.12. And humbly beseech him, that the meditations of thy
heart may be such, as that they may be acceptable in his sight, ver. 13. This
doing, rest assured, that thy thoughts shall be established, as is promised,
Prove. 16.3. Follow these Directions carefully, and conscionably, and doubt not
but the success will be blessed and happy.

think, as well as of the words which they speak, and actions which they do
before men; there is no surer sign of inward sanctity and holiness than it, and
thou may comfort thy self therewith, though other marks and signs may be
wanting: As some, whom I have heard of, have done, who in the hour of
temptation that they have been in, when they could not be brought to fasten
upon any mark of Salvation that was brought and applied; This only has been a
stay to their hearts, that they have made conscience of their inward Thoughts
and Cogitations, as well as of their outward Conversation: And this (as I have
showed you before) is made the note of an upright heart by Solomon, Prove. 12.5.
The Thoughts of the Righteous are right; which is not so to be understood, as
if an upright heart were altogether void of Thoughts that are not right and
allowable. For sometimes Satan casts in matter to turn them out of the right
course; sometimes their own Flesh will play its part, and stir up desires of
Commodity, and Praise, and Pleasures, and such like in them; but these are as
the muddiness that may be for a time in a good Fountain, that is troubled with
the tramplings of a Beast, which the Fountain soon works out; these they
resist, and judge themselves for, and God takes no notice of them, forasmuch as
the general bent of their hearts and thoughts is to that which is right and
pleasing in his sight. And, I beseech you, mark me in this Point (says a
judicious Divine, Mr. Bolton, His D^scourse of true Happiness, the 5th. Edit.
p. 122.
and one that had an excellent dexterity in comforting afflicting Consciences):
for words, actions, and all outwardness of carriage, do not so clearly and
impartially distinguish the power of sanctifiation from the state of formality,
as does the composing and ordering of the thoughts according to the light of
God's Word, and holy motions of his sanctifying Spirit.

I know that many of God's dear Children are much troubled in mind, and very
much cast down in regard of the Vanity and sinfulness of their thoughts, which
arises from that evil concupiscence which remains unmortified in them; so that
they cannot be persuaded their hearts are upright before God, or that they are
truly sanctified, their Soul refuses comfort in that respect, when yet none
have more cause to be comforted then they, Psalm. 77.2.
in regard of the uprightness of their hearts toward God. But let me use the
word of the Evangelical Prophet to you, Esaias 51.1. Hearken unto me you that
follow after Righteousness, ye that seek the Lord. Stir up your hearts, so many
of you as fear the Lord, and are subject to trouble of mind and heaviness of
heart, in regard of your distracting thoughts; and admit of a word of comfort.



I believe not (says one of the Fathers), Non puto illum qui cl^us^rat coelum
o^a tio^^, quod ^laus^r^^ animam a cogitation^: and facilius est coe^um
obs^ra^e, quam animam.
that He who shut the Heavens by his prayer (meaning Elijah) could shut his
heart from all vain and worldly Thoughts, (for he was subject to like passions,
says St. James, as we are, Jam. 5.17.) And hence infers, That it is an easier
thing to shut the Heavens, than to keep the heart from wanderings; Our thoughts
are generally more evil then good, and more upon worldly then heavenly things,
in regard of our corrupt nature, we being more Flesh then Spirit, and the many
earthly and wordly Objects presented to o^r senses in our ordinary Callings,
which do enforce us ordinarily to think of earthly things, more then of
heavenly; but it does not follow from hence, that our hearts are unsanctified,
for that the trial of Sanctification consists not in the multitude of our
thoughts, but in the mightiness of our thoughts; not so much in the number of
them, as in the entertainment that we give them. The Workman thinks more of his
Work and Tools, the Husbandman of his Husbandry, etc. than of their dear Wives
and Children; yet, who will say that they affect them better? When they think
of Wife or Children, (if they be as they ought to be) they think of them with
much more joy and delight then on any thing in this World, their thoughts
toward them are very strong and fervent. So though our thoughts, that pass
through our hearts of vain and transitory things, be very many, yet our mighty
and strong thoughts are upon God and his ways.

Cogitationem matammali


thought, and the thought of evil; Every thought of evil is not an evil
thought. There may be thoughts about evil, which are either in pure
speculation, or natural consideration of the thing; or with averseness of
affection from the matter thought on. And such thoughts of evil may be inspired
in us by the Spirit of God moving us to to consider of Sin, and think of evil
forbidden; as always to fear the defilement of it, and to stir us up so abhor
and shun it. And such thoughts of evil, are not evil, but good, nor can any be
good without it: Beware lest you mistake in this.

Ascendentes.
Secondly, Such thoughts as are evil would be distinguished of; some arise from
that evil concupiscence that is within us; these are Ascending thoughts, such
as the corrupt heart of man does breathe out: Of these, our Savior speaks,
Luke. 24.38. Why do Thoughts arise in your hearts? Nothing that ascends out
of the corrupt heart can be good, which is as the foaming Sea steeming out, and
evaporating up continually a world of sinful thoughts, ^
and ill-disposed imagination^. And others are put into us from without, either
from Sathan's immediate suggestions: So Satan provoked David to number the
People, mmissae.
1 Chronicles. 21.1. and Judas to betray his Master, Joh. 13.27. Or from Satan's
Instruments, as Job 2.9. Matthew. 16.22, 23. Now, those thoughts that are from
without us, which Satan does put into us, or are occasioned from man's
solicitation or provoking of us, or do arise by occasion of some external
Object; they may be so resisted, as that they shall not be accounted ours: they
do no farther defile us, than we make them ours by assent and consent, as may
appear by that Speech of Christ, Matthew. 15.18, 19. Nothing defiles a man, but
what comes from within; If they be only from without, they defile us not (if by
Grace they are repelled by us).

Yet it cannot be denied, that those sinful thoughts which distract us in holy
Duties, are (if not altogether yet) for the most part from within our selves,
arising from man's corrupt heart, and occasioned by a great neglect in the
performance of our Duties: As in want of preparation, before we enter upon the
Duty, we bring with in unsanctified and unprepared thoughts to the hearing and
reading of the Word, to Prayer, and the like; we set not our selves as in God's
presence, not considering how great a God and holy a God we have to deal
withal; we receive the Word, as the Word of Man; we pray as to man (it may be,
not so reverently, but) carnally and hypocritically, for vainglory and
by-respects. That is a great wane of attention so what is ^id, when the Word is
preached; few Lydias's are amongst us, whose heart God so opens, that we
diligently attend to what is spoken: Great want of Intention and Retention; we
give too much liberty to our senses, Act. 16.14.
and suffer our Eyes and Ears to wander too much; we are too formal in that we
do, regarding formality more then substance: And are very inconstant in the
Duties of God's Worship and Service. Besides a customary and carnal keeping of
the Sabbath, may be a great cause that we are molested with sinful thoughts in
our Prayers all the week after. These, and such like, may be the reasons why we
are so troubled with wandering thoughts in holy performances.

And yet albeit we are so deeply faulty, and must needs charge our selves as
guilty: Yet we may not conclude that, because of these, there is no saving
Grace in us.

Besides, These evil Thoughts God will sanctify unto us, and cause them to work
for our good; God could, if he would, and would, if he had seen fitting, have
taken away the swarm of evil thoughts, wanderings, and rovings out of our minds
upon out Regeneration; but he suffers them to fly up and down in our
imaginations for our profit. As to humble us under a sight and sense of our
sinful and corrupt Nature, which is needful for us to be often put in mind of,
and by nothing better then by the wandering of our Spirits, which show
manifestly of what a Nature we are, and what we would be; For as our Thoughts
are, such would we be, were we left alone: So to make us the more watchful over
our hearts and to have an eye to the door thereof; Seeing such a multitude of
vagrants hanker about the House, which we may conclude upon, come for no good.
It causes us to renew our interest every day in Christ's Righteousness and
Obedience. There is nothing that moves a godly man to do this, more then those
sinful stirrings of his Soul which he finds daily in him, intising and drawing
away his heart from God (says a holy man). Dr. Sibbs, His Souls Conflict. p.
273.
And it is a means so cause us to long the more after our dissolution, that we
may be rid of this Body of Sin; it makes them to pant and breathe after a full
and perfect deliverance from the corruption of Nature, and from those spiritual
evils they find in themselves, as did the Apostle, Romans 7.24. Thus God leaves
these vain and wandering motions, these sinful Lusts in u^, Aug. de bayt. Parn.
c. 39.
as he left the Canaanites in the Land (says Augustine), to teach and exercise
his People withal, which (if they grew careless) should be as pricks and goads
in their sides, and thorns in their Eyes; and that they should not think they
were come yet to their final rest, but should still look for a better. If we
make this good use of them, we need not doubt, but although they be evil in
themselves, yet they are sanctified unto us: For as good motions rejected,
become thereby unsanctified unto us; so evil Thoughts repelled and resisted,
may be sanctified, and occasion much good unto us through God's good Grace. Let
not any godly Soul then be too much perplexed, for that they are not wholly rid
of them; It is humane to have them, devilish only not to resist them but to be
overcome of them, by assent, consent, and liking. It is half the conquest to
bear them as a burden, Gregory.
and that through God's assistance; Satan, and our own concupiscence, are not
able to bring sin farther then to the Thought, and not into Act, which is that
they principally aim at. Let me demand of thee, and let me have a true answer
from thy Conscience.

First, Are not these thy wanderings of thy Spirit grievous unto thee, and
burdensome; do thou not go under them, as under a heavy load, which thou
would give a world, were it in thy power, to be rid of?

Secondly, And do they not cause thee to draw near to the Throne of Grace, and
put up many a suit to God humbly in the Name of Christ, that thou may be rid
of them, and they whipped out of the Temple of thy Soul, that it may not become
a den of Thieves?

Thirdly, Do thou not in obedience to God's Will, still maintain the combat
betwixt the Flesh and Spirit, and fightest lawfully; and albeit thou receivest
many a foil, yet thou are careful presently to ralley thy scattered forces
again and again, and wilt not give over thy attendance upon God's Ordinances,
but put on firmer Resolutions to be more watchful?

Fourthly, Does not this cause thee to cast away all confidence in thy self, in
respect of the work done; confessing ingenuously, that when thou have done all
that thou can do, thou art but an unprofitable Servant, Luke 17.10?

Fifthly, And do not thou learn from hence, more and more to live the Life of
Faith in the Son of God, trusting and relying only on his Obedience for Life
and Salvation? Bless God, that thy Conscience can give a comfortable answer in
some measure to these Interrogatories, and cheer up thy drooping Soul; let not
thy imperfect Obedience dishearten thee: For God will accept of us according to
that which we have, and not according to that which we have not.

I am buffetted many times with horrid and blasphemous Thoughts; Such as call,
God's Being, his Truth, his Power and Providence into question; with Thoughts
unnatural and inhumane; and can such Thoughts as these ever creep into the
heart of a Child of God?

Bern. Cant. Ser. 32. Capel on Tempt.
says one, but where the indivisible point of that difference does stand, I
know not: Indeed we shall find, that ordinarily they are so mixed, that the
same sinful thoughts are ascribed both to Satan and to Man. It is said (as was
noted before), That Satan moved David to number the People, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And
yet afterward David confessed it to be his sin, that he numbered them, ver. 8.
So Acts 5.3. Peter tells Ananias, That Satan had filled his heart to lie to
the Holy Ghost; and yet, ver. 4. he says, Thou have lied not to Man, but to
God. Satan begets, but it is the Heart that conceives and brings forth:
Notwithstanding the suggestions of Satan may at some times be distinguished
from those of our own Hearts, by these apparent Differences.

First, For matter; Sathan's suggestions are oftentimes so outragiously wicked,
that even Nature it self (though corrupted) does abhor them, when they are
first suggested to the mind. No Temptation does arise from the Flesh, but the
Devil interposeth himself, and speaks his good word for them. And though
commonly the Flesh, to re-gratifie the Devil, sets forward his Temptation; yet
it may sometimes so fall out, that the Devil tempts alone, and that so grossly
(says a godly Divine), that the very Flesh is a shamed of them; those that
come from the Flesh, are more suitable to Nature, and more delightful and
pleasing to it.

Secondly, For the manner of their injection; Satan's suggestions are sudden,
like a flash of Lightening, and with such unavoydable violence, as that they
cannot by any wit or strength of the party be prevented, But those that come
from our sinful and corrupt Nature, are more deliberate; it does rather lead
and entise, than enforce unto sin, Jam. 1.14. His temptations are sometimes so
subtle and strange, that, before the instant that they are suggested, we never
thought of such a thing; nor was it possible that they should be the thoughts
of a simple ignorant man, but the apparent suggestions of the old Serpent. But
the Flesh takes occasion of things present, and subject to the senses, to
intise us unto evil.

Thirdly, For the Effect: A man's thoughts being natural, work no extraordinary
perturbation of mind; But Satan's suggestions being blasphemous, strikes the
heart with horror: the Understanding is astonished, the Heart quaketh, etc.
unless by long custom, and continual sinning, Dearnad.
the heart is become Diabolical. And these are the chief differences that
Divines give between those sinful thoughts that are the immediate suggestions
of Satan, and those that arise from our own hearts: Otherwise they are so like
the one to the other, that they can hardly be discerned. But if in case such
horrid thoughts arising in your hearts, be such, as that not so much as the
Affections do incline unto them; but on the contrary, thou do wholly abhor
them in the very first arising thereof; you may conclude them to be rather the
suggestions of Satan, then from your own concupiscence. And that they shall be
put on his Score, and not on yours; nor shall they ever be imputed unto us, for
that they leave no guilt upon us.

And put case, that these horrid and blasphemous Thoughts are ours, either
because they arise from our own sinful concupiscence, or for that we give too
much way unto them when they do arise: yet there is no cause for thee to infer
from thence, that thou art not therefore the Child of God, or that God loves
thee not, in that he thus suffers thee to be tempted.

First, For that there are no kind of Temptations more commonly incident to
God's Children, especially being afflicted in mind, than these. So ordinarily
does Satan sight with this Weapon, that he durst assault the Son of God with
it, Matthew. 4.9. and yet he was the unspotted Lamb of God, in whom was no manner
of Sin, no, not so much as the least degree of carnal Concupiscence; Can we
wonder then, if any of the members of his Body-mystical be thus assaulted? With
this consideration St. Paul stays the hearts of the godly Corinthtans, lest
they should be too much dejected under Sathan's Temptations; There has no
Temptation taken you, but such as are common to man, 1 Cor. 10.13. that is, to
a Christian man whilst he is in the state of mortality: It so appertains to him
(says a learned Doctor) as the Soul it self, Dr. Done. p. 789.
and as Reason appertains to a natural man. He is not a man, that is without a
reasonable Soul; he is not a Christian, that is without Temptation. It
appertains unto man, so, as that it is convenient; more then so, as that it is
expedient; more then that, that it is necessary; more then all that, that it is
essential to a Christian. Indeed, every Christian is not assaulted with such
horrid and blasphemous Thoughts, as some others are; but none are wholly freed
from all Satanical Temptations; nor can any man assure himself that he shall be
exempted from Temptations of that Nature, seeing they appertain to man; to one
as well as to another.

Secondly, Albeit God in his wisdom may permit Satan to buffet thee with these
hellish Temptations; yet he keeps the hook in his Nostrils, and wills nothing
to his Children, but what he overrules to their good; sometimes Pride is hereby
prevented: Thus St. Paul was buffeted, lest he should be exalted above measure,
through the abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7. And sometimes we are awaked
thereby out of our deep sleep of Sin, and stirred up to renew our Repentance
for some Sin, that as yet we have not been thoroughly humbled for. Sometimes God
suffers it for the trial and exercise of our Graces, Jam. 1.3. And sometimes
that his Grace may appear in our weakness, supporting and upholding of us, 2
Cor. 12.9. But whatever the Reasons are, God has promised to turn all to the
good of his; And therein we may comfortably rest assured, that albeit it be not
God's good pleasure wholly to free us from them; yet they shall tend to our
profit, and that he will give a good issue out of them in the end, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Thirdly, The Comfort of a Christian lies in his resisting of Temptation: It is
not a Sin simply to be tempted, if we do not yield to the Temptation, but
resist it with all our Power, we are safe enough. The chastest Matron in the
World may be assaulted, (as Joseph was by a great Lady), yet she is never a
whit the worse for that, if she assent not, but the better to be thought of:
Ill Counsel is the fault of the Giver, not of the Receiver. We read in the Law
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 22.26. that if a Virgin were ravished in the field, and that
she cried out for help when she was assailed, and that none came in to her
rescue, in such a Case it should not be reckoned as her Sin; for, as when a man
rises up against his Neighbor and slays him, even so is this matter. So, if
the Devil commit a Rape upon thy Soul, and thou cryest out so God, and
spreadest thy blasphemous Suggestions before him, as Hezekiah did the Letter of
railing Rabshekah, Isa. 37.14. If thou humbly and sincerely protestest thine
own Innocence in his sight, thou art a happy man, and in the Case of God's
blessed Children. The greater thy Temptations are, the more noble shall thy
resiastnce be accounted, the more exemplary thy Life and Virtues, the greater
in the end shall be thy Crown and Glory.

etc.

whilst the strong man keeps the House, all things are in peace and quietness,
Luke 10.21. No Prince will make War against his own Subjects: What Birds does
the Fowler shoot at, tame or wild? Whom does the Dog bark at, the Stranger or
Home-Dweller? Ephraim is joined to Idols (said God in Justice, Hos. 4.17.) let
him alone: So says Satan in malice, they are joined, united, incorporated to
Sin, let them alone; and as the Spouse gave Charge concerning her beloved, Cant
2.7.
Waken him not until he please. Such is Satan's Command to his officious
Spirits concerning sleepy and secure Sinners, I charge you waken them not by
any Temptation, affright them not therewith, but let them sleep on till they
sleep their last. Whilst Satan and you were Friends, he was well content that
you should go on in your formal Profession without disturbance; meddle not with
Repentance, and he will not meddle with you so as to disquiet you: But if you
fall out with him, and complain of his Service, and cry out, a new Master a
new, then be sure to meet with Temptation upon Temptation. The Lion foams and
roars, and be stirs himself that he may keep his prey, or recover his loss
again.



Job's Case, who notwithstanding was as just and holy a man as lived upon the
Earth, Job 7.13, 14.

We shall do well to distinguish of Dreams: Some are Natural, others
Supernatural. The Natural arise from Complexion or from Affection: From
Complexion or Constitution, as from Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholy: The
Sanguine has merry Dreams; the Melancholy, sorrowful; the Chollerick, Dreams
of sire; the Phlegmatic, of Floods and Rain, and such watery, Objects. And as
these Elemental Humors do abound in a Man, Dreams have a stronger Force, and
more violent Perturbation.

From Affection; What a man most thinks of in the day with desire and delight,
that he soonest dreams of in the Night. A Dream comes through Multitude of
business, says Solomon, Eccles. 5.3.

Somnia ne cures, nam men's humana quod optat, etc. Sanderf. 6. Sermon. ad Pop. p.
493.
Though Dreams of this Nature are not much to be regarded, yet they are not
altogether to be neglected: There is Use to be made of them, both in Physic,
as to discern our Temperatures and natural Constitution in time of Health; and
in time of Sickness some reasonable Conjecture may be taken thence, concerning
the Ranckness and Tyranny of that Humor from which the Malady springs: And
in Divinity too, good Use may be made of them in finding out our beloved Sin:
Our Dreams (for the most part) look the same way, which our freest Thoughts
incline. The voluptuous dreameth of his Pleasures; the covetous, of his Profit;
the ambitious, of high Place and Preferment; and so thereby we may make some
kind of Discovery, whether the Lust of the Flesh, or the Lust B.B. Hall Med.
of the Eyes, or Pride of Life, be the Master-Sin in us. And thus, by thy
Thoughts in the Night thou may learn to know somewhat of (...)


