(...). Sagrir. OR Doomes-day drawing nigh, With Thunder and Lightening to
LAWYERS. In an Alarm For New Laws, and the Peoples Liberties from the Norman
and Babylonian Yokes. Making Discovery Of the present ungodly Laws and Lawyers
of the Fourth Monarchy, and of the approach of the FIFTH; with those godly
Laws, Officers and Ordinances that belong to the Legislative Power of the Lord
Jesus. SHOWING The Glorious Work Incumbent to Civil-Discipline, (once more) set
before the Parliament, Lord General* Army and People of England, in their
distinct cap^^ities, upon the Account of Christ and his Monarchy.

Humbly presented to them by JOHN ROGERS, an unfeigned Servant of Christ, and
this Commonwealth in their best Rights, Laws and Liberties, lost many years.

Bread of Deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled
with Gravel.

Prove. 20. 17. Whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he shall cry
himself, but shall not be heard.

Prove. 21. 13. They are Brass and Iron, they are all Corrupters, the Bellows
are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in vain, for
the Wicked are not plucked away.

Ier. 6. 28. 29. (...) When their Judges (or the greatest Lawyers) are thrown
down into stony places, they shall hear my Words, because then they are sweet,

Psalm. 141. 6. Causidicis, Erebo, Fisco, fas vivere rapto;
Militibus, Medico, Tortori, occidere ludo;
Me^iri Astrologis, Pictoribus, atque Poetis.
LONDON, Printed for Tho: Hucklescot, to be sold at the George in Little
Britain. 1654

To the Right Honorable The Lord Genesis CROMWELL, The Peoples Victorious
Champion in England, Ireland, and Scotland.
My Lord:
HIs EXCELLENCY the Lord Jesus has sent out his Summons to other Nations also,
and the Blade of that Sword (whose handle is held in England) will reach to the
very Gates of Rome ore long, but by what Page 131. There is a Prediction which
says, a C. shall sound within the walls of Rome.
Instruments we know not, yet for what end we know, Psalm. 72. 2. 4. 13. viz. to
break in pieces the oppressor, and to deliver the poor and needy, yea to
spoil the weak-hearted, and be more excellent then the (mightiest) mountains
of prey, Psalm. 76. 4. 5. this shall go on till all the earth be filled with
his glory. Now my Lord, hitherto he has honored you in his War, let him also
do so in his Work which the War has made way for, viz. in throwing down of
Tyranny the Oppression, which as you have begun to do, so this Treatise has
unavoydable reference to your Self, to carry on; as our Conqueror upon
Christ's and the Commonwealths account, and not upon your own. Therefore are
the eyes of thousands upon you, to see what you will do for their safety and
freedom, according to the just Rights and Liberties of the People of this
Nation, which they had before the Norman Tyranny and Conquest; for it is far
better for us (my Lord) now to hang us, then not to help us against these
unsufferable Laws and Lawyers, which rob us of Justice and righteousness, as
it is obvious in the Treatise; whiles not one honest man in England dares
justify them, the mouths of all are open against them, which like doors
without Lock or Key can scarce be shut close again till there be an
alteration. Jethro's counsel to Moses (my Lord) concerns you, in Exodus 18,
19. Hearken and I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee, be thou
for the People to Godward, that thou may bring their causes to God, etc. we
beseech you hearken to the inexorable (yea inexuperable) cries and calls of the
Communalty for godly Laws; and for justice upon the usurping proud Mirror of
Just. p 230. and p. 60.
Lawyers, for their lying, perjury, and treachery (which is according to the
Statute, and good Laws punishable.) It is without malice to a man of them, and
merely out of Conscience to engage against sin, and enemies to Christ and this
Commonwealth, that I must make such a Character of them as I do; it may be I
speak spiritfully (yet not spightfully) though oppression makes a wise man
mad, (says Solomon) Eccles. 7. 7. and indeed if it be madness to engage
against Sin, I will be so, for Si natura negat, facit indignatio versum; but
here is no need of Passion, seeing Piety preaches, yea the light of Nature
presses these lines against that sinful Society, yea the (...) calls for it.
The Egyptian Hieroglyphick for Legislative Power was oculus in sceptro, but
ours had need to be oculus in ense, the eye in the conquering Sword of the
people; I mean, first
a full eye to look (...), backward and forward, with an open Prospect into
the Peoples Liberties and advantages for their safety and freedom; and then an
able quick eye to deliver the People from oppressors, and to defend them in
their own ^ights. And indeed (my Lord) we would have no Law, Nisi lex oculata,
but that Law which sees how, and what, and to whom to administer in
aequilibrio, in justice, whilst many of our Laws are the ^lawes of this
Commonwealth: for as Plutarch says, Turpe praeceptum non est lex, sed in
quitas. The Chinese would persuade us, that they only see with two eyes, and
other Nations but with one. O that we could convince our Neighbor Nations now
by our Laws and Government, that we see with both eyes, for our selves and
friends too (if need be!) wherefore let us fall to their (...), let us work,
and watch for Christ's Monarchy, which is now upon the borders! and be sure to
keep in the Kings (Christ's) Road, for that is safest. Isreal's Omen of going on
against his enemies was, 1 Chronicles. 14. 15. the voice in the top of the trees;
and this is ours also, viz. the voice of God as in Primitive times, and in the
top-ages of the Church; for his Spirit is mighty, and grows great every day:
and when the enemy shall be like a Flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up
a standard against them, Isa. 59. 19. and why? see Isa. 31. 3. the Lord Gods
greatest work in these days is Spiritworke, and none will be found fit to be
employed in it, but such as are spirited for it, by the Holy Spirit; for then
our Wars will be holy Wars, our Laws holy Laws, our Parliaments holy
Parliaments, etc. and not before. Wherefore my Lord, for Christ's sake mind,
and find out what your work is! you have not done all yet, for now you have
won us, you must wall us with the good and wholesome Laws and Liberties of the
People, as we were before the Norman invasion, or rather as Israel of old,
Deuteronomy. 6. 1. or else Gog will arise, who says in his presumption, I will go to
the Land of unwalled Villages, I will go to them that are at rest. It is
dangerous indeed (now) to sit still, seeing the Wheel full of eyes is in his
swiftest motions, and may (without heed) run upon us and ruin us. The Devils
design is to make the most able and eminent Instruments useless by idleness,
when the greatest work is to do, as one says of the Crab, that seeing the
Robinson, o^ Genesis 49.
Oyster gape, he throws in a little stone which hinders it from shutting
again; so am I (and hundreds beside) suspicious, least Satan should deal
with them that now sit still, and gape about (as if they had nothing to do) by
throwing them some temptations or other, to stay them here behind, in
purchases, preserments, or pleasures, and make them loose their work and
opportunity. O it is sad! if it be so; for the best Birds, dum morantur in
nidis, do moult and loose feathers. But (my Lord) hark! the Trumpet sounds!
and Christ is coming in great glory! arise, and to your work! -- It is not
notions of Philosophy, nor Principles of Policy which will give us to see this;
for in Philosophy what is so dark as light? and the Sun which one would think
most evident to be seen, is hardest to be looked on; and so is this glorious
approach of Christ, and his Fifth Monarchy. But Eagles see better then Owls.
The Lord Jehovah (then) make you Eagleeyed, and Eagle-winged in this work
which you have to do for Christ, and this Commonweal. Cicero expected
extraordinary knowledge and practice from his Son, because of his conversing
and living with Cratippus; no less do wise men look for from you (my Lord)
for that you are so conversant with the Occurrences of these times and seasons,
and that so eminently too, and live (as we hope) so much with Christ, and for
Christ: yet we know a man may have good cards, but loose the game by playing
ill. But (my Lord) I leave you to that Spirit which gave Daniel skill, Dan. 9.
22. and Joshua courage; the same wisdom that tells us, He that understands is
of an excellent spirit; tells us also, That the Prince who wants understanding,
(i. e.) in the things of God, according to the season of his government) is
also a great oppressor. Wherefore my Lord, I beseech you, contemn not the
Clock that tells you how the time passes; a mean Herald may go on great
errands, and on this errand he is contented to be mean and contemptible, who is
sent to you, and prays unfainedly for you, that you may never be set aside, but
be of singular use (yet) in this Generation, and then, and not till then, rest
from all your labors, as David did. Acts 13. 36. The Sword of the Lord and of
Gideon together, gets the loud suffrage of your suffering,

From my Study the 8th. Month, 20th. day, Tho. Apostles. Yet your (heartily)
humble Servant in the service of our Lord Jesus, JOHN ROGERS.

To the Reader of any Faculty whatsoever, in the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
SIR,
WHat is your Profession? -- Be what thou will, I profess that this Treatise
concerns thee, and bids thee beware of a fall. Hold fast! especially if thou
art any of the Supreme. For he that ventures to fall from above, with hopes to
be catched below, may hap to be dead ere he come to ground; this is sat
sapienti, a Word to the wise. Therefore, with humility and love to you.

1. Are you a Parliament man? mind your work then, and the 1. To
Parliament Men.
Fifth Monarchy; or else the stone, Dan. 2. and the wheel, Eze. 1. may hap to
mind you, and grind you too. Righteous men know their work of the Generation
they live in, Genesis 4. 20, 21. 22. Genesis 6. 9. Act. 13. 36. So did Abraham, Noah,
Moses, and Aaron, David, Daniel, Nehemiah, and Ezra, and all men whom the Lord
anointed and appointed to govern. And so will you, if you be of God for good
to this Generation. Your work so absolutely incumbent is obvious to every
discerning eye, the neglect of which, (if you be guilty) I fear lest it should
be more fat all to you then to the last Parliament (if that be true in 1 Samuel
15. 26, 28. and 16. 14.) and may hap to throw you aside as well as your
Predecessors, and others in all ages that have (through carnal Reason and
Policy) laid aside their work and duty. Now I do declare to all that hear or
read this Treatise (and will if my life were on it) that your work is about
the Laws and Tithes, to strip the Whore both of her outward Scarlet-array, and
to rend the flesh off of her bones, by thorwing down the standing of Lawyers,
and Priests. It is not enough to change some of these Laws, and so to reform
them (as is intended by most of you) according to the rule of the Fourth
Monarchy, which must all to pieces; O no! that will be to poor purpose, and is
not your work now, which is to provide for the Fifth, as chap. 5. by bringing
in the Laws of God given by Moses for Re-publique Laws (as well as the Laws
of God given by Christ, which must in for Church Laws) Isa. 26. 13. Mark 10.
42. so that seeing the Law-booke of God, which has been lost so long, is now
found again, therefore like Josiah, in 2 King. 22. 12, 13. Command that the
Lord be sought to about it, lest the wrath of God be kindled for not hearkening
to the words in that Book, and cause these Laws of God (as chap. 23. 2, 3. to
be restored and read (as he did) in the ears of all the people, that the
people may be subject to those Laws; and then the Lord will bless you as he
did Israel: But if you do it not, (I fear) you will be found to neglect your
work and opportunity for God and Christ. Why are there so many perplexable
cares about the Laws? Has not God given you a Book of Laws ready to your
hand? and can men make Laws better then God? then if Moses dare not set up any
other Laws but those given of God for the State, or Politic Government, how
dare you? Now God has brought you out of the house of Egypt, shall the
Egyptian (or Norman) Heathenish Laws yet rule you? O God forbid! Wherefore
seeing you have Gods Law-booke before you, if you lay it aside, and take up
men's before it, it will not be well taken I promise you: therefore the Lord open
your eyes both as to the Laws and Tithes, and that you may look before you
leap, It will appear this is your Generation-work.

1 By the variety of Providence, and Dispensations of God Proved, ^. By the
call you have to it.
which declare it, and have called you to do it, Micha 6. 9. The Lords voice
cries, the voice of the Lord from the City (for all that common, or corrupt
Counsel-Petition put in for Tithes, August last, which was not the voice of the
Lord, but the voice of the Lady, the Queen that sits on the Scarlet-colored
Beast full of Bla^phemies, Rev. 17. 3. abusing the most precious Saints and
Servants of Christ with a subtle insinuation of Jesui^s, and the like; but it
is well known they were put on to it by the High Priests of this City, some of
whose names I have by me) so that the Lords voice from the Temple, yea and the
voice of the Lord, that renders recompense to his enemies, Isa. 66. 6. cal^
upon you; yea that extraordinary voice which cast the others out of Parliament
that neglected this work, and which has called you in to do it, and as David
says, Psalm. 18. 13 the Highest has given his voice, or lifted it up, for all
to see, that he is against these Lawyers and Priests.

2 The loud and longing expectations of the People tell you, 2. The Peoples
expectation.
this is your work, and for this you are entered into the Government, as
appears in chap. 4. and 5. and how grievous it will be to frustrate the
expectations of the wise, holy, and understanding people of this Nation, judge
ye.

3 This work is the greatest (and may be the most glorious 3. The worth of the
work.
work) as yet before you; and therefore to neglect it, is of the most grievous
consequence, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Numb. 14. 29. Romans 11. 20. though it is true, if
ye be found faithful in this little, ye shall have much more glorious things
for Christ, and against Antichrist set before you, before you have done, which
the Lord will honor you with, but else not.

4 This work must be done (in order to Gods design for 4. The necessity of it.
Christ, and against Antichrist) either by you or some others, Hest. 4. 14. Now
it being so eminent a service for Jesus Christ and the Commonweal, to throw
down the tyranny, usurpation, and oppression of the Norman and Babylonian
yokes, viz. Terms and Tithes, Lawyers and Priests; O take heed, how you
neglect so noble a work! to the obstructing (as much as you may) Gods design,
which if you do, will light heavy on you one day. But if you be courageous,
and constant, and How the Parliament may be glorious before God and men.
quick, and careful in your work now before you, God will honor you further,
and Gab^iel shall give you the peculiar Title of, the Parliament GREATLY
BELOVED of God, Dan. 9. 21, 22, 23. and 10, 11. 19. then God will stand by you
(if you stick so close to him) and bless you extraordinarily, both with
Public and Personal deliverances; else remember your Predecessors: where are
they?

But as to Tithes there be many objections; for so many Tithes.
Parliament Men have impropriate Tithes, that it is not likely to stub up all
at once. If so, say I, how did Cyrus get over the deep river with his Army (to
besiege Babylon) that seemed impossible, and impassible, but by dividing it,
and cutting it out into diverse, and so soaking or draining out the water into
many branches made it low, and easily foardable. Thus (if there be no help for
it) let them divide this deep thing into the Tithes of the Clergy and Laiety
(as they call them) and* get over the first branch against Babylon; i. e. to
take away Tithes as from the Clergy, and out of the hands of the corrupt
people, who as long as they have maintenance in their hands will keep up the
Popish, Sottish, Antichristian Clergy, and Service Book Readers about the
Nation as they do. But if that prevail not, then let them give us a Hearing,
and as much liberty to speak what we can against them, as the Clergy, with
their Lawyers have had to speak for them; and if we show not more Reason, and
Religion ^oo to cast them down, then all the Pack of Priests or Lawyers in
England can to keep them up, let them stand; else fall like a Mil-stone, though
they make a great noise. O that the Parliament would go on apace with this
Public work, that is upon them, i. e. Of Laws and Tithes, least they be laid
aside, or which is worse, as that part of the Fourth Monarchy too, which must
be crushed and crumbled by the entrance of the Fifth: else I fear (as well as
hundreds more) a Blast, or a Blow ere long, and mark it.

Obj. But you being a private man are too bold to correct Parliament Men as you
do.

Ans. No, it is my duty thus to do; which Panormitanus a learned Lawyer
(himself) says* That one poor simple Layman Extra de Appel cap.
significasti. Fox, vol. 3. p. 122. col. 2. and ^24.
(ergo, a Minister) that brings Gods Word with him, is more to be regarded then
a whole Parliament, or Council without it. And my most honored Predecessor
Mr. Joh. Rogers Proto-Martyr, in cursed Queen Mary's days, testified to this
with his blood, (who has led me the way) when this very Objection was made him
by the Bishop of Winchester, and so p. 124. Col. 2. he says, That with the
Word of God be alone was to be heard against the WHOLE PARLIAMENT, and that the
Laws of men might not rule the Word of God, but they are all to be discussed,
tried, and ^^^ged thereby, and neither (says he) my Conscience, nor any man's
must be satisfied with such Laws of Parliament as disagree from Gods Word.
This I witness too with that holy Martyr, were my life on it as his was; and
though many of the Parliament are offended with me, yet I must not, nor will I
budge or shrink back to bear my testimony to them. But thus far for such.

Secondly, Art thou a Member of the Army that art the 2. To Armym^n.
Reader? let me tell thee, thou will not lie quiet long; for God has a work
to do yet by thee, or upon thee! and such men must not be idle in this age.
Remember Alfreds resolution:

Si modo Victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas,
Si modo Victor eras, ad crastina bella parabas.
To the other side the water, away Sirs! and help your Brethren beyond Seas,
but forget not your work at home, i. e. to make us free; as chap. 3. And then
the Lord shall utter his voice before his Army, for his Camp is very great,
Joel 2. 11. or else cursed is he that does the Lords work by halves.

Thirdly, Are you a Merchant? your turn is come too 3. To Merchantmen.
now, for the Lord has given out his Commandment against the Merchants and
their Ships, Isa. 23. 11. and their time to lament is now come, and your
greatest Trade by Sea must be to tell of the Judgment that is coming upon
Babylon; they shall weep and wail over her, and as many as Trade by Sea shall
see the smoke of herburning, Rev. 18. 11. 17, 18. therefore it is time (now) to
leave off buying her Merchandise, ver. II. and to carry news to all Nations of
that work which is begun in England, to the lifting up of Christ and his
Kingdom, against all that stands in the way; and bid them make have out of
Babylon, for her hour is come, and Judgment is begun; let this be your News
to all your Friends in foreign parts, sent in Post
out of Christ's Royal Exchange.

Fourthly, Are you a Minister? I must tell you then, the 4. To Clergymen.
Times will be terrible to your Function and Faction; for the Clouds will burst
out with a Thunderbolt ere long against the National Ministry and their
maintenance.

1 Their Ministry; the foundation of them will be rent up 1. Their Ministry.
Ezekiel. 3. 14.
by the roots in this Fifth Monarchy, which will lay open the lewdness of
them; 1. In their Ordination. 2. Dispensation.

1. In your Ordination, as Antichristian, whiles they make 1. Your Ordination.
that Ceremony, or Ferme nihil (as Chrysostom calls it) of imposition of hands,
to give essence to it; and whiles they take it from an usurped Power, whether
in Prelates or Classes (that have no more right then the Pope himself had to
ordain) and receive it not from the true Church of Christ; and whiles they
*with the Papists, Bell. de Ordin. in an Antichristian order, (i. e. contrary to
Christ's order and rule left in the Gospel) receive it before a Call and choice;
this is obvious to every one, how they Ordinationem praeponunt vocationi and
electioni, which is disorderly and Popish. See Rutters. chap. 15. page 265. as
tending to give them a Jus in re before a Jus ad rem, a right in the thing,
before they prove they have right to it, by the orderly Call, choice, and
acceptance of a Church of Christ; till which (I say) they have not the
essentials that belong to Ministers of Christ in Call, but are palpably Popish,
and Antichristian in their Ordination both for matter and form, and at best
but Priests.

2 In your Dispensation, they are so unfit for the Ministry of 2. In your
dispensation.
the New Testament, that quite contrary to the rule, 2 Cor. 36. ( Who has made
us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter but of the Spirit)
they are Ministers, not of the Spirit (which they spit at) but of the mere
Letter; and such only are
your Orthodox men that are litterall Preachers, though unable in the
Scriptures, and ministrations of the Spirit. But the truth is, we find few of
Paul's able or Orthodox Ministers, i. e. of the Spirit in our days, that
preach the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, as the hidden Gospel of Christ;
and whiles the Learned Doctors and Rabbis (like the Pharisees) will be laid
aside (for their stumbling at Christ (now) in the Spirit, counting him in the
spirit an Imp^stor too) some poor Babes and Fishermen shall be fitted for his
work in the Spirit; when as it shall be a higher degree to commence the lowest
in the Spirit, then the
highest Doctor in the Universities; and then shall a Minister of the Spirit
say, according to the dispensation of the Spirit given me for you, I am come to
preach the Gospel, Col. 1. 25. Ephesians. 3. 2, 3* this look for ere long, Sirs!

Secondly, Their Maintenance which is now by Tithes, must 2. Their maintenance
by Tithes.
tumble (ere long) to purpose. It is true, as yet this corrupt maintenance must
stand a little time, to the persecution of tender Consciences, and of diverse
godly Gospel Ministers, (whom I could name) some are driven (as it were) out of
England into Ireland, or elsewhere, on this Account already. It is true too,
that the Lawyers are so much obliged to them for letting them live so by sin,
in cheating, oppressing, and lying (without reproof) that in requital they
plead for the Ministers to live by Tithes and Oppressions, etc. I confess I
was occasionally the fourteenth day of the seventh Month at the Committee for
Tithes in the Checquor Chamber, where was a rude rabble, and amongst them many
Lawyers, and Ministers, of the City and Country too, to tugge for Tithes; and
finding liberty given to any that would speak, I being desired so to do by
some Parliament Men, I accepted of the Call, for that I could not in Conscience
be silent, seeing I had such a season to make my blow at Antichrist, and to
speak for Christ; but finding that the liberty was limited to what could be
said, as to, or against their Propriety by the Law, I only laid a foundation
for a future Discourse, which I took up the sixteenth day; and because Master
Jacob (being of a like complexion and constitution in Principles with the
Priests) with the assistance of one of his Brethren, that foule-mouthed,
scandalous fellow of Garlick-Hith, censoriously and rashly condemned me, as
full of impertinencies therein, although The Authore speech at the Committee.
Sept. 16.
they were well rebuked for their rough, proud spirits; and the Committee took
Mr. Jacob up sharply for his folly, impertinency and impatience, (for he wanted
his Note-booke) yet to satisfy some of the precious Servants of God, I shall
here insert, what I asserted.

Quest. Whether the present Clergy have right by the Laws of The present
Ministers no right to Tithes* by the Law proved.
this Land to Tithes etc?

Before my answer, I premised that without Fee, Prefermen or By-end, I should
offer my judgment, being brought hereto in a good conscience, as persuaded
that I appeared for Christ against Antichrist, so that I would not be daunted
at the threats of any given out against me. Then I digested my discourse into
four heads.

Ans. Neg. 1. Ab origin, from the Rise of those Common Laws Answ. 1. Because
Canon Laws which give the right are down.
that they plead to give them this right, i. e. Ecclesiastical, Cannon, or
Christian Law (so called) If the Cannon or Ecclesiastical Law is down, and
gives them no right, then the Common Laws which arose therefrom, are down and
fallen with them. But the Canon Law is down, etc. ergo, The consequence is
clear, for that secunda lex derivatur a virtute primi moventis, the subordinate
Law derives virtue and life from the Supreme: Now that the Common Laws were
but subordinate and assistant, and that the Cannon-Laws were ever since the
Conquest accounted the Supreme, there is sufficient proof. Sir H. Spelman
says, whosoever Sir H. Speiman* De non temerandis Eccles. p. 119
takes the Tithes, or Gifts bestowed on the Church, must do it by the Laws of
the Church (i. e. Canon-Laws; hence we had Bishops Courts.) So Sir Edward Cook
says plainly that by the Common Laws of England, it is evident that none but
an Ecclesiastical Sir Edw. Cook.
man has Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or right to Tithes, and that by the
Ecclesiastical Laws; yea, de jur. reg. p. 5. he denies that Kings can meddle
with them, being unordained thereunto (i. e. according to the then Cannons) by
the Bishops. And this agrees with the Canons in the Lateran Council Lateran
council.
1215. in K. John's days; sub Alex. 3. p. 26. c. 8. (which was no other then
the Popes Notary to ingrosse that fair which he writ before in a foul copy,
(which forbids Tithes to any, but to those, whom their Cannons gave a power
unto, and qui Decimas Laico in seculo manenti concesserit, est deponendus, and
he should be deposed that granted Tithes to an unordained man. Yea, Cabilonens.
Council. Cabil. Synod. Mog.
c. 18. Qui decimas dare neglexerint, excommunicentur: They that neglected to
pay Tithes were (by their Cannon Law) Syond. Mog.
to be punished by Excommunication; yea in another Synod. Moguntin. c. 7. 5.
Statuimus, ut decimae quae jure debentur Divino, aut lege Christiana, solvantur
sine fraud. Our Law is, that Tithes which are due by Divine and Christian Law
be paid
without deceit. By all this it appears, their Cannon-Law, or Christian Court
gave them their (pretended) Right; and Rise Syn. Aug.
to the Common Laws. So in Synod. August, c. 19. Qui just as non solvant
decimas, ter moniti, iis neganda communio, Those Mr. Littleton, for p. 1096. c.
2. and 1001. 2. 45.
that after thrice admonition pay not their full Tithes, deny them the
communion; so that they had such Laws to give them their (pretended) right,
and to punish the refusers, which Prelates punctually observed; yea Littleton
himself says, Sect. 5. 28. the Ordinaries give the grant of Tithes; yea Anno
1538 K. H. 8. made this positive Law, That whoever denied to pay his Tithes,
should be made to do it by the Parsons or Vicars, etc. at their Ordinaries.
Hence were such cruel Bishops Court; Revel. 17. 2.
so that the Kings Laws were but to help the Whore herein, being besotted with
the wine of her fornication, Revel. 17. 2. Thus we have proved Tithes fallen
with the Bishops Ecclesiastical Courts.

Ans. 2. Ex objecto, The Laws which they plead and pretend Ans. ^. Because
there the Laws look on men ordained in another manner.
for Propriety, look on such only as were ordained according to the Popish
Cannons then in force when those Laws were made; but the present Clergy
dis-owne those Cannons and Ordination, ergo the Laws that refer thereto.
That they dis-owne that Ordination and those Cannons none can deny, the
Presbyterians practice an Ordination being openly contrary thereunto (though
indeed as Popish and soppish as theirs.) The major is easily proved. Judge Dier
quoted by Sir H. Spelman (Lord chief Justice Judge Dier.
of the Common Pleas) H. 8. fol. 58. p. 3. avers it a horrible thing for
persons (though religious) to take Tithes, and not ordained (i, e. according to
the then Cannons) to give the Sacraments, and read Divine Service, etc. he
instances in Appropriations: now as we say, it is an horrible thing to be so
ordained; so we say also, to take the Tithes which are given by the Laws, and
to such so ordained; and therefore ought to be abolished. But this
says Master Lambert, an eminent Lawyer, in his Preamble of Kent, It is one of
the monstrous births of Covetousness, that Lambert*
came from the man of Rome in the night of Superstition. So Sergeant Rastal in
verbo Appropriation says, It is a wicked Rastall.
and unlawful thing for any Laymen, or one un-ordained by the Bishops to hold
Tithes, etc. So Sir Edward Cook before, and Lord cook.
the several Councels say the same; and those very Laws which the Lawyers
brought before the Committee to plead for Parsons right, give right to none
else but such so ordained, as their Magna Charta, 28 of Edw. 1. c. 13, the 27
of H. 8. the 31, 32. Stat. and the first of Edw. 6. chapter 13. etc. Thus it
appears Magna Charta^.
that these Laws look not on this Clergy*

Ans. 3. A Fine, from the end of all honest Laws (which 3. The end of the Law
is lost by those Laws which grant them Tithes.
must be preferred before the Letter of the Laws) viz. the public good and
freedom of the People. Those Laws lie forfeited to the State that are against
the Public good and freedom of the People; but these Laws for Tithes are
against the Public good (for they are a Public evil) and freedom of (for
they are an oppression to) the People; therefore their end being void, they
must be void, and lie forfeited to the State: vide Chap. 4.

Ans. 4. From the foundation of the Laws, which ought to be the eternal Law of
God, chapter 4. So far Moralists reach, as 4. The foundation of such are sand, and
unsound.
Tully, Plutarch, Suarez, Plato, etc. So the Schoolmen say, that all Laws
must fetch their radical force and virtue from Gods, as Prove. 8. 15. By me
they decree Justice, etc. Now there is no Law of God that requires to maintain
the Ministers of the Gospel by Tithes, but the contrary; for Hebr. 7. 12. The
Priesthood being changed, the Law (of Tithes that kept it up) is changed with
it. But Doct. Seaman will not that they be called New Testament Ministers, but
he has told the Committee, the Ministers of the Nation and the State (i. e.
for Tithes-sake, and
Masterships of Colleges) so that their foundation-lesse Laws cannot stand to
give them a right, no more then a Caligula's Law could, to make his Horse
Incitatus a Priest. This business of Tithes the Protestants of old engaged
against the Papists in. And we shall Synod. 5 contr. Q. 6 Constantine took away
Priests Revenues, and gave free gifts to Gospel Ministers. Theodosius pulled
down their places of Worship. Ambrose.
find the Civil Power has pulled down such groundless Laws (as these they
pretend to) of old; as Constantine, Lib. 1. tit. 14. leg. 1. who took away the
goods of the Priests, as forfeited to the State for their Idolatry. So
Theodosius, Leg. 5. he was zealous against their superstitious Public places
of worshipping, he required them to be joined to his Treasuries. So when
Symmachus said, O! the Emperors have taken away the Priests revenues, Ambrose
answers, Sublata sunt praedia, etc. They are aprey to the State, for that they
did irreligiously use that, they took under pretext of religion; so are Tithes
now, which are taken under pretense of Gods Worship and Law, but they keep up
Idolatry, Superstition, Service-Booke; hence lies Drunkenness, Malignancy and
Popery, and what not? (that is Antichristian, o^ Profane) among the National
Clergy, especially in the Countries a hundred or two hundred miles off.
Therefore there is as much (yea more) reason for the downfall of this
Devilish (not Divine, as now it is) maintenance, as was for the fall of
Abbeys, Monasteries, or the like, which had as good Laws to keep them up as
Tithes now have. In Augustines Aug. in Psalm. 146.
time there was no compelling to pay Tithes, who was content with the 1000th.
part, and to lick up the Peoples crumbs for their good. The Bohemians have
protested against Tithes, in 15 Art Bohemians.
and say, The Priests preach that men are bound to pay Tithes, but they say
falsely, for there is no proof for it in the New Testament that Christ commanded
it, or the Disciples took it, etc. So the Muscovites say, Sacerdotes ex
contributione sustentantur, Muscovites:
etc. and many others; therefore their present Laws for Tithes being without
foundation (of God) must fall, and lie forfeited to the State (that stands for
God) as unlawful, reasonlesse, and religion-lesse Laws. The 6th. and 16th.
Article against Wickliffe.
Wickliffe (Martyr) was his opinion in this, that the Civil Magistrate might
alter or take away such maintenance
from the Spiritualty (so called) that offended habitualiter; as these do.
Secular Laws are but the materials, or the hemp of our obedience, Religion
twists them strong to last. The work that lies before this Parliament is as to
the Laws To the Parliament.
themselves, as well as to the Tithes; the omission of which made their
Predecessors (the former Parliament) to be rejected, and these to be called of
God; and as soon as they were set to have this Work (of Laws and Tithes) first
presented to them, that they might begin where the other left off, and go on
where the other stumbled and fell; which if these also do ( the Lords work)
negligently, deceitfully, and but by halves, their rejection will be the more to
their reproach and shame then the former. There be Two times to alter Laws.
two times to alter the Laws; as

1. When the present Lawgivers see the defects of the former 1.
and are enabled with more Reasons; so it is now.

2. When the Times are turned, and States are changed, then 2.
are the Laws turned, and to be changed into such Laws as are fit for the
season, etc. This is our Case; so that upon the account of Christ, and the
Commonwealth (as it now is) it concerns the Parliament to put apace upon this
work of throwing down Tithes; not but that there is to be a Maintenance for
the Gospel-Ministery) A Gospelmaintenance for Gospel Ministers; God forbid the
Parliament should settle Tithes to maintain a National Ministry, and nothing
for a New Testament Ministry that cannot take Tithes.
which is Moral, and the equity of the Law, but this must be in Gospel-manner.
Thus their Propriety to Tithes is proved rotten and invalid by their own
Laws, as to the principle, object, end, and foundation of them; and if God do
not honor our present Governors with such a stripping off the ornaments, and
pulling away the black Patches of the impudent Whore, (as this does, ^ I fear
they will hardly be the men then that must tearher flesh from her bones, and
burn it with fire. But as to that which Doctor Seaman asserts, that they are
the Ministry of the Nation, let us grant it, (for they are so) but we are
Ministers of the New Testament; yet we say he must prove, That the Nation (or
National Church) is Christ's Church after Gospel Order. 2. That they (the
National Ministry) are the New Testament Ministry according to Christ's
order; and then 3. That such a Gospel-Ministery must be maintained by Tithes,
or else his words are but wind, and worth nothing but a puff.

CHristian Friends! this is the substance of what I delivered first
by word of mouth (which I had a Copy of in writing, whence I have taken this)
and afterward in writing by an Honorable Member of Parliament; but that the
spirit of Antichrist might appear for its self, there was such uncivil
talking, hissing mocking, threatenings, railing, and crouding me, whiles I was
speaking to the Committee to interrupt me, that the Chair man with many Members
were forced to check them, and to rise up to chide several times: after we
were with*drawing by order from the Committee, Mr. Jacob exclaimes against me;
(with that I turned back) and heard him say, I offered many impertinencies, and
he was glad the Truth had so many weak enemies as I was. Let him and all my
enemies know, that I trust I shall be a very weak enemy to Truth as long as I
live, I desire to be so, and rather to dye then be any enemy at all to Truth;
but yet tell him* That
Antichrist (against whom I engaged in this business of Tithes, which the
blood of Martyrs will witness with me; Fox, p. 494. 2. 80. and 537. col. 2*
etc.) I say tell him, that Antichrist shall find stronger, and abler, and
faithfuller, and more undaunted resolute enemies then I am, to this trash and
trumpery, and relick of Antichrist, and it is my joy to be one (though a weak
one) that ingages for Christ herein, (though I was grieved to be alone among so
many Adversaries of the Clergy, Lawyers, and rude Rabble at that time.) But my
answer to Mr. Jacobs affront was this, that he spoke like himself (meaning a
Presbyterian, and one that would have been Mr. Love's Successor) and that as
Augustine once said, he was content to speak (...) Latin so he might but win
their Souls to Christ: So I said I was well content to speak foolishly and
impertinently, so I might but serve my Master Christ therein, as I trust I had
(which since among many others, some Parliament Men, and honest Ministers too,
and members of the Army, have with thanks told me, was well.) But after he was
reproved by the Committee we withdrew, where a huge conflux of rigid Clergy,
Solicitors, and Rabble fell a railing and assaulting me (among whom was Crofton
the Preacher of Garlic Hithe, threatening and abusing me) but I was (through
mercy) rescued by some Friends and Members of the Army, and carried away to a
Friends house to refresh my spirits, which were much spent with their
violencies: but I did not feel the hurt which I had by their croudings,
punches, and pulling about, and getting me (as once they had that day) under
their feet, (til I cried out for help,) etc. I felt it not till the next day,
and then what with inward bruises, and outward soreness and sickness, I fell
into a fierce Fever, when (amongst others) Colonel Rathbone came to visit
me, and told me how the rabble (the day before) fell upon him also, upon the
same Account of engaging against that garbidge of Antichrist, and for
applauding what I had offered to the Committee they fell upon him, and he was
stabbed twice, once in the forehead, and the other was in his side, so that he
hardly escaped with his life: and as soon as he was dressed by the Chyrurgeons
he said he came to give me warning of them, they were so incensed against me,
it would be dangerous to stir abroad for some time, seeing my life was
threatened. By this it appears what a spirit it is pleads for Tithes, insomuch
as I wonder nothing at all at their lying, railing, and abusing me about this
City, and in Martins in the Fields* Where the Presbyterian Professors follow
their old Trade of venting and inventing to the amazement of honest men,
whereby they have brought a sufficient reproach upon their Religion before the
Lords Commissioners, October. 12. last, when their Sun was in Scorpio (which is
their best sign for the boldest design) whiles by lying and slandering they
wounded the godly, non apis sed aculeo Scorpionis; being set on by other
Presbyterian Prelates so to do; And seeing they would insinuate my want of
Abilities, which I confess are many, yet I would they would get their Guide
Mr. Sangar (if he can) to construe them this piece of Hebrew, (...)

And tell me then if such Mendaces and linguae dolosae variis artibus laedendi
non sint instructae, and let such Hipocrites in their crafty cruelties to wound
the innocent; examine, Numb. 14. 37. Prove. 6. 16, 17. Psalm. 12. 3. and 63. 11.
1 Timothy 4. 2. and seriously read this Hebrew: (...)

If the Gentleman can read it, I wish he would preach and practice it then
better, to the very roots of it, and teach his party so too* but to pass by
them, the truth is (long ere this) I looked for some Libel or other again, as
the old Libeller Crofton gave out he would print me; But for all this storm
their Tithe must tumble, and the standing too of those Nationalists ere long.

5 But art thou a Lawyer, that art Reader? then read thy 5. To the Lawyers.
soul into a repentance, and renounce that trade of sin whereby you have
stretched out, or racked so many Innocents on a be^ of steel. I know many of
you will be stark blind with Sim.
pride and passion, such as the Devil uses, as Faul^oners do Hawks, to keep
them hooded and never suffer them to see unless it be to the hurt of others.
But not to see, is the highway to suffer, for as in Paul's voyage, when as
neither Sun no^ Stars appeared, all hope of safety was taken away; and so
indeed is it to such as see no light to lead them out of this dangerous Sea.
But that you may have light, not only the light of Nature, chapter 2. stands
without in the entry, but the light of Grace, chap. 5. is within, and will be
brought out ere long in the Fifth and last Monarchy; and then the Decalogue
will be Adams. What Law ere long?
the Magna Charta (as Adams on Pet. says, p. 1112.) to which all our Laws
shall refer, as conclusions to their Principle: in the mean time (be not mad
man! for) it is Gods Law, with the Peoples Liberty, that like a skillful
Anatomist does dissect and open the Body of that condemned ( Norman) Law, and
searching into every piece and member of it, reads over a sound and seasonable
Lecture upon every small Article and Particle thereof, therefore make no
disturbance, for if thou do, thou die for it by the Law, Heb. 10. 28.

Thus to particular Readers: Now to our Freeborn Countrymen 6. To the Country
in general.
in general, I must tell them, that it is high time, and more then time to
know their Rights, Privileges and Freedom, and let all that are past Children
and Fools now call for them, in humble, orderly Addresses, for which end I
commend this Treatise to them. So also it concerns them in all they can to
Write, Print, Publish, and Declare against the Norman Tyranny of Laws and
Lawyers: let every one make one, and that not in ch^ller but in conscience, not
in revenge but in righteousness, and so it is that I send out these lines
without the least malice that I bear to any one Lawyer in England, (some of
them I honor) but merely in my love and zeal to Christ, and this (his)
Commonwealth. I am engaged against the Interest or Trade of all alike, whiles I
love the persons of many of them, whom I hope the Lord will humble and make
honest Zena^'s.

The Locrians had a Law that if any intended to bring in a new Law, he should
come and propound it to the people publicly with a halter about his neck; so
that if it were not permitted as profitable for the Commonwealth, he might be
strangled; I confess (though the Lawyers wish we had such Laws now, vid. Mir.
of Policy p. 58.) this was a cursed and cruel Tyranny amongst them; yet I say
it is with as much submission as if a halter were about my neck that I present
this Treatise to the public; and if the Doom of the ( Norman) Lawyers
Interest, with the destiny and downfall of many (of men's) Laws, and of Tithes,
with much more of the baggage of the Fourth Monarchy be not for our profit, and
the exalting the Laws of God, the Liberties of the godly, the Magna Charta of
his Word, with the entrance of the Fifth Monarchy to the deliverance we long
for, (mentioned in this Treatise) be not for our prosperity, and the best
advantage of this Commonwealth in Christ, then let me suffer; but if they be,
then let them accept of my faithfulness, -- And so I will go in, though it be
not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish. Esth. 4. 16.

There be two sorts of men must and will be my professed Adversaries, Clergy and
Lawyers.
viz. the National Clergy, and the Norman Lawyers, whiles I am engaged against
the Babylonian and Norman Yoaks, and strike at the block or Body of them (as I
have done* at the first in a Treatise of Church Discipline, and do at the last
in these lines of Civil-Discipline) the fierce chips fly about mine ears (but
they must into the fire ere long, with the Beast and false Prophets, Rev. 19.
20.) some Brats of that Brood are very Back-biters and Presbyters.
bitter B -- biters, as well as P -- biters, But I am positive with Jo. Hus.
That all the (National, corrupt) CLERGY* must be quite taken away, ere the
CHURCH of CHRIST be truly Hus lib. de vita and reg. Antich. cap. 37.
REFORMED, or ANTICHRIST fall: I hear some are pursuing me with the rage of
the red Dragon, Rev. 12. and in chief the forenamed scandalous Libeller (
Crofton) of Garlick-Hithe; the fittest man for such a business I know of; He
is it seems full of Arts, and Sciences, and Tongues too, for wronging and
slanders, and whiles he dialogues with his Nose, his communication is mear
smoke: This is he, that cal^ all Independants devils, and says they are damned
that are so: this is he that preached they were damned that took* the
Engagement (as I have it to show under an honest Ministers hand:) this is he
that on pain of damnation and as they will answer it before him at the Day of
Judgment; requires the People to hear him only, and not stir from him to any
other man; this is he that is so notoriously known for a scu^rillous and
scandalous Priest in many Counties, and is most grossly Popish both in
Doctrine and Practice; as does appear to many, and may (ere long) to more; This
is he that is always slandring and persecuting the people of God, calling Dr.
Crips^.
them naucious names, and making lies of them in the Pulp^t (yea, of such as
are asleep in the grave, whom he inhumanly slanders,) and what not that is
ignoble or unworthy? Far much Worse I might speak, but I shall spare him and the
Reader and only mention (among many other informations given me of him) a piece
of one Letter sent me by a Stranger, Sept. 2. last.

Honored Sir, -- I could not rest quiet in my mind nor Conscience, till out
of that love I bear the Jehovah that has brought you from the Antichristian
yoke, and by his Spirit made you the Instrument of his great Glory, for the
comfort and rejoicing of the poor People of God in a most special manner;
therefore I cannot rest till I acquaint you with false aspersions Mr. Crofton
the Priest of Garlick-Hithe casts upon you and the People of God; he is making
a Book against your last, apprehending something therein that shrewdly
concerns him (what is like* to a guilty Conscience?) for the better defending
himself against anything you can lay to his charge touching his Malignancy,
which I presume you can enough; If not, I am sure I am able to do it, (I speak
it before God with grief of heart) he has sent to Renbury in Cheshire, to
those (like himself) to draw up a Certificate, and, says he, let it be drawn
to this effect; That I was faithful and diligent in preaching, holy and honest
in conversation, etc. and get as many hands to it as it is possible, and send
it up speedily, for it will be chiefly necessary in a Book I am putting out
against one. By this you may judge of him, I am sure had you but information of
him from the pious people of that place, they would soon give you his
Character aright, and not so. Sir, I did humbly conceive it requisite to
acquaint you that no false aspersions might come upon you unawares. I desire
you to pardon my boldness, for I am one who from my heart entirely loves those
that profess Christ, etc.


This Letter was sent me by one once his Hearer, til he and many others (who
have their eyes opened) durst not abide his dangerous Ant christian Doctrine,
or unhallowed unchristian spirit. Many Ministers of the Gospel have come to me
about him, and given me such a Character as it is a shame he should be
suffered; besides several Countrymen, Gentlemen, and other Citizens that have
notoriously known him up and down doing mischief, to the reproach of religion.
But such as these like the Snakes of Syria will not bite their own Countrymen.
Yet let him go on, for though he may think like the Fish S^pia to escape in
the muddy thick waters of contention, he may hap to mistake -- Thus such as
these of Antichrists corrupt Clergy and
^^ayi^y (I mean Lawyers) I must expect like Mastives that fly ful-mouth on a
stranger. And indeed I am of opinion, that the faithful Witnesses (those whose
bodies must lie three days and an half in the streets spiritually called*
Egypt and Sodom) I say I am persuaded their slaying, or rather falling (as is
meant by (...) a (...) Revel. 11. 7.) by the power of Antichrist is not past,
but hard by; however I believe it (as if I saw it with my eyes now) a most
terrible tempest of darkness and confusion is coming, and the smoke of Babylon
will put the Air into dark mourning ere^^^g, yea breaking all to pieces, breaks
in apace upon us, i. e. And it is upon the hearts of many in the same manner
that it is upon mine, and diverse have been with me about it to tell me, that of
a truth the time of trial is nigh, and they expect (yea and desire it) to
suffer as Witnesses. This motion upon many hearts together makes me think the
Refiners fire will quickly be kindled, and then woe be to the oppressor! whether
on Ecclesiastical or Civil account, for Judgment will come upon the People of
his curse, Isa. 34. 5. in this Day of the Lords vengeance on them, and those
that know not the Lords Law shall be accursed, Jo. 7. 49. Deuteronomy. 27. 19. 25, 26.
but in this day deliverance shall arise to the People of his blessing, and as
Ier. 23. 7, 8, 9. They shall no more say, the Lord that brought them out of
Egypt, but the Lord that brought them out of the North-countries (and Norman
captivities) then shall the Law of the Lord be magnified, Isa. 42. 19, 21. and
as the Sun What days we look for.
obscures all the Stars with his bright light, so shall Gods Law all men's in
the next Monarchy, and like Moses Rod, swallow all these Magicians. Lord hasten
this day! -- School-boyes look after Holy Days, Worldly men after Rent-dayes,
Chapmen after Market-dayes, Travellours after Fair Days, Professors after
Lords Days, and the People of God long for these days of Christ, viz. the end
of the Four Monarchies, Dan. 7. that the Fifth may 1656. By that year, have!
have! have!
come, wherein Christ and his Saints shall rule the World Mark it; by A^no
1656. the Flood begins; and as in Noah's Ark after the doors were shut up
there was no mercy, though they came wading middle deep, so let this be an
Alarm to all men to make have whiles the Door of the Arc is open, in few
years they will find it shut, and then though they wade through, and through
much danger, whether Parliament Men, Army-men, Merchant men, Clergymen,
Lawyers, or others, they may hap to find it too late, and that their delays
have bred dangers, for the door will be shut shortly! My aim herein is, to
awaken them all up to their work in the Restoration of Gods Laws, and
Government, the Peoples Liberties and Privileges, the Commonwealths comfort,
and advantages in Christ's Kingdom and appearances, which is and shall be the
mark of my Arrow, yea the Rainbow of my Cloud that looks on the Sun, and that
which my soul shall pump out apace in all my prayers to God in Christ for this
Commonweal, whose honest, faithful Servant I am in my heart, without the
cunning, Politic, or artificial composition of complements, though I must and
do suffer for my sincerity and simplicity.

London, Tho. Apostle, (...) 19th. day of the 8th. Month. JOHN ROGERS

Doomes-day to LAWYERS, OR, An Alarm for new LAWS.
CHAP. I. How the Author comes to engage in this Work, and why? And how the
Lawyers are Antichrists State-Army of Locusts.

THE Administrations we are under are either Ecclesiastical, Three sorts of
Administrations.
(so called) or Civil, or Spiritual* As to the first, I have upon the
importunity of Church Members made up my accounts in an Idea of
Church Discipline, called a Tabernacle for the Sun, etc. Sold at the Greyhound
in Paul's Churchyard: 1. Church Discipline.
Wherein appears how Ecclesiastical forms and Administrations must be every
day more and more refined and reformed, and be more glorious, till all selfish,
sensual, and carnal, Prelatick Interests be pared away; and till
Ecclesiastical be turned into the spiritual, as the higher and Head of that
Administration* So shall 2. Spirit-Discipline.
all spiritual (which I hope ere long to publish in an Idea of
Spirit-Discipline) be swallowed up in Christ the Ocean which all spiritual
Administrations but lead us into: But as to the Civil, upon the request of
some faithful Commonwealths Members (and of those 3. Civil Discipline.
the grave sort, of 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, years of age and more, whereby) I much
incline (could I procure so much time) to give an accou^^ to all the World in
an Idea of Civil Discipline; how Civil Forms must be every day too, more and
more refined and reformed till we have Gold for Brass, and Silver for Iron,
Isa. 60. 16, 17* and violence be no more heard in our Land, which will be in
the fifth Monarchy now entering: But all Civil Forms are (as yet) accompanied
with a world of corrupt, close-cleaving Interests, which do deprave the
Government, and deprive us of that good which is the end of Civil Policy. Now,
as it is Gods Design in these latter days to pare away and purge
Ecclesiastical Forms, and so to make them serve the Spirit; I say, it is also
a glorious Design of his to purge the civil Administration of those detestable
corruptions and dregs, which do attend it, and to pare away a^^ All are a
purging apace from Tyranny.
wicked, personal, humane, selfish Interests, and to make the Civil serve the
Ecclesiastical, and officious to the Saints and Churches, Isa. 60. 3. 10, 11.
as the lower principle is to observe
the higher and be obedient, Rev. 21. 24. Wherefore as sure as Isreal's God will
throw down the Tyranny of the Ecclesiastical Administration, so surely will he
also crush and throw down the tyranny of the Civil Administrations, that our
veriest Exactors shall be righteousness, Isa. 60. 14, 17, and the Sons of them
that afflicted us, shall come bending to us, etc. Isa. 49. 23, 24. But we shall
be far from oppression, Isa. 54. 16. Zach. 9. 8* as the Scriptures do hold out
very fully. I shall in this Treatise, and at this time do no more then
instance in that unsupportable The Tyranny of Laws and Lawyers. etc. Sim.
Tyranny of the Laws and Lawyers as they now are: For as there could not be a
Church-Reformation as long as the Antichristian, National Clergy were highly
countenanced, and accounted the Pillars of the Church; so is there as little
likelihood of State-Reformation, as long as the corrupt, cruel, oppressing,
cursed Crew of Lawyers (for so they are the accursed Tribe of this Nation, as
will appear by and by) be accounted the Pillars of the State. Now as the
downfall of the corrupt Clergy with their Cannons was the fatal blow to all
Church Tyrants, and soul oppressors; So will the downfall of the corrupt
Lawyers and their Terms, be destructive and irrecoverable to all
State-Tyrants, and body-oppressors; till which be, I dare oblige, life,
liberty, and all I am, at stake, that the State will never thrive, nor the
faithful people in this Commonwealth be ever sensible of a good Reformation,
or ease, or
Liberty; as long as the most lamentable Mil-stone of the Norman yoke ^yes yet
unremoved, and pressing of them to death. It is not the removals of the little
burdens, or lesser weights will help them, as long as they must yet be
embondaged by the Lawyers. Or what if Taxes should be abated, and Tithes
abolished? the sense of this and all else would be lost, as long as the Lawyers
are yet left to squeeze out men's Estates, Liberties, Lives, Blood, The great
burdens of the Nation.
Hearts, and all. It is true, that Tithes have lived so long that now they are
grown (like an old man) useless, decrepit, and quite out of account and
credit; and they do but trouble to take up time or room in this world, they
will speedily be thrust aside: And so will Lawyers, with their Terms, for
their stinking breath is already offensive. The rich Romish Gluttons are
fattened up by Tithes, and crammed up to the mouth, whilst the poor Gospel-
Lazarus's cannot have the crumbs for their mouth; wherefore as Nebuchadnezzars
Image had the Head gold, the Arms silver, the Thighs brass, the Feet clay; so
have Tithes and Terms, and the lower they are, the worser in every age. They
will be ere long dashed to pieces, Dan. 2. 31, 34. and not endured. In the mean
time, Tithes and Taxes are but niblers, but the Laws and Lawyers (as they now
are) are the swallowers. Mice may be niblers, Sim.
but the Cat that keeps them in awe, is of an eating kind, she devoures more at
one bit, then the poor Mouse would at twenty; and eats up them too at last:
And so the Lawyers. For the Sim.
most ravenous fishes have the widest mouths; and I am sure, to hear them plead
at a Bar, you would easily think they would find no bones in a Bag of money. But
seeing I am to engage against them as the greatest Tyrants and Oppressors of
this Commonwealth, and as such as will stunt the growth of this State, unless
they be cut off from sucking out the blood, and life, and heart, in her veins
and vitals: I will be so ingenious as first to give them
notice of it; and if I prove not to their faces by plain dint of Scripture and
Reason, that they are as wicked a Generation of Cheates and Tyrants as the
Earth bears, I will abide their worst, and bid the test and contest with any of
them all.

But this I shall premise, That my zeal to God; for Christ; and What puts the
Author upon this Work.
his Servants; (who suspire most sadly under the Norman, as well as Babylonian
Yoke) with my unfeigned affections to my dear Countrymen, and to the true
Liberties, Laws, and Rights of this Commonwealth, have cast me upon this
Campania of discourse, and made my Spirits quick and keen to this combat
against the proudest Goliath of them all; for I have a little stone in my hand,
that must hit them on the foreheads, etc. before I fetch their Heads.

But before I go further, Methinks they ask what Call I Q. What Call.
have hereto? and bid me show my Warrant.

Which I will offer in the first place, as signed by all the powers Answ.
and Laws in Heaven and earth, which (I think) is then sufficient; and to be
clear, I produce my Call hereto, 1. From the Law of Nature. 2. The Law of
Nations. And lastly (but not leastly) from the Law of God. ^. The Law of Nature
proves and gives a call.


1 The Law of Nature, which says, Ephesians. 5, 39. No man ever yet hated
himself, but loves and cherishes himself: This Law teaches us to maintain
and defend our lives and liberties; yea, and fellow members too, against all
injuries and wrongs. The Heathens themselves would tell the Lawyers, that the
Law of Nature puts men upon opposing them, at this nick of time for their
tyranny and injustice. See but Cicero lib. 1. c. 3. Offic. who says, (...).
Tull. Cicero.
That Nature (the common mother of mankind) commands and ordaines that every
man endeavor and procure the good of another whatsoever he be, only because he
is a man; otherwise all bonds of society, and mankind must needs run to ruin.
Can the Lawyers deny? (yes, that they can, and durst deny any thing for their
own ends, for it is their trade) but can reason deny this Warrant signed me by
Nature? The very Roman Law allotted Roman Law.
a punishment to that person, or neighbor, that would not do what he could to
rescue and deliver a very slave from the outrage and injustice of his Master;
And shall not we for the freeborne people of England? Besides says Cicero
further, in saying Cicero.
that thou must only attend on thine own affairs, lest thou should wrong
others, and thereby be unjust thy self in another kind, thou do thereby
abuse the Law of Nature, and abandon humane Society, in that thou will not
afford all thy endeavors, either of mind, body or goods, for the necessary
preservation and privilege of the whole. So that I say this Law has signed my
Warrant with her broadest seal to do all I can in word and deed, writing and
discoursing, against the injustice, cruelty, and unsuffer able, sinful,
accursed Practices of the civil and uncivil Lawyers; and not that I thereby
would wrong them in the least, to write of them thus, but that I should wrong
my dear Country, and Countrymen (at the least) if I do not (thus endeavor)
to right them against the Lawyers; who would, and do enslave them, contrary to
the Laws of God, nature, and Nations:
And therefore I must not so mind my own private and personal affairs, as to
forget their tears, sighs, moans, and complaints The Lawyers complained of.
which some of my own Countrymen, yea, of fourscore years of age (yea, great
Professors of the faith of our Lord Jesus) yea, honorable persons have made to
me, and many others of their miseries, slaveries, and importable sufferings
under these cursed Lawyers, by tricks and cheats. So that the Law of Nature
looks for it at my hands, as long as my hand will hold a pen, to protest
against such crying sins (of Scarlet-dye) which the unnatural Lawyers live
by. And to conclude this first Consideration, of the Law of Nature, observe,

1. That the Law of Nature is one and the same to all Nations Observe. 1.
Isidorus in lib. 5. c. 4. Etymolog. Jus natural est commune omni nationi.
(quoad prima principia) inclining all a like (ad agendum secundum rationem) to
things according to Reason; now Reason is either speculative or Practick; the
first chiefly looks at, and is busied about necessaries, (circa necessaria;)
but the second is ( circa contingentia) about circumstances; the first proceeds
ad propria; the second ad communia. Now this Law of Nature has among all the
same principles, though (it may be) not the same conclusions among all (through
some miscarriages.) Yea, furthermore, in irrational creatures, Nature has a
Law to defend herself from Tyranny and oppression; and this is by instinct in
Dogs against Wolves; Lambs against Foxes; Bulls against
Lions; and so between Chickens and Kites, Pigeons and Spar-Hawkes; Partridges
against Hawks, etc. So that it is irrational (yea, worse then so) to question
the lawfulness of defending our selves, lives, and Estates from these greedy
(ungodly) Devourers; seeing that so to do is to question the imprinted Law of
Nature. But to be short.

2 Obs. That this Law of Nature (i. e. quantum ad prima Observe. 2.
principia) is unchangeable in all ages, which does not (yet) exempt an
addition of all good Expedients and things useful.

3 Obs. That this Law of Nature (est scripta in cordibus Observe. 3. Aug. in l.
2. confess* c, 4. tom. i
hominum) is indelible (quem nec ulla delet inquitas) that is, as to common
reason; Although it may, as to secondary commands, as in the Law of the
Nations, or the like; either propter malas persuasiones, or propter pravas
consuetudines. And so in Romans 1. 26. we read of some that were given up to most
vile sins (contra naturam) not only contrary to reason (which is the
constitutive difference betwixt man and beasts) but against nature, which is
contrary to the very genus of a Creature by nature. And so not only the
corrupt devouring Lawyers, but I believe, others that let them alone to go on
in their unnatural tyrannies and abominable sins, will be found offenders
against this Law of Nature. For as Justice is built upon this twofold Basis, 1.
That Justice.
none be wronged. 2. That Good be done to all, as much as may be. So also there
is two sorts of Injustice: as 1. In those that Injustice of two sorts.
do the injury and oppressions; and in this seat the Lawyers sit. But then 2.
In them that suffer these oppressions and injuries to be done (under their
noses) that might deliver us (it may be.) And I wonder how any one honest man
in England can forbear writing, printing, petitioning, protesting against this
ungodly Generation of Lawyers, preaching and proclaiming them on the house top
for the Egyptian plagues of this Commonwealth, and the vilest Tribe that are.
Surely the Lords controversy with them (which is great)
will come nigh their Fa^tors and Abettors too, and all that can see and suffer
them every day (as they do) to live by sin, to tell lies in open Courts, and
to make a trade of oppression, perjury, lying, false-swearing, forswearing,
cheating, devouring fatherless and widows, and beggering many honest godly
souls by craft and cruelty. It is a shame if any man in England who can write
but a line of them upon his own knowledge puts not pen to paper, and gives not
out his grievances to the world, that those in Power may know the TRUTH,
nothing but the TRUTH, and the whole TRUTH of them. But,

4 Obs. All profitable, good, and virtuous acts (i. e. humane Observe. 4.
as of Justice,) are according to this Law of Nature: for agere secundum
virtutem is nothing else (as to us) but agere secundum rationem, to act
according to the principle of reason. But least here Virtuous acti ons
considered two ways.
be a mistake, we must know, that it is one thing to see virtuous acts, as they
are actions in themselves, (for so they are to be considered in propriis
speciebus, not of the Law of nature, but according to their virtue, which is
given beside nature, as Art; or above nature, as grace, or the like) and it is
another thing to see them as they are rational, virtuous, and morally good,
(as just, merciful, etc.) and so they appertain to the Law of nature; for
every thing naturally inclines to operation according to its form, as Fire to
heat, Sun to shine; and so a rational principle to do rational good, and
virtuous (humano more) actions. In this sense says Damasc. in lib. 3. Orth.
fid. c. 14. Actus virtuosi subjacent legi naturae. Hence, as I take it, that
notable Moralist M. Tully Damas^^n.
tells us in Rhet. lib. 2. de Invent. f. 4. Res a natura profectas M. Tully.
(and aconsuetudine probatas) legum metus and religio sanxit: that ordinary
Religion has ordained it, that the matters of the Laws (human) be fetched
from nature: And indeed it is hence that human laws, or Laws of nations are
derived from the Law of Nature, as the only rule of reason (and therefore of
rational actions and laws) left standing and perpetual.

These four Conclusions thus asserted, and assented to, I challenge
all the Lawyers on this side hell, to enervate or deforce the full commission
which I own (to write against them under hand and scale) according to the Law
of Nature.

Secondly, The Law of Nations says, Luke 6. 31. As you would 2. The Law of
Nations gives a call.
that men should do unto you, do you also that unto them; or else as one of
Terences golden Sentences (for the Lawyers care little for the Scriptures,
which I have tried of late by bringing out a Bible for the Statute-Book, but
they could not abide it) who Terence.
says the same, Ut tibi ^ieri vis, alteri sic seceris. This Law of Nations is
to be brought out of the Law of Nature; and looking so alike the other, I shall
say the less to it; for that as Conclusions are drawn ( ex principiis) out of
principles in all Arts and Sciences; So humane Laws, Civil Laws, or the
Laws of Nations are to be drawn out of the Law of Nature, and the Principles
of Reason, as so many Axioms or demonstrative Conclusions.

But to the thing, The Law of Nations distinguishes between meum and tuum,
Possessions, Estates; and gives fixed limits, The use of this Law.
and makes confines, which every man is bound to defend against all Invaders,
Cheates, oppressors whatsoever; now who do invade other men's estates? eat up,
and devour them by incredible The Lawyers complained of.
Fees? prolonging Suits? crafty Tricks? and Subtleties? depauperating millions
of men? and devouring millions of money? till they have got by cheates, fetches,
and Fees all men's Lands (almost) into their hands? who do thus like the
Lawyers? Are there any greater Thieves (or may I not say Knaves) in the world
then Thieves.
they are? When Diomedes was brought before Alexander for Piracy: Says
Alexander, How now Fellow? what a Pirat? Ah I says he, indeed I am a Pirat, for
that I robbed a few Fishermen in a Cock-boat; but if I had scoured the Seas as
thou have
done, and spoiled all the World with an Army and a Navy, I had been no Pirate
but an Emperor by this time. So it may be, might a poor silly Fellow that was
hanged for fourteen pence have told his Judge; ah! Sir! I must be hanged for
such a trifle (contrary Who are the worst Thieves
to the Laws of God, Exodus 22. 3, 4. 2 Samuel 12. 6,) yea, and of Nature,) It is
true, I am a Thief, and must restore it manifold, or else be sold for my
Theft; But my Lord, had I been a Lawyer, and robbed thousands of their Estates
every term, and spoiled many Gentlemen, Yeomen, Widows, Fatherless, and
almost all England of their Estates, then I had been no Thief, but (may hap)
My Lord too, by this time. But I must tell the Lawyers for their learning
(however man accounts of them, yet) God accounts them but Thieves and Robbers,
Isa. 1. 23. Prove. 22 22. Isa. 10. 2. Job 12. 6. Dan. 11. 13. Ezekiel 22. 27. and
by these and many more Scriptures, I am confident, many whom they have judged
for Thieves or Breakers of the Law, shall judge them for the worst of Thieves
and Law breakers that are (i. e. breakers of the Law of Nature, the true Law of
Nations, and the Laws of God) and that some who have been hanged (at the day of
Judgment) shall escape when they shall not; for as Alexander had no more right
to rob, then Diomedes; but ('it is true) he had more power to do
mischeife, and was not easily brought to account and suffer for it; So the
Lawyers have no more true Laws, or right to rob the Thieves hanged at Tyburn
les, guilty then some Lawyers.
People of this Commonwealth by Cheates, Extortions of Fees; or the like, then
those that are hanged at Tyburne have. But it is true, they have more power (and
less need) to do mischeife, and to make a spoil of other men's Estates, and
as yet though as sure as God is (...) heaven they shall be called to account)
they cannot be brought to a trial and suffer for it. But as to my Warrant I
say, it is by the same Law that I would hinder a Thief from stealing, or a
Servant from purloining of his Masters goods and estate; or that I would
discover one that has done so, or warn such as are so wronged, or like to be
so robbed. So that
the Law of Nature, of Nations, Civil Laws, Municipial Laws, and all, do
oblige me against these uncivil, unnatural, and unsufferable Lawyers. I know
some of them of my Kindred The Authors resolution.
and Acquaintance, and those of the Great ones too, will be angry at the heart
with me for this my faithfulness to the Nation; But shall I tell them of one
honest Lawyer? (which is rare I Will promise you, as black Swans, we use to say:
wherefore I must go far enough for him) and that is Papinian, which would
reprove Caracalla to his face, though he died for it? And would they have me go
behind the door? why it is not for one Paricide, but Homocides, Oppressions,
Thefts, blood, and the Death and Estates of abundance, that I am bound thus to
appear in public. A Heathen could say, Let Justice be done, though the world
perish for it. And should I be negligent of my duty? or be possessed with a
pusillanimous, pannick foolish fear of loosing great men's favor? worldly
means? liberty? life? or the like? no, I trust in Egyptians.
God I shall not; and therefore for good to those Lawyers that repent, I thus
write. Amongst the Egyptians if any one man had Diodor. Sicu. l. ^. c. 2.
seen another distressed by Thieves or Robbers, and did not according Sim.
to his power presently assist him all he could, at least by discovering the
Robbers to the Magistrates, he was adjudged worthy to die; and had for the
first offense or mulct diverse blows on his body, and was to fast three days
together. And to tell the The Author put upon this.
truth, above half a year agone, (and some a year) I have seen weeping (most
sadly distressed by these National Robbers) so as I was put on by many
afflicted, yet pious Christians to make discovery of them to the Magistrates in
the late Parliament; but consulting too much with flesh and blood; and knowing
how many Lawyers were amongst them, I did it not; since which I say, I have
suffered the Mulct; for I have been well buffetted since, and lashed in my
mind, and scourged in my spirit for my remissness herein, and fasted too; but
now I am almost ready to conclude my self not worthy to live, if I should let
them alone longer in their daily robberies, and not (at least) write against
them to discover them to this Parliament in Authority now over us. Whether men
Their Robberies how?
would rob by force or by fraud, it is all one, for we must resist them, or we
violate this Law of Nations, which has most strictly obliged us to the
preservation and privileges of the Commonweal. So that it is to break the
Law, and betray our Country, Pliny Alex. ^b Alex.
to let them thus alone. We find in Pliny lib. 4. and Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 6.
c. 4. The Law of Tyrannicides honors the living with rich and memorable
recompenses., and the dead with high and honorable Epitaphs, and Statues, that
have been Defenders of their Countries Liberties and Privileges, from
Tyrannical Oppressors and Intruders; as Harmodius and Aristogiton at Athens;
Brutus and Cassius, in Greece; Aratus of Sicyone, etc. and can men meet with
more cruel, crafty oppressors and intruders (as we shall prove them all to be
by and by) then the Lawyers are? Well then, I hope hundreds and hundreds will
suddenly arise (besides my self) in their capacities and places, to It is
against the Law not to discover them.
defend their Liberties and Privileges against these Tyrants and Robbers. For
the Law made against Forsakers and Traitors, takes hold with both hands on
those who contribute not their best assistance against these wretches: Oh!
cowardly Soldiers! will you counterfeit your selves sick when you should
fight? or cast off your Arms and run away now? O no! rouse up your selves! A
word to honest men to be up.
Is there an honest man in England that dare sit still yet under the judgment
of these Locusts? for shame! for shame friends! up! up! petition! print! and
all! As in a public fire every one must Sim.
work to bring Hooks, and Buckets, and water, and Engines, and all we can, to
quench these consumers! hold! wait not for a ceremony now! as for the Captains
of the Watch first to call you; or that the Governors of the Nation must appear
first to put out this flame!
No! no* but every man must up, and about it, draw water, climb to the top,
wait not for a word of command, but make have about the business, for it is
good for all that the fire be quenched; and if thou waitest for the word, these
Consumers (in their flame) may hap to have the mastery, and do more mischief
of a sudden then we are aware of. Thus our Warrant is signed in the second
place by the Law of Nations.

Thirdly, The Law of God says, Luke 10. 27. Love the Lord 3. The Law of God
gives a call to this work
thy God, etc. and thy Neighbor as thy self. Besides the Law of Nature, and
Nations, the Law of God is unavoidably necessary ( ad ultimum finem.) Now this
Law of God gives me Warrant as a Minister, and as a Man, to proclaim the
injustice, oppression, lying, cheating, deceit and villainies of this wicked
Tribe; Amos. Expos.
as Amos 4. 1. Hear the Law of the Lord, O ye Kine of Bashan! ye which
oppress the poor, and crush the needy; that is, O ye Judges and Lawyers! that
are fed with the best and fattest things; abounding in wealth and stores! and
they are such Kine whose bellies are filled for a day of slaughter, which is
signified Complaint of the Lawyers.
by Bashan. -- and they say to their Masters, bring wine. By the poor, is meant
the borrower; but by the master is meant the creditor; now these wretched
Lawyers do not (as they ought to do) justice for the relief of the poor
Debtors against hard hearted Usurers, but rather they oppress the poor* and
fulfill the desires of the rich misers to the wrong of others; and then they
say, come your cause will carry it, bring us wine, a quart or pottle of wine to
make merry with. But God will confound this their carnality and covetousness.
Amos 5. 7. Hear, O ye that turn judgment into wormwood! and have made the
Laws bitter to the poor and honest people, and have made their remedies worse
then their diseases, and have managed the causes of the righteous with so much
sin, as have filled them with frequent sorrows and tears; abhorring true reason
and equity. Verse. 11. For as much therefore, as your treading is on the poor*
etc. That is, your greatest violence, disdain, abuses, and base injuries are
done to them, to screwze, Expos.
and grind them under your filthy feet. Ver. 12. I know your manifold
transgressions, and mighty sins, in afflicting the just, taking Bribes (or
Fees) and turning aside the poor in the gate from their right; i. e. when the
poor have nothing to give them, they get them into prisons, to lie and rot
there. The Germans have a Proverb, that the rich are hanged up by their purses,
and Germans Prove.
the poor by their necks. Thus by injustice (as the Prophet says) the
Tyrannical Tribe of Judges and Lawyers grow great, get estates, build stately
houses, have pleasant Gardens, and ruffle it out in Angles of luxury and pride,
and whilst Angels protect them they behave themselves like Demigods; But God
will reward them in their kind. Micah 2. 1. 2. Woe to them that devise Micah.
Expos.
iniquity; that is in Hebr. (...) lie, vanity, etc. who do this like the
Lawyers? and when the morning is light they practice it; So away they run to
Westminster, and there plead their lies. V. 2. Of the Lawyers.
They covet fields and take them by violence, and houses and take them away; So
they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage. But thus says
the Lord, Verse. 3. Behold against this Family (i. e. of Lawyers) or these Inns
of Courts) do I devise an evil, etc. and Verse. 4. In that day shall one take
up a parable, and lament with a d^lefull lamentation, and say; we be utterly
spoiled. Thus the Lord complains and threatens them very speedily, and to
purpose, as will appear ere I have done with them. Now Gods Word gives me
warrant all along to cry aloud and spare not. Should Whoredom be suffered in
the open streets without open reproves? or Drunkenness, or the like? Why the^
should oppression? injustice? lying? perjury? violence? cheating They trade in
sin.
and such like Knavery? is not one sin, as much sin in the sight o^ God as
another? I apprehend my Commission to lead me as largely against the Lawyers,
who make a daily trade of sin (a^ lying, swearing, cozening, oppressing and
wronging the Fatherless
and Widows, and all this in open sun too, hereby getting money) as it does
against Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, wh^ every day live by their sins,
making a trade of them, and getting money by them! O how bitterly God
complains! Heaven 1. The pronunciative Law of God.
Earth! and Creatures groan at such a company of as vile wretche^ as the earth
bears! that live by sins! and have no other trading and that they should be yet
tolerated to have open practice! Je^ 6. 29. The Founder melts in vain, for
the wicked are n^ J^remy.
plucked away. I wish one day it appear not all one with open Expos.
toleration of Drunkenness, Whoredoms or the like: But I am bound in
conscience to bear testimony against it, and say with the Prophet, behold the
end is come, the end is come, ^ watches for thee, behold, it is come. Ezekiel. 7.
6, 7. their tim^ is come, their day of trouble is near; these judgments are
inculcated, because the Lawyers will not believe (it may be.) Ver. 8 Now will I
shortly pour out my fury upon them. Ver. 10, 11 12. Behold the day! behold it is
come! the morning is gone forth the rod has blossomed! violence is risen up
into a rod of wickednesse^ None of them shall remain! Nor of their multitudes!
Neither shall there be wailing for them! The time is come! The day draws
nigh! Gods Word to me is, to declare against their Injustice and Tyranny,
Cheating and Lying, and to warn them, Whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear. Ezekiel. 2. 7. And if they will hear, Ezekiel. 33. 12, 15. Say, Son of
Ezekiel.
Man, if the wicked will restore the pledge, and give again what they have
robbed, and walk in my statutes without committing iniquity, they shall live,
and not die. Thus far the Law of God gives me power. So Psalm. 82. 2, 3. How
long will ye judge unjustly? and accept the persons of the wicked?

But to come to the directive power of Gods Law, see Judge. 2. The directive Law
of God.
5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof. And that it
is incumbent upon us by Gods Law to defend our Liberties against all Tyrants
and Oppressors (as I said before) is without doubt, Hos. 5. 11. 1 Cor. 7. 23.
See what Mattathias ^ Mac 3. 43.
said to his Brethren. Come, let us restore the decayed state of our people,
and let us fight for our people, and for the Sanctuary. So that it plainly
appears, we may do all we can for the decayed estate of this Commonwealth,
against the corrupt, cruel, and cursed innovations of the devouring Lawyers,
(as well as other Tyrants that were Lords over us;) and for the restoration of
our Primitive liberties, and freedom of Justice (as we shall show by and by) at
every man's door, That righteousness may run down like a Isaiah. Expos^ Gods Law
is to be obeyed against men's.
River in every street, Isa. 48. 18. And be as common as the waters in the
Highway: So that herein the Law of God engages us, Et nullus subditur legi
inferioris contra superiorem. What then? though some Humane Laws, (through the
corrupt, close, and clandestine Interests of men) should not allow this
liberty? our consciences are not bound to humane unjust Laws, which run
run-counter and justle against Gods? but as 1 Pet. 2. 13. to submit our selves
to men's laws (propter Deum) for God. Nemo astringitur mandato inferioris, cum
superiori mandato dirigatur.
So that we are bound to men's laws but secundum quid, as we say; but we are
absolutely obliged to Gods Laws. And in obedience to Gods Word, we must not
only endeavor to free our selves, but our neighbors from Tyranny and
Oppression. Love thy neighbor as thy self.

Let me a little digress (now) for the Publicks sake in this my A digression.
discourse; not only to acquaint the Governors of our Nation, how much the
Message from Bordeaux in France, or any other Nations concerns us; for we are
bound by the Law of God to help our neighbors, as well as our selves; and so to
aid the Subjects To assist our Neighbors.
of other Princes, that are either persecuted for true Religion, or oppressed
under Tyranny. What mean our Governors to take no more notice of this? How
durst our Army to be still, now the France, etc.
work is to do abroad? Are there no Protestants in France and Germany (even)
now under persecution? And do not the Subjects of France that lie under the
Iron yoke of Tyranny, send, and seek, and sue to us for assistance? Well, woe be
to us, if we help not the Lord, Judge. 5. 23. against the mighty! For it is the
Lord has sent for us thither, and calls for a part of our Army, at least, into
France or Holland. Therefore, Cursed be they that do the work Holland.
of the Lord negligently, or, but by halves, Jere. 48. 10.

Object. O! but some will say, What call have we?

Object. Answ.
Answ. Can ye have greater? You are called thereto by God, and Men?

Object. We have no example for it.

Object. Answ. 1.
Answ. 1. Suppose it so, yet by faith it is ye must subdue Kingdoms, obtain
promises, stop the mouths of lions, quench the violence of fire, wax valiant in
fight, and turn to flight whole armies, Heb. 11. 33, 34, 35.

2. Stay for such ceremony, and your help may come too late. 2.
Mattathias (I told you of before) fell pell-mell upon the work, as soon as
ever necessity called for it, and opportunity seconded it.

3. Your work is not to be after the commandments, or e^^mples 3.
of men, for that is the way to be broken, Hos. 5. 11. Isai. 29. 13. But by you
the work of God is a strange work* to confound the wisdom of the wise, etc. But

4. If nothing else will serve, there is ample example for you 4. Examples of
this.
both in Scripture and History; in Scripture, we know Hezekiah, though King
only of Judah, 2 Chro. 30. yet looked after them of Israel too, though under
the Dominion of the King of Assyria; yet even to those subjects of Assyria that
were one in Hezekiah.
faith, he sent Messengers to invite them to come into Jerusalem, and he gave
aid to them (though against the Laws of the King of Assyria) to destroy their
Idols and Idolatry, and to set up the true worship; so may we assist our
friends in France, (if we are called to it) and invite them to us, to join with
us: And we may (yea, and must, if we sin not) send help and aid to them, till
their Idols and Idolatries be hew^n down, with all their high places; and so go
on, till that France (whom I conceive the second of the ten Vide Chap. 5.
horns, Rev. 17. 12. Dan. 7. 9, 10.) have her Judicat^^y Throne set up, Psalm.
89. 14. and 9. 4. also; and then the work will run on round about, without much
of our help; and all the ten horns will tumble apace; and in few years Babylon
will be fallen; and Christ reign to the total extirpation of Antichrist. Another
example is given us by good Josiah, 2 King. 22. 2 Chro. 34 and 35. who out of
true zeal to God, took upon him to expel Idolatry, not only out of his own
Kingdom, but also out of the King of Assyria^s Josiah.
dominions. But now we are, or may be sent for to do it in France or Holland,
or the like; wherefore, let me tell our Army A word to the Army.
and Statesmen, that if they belong to the Lord yet, and if God has good to do
by them yet, that then they shall not be able to sit The work will go on beyond
Seas.
still long; for if they will not take their work abroad, they shall have it
home, as sure as God lives, and is righteous. For where the Kingdom of Christ
comes, there is no such thing, as bounds or limits, or Rivers or Seas, that
shall cage up or confine the fervent zeal and flaming affections of an Army,
Representative, or People spirited for the work of Christ; which is more and
more public, and looks beyond Seas now. O no! no more then the bounds or
limits of a Parish shall confine a Minister of the Gospel, to the Spiritual
work of Christ.

In History we have examples enough. Constantine the Christian Examples.
Constantine the Emperor.
makes Wars against Licinius the Emperor, for his persecuting the Christians,
in punishing and putting them to death, and depriving them of their Christian
liberties; so that after Constantine had warred for the oppressed ones, he
compelled the oppressor Licinius to give liberty to the Christians in matters
of Religion, and then he put him to death in Thess^lonica for his Devilishness
and Cruelties to his Subjects. And after him we find that Constans threatened
to war upon his own, and elder brother Constans.*
Constantius, for banishing Athanasius from Alexandria, because he was so hot
an Antagonist against the Arrians: and this war would have been a bloody one
too, had not Athanasius been restored. And is it possible, that Constans (who
adhered to them that were the Orthodox Christians) for the restitution of the
Biship, thought his call to war sufficient? And shall not we upon suit The call
abroad.
and petition of the oppressed City of Bordeaux? and Subjects of France? or
distressed English in Holland? imploring aid against Tyranny, and Persecution,
think we have call enough, for the restitution of Christ, his Kingdom, Saints?
Liberty of the poor oppressed Protestants? and the deliverance of distressed
Cities? Citizens and Subjects? For shame away with this irrational,
irreligious, and unchristed spirit! and take courage upon
Gods command, men's call, the spirits motion, and Christ's arrand in the world,
and call the scarlet whore that sits on that Horn of the Beast, to a strict
account for the innocent blood that is to be found there upon the Inquisition.
Thus Theodosius made Theodosius, So^om. l. 7. c. 18.
war on Cosroes, King of Persia, to deliver but a few Subjects (fewer then are
in the City of Bordeaux) from tyranny and persecution.

But upon a more civil account, we know the Roman Commonwealth, Romans on a
civil account.
and the Lacedaemonians, and Thebans, and Spartans, have ever sent succor and
assistance to their Neighbors, when oppressions and tyrannies compelled them to
implore it, as now the B^rdelois do of us; and must we not aid the afflicted
and distressed? There is a notable sentence of the Spartan Senate left upon
Spartans. Justin. lib. 1. Diodor. lib. 2. c. 3^.
Record. For the Spartans being Lords of the great City Byzantium, they made
Olearchus Governor there, who kept up the corn (in the time of wars) for the
Soldiers, and let the Citizens die for hunger; but Anaxilaus, a great Citizen,
disdaining such tyranny, enters into treaty with Alcibiades to deliver up the
Town, who indeed was received soon after. But Anaxilaus being impeached by
Articles, pleads his cause himself, (for Lawyers were not then as now) and his
Judges acquitted him, with these words, Wars are to be made with Enemies, not
with Nature* for it is against the very Law of Nature, that those who should
be their Defenders and Preservers, prove more cruel the enemies.

So as it is against the Law of Nature, for the King of France to be worse then
an Enemy to his own Citizens and Subjects; So it is an much against the Law of
God (should they supplicate to us for assistance) to be worse the^ Neighbors,
and then such Professors and Pretenders for the Kingdom of Christ, as we make
a noise of in the world to be; if we strike not (now) in for the interest of
Christ, and take not the opportunity to visit those coasts, and to view the
condition of the Protestants and oppressed ones in that Kingdom. So let us
come into our own Country Examples at home. K. H. 2. H. 8.
for examples; did not King Hen. 2. war against the Emperor Charles 5. under the
color and command of defending and delivering the Protestant Princes? yea, K.
H. 8. made ready to help the Germans, if the Emperor should oppress them* And
shall we sit still? now the eyes of all oppressed and distressed
Protestants and Subjects (in all Nations round us) are upon us? and the rather
for that we pretend to do all for the Interest of Christ, and Liberties of
people. Nay, in this we have all the advantage that can be; that whereas others
waged wars with their own Interests, In the name of Jesus Engagement.
ours will be with Christ's, who is to rule all Nations; theirs about meum and
tuum, ours only for Christ and his Kingdom. Oh then! that our Powers, and
Armies, and Navies, and Churches and all together would join in one, to engage
together as one armed man! And in the name of Jesus now to proclaim liberty to
the captives and oppressed ones of other Nations, Numb. 32. Josh. 4. 12. Deuteronomy.
3. 20.
abroad as well as at home; were there but once a Proclamation made in the name
of Jesus Christ; O how many would come running under his banner from all parts!
beyond expectation: of such too as are not yet known to the world, and then woe
be to A Proclamation to be made.
Gog and Magog. The Gaddites desired to be at rest, and to go no further, but
to stay on the other side Jordan, and to live there; which though Moses
assented to, yet it was with this proviso, that they should go on and assist
their other Brethren with their whole work, and go through-stich with it now
they had begun ^t, until the Israelites had conquered the Land of Canaan; yea,
and to go first out, as the Van (because they would first sit down) and if
they refused to do thus, then they were anathematized (and destined) to
destruction, like them that were adjudged Rebels Gaddites who now?
at Cadesh barnea, and none of them (by the decree of God) were ever to enter
into the Land of Canaan. So such of the Army, Representative, and Commonwealth
that have (...) heart to go further beyond the Seas (Jordan) but would be ^
rest, on this side, should hear a Moses say, what? what? y^^ brethren go on and
fight further for Canaan? and you sit still? a^ live lazing and idling at home?
No! no! away: you that wo^^ first sit down, and lay down Arms, and live in
Peace, get you first out beyond Jordan, for you shall not return to your
Cattle and Corn, and fine finical fig leaves, to be Coached and complimented
into effeminacy and fooleries; no, nor yet to dwell ^ When it is time for the
Army to rest.
home in England with your wives, until the Lord has driven (...) enemies
before you, and granted a place to your Brethren beyond Jordan, as well as to
you on this side it; and then you shall (...) turn in peace, and with welcome,
and be innocent before the Lo^^ and his people Israel, and abide in quiet, but
not till then. Therefore, Uriah said, 2 Samuel 11. 11. The Ark of the Lord, and
Israel Uriah.
and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the Servants of my Lord are
encamped, etc. And shall I go into (...) house to eat, to drink, and to lie
with my wife? as thou live^ and as thy soul lives, I will not do it! O brave
Soldier! come on then! let us be gone abroad, and get on the other side the
ri^^
in the name of the Lord Jesus! and those that will not do it, li^^ the Rebels
at Cadesh barnea they must be cursed, and never en^^^ into the land of Canaan,
which is on the other side the Riv^^^ Wherefore to our Neighbors both at home
and abroad, let every one discharge his duty aright; and let not Holland or
France b^ forgotten (and it shall be a door of hope to us in the valley of ^
chor.) For believe it, upon perpending the concomitants ( wise^^^ know what I
mean, Hos. 14. 9.) there is a necessity of taking all (...) opportunities to
show our love to Christ and his Kingdom; and our charity to our oppressed, and
afflicted, imbondaged neighbors: and let not men dispute so much whether it be
lawful (...) Our Warrant for this.
defend or strike in for another liberty, and deliverance, if it w^^^ lawful
to do so for our own, seeing we must love our neighb^^^ as our selves. Diligit
in proxime* quod in seipso diligit, ^ diligit proximum eandem ob causam,
propter quam diligit s^ ip^um: if we love Christ then in our Nation, why not in
another and if Justice, and Peace, and Piety, and Righteousness among our
selves, why not among others? O for shame sirs! let us rub^^ eyes, and look
about us! And after the wicked Lawyers have had a b^ng, let us beat a march,
and alarm the whole world. Jer. An alarm.
50. 2. Declare ye among the Nations, and publish, and set up a standard,
publish and conceal not, (till ye) say, Babylon is taken. Who is on my side?
(says the Lord.) Who? Come against her, from the utmost border (even Ireland
and Scotland) open her storehouses, cast her up as heaps, destroy her utterly,
let nothing of her be left: Woe to them, for their day is come, the time of
their visitation. The vengeance of the Lord our God, yea, the vengeance of his
Temple (or Churches,) Jer. 50. 26, 27, 28, 29.

I intended not this length, but the Lord will have it so; and so I come in
again to the Lawyers, having proved my warrant by the Law of Nature, of
Nations, and of God. Which Law of Vide Chap. 5.
God is of all the necessary, seeing that men's judgment (especially in
particular contingencies) may be divided, and produce divided and different
effects, till the divine law directs them: for Psalm. 19. 7. The law of the Lord
is perfect, the testimony of the Lord Laws of men must breathe by Gods.
is sure, the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, etc. From
whence ere long all other Laws among men must fetch breath. And then as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He
shows his word to Jacob, his statutes and judgments to Israel; and he has
not dealt so with any other Nations; as for his judgments, they have not known
them. This will, I trust, be fulfilled in a short time, as soon as ever the
Lawyers once tumble. In the mean time, says the Lord, Isa. 3. 20. Woe be to them
that Woe to Lawyers
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! Verse. 23. Woe be to them that
justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness (or righteous
cause) of the righteous from him, etc. And Isa. 1. 21. O! How is the faithful
City become an Harlot, etc. Companions of Thieves. Verse 23. Every one loves
gifts, and follows after rewards; they judge not for the fatherless, norwidow,
etc. Therefore says the Lord, Ah! I will ease me of my adversaries! and will
restore thy Judges as at first, (how that is, we shall hear hereafter.) But woe
be to these Priests and Lawyers the two Plagues that rose together.
wicked ones!

The two Plagues of this Nation rose up both from the bottomless smoke, and are
the Priests and Lawyers; both alike they keep up a corrupt, carnal,
Antichristian interest; the Priests would fill the cup of the Whore for the
Nation to drink of, and the Lawyers would cloth her with scarlet; but woe be to
us! if either be suffered to trade: for, because thou have let go them that I
have appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for theirs,
and thy people for theirs, 1 Kings 20. 42.

They must fall together, seeing ever since Edward the third his time in
England, they were advanced together, i. e. as to their height in interest. The
Lawyers (who are Tyrants and Oppressors Lawyers Locusts.
of the Civil state) may as well be compared to the locusts mentioned Rev. 8.
3, etc. as the Priests, (the Tyrants and Oppressors of the Ecclesiastical
state.) For

1. Out of the smoke, which darkened the Air as well as the Sun, 1. Arising out
of the bottomless pit smoke.
(Earth as well as Heaven;) and so out of that Antichristian darkness which
arose upon the State civil as well as Ecclesiastic, came these locusts, Verse.
2, 3. upon the Earth, and Lawyers into this Kingdom (as we shall show
afterward.) Vide Malmsbury, Malmsbury.
in William the second his time, they proceeded from the Romish Clergy.

2. Locusts are unclean Creatures, many times translated 2. Unclean Creatures.
Grasshoppers; and the Midianites and Amalekites that came against Israel in
Gideons days, Judge. 7. 12. were said to be like Grasshoppers, which, says
Cooper, signifies Bodily oppressors, Egyptian plagues, as Exodus 10. 13, 14.
Grievous! Such are the Cooper.
Lawyers all over the Nations, and they never are in such multitudes, but they
are most grievous plagues as can befall a Nation* we had need to seek in have to
our Moses's and Aarons, by whose means I am persuaded they will be swept away
of a sudden into the Red Sea.

3. Locusts have their strength in their multitude. O what 3. For multitudes.
heaps of this noisome Vermin may you see at a time in the Temple! or
Westminster-hal! Nullum unquam fuisse human^ ordinis institutum, quod magis
brevi tempore crevit, etc. These do make up the numerous Army of Antichrist (in
this State) against Christ, and are to torment men, Rev. 9. 3, 5, 7, etc. and
so 4. For their variety of orders.
Exodus 10. 14. they cover the Earth.

4. Locusts have their variety of orders, and ye may see them noted in their
several colors and marks. Thus have Antichrists
L^ity (I mean) Lawyers, as well as Antichrists Clergy (I mean) the Priests. It
were but lost labor to enter into this number of his name, of to reckon up the
variety of orders, and degrees of this brood of the Beast, distinguished by
several Forms, Sects, and Habits of diverse Fashions.

5. Locusts are of earthly dispositions, greedy devourers, insatiable 5. For
their earthly dispo*sitions.
for covetousness; always desiring, but never delighting to work, sow, labor,
nor plough, but to eat up the fruits of other men's labors; and to fall on,
cease upon, and take possession of the best Meadows, Valleys, and pleasant
places of the Land; now the Lawyers (as well as Priests) are such a plague of
Locusts. For
what fertile or fruitful Soil in England, that they have not ceased upon? and
eat out* and (with ravenous fees) bought out the best estates in the Land? What
have these Lawyers (like the Locusts) but a mouth and a helly? a huge mouth (at
the Bar) to bite off, and as big a belly to take in: A mouth to gape for it,
and a belly A mouth, and a belly.
to get it; a mouth to plead for it, and a belly to feed on it; a mouth to
serve, a belly to consume; but all this while no hands to do good, or deal out
to the poor and oppressed.

6. Locusts have a leap (like Grasshoppers) and so have the 6. For their leaping.
Lawyers; for like the Leopards they get their prey, Sali^ndo, by leaps, which
are sometimes very large; and as to the things of God, or Religious Exercises,
we shall find few of them frequent them, unless by leaps now and then: so by
fits and jerks they will seem (may hap) serious, as if they set for Heaven, and
may promise much. But I always except such as were Lawyers, and are Exception
of* some.
converted, or (it may be) some that are (yet) so accounted, who are godly and
conscientious, and cannot close with the common sort or ordinary practice of
greedy, griping, selfish, oppressing Lawyers; but such are not very many: And I
must needs say, I cannot see how an honest man of a tender conscience, can
continue No honest man can live a Lawyer.
a Common Lawyer with them, in pleading and practicing as they do; for
doubtless he will lie under very desperate and daily temptations to trade with
sin. But as to the sect of them in general (excepting some particular (rare)
ones; such Zeno's as are honest Tit. 3. 13.
and godly amongst them) these Locusts may leap to a little honesty (it may be)
on Sundays; but all the days after, they follow their old trade of lying, and
oppressing, and eating up the greens of Greg. Moral. Job 39. 23.
the Land. Subitos dant saltus, sed protinus in terram cadunt. Their ordinary
going is but higgle-haggle* here and there, this way and that, on this side,
and on that too, for any Cause or Client; so they meet but with an Angel in the
way.

7. These Locusts (that help to make up the Army of Antichrist) 7. Like to
Scorpions.
had a power like to Scorpions given them, Revel. 9. 3. and so have the Lawyers.

1. Scorpio est blanda facie, sed caud^ pungit occulte. The 1. Flattering
faces, full of craft and cruelty.
Scorpion has a flattering face, and so these Locusts, Revel. 9. 7, 8. Their
faces were as the faces of men, and they had hair as the hair of women. But
Verse. 10. their tails were like to Scorpions that had stings to torment men.
All this signifies their Hypocrisy and craft, as well as cruelty to hurt us.
Exterius boni* sed interius mali (says one.) For ( Scorpio blanditur vultu,
sed Carthus. in Ap^.
percutit cauda) these Scorpions will finely fawn to thy face, but they torment
with their tail, when thou think danger is over. This signifies (also) their
( varias frauds) sundry sorts of tricks and frauds (as Cotterius tells us) to
deceive and do mischief Cotterius.
with; therefore they have women's hair, as well as men's faces. As the Apostle
says, 2 Pet. 2. 3. Through Covetousness, with fained words they make
merchandise of men; for they seem the faces of men that are most discreet,
wise, prudent, eloquent, yea, and affable, and courteous; but as Pliny, lib.
11. c. 25. says of the Scorpion, Cauda semper in ictu est, nulloque momento
meditari Pliny.
cessat, ne quando occasioni desit: Their tail is continually in motion to
torment us, and every moment ready to take occasion to sting us; and as Paul in
Romans 16. 18. says, With fair speeches and flattering words, they deceive the
simple.

2. As Scorpions ever since they were cursed (in Genesis 3. 14. 2. They eat the
dust, as it is a curse.
Thou art cursed above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou go,
and dust shall thou eat all thy days) I say ever since with their tails (which
torment us) they gather up the dust of the Earth, and feed altogether upon
earthly things as their meat. Scorpio cauda lingit, and isti spiritualia
temporibus postponunt. So they, like the unclean beasts under the Law, creep
(...) all four upon the Earth, and all this upon their belly too. O bitter
curse! they cannot abide the things above. And this make them ready to receive
Petitions, opinions, causes, complaints, many hours together about Bodies and
Estates; but cannot abide* a Petition They cannot abide a plea out of Scripture
that concerns Souls, which lately I tried their patience with before the
Lords Commissioners, but upon the naming of a Scripture or two, they would not
hear it; at which drawing my Bible out of my Pocket, and telling them that that
was the Statute Book to be used in such cases, and beginning to open some
Scriptures, I came to that in Ezekiel. 22. 27. Her Princes are ravening. Wolves,
they seek to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain, etc. but they fell a chasing
and fuming, and could not endure it. But

3 Scorpions sting, but not dead at first, but the wound works 2. They sting
deadly and by degrees. Pliny.
by degrees; and Pliny says plainly, that the venom runs along the veins, by
little and little, till it comes to the heart and kills them. The Lawyers like
them sting deadly, and it were better they killed us right out, ( Rev. 9. 6.)
then to consume, perplex, pain, grieve, and afflict us to death by degrees,
the plague of them is the worse: Habent venenatam suam potestatem. Thus these
Locusts are like Scorpions.

8 These Locusts were Monster-forme, and that multi-forme, 8. Monsters.
being made up of many sorts of creatures; so the Lawyers are (i. e.) Foxes for
subtlety, Vipers for venom, Dogs for mouthing it, but Tigers for tearing it,
and cruelty.

But 1. In their Body, horses prepared to battle, Rev. 9. 7. 1. In their bodies.
Horses not common, but kept up, and fed, pampered Jades, that work not, but
feed hard, and eat and drink of the best; therefore says the Apostle 2 Pet.
2. 12. They are as brute beasts lead with Full of fury for Antichrist.
sensuality, and yet like Horses prepared to battle, that is, full of fury, and
rage for Antichrists design, and against the Gospel of the Lord Jesus. Cum
fervore and impetu procedentes, sine Carthus.
Dei timore, and discretione currentes in conculcationem electorum; and sicut
equi (says Beda in loc.) non sua ratione sed Beda.
sessoris impulsu aguntur, ita diabolico spiritu agitati feruntur contra
Christum. They must needs go whom the devil drives: and thus like the horses,
Job 39. 25. They mock at fear, and go on as bold as blind Bayards (furiously)
for Antichrists interest, ^s his Army for Civil affairs. Besides, it seems
they are cruel and given to Blaodshed, and under pretense of Treasons, breach
of Law or the like, they cause the faithfullest to suffer, as Sir Walter
Rawleigh told them to their faces.

2 On their Heads, as it were crowns, etc. So are these Locusts, 2. Their Heads
or Lawyers, Antichrists Army of crowned men in Statematters, as well as the
Priests and Clergy his Army in Ecclesiastical matters; not only in their wear
of Caps like Crowns, but in that they get the legislative Power, and have (
more regum) in (...). Prima Leo, postrema, draco, media ipsa chimaera. Par. in
loc.
the manner of Kings, Lords, and such like persons, imposed laws and ties to
consciences, tyrannizing and oppressing all the people of God as their Vassals
and Subjects: Thus the Lawyers are Antichrists Horses kept up for his battle,
being monster-form, magni-forme, and multi-form; But Christ he rides upon his
white horse, conquering and to conquer.

3. They had Faces like the faces of men. That is, least me* 3. Their Faces
should loath and abhor them for their cruelty and cursed dispositions, they
insinuate into great places, Kings Courts, and Palaces, etc. by simulation,
and fine glozing flattering shows of humanity and humility, having learned the
art of dissembling in the Inns of Courts, having it infused as a principle
which Kings and With their art of dissembling.
Rulers held (by their authority) that none was fit to Rule, unless he can
dissemble. These Lawyers never more dissemble, the^
when they resemble the faces of men; For they put the fairest faces on the
foulest actions. There be no greater Flatterers in the world, and they smile at
the most distance: And (methinks) now the Lawyer (is like one nigh drowned,) he
fastens upon any ne^ hand, in hopes to save himself: but soft sir!

4. Hair as the hair of women, Rev. 9. 8. That is, as Cotterius 4. Their Hair.
notes, 1. Varias frauds, their variety of art to deceive an^ insinuate. 2.
Ornatum illicitum, their unlawful attire, to make Cotterius.
a great show with fine, soft and delicate ornaments. And 3. Effoeminatos
mores, their effeminacy and womanish fancies a^^ fashions: and like women, O
how they love their long hair! and delicate
comam alunt, pingunt, mulcent, powdering and painting it!

5 Their Teeth as the teeth of Lions, Rev. 9. 8. Such an expression 5. Their
Teeth Terrible.
is in Joel 1. 8. Voraces and truculenti sunt, that is, th^^ are ravenous and
cruel; so that in the description of them, there is falsi boni simulatio, and
very mali dissimulatio, and Aper^ Saevitia. A semblance of good in their faces,
a dissemblance fevill in their hair, but dentibus, crudelitas significatur, by
Lyra.
their teeth is figured out open cruelty and tyranny, and be sure these State
Locusts, or Lawyers where they cannot get what they would with the first or
second, they bring in the third, and show their teeth to the purpose, in
tearing away men's Estates, Liberties and Lives too if they can, omnia rapiunt,
aeraria exhauriunt, (...) devorant, agros vastant, cru^^les and saevi sunt in
pios, qui (...) manus eorum incidunt, making themselves rich by others ^uine.

6 They had Habergions of Iron, Rev. 9. 9. That is their outward 6 Habergions
of iron.
defenses, whilst corrupt Laws and Lawyers have been a long time (especially in
these five months, that they have so ^arfully tormented us, I mean for the
hundred and fifty years last ^ast) kept up by secular Powers, so that there was
no opposing Pareus.
them; Quibus munitae ut a nemine facile laedantur, they had power to hurt all
that while, but none could hurt them.

7 And the sound of their wings, like the sound of Chariots, 7 Their wings and
privileges
Rev. 9. 9. This State-Army of Antichrist being (as we heard be^re) so crafty,
cruel, fierce, strong, forcible, and armed with secular Powers, and all means
to hurt men with: They have wings, ^at is, such things, advantages, and
Privileges, with which they ^ie high in boldness and ambition, and are
elevated exceedingly, and lifted up, and especially to the terror of honest
people. Beda Beda.
writing on this place says Expavescendum magis, quam exporendum. It is rather
trembled at, then interpreted how this Army of these Locusts increase, For with
their wings they make such (...) huge noise, as amazes and amuzes men, and
makes them afraid of them.

For the noise is first, Confused, like the sound of many Chariots, The Army of
Locusts.
uttering no distinct noise, terrifying the people with horror ^t their loud
clamorous voices, lamentable lying, pleadings, and disputes, and violent
jangleings, and indistinct voices which others must not rightly understand.

Secondly, it is Comfortless, for they neither sound glory to Noise of their
wings, what ^
God, good, nor peace to men; but all vexation, Suits, troubles, and mischeifes
that may be. As K. Jabin in Judge. 4, 2, 3. had one hundred Chariots of iron,
and for twenty years vexed Israel sore, but these have a hundred and twenty
years vexed England sore, so that nothing but ruin and undoing is looked for
from them; and a man needs no more trouble then to be within the sound of their
Chariots and Laws, I Will warrant him, his hea^ will ache and quake too. For as
Diversi currus diversis vis cum Lawyers perplex us, and how?
impetu ^urrunt etc. Diverse chariots, run diverse ways, and all furiously to
battle, so do these Antichristian State Locusts, (...) Lawyers, diverse ways
perplex ^s, and s^ing us out of one Court in^ another, with unreasonable
restlesnesse, till they have run over ^ or ruined us with violent contentions
and torments, and that which is worst, is, that they are so numerous, and run
so many ways that we can by no means escape them.

8. These monsterous Locusts have stings in their Tails* Re^ 8. Stings in
their Tails who?
9. 10. not only the Priests and Prelates, and so Antichrists Ecclesiastical
Army had their tails, as Officials, Commissaries Proctors, Registers, and such
like, that did grievously afflict and torment men; but also the Lawyers,
Antichrists State-army have their long tails too with terrible stings, and
such are Soliciters, Clerks, Bailiffs, Sergeants, Goalers, and such like; and
it is so much to their advantage in tormenting men to have terrible tails that
they will have none to execute their Warrants, Writs, Orde^^ or the like (as
near as they can) but the most cursed graceless Such multitudes of Clerks etc.
are against Justice, and true Law, Mir. of Just. fol. 246.
Villains they can get; and by this means are men in the Country (above all
places) abused, by bloody Villains, drunken Sots, who sit night and day
drinking and swilling upon an honest man's scor^ whom they have served with a
Warrant, or so, and yet use him ((...) may be) if he be a man fearing God,
worse then a Dog in beating, bruising, pulling, threatening and abusing him all
manner of ways, if he do not fill their Pouch*with money, and their Paun^^ with
liquor up to the throat, these torment so with their taile^ that some men had
better be hanged right-out then so used, and verse. 6. Seek death but cannot
find it. Mors optanda magis. whilst Clubs and Canes lie thumping upon the backs
of poor peopple that once come under the Bum-Bailiffs, being so crue^^ plagued,
pulled away from their Wives, haled up and down by head and ears, bereaved of
their Relations, and robbed and spoil^^ of their Estates, and comfortable
subsistence Judge Arnold was hanged for saving a Bailiff from death, who had
robbed the people by distresses, and extorting money from them. See Mir. of
Just. sore, p. 241 and now the Bailiffs do it daily, and no justice.
. Oh! how sad this torment of their TAILS? as thousands can testify to the
^^oure! So that all the Lawyers Estates cannot make amends for the world of
mischeifes they have done, and yet do daily with their Tails, which are most
violent, virulent, and venomous.

Thus they are described in their monster-formity, or monstrous deformity.

9. These Locusts have a limited Power. As 1. To Persons, 9 Their limited power.
Rev. 9. 4. that they should not hurt the grass, nor the green things, ior the
trees. 2. To time. Ver. 5. 10. they had power to hurt but five months.

1. To Persons, The Saints who are of three sorts, resembled 1 To persons.
by grass, (...), weak yet sappy: And 2. (...) by green flourishing things.
And 3. by trees of the highest and tallest stature in Christ, viz. Fathers,
Young Men and Children, 1 Jo. 2. yet all are to abstain from Lawyers, and the
Lawyers are to have nothing to do with them, for as the Apostle says 1 Cor. 6.
1. dare Et electi licet percutiantur, non reputant laesionem Hugo in loc.
any of you go to Law before the unjust? But as it is in 1 Timothy 1. 9. The law
is not made for a righteous man; but for the lawless and disobedient, for
ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy and profane etc. So it is in Rev. 9. 5.
for them that have not the seal on their foreheads.

2. To Time. But five months, Quinque menses brevitatem 2 To time. Andreas
Casarie^s.
temporis exprimere arbitramur. Primasius reads it six months, but the
Septuagint says five, yet the obscurity hereof has puzzled most Expositors as
to the time; for taking in Scripture sense a day for a year, Numb. 14. 34. at
thirty days to the Month, yet five months is but one hundred and fifty years
which is a short time; but to this I think Bullinger says well, that the
allusion Bullinger.
is made to the time of the Locusts or Grasshoppers coming forth which is about
April (as we say) and continues to September, i. e. the five hot months; so
these Locusts have a Summertime of doing mischeife for about the space of one
hundred and fifty or one hundred fifty five years, which will be a hot time for
them indeed; they sing, and leap, and devour.

Don Pluto dares not to assay though he be Prince of hell.
So much as Lawyets dare, though they their souls to Angels sell.
M. Brightman tells us what Troops of millitary Locusts the Sa^ac^ns Brightman.
1 The military Locusts.
were; beginning Anno 630. to fly and leap about, and for one hundred and
fifty years, i. e. the first five months they did miserably torment. But beside
them the Religious western Locusts came in by swarms in their hot
Summer-months, and the^^ 2 Religious Locusts.
a world of Priests, Jesuits, Monks, Friars, and after them Prelates rose up
apace; In the days of Innocentius (so called) the third they began with
abundance of power to torment men as they listed, and this continued to 1360. a
hundred and fifty years Whereas Wickliffe full of the wind of the Spirit began
to blow vehemently, after whom others followed and ceased not, till this
Egyptian plague were (as to the greatest torment and terror of it) over.

But besides all these; the third sort are the State Locusts, viz 3 State
Locusts
the Lawyers, who arose out of the bottomless pit smoke too, as has and will
yet (further) appear: But we must not reckon from the first time of power given
these sort of Locusts to hurt, (for that is of long standing,) for we shall
find in Edw. Confessors time. An^ 1043. how the Common Law (so called) arose
out of four Nations, Common Law when it arose.
and gave a being to some; but after that William the Conqueror altered, and
disused Edwards, and kept (for his own corrupt ends and interest) more to the
Danish and Saxon, appointing Lawyers.
Terms, and thereby bringing forth an abundance of Lawyers, but as yet they
were little, and their interest was a poor puny thing till Edward the thirds
time about one thousand three hundred and odd, and all this while it was but
as one friend pleaded for another; but now the weather began to grow warm upon
them in one thousand three hundred sixty nine and so continued to K. He^ 7: one
thousand five hundred and four, or thereabouts. But the^ as Rastall in his
abridgement notes, Acts were made in favor to Rastal. And so Stowes Chron. in
lo.
them; and their Summer-months to do mischeife, and to torment the people came
in a pace, and continued hot to them, that they had and did almost what they
listed, and had their Laws, and Liberties, and Privileges enlarged all along:
So that they were to this day in their vigor, thus in Q. Eliz. 8. An. 1566.
they were fostered up by her Acts of grace to them, and they have to this day
had their flourishing Summer and time to prosp^^ in; and to sing, devour
estates, eat up the poor, and torment the people; but now their five months i.
e. the one hundred and fifty years are upon expiring, and their power to
torment will bo^^ more by a year or two; not but that they may have a being
yet, but The Lawyers end within a year or two.
not as they had before, to do mischeife; They shall prevail no longer, for
their madness shall be evident to all, 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. their September is hard
by, and a West wind will remove them out of those places wherein they have sat,
and sung, and plagued us for five months. Concerning the Locusts, Hildegard
has a prophecy, which is,

In those days shall arise a sort of blockish Fellows, proud, Hildegard*
Prophecy.
covetous, perfideous, and crafty, eating upon the sins of the people,
preferring themselves before other men, of arrogant disposition, and void of
all shame or fear of God, in inventing new mischeifes, strong and stout; but
all prudent men and faithful Christians shall curse this pestilent order. They
will flatter noble men, and lay hold on whatsoever they can get, and howsoever
it be gotten by stealth, robbery or legerdemaine. And alas! they will receive
any thing, from Rogues, sacrilegious persons, Usurers, Adulterers, Apostates,
Whores and Bawds of Noble men, perjured persons, corrupt Judges, Tyrants or any
that live contrary to Gods Law. They shall live a delicate life, and get a
certain fullness of an abundance of all worldly things, though it be to their
own eternal damnation. And they shall every day wax more and more wicked, with
minds more and more obdurate. But when once their crafty Conveyances
shall be found, then shall their large Gifts (and Bribes and Fees) cease, and
they shall go from house to house hunger-bitten. Then shall the people pursue
them with this outcry: Woe be to you miserable wretches! that are ordained to
sorrow! the devil has guided you! your heart is without grace! your minds
unstable! and your eyes blinded with vanity and folly! Remember the time when
ye were in sight happy, pleasant flatterers, lovers of the World, drunkards,
ambitious, Patrons of wicked facts, pollers and pillars of all ruin, unsatiable
sowers of discord. Then the people shall say, out upon you get you packing
hence! ye Captains of mischief! For ye are fallen headlong into everlasting
shame and reproach, by God's just judgment. Thus we have done with these
Locusts, only say further Ver. 12. One woe is past! It is past indeed at the
downfall of this Antichristian State-Army, as well as at the downfall of
Antichrists Ecclesiastical Army of Locusts. And whilst we have offered these
considerations of the Locusts, we do not exclude a more spiritual and
refined meaning of those words in the full sense of them.

But to conclude this Chapter; We might well wonder, how the Lawyers yet stood,
seeing the Priests and Prelates and such like Locusts were swept away, but that
their five months (we find) began here in England after the Priests and
Prelates; yet now the day of their destiny draws nigh. Wherefore gird up thy
loins, says the Lord, and speak unto them all that I command thee; Jer. 1. 17.
be not dismayed at their faces, least I confound thee before them.

CHAP. II.
That there is a CIVIL POLITY and LAWS, and what is the right PRINCIPLE
thereof, and how to be obeyed above Laws, or Lawyers.

THere is no man so irrational as to deny the due use of Civil Discipline, and
(for the well ordering of civil affairs) of sound Laws; but a religious man
much more knows a necessary use of such a Polity and Government, in
subserviency and subordination to Christ, and his Kingdom, though specifically
In civil Discipline. 1 Reges. 2 Leges. 3 Greges. Laws.
distinct therefrom, even in terminis. In Civil States must be 1. Reges, 2.
Leges. 3. Greges, Magistrates to rule, Laws to rule by, and Subjects to be
ruled thereby, and all these ought to be in obedience to Christ's Kingdom. Now
the Laws are the Nerves and Sinews of the Commonwealth; or if we will the
Axle-tree of our State upon whose firmness and fitness we move. Be Sim.
sure they be sound then, and such as do not oppress the people of the
Commonwealth, for if they do, they render our Rulers by them for Oppressors and
Tyrants. The reason of it is in Calvin Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. 14. who says that
the Law mutum esse Magistratum, Calvin.
and magistratum vivam esse legem, etc. is a close Magistrate, but the
Magistate is an open Law; so that if the Law be close tyranny, the Governors
thereby must needs be open Tyrants. But Laws necessary.
for civil Order and use, good and plain Laws are unavoidably necessary; this
will appear upon the very definition of the Law, which is quoddam dictamen
practicae rationis, a certain dictate Law defined.
of practical reason. For as in speculative reason, out of indemonstrable
principles naturally proceed certain conclusions of sciences, And explained
the knowledge of which are not naturally brought forth in us, but by art and
industry and invention of reason; So Certes, it is requisite that humain reason
bring forth some particular orders, and dispositions out of the Law of Nature,
and out of that certain common and indemonstrable principles, which particular
dispositions and orders are called human Laws, whilst they keep such
conditions as appertain to equity and reason, and so says Tully l. 2. de
Invent. f. 4. and gives this reason for it, quod initium Tully.
juris a natura profectum, etc. because the beginning of human right and Law is
to arise from Nature, and is confirmed by practice, and then we are bound unto
obedience; res a natura profect as and consuetudine probat as legum metus and
religio sanxit. Let none think me then an ex lex, whilst I am with Calvin
Calvin Instit^. l. 4. de ert. Mediis.
calling upon all honest men to inquire after the constitution and equity of
our Laws. Ut decet, intuemur, legis constitutionem and equitatem, cujus ratione
constitutio ipsa fundata est. Now though the constitutions be diverse, yet the
equity is (or ought to be) one and the same in all Laws, as is in Exodus 22. 1,
2. Deuteronomy. 19. 18, 19. in this sense with Augustine de lib. Arb. lib. 1. c. 6.
Austin.
tom. 1. I affirm the use and necessity of humane Laws, so they agree and keep
to their first principle and ends. Thus Isidorus in Isadorus.
lib. 5. Etymolog. c. 20. says, Laws are made, ut earum metu humana
^o^r^eretur audacia, tutaque sit inter improbos innocentia; to correct and
restrain audacity, and to countenance and defend innocence and honesty. As to
the necessary use of honest humane Laws: the first consideration (I conceive)
incumbent is the right and true principle or rise of Civil Laws. The
principle is the clear Light, Reason, Equity, and Understanding The Principle
of the law.
of things in themselves in abstracto, as abstracted from all humane
constituted Forms. This principle is the life and perfection of good Laws.
Hence is it needful that all Humane Laws be derived, and fetched from the Law
of Nature, which is prima regula The Law of nature.
rationis, and according to this rule is a man, or thing, said to be honest,
true, and just. This is by the Wiseman, Prove. 20. 27. called
The candle of the Lord in man, (...) or the light, (...). Sept. or Lamp of the
Lord, (...), Aqu. Symm. Thod. (...), men have reasonable souls, which serve to
enlighten them in inferior matters, which is employed by (...) a rational
breath, Spiraculum vitae. For as the Hebrew Doctors do affirm the word (...)
points out the upper or supreme region of reason, yea, the very top and flower
(as one says) of a reasonable soul, (...); Culverwel.
or else as it is (...) a soul sparkling and glittering with intellectuals, and
shining bright with the light of reason, this is the Candle.

But to give light, one word, first, of Nature; secondly, another of the Law of
Nature; and a third, of the Light of Nature, as the principle of the Law that I
here handle.

1. Nature, I mean not that which the Schoolmen call Natura 1. What Nature is?
Durand. Culverwel.
naturans, as Durand, and others; but as it is scattered and diffused into
diverse particular Beings, it is the very same with Essence* and it fingers
forth; First, Originem entis, which as Culverwel calls it, is the very genius,
and I may say, genus of entity; yea, entity or being its self; for a thing
cannot be without its nature: And secondly, Operationem entis, for all essence
boils and bubbles out into several and serviceable operations, and acts; and
hence it is, that customs of long standing, are accounted Natural, and Law
oftentimes, as Galen says, (...)* Galen.
But,

2. The Law of Nature, is that Law which is seated intrinsecally, 2. What the
Law of Nature is?
and indeed, esential to a rational Creature, insomuch, as such a Law is as
necessary to have being, as such a Creature; and indeed one is connatural with
the other. But the greedy Lawyers long f^^ a further latitude, and say, Jus
naturala est quod natura omnia animalia doc^it, etc. And in this their sense,
the sensitive Creatures they would have their Clients, as under this Law but
the Schoolmen school them, till they cool them for it, and inform them of their
folly in it: For surely, they are so used to Fees that the Birds, Beasts, and
Fishes, by their good will, should do their homage to their great god Terminus
in their Courts. But
this we confess, in the very sensitive creatures there are some simulachra,
apish imitations, or shadows of morality amongst them; some (...), as the
Philosopher says: But this is far from the Law of Nature which we speak of,
whilst as Suarez says, they are deficient in the duties, yea, Suare^.
and branches of the Law of Nature, as to acknowledge and adore ^ Deity. Inter
brut^silent leges: Therefore the learned Grotius Grotius.
does thus describe the Law of Nature, Jus naturalo est dictatum rect a
rationis etc. And Chrysostom calls it too, (...); Chrysostom.
A radical knowledge, which is also fundamental in man's being, which blossoms
and burgeons out into the best fruits of morality: For this too, we find Philo
our friend, (...). Phile.
Right Reason is that fixed, sure, and unshaken Law, (...) not written with
hand upon a piece of Paper, or like a dead (...) Letter engraven upon a Pillar,
but penned with the point of a (...) Diamond, yea, the finger of God himself in
an immortal mind. So Plutarch says also, (...), Plutarch.
etc. The Law was never limited to Paper or Writings, but to Reason; it is
situated in the center of a Rational Being. Plato too tells us plainly for Pl^^*
this, that other Laws were but a Comment upon it, yea, and infirmiorum hominum
Commenta too; but this was the (...), Brightness and orient justice of Nature.
And in this sense Cicero says it is, Non scripta, sed ^ata Cicero. (...). Sim.
lex.

Thus for the Law of Nature, which is like Gold in the lump, out must be beaten
out into the leaf: Hence the Natural Conscience is, centrum notitiarum
communium.

3. The Light of Nature is Reason, or the Intellectual Lamp 3 The light of
nature.
set up in the soul. This is the Cannon Law in the essences of men, without
which, all Laws are erroneous; for let this Lamp of Reason but once out, and we
are left in the dark to court shadows, and complement, cloudy forms, Idea's and
Idols of men's make; so that reason it is which promulgates the Law of Nature,
and makes the difference between (...) and (...). Now though the formality of
humane laws flows from men who ha^
their own Interests, yet the sinews and life of all true Law^ have their
sperma and spirit in the Law of nature. But besides, there is a Law of Nations
which lies between the Law of Nature, Law of Nations.
and Civil Law; and this is either per con^omitantiam, the is, when several
Nations in their several conditions and capacities, yet have some of the same
positive Laws, or else per communicationem (which is indeed the most duly
(...)) by compacts and leagues together reciprocally. But now as to huma^
Humane Laws. The principle of them.
Laws, which Tully calls Leges populares, and the Hebrew (...) or (...), they
have their rise from Reason, which is therefore to be first considered, for
that there is a necessary co^catenation between first principles and
conclusions; and as Suarez Suarez. (...).
says, Veritas principii continetur in conclusions: The truth of the principle
is, or ought to be in the product; so must reason (as the principle) be in the
Laws; and he that serves the Form
and shifts the Principle, i. e. Reason, is the Traitor; and an Apostate Tully.
to his own nature, and the God of it. This makes Tully to tell us, that
Veralex est rectaratio, naturae congruens, di^fusa in omnes, constans,
sempiterna, etc. Reason is the true Law, which has a natural congruity, is of
a large latitude a^^ diffusion, and never dies.

Hence, what have Governors and Legislators to do, b^ (...) (as we say) expound
upon the Law of Nature? and enlarge her borders? But to make haste, take up
the^ Corollaries.

First, That there is nothing more agreeable to Nature, the 1. Corol.
Law, (...), seeing it is founded in Nature.

Secondly, That all just and honest Laws are (...) 2. Corol.
steps of true Reason.

Thirdly, Reason and clear understanding (which is the proper 3. Corol.
principle) is the best Judge of Civil Laws; and it renders ^ man a Judge, even
when the form of the Laws renders him one judged; for that which has the
highest command, is the suprea^ Judge, but Reason has the highest command; so
also that which is the most perfect in every kind, is the rule of the rest;
but Reason is so.

Fourthly, Some disobedience is more lawful (i. e. according 4. Corol.
to the rules of God and Nature) then subjection, i. e. When the Dictates of
Reason do cross the Injunctions of Form; in such a case he is not the Traitor,
who does contrary to the Formaliti^s of the Law, but he that denies Reason, and
does contrary to the principle of it; for that, the principle is supreme to the
letter; therefore the greatest Rebellion, Disobedience, and Treason, is against
Reason, Equity, and Understanding. Nullus subditur legi inferioris contra
superiorem.

Fifthly, Humane Laws must no longer be kept up, then they 5. Corol.
keep up the principle of them, which is Reason; but in cases of contest
betwixt the Letter of the Law and Reason, we must side with the principle: In
talibus non secundum literam legis, sed recurrendum ad aequitatem (Jurisperitus
in digesto veteri, Lib. 1. tit. 3. leg. 24.) In this sense (says the Prophet)
Isa. 10. 1, 2. Woe, to them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that
grievousness which they have prescribed, to take away the right, etc. This is a
sad curse! which has continued long in England, which certainly the Lord will
visit Lawyers for, and corrupt Judges.

Sixthly, As Reason is restored to more perfection and clearness, 6. Corol.
all the Laws and results of such Reason must be amended and corrected: Now
like Hezekiahs waters, by degrees true equity and reason is rising apace,
higher and higher, out of its Chaos; so that in this light and discovery,
according to its degree, must tumble down all corrupt Forms, Letters, and Laws.
So that this Resurrection of Reason, or the Principle, will prove the ruin
of persons, and personal interests; and that is the reason that the Wisemen
are employed by the present Herod's of our age, under pretense of worshipping
this Infant (so as yet) to tell them, how and where they may destroy it, in its
first appearances, least it live and reyn them out of the saddle; and this they
hope to do by murdering the children of Reason; but in vain, though as yet
true Reason is counted the Traitor to the acted Forms.

Seventhly, Reason restored to latitude and liberty, will ride 7. Corol.
in triumph in the spirits of men, and draw all forms after her, as her
Vassals, Subjects and badges of her conquest and dominion: and in trophie of
triumph, Reason shall sit in her Majesty on the Throne as Sovereigne, and
Lady-Law in command. And then an Aristotle acknowledges (...). Aristotle.
Then the Law rides triumphantly, when its filled with reason; and then reason
will call corrupt forms and Interests to account, as guilty of much innocent
and precious blood. It is not the principle, but the domineering form which
must be brought to the Bar for the greater Persecutor and Tyrant, and
engine of destruction, who with a Wolfe-like nature, tears a pieces the
Lamb-like appearances of Equity, Truth, and Reason. Now that time will be
glorious indeed, when Righteousness and Truth shall possess men's hearts, and
when the principle shall be restored in a civil reference, as well as in a
spiritual: (says Mr. War) then War.
shall be the triumph, and the tumbling of all tyrannical forms and Laws in
Church and State.

8 When this principle is restored, the Lord alone will be exalted ^. Corol.
in that day, and we shall stand on even ground, in a perfect level, as to
selfish Interests or Forms, and one shall be equal The right Leveller.
with another in Justice and Law. Without this principle of reason men are
degenerated, dethroned, and Nebuchadnezzar-like turned among the Beasts; which
whilst a rational man, who has this principle cannot endure, he meets with
roaring Bulls and Bears ready to tear him in pieces; but God will deliver him
out Suarez.
of the Den of Lions, who would have with Suarez, omnia praecepta (both as to
principle and conclusions, or Laws thence) a Des auctore naturae, all Laws of
God, according to this principle of reason* which are then (and not else)
binding in foro conscientiae, in conscience. And for explication of this,
Hierocles and Pyth^goras do both utter these words. (...). Hierocles
Pythagoras.
To obey right Reason, and to be persuaded by it, is to obey and be persuaded
by God himself etc. And Socrates had such like sayings often in his mouth
(...). Socrates.
It does not behove a rational man to be persuaded by any thing but by right
Reason, that has the seal of God upon it; so that, as this Principle is
exalted, the Lord will be exalted with it, and by it in the State.

Ninethly, Because Reason is not the perfectest Principle of all, 9 Corol.
and because ratio humanae non potest participare ad plenum dictamen rationis
divinae, sed sue modo and imperfecte, humane reason cannot partake of a perfect
plenary measure of divine, therefore the Spirit of God is given to some to
perfect that principle for the Lords work and use, as will be abundantly in
these last ages;
^ow the fuller reason is of divinity, the more perfect and absolute it is.
Divine Reason is the eternal Law of Government in the supreme Lawgiver and
Governor; therefore all reason of Government, and Laws in inferior Lawgivers,
ought to be derived and received in special manner from this eternal Law of
God which stands and abides for ever.

Tenthly, Not Persons, but Principles are to make, determine, 10. Corol.
define, and refine Laws; so that we are not to be ruled by the Arbitrary wills
of Judges or Lawgivers, but by Reasons; Hence it is the Power, or the
Principle that we are in subjection unto, and not the person simply; so that
the highest Treason and Rebellion is against Reason it self: and we may
obviously judge then of the Lawyers in this sense, as the veriest Trait^rs that
are in the 1 Timothy 1. 10.
world; and ere long this Principle will recover and become Law to every man;
for other Laws are made for the disobedient, says the Apostle, that is, such
as obey not this principle; so that such a Leveller as aims at the principle,
is an honest man; Its man's declining from the principle makes him like the
Horse or Mule, that needs to be restrained by curb, bit, or bridle, Laws and
Mulcts.

Eleventhly, In the absence of this principle, the greater light 11. Corol*
guides the less, and men submit to better understandings; and hence humane
Interests and Factions prevail amongst men, and some men's persons are had in
admiration, and made Idols of, and worshipped: the nescience of the Principle
endungeons us in civil darkness, and makes Idols of Forms. It Is true, the
injunctions of Form, pretend to be a Kin to Reason, but whilst wild men weild
them, or they be bent or bowed to serve some men's designs, humors, lusts, and
passions, they become abominably corrupt; and then he is the honest man, that
is rational, a friend to the state, and desirous of its good indeed, that
holds to the first principle; yea, call him what you will, yet he will be found
faithful to that God, that will break the Iron yoke, and go forth in great
indignation against Tyrant-forms and Laws, which have usurped the throne of
Reason, and taken away her honor. For this end has Reason so great
controversy against the Laws and Civil Forms, and God himself is on Reasons
side: Yet for orders, or necessities sake, we grant some reverence to be given
to the Form, so Reason be not robbed; but the truth is; the Sons of Reason are
but few, (as yet) and they are under persecution, by reason that the Forms are
many, and backed by many, and give
protection to none but their own followers, that brutishly yield subjection to
them; and the less reason is with them, the more they hurt and tyrannize.

Twelfthly and lastly, As the principle arises, the Laws are altered; 12. Corol.
for manifestum est quod verbo humano potest and mutari lex, and etiam exponi,
in quantum manifestat interiorem motum Tho. Aquin.
and conceptum rationis humanae, Tho. Aq. 1. 2ae. 97. 3. 0. But to be clear,
Laws are of two sorts.

1. Such as are the results of humors, designs, corrupt passions, 1. Laws Lusts.
and lusts of men, tending to establish them and their greatness: Law in this
sense is nothing else but will, custom, lust, and power of men; and is as
corrupt as those that made it: What are Oaths? Advouchons? Fealties? Homages?
etc. and many other badges of slavery? but the bare issue of their own
greatnesses and lordlinesses, and to establish them therein? yea, and other
Laws that seem fuller of reason, yet they are, according to the Interpreter or
Judge, made corrupt presently. Thus Form has got up in the room of principle,
and lust, and will, and humors of great men, in the room of Reason; insomuch,
that many times Reason is made the offender, and criminal thing, yea, and
oftentimes condemned by form, lust, will, or passions, and designs of great
men, yea, and sometimes too charged with Disobedience and Rebellion against the
State; and so will be, till innocence appears and triumphs, and then the light
of reason will show the error, and lay the very same faults at the door of
form, and of men's humors, and lusts, which oppose Reason and Right; and then it
will be obvious, that the Judges, Lords, and Lawyers, that sit and condemn, do
condemn the just, when they do most deserve to stand at the Bar, and to be
condemned for judging and censuring Reason to suffer; being it is they, that do
contrary to that rule, Romans 13. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers. Now Reason is highest, though corrupt Laws and Lawyers, and lusts of
men would make her lowest and least.

But secondly, other Laws that be in appearance more rational, When Laws are,
and are not to be obeyed.
and for common good and safety, yet when the observation of them ( Fit damnosa
communi saluti, non est observa^da) is made obnoxious to common good, we are
then to obey the Law and Light of Nature.

To instance, a City is besieged by a potent enemy, wherefore all Sim.
the Ports and Gates are by the Law required to be kept shut, and not one to be
opened, and this is for the public good; but the siege being raised, the enemy
gone, and danger over, this Law must be altered, because it is no longer for
public good; but it is obnoxious
to the public, not to open the Ports and Gates to trade in and out: Now, and
in such a case, if the Law be not changed, why then contrary to the Letter of
the Law, the Public Liberty and Privileges must be preserved. Some men know
what I mean by this instance.

But one instance more. After the conquest of William, were Courts and Terms
established at Westminster, and to the disadvantage of the Public, the Law was
taken from their own doors, and in their several Counties, where they might
have had justice Terms down, and why?
for a little matter, and in a few days controversies determined; but all this
was altered to advantage the Darling of Prerogative and Royalty, which they
preferred before the common good, and therefore forced men to their great
charges and expenses, to Post to London, and to take long journeys, and attend
many years (it may be) in Suits of Law, and lose all at last: But now the case
is altered, seeing Prerogative that was so nursed up, is now down; for the
public good it ought to be then, that Law and Justice should be in all
Counties again, and at every man's door, as was before; and these ungodly Terms
and Westminster Courts be Justice is a Leveller.
down, and equal Justice be done to all alike with a level hand to rich and
poor; otherwise there is a Darling yet, which is more preferred then the
public. But I will say no more as yet to that; only this, That all the
Demetriusses of this Diana begin (already) to cry out for fear, at the change
of their long established forms, (whereby the public has been inslaved) and
whereby they have made gain, by great fees and extortions; so that the day of
the Principle, and Equity is terrible to them, and a Lilburn is as bad as a
Tiburn to them.

These twelve Corollaries drop out from the light and law of nature; so that,
Nos legem bonam a mala nulla alia nisi naturalinorma dividere possumus, etc. By
that Law we discern and M. Antoninus.
divide betwixt good and bad; and because as the Emperor M. Antoninus said,
(...) are equivalent; the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, and the Law of
God, require reason, i. e. The principle to have the pre-eminence of all humane
Laws whatsoever, and that for these Reasons too.

1. Because this Light of Nature, i. e. Reason and clear understanding Reas. 1.
Light of nature is a certain light.
of things rational, is a lumen certum, such a light as makes a clear and
certain discovery of things within its sphere. There were a sort of Academicks
and Scepticks, who had this Motto, (...), I cannot comprehend or reach; and
indeed only God himself can perfectly, (...) an object; their radical
principle was but (...), to hold every proposition in aequilibrio, in equal
balance, and that there was an (...), an equilibrity of reason for the
affirmation or negation of any opinion or persuasion. But this is a black
error, yea, a heresy of an irreconciliable antipa^hy against Reason, and the
light of nature; which gives a certainty of knowledge in things rational, which
first peeps out in sense, but shines in the understanding as bright as
noonday. And yet I assert, that God the eternal entity, that (...) must needs
be the Fountain of certainty. But reason (though her color goes and comes in
motu and fluxu, says Culverwel,) yet in her sphere sees certainly, and deals
faithfully with men; therefore men's Laws must be made by this, and this Reason
be a Law above all humane Laws.

2. It is a lumen tranquillum, a quiet light, and the want of Reas. 2. A calm
peaceable light.
this causes much contention and quarrelsomness; were this light but followed,
or reasons voice regarded, it would stop many a suit, compose many a
difference, sheath many a sword, quench many a flame, cure many a wound,
comfort many a soul, and stay much blood, dispel much jealousy, sullenness,
and suspicion, and what not? In the dark men are foes with friends, and friends
with foes, and they fall out, and cannot tell for what; but when Reason comes,
Passion is rebuked, breaches are soon made up, and all ^verboyling lusts of men
scummed away, which are (as the Orator says) averse, a recta ratione, and
contra naturam.

3. It is a lumen jucundum, a sweet, pleasing, and cheerful 3. A sweet pleasant
light.
light, (...). Reason is the smiling light of nature, and her crown of Roses;
the very frowns and supercilious threatening brows of nature, in many cruel, and
(almost) unnatural Laws, are hereby paved, levelled, and pared away, and turned
into pleasing looks upon the poor as well as rich, without respect of persons:
And thus the dark dismal night is chased away into a lovely, ^ightsome, and
welcome day.

4. It is a lumen dirigens, a light for the feet, the (...), 4. A guide or
leading light.
the guiding and directing light. Hence Schoolmen call Reason the Principium
movens omnium actuum humanorum, the moving principle; therefore this principle
is to be preferred: Would not one that is lost in a dark night, be glad of a
Candle?

5. It is lumen derivans, or (...), lumen a lumine, a 5. A light derived of
divine.
derivative light, it is but scintilla divinae lucis, a Beam of the Body, or a
borrowed excellency of Divine Reason. So that God himself is the Eternal spring
and Head of reason; and hence it is that the light of faith, and light of
reason, will both shine in one heart; and Reason uses such a prospective-glass
to discover, amplify, and approximate some amiable objects. Now seeing Reason
is derived from the most Divine Principle, it ought to be regarded and
preferred, because in time, Isa. 60. 19. shall be made good.

6. It is lumen ascendens, an aspiring, growing light, as Prove. 6. An aspiring
light.
4. 18. The light of an upright man shines more and more, to the perfect day.
In every age Reason reaches higher, therefore in every age the Laws should be
corrected and pared away from all self-seeking interests, according to the
measure of Reason, while
ought to be most of all regarded, as the standing rule. But if (...) be thus,
let us make this use.

Use. Let no man hide his light under a bushel, but out with (...) A Call to
our Countrymen, to let out the light of reason for the reforming of Forms and
Laws against Reason.
for the public good, and benefit of the whole Civil firmament (...) it is
contrary to the nature of true light to be kept up, and (...) reason to coop it
up* Nothing makes man more useful as to (...) then reason; and to cabin it up,
is the way to coffin it up* (...) limit it, is the way to lose it* Therefore
for shame Friends! (...) Countrymen! can we be idle? Let us bring out Reason
to (...) form all Forms and Laws that are against Reason; and this (...) openly
in publishing, printing, and discoursing.

Obj. This is the way to be hanged for our Reason; what brougt Object.
Sir Walter Rawleigh to his untimely end, but his too much reason and
understanding? And so others are thereby brought tamper with Laws, and the
State, and (it may be) lose their li^^ for it, under pretense of Traitors.

Answ. It may be so; but let a man be called what you (...) Answ. Who is the
honest man.
because he prefers Reason, as the principle of the Law, yet (...) an honest
man.

2. It is Satan's design (in civil affairs as well as spiritual) (...) blur and
blemish the most serviceable and faithful men, (...) naucious and nocuous
terms, to render them odious to the wo^^ and then to cut them off whiles there
is none to pity them.

3. He is the greatest enemy to common good, and traitor th^^ Who is the
greatest enemy and traitor.
can be, that betrays his Reason, and becomes a slave to enforce Forms and
Laws of men, that are tyranny and oppression, and (...) against Reason.

Object. But Humane Laws do bind the Conscience to obedience. Object.


Answ. It is true, if they be just and honest, they do, as (...) Answ.
8. 15. By me they decree justice; but if they be dishonest, and (...) just,
and inconsistent, with a rational principle, they do not.

Laws are said to be unjust two ways: First, When they (...) Laws unjust, how
and when?
contrary to humane good and welfare; and this is two ways (...) 1. Ex fine,
when they be burdens, and hinderers of common 1. When contrary to humane good.
good and benefit, and rather tend to advance some private goo^^ and selfish
interest of great persons, or the like. 2. Ex form^ when they are dispensed,
dispersed and executed by an uneven and unequal hand, for though they tend to
the public good, yet they may be unjustly executed, and so made yoakes and
burdens to some above others; so that then they are flaws not Laws, magis
violentiae sunt quam leges, and as Aug. de lib. arbit. l. 1. c. 5, Lex Augustine.
esse non videtur, quae justa non fuerit, unde tales leges non obligant in foro
conscientiae, etc. Such Laws are not binding the conscience to obedience, but
it is a greater sin to obey them, and disobey Reason; then it is to obey
Reason, and disobey them.

Secondly, Laws are unjust when they are contrary to divine 2. When contrary
to divine good, Use.
good, and such especially are to be disobeyed, Act. 4. 19. for God is to be
obeyed before men.

Lastly, Remember your reasonable service to God, and certainly, honest, just
men may upon a civil or rational, as well as a religious score, be said to
suffer for God, and with the witness of a good conscience, 1 Pet. 2. 19. And
this is thank-worthy if a man for his conscience toward God suffer grief,
wrongfully. Martyrs in State-Mattars, and on Civil accounts.
This the Lord looks on and owns, and crowns in our sufferings upon a civil
account as well as otherwise. So that many that have been by corrupt
Antichristian State-Lawes put to death for their opposition and disobedience to
such unreasonable Forms will be found faithful ones, yea, and Martyrs too, in
that day of the Lord. For though the Form promises protection to its own
Followers, yet the lives of others that prefer Reason must be sacrificed, and
their blood poured out to quench the flame and fury of enraged Forms and
unreasonable Laws.

Object. But we are bid to obey the Higher Powers.

Object. Answ.
Answ. True, as we said before, in things honest and just: But, 1. 2.


2 Those that despise this Principle, and so highly prize, and prefer the
form, they oppose the higher Powers, and speak evil of dignities. So that by
this Law of God, many condemned for Traitors and Rebels by their Judges, may be
justified, and their Judges themselves be condemned for Traitors to true
Reason, which is the highest Power.

Wherefore in a word, will we live like men? make use of the light of Nature
among men; and sit not still, till the Laws be regulated
by Reason, as the Principle of them.

Quest. Who should do it?

Quest. Answ.
Answ. They that have power to make them, have power to mend them, Now condere
legem to make a Law, or to ordinare aliquid in bonum commune, to ordain any
thing that tends Who are to make and mend Laws
to the public good, is either done by the commonalty (as we call it) or by
some that represent them, as appears in the next Chapter. Hence says Isidorus
in l. 2. c. 1, Etym. Lex est constitutio populi, Isidorus.
secundum quam majores natu simul cum plebibus aliquid sanxerunt. Therefore let
all the freeborn English look out for reason, and prefer the principle above
all forms, yea, above all persons, but to that at last.

Thus to conclude, the Laws which we call for, are such as first What Laws we
would have.
flow from the Law and Light of Nature. Secondly, for the public and common
good. Thirdly, made by such as represent the public Commonalty. 4* As
directive and Rules to humane actions. Hence says Suarez, Lex est mensura
quaedam actuum moralium, Suarez.
ita ut per conformitatem ad illam, rectitudinem moralem habeant, and si ab
illa discordent, obliqui sunt. And Plato in Plato.
plaining of his political Idea's makes a graduall description of a Law by
four steps.

1 He calls the Laws (...) things fitting, but for that this is too general. He
calls a Law 2. (...), but lest an Law of Subjects defined.
evil Law should be established by the multitude, he calls it 3. (...), where
(...) is taken sometimes for (...) and at other times for (...). But 4. Laws he
calls (...):

Aquinas calls the Law an Ordinance of Reason for the promulgation Aquinas
of public good, taking care of the public; and such we wish for. And so
says Suarez too, Lex est commune praeceptum, Suarez.
justum ac stabile, sufficienter promulgatum. the Law is a public Precept,
just and stable, proclaimed openly to all. These definitions we allow of, and
such Laws we account necessary to this Commonweal, 1. Wherein public good,
with olive branches 1.
to all is chiefly and solely intended. 2. Which flow from a clear 2.
understanding and Reason, (...) etc. 3.
3. Which carry life and vigor with them to work. And lastly, 4.
proclaimed and made known to all in a public manner, very emphatically and
sufficiently in their Native Language, and so as that none may plead ignorance,
and with this I conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. III.
The right RISE and ORIGINAL of all good LAWS, and how the People have been
robbed of their RIGHT to this day, with the INCOME of corrupt LAWS and LAWYERS,
the true Rise of their Interest, Innes of Court, and Trades by sin. And in
order thereto, what it is the People expect from their Conqueror, the LORD
GENERAL, and the Army.

I Propose, yea, I purpose brevity in the following The People give the rise to
their Laws.
Chapters, having passed through the most material of this discourse; but
before we can go further, we must find out the Rise of good Laws, which
appears plainly to be from the People, who being most sensible of their own
burdens are most capable of making Laws for their own ease and welfare.
Cicero M. Tull. Cicero^.
owns this in his Offices lib. 2. Cum premeretur olim multitudo ab iis qui
majores opes habebant, statim confugiebat ad aliquem virtute praestantem, etc.
Jus enim semper quaesitum est aequabile, neque enim alitur esset Jus id si ab
uno bono and justo viro consequebatur, eo erant contenti, cum id minus
contingeret Leges sint inventae, etc. When the poor people were oppressed by
the rich ones, they presently made choice of some that excelled others in worth
and wisdom to represent them, and when they obtained from some honest, just
and good man, redress of wrongs, they rested satisfied; but that failing they
were forced to Laws, and invented Laws for their liberty, not for their
bondage or slavery. To this says Isidorus l. 3. Etym. c. 21. Constituitur enim
Isidorus.
Communitas Cavitatis ex multis per^^^is, etc. The Commonalty makes Laws
consisting of many persons that represent the public, So says Aug. de Civit.
Dei lib. 2. c. 21. and lib. 22. c. 6: Nullus potest condere leges, nisi
communitas, vel personae publicae. vices ejus gerentes. So that it appears to
any unprejudiced* and honest man that those Laws which have in their bowels
freedom, and honesty, do owe their homage to the peoples choice; A people
rightly principled (as before) with Reason and Understanding are the proper
original (in that sense that Origo is a re ad rem,) and rise of rational Laws
which are laid out altogether for the peoples rights, and Liberties, from hence
we have these Observations.

1 Obser. Reason and Judgment goes before to create a capacity, Observe. 1.
Freedom and Honesty follows after to execute and fulfill it. 2 Obser. Justice
and Equity must be in men, before they come Observe. 2.
to be in the Laws of men. 3 Observe. The rational honest people in general
are the Observe. 3.
true original or rise of those Laws which they are Governed by. 4 Obser. The
genuine intent of Laws in their original is to Observe. 4.
curb and keep in (principally) the Princes, not the People; the rich, not the
poor; Oppressors, and Tyrants, not others of the people; To bridle Great ones
who are most lawless, and to keep Governors within their due Precincts of
just and righteous Government. 5. Obser. True Laws as they arise from their
original, are Observe. 5.
not to burden, but to ease; to grieve, but to relieve; to hurt, but to help;
to ensnare, but to take care for peoples Liberties and Freedom. 6 Obser. As
Laws cannot be made but by the peoples voice; Observe. 6.
so a Judgment cannot be (rightly) executed, but by the peoples concurrence:
So that Sicut cogens aliquem ad aliquam, legem non publica authoritate sancitam
servandam injust e facit, ita quis alium judicans non habens authoritatem, vel
usurpand^ sibi judicandi potestatem, graviter peccat; As to compel one to keep
such Laws as are against the Liberties of the People, and have not their
original from the people is Tyranny and injustice; So to pass Judgment upon
any one of the freeborn people by an Usurped power, and not derived from the
people, this is no less Tyranny and Injustice. But all this while I speak of
a rightly principled, people that are in their capacity.
Use 1, Where abouts are we then? as to the Laws and Lawyers? Use 1.
or whence had they their original? by what Rules do they proceed? And to the
original of the Laws, first, we shall find Our Laws and Lawyers their
original.
(them) since the Norman Conquest, that the Laws were a Norman bondage, an
Iron Yoke and Collar about the necks of the freeborn people to this day. For
as Fortescue tells us, c. 17. Regnum Fortescue:
Angliae primo per Britones, deinde per Romanos, iterumque per Britones, deinde
per Saxones possessum, extunc per Danos, iterumque per Saxones, sed fin^liter
per Normanos, etc. This Nation has been under diverse Conquests, so that
several alterations have thereby been made of the Laws, either in part or in
the whole upon every Conquest, and if at any time the Conqueror continued any
Laws which the people allowed of, it was for his own ends, to ingratiate
himself into the people thereby, and yet to espouse his own Interest. For as
one says chapter 2. p. 6. of his Survey of English Laws, so some noble, and
notable Thieves, Sim.
do (as Hind the Robber) return back again some part of the moneys they take
from the poor Travelers, to be the better thought of, and the less pursued.
But this is certain the honest hearted Britains lost their Laws and Lands
together, though the Britains lost their Laws and Lands together.
Saxons (and so the Normans after them) allowed of some of their Laws (after
they were Saxonized) for their own ends. Now the reason of all is, that the
Conqueror was evermore carried on by his own will and lust which he looked upon
above the peoples Rights and Liberties, and mere force being partial, would
never suffer a Jury of Freedom. Thus Will. the Conqueror altered some, and
quite took away others of the Laws that were in Edward the Will. the Conqueror
Confessors time; which Laws were so allowed of, that Kent and other places
would never have yielded to him but on condition they should keep their own
Laws; But notwithstanding his engagement to them, and his oath at his
Coronation, he takes away those Laws that were the peoples Privileges, and at
his own His perjury to set up Norman Laws and Lawyers.
pleasure makes Laws, destructive to the peoples good and public weal, only
to advantage his own Interest, and promote Prerogative. By him, and the Saxons
before him, our English civil Laws were so barbarously razed up from their
foundation, principle, and original, that we were made, and have so continued
absolute Slaves to Great men; and whereas before, when the people were the rise
of the Laws, they were wont to curb and control the exorbitancies The people
made slaves.
of Great ones, and were therefore principally intended, but now they are
changed, and are made principally to enslave and oppress the poor and
commonalty or freeborn English, and to make them Vassals, and do homage to
great men's humors* Thus Great men got a latitude ore the freeborn people, and
could oppress by law; and by the proudest Principles of self-Interest, and
worldly Greatness, stand upon the pinnacle of power and tyranny (yea, on
tip-toes to be high enough) for men to fall down and worship them, in offering
sacrifice to their lusts, and in doing homage to their huge wills: Thus great
men were followed as consonants follow Vowels, with obsequious flatteries, and
complacent And Fools.
compliances of the simple fellows and servile spirits that have lived in the
world before us, who easily adored these golden Images, and gave up their
rights as they were the freeborn people of England) for a free will Oblation.
O these Prodigal! and stupid white-livered people! It is pity they were
Englishmen! And Cowards.
that would give that away for a word or good look from a King, Courtier, or
Conqueror, which will cost much time and labor to recover. Obsequious and
servile spirits are but faint and treacherous Guardians of Englands just Rights
and Privileges:
Upon this advantage has great men's Interests gotten in, and tiptoed it over
the people, when the poor silly people durst not but open the door at their
knock, they could not do less then enter in, and shut us all out for Fools.
And when once they had got the possession Laws made to keep in slaves.
of the Law, their first work was to secure themselves and their own Greatness
by a guard of Laws against the Liberties and Freedom of the people; in so much
that our Cannon being thus turned upon us, they charge us with thunderings,
threatening of us for Traitors and Rebels by the letter of their Laws, if we
but stir a step toward our Freedom; so that the Laws are forced to accuse,
kill, and condemn their own Mother, and the best Friends they have in the
world. Thus the Law became any thing or nothing at the
commands and courtesy of great men, for which I blame not such as were
ravished of their Rights against their wills, when all their ^ing and crying out
for help (in corrupt times) could not save ^em from being deflowred. But it is
folly upon a hill, to lose this ^r virginity, if it be possible to save it; and
never was more Hopes of recovery. What William the Conqueror did, that Oliver
the Conqueror is to undo, and how?
^pes of help, then now (the people being Conquerors) to get ^m under this
Norman tyranny, if we cry aloud, and complain God and men; and in our
applications to the Lord General, ^d the Parliament, we declare our wrongs, and
call aloud and in^ssantly for justice upon those villainous Laws that have
ravished ^d robbed us of all our rights; ere-long (then) it may be all the ^ to
question and sentence those Laws: Let us consider, but ^at William the
Conqueror has robbed us of, and then we ^all know what Oliver the Conqueror
ought to restore us to, ^d re-invest us with, as our own; as

1. Whereas, the Laws, the freeborn people that were rational, 1. In the
original of the Laws.
^d in a capacity, were the Institutors of, by their Deputies or ^resentatives;
William the Conqueror usurps that power, and eats all Laws in his name, and so
ever since they have run in ^e Kings name, as in an orb above the people, on
purpose to ^rannize over the people: Hence says Philip Honor: Cum a Phil. Hon.
^ulielmo Conquestore, quod perinde est ac Tyrannus, institu^ ^i^t leges
Angliae, admirandum non est, quod solam princi^is utilitatem respiciant,
subditorum vero bonum desertum esse ^id^^tur. Seeing the Laws of England have
been made by ^ill^am the Conqueror (and from thence the Tyrant) it is not to ^e
wondered at, that they only regard the Interest and Preroga^ive of the King,
and seem to relinquish the right and liberties ^ the people, and so not at all
to favor or be-friend the freedom ^f the people. But this must be amended, for
the interest of great ^es will bias the Law, till the people be
reinfranchised, and ^ll there be no Laws but such as arise from the peoples
voice.

2. Williams Conquest brought in Laws, with *the Norman 2. The language of the
Laws.
^anguage and French Tongue, and least any Law should remain of the people)
that would not fetch and carry for him, he com^ands them all to speak Barbarism
to them, in his own barbarous ^guage of broken French, i. e. not to be so much
as understood ^ the poor people: So that ever since the people have been under
^aws they understood not, which is a grievous yoke and curse, as ^^ut. 28. 49,
50, 51. appears, The Lord shall bring a nation against thee, as swift as the
eagle that flies; a nation (...) tongue thou shall not understand; a nation of
a fierce co(...)nance, which shall not regard the old, nor show favor to the
yo(...) he shall eat the fruits of thy cattle, and the fruits of thy land,
(...)til thou be destroyed.

Thus William the Conqueror gave the Normans the chi(...) possessions of the
Lands, and he changed all the temporal Law(...) the Realm, and ever since the
Norman Lawyers pleaded cause(...) Against the Laws of God to be of strange
Languages.
an unknown tongue; this is contrary to the Laws of God and (...)ture, as
appears Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13. This Law which I (...)mand, is not hid from thine
eyes, neither is it far off: It (...) in Heaven that thou shall say, who shall
bring it to us? ne(...) is it beyond the Seas, but it is near thee. Gods Laws
to his (...)ple, were to be known, yea, the Politic Laws were to be (...)
their own tongue, that none might say, we have not heard t(...) nor known them,
Romans 1. 20. But they had it at the hand of M(...) Deuteronomy. 6. 7. and were to teach
it to their children, and talk of t(...) at home and abroad, when they walked
by the way, and (...) they rose up and lay down; yea, the Heathen abhorred such
(...)ness and brutishness, as to enslave the people under unknown (...)guages,
Esther 8. 9. Then were the Kings Scribes called i(...) third month (Sivan) on
the twenty third day thereof, and (...) Law was written to every Province, and
to every people (...) their Language; and to the Jews according to their
Wri(...) and their Language. The very Heathen had so much equity(...) reason;
therefore in Edward the third his time the Laws (...) Edward the third.
commanded to be Englished, and no more Pleas to be in Fr(...) or Latin. And
honest Vespasian, as soon as he was Emperor, (...)sently Vespasian.
commanded all the Laws to be written leg^bly* in B(...) that none might plead
ignorance in any one of them; but that (...) people might all understand their
Liberties and Laws; and (...)fore it has been ever the policy of Usurpers and
Tyrants, to (...) people ignorant of their Laws and Freedoms. But are we not
(...) What the people hope for.
delivered? believe it, the people cannot do less then expect(...) their Laws
to be abbreviated and Englished, and not one (...) Plea, or Process, to be but
in English; and that, not like Calig(...) Caligula.
who upon the peoples outcry of this tyranny, caused the La(...) be brought
openly and set up for all people to know it; but (...) ^^r his own Interest, to
keep the people in ignorance, and to en^^^re Tyrants would have people ignorant
of their Laws.
them under tyranny, out of policy he appoints it to be writ in so small a
letter, as few could read it, and to be set up so high, as few could reach it.
This policy appeared in the late Parliament^ ordering of the Law to be
Englished, but yet in a mystery too: This policy must be questioned and
condemned to death, for the peoples Laws are to be open and known by all; and
this right they hope to be restored unto by my Lord Cromwell, as the peoples
Conqueror; not as the Norman did, to divide the best Lands, and Mansions, and
Manors of the Nation, to his Natives
and Soldiers, which was an undeniable argument of selfseeking, and of an
interest that will be broken apeeces in due time; but to deliver up the peoples
Laws and Liberties in their own Language. This God and Nature requires, else it
will prove destructive What will be destructive to the Commonwealth.
to the welfare of this Commonwealth.

1. That the Free Commoners be kept blinded and ignorant, (...) to their own
Interests and Privileges, which are theirs by 1. Ignorance of the Laws.
free birthright. 2. To be constrained from all parts round the Nation to come
2. Terms at Westminster.
to Westminster for justice, or right by Law. 3. To be ^orced to put out their
Causes to corrupt Lawyers, to 3. To buy the Law of Lawyers.
plead and censure them, and to make merchandise of them, and of the Law. 4. To
wait there for justice four, five, six, eight, or ten years 4. Delay of Justice.
in Law, till the Norman Lawyers have made themselves rich by removing suits
out of one Court into another, and by retarding of justice, to the ruin of the
Client.
Now certainly God will in due time deliver his people out of Deliverance is
promised and expected.
this tyranny and slavery, and proclaim Liberty to the Captives that are kept
in darkness and misery, under the ignorance of their own rights and
privileges; which is a grievous curse to us, as appears Deuteronomy. 28. 49, 50, 51,
52. Jer. 5. 15, 16, 17. And if the Lord make not the General (as his peoples
Conqueror) faithful to them herein, it will light sadly on some of this
Generation; but yet his people shall be delivered, as Esther 4. 14. For it is
one of our privileges promised us, that we should be restored unto, in these
latter days, as Isa. 33. 19. among the most excellent privileges Gods people
must partake off, as freedom from bribes, oppressions, blood, etc. Verse. 15.
is, Thou shall not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech, then thou
can perceive; of a stammering (or ridiculous) language (as such is the
Lawyers Latin and Norman) that thou can not understand. Antichrist
in the State, has kept the poor people in darkness too, under an unknown
language, and made this ignorance the mother of their devotion to his Civil
Worship and Ordinances. But it is now high-time to tumble, seeing Gods
Israelites are to have his Laws Politic Laws in our own Language, and why?
( viz. Political) in their own language, Deuteronomy. 30. and that for these ends.

First, That they should be in the mouths of all the people, 1.
whereas now they are only in the mouths of Judges, Lawyers,
Counselors, who are indeed Concealers of the Law, and lock (...) up till a
silverkey come to open.

Secondly, That they might teach them to their children, (...) 2.
know them; which they cannot do now the Laws are in an unknown language,
unless their children be brought up at Inns of Court, or the like.

Thirdly, That the Laws might be all writ upon Posts and 3.
Gates; for the people generally to know them all; but now they must go to the
Records which lie at Westminst^^, or Inns of Court, or Judges, or Counselors
Chambers, and give a good sum of money too, before they can come at them, so as
to know them.

All this is tyranny and oppression, diametrically in opposition to Tyranny!
the Word of God, the promises of these latter days, and the liberties of the
Subjects; so that our expectations must not be frustrated of our freedom from
this Norman bondage.

3. Whereas the people had Justice and Law at their own 3. Law and Justice at
every door in every County.
doors in every County and Hundred in this Nation, and their Law was plain and
honest, and Controversies soon decided in few days by their honest neighbors
of the Hundred, who making
the case as their own, administered justice presently; were it for a thousand
pounds, it might have been recovered at the charge of a shilling or two; for
there were several Courts in every County, but the Supreme Court in the County
was called Gen^rale Placitum, being to determine those differences which the
Parish or the Hundred Courts could not decide; and also to ordain Sheriffs, and
other County-Officers, etc. But the Conqueror William alters the How Terms came
in at Westminster.
Law in this, takes away the peoples liberties herein, and instead of this, he
sets up Courts and Terms at Westminster, takes away all Law and Justice out of
the Counties, and to keep up his own Darling under his eye, brings all up to
him hither by a policy. For he commanded nine men out of every County to be
chosen, to make a true report what their Laws were before the Conquest; and
after they had so done, he changed the most of them, and brought in the Customs
of Normandy in their stead, commanding causes to be pleaded, and all Matters of
Form to be dispatched in French. He revived again the Danish Custom (he being
How the Jury of twelve men came in.
a Kin to the Danes) in Trials of Rights by twelve men; so that for his own
ends and profits, it appears all his Laws were established, and the peoples
pulled away from them to this hour. Hence the peoples freedom in their Gemote
or Monthly convention for Law and Justice at their own doors, was rent away
from them, as appears in the History of three Norman Kings, page 98. And How
Councels of State, Chancery Court, etc. came in.
William the Conqueror ordained (says the History) his Council of State, his
Chancery, his Exchequer, his Courts of Justice, etc. These places he furnished
with Officers, and assigned four Terms in the year for determining of
Controversies among the people; whereas before, all Suits were summarily heard,
and determined at home in their own Counties, and in every hundred, Tyranny and
slavery, where in.
without Formalities or delays. Now it is highly incumbent upon this present
Power, and his Excellency the Lord General, to redeem the freeborn oppressed
people from this Tyranny and servitude; and that it is such a tyranny and
bondage, will appear several ways.

1. In that, by this injury done the free Commoners, they are 1* Their
oppression and misery, for right and justice.
forced to come up to London, from all parts of England, and to wait at
Westminster at great charges and expenses, during the four Terms, for Right and
Justice, or recovery of their own; which attendance on the Lawyers, is well
known to be lamentably chargable:
For though the poor Commoner, that lives threescore or a hundred miles off,
could before for a little matter, in a day or two at furthest, have had justice
and right at home; Now he must wait long and lamentably, till he make himself
poor, and his Lawyer rich, before he can recover his own; and I know them that
have been beggered and undone by it; for they not only carried Their long and
chargable journeys to London.
up to Westminster full purses, and brought home empty, but they have been
forced to borrow money at London besides that, to suffice their Lawyers, and to
bear their charges home again, with weeping eyes* which brought them upon their
knees, and made them to work hard night and day with sweat and tears, till
their fingers ends aked again; to get up some more money to fee their Lawyers
for the next Term, and to find their long journeys to Westminster again, and
yet were compelled for all that, to borrow again and again at London, before
they could get home; and if this be not oppression and wrong to the people,
what is?

2. The bondage of it is further, for the delaying to do right, 2. Delays
Whereas before, all Causes of Controversy were fully and truly determined in
fifteen days at farthest, in Mirror of Just. fol. 8.
when not a month, nor twelve months, nor twelve years (sometimes) will be
enough for a Lawyer to remove actions out of one Court into another; from one
place to another, to enrich himself, and undo his Client; nay, threescore years
have some been tormented and hurried out of one Court into another; put to
charges, paying fees, preferring Petitions, retaining Counselors, and yet
continue in that bondage and misery. I know many who are in Law, and some have
been six, others ten, others twelve, others twenty, others thirty, others
forty, others fifty years, and yet as far from help, relief, and right, as at
first. O what crying and complaining
of this delay of Justice is in our streets! notwithstanding many Statutes to
the contrary, as that of Edward the third, An. 2. cap. 8. in these words, That
it shall not be commanded, neither by the Great, nor little Seal, to disturb or
delay doing right; and although such commands come, yet the Judges should not
cease or delay to do right in any point. So An. 20. of Edward the third, cap.
1. That all Justices do right to all people, not having regard to rich or poor,
without being let and hindered: Yea, it is accounted a Maxim (says Markham)
that the Law hates and eschews delays; and see but Magna Charta, Chap. 29. We
sell no man, we deny or delay no man justice and right. Many other Statutes
command right to be done to all men without delay, as 22. H. 6. 40. a. v. 2. C.
25. Stat. Glocest. c. 2. and they are sworn to it too, 2 Edw. 3. c. 2. 28 Vide
Captain N. Burts appeal from Chance^y, page 9.
Edw. 1. cap. ^0. 4 Inst. 109. but to no purpose, for they are as slippery as
an Eel (and make nothing of an oath, as will appear afterward) whiles they
think fourteen, eighteen, or twenty years not long enough to delay justice, but
still must be new Motions, new Petitions, new Orders, new Reports, new Demurs,
new Deceits, and new Delays, on purpose to vex and weary the Plaintiff with
new Fees, and to undo the poorer sort of people that cannot follow. If this be
not injustice, tyranny, and oppression, wronging and robbing the poor of their
Right and Liberties, what is?

3. It is a bondage, for that hereby the price of Justice and 3. Justice bought
at too high a rate.
Law, and of recovering of a man's own, is too high for a poor man, he cannot
pay for it, and is thereby oftentimes forced to lose it; for that the mercenary
Clerks and Lawyers can, as they list, raise the market of their Fees to a great
rate, or else delay their orders, or the like. The poor oppressed pay for all.
I know an Example. So Mr. Chapter dealt with one Henshaw, borrowed all his money,
then kicked him out of doors, then clapped him up in prison, and by ^eeing the
poor man's Lawyers, kept him there. The late Act of Parliament worth nothing.
honest man that lent a Lord his Master (a great Swash) a sum of money upon a
sudden, but after some years, seeing his great master refused to pay him, he
told him then he must make use of the Law; which the Lord no sooner heard, but
sent for a Writ, arrests the poor man, and without Declaration for what, got
him into prison, and all to prevent the poor man's suing for his own: by corrupt
Lawyers and large Fees, he kept him in Newgate many years, till he was ^igh
starved, rotted, and stunk to death. So that the poor man must lose justice,
because he wants purse enough to pay for it; and a Plea upon the late Act for
one not worth five pounds, was not worth five farthings. The Lawyers are such
Juglers.

Thus for these and diverse other Reasons, this murdering and bloody tyranny
requires quick relief from these delayings, charges, deceits, and fees,
turnings, windings, and intricacies of the Law. Wherefore with full eyes are
the freeborn people of England expecting their return out of captivity in this
also, by my Lord Cromwels (their Conqueror) means: So that Justice, and plain
Justice desired to be had at home.
honest Law may be had (as was before William the Tyrants time) at their own
doors, and in their own streets, in every County and Hundred in England, which
would much enrich the people, and keep the more money in their purses to pay
taxes with,
and the like; the which doubtless (then) they might do without murmuring.
Therefore down with Terms, and such Tradings of Lawyers at Westminster, and
spread Law and Justice all Down with Terms and Westminster Courts.
bout the Nation.

Object. Thereby many would have but little trading.

Answ. 1. Little the less for that, because the successive Representatives
Object. Answ.
at Westminster would keep it up, and thereby the City would be frequently full
of people from all parts.

2. People, when they come up to London, will have the more 1. Trading would
not be lost by it.
money to buy Commodities, then now they have, seeing the Lawyers are such
Money-suckers, and Purse-soakers; but

3. Let not people be deceived, so as to think the promises and 2.
privileges which we expect in all the changings and turnings of 3.
times, tend to set up better trading for the world; for all the earth shall be
shaken, and reel like a drunken man; but as the Kingdoms of the world become
Christ's, so tradings will become mostly a trading for Christ and his Truth, and
a taking off of the old world, looking for the blessed hope and glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

4. Whereas before the Conqueror William (in Edward the 4. From Tribute and
Taxes.
Confessors days) the people lived in much liberty and freedom from taxations,
and tribute; yea, Edward the Confessor freed them from Dane-gilt, which the
people before paid, being at least forty thousand pounds. But the Greedy
Tyrant, William the Conqueror did contrary, and sought to enslave the people
with cruel burdens (as we find in the Summary of English Chronicles, page
41.) He made enquiry what riches the people had, Vide The lives of the three
Norman Kings, p. 91, 98.
how many acres of ground were sufficient for one Plough by the year; how many
Beasts to the tilling of one Hide; how many Cities, Castles, Farms, Granges,
Towns, Rivers, Marshes, and Woods; and what Rent they paid per annum, etc. All
which was put in writing at Westminster, and kept in the Kings Treasury, in a
Book called Doomsday Book. And according to the Roll he imposed heavy
Taxations, and squeezed out the ^at of the Land to himself. So in Acts and Mon.
p. 173. he gave his Normans the chiefest possessions of the Land, and stripped
the stoutest of the Nobility and Gentry of all. But now the people are high in
expectation of ease and deliverance from heavy taxes, which hitherto have been
gathered and required of necessity, for the use of the Commonwealth, and
benefit of the freeborn people. But now they hope to have the bands of
wickedness loosed, Isa. 58. 6. And that their Conqueror Oliver the Lord Gene
tell will set the oppressed free, and undo the heavy burdens, and ^ose them
and deliver them from this bondage, which appears to be so, for that Governors
are limited by Gods word in Ezekiel. 48. 18. The Princes shall not take of the
peoples inheritance by oppression, and thou shall not steal, is a mortal
command to Kings, Princes, Parliament, Armies etc. Exodus 20. 15. as well as to
the poor oppressed people* Naboths Vineyard was his own Inheritance and
propriety, which the King had nothing to do with by right; for as Bucan says de
Magist q. 75, 76. 77. Distinctio dominorum and propriet as possessionum est
juris divini, juxta Bucan.
mandatum non furtum facies, etc. Distinction of dominion and propriety of
possession is of divine right, according to the command thou shall not steal:
It is not said thou shall not give or lend, or the like, but thou shall not
steal; for that no man can lawfully take away the goods, or propriety of
another. Says Seneca l. 7. de benef. c. 4, 5, 6. Caesar has the dominion of
all things belonging to Seneca.
him, but the propriety belongs to particular persons. As the Civilians say,
one may make claim to a House or Ship, but not to all the furniture, or lading
in the House or Ship. Therefore it is injustice and tyranny for a William the
Conqueror to command men's Estates and Purses so, as against all. Law, Liberty
of the Subjects, and propriety of the Law to lay Taxations upon them above what
they can bear, seeing that Subjects are not to be dealt with as Slaves and
Bondmen. But God himself in his Law to Kings, Deutr. 17. 15, 20. calls his
people his brethren, and so David did own them for his Brethren, 1 Chronicles. 20,
2. and so one Bartolus a famous Lawyer in Tract. de regim. Civit. says,
Subjects Bartolus
are to be held and used by Kings and Governors in the quality and condition of
Brethren and not of Slaves; so that our Governors, and the General, must use
and ease the freeborn Englishman as their Brother.

Fifthly, Will. the Conqueror brought in another Iron Yoke which the 5 From Fines
and homage etc. to Lords of the Manor.
people call for ease from, and that appears in p. 99. of the History of the
lives of the three Norman Kings. That in all those Lands William the Conqueror
gave to any man (as he did much give away to the Normans, yet this covetous
Tyrant) he reserved dominion in chief to himself, for the acknowledgement
whereof, a year^ rent he caused to be paid unto him, and a Fine whenever the
Tenement or Land did aliene or die; these were bound as Clients to him by oath
of fidelity and homa^e; and if any died who^ Heir was in his minority the King
( Conqueror) received the profits of the Land; and was his Guardian til the age
of one and twenty* This bandage of slavery is great, and though it is in part
taken aw^^ by the fall of the Court of Wards, yet there remains a very gre^
Tyranny under such as are called Lords of the Manor, for eve^ since (says
Holinshed) as Lords and Great ones, have held this (...) Holinshed.
the King, so also have inferior persons and the poorer sort of people held
this of their Lords, and in case of disobedience the propr^it^ly does revert.
Hence came Lords of the Manor, Landlord, Tena^^ Holds, Tenures etc. which are
all slavish ties and badges, orig^nally grounded upon m^er conquest and Power
inslaving the people. Now, let us but consider the nature of this bondage; for
when thou that art a free Commoner have bought a piece of Copyhold-land, and
paid all to a penny for it of the Owner, and to^ farthing the full worth of it,
yet the Lord of the Manor (for sooth) must have his Fine, or else you shall
not have a foot of the Land, but he will ceize on it* that never pald a penny
for it. Nay more, if you leave it, though it be presently, another Fi^^ falls
upon it; or if you die, your poor Widow or Fatherless chil^ that is in need
and comfortless must pay another Fine for it too, o^ a Herriot of the best
goods left: which the Lord of the Manno^ must have, or else the Land be
forfeited: O these arbitrary tyrannous customs! For as Jer. 5. 26, 27. Among
my people a^^ found wicked men: they lay wait as one that sets snares, th^^
set a trap to catch men. As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full
of deceit, therefore they are become great and waxen rich. These grievous Laws
are snares indeed. So that for Fines and ^^rriots, they covet Fields, Amos 4.
1. and take them by force; and houses and take them away, so they oppress ^
man and his house; hear O ye kine of Bashan! which oppress the poor, and
which crush the needy, Amos 8. 4. These as the Prophet Isa 59. Turn Judgment
backward, Equity cannot enter; and he that refraineth makes himself a prey.
These oppressors takes pledges of the poor, which is forbid Jo^ 24* 9* and
they turn aside the needy from righteousness, and take away the right of the
poor, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the Fatherless,
Isa. 10. 2. Is it not time Fellow-Commoners to call for our freedom from this
formality and lust of man? what are these Laws but the direct issue of
Tyranny? and the badges of our slavery? shall rich men thus reign over us? and
contrary to all Reason or rule of Righteousness thus oppress the poor? and
widows? and fatherless? and all with ^ealtie^? Homages? Oaths? Fines, etc.
What Law is this but Lust, and Will; Power, and Custom, which is insufferably
corrupt and full of that Feminine which Juvinall speaks of* Sic volo, sic
^ubeo, sic pro ratione voluntas. This absoluteness in some men over the
persons and estates of others, is plain Tyranny, and without Reason, which the
ravenous Conqueror brought in, and will not our Religious and Rational
Conqueror take it away then? Shall men (as the Psalmist says) Psalm. 94. forge
wrong, or frame mischief for a Law? God says plainly, they shall not oppress
the poor, and the widow, etc. Exodus 22. 22. Zach. 7. 10. and will not all the
godly say so too? Then surely this Supreme Power so called, i. e. the
Parliament of England, had need to arise and redeem the people (who expect it)
from this arbitrariness and absoluteness of men who oppress the poor,
fatherless, and widow, with this iron yoke of fines, rents, and herriots to
Lords of Manors, and the like, which was brought in by the lust, humor, will,
pride, and covetousness of a Tyrant. Pure Religion visits the fatherless, and
the widow, 6, From the Norman Lawyers.


Sixthly and lastly, There is another, and that a most notorious servitude and
misery which William the Conqueror brought the freeborn people of England
into, which by Oliver the Conqueror the people expect deliverance from, or else
their lives will be but a burden to them. This bondage is by Lawyers, for
whereas before when the Law was delivered at our own doors, every man was heard
to plead his own cause without Sollicitors or Attorneys, since* that, the
Customs of Normandy were advanced by William the Conqueror, the Courts set up
at Westminster, and the Laws commanded to be made, and causes pleaded in
French, Lawyers their original.
the poor Commoners must of necessity retain Norman Lawyers, seeing they
themselves understood neither the Law nor Language.

Thus the poor people were miserably abused, and forced to buy their Law, and
come by their own at a dear rate, whilst Lawyers pleaded their causes, and at
one trial of a suit sucked up more money (may hap*) then a poor man could get
by his work, 1.
and labor in half a year. So that their rise may be ascribed, first, to the
unknownness of the Law, in a strange tongue; secondly, to 2.
the intricateness and fallacies of it, whereby an honest plain man, was
rendered unable to extricate himself; therefore he must have recourse to the
shrine of the Lawyer, unless he have learned State-Jesuitism tricks, and
quiddities, in some of the Inns of Court; 3.
and thirdly, the Terms at Westminster, whilst the Lawyer like the Roman, sets
up his god Terminus for all the Country round, Terms.
to fall down and adore. The common sort of Lawyers carry a head full of Idea's
of right or wrong, and so can run on in a round o^ formulary of words to cousen
poor simple people: I trust God will undeceive us.

But as yet in King Williams time, the Lawyers interest (which from the first
was grounded on corruption) was but a Jelly, a poor little puny thing: For one
friend coming up to London to the Term, about his own cause, for a little
matter (toward bearing his charges in his journey) would appear, and plead
something for his friends, or neighbors cause; so that it soon came to this,
that he that was most versed in the tricks of the Law, and these Courts; would
be desired by his Country neighbors about him, to undertake a journey to
London, and to do their businesses too; and so, they would bear his charges,
and give him some small reward.

Thus honestmen would get sometimes Parents, Friends, Brothers, Neighbors,
sometimes others to be (in their absence) Agents, Factors, or Sollicitors for
them at Westminster, and as yet they had no stately houses or mansions to live
in, as they have now (called Inns of Court) but they lodged like Countrymen
Inns of Court, when, and how they began.
or strangers in ordinary Inns. But afterward when the Interest of Lawyers
began to look big (as in Edward the third^ days) they got Mansions or
Colleges, which were called Inns, and by the Kings favor had an addition of
honor, whence they were called Inns of Court.

Thus, those that came to be versed in the ni^^ties and formalities of the
Norman Laws, every Term were employed by others of their friends in the
Country, and found it sweeter then to follow the Plough; and as Controversies
increased, they increased in number, and took up their quarters, and by degrees
grew up into an orderly body, and distinct interest, as now they are; and
after they were thus formed into a body, they hired the Temple of the
Knights-Templers, for their abode together; The Temple.
and as Contentions increased their Interest grew great, and by a long series
of time, so great as it is now. What grounds the good people of England have to
expect the fall of these Norman Lawyers, and restoration of our Liberties and
Freedoms as at first, by Oliver their Conqueror, will appear, first, from their
rise and interest, secondly, our bondage, thirdly, their trade and practices
(in sin.) To the first.

1. The rise of the Lawyers, was the will of a Tyrant, or an 1. The Lawyers
rise and interest.
Arbytrar^ ^ower, which was, and yet is a plague to the freeborn people of
England. 2. Their Interest comes from pride, strife, fullness of Broad, 2.
and prosperity. 3. It was at first but a bare title, and upon the ruins* of 3.
others, and by corruption it grew up to an interest, as it is now. 4. Their
interest grows great by sin, as lying, cheating, 4.
wronging and robbing the poor, and making merchandise of the Law to the
freeborn people of England. 5. As their interest got up, they would suffer
none to plead, or 5.
be a Lawyer, unless he were brought up in their Courts and Inns, in their
trads, tricks, and cheats to sell the Law (at a large rate) to Chapmen (called
their Clients,) so that the Law must be bought and sold before it be had. 6.
This Interest taught them (ever since) to m(...)ize and 6.
ingross the Law, into their own hands, for their own gain and markets. 7. It
is an Interest that regards no other, but its self, yea, and 7.
is resolved to promote its self, though it be with the ruin of others round
about. 8. This corrupt tyrannical Interest for fear of a fall (knowing 8.
how wickedly it st^le in, with robbery and ruin to the people; so that it is
a wonder it is suffered to stand all this while.) I say, for fear of a fatal
blow, it does back and barricado its self with secular powers, and use all
wiles to establish its own greatness; so as that the fall of it may be costly
and chargable to the poor oppressed people.
Thus from the rise and interest of the Lawyers, it is obvious to every
rational capacity, what a necessity there is for the throwing down this
dangerous and destructive order of the Lawyers, before we can be freed from
slavery, tyranny, oppression, arbitrary will and power, and lusts of men; lying
and cheating away our estates and liberties, and making merchandise of the Laws
of England, and Justice.

These must down, I dare engage my life on it, before the people
can be quiet, or the Commonwealth flourish with Equity and Justice; all
Objections to the contrary we shall answer by and by.

Secondly, Our further grounds are from the peoples slavery 2. Peoples slavery
by them.
under this tyrannical order of the Lawyers: For

First, Let a man now seek the benefit of the Law, he shall 1.
lose it, and his right too, without the Lawyer be lustily feed for it, and
this was not before the Norman tyranny; so that, as the Jews were (in Christ's
and the Apostl^s days) subject to the Romans, and could not have the benefit of
their Law, but by the Romans; so the Commoners of England have been miserably
abused to this day, by a company of cheating Lawyers, and cannot have the
benefit of the Law, but by these Norman Customers or Publicans, that sit at the
receipt of custom.

Secondly, The freeborn Subjects of England, are under slavery 2.
by these Lawyers, in that they will allow ^o Advocates but of their own coat,
(forgetting their own first original) to plead a cause: which, I the more
wonder, for that the Norman and Dane were so near a kin, that the Norman set up
several of the Danish Customs; but (I believe purposely) he omitted this that
King James mentions in his Star Chamber speech, In some Countries (says he) as
in Denmark, all their State is governed (only) by a written Law; there is no
Advocate or Proctor admitted to plead, only the parties themselves plead their
own cause, and then a man stands up and pleads the Law, and there is an end.
Surely this Custom had been borrowed of the
Danes too, but that for the Lawyers, who would lose their fees then. This made
some of the eminentest of them, imagine me of a Lilburnian spirit! for that I
would ever speak in my own cause, and in others honest causes too, and would
hire no mercenary fellow of them all; but I have told their Masters and Lords
several times, that I would have my liberty to plead my own cause, which I have
done, and carried it too, against four Counselors in f^^ against me. But this
made them most enraged enemies to me ever since; and such are afraid their
markets must fall, if a man come once to plead his own or his f^iends cause,
which is our freedom to do: And we find it was good Statute Law in 28 Edw. 1.
cap. 11. For men's friends, parents, brothers, or neighbors, to plead for them,
without the help of a Lawyer. This must be again, ere the people can be quiet,
or sit down under their own freedom; and then there will need no Solicitors,
Agents, shirking
Cheats, and such alike mercenary train too at Committees; but an honest man
shall tell his own tale, as Anaxilaus did in the Spartan Senate, Diod. Sic.
lib. 2. c. 37. Diodor. Sic.


Thirdly, Let but Reason speak, and spite of all the World, it 3. Lawyers.
will appear, That the free-people cannot (either as rational, or as religious)
be much longer able to abide this abominable Antichristian, and accursed tribe.

1. As rational; the people cannot spare them for their usurpation, 1. Robbers.
arbitrariness, and ambition, whereby they become (as to a free Commonwealth.)
First, Robbers, who forcibly take away our rights, and as Augustine says in
Lib. 4. c. 4. De Civ. Dei. Augustine.
They are but a rapsody of free-booters; unjust possessors of other men's
estates, that tear away our goods against our wills. Hence says Dr. Sutton,
Lawyers are like the M^lt of a man's body, which Sim. Sutton.
Laurentius says, never grows great, till all other parts of the body decay and
perish.

Thus were these Robbers reared aloft by the ruins of freeborn English-mens
Rights and Privileges; and who would not recover their stolen goods? Now as
Antiochus was ^irnamed Hierax Oppressors.
the Hawk; for that he had no estate, no patrimony left him, but preyed upon
other men's estates and territories, and by rapine and robbing, picked out a
Kingdom to himself. So certainly the Lawyers are such ravenous wretches, that
they wrong and rob any to make themselves rich, and like a dog, will try all
right by their teeth, till they tear out a piece to themselves from every one
they set upon; and as a poor woman, with loud language cried out to Baldwin the
Archbishop, O! O! you eat up my flesh! So may Acts and Mon. p. 230.
many cry out against these ungodly Lawyers, Blood-suckers, and Robbers by Law.

Secondly, They are Tyrants too, and such as no rational spirit 2. Tyrants by
practice, how?
can long suffer. Ambition was their first Solicitor thereto, and that they are
Tyrants, will appear many ways: For

1. They are ruled not by Reason, but Self-will, which prescribes 1.
no limits to their lawless affections and lusts, but run out into many
out-ragious insolences and tyrannies, which cannot be numbered, especially in
the Countries. For as an oblique angle diversifies Sim.
its self into sundry species, so certainly their tyranny and injustice,
according to the variety of accidents, have variety of actions, which without
much difficulty cannot be deciphered; all arising from Lust, rather then Law.

2. These Tyrants hate and suspect wisemen most; and fearno 2.
opposition more then virtue, being conscious of their own vicious courses; so
that those upright ears that grow higher then the rest of the corn, they cannot
endure them; but they will keep them under, or behead them, especially where
honesty and faithfulness make them more conspicuous then others; so that a
rational well-grown
upright man, must be calumniated, and under some colorable pretext or other
cut off by them. I might instance in Sir Walter Rawleigh, the old Earl of
Essex, and others since.

3. They like Tyrants cannot abide a conslux of rational 3. Machiavil in
principe.
Counselors; and they account these days dangerous to them, for that we have
such public Assemblies, Diets, or Parliaments, for fear some notably endued
with Reason, should discover their rise, interest, and tricks, and so raze them
out root and branch, Arist. l. 5. c. 11. Polit.
for a pack of Cheats, Knaves and Tyrants, that will ruin the Commonweal.

4. Tyrants love Factions and Divisions, and so do these Lawyers; 4.
for without brawls and bitter contentions, many of our busy Lawyers, (like
the lunatic in the Gospel,) might walk without clothes; therefore as Solon
said of their Orators, They were Solon.
the winds which raised up the waves, so may it be said of our Lawyers; and
such winds, like the Merchants of Lapland, they buy of the Devil; or else, if
there be a fire kindled, they run to it, and will be meddling with it, not to
mend it, but to warm their own fingers. Thus are they like those dishonest
Surgeons which lengthen out their cures.

5. As Tyrants they love to keep out of danger, and will have 5.
good guards, and disarm the people, throw down their Forts, and keep a
formidable guard of rough strangers to aw the people, and pillage their purses.
Thus, I say, the Lawyers have backed and guarded themselves excessive strong
with many Laws, disarming the freeborn Englishmen of all, or most of their
privileges and liberties, bringing in Norman and Danish Customs to oppress us,
and guard them.

6. As Tyrants they leave no design unattempted to torment the 6.
people by fleecing them, and filling their own coffers: For like Butlers
Boxes, they will be sure to gain, who ere loses, and to Sim.
grow great, as the Soldier said to Pompey, Per nostram miseriam.

The truth therefore is (and let the Lawyers look to it) they
gather up wealth, and lick up riches, like a sponge to be squeezed out again;
and as Demosthenes was wont to say, Such men are golden fleeces; their wool is
not for themselves, but must be shorn off to cloth the Commonwealth with ere
long.

7. As Tyrants they would seem virtuous and honest, the 7.
more easily to deceive such as trust them; and thus great ones like great
Brass Pots, are not withstanding their bigness, carried about by the ears out
of one Court into another, as the Lawyer lists, who has in the Inns of Court
been brought up in the art of lying and deceiving. They are crafty thieves, and
know they cannot long live in that trade, without putting on some apparel, and
exercising some parcel of honesty and justice; but it is at such a time, when
the subtlety shall take much, and when like the Panther they allure with the
savor of their words, their ugly Sim.
visage is hid, till the poor deluded people come within their reach of being
made their prey. Well, yet the Fox will be known by his tail, as in p. 26. of
Solicitors, Clerks, Sergeants, Bailiffs, Dr. Featly Ser. p. 495.
etc. for all their art. For though they fawn like Spannels, yet by their
snarling, grinning, and tearing, we know they are curs. And Lawyers look to it!
For as the wily fox, once catched, has his Sim.
skin quickly plucked over his ears, wherewith every fool will
have his cap furred: So will you ere long, whose craft and cruelty Colonel
Pride himself abhors, and says, It will never be well Col. Prides speech.
with England, till mercenary Lawyers Gowns be hung up by the Scottish Trophies:
And then every fool will have a fling. But

8. As Tyrants they give a breathing time to torment men 8.
afresh; and such Tyrants are the worst of all, as was Nero, Commodus,
Tiberius, etc. See how men deal with their bottles, leting Sim.
them stand under the tap till they be filled, and then they hang them up; and
so have these done with the free Commoners of
England, and with the faithfullest Subjects; or as spunges are let Sim.
alone a while to lie a soaking, till they have sucked in some good store of
water, and then they are squeezed out again; so do these Lawyers let men alone
all their vacation time, till they can gather up more money for them, and then
comes the Term to squeeze them dry again. And I am of opinion, merely out of
love to themselves here, that their vacation times (so called) were ordered,
Vacation times, how ordered.
as in Michaelmas Term, to end in (...) November, that the poor Countryman
may go home again and thrash, and sell out his corn, to provide money for the
following Hillary term, which in the eleventh month (...) called January,
begins, and ends in the next month (...) Ad^r; and then the poor Farmer must
home to put off his Cheese and Firkin-butter, and all he can to come to the
Lawyer again by Easter Term; and because it is a dead time of the year, the
vacation is the longer, until the second month following (...) Ziu, called
April, which holds to the next month called May or Sivan (...), and then comes
a Vacation time, until the next month of June (...), which is indeed very
short, for that the Countreyman must have nothing to do, but to go home and
shear his sheep, and make (with what speed may be) money of his wool, and to
come Post up again to supply his Lawyers pocket by Trinity Term, which ends in
the same month too, to give the poor oppressed people a little breathing, by a
long Vacation, as they call it, for they think it too long; only they know
their Clients are plying it hard for them, and are following the Harvest, to
have out their hard corn with the first, to make money, and all for a company
of Norman Tyrants.

These Lawyers (methinks) are much like the Beast called Sim.
Rosomacha, of the bigness of a Dog, but his face is like a Cat, (the Emblem of
Contention) his back and tail like a Fox (so we said before;) who uses, when
he has filled his paunch, as full as it can hold, to get betwixt two Trees
standing together, and so by squeezing his belly between them, empties it; and
then returns to his carrion again. And thus the greedy Lawyers, betwixt two
Terms, squeeze all out to fall a fresh upon the oppressed peoples purses, and
devour them by whole sale.

Let but Reason speak for the Commonwealth in this case, and if any man that
has Reason, or is a Friend to the freeborn Subject
of England, can show better reasons, or more righteousness, for their
standing, then we can for their stownding and downfall, I have lost my senses:
Thus for their tyranny.

Thirdly, Englishmen as rational men, may no longer abide 3. For their Bribes.
them for the abominable Bribes which they take, to the corrupting and
gangreening of honesty and justice; and they must have them over and above
their Fees, and that by their Clients adversaries too, if near a Trial. Philip
King of Macedon, said of a strong Castle, That it was impregnable, if he could
not drive in an Ass laden with gold; and so many causes are battered down by
golden pieces: For the Lawyer oftentimes like the Hunter, hunts a man at his
Form, but leaves his cause at a loss. Doctor No right in judgment is to be
sold for Fees or Bribes. Mirr. of Just. fol. 258. Dr. Featly.
Featly tells us of a famous Lawyer, that refused for a while to patronize a
bad cause (which is a wonder that a cause can be bad enough for them to
refuse;) but when the party cast before him a sum of good Hungarian Gold, on
which were stamped the Images of armed Soldiers, he then cried out, Thou have
taken me captive, for who can resist so many armed men?

-- Quid now mortalia pectora cogis?
Auri sacra fames --
Virg. The injection of a dram many times turns the scales of Justice among
those men. For as Lewis the eleventh King of France said, Sim.
He often won the victory by fighting with golden and silver spears; so may
many a great man say, who should else have been surely cast by the honest
causes that have come against them in Law. And as the French answered the
Helvetians once, who bragged, That their Country was so environed with Rocks
and Alps, and high Hills, that it was unconquerable; say the French, We could
easily climb those Hills, and overcome those Rocks, if we have but Guns that
will send in Golden Bullets among you: So certainly, the best cause may be
betrayed; and have been lost by bribes. Such showers of bribes have brought
many a dreadful Thunderbolt in the tail of them.

Fourthly, Rational men do abhor their rise; and the rise of 4 For their
encouraging contentions.
all their riches, being from Quarrels and Contentions. The Lawyers are but
Brethren to the Worms, for both are engendered out of man's corruption: They are
then worse, then the worst of our Excrements, or the Dung of this Commonwealth;
and do they not stink in our nostrils? Why then, we are not well, and have lost
our senses sure. Why else should Englishmen be so mad ((...).)* as to run to
these Norman Lawyers Anviles, for sharp Instruments to hurt their own
Countrymen with? whilst they use Upper Bench Writs, b^^ as
Westminster*Mastives to bait the
Country with? The Lawyers like the Indians strike fire by rubbing two sticks:
And some that follow suits in the Law of their managing, are like the Hare in
the Epigram, who to save her self from the Hounds, leaped into the Sea, and so
was devoured of the Sea dog. I have heard many say, they had better lose their
right, then lend it them though it be but to recover it, seeing it is so
costly. For as two that contend, one has a blew face, R^gers on Love, p. 24.
the other a bloody nose, but both are well beaten before they leave off; and
so it is with going to Law. It is not long since two Brothers Sir H. R. and Mr
J. R.
of good quality sell out about their estates, and were hot to go to Law, until
a Letter which was intercepted, written from one Concealer, I should say
Counselor of the Law, (^o acounted) to another, was read to these Brethren.

SIR,
I Am retained for one Brother, and take you the other, and I will warrant you,
we will quickly pluck them as bare as two Birds that have not a Feather left to
hide their skins, etc.


This Letter ended their Law suits; for else as the Mouse Sim.
and Frog were both devoured of the Kite, so would Plaintiff and Defendant have
been both devoured and eat up by these Lawyers, who live like Salamanders, best
in the hottest fires of contention.

Fifthly, Their variety of Frauds and Arts to deceive, do 5. For their Frauds.
Sim.
render them unsufferable to rational men; For as the Fox said to the Lion,
that indeed his tongue was Sovereign, but he had ill neighbors (meaning his
Teeth.) So certes we may say of the Lawyers, when their tongue is fairest,
their teeth are fearfullest, and they intend to tear away most estate and money
then. For whiles a true friend, like a Chestnut, keeps a sweet nutrimental
Kernel under a plain rind, such fainers as these are like Peaches that have
harsh rugged stones under a Velvet Coat. There is an Island beyond Arabia
(says Diodorus Siculus) where the Inhabitants Diod. Sic: Antiq. lib 3.
have Cloven tongues; so that therewith they can alter their speech as they
list, and imitate Birds in tunes, and speak perfectly to two persons, and two
purposes at once, to one with the one part of their tongue, and to the other,
with the other part thereof.

Now I know none but Lawyers like them in this; for they will speak for a Fee
for one, and yet I know them that have given Advice and Council to the other,
and taken the others Fee too. In Henshaws Case, p. 55.
They are like the Amphishaena who has two heads, and moves two contrary ways
at once. The Italians put a Proverb upon Caesar Borgia, and his father Pope
Alexander, saying* The one never thought as he spoke, and the other never spoke
as he thought: So indeed it may be said of many of these Lawyers, who like
Hebrew Letters, must be spelt backward, if once we read them aright.

And now, O what Parasites they are! as the English Papists in Queen Elizabeth's
days durst temporize to purpose, so do these begin apace; but as the Coriander
has a corrupt root, an unsavory Sim.
leaf, but a sweet seed; so has this Faction a filthy root, unsavory actions,
but as good words as one would wish, if need be: Yet let them look to it, Gods
curse, like a Promoter, must search for all their ill-gotten goods ere long.
And as when the crafty Fox that had deceived the Crow of her breakfast, hugged
himself for joy, to think of his project; till when he had eaten it, he found
himself poisoned with it, and then he repented, and wished the Crow her own
again. So stolen goods are sweet to these Deceivers, and they hug themselves in
their cheating tricks and
knaveries, till their bowels begin to gripe them for it. For the day of Christ
that is coming will be a terrible time of torment to them. And as Christ
brought that fish to the Hook that had the Sim.
money in his mouth, Matthew. 17. 27. So will these wide mouthed money*mongers be
hooked for it, fearfully ere long. They have gotten great Estates, and bought
Manors and Lands, and taken exact Surveys of them; but they have not yet taken
an exact survey of their Consciences, how they came by this money which
purchased these Lands, (says Dr. Don, Ser. fol. p. 818.) Our coin Dr. Don.
has the State on one side, and God with us on the other; and surely, if we
see not God with us in what riches we have gotten, they are but counterfeit and
falsely gotten, and will gripe us grievously, till we have vomited them out.
When Vespasians covetous Officers had filled themselves like spunges, by Rapine
and Extortion, the Emperor squeezed them out dry again into the common
Treasury, till they had nothing left. Now, although many wish for the fall of
the tree, that they may gather up the chips, yet the Lord knows this is not in
my heart; but believe it, the Laws of God and Nature require a restitution* and
that what they have ill gotten from the people, be brought into the public
bank again; for they have robbed the Nation with a great deal of ravenousness
and art. One Cacus a cunning theif, Sim.
when he had stolen any Beasts, he would drag them to the Cave by their tails
backward, that by the contrary track of their feet, he might be freed from
suspicion of theevery; such art and subtlety have the Lawyers had in deceiving
and robbing us; that they seems to take another track quite contrary to it, and
to go under the name of dues and fees. And besides, their decerts are many in
the Law too, which like a Cob-web to Spiders, whilst they make it their
dwelling, it is a prison to entangle others in, as flies to feed them. So many
Meanders and Intricacies there are in the Law, that like snakes they hide
themselves, by folding into many doubles. Wherefore like the Foxes they must
have depth of soil to Earth the wrongs of their poor Clients, and hide their
own Crafts; which are too many to live much longer, seeing the honestest cause
must miscarry by their cunning tricks and fallacies; and a bad cause shall be
so beautifully varnished over by their arts and cheats, that the most innocent
honest man that is, shall suffer ruin by them.

I have a Neighbor by me, who was arrested for two hundred Mr. ^.
pounds debt, to a man whose name he never heard, nor face ever saw before, and
he was laid in prison thereupon, to his utter ruin, till he proved the Bond
forged, the Plaintiff a cheat that lived by such tricks, and yet he escaped
scot-free, though there was a knot of them that lived by such cheats. Hence Sir
Walter Rawleigh, upon his trial, hearing the Lawyers for the King plead
violently against him, he turns to the Jury, and says, Gentlemen, I pray
consider, that these sort of men (meaning the Lawyers) do usually defend very
bad causes every day in their own Courts, yea* and against men of their own
Profession too, as able as themselves; what then will they not do against me?
and^. I know now an honest Gentleman that had a good personal estate, who lies
yet in the Fleet, eat up almost with lice, and near starved, Mr. ^.
and all his estate taken from him, by the mere cheat of the Lawyers, upon a
forged Bond too, for another; only a man whose face he never saw before,
pretending his hand to be in that Bond: But to finish this, O, how miserably
tyrannical they make the Law to the freeborn Englishman! They make it like a
Millstone, Sim.
which they drive about with a wheel (artificially) full of cogs and spoaks,
under which they grind the innocent and harmless ones to powder: And can we
hear their groans? sighs? sad complaints, and fearful cries? and we sit still
like senceless stones? shall we?

Sixthly, Lawyers unsufferable Fees fill all mouths with woeful 6. For their
Fees.
exclamations and eyes with willing expectation of their fall. For as no sooner
was the Apple in Adams mouth, but the Devil was in his Maw; So no sooner does
one Fee them with an Sim.
Earth-Angel in their hand, but the Devil doubles fees with Hell angels in their
hearts; and they fall to lying, pleading, cheating,
wronging and oppressing as fast as they can, without fear of Heaven or Hell.
It would make an honest man's heart to ache to hear how fast and confidently they
will lie, and like it well too. We laugh at the Indians for casting in such
store of Gold, every year into the River Ganges, as if the streams would not
run currently without it; and others laugh at the English as much, for when the
current of Justice is stopped (as it is often) in many Courts, the foolish people
can (as yet it seems) find no better way then that the Sim.
Indians use to open them; and shall we never be wiser? Indeed Pliny reports of
Apis the Egyptian God, that he never gave answers to private men, but e manu
consulentium cibum capiendo, by taking meat out of the hands of such as were
his Clients, and sought counsel, else he would be dumb. Is it not so with us?
Do not the Norman Lawyers the like? Let the Lawyer be greatly retained, or the
Law shall be greatly detained. And what will
retain them? as much as they can take out of their Clients hand at once? no!
For one that is eminent and belongs to the Council of State, told me he had it
from a Gentleman of four thousand pound per annum, that upon a motion to be
made to the Lords Commissioners, he retained his Counsel for one word to them,
and put five pieces into his hands, but the Lords sat not that day: The next
morning the Gentleman made a fresh sally, and gave a fresh salute to his great
Counsel with gracious Angels, and filled his paws again with two golden
pieces (for he was as hungry as ever since yesterday) but the Lords sat not
that day neither. But the next day the Lords sat for certain, so he comes to
his Counselor (or Concealer) Mr. M. Sir (says he) be mindful of my
business, I pray, it is but one word, to make but one motion to them this
morning; Sir (says the Lawyer) I have nothing to do with it, no! (says the
Gentleman) I hope you will Sir; speak but one word. Sir (says the Laweer) what
do you tell me of your motion, This is contrary to the Stat. A^. 18. of Ed. 3.
I Will not meddle with it, for I am not retained to it. (Now it seems the seven
pieces had not power enough to hold him three mornings but to make one motion;
Mr. M. was as hungry again as ever, he must have more or else be dumb,) So
that the Gentleman was glad to run and borrow two pieces more, (having not And
contrary to true Law Mir. of Just. fol. 64.
so much about him) to retain or keep his Counsel close to it, to speak one
word to the Lords Commissioners for him. Is not this a most unsufferable
cheating of the freeborn Englishman? and are not these cries of oppression and
Norman Tyranny very loud and lamentable? And is not the Law and Justice to be
sold at so high a rate, so as causes many an honest heart, and poor man to sit,
sigh, and complain, and loose his Right for want of money? seeing eight or nine
pounds can pay and pray but for one word. Tully.
Tully tells us, that the mouth of the Lawyer is an Oracle for the whole City;
but if in this mouth there be a gilded tongue, it will prove like the Oracle ^f
Delphos, which Demosthenes complained Sim.
of in his time, that it would speak nothing but what Phillip would have it
say, by giving it a double Fee. So full Fees, find full mouths, and can create
in the Lawyers any likeness, or mouthfuls of Plea's upon any account right or
wrong. As Demosthenes who pleaded vehemently against the Milesian Ambassadors
the first day, but in the second day appeared in another likeness, and
pretending he was not well, would not plead against them at all; but his neck
being wrapped up, and his face muffled about, he pretended he got the Quinzee,
and could not plead against them; but the people perceiving the occasion of it
was a secret bribe given him by the aforesaid Ambassadors, they termed his
Malady (I was going to say melody, for such tricks are the Lawyers mirth) they
termed it Argentangina, not the QUINSIE,
but the COINZIE, or silver-mumps; such cheating tricks they have to get Gold
their God. I was informed within few days by an Honorable Religious Lady, of
Rowles cut out for coin, and five hundred pound per annum lost thereby; and of
one that offered for twenty pieces to put other Deeds into the Rowles, which
may one day be known. So that of all men alive it is the worst meddling with
these men, who mind nothing but to feather their own nests, fill their own
purses, and feed their own paunches. Like a Capon that is cold and naked, who
in the absence of the Hen Sim:
will run to her nest, not out of any love to the Chickens, but to warm his
own sides; they regard neither Cause, nor Client, Justice, nor Law, but how to
get (like Pettifoggers) Orphans, Widows, or poor oppressed men's Estates, and to
eat men out in Fees and Extortions. Therefore as a Lacedemonian answered a
Physician once, who asked how he did, the better (said he) for Sim.
that I meddle not with you, and take none of your physic; So may we say to
the Lawyers, for none are well that are tampering with them: And I confess
that I am one of them that had rather loose my right, than run into their
hands; and yet I am beholding
to one of our new Committees, that would turn out as honest a just Cause as
ever came before them, and they confess it, and (all men know it, that have
but heard of it) yet to the amazement of (...) honest men* who had better hopes
of them, they would turn it over ^o these Tyrants, notwithstanding they
acknowledged that the remedy would then be worse then the disease. O when shall
Justice and (...) run down like a mighty stream in our streets! this promise
we wait for, and then Justice will be easier and cheaper to come by, and men
be more honest then they are now. We read of one Verconius in the time of Dr.
Benson on H^s 7. 7.
Alexander Seve^^s, how he abused many in taking money and Fees for preferring
their Suits, and doing them little or no good* which cheating in those days
was so detestable, that he was adjudged to be hanged up in a Chimney, and so to
be choked with smoke, for that he sold smoke to the people. And it is not
strange that in these days, this decei. and design of the Lawyers to sell
smoke, and cozen the Commonweal should be countenanced? How can the peoples
expectation be answered? not only in the continuing and keeping up this
accursed Crew, but in Committees throwing out honest Causes into their
dishonest hands? We are afraid too many of the Norman race, are now in
Government, and their love to Tith-mongers and to the Lawyers, and turning ore
honest Causes to those Locusts of the Commonwealth, makes our hearts
ache for them, as well as for ourselves. I cannot but speak, for a very Dog
runs on with a courage, when he is maintained by a more noble nature then his
own; as when a man puts him on ^ Believe it, I say, for I must speak it, to
deal so mildly with the corrupt Laws and Lawyers, as only to regulate or
better moddel them, is a pretext which will bring us but into new bondage; and
they had better tell the honest people they will hang them all up at their own
doors, then not deliver them (now their expectations are so high) from this
Norman tyranny, wherein the people are robbed of their Laws and Liberties; or
then not throw down Terms, to set up Justice at our own doors, and not to
throw down this selfish, arbitrary, contentious Interest of the Lawyers, which
arose out of the corruptions and contentions of the worst of men, and is the
fruit of lying, cheating, oppressing, perjury, deceit, and tyranny. For surely,
surely, such a weak purgation (as some men speak of) will but stir the rough
and tough humors, and anger them the more. Shall such men as these escape
scot-free, and nothing but thunder and lightning upon many honest men and
Ministers of this Nation? Some of our new Parliament have already put heart
into these vermin, whilst they have caused (to my knowledge) some virtuous
souls to sit weeping behind doors, or in corners complaining that they cannot
tell where to have Justice, or to whom to petition for right: yea, a Gentlewoman
big with child, that did but beg for an order to have her linen and things fit
to lie in (that are detained from her by a Malignant in the Country) and she
(poor heart!) must be turned by (for all her tears) most hard-heartedly, and
bid to go to the Law, which was the ready way to ruin her, and like the
Flounder to leap out of the dish into the fire. Well, the Lord make them wise!
for if they begin Sim.
thus, I fear they will end worse; and if they be so ready and prodigal to
cause the godly people to shed their tears, I pray God Cook of Grais^nn at the
la^e Kings trial. Thucydides.
they prove not as ready to cause them to shed blood. But in the mean time to
show mercy to the wicked, is cruelty to the good (as one said.) And as
Thucydides says lib. 1. They are not only Tyrants which make other men Slaves;
but they are much more so, who have power and means to suppress Tyrants, and
to prevent their oppression, and yet do it not, nor take care about it, but
rather continue the oppression upon the poor, etc. O sad! Let The Parliaments
great work about Tithes and Laws.
the Magistrate look to it then! Their work is great, as to the Law and
Lawyers, as well as to the Tithes and Priests; and it is not soft wood, or
bending lead which is fit matter for a Carpenters Rule, nor are such (flexible
dispositions) as we have met with hitherto fit for the work of this
Generation. Salomons Throne had carved Lions; not Apes, nor Asses, nor yet
Foxes are fit for that throne of Judicature in our days, which is to be for
the typified Solomon. Wherefore the Lord (the Counselor) be with the
Parliament so, as to execute true Justice upon these Norman Tyrants; and if it
fall upon them in a vehement shower or storm (seeing they are ripe in the
field) it shall only be to lay them down that are fittest for the sickle, or
the sith.

Lastly, Reason suggests to us, that it is time to be freed from 7. For that
they are strangers.
them, seeing they are strangers, and of the Norman Line, that have usurped
this power over us. When the will of their great master, William, advanced them
upon our Tombs, and Ruins, many an honest Noble Britain was brought to beg
their bread, and their possessions taken from them (says Holinshed) and given
these his greedy followers. And then as the Lord of Oxford said to Queen
Elizabeth (as she was playing on the Virginals, and the ledge being taken away
for the Jack^ to be seen) Your Majesty may see (says he) how Jacks went up,
and Heads went down
together. Well, I shall mention no more to this, then what the foresaid
Thucydides says in his 1. Lib. That amongst others they were the Tyrants and
Traitors which assumed the title of Protectors of Greece, and Defenders of the
Country, and yet stirred not to deliver the Country from the oppression of
strangers. Is he not a Nero that can see the burning and ruin of his City,
without reluctance or trouble? And have we not some Caligula's, that could wish
all the honest men in England (especially the Ministers) had but one head, that
they might strike it off* at a blow. But to conclude the peoples expectation
(as they are rational) in the downfall of the Lawyers up-start, and ungodly
Interest, several other things might be said; but this is all now, that Justice
calls for it (as to the Commonwealth,) and Charity challenges it, as to set the
oppressed free.

Secondly, The people cannot as religious (as well as they are 2. Lawyers live
by sin, as
Rational) longer endure this notoriously wicked interest of ungodly Lawyers;
for that of all the Nation, they are the men that are tolerated to live by sin,
and to make a trade of sin openly, and hourly, as (briefly to instance in some.)

1. Lying, which is as the Nerves and Sinews of their Calling; 1. By Lying.
for they cannot plead a Cause without lying; one or the other must be the liar
in every Cause. Let them not think at the day of the Lord to escape scot-free,
for their art* in lying, though they call them witty eva^ion^, or pretty
homo^ynies, or at the most but equivocations: At the day of judgment no such
Pleas, nor Fees will be taken, or serve turn to help them; nor can their
Father, the Jesuit Bercana, be able to save them in that day, nor all the
sub^leties of the Jesuits their Brethren. Wherefore the Lawyer needed not to
have been so angry with the poor Scotchman, A Lawyer once attainted of false
pleading, or maintaining an unjust action, or cause, is to suffer bodily
punishment. Mirror of Just: f. 230.
for speaking broad, when he reading his Morning Service out of Joh. 8. with
these words, Your Father the Devil was a liar from the beginning; pronounced it
as well as he could, Your Father the devil was a Lawyer from the beginning. But
the Lawyers I hear were angry with him; and what need they* can one be a
Lawyer, and not a liar? then there may be fire, and not heat; seeing as heat is
an unseparable property of fire, so is lying of a Lawyer; and the ablest Lawyer
is so accounted, because he is the ablest liar, and can best plead the worst
Causes, and the wickedest untruths.

These as the Prophet says, Isai. 32. 7. Devise wicked devises to destroy the
poor with lying words, even when the needy speaks right; the words are (...),
for as the vulgar reads it, Fraudulentia instrumenta sunt pessima: And these
consult and study tricks and lies to wrong us of our right, as the Man of God
tells us. Job calls such, Forgers of lies, Job 13. 4, 5. or Inventors, that
have gotten the art and trade of making lies; insomuch, that an honest man may
blush but to read over one of their Declarations against another. O the
grossest! palpable! known lies that they own in every Declaration. But (says
Job) O that ye would hold your tongues! which were more wisdom for you! So
Isai. 59. 3. 4. Your lips have spoken lies, your tongues have muttered
perverseness; none calls for justice, nor any (of you) pleads for the truth,
but trust in vanity, and plead lies, conceiving mischief, and bringing forth
iniquity; and making it indeed a cause of the Devils, seven times more the
Devils, then it was before. And if they get an honest man's cause (though a good
cause) into their hands, yet by their lying and sinful management of it, they
make it dangerous and devi^ish, Dangerous todeal with them.
Hatching Cock^trices eggs, Verse. 5. and bringing out iniquity, insomuch, that
it is very dangerous to put a cause into their hands, or to take one out of
their hands, though it goes well (as we say) on our side; yet he that eat^
their eggs, will be sure to be poisoned. Hence saye^ the Prophet, Verse. 7, 8,
9* 10. Wasting and destruction are in their way, there is no judgment in their
goings, they have made them crooked paths; whosoever goes therein, shall not
know peace. Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does justice overtake
us; we wait for light, but behold obscurity, etc. Verse. 15. Yea, truth fails,
and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey, etc. i. e. By these
savage Beasts he shall be ruined and spoiled. Now the righteous hates liars,
Prove. 13. 5. as well as the liars (or Lawyers) hate those that are afflicted by
them (says Solomon)* Prove. 26. 28. And so says he, in Prove. 6. 17, 18, Six
things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are abomination to him: First, A proud
look; secondly, A lying tongue; thirdly, Hands that shed innocent blood;
fourthly, An heart that devises mischief; fifthly, Feet swift to it; sixthly, A
false witness that will speak lies; seventhly, One that sows discord among
Brethren. Now the very children in the streets can easily understand all this
in the Lawyers, yea, in their constant practices; and can men of conscience,
fearing God, any longer abide them? that live so openly and notoriously by sin?
If the Governors will suffer this, they have as much A word to our Governors
about them.
reason (and Religion for it too) to set up and suffer drunkenness, whoredom,
or other sins, in the sight of God and men, in open Courts, to be bought and
sold at Westminster Hall, or the Parliament door. And I do believe it, yea, am
sure of it, that the Lord will, by some sudden stroke, declare as much to this
Nation, if this living by sin, and these monopolizers of lying, swearing,
cheating, and oppressing, be much longer continued up. Therefore I take no
great care concerning this matter; for as a little before the ruin of Nineveh,
(so now) says the Lord, Woe! woe! woe be to you, for you are full of lies and
robberies, and your prey departs not, Nahum 3. 1. Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. Behold, I
am against thee, I will cast filth upon thee, I will make thee vile; and they
that see it shall say, Who will pity them? I pray God then give our Governors
Grace and Religion enough (before this Decree come forth) to declare and decree
down these trades of sin; for if both in the Law of God, and Light of Nature,
it be abominable to commit adultery by open day light in Westminster Hall
before all; what is it then to plead a hundred lies in one morning; is not
lying a sin, as well as whoring? or what would you say to see a woman lie down
to sin, before a beast? and will ye? (O ye Governors, if ye fear God!) will ye
see hundreds of men (every T^rm time) to prostitute their souls, and lie down
to commit sin with Satan every morning (next their heart too?) to engender and
bring forth lies, and many such misshapen Monsters (as Robinson says in his
Essays, p. 164.) of the Devils own seed Robinsons Essays.
and begetting. Every morning, O how many are in travel to bring forth most
monstrous foul sins in the open Courts? and can an honest Parliament sit so
^igh them, and own them? if any object, O but it is for the peoples good! they
speak like fools then; for is sin for the good of the Nation? then see Isai.
59. 2. and Jere. 5. 25. Or was it unlawful to commit fornication with the
Moabites, to draw them (thereby) to Religion? or is it unlawful and wicked, to
steal from the rich to relieve the poor? and yet not unlawful to trade in lies
(grant it were to do good?) This pretense of theirs makes them mock, and merry
at sin, and they oftentimes do as beggars, cover one patch with another, and a
lesser patch with a bigger. But a servant of them, a little honester then his
master, told him, That if he did not couch his lies more close, and make them
more cleanly, he should tell them himself, for all him, and a vouch them too,
for he did not like the trade. Thus for this; the people as religious, are
obliged to look and labor for the fall of this ungodly interest and trade.

2. To heap up the measure of sins, and make us ripe for judgments; 2. For
Perjury.
they cause much false-swearing and for-swearing, by compelling the poor people
to useless, sinful, and unnecessary oaths, and making nothing (many of them) of
an oath themselves, which is horrible sinful, and unsufferable. For although
there is a holy solemn kind of swearing, which is a part of Gods worship, yet
it is by the Name of the Lord, Isa. 65. 16* not by Baal, nor Malcham, Zeph. 1.
5. nor by faith and troth, which some are so prodigal of, that swear all away;
nor yet by the Bible, or kissing Oaths unlawful.
the Book: Much less lawful is it to force any to an oath, which is done daily
by the Ceremonies of kissing the Book, and laying on hands, whereby the sacred
Name of the most high God is greatly dishonored, and prostituted to millions of
filthy and unclean lips, upon slight, and sleeveless occasions. O crying sin!
of taking God, Name in vain! for which I am sure, He will not hold them
guiltless* Oaths ought to be never used but on holy days; and it were a
thousand times better a man's ex^rements should run from him* and he not know
it, then such oaths, and he not mind them when he has made them. Lawyers
(many of them) make as light of an oath, as that Host did, who told his Guest
in Lent, he might eat flesh in another Inn; For Sir, says he, we are bound,
but they are but sworn.

Sometime since, a Gentlewoman, and Sister of mine, was left a Widow to some
considerable Estate and Goods, but the Court requiring her to take oath, that
the Inventory was true, she refused it, as not only scr^pelling that oath, but
any oath; the Court perceiving her (out of Conscience) inflexible, up starts
one of the Lawyers (who never saw her before; nor since*) Ha! says he! this
Gentlewoman has a nice conscience truly. Come, says he; give me it, give me
the oath, I will take it for her; and so (for fear of losing his fees, if no
oath had been taken) he takes it at a venture, (though he knew nothing of the
Inventory) yet he would take his oath it was true, and made no bones of it.

O! what brave desperadoes these Lawyers are! they will make a notable sally
for sinful fees then. If Samson will set so on the City gates, what withes can
hold him? and if these Lawyers dare venture so lustily upon oaths, what Laws
will hold them? He that enters into a Statute, conceives the extent of it to
reach his Body, Lands, Goods, Estate and all; now an oath, what is it? but such
a kind of Statute entered into, and acknowledged before God, the Judge of this
World. The condition is, To say the truth, nothing but the truth, and the whole
truth, etc. which is extended on Goods, Lands, Peace, Liberty, Estates, Bodies,
Souls, and all; and yet in slighting and casting away such oaths, what do they?
but to take their own word, slight, and cast away the truth, whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. It is no wonder then, they are so unsufferable, being
guilty of a world of perjury, (Ah crying sin!) in this sad Nation. And as in
Jere* 23. 20. Because of swearing, the Land mourns; therefore, says the
Lord, I will be a swift witness, Mal. 3. 5. against false swearers, and against
those that oppress the widow, the fatherless, etc. Therefore, upon the score of
Religion, the people appear against this ungodly tribe, and trade of the
Lawyers. The Leapers in Israel were forced to go with their clothes rent, their
heads bare, their lips covered, and to cry out unclean! unclean that we are! It
were well if the Lawyers (at the least the worst of them, that are Blasphemers
and perjured) went with a rent on their clothes, a writing on their Breasts,
and a brand in their foreheads* that all men might know them for a company of
perjured wretches, and beware of them, till other course were taken with them.

Thirdly, Religious men's mouths are much open against them, 3. For innocent
blood and murder.
for a great deal of blood which they are guilty of; what Innocent has
suffered, and not by their c^aft and cruelty? by corrupting of the Jury,
construing the Laws as they listed* or the like; besides the lives of many
thousand Thieves, who ought to have been Thieves.
sold, or have made restitution for their Theft* as appears in Gods Law, Exodus
22, 3, 4. which is the best. It is manslaughter to put any to death for mere
theft and a bloody Law against Gods, of Tyrants invention. Mr. Ch^dley has
writ very well to this; therefore say only thus, that the Law (in its
virginity) did ackowledg it that none* ought to be hanged for the^t, Mirror of
Ju^^ fol. 102, 257. Pretended Traitors and Enemies, Holinsh* Chron. Juries
wronged
But I say besides their blood, how many thousands by their subtilty have been
destroyed, and some or other of the most eminent for Reason and Religion, or of
both in all ages, have been murdered by their malice and injustice; Sometimes
putting honest men to death for Rebels, Traitors or the like, only for words;
which Tyranny and accursed cruelty of theirs is condemned by bloody Queen Mary
her self in the first year of her R. Chapter 1. and is absolutely contrary to
their own Law, in the Statute of Hen. 4. 2. Yet to color over cruelty with
craft-paint, they would ever pretend they were put to death for matters
according to Law; but least the honest Jury of the neighborhood, or upright
conscientious Countrymen should discover their cheats and tricks which they
have ever had to take the best, honestest, and faithfullest men's lives away in
England; they would make the fact what they list to have it, and tell the Jury
it was grounded upon good Law* which they must not question nor inquire further
into, but must take it (upon their words) in trust: Wherefore (to keep up this
trick to kill men) they made it a maxim amongst them, that the Jury must not
meddle with the Law, no (by no means) only with the fact ( i. e. as they have
stated it, which they pretend to be by Law, and the Jury must have no
cognizance of the Law upon which the Fact is grounded, for Felony, or Treason,
or the like) This is so destructive to the true Laws and Liberties of England,
that no man might (then) say his life is safe, but to satisfy some men's lists,
the Lawyers could easily take it away. Besides our first Fundamental Laws
(before the Norman Tyrant) the Laws of God, and the Law of Nature, all account
it incumbent upon the Jury to judge of the Law, according to which* the
indictment is drawn* and Fact stated, as well as of the Fact; and not to take
it upon trust from the Lawyers, those Norman Intruders and Tyrants words,
Juries right.
least thereby they become also guilty of innocent blo^d. Yea, this Cooks
Instit. Littleton.
is good Law too of England, that the Jury should take notice of the Law as
well as of the Fact, in 1. Part of Cooks Institut. Sect. 366. fol. 226, 227,
228. and in Sect. 368. says, Where the Inquest may give their verdict at large,
if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law upon the matter, etc. Cook
says* The Jury if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law, may give
a general verdict. This is honest dealing, and English A Lesson for Jurymen.
Right, and hereby may an honest, godly* conscientious Jury preserve many a
Brother English-mans life, which the Norman Tyrants would else take away. O
that all Jury men would learn this Lesson, whch the Laws of God, and Nature,
Conscience, and honesty would teach them! to take knowledge of the Law as well
as of Fact, and to trust the Lawyers no longer; who by this abuse, and bloody
cheat of theirs are guilty of hundreds of innocent, precious blood, and have by
their over-awing and befooling our Juries made them guilty of the like blood
and murders, hoping they shall drink of the same cup. But the Lawyers know
they are worse then hanged to have this truth known* and owned by all
Englishmen, and Jurymen: this made poor Judge Jermin at Judge Jermins speech.
Guild Hall to stamp and storm so at the Trial of JOHN LILBURNE, who though
of a haughty spirit, yet pleaded this honest Doctrine. O, says the Judge, you
broach an erroneous opinion, viz. That the Jury are Judges of the Law, which is
enough to destroy all the Laws in England (he might have said, all the Lawyers
in England, and so all their forced intruded Laws, and I think so too) There
was never such a damnable Heresy broached! -- oh! oh! poor hearts! -- this
comes home to them it seems! for by this they will appear, they are as bloody
murderers (so they may make their markets of Men's lives) as any that tread (or
ever trod) on English ground? And besides (many a noble, honest, brave man,
that have been thus basely slain by these Norman Tyrants and Intruders)
sometimes they have slain men* upon unknown Laws too, not only upon Laws, which
they never knew whom they have murdered; but upon Laws never divulged, nor
(orderly) published to Englishmen, that they might know them; beside which,
some were in a language they knew not; and then says Hide (in his Arg. against
the North* Commissioners Hide.
of Oyer and Terminer p 411. Miser a servitus est, ubi jus est vagum aut
incognitum. O our miserable! insufferable slavery! to be under Laws which are
dubious or uncertain! and which we know not. And that eminent Oracle of the
Law* Sir Edward Cook.
Cook, in the Proeme to the third part of his Institutes; and also in the
fourth part fol. 332. has the like, and in many other places. Besides all
this, some brave men they have murt hered, to please and humor the great ones
their masters of the times* So to keep up Kingly Prerogative of old, a friend
to the public, or the people, was soon found and judged an enemy to the King;
and it was quickly compiled and comprised into Articles of high Treason to be
but faithful and honest to the peoples Interest; I pray God this be not the
thing that keeps up the Lawyers amongst
us now, viz. to keep up the Interest of the Great ones; and keep down the
peoples Right and Liberties. That like Popiclus (of O^to ^rising. Ch^^n. l. 3.
e 7.
Polonia) they might by murders and oppressions over* awe the people, so as
that they should not dare to demand their Rights, and then make themselves
absolute and hereditary.

Thus I might go on all day, to show how many ways they are guilty of the most
grievous murders, and of as able men as ever the Earth bare; and to fast from
blood* has been Lent-time to some. But I conclude the Catalogue with this
trick (to make up their measure) to get (yea, honest) men into prisons, and
many times upon mere cheats, as we heard before in Page 55. and then to keep
them there (purposely) till they be starved to death, and ^^t up with lice, and
die worse then dogs Imprisonment of any man till he die in prison is
manslaughter, by th^^^^y law* vi^^ Mir. p. 88. of Justice ^. 27* 28, 30. 274.
so to suffer any (though never so poor) to perish for want, p. 228. Or to delay
to relieve prisoners till any one dye is manslaughter. f 30. One Judge P^rine
was hanged* for this.
. Let a man but take a view of one place (amongst many others.) i. e. the Upper
Bench, how many hundreds have they most miserably (worse then Turks) tormented,
and starved to death? O England! England! does blood ( precious blood) bid thee
call for Justice upon these Intruders, or Lawyers, and shall we sit still?
Hark! Jere. 4. 31. I have heard a voice of the daughter of Zoin, that bewaileth
her self (in anguish) that spreads her hands, and says, Woe is me now! for my
soul is wearied, because of murderers. They murder the innocent, Psalm. 10. 8.
and the fatherless, Psalm. 94 6. and poor; yea, they are polluted with blood,
Hos. 6. 8, 9. (...) as troops of robbers, they wait for men (says the Prophet)
to murder them (by consent, it is in our Translation, I know not how it was
thrust in, but the word is) (...) Shechem, the shoulder; which signifies
either, that they do it with one shoulder, or else (which I like best) they
murder Expos.
the shoulder; i. e. such as are most eminent, high, able, and the worthies. So
that, thus says the Lord, Hosea 4. 1, 2. the Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of the land (for that) by swearing, lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood.
This is one ground more of the great complaint the free Commoners have against
these Norman Tyrants or Lawyers, which is as hideous to the honest Englishman
(that fears God) as Julius Caesar's Robe was to the Senate House, that saw it
stabbed through, with so many holes, and bloodied in so many places. Thus are
the Laws and Liberties of this poor Nation lost, which makes us groan to God
and men. 4. For their cheating and stealing. Judge Hall was hanged because he
saved T^ustrom the Sheriff from death, who had taken away goods from many men
against their wills (though for the Kings use) for that it was robbery. vid.
Mirror. of Jus^ f. 241, 241. And do not the Lawyers rob thus daily?


4. As men are religious, they rally up against these ungodly Lawyers for their
open Robberies and Cheats; which (speaking too before) I shall add little to,
having told you, of their tricks, and arts, which their Inns of Court bring
them up in to get money, and abuse the oppressed people, by Fe^s and Bribes; but
Trop done soyt repele, There will come a day of reckoning for them; and all
that they have knit up by their rapine, will be unravelled again with a witness
ere long; and these Powder-masters will be blown up with their own provision
then. Shall I count them pure, with their bag of deceitful weights (says the
Lord) Mi^. 6. 11, 12. For the rich are full of violence; the inhabitants have
pleaded lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouths. Verse. 16. For
(according to their Norman customs) the statutes of Omri are yet kept, that I
should make thee a desolation. Trust not in your robberies, nor lies, says the
Lord, Jere. 7. So says David, Psalm. 94. They frame mischief for a Law, and
gather themselves against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the Innocent,
God will recompense them in their own malice; the Lord our God will destroy
them. They judge for rewards and hire, and build up with blood, Micah 3. 10,
11. They are brass and iron, they are revolters. Jere. 6. 28. Every one loves
gifts (and fees) and judge for rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither
does the cause of the widow come to them. O! I will ease me of these my
adversaries! Isai. 1. 23, 24. What are their Inns of Court, but as Job says,
Chap. 12. 6. Tabernacles
of robbers which prosper. And as Solomon says, Prove. 21. 7. The robbery of
the wicked shall destroy them, because they refuse to do judgment.

The Searchers (of God) shall be sent out to seek out all their ill-gotten
goods; for which they will be arrested with a vengeance, as the veriest Fellons
that are; though it is true, as yet we have robbery for right, and oppression
for judgment. Small thieves are condemned to die for it, whiles great National
ones ride rattling in Coaches. I warrant you the poor sneaking Solicitors and
Clerks, yea, the Bum-bailiffs, and Sergeants, (that abuse men, and beat women
great with child, as one J. Turvy did a Gentlewoman the other day, and yet not
punished,) I say such as these say, it is good gleaning after them that run
away with whole sheaves, and whose robberies are accounted rights, because
countenanced, connived at, and privileged forsooth. O sad! are we such slaves
yet? As the same River that runs through diverse Sim.
regions, has diverse names, and yet it is the same River; so theft has diverse
names; in Soldiers it is called spoil and plunder, in Governors called
Cessments, tribute, etc. In Lawyers called Fees, in others Gifts, and Bribes;
in Church, they call it Sacrilege and Simony; in State, Oppression and
Tyranny; in Law, Corruption and Bribery; and when this one River rises up into
a Springtide, or swells up to the bank then it is called Usury. But
in a poor naked man it is called Theft and Felony (without any other fine
minced words, which were coined to cover great men's knavery) and such a one
must be murdered for it, without mercy or clergy (as they call it) Dalton,
fol. 226. Although in truth it Dalton.
is the same River that runs, and the same thing (though new in name) in all
these; but the same Cob-web which some ( Spiders) can dwell in, shall hang
others. As among the old Lacedaemonians, theft amongst them was never punished,
where it was carried cunningly and secretly; but he that was discovered for
stealing, and did it not neatly, he was punished not so much for stealing, as
for behaving himself no more covertly and cunningly in it. So whiles poor men
suffer mulct for a little matter, because it is open plain theft; these rich
ravenous Robbers do it with art and cunning, and have coined a new name for it
too, to guild it over, and so escape scot-free, though they rob us daily of a
thousand times more then all the Thieves in England besides. But their Dooms
day Book will be brought out ere-long, where it is set down to a tittle what
they ow to this Commonwealth upon this account, first, for the principle, and
then secondly, for restitution; which
the people upon the alterable Laws of Religion are raised high to expect.

5. For oppression too; the people as religious are resolved 5. For oppression.
22. Q. 12. a. 2.
against them. For as Aquinas says, A tyrannical interest, having no proper
address for the public welfare, but only to satisfy a private will, and to
bring in particular profit to those that appertain to that interest, cannot in
a reasonable or religious construction, be accounted and continued as lawful;
and therefore the rising against such an ungodly selfish interest, and the
disturbance of it is not unlawful, nor ungodly; neither may men be esteemed
Rebellious or Seditious for so doing. He speaks honestly for us, let the
Lawyers then look to it, for hitherto have lean kine (as Pharaoh saw it in his
dream) eaten up the fat, and they have made gain of oppression, Isa. 33. 15. So
that whilst we looked for judgment, behold oppression; and for righteousness,
behold a cry, Isai. 5. 7. Some of my honest Countrymen of threescore, yea, of
fourscore years of age, have with weeping, told me of the tyranny, and infinite
injustice and oppression of these Godless (especially if Goldless) Lawyers, and
how they have devoured and destroyed them; how long they have been suing for
their right, and at last gone without it; how they have been hurried out of one
Court into another, and used as the Cat that flings the Mouse out of one claw
into another, to make sport, and then at last devours it. Several in a day have
suspired out such stories of these wicked intruders, as would make a tender
heart to ache and quake. Ministers suffer by their tails.


Ministers have been stung with these Scorpions terribly (and I could name some
who have been with me about it) when merely through malice they were arrested
by ill neighbors or enemies, and of all men they have been most abused, beaten,
bruised, and uncivilly handled by these Locusts and their tails, i. e.
Sergeants, Bailiffs, or the like. Yea, the widow has come crying and wringing
Widows sufferings.
her hands to me, for that the Lawyers had inveigled and gotten in her son (a
Swash) or the like; and so persuaded him (by good words full of hopes) to
arrest the poor widow (on purpose) to bring the estate into the Lawyers hands,
that neither of them should have it, but spend it out in Fees and Laws.

How many hundred of these stories could I tell? but if every Example.
Englishman that has suffered by them, should but print it to the world, they
would appear the most odious Tyrants that ever the Earth bare. As I was taking
Boat to Westminster the other day, a Yeomanly man desired to go in the same
Boat with me, who sat and sighed, as if his heart would break all the way,
having an honest face; and he telling me he was a Lincolnshire man, I asked him
the cause, and he told me, how he was undone by the Lawyers, how he had a good
estate and money, but now all was gone, and ^^te up by going to law, and he was
put off from one time to another, and out of one Court into another; and came
up every Term with all the money he could make; and that he had continued in law
these twelve years, and yet his business was as far off as at first; sighing
and weeping and wishing, that he had never seen their faces, and earnestly
praying that he might be the last might suffer by them. Thus by chance
(sometimes) several in a day I meet with, that tell such lamentable stories of
the Lawyers, as it is a wonder to hear; who are grown so griping, that they
touch and take, and will quickly squeeze out the intrals of the fattest purse
into their own pawnches, leaving nothing behind but skin.
It was but a fained tradition that Britain bred no Wolves, for there were
such store (says Abbot) that Kings laid it as an imposition In his Description
of the World. p. 196.
upon the Kings of Wales to bring in certain hundreds yearly: So it is a mere
fable to fancy all Tyrants and oppressors cut off, with the late Tyrants head!
why alas! how many hundreds of them may we meet at Westminster every Term time.
But, says the Lord, I will feed them that oppress thee with their own ^lesh;
and they shall be drunken with their own blood, and all shall know that I am
the Lord thy Savior, Isa. 49. 26. This the people look for.

6. Their pride is intolerable, and their Goliah-like looks fright ^. For
Pride.
the timorous Israelites, who dare not behold them, but with Cap and Leg: yet
let them know (for all their French, or Spanish, or
Curtizans Meal-tub powdered upon their hair, I say they may know) that a Silken
Halter is but a halter for pride. So their haughtiness shall be laid low, when
the Lord shall be exalted, Isa. 2. 17. God shall bring down their pride
together, with the spoil of their hands, Isa. 25. II. Their crown of pride
shall be trodden under foot, chap. 28. 3. with Sodom-suffering for this Sodom
sin, Ezekiel. 16. 49. I believe they will look like Caligula upon me, when they
meet me now; and as the Bore whets and sharpens his tusks in his own foam; so
will these proud Sparks* (whose, garbs like the Sicilians, are sinful and
luxurious) they will whet and sharpen their hands, heads, hearts, tongues, and
all against me in foam and anger for revenge. They are already so enraged
against me, that it has been said, Woe to me, if ever I fall into their hands:
and I believe it; but my God will be too hard for them all within a little
while; and he that shall come, will come, (i. e. in his fifth Monarchy, as may
appear in the last Chapter,) and then as Jere. 48. 29, 30. We have heard his
pride, etc.

For these and hundreds more Reasons, all Englishmen, whether The peoples eyes
on the Lord General, for deliverance from all these Norman Tyrants and
tyrannies.
rational or religious, call aloud for deliverance from this Norman yoke; and
it is chiefly for this end, the peoples eyes and cries are directed to the Lord
General, as the Instrument by whom they are recovered out of the Norman
Tyranny, and have conquered the Norman; and therefore are to return out of
captivity, and to be restored to their Laws, Liberties, and Privileges; that
the Lawyers may be reduced and squeezed into their first poor and beggarly
principles, that the Temples and Inns
of Court be sold, that the Lawyer go home to his calling in the Country, that
he was in at first (before he grew up into an interest) that Terms be down, and
Justice dispersed into all Counties and Vide chap. 5.
Hundreds, that men may have justice at home: And if our Conquest produce not
this deliverance from the Norman tyranny and injustice, we had better have been
hanged up at our own doors; for Justice is delayed, the Law corrupt and full of
intricacy, and unknown to most, and people oppressed, undone, and put And why
so?
to death upon trivial occasions, and many destroyed for want of a Formality,
or Punctilio in Law, and all our Freedom and Liberty lost.

Now to conclude this Chapter, know the poor oppressed people and freeborn
Commoners, are passionately looking upon the Lord General for a restoration of
their Rights and Liberties, which they lost by William the Conqueror, for these
Reasons.

1. William the Conqueror wa^^ed upon his own account, and Reason 1. O^: the
Conqueror conquered not for himself but for the people.
for his own Ends, and fought merely for himself, and so robbed the people of
all: But our General Oliver the Conqueror went out to War, and engaged against
the Normans, and got the Garland (through mercy) upon the Peoples account, and
for the people to free them from tyranny and oppression, and this he has often
and often declared to the Nation and Commonalty, and for this (next to the
Interest of Christ) he has had the peoples prayers, and purses, and persons,
and hearts, estates, blood and all; and upon this score have so many Battles
been fought, Towns taken, and Victories obtained in these Nations. Therefore as
Austin Augustine
speaking of the History of David and Goliath Sermon. de temp. (says) nemo
pugnavit in valle Terebinthi donec David veniret ad praelium, no man ever
fought in the valley of Ela^ or Terebinth, 1 Samuel 17.
Turpentine trees, till David came: So no man did ever appear so openly, so
publicly, so solemnly to act the part of so excellent chivalry in the peoples
cause against the Goliah's (and those that bid defiance to Israel) as this our
General did, who is the peoples Champion. The chiefest Oath the Athenians ever
took was this, Pugnabo pro sacris, and pro patria, cum aliis and
solus; I will fight for God and my Country, whether I fight with my fellows or
alone for it. Wholesome meat breeds good blood; so a good cause, good courage
in men: this good Cause on the side of our Conqueror carried him out, and
brought him off with good Success: and can it (now) be forgot or abandoned? Tu
pia tela feres (says the Poet.) The Jews never acquitted themselves so
worthily, nor fought so faithfully, as when they fetched their Armor out of
the Temple from the Priests hands; nor could our Country men have been such
Conquerors, under the Lord General, had not the faithful godly people of this
Nation brought them armor and magazine out of the Temple of the Lord, insomuch
that they fought with consecrated weapons, which were kept in their hands by
the faith and prayers of Gods dearest, and the Commonwealths faithfullest
Servants*
and shall they now be left in the lurch? God forbid! when the Israelites went
to war, they first consulted with God, and the Priests gave answer from God by
the Ephod; though in latter times (says Josephus) they guessed at the ovent by
the glowing Josephus.
or duskishnesse of the Diamonds on the Breast Plate, which if they shined
bright show good success; but if they looked dim and failed, or changed into a
pale Color it portended ill success; all along these (late) Wars the precious
Diamonds (that are on Christ's the High Priests Breast Plate) did shine; the
most excellent and discerning Saints in England did confidently fore^ell and
foreshew the good success of these wars, and they glowed to *
have Israel go: and so they do now (as much, if not more) to have the Army
march on, and to remember their work on the other side the water (and not to
rest on this side Jordan (as we said in the first Chapter) although the
Diamonds do look dimly as to some selfe-seeking Gaddites, who are always
(almost) a^ Worcester-house, or Drury-house to have their portion allotted them
here, and to go no further. But ah! alas! is all done? -- is all done at home
yet? why do not we follow the victory over the Norman Tyrants? H^nnibal said
to his Soldiers, Qui hostem vicerit mihi erit Cart haginensis; so let my Lord
General say, come sirs! we fought and have conquered for the people, and upon
their account; now let us deliver them up their own Laws and Liberties, and
free them fully from these Norman Intruders and Intrusions* and whosoever has
conquered shall carry the Vide Declaration April 164* and Ma^ch 16. 18
triumph of an Englishman over all these Normans; we will no^ seek nor set up
our own private Interests (though power be in our hands) because we engaged all
along for the Peoples and the publicks; and for that end, God has given us
power in our hands to deliver them, and throw down the Normans. As when Titus
Sim.
had taken the City of Jerusalem, his Army saluted him Emperor, and presented
him with Crowns and Garlands, by way of congratulations; which he modestly
refused, saying, He had done nothing more then lent his hands, and help to God
(and his people) who has declared here (by our Conquest) his fi^rce wrath
against this sinful people. Thus should his Excellency say, I have but lent my
help to God, and his poor people that were held in unsufferable slavery, by the
tyranny, oppression, and injustice, robbery, and wrongs, which William the
Conqueror brought upon them; from all which we are to deliver them, and against
all which (with all the Norman Lawyers and Oppressors) God has justly declared
(by our conquest of them) in his fierce wrath against them: This is the first
Reason, why the peoples eyes are so on his Excellency, being their Conqueror.

2. William the Conquerors Army were strangers, and outlandish Reas. 2. They
are ou^ Countrymen that have conquered.
cruel Kites, and therefore made all that was the peoples of England their
prey, without mercy; but the case is now altered, this Army were our own
Countrymen, and Fellow Members (under the Norman tyranny) with us; so that the
Law of Nature calls upon the Army of our Brethren for our deliverance, and
recovery from these alien^tions. We find this in France, Anno 1483, 1522,
1531, 1549, 1560. by diverse Decrees of Parliament, the care they had to recover
and wring the power out of the hands of strangers, intruders, invaders, and
usurpers. Strangers unsufferable.
So in the Assembly of the Estates at Toures, where King Charles the Eighth was
in person, diverse alienations made by Lewis the Eleventh, were repealed and
annihilated, and diverse great places of power and trust were taken away from
strangers, and given to their own Countrymen, as from the Heirs of Tancred, of
Casthel, etc. So also they did in their last Assembly at Orleans. What makes so
much opposition now in France against their young King, and the old Queen, about
Mazarine, but that he is an intruder, and a stranger? How can we then be
content to have Usurpers, Intruders, and Out landish Normans, to eat us up? and
possess our Estates? Laws? Liberties? and all. Charlemain (says Aemilius.
Paulus Aemilius, lib. 3.) did once endeavor to subject the Kingdom of France
to German strang^rs; but the freeborn Frenchmen most stoutly withstood it, to
the face of their King, and chose the Prince of Glasconny for their mouth, most
courageously to declare against it, that they would not suffer it, that
forrainers should rule over the sub^ects of France; and certainly had
Charlemain proceeded in that business, it had come to the trial of the Sword.
So in Anno 1195, 1200, 1269, 1297, 1303, 1325, 1330, and 1360. we shall find
how faithful the Frenchmen were to their own nation against strangers; yea, at
any time when strangers had gotten any portion of their Land, they kept their
right, and the command, and the Laws to themselves; so they did when any was in
the English hands; and if strangers (as the English) obtained their Rights,
Laws, and Liberties by force, and so took away their Sovereignty and Command,
as at the Treaty of Bretaigny, etc. yet that Treaty was not kept, neither were
they bound (by the Law of Nature) to hold to such an agreement (wherein
strangers were greatest, or Governors in their own Land) any longer, then till
they could get deliverance out, or recovery of such alienations. And shall we
after recovery, lie under the Norman Laws, and their Outlandish tyrannies? Will
not all the World then count us fools?

But some may object, O but this has been so long (for time) Object.
that now it is too late to recover!

Answ. It is true, so great has been the tyranny all along to Answ.
keep up Kingly, or Lordly Prerogative, that the poor people have been banged
and bandied about like Balls; so as that hardly a great man or good man, might
be found in an age, that had so much sense of the peoples sufferings, as to
lend a helping hand to them that were beaten, abused, imprisoned, starved,
banished,
stead, or burnt to their very bones, by insolent and insupportable
oppressions; but if by chance one dared to venture it, to appear for the poor
inslaved peoples rights, he was presently (in post) attached, impeached, and
condemned to a most miserable death, or at least banished for a factious,
seditious, Rebel or Traitor, or one thing or other; and then it may be such a
faithful man for his Country should scarce find a Brother, a Friend, a Reuben
(among all) to say of such a poor afflicted Joseph. O! let us
not kill him, for he is our Brother! But by this means, I say, viz. the craft,
and cruelty of great ones, and the ignorance and connivence of others in this
Nation, have the people been so long abused and imbondaged; but notwithstanding
there is no presumption of time, nor prevarication that can prejudice the
people Our rights not lost.
of their right. No tyrannous intrusion, or continuance of invasion, can by any
length of time (I say) prescribe against our lawful Liberties and Rights, which
we now lay claim to: The Commonwealth lives and never dies, notwithstanding
daily and alternative revolutions or resolutions; no lapse or lask of times, or
turn of individuals can deprive the people of their just right, which we hope
our Brethren of the Army will help us with (as our own) and free us from
strangers. It is no time as yet, to leap after Grasshoppers, or sly after
Butter-flies, that is work for boys, and not men; nor should they sit down, as
if they had done enough now, because they have gotten Arrears to purchase
Lands, and Manors, (insomuch, as one great man (I could name) amongst them,
was taking care (in my hearing) for no less then a
whole County to pay him:) But Brethren, do ye forget what ye fought for? why
do ye not set the poor people, your Fellow English men, and Countrymen free
then from the Norman Tyrants, and restore to them their Goods, Laws and
Liberties again? What though some great men (may hap) are content as they are?
and are in the conspiracy (combined with others) to betray us? and to leave us
now in the lunch to sit in the suds? yet I tell you Sirs, this treachery will
be rewarded one day; for they cannot make the free Commoners lose their Right
nor Liberties; and as sure as God is righteous, these prevaricators and
people-cheators will be remembered, and shall have their Right; although now
their Hairs are gum-powdered, their Hearts may be gun-powdered
one day; for the people are now past children and fools, to be so cheated by
the Normans as they have been. And if the people of Rome condemned their
Captains and Generals of their Armies, for capitulating with the Enemies, to
the disadvantage of the public and peoples right (though necessitated to it
sometimes;) how then shall the freeborn people of England, think you, be able
to endure this yoke of tyranny, and these Norman intruders to enthral them? and
this to be suffered too, by our Brother-Countrymen, that could, and should
redeem us? being not compelled, but rather complemented, not forced, but rather
flattered into this woeful omission of their duty to their Country. Wherefore
for A word to the Army.
Gods sake, and the good peoples sake, let my Lord General, with the Army, be
awakned to the sighs, groans, prayers, tears, and continual cries of the
faithful people for freedom from this Norman iron-hearted yoke, which crushes
hundreds of honest hearts to death: The Lord knows it, it is my conscience
makes my compassion boil over thus, on their behalf.

3. This Liberty from the Norman tyranny in Laws and Lawyers, 3. This liberty
is our birthright.
etc. we be all born to; it is our own due by birthright, which appears by
variety of Records, Chronicles, and Statutes; besides what was said before, we
find it acknowledged by the Norman corrupt Judges themselves; as in the case
of Sir William Herbert reported by Sir Edward Cook. Now a man's House or Land
may be let, leased, morgaged, or seized on by Usurpers (that have no right to
it) for some time, but he holds his right as his inheritance, in hopes to
recover it again one day; so do we our Liberties; and indeed, if we be not now
restored unto them, our Brethren will be little better then the Norman Tyrants
to us, seeing they may deliver us and restore us to our right, but will not.
Sirs! you know the Merchants non-payment of his custom due, forfeits all his
goods: I say no more --

4. The people are in absolute expectation hereof, from the many 4. There be
several and solemn engagements made to do it.
solemn engagements and protests, made by my Lord and the Army, in the sight of
God, Men, and Angels, to deliver them out of Tyranny, and to restore them to
their Rights and Liberties, (I might name New Market, Triple Heath, Dunbar,
Worcester, etc.) It is true, William the Conqueror made many promises and
protests to the people too, to defend their Laws and Liberties, and took solemn
oaths so to do three several times, (as all the Chronicles tell us) but the
difference in the peoples hopes
and hearts of these two Conquerors engagements must be this, That whereas
William the Tyrant regarded not his Engagements to keep them, but on the
contrary most cursedly introduced his own Laws and Lusts, and robbed (like a
Beast of prey) the people of all their Right, and Liberties, and so set up that
bondage of Terms, Judges, and Outlandish Lording practices over the poor
bleeding people; yet that now Oliver their Conqueror (a better Christian) will
keep (out of conscience to God, and them, being a man fearing God) his several
solemn Engagements and Declarations to the people, and contrary to the Norman
Tyrant introduce the Laws and Liberties, and Just Rights to the poor, weeping,
praying people, as was before the cursed Norman Conquest. Hence it is, that as
men reckon their riches not by what money they have, but by what Bonds and
Leases they can produse, so we reckon upon all the promises and protests of his
Excellency and the Army; which Bonds being due to the people,
if they pay them not, they are resolved to put them to suite before a just
Judge ere long.

5. They are the more earnest and intent in this their expectation, 5. Fast
actions best.
for that the first actions in any Sacred or Civil Constitution (in respect of
those which are to succeed) are like the original to all the other after
draughts, or like the Copy to all that write by it: Now as every man has a
Christen-name (as we call it) before his Surname, so is it fit that the Lord
Generals (and the Armies) first Virgin-Act, be for Christ, and for his Churches
which bear his Christen name, and then next that to his honor (and surname) the
peoples liberties be delivered them from the Norman Free-booters. But it is
true, there be some Members of the Army (whom I have met at Drury House they
know,) that are so troubled with the itch (of -- getting Lordships) that they
are altogether forgetful of the people, unless it be how to oppress them by
fines and fixe-ness ( i. e. pride) and are never well, but when they be rubbing
upon the poor, and scraping off their scabs upon honest people of this
Commonwealth. But I think it is true of some (though God forbid it should of
all) that rather then Soldiers will lose their game, they will shoot the poor
Pigeons out
of their Dove-Coats. But

6. And lastly, upon a Scripture account the peoples expectations 6. Scripture
promises.
are drawn high for deliverance by the General, and the Army; for that the
promise is, And your Governors shall be of your selves, Jere. 30. 21. Now
hitherto, they have been strangers Jer. 30. 21.
of other Nations, of the Norman race, and therefore Tyrants and Oppressors. I
know some open that Scripture as to Christ; but they may know, that it speaks
to Gentiles, as well as to Jews; and to the Governors of Nations, as well as
the Governor of Judah and Jerusalem; and it agrees with Dan. 7. 18, 22. Where
the Saints of the most high must take the Kingdom; which is to be after the
Ancient of days has sat, and the judgment be set (as was in 1648.) But says
one to me (who is now a Cap. Chapter
great Purchaser too, but to my knowledge before that, he was of another mind,
and made not his Kingdom of this world) what do ye tell us of setting up
Christ? why his Kingdom is spiritual, and we have not fought for his Kingdom;
but for this Kingdom, viz. a Civil Government, and such matters which Christ
meddles not with. Answ. But, my Gentleman may know, the stone Rev. 11. 15.
cut without hands will meddle with all the Kingdoms of the World, Dan. 2. 34,
35. and then with this, and so it has; and then woe be to his purchase! For
behold, says the Lord, I am breaking down, and plucking up all, Jere. 45. 4,
5. And seek thou great things for thy self? But in that day his servants
shall rule, and that in the midst of us. Wherefore, the Lord make ou^ Army
mindful of this fifth Monarchy, and remember the Saints of the most high that
groan (yet) under most grievous oppressions by the Government of Strangers. Not
but that I am clear of Pythagoras his opinion, who says, That a worthy stranger
is to Pythagoras.
be preferred before an unworthy Citizen and Kinsman; yet withal, that our
worthy Fellow Countrymen, and Freeborn Britains are abundantly to be preferred
above unworthy strangers and wicked Normans. For though, it is better a theif
feed us, then a Shepherd devour us; and it is better to have a Robber do us
justice, then a Justice rob us; and it is more profitable to have our Estates
saved by an intruding Guardian, then wasted by one legally appointed; yet these
Theives, Robbers, Intruders do devour us, rob us, and destroy us of our Rights
and Privileges: and will not our Army help us? How can they (then) answer it
to God and men should they frustrate the incessant expectations of all the
honest people in England? and not deliver them from these Tyrannies and
Usurpations? but force them with full mouths to cry to Heaven for Justice. But
we trust, there is no fear; for it was the Duke of Medina that said, His Sword
knew not how to make a difference betwixt a Protestant and a Papist; but as his
Excellencies sword, so his word (we hope) will make a large difference between
Britains and Normans; such as love, and such as hate the true Laws and
Liberties of the Commonwealth of England; and then he may be styled not
Defender of the Faith, but Defender of the Faithfulness of Gods People, and the
Commonwealth in all her due Rights. Thus far for this third Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
The END, the OBJECT, and FOUNDATION of the LAW: with WORDS to the PARLIAMENT,
and to the PEOPLE about Norman LAWS and LAWYERS.

A Thing is said to be distinguished two ways 1. secundum speciem, according
to its specificall nature. 2. Secundum perfectum and imperfectum in eadem
specie, according to the degree of it: now the perfection or imperfection of
the Law appears in the End of it, Object of it, and Foundation of it. For

1 It appertains to the Law, that it be ordained for public 1 The end of
humane Laws what?
good and profit (ad commune bonum) as the end and intent of it; and not to
particular Interests, or advantages of particular persons or Prerogatives.
Common good is taken as it is to the safety and freedom of the people; So that
all Laws that are good do ( dirigere humanos actus secundum finem) direct men
to this end, which is the end of all honest and just Laws, viz. the safety and
freedom of the Commonalty.

First, As to the End in general, viz. public good; the Lawyer 1 In general.
himself says, Finis humanae legis est utilitas hominum, which I think is a
little too strait, but like the Lawyers end of his Law; because men may have
their particular good and advantages by a Law which is dangerous, hurtful and
destructive to the common good of the people. Therefore a just Law in general,
ordinatur Isidorus in dig. vet l. 1 tit. 3, lege 2. and 24. Is^l. l. 5. c. 211.
ad commune bonum, has the good of all men to its end, And Isidorus says
three things must be considered in the conditions of humane Laws. As 1. Their
congruity to Religion, and the Laws of God; which I shall speak to in the
Foundation by and by. And 2. Their proportion and measure to the Law of Nature,
which we spoke of in Chap. 2. And then 3. Their end as they relate to the
public utility and advantage' which we are now upon whence observe.

1. Observation, The End that humane Laws tend to, is mainly to be eyed by all.
2. Observe. Good Laws are ever tending to the Public good. 3. Obser. Such
Laws as swerve from this honest End, are dishonest, and unjust. 4. Obser. Every
humane Law imposed upon others, is imposed, per modum regulae and mensurae,
according to the rule and measure that is consonant and suitable to such as are
so ruled and measured; and this Forma is to be in proportion ad finem. 5. Obs.
It is necessary, that every positive humane Law be just, honest, and possible;
agreeing with the Laws of God, the light of nature, the custom of the
Country, the conditions of the people, and the times and seasons wherein we
live.
These things observed, will bring forth Laws well Larded; enlivened and
enabled to suit their end and to serve the public; 2. In specie.
But as to the End of them more in specie.

1 The safety of the People, hence such as are Defenders of 1. safety.
good and wholesome Laws, are called the Conservators of the people; and so
Cyrus acknowledged himself to be a Conservator of his Countries Laws, and
Liberties, for the safety of the people, and obliged himself to oppose any
that would offer to infringe them; and this he did at his Inauguration,
notwithstanding Zeneph. de Reb. Laced.
Flatterers had tickled the ears of his Son Cambyses that all things were
lawful for him. So the Kings of Sparta engaged to govern according to the
Laws, which the people had from Lycurgus for their safety: Hereupon, when it
was asked Archidamus, the Son of Zeuxidamus, who were the Governors of Sparta,
he answered their Laws. So that to resist or refuse those Laws which are for
the safety of the whole, is not to be suffered in any,
no not in Magistrates, but may be mentioned amongst the worst guilt of
disobedience and rebellion, Seeing it is far worse then it is for the people to
appear for such wholesome Laws against Magistrates; for the Laws which are for
public safety and advantage are to be obeyed before Kings or Rulers, says
Aristotle de Aristotle.
mundo and lib. 3. Polit. c. 7. But to this by and by; in the interim take
these Conclusions.

1. Conclusion, Those Laws which are dangerous, intricate, 1.
and Insnaring, are not to be allowed of; but the public cries out against
them. 2. Conclus. Humane Laws have their end, in common, or 2.
to all alike in Justice; which ought not like a Bowl to run by assed by humor
or favor of men; but to be impartial to all alike, and then it makes harmony:
Job compares it to a cloak, or robe, Job 29 14. not hanging loose, or on one
shoulder, for so it may soon be blown off; but it must be girt with a girdle;
yet with
care that the girdle be not over-loaden with the purse, for then as you see in
Carriers, it will lag and bend all to one side: But 3 Conclus. Humane Laws are
of an unavoidable necessity 3.
for the peace and tranquillity of a Commonwealth. Necessarium fuit ad pacem
and virtutem hominum quod leges ponerentur: Tho. Aquinas
says Aquinas. A good Commonwealth consisting of Hetrogenean parts must be
like Peter's sheet knit up at the four corners Act. 10. to which end humane
Laws, must tie up all in one. They must speak to all men in one and the same
voice. Says Tully. Cicero.
4 Conclus. Civil Precepts, or Laws have their vim coactivam, 4.
compulsive power and faculty. 5 Conclus. Matters of Fact are the proper object
of the 5.
Laws cognizance; and the Laws take no notice of thoughts, nor words; neither
do they judge of the intentions but of the actions of men. Cassius was once
wished by the Caldean Astrologer, not to fight with his Enemies whilst the sign
was in Scorpio; why Cassius.
prithee? (says he) speak to children; for I fear not the sign but the sight
(meaning such an Army against him of Archers) and (says he) I fear Sagittarios
(meaning the Actions and Aims of his Arch-enemies, the Parthians) more then
Scorpio. So should
Governors and Judges mind more the actions, then the Intentions; the facts,
then the thoughts or words of men. 6. Conclus. Honest, humane Laws are the
publicks Shield, 6.
and the peoples Buckler of defense. They are for the security of the poor
against the rich oppressors; and to guard the poor lambs from the violence of
wolvish natures (and till that time, that the Wolves will lie down quietly with
the Lambs, Isa. 11. which will be in the fifth Monarchy, which we are almost
at; till then, I say there is a necessity of such Laws as will restrain their
rage and wolvishnesse.) They are made (of right) against the exorbitancie and
injustice of Rulers, and great ones, to keep them within bounds of civility,
honesty, and righteousness, that the Great might not oppress nor tyrannize it
over the small ones. Now, will a man lend money without security? so it is on
good security we may venture to deal with Great men: Now the Laws are
our Security so to do, and they save us from their Injuries and teeth, which
else would tear us. In the Strand the other day was a Lion and a Lamb to be
seen together, and the Lamb would sit, and lie down by the Lion so long as the
man stood by, and did not fear; So, so long as just Laws stand by us, we need
not fear, for they secure us from the fury of others; but if the Laws be (as
many of ours are) unjust, partial, or corrupt, for great men's peculiar
Interest, more then for public good or safety, as in p. 38. and p. 48. then we
are in danger indeed.
There is a Sea that is called Mare mortuum, which is as smooth and even at the
top as can be, but it is very deep and deadly at the bottom; So there be many
Laws in England yet, (some of which Sim.
I have named) that are very fair, smooth and good in the letter (as to common
sense) but alas! they are a little under, deep,
subtle, intricate, and twisted up with craft and cruelty, to take away the
lives of faithful Commonwealths-men if once they call for their Right and
Liberties: and these are not leges mortuae, dead, it were well if they were so;
but mortiferae, deadly Laws. The Dove fears the tyranny of the Hawke, and knows
not what to do; well, the Birds advise: one wills her to fly aloft, O but says
she, the Hawke has the largest wings to help, and will mount as high! Another
advises her to keep low; then, oh! (says she) it is true, that were better of
the two, but the plaguey Hawke will stoop ^aw too to get his Prey, rather then
hee'^ loose it: Why then says another, keep the Woods; O but says she, that
is the Hawks Manor! there is no safety for me there! Why then says another,
keep in the town; alas! says the Dove, there I am a Prey to every man, and
must have my eyes put out, to make my enemy (the Hawk) sport too: Well, what
should the do then? why the best advice was to live in the Coat, or hole of
the rock, under the protection of man; the parable is easy, and many are like
Aesops living creatures who must have Morals tied to their tails; let this be
one then, that the most innocent are the greatest sufferers, and find the ^^rst
adversaries, and such sometimes as there is no escaping from but in Christ the
Rock; and truly were not the
poor under protection of Laws, there would be no living: wherefore for
shame, Sirs! let us see to the Laws of England, that they administer us safety
from great Tyrants and Oppressors. Augustine tells us true enough, when he
says, the Austin, c. 4. and 6. de civit. Dei.
Laws are necessary for this reason, because they are respected by such (as
otherwise) contemn virtue and honesty, for that the Law forces her way
thorough them, constraines them to obedience, and ministers conduct in
warfaring, and gives life, vigor, and luster to Justice and Equity. The Spartan
Pausanias tells us, all men (even Pausanias.
Kings and Princes) must come under the Laws to be directed; and Agesilaus a
King confesses, that he, and all Commanders must yield obedience to the
Commandments of the Law. Now as Cicero says, Lib. 2. de Offic. When men began
Cicero.
to do unjustly, the people to redress their wrongs done them by great ones,
and Oppressors, appointed and invented Laws to direct the Magistrates for the
public safety and peace of all men, etc. So that the Law of Nature, reason,
equity, conscience, all consent to the Peoples Laws for their own public
good and safety; for every Creature will have a shelter, as Snailes their Shells,
Bees their Hives, Dogs their Kennels, Birds their Nests, Foxes their Holes,
Conies their Buroughs, and whither must we run for shelter, without honest
and just wholesome Laws? O! honest Countrymen! we must look to our safety!
for many of our Laws are such rotten refuges and shelters, that they will soon
fall upon our heads, and leave us naked to the gripes of Oppressors; and if we
seek not remedy from the Supreme Authority,
I am sure I shall be sure to say with the Poet (ere long) to purpose, Non
expectato vulnus ab host tuli; but thus far for the first special end of the
Laws.

The second special end of the Laws is the Peoples Freedom, 2* Freedom.
to keep the People from slavery, for otherwise there would be no moderation
between the Lordlinesse of some, and slavishnesse of others. Thus we shall
find in the Laws of the Egyptians, and Romans, and by the constitutions of
the Antonines what notable care was taken for the Peoples liberty, insomuch
that the poor slaves in those days (especially the infranchised ones) might
bring their actions for any apparent injury against the Patrons, or Masters.
Now seeing there is so much difference between slaves and children, and
notwithstanding the very Heathens would not permit the very slaves to be used
cruelly, but they might have open recourse to, Cicero lib 3. Offi^. Diod. sic.
l. ^. 2. l. 1. D.
and present remedy from the Law, what should we look for then? we, that are
the natural, lawful, freeborn children? and Sons of this Commonwealth? How
can we endure to be Slaves? and if Heathens would not suffer their slaves to be
wronged, but would presently right them by Law, will then our Christian
Governors see us so wronged of our liberties as we are? and shall we not find
speedier remedy, and have freer recourse to just and honest Laws, which aim
at our liberties then we have? God forbid! It is true hitherto (and the runner
may read it) in the Chapter before) the freeborn English have been abominably
abused and enslaved, and could find no remedy after many years attendance on
a corrupt Law, but we hope this will be amended, and the Laws intended (as they
ought to be) for the safety and freedom of the people, that Princes may be
manacled, and their rages curbed; that private ones may be guarded, and their
rights restored by righteous Laws (not measured by the interest or power of
great persons) but well and evenly weighed in the balance of freedom. It is
true, most Commonwealths are (as yet) in a middle posture, as having their
Laws partly for Great ones interest, and partly for the Peoples liberty; but
alas! the Great ones have the greatest influence, and the poor peoples
liberties lie as lost, and as loath to speak for themselves, for fear of a
foul check, if not of a break-neck, but in due time
we do hope for deliverance, and in the mean time do groan for our
liberties; yet let us observe

1 Obs. So far as Laws are just and allowable, they advance the peoples
interest and freedoms. 2 Obs. Such Laws look first and principally upon the
peoples, or public good. 3 Ob. Honest Laws make legible to the people their
positive and (...) (...)* 4. Obs. True Laws for the peoples Freedom, have their
Rise from the People, and Rule by clear Reason: Till which the people are
slaves to others; and it is no marvel then if our Laws (as they now are) are
out of tune, and make no good music in the end; but that instead of Freedom
they end in Bondage. But
the Nightingales will not long live incaged, whilst your common hedge-Sparrows
can endure it very well. When Cyrus was young, Sacas was appointed by his Grand
father to be his Lawgiver in Diet, Recreations, etc. but when Cyrus grew
elder, into tiper years, he became his own Lawgiver, and a Sacas to himself;
Sim.
so surely we are old enough now to be our own Sacas's, which will be our happy
time. Like as a man that has been long in prison, so soon as he gets out, oh
how he leap^s! and dances! so as no ground will hold him! such a time of
deliverance is coming to Englishmen.
But thus far for the End of the Law.
Use. Then we are not too old to learn, that the end of the Use.
Laws is the honor of them, and of the Nation. And no greater dishonor can
redound to this Commonwealth then yet to have such Laws and Lawyers, as are
neither for the profit, safety, nor freedom of the people. How? how many
hundreds? yea, thousands in England that can, and some do positively assert it
to reflect with the greatest reproach upon us that can be, viz. the
corruption of Laws, Lawyers, Judges, etc. (as in the Chapter before) which to
the shame of this Nation is noised and noted beyond the Seas; the particulars I
forbear as yet.

Secondly, The next thing is the Object of the Law (which I 2 The object of the
Law, who? or what?
shall be short in.) Now the Object is not the materia ex qua, but circa quam,
the matter out of which the Law is made, but about which the Law is conversant
and takes most special cognizance; that is, wicked men, in their wicked
actions, whom the Law is to curb and restrain, which takes in also the formal
reason of the Law, with reference to the End that we handled before, i. e. for
the public good, freedom, and safety; it a habet rationem finis, etc. The
Apostle therefore in 1 Timothy 1. 9. says, We know the Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless, and disobedient, for ungodly, and for
sinners, for unholy, and profane, for murderers, etc. and whoremongers, for
men-stealers, and liars, and perjured persons, etc. that is, for their
punishment, to the muzzling of the mad world, and of wolvish natures, that
would tear a pieces the innocent, and destroy the Lambs of equity, truth, and
honesty. Such as these are the proper object of the Laws punishment, and none
ought to escape that is an oppressor of the poor, and innocent, though he be
an Emperor or King. Trajan knew this well enough, when in Trajan.
delivering the Sword to the great Provost of the Empire, he said to him; Sir,
if I command as I should, use this sword for me; but if I do not, but oppress
the people, then use and draw it against me: So that the greatest of the Nation
are as properly the object of the Law, and of the word of justice for their
evil doings, as the poorest. Thus Zenophon lib. 8. Paed. mentions Cyrus's
solemn Stipulation and Confederation with the Persians. Zenophon.
They say, O Cyrus! In the first place, thou shall promise to the people, that
if any make war against the Persians, at home or Cyrus.
abroad, or seek to infringe or entrench upon the Liberties and Laws of the
Persians, that thou will to the utmost of thy power defend and protect this
People with their Liberties; and as a faithful Guardian execute their Laws
upon all offenders, and evill-doers. To which Cyrus faithfully and solemnly
engages; And then they say: so we Persians do faithfully promise to be aiding
and assisting to keep all men (without respect of persons) in obedience to
thee; according to our Laws and Liberties, which thou art to defend for the
Persians. All this shows that those Laws of theirs were (without respect to
persons) evenly dispensed to all alike, making wicked men in their evil
actions their object, whether great or poor.

Use. What have we to say then for those Laws and Lawyers Use. Our English
Laws persecute the honest.
in England, which make honest, faithful, innocent men the most object of
their torment and punishment? in Rev. 9. 4. the Locusts were commanded to
torment, and hurt none but them that had not the seal of God on their
foreheads, and yet contrary to their Commission they must be meddling with the
green things. O see! how sadly this is lamented and threatened! in Mic. 3. 2. Is
it not for you to know judgment? who hate the good, and love the evil, who
pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones? etc.
O Tyranny! is it not so now with the Lawyers? are not the good the object of
their craft and cruelty? do they not torment the innocent ones most, and tear
away their estates?
and torment them with injustice and oppression? and who can be worse Tyrants,
or viler Malefactors then they that ensnare the honest? afflict the innocent?
pillage the people? lay traps for their ^^ves, liberties, and estates? scoff
at oaths? and mock at our ^^iseries? Insomuch that when the poor and oppressed
come to the Law for right, the Law is so handled, and handed out by them, that
it proves their greatest wrong and grievance* Oh! is this to be suffered? Did
the Law look aright, the Lawyers would be the object of her punishment to
purpose, for Romans 13. Justice is unicuique reddere suum, for which end is the
Law to be a directive line, and Lawyers should make it a terror to evil doers,
and not to honest men; in this there is need of a thorough Reformation both of
Laws and Lawyers.

Thirdly, The Foundation of the Law, is that upon which all 3. The foundation
of the Law, what? Austin.
other Laws are built, as Super-structures in their several Stories and Lo^ts.
This I account the eternal Law, which is (as August. (...) 1. de lib. arbit.
calls it) the Supreme Reason, that every Law must be brought unto, and regulated
by* Lex aeterna nihil aliud est quam ratio divinae sapientiae, secundum quod
est directiva ^^^ium actuum and motionum. Hence the Stoics and Heathens would
have all their Laws (they say) born ex cerebro Jovis, of Aquinas 12* ^* 93. 3.
c.
their Gods brain. And the Schoolmen must acknowledge that all humane Laws
have their Foundation here, and fetch their virtue radicaliter and remote, from
this Eternal Law. So Tully (that eminent Patriot) tells us the lineage of all
other Laws. Hanc video sapientis^imorum fuisse sententiam, legem neque hominum
inge^i^s M. Tu* Cicero.
excogitatam, neque scitum aliquod esse populorum, sed aeter^um quiddam quod
universum mundum regeret imperandi pro^ibendique sapientia. Ita principem illam
Legem and ultimam ^ente^^ dicebant omnia ratione cogentis aut vetantis Dei. It
has been the judgment of the wisest men all along, that an honest (just) Law
was not a spark struck out of humane Intellectuals (at first) nor blown up, nor
kindled by popular puff or ^^eath, but from an eternal light and wisdom,
shining, ruling, and irradiating the whole Universe; and clearing up what ways
were allowable, and what forbidden by God. So that the mind of (...) himself
makes the Center of all honest Laws, from whence they are taken, and to which
they return. Plutarch that florid Moralist Plutarch.
(as one calls him) gives us the like account, and resolves a^ Laws and Justice
into that primitive eternal Law, even Gods own wisdom. For thus (in his
language) says he, Justice does not only sit like a Queen (commanding) at the
right hand of Jupiter when he sits on his Throne; but she is always in his
bosom, and one with himself, and he says that God is (...). Neither does
Plato come much behind him Plato.
in his acknowledgement of a Law, which he calls (...), Gods golden Scepter to
rule men. Now this Law is, say others, Aeterna quaedam ratio practica totius
dispositionis, and Gubernationis universi. The eternal ordinance of God lying
in his own wisdom and Council for the regulating and governing the whole
world, minding the public welfare of all being. Now every one of our Laws
should be a beam of this, and of no other fountain nor foundation: seeing as
acute Suarez calls every Law Suarez.
jus in communi constitutum, etc. a constitution to common good, according to
the command and Law of God: So that this Eternal Fundamental Law what?
Law is the only immutable and necessary fundamental Law; and whilst men make
mere notions fundamental Laws, and cry up such customs as are of eldest date
for their fundamentals, they make Idols of their forms, and oberre from the
real, unalterable Fundamental Law for the most part. For that Law is the
Fundamental Law that is first laid for all other Laws to be fetched and
derived from, and this is none but this Eternal Law, as appears Prove. 8. 15. By
me (says the Wisdom of God) Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, or make
Laws. And Augustine.
Augustine tells us plainly in lib. 1. de lib. arbit. c. 5. etc. tom. 1. That no
humane Laws are to be allowed of, as honest, just, and lawful, unless they be
fetched from this Eternal law of God, and good reason for it too; for as in
all motions, in omnibus moventibus, Reas.
virtus secundi moventis derivatur a virtute moventis primi, the second fetches
force and virtue from the first, so in omnibus gubernantibus, etc. in all
Governors the subordinate has Commission from the Supreme; and the inferior,
from the superior; So a Subject-Magistrates commands are according to the
commands of his King or Supreme Governor, who has given him Commission. And
thus are all humane Laws according to, and derived, and Commissionated from
this Eternal Law of God, or else they are not good; and for as much as they
do partake of right and Orthodox Reason, they are thus derived ab eterna lege:
so such Laws as are against Reason, are iniquity, and not fetched from this
eternal Fundamental Law. Let us note then.

1. Rule, This eternal Law, is the only absolute, unchangeable Fundamental of
all humane Laws. 2. Rule, Of all others this Fundamental must be known. Now a
thing is said to be known, either in seipso, as it is in it self, and so God
and Saints are said to know this eternal Law; or else in suo effectu; as one
that knows not the Sun in his own substance, knows it in sua irradiatione, in
his irradiation and opperation. So we are said to know this Fundamental Law by
its irradiation of Reason in us, more or less; so that by its effects, and our
participation of Divine Reason we know it. 3. Rule. Mere humane Reason
(secundum se) is not the standing Rule of things, but according to its
participation of divine. 4. Rule, Mere Humane Reason does not partake (ad
plenum dictamen) to the full of divine Reason, but only reaches to a measure in
every age; so that as it increases and grows more divine, so must humane Laws.
5. Rule, Humane Laws are not infallible demonstrations or conclusions. 6. Rule,
The more agreeable the Laws are to this Eternal Law, the more unalterable they
are; and the more they partake of this Fundamental Law, the more absolute they
are, and to ^e obeyed; and the more proper, excellent, and profitable are the
acts and ends of such Laws.
Use. What remains? But the day of reckoning and reforming the Laws and Lawyers
of this Commonwealth? seeing they (for the most of them) fail in the End,
Object, and Foundation. All are not Fundamental Laws that are so called;
neither is the notion of a Fundamental Law, such an Idol as men make it, as
if Fundamental Laws mee^ notions.
a noli me tangere were writ upon it, because it has been of long continuance,
and therefore must not be altered; but without such respect or fear of such a
Scare-crew, have the Conquerors all along altered even those they called
Fundamental Laws, that stood not with their Interests or Intents; and they
have abrogated them without any judicial process against them: and so did
William the Norman without the least respect to the peoples Rights or
Liberties: And what shall Oliver the Peoples
Conqueror do nothing? does the fearful word of the Fundamental Laws of
England (i. e. of the Normans in England, which have robbed and cheated us of
our Rights and Freedoms, do these their Laws) strike more terror (being
secret enemies) then a whole Army in the field of open enemies? have we none to
plead, none to intercede (as the Prophet says) for us? seeing for so many
years the Norman Laws of England have been such pure Servants to corrupt
Interests, as none else (as I know of) have enjoyed the honor of Fundamental.
O fie! for shame! let us look about us! and see! -- We have lost our
Fundamental Laws by William the Conqueror, and other upstart, irrational
selfish, unworthy What Laws are most fundamental.
Laws have usurped the title and honor from the people, and shall they not be
altered? and others be set up upon the Eternal law of God, agreeing more with
divine Law, in their stead? for the liberties, peace, profit, safety, and
Freedom of the people? and that will not torment honest men (as hitherto Laws
have) as the object of their tyranny? It is this that we call for, and nothing
else, and we will never cease day nor night, nor give rest to God or Men till
it be granted us, for the good of the godly of this Nation? Those Laws are most
honorable and fundamental (though they be but of a days standing) that agree
best with Gods Laws; But O our misery! how many Statutes, Acts and Judgments
are there which have subjected the bodies of men and women to arrests and
imprisonments? yea, and sometimes to death (diametrically) contrary to the Law
of God? Reason? and Charity? yea, to Magna Charta it self? such as were named
before in the Chap. 3. and yet I might add many more: as that of Habeas A Writ
of Habeas corpus tyrannical.
corpus, whereby any Freeman of England may suffer imprisonment before his
cause is heard or judged by the Law; which imprisoning is the utmost punishment
the Law can inflict upon Trespassors and Debtors. This Writ is a wrong to the
Liberties of the people, and delivers (many times upon malice) honest men into
the hands of devilish minded men; yea, of Foxes, Walves, Bears, and Tigers; I
mean wicked Lawyers, Bailiffs, Sergeants, and Goalors, to raven upon their
Bodies and Estates, with unsatiable, and monstrous cruelty; whilst their poor
Wives and Children want bread to eat: O unsufferable Tyranny! and
such is the starving men in Prison, and murdering them upon malice; So the
imprisoning upon debt, and keeping their bodies in iron cages, whilst by their
liberty and industry in their callings Imprisonment for debts illegal, Mir of
Just. 102. 257.
they might (by degrees) make money to pay their debts off; which would be to
the honor and enriching of the Nation. I might also mention the hanging men for
mere Theft, and other Laws beside, which are cruel, absurd, and opposite to
the Laws of God. Against whose Laws no Laws are or ought to be Fundamental.
Wherefore away with that Bugbear word of Fundamental Laws, and let us look to
the Eternal Law of God
as the only Fundamental that must stand when all is done, which does
formaliter obligare, as the Rule of Rationals.

Wherefore my word to the Supreme Authority of this Nation 1. To the
Parliament.
in Parliament is,

1. As they are the Supreme in Rule, so they ought to be 1. As the Supreme.
Supreme in Reason: Now Supreme Reason is divine, or the wisdom from above,
which is not cruel, bloody, litigious, oppressing, etc. But says the Apostle,
James 3. 17. It is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy. This ratio
divina, is ratio Gubernativa. Of all men it is they, that must have the Reason
of the Law: Now these Laws which they have not a right Reason for, and such a
Reason as is derived ab aeterna lege must not stand. None must abide but such
as agree with the Law of God, as the Fundamental of them: Wherefore, seeing
they sit not for themselves, but for the people; I pray God they may hear the
loud cries and complaints of the poor, oppressed people under the tyranny of
such Laws and Lawyers, as are now in being, to the robbing and ruining of our
Rights and Freedoms. Oh! we fear! least what victories are continued us
according to our faith, and incessant prayer, should produce in some a desire
to take up the Dutch Titles of High and Mighty, and to seek
more to be adored for a Supremacy in Government, then a Supremacy in God or
Grace! oh! God forbid! least the Cannon mouth be turned upon us! -- Only this
we say, that we see these tryumphs by Land and Sea make some monstrous high,
and too high to take notice of the Petitions of the poor and oppressed,
fatherless, and widows, who are begging, and weeping, and praying, and
Petitioning, and to no purpose to men, when they complain, and sigh, and sob
before God; who have (some of them) more right to, and have made more faithful
prayers for these mercies and victories, then some of them who usurp and
assume the whole benefit of them, rattling about in their Coaches, and blazing
it abroad in their gold and silver; and yet
oppress, or afflict, and reject the prayers and tears of such as have most
right (it may be in Gods account) to what they enjoy. But our prayers are to
our God, that he will keep our Parliament humble, and to make them wise for the
Fifth Monarchy (mentioned in the next Chapter) and in the mean time the
supreme Rationalists for the good, safety, and freedom of England; whose eyes
are full fixed upon them for deliverance out of this Norman tyranny and
Tyrants, according to the Eternal Law of God, which is ratio divinae
sapientiae moventis omnia ad debitum finem directive, in all actions and Laws
that tend to the public good.

Secondly, As they are Legislators too, our eyes are upon them 2. As they have
the Legislative power. Isidorus in l. 5. c. 10. Etym.
in the earnest expectation of greater matters in restoring us to our Right,
and lost Liberties, then has been hitherto: Lex (says Isidorus) est
constitutio populi secundum quam majores natu simul cum plebibus aliquid
sanxerunt: and it is not the ratio cujuslibet that condere potest legem, but of
such Governors as represent the people, whose rights and freedoms they sit
for; our prayers herein are, that they be rightly principled and spirited to
make the Laws which we must live under in these days, as to the people of this
Nation. Wherefore

1. The Intents and Wills of the Lawyers must be bent upon the public good in
all their Laws and Statutes; therefore the 1.
honest people are all purposed to wait with patience upon this Parliament or
Legislative Power, for the pulling down those Laws which are against the
public good, and for setting up of others in their room. Because hitherto the
Brambles have made Laws for the trees, and have scratched and tore them, and
then wrote Laws in their blood. Carneades was wont to say utilitas Carneades.
justi prope matter and aequi, which in an honest sense is sufferable: Our
Lawgivers should send out Laws with olive branches in The Parliament not
supreme power when?
their mouths, which should drop sweetness and fatness to the Nation. Look
how the Sun is said to shoot out with healings in his wings, and so should our
Law givers. It is not for the Parliament to be the supreme Power of the Nation
in the next Monarchy, but they may (then) be content to be subservient:
wherefore, in the mean time let them like honest men, and good Christians,
execute justice with mercy, as well as mercy with justice: For a Plutarch can
tell us, that God is angry with a too Plutarch.
hot and hasty spirit in Legislators, (...), he will not have them meddle with
his Scepter, his Thunderbolt and his trident; i. e. he does not love they
should Lord it over their Brethren, as if they were the supreme Power, and had
his absolute dominion or Sovereignty; he would not have them too violent or
domineering, but rather darting out such warm, amiable, and winning, and
cherishing (...), beams of Justice, goodness, and clemency, so as might
enlarge all the hearts of Gods people to praise him: Our Laws should therefore
like so many fresh and pleasant green pastures, in which these (...) Our
Parliament are to lead their flocks to feed sweetly and securely by those
refreshing and gliding streams of Justice, that run
down like waters, as is promised. But O when! when! -- Well, but if all Laws
be for the peoples good, a Broom will soon be found to sweep down these
Cob-webs, or Laws that are so full of venom and subtle workings against the
faithful ones, for the Cobwebs in Westminster to be swept down.
peoples interest, and this will sweep down many an Achitophelian, and
Machivillian, and Devillian web, which hangs yet in Westminster, and so also
many a Hamans and Herod's web which entangle honest hearts, so as to take away
their lives, and catch them in snares; for many of the Laws are not for the
public good, being by Kings and Courtiers to keep up their own Interests, and
like Domitians Play-fellows, to make royal sport, and pastime in catching the
poor Flies. (for so they accounted the people of this Commonwealth) and
insulting over their torments with Tyranny. But let these vile Laws avaunt,
and let us not have reeds to pierce us through, but staves for the weary and
afflicted to lean upon. Let our Laws be cords of love, and not snares and
nets to trap our Brethren with, and to hunt them, as the Prophet says in Micah
7. 2. so Jerem. 5. 26. They set snares to catch men. Therefore, our God give
this Supreme power (here) the supreme privilege of Reason, as to fetch their
Laws from the eternal and only true fundamental, viz. the Law of God: for
those Laws are most radical and fundamental,
that come nearest to the Law of God, and are participations of that eternal
Law which is the spring and original of all other honest inferior and
derivative Laws, (...) Plato.
as Plato says, and there is no such public benefit as that which comes by
such Laws; for they, they are that tend to the conservation of the vitals and
essentials of a Commonwealth, in the which all have an alike and equal
interest and privilege.

Secondly, Justice is the next aim of the Legislative power, 2 Justice called
for from the Legislators.
on purpose to keep up the public good. Thus the great Jehovah, and Almighty
Legislator has let us see his method in the Decalogue, and set our Lawgivers
an example: for in the first Table the intention of the Lawgiver is to ordain
for the Public good, and safety; and then the second Table contains the
order of justice to be observed among men, that every one may have right,
according to which the Public good is preserved; our Parliament is to set up
God, godliness, etc. in their capacities, as the Public good, and then
according to his Law to set up Justice and Righteousness amongst men, because
by good and just Laws are men secundum quid, and in ordine ad tale regimen
made good and just.

The Brain, Liver, and Heart in the Body do resemble three principal Members
of the Body Politic; the Liver is the beginning of natural faculties, which
segregates the Humors, Men made good by good Laws, and bad by bad Laws.
aggregates the Blood, and so sends it about into the Body, and for this may
use be made of the Physician; the Heart is the beginning of vitals, and
generates vital spirits, and then sends them and spends them about in the
particular members of the body, and this do some of the faithful Ministers of
the Gospel, who will spend and be spent for the work of Christ in this
Commonwealth. But then the Brain is the beginning of Animals (as Doctor
Sutton says in his A^size Sermon. p. 2.) Sutton. Emblem of Physicians,
Ministers, Magistrates.
commands in chief the Body, sits in the highest room as in a royal Palace,
compassed about with Forts and Guards; has the five Senses as so many
Intelligencers to give notice what is done abroad, etc. and this emblem befits
good Magistrates, who must sit highest, and honourablest, and command the body
so as to keep it in order and good temper.

3 Although a Law does necessarily praesupp^nere actum intellectus, 3
Legislators wills inspired by divine reason.
yet it does formally lie in actu voluntatis, but then the will of the
Lawgiver must be guided by Divine reason, or else his Laws will be tyrannical
and unjust; for Tyrants are absolute in their own wills, and stand tiptoe for
their own interest, and like Horses at stake (tied by a Law yet) they reach
out with one leg as far as they can to grazs, into their own bellies. But
Aristotle tells us excellently, (...), Aristotle.
that an honest Law is a clear intellect without the will, that is, it is
impartial to all alike, and cannot be bribed to injustice; it is a pure
judgment without selfishnesse, or seeking our own wills; it is such a Law as
makes no factions; therefore a Lawgiver must follow the ultimum and practicum
dictamen legis, i. e. true reason, and his will like a ^aeca potentia must
follow the novissimum lumen intellectus, the last light of this (...); and
therefore Justice is painted blind, though the Law be oculata, and must see,
for (...).

4 Lawgivers had need to have a sound judgment of all 4 Legislators judgment
sound.
men, and like Janus his head look both ways, yea all ways with Argus's eyes
when they make Laws; Judicium and prudentia Archi^ectonica ad ferendas leges.
The Egyptian Hieroglypbick Egypt.
was oculus in sceptro, and it had need with us to be such an eye as can see
both (...) into public affairs; therefore as the Phisician before he sets
down his Receipt, or prescribes to his Patient what to do, he will feel the
pulse of the Sim.
body, view the urine, observe the temper and changes in the body, and be very
inquisitive to inform himself of the true estate of the body before he can
proportion his remedies, etc. So should our Parliament know how the Pulse beats
of this Body Politic, and consider what temper and changes attend us,
otherwise
they will never proportion Justice and Laws suitable to the present estate of
this body, nor bring forth apt remedies to remove those dangerous Laws and
humors, which are Aquinas 1. 2 Q. 100. 9. ^. Averroes in 2 Rhet. c. 18.
the cause of our complaints and sickness; Legislator humanae legis judicat de
actibus exterioribus. I pray God give our Parliament such judgment and
insight, for certainly as Averroes says, Judgment is a Syllogis^ne in which a
Judge can never make a good conclusion that considers not of the premises
first. How many Votes and resolves in Parliament (without this) will
prove one after another stark naught and blind; and if the first conc^ction
be not good, the second cannot be so; but then up starts the Si^^emites, whose
counsel is, that fire may go out of the ^ramble to burn up all the Cedars of
Lebanon. Now seeing we are sure the Laws* flow from a fountain of wisdom,
then all our Laws must be like Candles lighted at his; for those Laws are
most profitable and prevalent which are founded in his light, (...), O what
sweet and soft persuasion will those Laws have with them that are stuffed with
the excellent fanny-downes of reason.

5. Lastly, the Legislative Power taken special care of the due 5. All Laws
made known by Legislators. ^^id^r.
Proclamation of all the Laws, that the people be not ignorant of those Laws
which require obedience; hence as I^idor^s, l. 2. c. 10. Etym. says, Lex is a
legend^ as well as a ligando, and therefore must be made known, as was said in
chap. 3. V^^^ ^ubae to all the people; for it is horrible tyranny to punish any
freeborn Britain, or Englishman upon an unknown Law; and therefore as all
the Laws of God are published in a most sufficient and emphaticall manner; so
according to the Laws of Vide Master Braine's new ^arth.
God, ought all our Laws. Thus as they are our Legislators, do we heartily
look for the ^^^ting up of such Laws as agree with Gods and the peoples
nights, and for pulling down those unjust, usurping, tyrannical topping Laws,
and Lawyers, who live on the robbing and wronging the people of their Q. 1. A.
just Laws and Liberties; but the Question is now (we know by whom) when the
Laws may be altered?

Ans. Although in the second Chapter I have spoken to it, 1. What Laws must be
altered.
yet I add this:

1. That the Laws may be (yea and must be) altered i^ unquestionable, seeing
they are not infallible conclusions, but better may be brought forth for the
public good, safety, and freedom. And,

2* They must be altered, when the present Legislators see the 2.
defects of the former, and are endued with reason to reform them; yea though
the first aimed at public good, seeing instituerunt imperfecta (and forte
injusta) in multis deficientia, yet their Successors must mutare, and
instituere aliqu^ quae in paucioribus deficere possunt a commun^ salute and
utilitate.

3* When the times are turned, and States are changed with them, 3.
then others must be set up that better suit the times, and seasons wherein we
live, and the condition of the Commonwealth upon such a change; this made
Augustine to say, in lib. 1. de Augustine.
lib. arbit. c. 6. tom. 1. Lex temporalis quamvis justa sit, commutari tamen
just^ per tempora potest, pro hominum ac temporum variis conditionibus; let our
Laws be ever so honest and just, yet they may be lawfully and justly altered,
according to the conditions of the Times we live in; And if so, then surely it
is without exception, that those unjust and dishonest Laws that have enslaved
us, and kept us Prisoners, should be
tore down by these times, seeing the Norman conquest is now captivated, none
of his tyrannou^ Laws or Lawyers are to be continued, but the people ought to
be set at liberty by these Legislators, as to their own Laws and freedom.
And for this, the times, turns, Victories, Triumphs* God, and the people do
expect, and shall all be frustrate? God forbid! there is a Price put into the
hands of Governors, and will they not To the Parliament.
have the heart to use it? Had ever any Parliament that liberty to appear for
God's Laws, and the Peoples Liberties as these now have? were they not called
by an extraordinary Providence upon that account, to see what they will do for
God and his people? to deliver them from injustice, and oppression,
of cruel (godless) irrational Laws and Lawyers? Take good heed therefore,
and love the Lord your God, and cleave not unto the generation of cruel men,
Josh. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11. It is true, they will ^latter and fawn upon you for
your favor, but Alexander grew not a Tyrant till after he was Baptized into
the Title of a God, unto which I think the Titles of High and Mighty, or the
Supreme Power equivalent; and without Caution, may be as dangerous an
edge-toole as ere we touched. But let them consider that in Ezekiel. 1. 18. the
wheels (which
run swift now) are full of eyes to overlook them; and will not the wheels
turn upon us; if yet they allow so many hundreds to live, and make a trade of
sin (^s in chap. 3.) at their very doors, by lying, swearing, cheating,
oppressing and injuring the people? without this horrible trading of Lawyers be
dashed down and damned to Hell, I do not see how they will answer the call of
God, or the prayers and expectations of the godly people; besides the
assiduous, and daily sad cries, and tears of thousands of Widows and Orphans,
and oppressed ones in this Nation, who all together (as with one voice) groan
at this grievance (which is as yet unremoved, and unremedied) and that b^g, and
pray for their just Rights and Freedoms, which they had before the Norman
Tyrant made them all Slaves, to advance his prerogative upon their ruin and
misery! O sad! and what swarms of
such Vermin were bred in every age out of Englishmens corruptions, and
contentions appears in chap. 3. And is it not time now to crush them? The
wicked have walked on every side, while the vilest men were exalted, as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 12. 8. O! is Kingly power pulled down, and yet are the
free people made tributary? Is Prerogative cut off, and yet shall Laws of
England stand, that were ruled and run by that great byasse? Is their head
Abaddon gone, and yet these regiments of Locusts and Scorpions remain to the
ruin of poor people? God forbid! for their five months is upon the period,
they must down.

Quest. How shall we then come by our own, if Lawyers go^ down?

Answ. More easily then ever; for whereas justice was of too How we come by our
own without Lawyers.
high price in their hands, we shall then have it at our own doors, and at an
easy rate shall we then receive our own: And why? Because it is the Law, not
Lawyers, which gives us our own* Whereas before a man met with so many delays
(for the Lawyers like some unjust Post-masters, when the Law would go one mile
with them, would compel it to go two) and with so many subtleties, intricacies,
turnings, and windings, formalities, and punctilio's and lamentable expenses,
that they were at last forced to leave the Law, and loose their own to boot,
and all because of the Lawyers; so that the way will then be clearer to recover
a man's own.

All other objections that I have met with, are answered; so that the rubs and
lets being removed, what remains but to go about the work, the work, the
work of God, the work of the people.

If any stop me, and say, stay Sir! show mercy! make not too Object.
much have! -- remember the condition of the Lawyers will be very sad! some of
them are sensible of it already! one hanged himself in Holburn but yesterday,
and we doubt many more will, if you drive on so fast.

Say thou so? I am sorry for that, but the truth is, their Answ.
trading will bring them (without a turn) to the worst end of all, and indeed I
fear it will be the end of many a Desperado of them, to cry out with Severus,
heu! omnia fui, and nihil profui! for you shall seldom find faith among men,
that mind more to make gold theirs, then God theirs; yet this should, and does
make our hearts ache for them, and pity them more then they pity themselves,
that so live by sin; and that account no Angels good, but A word in charity to
warn^ the Lawyers.
them that trouble, and stir the waters. But let not those few, (ah few!) that
are honest among them, fall now to the trade of ruining themselves, that have
ruined others; but this I tell them, that it is best for them (both as to this
world, and the world to come) to leave off their unlawful callings quickly, to
recant their trading, and triumphing in sin, to turn to God, and give
themselves up to some other honest employment for the public good; and to join
issue with the servants of God, and faithful ones of the Commonwealth, for the
Right and Liberties of the people, that were took away ever since William the
Tyrant wrested them out of the peoples hands. But now the dawning of our
deliverance is entered, Prayer for our Governors.
and the mouths of many are already opened, like doors without lock or Key; I
pray God make our Governors full of spirit, and like brains of strong
constitutions, not to be toxicated (as the other were) with the world of
humors, or vicious fumes and vapors that will arise from unclean stomachs; and
that they make haste, for God will not stay for them, and their
time (like Sand in the Glass) if well shaken together is less then it looks
for; therefore the Lord hasten them in this work, with their eyes in their
head (Christ) and kept before them, for else like Plow-men (indeed) they will
make but balk^ for right furrows; God will go on with his work else without
them, for his time is come, he has heard our groans, and is come down to
deliver us from these Taskmasters. And as it is storied of Hercules, that with
his Club he came into a P^tters shop, and dashed all a peecet; so will he that
will come, come with his Iron Club, and make all fly about us, if we be not
forwarder then yet we are; for as one shower that falls on the Sim.
Dunghill makes it dirty, and in the Kennel makes it stink, and in desolate
places brings forth weeds, and in Gardens brings forth flowers; so one
dispensation, and day of his coming will perplex, and make the Lawyers stink in
our nostrils, and bring Priests and Lawyers help one another, Priests let them
alone to live by sin, and Lawyers in requital pleads for them to live by tithes.
forth vanities in some, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost to his Saints, and deliverance, and sweet freedom, and blessings to the
Commonwealth. In the mean time, it is a shame that Ministers of Christ can
see them live so in sin and say nothing, seeing those Agags that the
indulgent eye of Saul's have spared and favored, must be met with by the
(two-edged) Swords of the Samuels of God ^ but so much to our Authority in the
Legislative power, for the advancing the Law of God, as the only fundamental
Law of this Nation.

Secondly, My word to the People is as a Remembrancer: for 2. To the freeborn
people of England.
when Cyrus King of Persia proclaimed liberty to the Jews, only those went out
of captivity whose spirits God stirred up, in Ezra 1. 5. This is the case, we
are freed from our Norman Captivity. Now! you whose spirits God has stirred
up, why appear for your Liberties and Rights! return home unto your own! it
is high time! be not longer Slaves to Norman Laws, or Lawyers! This your
liberty is Natural, and connaturall, Our Liberty what it is.
as Paul said, Acts 22. 20. I am a freeborn Roman, which was his Plea, and
unsuited his Adversaries, and made them afraid; which surely had never been,
had not this bo^est
man made use of his right and liberty, and let his Judges and Governors know
it. Surely this liberty is more worth The worth of it.
then all the Lands in the Nation to us, and if we know it, we should not
slight it so as we do! therefore honored Ames, cas. l. 5. c. 22. tells us,
that this Libertas proxime accedit (...) vitam ipsam, Liberty a man counts next
his life, and will not loose it (if it be possible) but will loose his estate,
yea^ the Ames.
^lo^the^ off his back first; yea further, for the Public Liberty and common
safety, a faithful man will loose his very life, and prizes it abundantly above
his life, as some honest hearts have done in England in most ages. And if any
wonder that I will Obj.
^rive thus against the stream, seeing I cannot turn it, I must t^ll them,
That the Fish which always goes down Ans. Sim. Why we strive against stream.
the stream we suspect for dead, whilst the living Fish makes against the
stream; but the truth is, as when Tides turn, there is first a secret motion
and turning at the bottom before it comes at top; and so there is in the
bottom of our hearts, which will ere long be more openly to all eyes; in the
mean time, we must mind the People of the time of d^y, and tell them
what the Clock strikes, for their liberty and deliverance is hard by; And
believe it, Brethren, the flaming Sword is in our Genesis 3.
sight, turning hither and thither, every way, to drive out these Wretches that
have lived so long upon forbidden fruits; and although the bowls of Authority
seems (to many) to run Bias to a bad (I was ready to say Mad) Mistress, this
will be mended (ere long) when the Mistress is removed; but we must ballast our
Ship before we put to sail, therefore consider Countrymen!

First of all, No Governors are above the Peoples Laws and 1. Laws and
Liberties of the People are highest. Aristotle de mundo, and lib. ^ Polit c. 7.
Liberties; hence it was that Kings could not ( De jure) conclude, or determine
businesses according to their own wills; and Aristotle ( Alexanders Tutor)
tells us, That absolute power in Governors is the next degree to plain
Tyranny, yea had it not been for fear of offending Alexander, I think he had
called it absolute Tyranny, and said true too. Therefore are Kings and
Magistrates the Organs, or Instruments of executing the Peoples Laws, and must
receive their Laws from the People. Hence it is that the Emperor, King of
France, Kings of Spain, England, Poland, Hungary, or Princes of the house of
Austria, Dukes of Brabant, Earls of Flanders, or Holland, before their
Coronation, or Creation to the Governments, do engage to keep the Laws of their
Country; and their breach of the Laws is, or ought to be as punishable upon
them as any others. And to show how the Laws and Liberties of People are above
their Governors, God always gave Laws to such, as should govern the people for
the peoples good, Deuteronomy. 17. which their Rulers ought not to alter. vid. Brains
New Earth.

Secondly, All Rulers and Governors are bound to execute 2. Rulers are to be
for the peoples good. Caesar l. 5. and 7. de bell. Gal.
their Offices and Authorities for the peoples benefit, and public good; and
the greatest Treason is against the peoples Laws, and Liberties. And Caesar
himself in his Commentaries, tells us, that Amblorix King of the Eburons
confessed, that such were the conditions of the Gaulish Empire, that the people
lawfully assembled had no less power over the King, then the King had over the
People, but rather more. So we find there, how Vercingentorix gave an account
of his actions before the people, how they were for their good and freedom,
Thus in England, Ireland and Scotland the Representative of the People have the
greatest authority (i. e. as from the People) the like in Spain, especially in
Aragon, Valentia, and Catalonia ( cum aliis etc.) There is a Justitia Major who
stands for the Peoples Rights and Liberties, has more power then the King or
his Council, and therefore at his Coronation, the Lords of the Kingdom use
these words in their own Language to the King, p. 60. Nos qui valemos tanto
como vos, y p^demos mas que vos, vos elegimos Rei con estas e y estas
conditiones entra vos y nos un que, mandamus que vos. We who are in as much
value as you, and have more power then you, yet have chosen you King upon
conditions. etc. and there is between you and us, one that commands both you
and us, i. e. the Justitia Major, who is altogether for the peoples Laws,
Right, and Liberties; and to see that for this end the Kings, and Princes
govern. But in case Governors do not rule for the public good, then

Thirdly, The People may orderly declare against the dangerous 3. Else the
people declare against them.
Practices of their Rulers, and make an orderly resistance for their own
Rights and Liberties: Now let me not be mistaken, Rulers how?
for I fear this Doctrine will not please some selfish Rulers; but this I say,
whilst I call upon the people to appear for their own freedom and rights, I
mean not by arms, to fight, or wage war against their Governors in a rash
disorderly way, O no! not for a world! that we should be guilty of so ungodly
a Rebellion! for really, I would be one that would spend my blood against them
that so do: but this I say, let them mildly, declare against the
mis-governments of such men as seek their own private more then the public
good, and let them use means to correct Not by open arme^.
that mis-government, to admonish the offenders; to petition to the Parliament,
or to our Conqueror the Lord General, with the same importunities the poor
Widow used to the unjust Judge, till she was answered; and so continue, until
the godly people have By new choice.
their rights of a free choice of another Representative in their stead, that
will do better, and more righteous things for the People; and this privilege
the people may freely seek (by peaceable means) to enjoy and challenge as
their right, If these in this Representative should wrong, or yet rob us of our
Rights and Privileges, or act against the public good. Seeing the People
have the right and original power (as was declared in the last Parliaments
Declaration after the cutting off of the King for Why?
his tyranny) of choosing their own Rulers.

Thus the States or Princes of the people met at Mispah to choose Saul, 1 Samuel
20. 18. so 1 Samuel 11. 14. which was confirmed to him by the people at
Jabesh-Gilead; so was David first in Hebron, and after in Judah by the general
suffrage of the people. In this sense says Hushai to Absalom, 2 Samuel 16. 18.
Nay, but whom the Lord, and this people, and all the men of Israel shall choose,
his will I be, and with him will I abide: Yea, we read how the Heathen people
had learned this lesson by the light of nature, to choose their own Governors.
Thus Cicero says 1. de offic. that Deioces from a Judge of private
controversies, Cicera.
was for his uprightness chosen by the whole people of the Medes for their
Supreme Governor: and Livy tells us the like, ^ivius.
how their Governors and Senators were chosen by the people, and upon their
defaults, how they set up others, and put them out. Hence Tarquinus Superbus
was esteemed a Tyrant, being neither chosen by the people, nor the Senate, but
intruding. And thus we might go on, to show the people had ever the right of
choosing their own Governors; therefore they have the privilege orderly to
declare against their male-administrations; and to use all means that may be to
remove them that are retrograde to the public good, that others may succeed
who are more sensible of our bondage and tyranny. And this I say, that the
people have a defensive force of arms to preserve their Rights and Liberties
with, from those tyrannies and oppressions of their Rulers, as would wrong them
of them, and wring them from them; yea, moreover, if it be by consent of the
public (and not upon discontent of a few private hot-brained spirits) the
people (generally concurring)
may decline obedience to those Governors that have, or hold them in slavery
under Laws against the public good, whether as in relation to liberty of
Conscience, or liberty of the Subject; with reference to Gods Laws or the
Peoples. Thus Libna withdrew obedience from Jehoram King of Judah, 1 Chronicles. 6.
17. 2 Chronicles. 21. 10. for abandoning the Laws of God and the People. So when
Antiochus by his tyrannical Laws required the Jews to embrace his Religion,
and thereby robbed them of all the Laws of God, and their own Laws; We find
Mattathias 1. Macc. 1. 43. and 2. 22.
resolute to resist, and he says to the King; We will not obey, nor will we
do any thing contrary to our Religion. But, he took up arms, got into the
mountains, gathered Troops and waged war against Antiochus for Religion, and
Laws, and Liberties of the people, the Jews. Yea, we shall find Debora raise
(under the conduct of Barac) an Army for the Laws and Liberties of Israel (yea,
when many of the Tribes thought not of Liberty, as Reuben, Dan, Asher,
Benjamin, and Ephraim, and were against it too; and adhered to the Tyrant and
tyrannies of Jabin) by a few out of Z^bulon, Nepthalie, and Issachar, they
overthrew Sisera, and restored the people to their just Rights and Privileges.
Now these are so far from being Adversaries to the Public (that have a public
call thus to do) that they are her faithful Friends and Servants that seek to
defend her Rights and Liberties, though it be a disobedience to usurping or
tyrannical
powers; but be sure they have a clear call upon the public account, before
they appear so, and then let them be on the defensive side too, as for their
own.

Fourthly, Let our Countrymen know, that this conquest has 4 This Conquest
has been on the peoples account.
been altogether upon the peoples account, i. e. for their just Rights, Laws,
and Liberties; now is it not fit for them to demand their own? will they loose
their own for want of humble asking? or honest acting? The children of
Sophocles would have impeached and impleaded their Father for an old Dotard;
but Sophocles brings forth a book of his own writing, which was full of
Ingenuity, Art, and Reason, and bids his Judges see by that whether he were a
Dotard or no: So let other Nations see by something or other that we are past
children and fools to loose our Liberties and Rights any longer; therefore for
Christ's sake and the Countries, let us use all honest and lawful means to take
possession of our own, and pull them out of the hands of the Norman Tyrants,
and Intruders. Where be the faithful Commonwealths-men that call for their
Liberties and Laws (as was before William the Conqueror) are any of them left
alive? The Host of Nola in the story being commanded by the Roman Censor, to
go and call the good men of the City to appear before him, went to the
Churchyard and there called at the Graves of the dead, Ho! O ye good men of
Nola! come away! the Censor calls for your appearance! for I know not where any
good men are left alive! I think we may go so to the graves of some faithful
Commonwealths-men, and say, O hasten! out of your graves! for we know not where
to find such faithful ones for the Peoples Liberties left alive! for where
are they that will stand up for their Rights? would we but join more
magnanimously in a general issue herein, some particular faithful ones would
not be so much sufferers under the tyranny and cruelty of the Normans, as they
are, whiles we sit still and say nothing. O sad! will not after ages blush at
our folly? do we not say, it is pity but the prisoner should stay there, and
lie by it, seeing he will not go free when he may? when his Irons are off, and
doors are open on purpose? although it is true, after a man has his Reprive,
the dogged Keeper will make him wait, and beg too, long enough ere he sets him
at liberty, and lets his feet out of the Iron
bolts: and this (I fear) is our case too much; but then lets complain to the
Supreme Power of Heaven, and sue them before him for our false imprisonments
and bondage; if they do not deliver us, and give us our Liberties upon our
concurrent desires so to do. Wherefore pluck up courage Countrymen! and let us
be no longer cheated with Lawyers, or Oppressors.

Lastly, Consider the days entering in the fifth Chapter, which 5* Cons.
will put a full period to all their Tyrannies and Usurpations.

CHAP. V.
Of the FIFTH MONARCHY, when? and how? and why? with the alteration of all the
LAWS, and OFFICERS of the FOURTH MONARCHY; Improved with use to the PARLIAMENT
and the PEOPLE.

THe consideration of the Fifth Monarchy (now The Fifth Monarchy now hard by.
entering) is very pregnant to our purpose. For all the Laws and Ordinances
Civil and Ecclesiastic of the Fourth Monarchy, must tumble at the entrance of
the fifth. That there is such a Kingdom to come is obvious to all intelligent
men, by abundance of Scriptures, as Dan. 2. 35, 36, 37. and 7. 17, 23. 25. Rev.
11. 15. Isa. 9 6, 7. Psalm. 2. 5, 6. Psalm. 72. 8, 9, 11. Luke 1. 32. 39. Rev.
17. 14. and 16. 11. 19. Jer. 15. 25, 26. cum multis aliis; and it is for this*
fifth Monarchy (which must remain for ever, Isa. 9. 7. Dan. 2. 44. Luke 1. 33.
Psa. 72. 8. and 47. 2. Mic. 4. 7. Zach. 9. 10 etc) that all other Kings and
Kingdoms; Powers, Which breaks the Laws and Lawgivers of the fourth Monarchy
apeeces.
and Policies; Laws, and Lawyers in the fourth Monarchy must be shaken and
broken into fitters and shivers like potsheards. That there is such a mighty
Monarchy a coming which must be universal all over the World is without doubt:
but to our matter, we must examine,

First, When it enters. Secondly, How it enters. Thirdly, Why it enters, to the
ruin of the other.

First, As to the Time; though men be of diverse minds as to 1. When?
the precise time, yet all concur in the nighnesse and swiftness of its coming
upon us, The graduall entrance of it as to us, being just by, although the
universal discovery of it all over the world is like to be about forty years
hence, as appears in Chap. 3. of my Tabernacle for the Sun, or Idea of Church
Discipline. But to clear the time as to us, see Dan. 7. 17, 22, 23, 26, etc.
The Prophet tells us there expressly of the four Monarchies, now the fourth
Kingdom (as he calls it* ver. 23.) or earthly Monarchy he distinguishes from
the three foregoing for its tyranny and extent ver. 7. agreeing with Rev. 13.
2. etc. and tells us that it had ten horns, that is ten Kings, Rev. 17. 12.
which are enumerated by Mr. Came Mr. Came.
(in his voice from the Temple p. 12.) but after this that Daniel had seen the
ten horns in the head of this fourth Beast or Monarchy, ver. 8. he looked
well, and then saw, what? see v. 8. and behold! there came up among them
another little Horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked
up by the roots. Pray note it, (...) I considered (says he) with great
attention and serious intention, i. e. to something very observable in this
Vision, and that is to the rise of this little horn, that ravenously got up in
the room of three horns. Some there be that interpret this of the Calvin.
Pope, others of the Turk, others of Julius Caesar (so Calvin) others of
Antichrist; So my friend Mr. Can: others to Antiochus Epiphanes, so Polanus.
But I must differ from them all, Polanus.
for that the Prophecy agrees with none of them all fully; but though I may
seem singular, yet with much assurance, and clear sight, I assert it, that
William the Conqueror was this little The little horn i. e. Will. the Conqueror.
horn; and so all along the Line of William and the Norman Kings on our English
Throne; And that for these Reasons.

1. This Little horn was unseen, and none a while; even after 1 Unseen for a
while.
the ten horns were seen, for he arose after them all, and was at his first
rising seen, besides them and another, verse. 8. 20. which the Prophet makes
observeable, seeing he saw him not before: at his first rise he was the least,
and the last; this was K. William the Norman, who arose by usurpation over the
other horns on the head, and so his Line; therefore.

2. He rose up, or thrust in among the rest, i. e. as Will. the Rose up.
Conqueror did, by force and arms, not by choice and election; not naturally
with the rest of the horns, by the suffrage of the people.

3 He was as is in Dan. 11. 21. a vile person, or base borne, as 3 A vile
person.
we have it in p. 37. of the English Chronicles; Robert Duke of Normandy the
sixth in descent from Rollo, riding through Fallis a Town in Normandy, he spied
certain Damsels dancing near the way, among whom he fixed his eye upon one
Arlote, a fair Maid, but of mean Parentage, a Skinners Daughter, whom he
procured that night to be brought unto him, of whom he begat a Son, who
afterward was named William, etc. So that this Will the Conqueror was the base
Son of Robert the sixth Duke of that Duchy. This is the vile person, who rose
up so by usurpation of power, whence all the Norman Kings that sat (since) upon
the English Throne came.

4 After the League made with him, he shall work deceitfully, 4 By deceit.
etc. Chap. 11. 23. (...) or with frauds and arts; did not Will. the Conqueror
thus? See but the third Chapter how often he broke his Oaths and Promises, and
contrary to all, set up the Norman Interest, and pulled down the peoples with
the loss of all their Laws and Liberties to this day.

5 This Little horn was to wax great and famous in time, 5 To subdue three
Kingdoms.
and to subdue three Kingdoms, and get up the room of three Horns, or Kings,
ver. 8. 20. 24. as one more stout then all his other fellows. This was
fulfilled by William the Conqueror, and that Norman race in England, and by
none else; this Line of William (by degrees) got up all the room of three
Kings in England, Ireland, and Scotland, and took up those three
horns himself, who was so little at first as a poor Skinners Girls Bastard.
In whom could this be fulfilled else? not in Pope, nor Turk, nor Antichrist,
nor Caesar, nor Antiochus, but only in this English Horn, usurping the place
of the other three, and plucking them up by the roots (...).

6 This little Horn shall speak great words against God, 6 Speaks great words
against God.
ver. 25. and as Chap. 11. shall do according to his own will, ver. 36. and
exalt himself, and magnify himself above God, and prosper until the
indignation be accomplished. After Will. the Conqueror and his Race had made
themselves great, and
gotten up all the Britains wealth and riches, their fattest fields and
Meddows, etc. as Chap. 11. Ver. 24. he grew great in pride and Tyranny, and
Arbitrary power according to the lust of his heart, as the Hebrew has it (...)
and this got up into such a height at last, in the late Charles, that he not
only opposed God, but refused to be accountable, pretending no Mortals must
question him; and thus he magnified himself, usque ad consummationem irae,
till his head was off; which indignation was to begin with him first; for his
height of Arbitrary Will, Lust, and Tyranny, in which as Chap. 7. 20. he was
more stout then all his fellows; wherefore this horn must needs be the
English, by Will. the Conqueror.

7 This little horn that speaks these great words against the 7 Perplexes
the Saints by changing their Laws.
most high, shall afflict and perplex the Saints of the most high chap. 7. 25.
(...) and think with himself how to change the times and Laws, and that this
takes in the Laws of the people (especially) appears by the word (...) dath,
which is not interpreted Legem Dei, vel Evangelium, the Laws of God, but the
institutions, Statutes, and Laws of men. Now who did ever so palpably rob and
wrong the People of their own rights and liberties, as William the Norman? and
his Successors all along, taking away their Laws, and setting up his own, for
his own ends, and ever studying how to guard their own Interest, and
Prerogative with tyrannical Laws, to the oppressing of the people and the
public.

8 This little horn was to be a hot, fiery, fierce persecutor 8 A fierce
persecutor of the Saints till the Judgment.
of the Saints, Dan. 7. 21, 22, 25, 26. till the Judgment should sit. and so
was William and all his Line of Norman Kings to Charles Stuart, ever persecuting
and afflicting Gods Servants under the notion of Heretics, Brownists,
Puritans, Roundheads, Anabaptists, and the like, till the last Tyrant ran out
into arms openly, and continued it until the Judgemen-Seate was set: (...)
which was Anno one thousand six hundred forty eight, in that High Court of
Justice erected for the Kings Trial, the Ancient of days came and gave
Judgment, first against this little Horn of the Norman Kings, and that was
according to the Prophecy, ver. 9, 10, 11. who will see Master Canns Master
Can.
first voice from the Temple, p. 14. may be more satisfied as to this.

9 This little Horn was to be (by that Judgment Court or 9. Never to be more.
Throne erected) so cut off as never to be more, see Ver. 26. This judgment
shall sit, and shall take away his Dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto
the end; ah dreadful Tragedy! (...) which was acted accordingly, and enacted
against all Kingly Power in England, never more to arise in these three nations.

10 After this Horn (thus judged,) the work is to go on, 10. The rest of the
Horns continue for a time.
and the Thrones of Justice, or Day of Judgment will reach France, Spain,
Denmark, Poland, etc. with all the rest of the ten Horns, but they have some
respite after the little Horn is cut off, and therefore, chap. 7. ver. 12. As
concerning the rest of the Beasts, their lives were prolonged for a season and
time, the Hebraism is, ad tempus and tempus, which is very remarkable and
excellent: (...) the rest of the Kings their Lives are kept for a fit season;
i. e. Gods own time of visiting them, which certainly is upon the wing.

11 Then enters the fifth Monarchy, as is ver. 14. There 11. The fifth Monarchy.
was given to him dominion, glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Languages,
Nations, should serve him, etc. So in verse 27. And the Kingdom, and Dominion,
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the
people of the Sainst of the most high, whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. Hitherto is the end of
the matter. This hastens (...) within this seven years, by one thousand six
hundred When.
and sixty, the work will get as far as Rome, and by one thousand six hundred
sixty six this Monarchy must be visible in all the earth; but in the mean time
it must have a gradual entrance as When.
to us, very suddenly (as appears in Daniels Prophecy) after the fall of the
little Horn, or the Norman line in the fatal stroke given to Charles Stuart,
one thousand six hundred forty eight, and this will be to the ruin of those
Laws and Lawyers, which as yet stand to oppress the people. O terrible
DOOMES-DAY to them at the entrance of this fifth Monarchy! And then

12. Lastly, This fifth Monarchy must be the last Monarchy 12 The last Monarchy.
on earth, ver. 14. and 27. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that shall
not pass away, and his Kingdom that shall not be destroyed. So ver. 27. whose
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom; (...) Hence it is that there must be
SHAKINGS of all Nations until the DESIRE of all Nations come, Hag. 2. 6. and
till that Kingdom come which will never be shaken, and then Christ shall have
the only Supreme Power, the summam potestatem in the Nations, Hebr. 12. 27,
28. Now the time being just by us for the fifth Monarchy, and for the breaking
all to fitters of the fourth; let the PRIESTS and LAWYERS look about
them, the ALARM is given them already: Throw her down, come against her from
the utmost borders, destroy her utterly, let nothing of her be left, Jer. 50.
26. God will execute the judgment that is written, Psalm. 149. 8, 9. For now
has the Angel poured out the fifth vial upon the seat of the Beast here in
England, Revel. 16. 10. So that such men must needs g^aw their tongues for
pain; but very shortly shall the river Euphrates be dried up, for the time
draws nigh.

Secondly, How this FIFTH MONARCHY must enter 2. The manner how. 1. By degrees.
in? a word to that;

1. Gradually, the Stone cut without hands grows by degrees greater and greater
till it fill the whole earth, (...) Dan. 2. The stone is this fifth Monarchy
cut out without men's hands, which must break a pieces all the other Monarchies
never more to rise. The fourth Monarchy is breaking up apace, and will suddenly
tumble and kick his heels in the air.

2 Mysteriously, Being cut without hands, it comes in, and 2. In a mystery.
men know not how; whilst men act and intend their own designs, in comes Christ
with his Kingdom. Was it not mysterious to our States in the late trial of
King Charles? did they think to fulfill the Prophecies and Scriptures thereby?
no surely, for they intended to fulfill their own wills and the will of the people
in taking away tyranny and Tyrants; but God intended thereby a fulfilling his
will so long foretold of this little horn. Thus how mysterious was the war
with Scotland, and now with Holland? and O how wonderfully mysterious will the
following Wars be? and especially the Catastrop^e of the Tragedy upon the other
Horns. I know most men are in darkness as to the great change, the Fifth
Monarchy will make amongst us? yea, and in all Europe? seeing already they are
netled at the verge of it, or the very appearance of
Tith-tumbling, and Lawyers-downfall. But it must be so, Rev. 16. 10. When the
vial is poured out upon the sea^ of the Be^st, his Kingdom is full of
darkness, etc. Yea, gross darkness shall cover the earth; when this glory is
rising, Psa. 60. 1, 2. it must be mysterious, being not by might, but by my
Spirit, says the Lord, Zach. 4.

But besides this, the manner of this Fifth Monarchies entrance 3. Suddenly
and terribly.
will be suddenly too, as Lightning, Matthew. 24. 27. and Noah's flood, ver. 38.
and terrible to the enemies, whose hearts fail them for fear; But glorious to
the Saints, Mal. 4. 2, 3. The wicked understand not this, but the wise shall,
Dan. 10. 12.

Thirdly, Why this Fifth Monarchy hastens so? Amongst other 3. The Reasons.
things, I pick out two, as

First, for the Redemption of the People; Luke 21. 28. lift up your 1 The
Redemption of the people.
heads, for your redemption draws nigh; and the creature, or the whole
Creation groans for this liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. and
for this manifestation. Because the creatures will then be freed from that
bondage of corruption, inutillty, vanity, and failing of their true end (as
Gellius has it) which they Gellius Redemption.
are now subject unto. But our Redemption will be,

1. From Ecclesiastic Bondage, Decrees, Councels, Orders, 1. From
Ecclesiastical slavery of soul^s
and Ordinances, of Pope, Priest, Prelate or the like. The whore shall be
striped stark naked, and made desolate, Rev. 17. 16. and all the Statutes of
Omri taken away, Mic. 6. 16.

2 From Civil bondage and slavery, or those bloody, base, unjust, 2. From Civil
slavery of bodies.
accursed, tyrannical Laws, and sin-monopolizing Lawyers, as (now) oppress
and afflict the people; For the sighing of the poor and oppressed, now will I
arise says the Lord. A Heathen Psalm. 12.
said once, Let Justice be done though the world perish for it; But Jehovah
says now, Justice shall be done though the
world perish for it. Then woe be to the Lawyers and Priests! I Of both.
meet with many old Prophesies of these days, as in the Oracles of the Sibyls
there is one, in lib. 3. p. 246, 247. mentioned by John Opsopaeus, that in the
latter days of Kings and Emperors, Christ Prophesies of the Sibyls.
alone shall be the King, and shall deliver his Subjects that have been
captives under other Kings and Emperors; and then shall there be good Laws and
Religion, together with Justice and Righteousness, which shall come down from
Heaven to visit Of the restoration of good Laws.
men upon the Earth; and the evil Religion (which I think they meant the
Popish and Antichristian that belongs to Babylon) and Laws (which surely
relates to the Civil Laws by what follows) with all envy, hatred, spite,
anger, violence, wrongs and deadly slaughter, shall fly away with them from
mortal men. Woe be to the Lawyers then!

There is another Prediction by one Paracelsus, a German Physician, which was
long since presented to Ferdinand, K. of the Of P^^acelsu^.
Romans, and since to the Emperor; which is this. About 50 (which I conceive he
meant An. 1650,) There will be a terrible Eclipse of the Sun, together with
great inundations or overflowings of waters, and after that will be
diverstumults, seditions, Of these war^ with Holland.
battles, burnings, and bloodsheddings, to molest the Northern Nations, viz.
Brabant, Flanders, Zealand, and Holland especially; and then will the Rosen
Crown (I suppose he meant the English-Rose) be ripe. The Summer (or hot
weather i. e. the wars in these days) that bears this Rose, is that
contentious time, wherein All shall be divided. A sure argument then, that that
thing shall perish, which man has built upon the sand, and then shall the
sandy foundation (i. e. in this Ecclesiastical and Civil both) be changed
into a Rock, where at all men shall wonder. O the wonderful things that ^re
now to be done in these Nations! he goes on very largely, and foretells great
calamities to France, Flanders, Zealand and Holland, To France.
as never were; and that it shall fall fiercely upon Spain too, insomuch as
the Pomeg^anat (meaning Spain) shall be divided, and the seeds thereof cast
forth. And thence he goes forward Spain.
in his twelfth Prediction to the Pope, and says, Behold, It^ly.
thou have placed thy self above God, but now he will give thee thy reward;
thou soughtest worldly glory, but now as worldly things perish, so do thou:
Those things shall befall thee which thou never lookedst ^or: And then in his 31
Prediction by the image of four naked children embracing each other, he says,
Laws plain and honest.
Magnafutura est mutatio and renovatio; etc. O! then enters the great change,
which shall be called the happy Reformation that follows, which is without
deceit, arts, subtleties; but in plain, naked, innocent Laws. And this shall
be when 60.
may be numbered (from such a year (I suppose he meant by An. 1660.) And then
he goes on in his 32. Prediction, which bears the image of the Sun shining upon
a man that is asleep, to show what glorious days succeed to Church and State
for ever after that.

Besides him, we shall find Nostradamus in his 1. Century, and Prediction of
Nostradimus.
10. Quadr. tells us, what troubles his poor Country France must be in; and in
3. Cent. 9. 32. 38. 41. and so in 7. 34. he says there shall be such sudden
mutations that their Salique Law shall fail them; and finishes his 38. Quadrin
of his fifth Centurie thus,

Qu' en fin fauldra la loy Salique: Of France.
And that their divisions at home in their own Kingdom by their own Princes
and Peers (as it is now) shall occasion the fall of their Crown, the alteration
of their State, Laws, and Religion: The Prediction says thus, Ie prevoy de
grandes guerres and des grandes effusions de sang* a l' occasion des premiers
du ^oannes Wol^ius
Royaume, etc. But Wolfius in his 13. Centenarie says, he had this too, out of
an old manuscript in the City of Auspurge, beginning thus, Praelia magnatum
video, cum sanguinis unda, etc. And Nostradamus in Cent. 5. 9. 99. tells how the
sword must begin Of Rome destroyed by our Army of England.
the Reformation of Rom^ and that it shall be ruled by the Britains (meaning
our English Army) Quand Rome aura le chef vieux Brittanique.

Thus one Joachim an Italian has long since foretold too, (a man many
honorable, and learned men make much mention of, as Predictions of Ioachim.
Paulius Aemilius, etc.) in a certain Book of pictured Prophecies in the
second Prediction he paints out the Pope thirsting for the blood of
Christians, and in the eighth Prediction says of him, Behold here the Husband
of the Whore of Babylon! and in 25. Prediction he says, Vae tibi Civitas
Septicollis, quando C. litera comminabitur moenibus tuis, etc. Woe to thee
Rome! when the letter C. (perhaps the late Charles) shall begin Concerning
CROMWELL it* is so be thought
to ^ound within thy walls; or else it may be Cromwell will give them an Alarm.
And after that he tells them, that almost all Christian Princes and Nations
shall unite to afflict them, and become their enemies, and turn out of the City
the proud Prelates and Cardinals, and take in, in their room, the humble, and
more worthy. And now proud Rome (says he chapter 21.) that says, I sit as a
Queen, I am not a widow, neither shall I see sorrow, etc. The time is now come
that that whorish Synagogue Romes ruin by the English.
of Romish Prelates shall be stripped stark naked, and their iniquities laid
open; For the LORD himself will arise in Judgment to destroy Babylon root and
branch, by the hand of the flying Power (meaning England) Then shall new
Preachers be sent to thee, that shall not only rebuke the People, but also
English Preachers sent thither.
thunder against the Priests, and put to silence the lofty and swelling
Masters; and they shall so bruise the forehead of that lewd Whore, that it
shall be reputed Righteousness to them that rebuke thee. Finally (says he
chap. 30.) the LORD shall not make an end till New things do arise; and that
there come a Generation bringing forth good fruit, and a full Reformation be;
Then, Qui in tenebris ambularunt ad lucem redibunt, and quae erant divisa and
dispersa consolidabuntur, etc.

Besides him, we have another Judgment in a Prediction of Predictions of B. ^.
Finius.
long standing, and that is one Cataldus Finius, once Minister of Trent* When
Rome (says he) begins to hear the lo^d bellowing Of Rome.
of the fat Cow (I know not who that is, unless the English Nation, as seems
by what follows.) Woe! woe then be to thee O Flanders full of blood! and
Zealand, and Holland full of Of Holland.
treacheries! (as if this were the way of the war to Rome) Alas! alas! weep
thou unhappy Babylon! thou damned pit of Priests! for the days of affliction
are come upon thee! and like unripe corn thou shall suffer a threshing for
thine iniquities. Many shall come against thee; yea, from the four corners of
the Earth,
the Holy ones of God shall be gathered together against thee.

Over and above all these, one Baptista Nazarus has translated Predictions of
Baptista Nazarus, his Ital. dish. Of Spain, France, Germany, Rome.
a prophecy out of Hebrew, how in the sixth thousand years (which is now) shall
begin great wars to vex Nations, and they shall come into Spain, France and
Germany, and put the Romans to the edge of the sword; and that the English
shall combine with others, and the Venetians shall enter into a holy league
with the English (I conceive that to be meant a league upon theaccount of
Christ against Antichrist, etc.) and they shall go on conquering; and have the
chief hand in vanquishing the Turks. So that it The Turks by the English
seems long since it was fores^en what God would do in, and by this Nation, and
how fast from them the Fifth Monarchy should go
on and grow up, to the ruin of the fourth Monarchy in all Nations, which
appears to strike terrible strokes at the Ecclesiastical Predictions of the
Sibyls.
and Civil Interest of Babylon. I could heap up many more Prophesies and
Predictions of this nature; But I shall end them in one more of the Sibyls lib.
3. p. 268. 269. which says that in the last days, after grievous and
intestine wars; shall be set up instead of the cruel Laws and wills of men,
the most venerable Of new Laws and godly Decrees.
Decrees, Laws, and Ordinances of the Lord; and then shall the, beloved People
of God flourish again. So that it seems the Sibyls foresaw how sadly the poor
people would be oppressed and enslaved by cursed and cruel Laws and Lusts of
men all along the fourth Monarchy, and what redemption herein the fifth
Monarchy would bring them, for as in Psalm. 72. 3. 7. (Christ) the King shall
reign (in those days) and then the Mountains, (Kings, Princes, Parliaments,
Generals) and the Hills (viz. Judges, Justices, etc.) shall bring peace to the
people by justice, and thorough righteousness, and then (...) in those days
the righteous shall flourish, and abundance of peace shall be, so long as the
Moon endures, and Christ shall reign from Sea to Sea (i. e. by degrees at
first, till it come) to the ends of the Earth; but thus for the first Reason,

Secondly, This fifth Monarchy must enter a pace, for that 2.
Christ has (of right) the Supreme Authority of the Nations, therefore Dan. 7.
27. (...) And the Kingdom (i. e. the fifth Monarchy) and the summa potestas
Regni, 2. The Supremacy of Christ over all Powers and Nations.
the Supreme authority of the Nation is his, or the absolute Sovereignty is
given him (the (...)) in Heaven and in Earth. Wherefore woe be to those
Usurpers, that trade, and triumph with the title due to Christ alone, who is
now coming for his own. No wonder Holland has so hard a tug now to keep the
title of (I
was going to say Almighty, but) High and Mighty, which Christ has a Commission
to take from them with a powder; Do but observe de Wits Letter to them, dated
(11 alias) 1. Aug. 1653. lying before the Texel, who ends it thus,

-- Which is the account sent to your High, and Mighty, and Noble, Great and
Mightinesses. So ending, I remain, Your High and Mighty, and Noble, and Great,
and Mightinesses faithful Servant, Cornelius de With Wit. And he deserves
the With for flattering men so. This must not be endured ere long, and it were
well for us if we took not that Title, which Christ alone must and will have
ere long to himself as his by right. Besides Christ alone must be the
Lawgiver, and have the Legislative Power in this Monarchy, Who then Lawgiver.
Isa. 33. 22. Jekovah is our Lawgiver, So Genesis 49. 10. Shiloh should be their
Lawgiver, so Psa. 60. 7. Judah: (...) that is, Christ (of the Tribe of Judah)
is my Lawgiver; (...) it is as much as to say, there is no stability in
Government or Laws, till Christ's Fifth Monarchy, till he come (...) give it
them. He has the Judicial Power too, John 5. 22. 27. But although he does
delegate a Judicial Power to his Servants, Isa. 1. 27. 1 King. 6. 12. and
subordinate Officers, Isa. 60. 17. Dan. 7. 27. Rev. 19. 14.
which must all be Saints too; yet he keeps the Legislative Power to himself,
and will not part with it (nor can he) to Princes or Parliaments; He alone is
to have the absolute Sovereignty, as the word is (...) Dan. 7. 14. So that his
will, his word, or command is the Law, and the Law ought to be none but his
Word all grounded, and fetched from the Word of God, which is What Laws then?
to be the Statute-Booke, Psalm. 147. 19. He shows HIS Statutes, and HIS
Judgments to Israel. Then the ablest Lawyers will be such as are most
conversant with Christ, his Scriptures and Ordinances. O happy days! then the
Laws will be Who the best Lawyers then?
healing as Sovereign Medicines, and the Magistrates like P^ysitians must
apply them; for these and diverse other reasons we look for the fifth Monarchy,
and do continually cry, Come Lord Jesus! come quickly! Let every one that
longs for these new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2
Pet. 3. 13. Pray, Our Father, thy Kingdom come, (that) thy Vid. Brain's new
earth.
will (may) be done in earth as it is in heaven, Matthew. 6. 10. that we may have
none but Christ's Laws, Statutes, and Government, but forget all old Forms of
Civil or Ecclesiasticke, for which end Lord hasten this fifth Monarchy.

Use. My first word is full to our Governors in the Honorable Use. 1. To the
Parliament, to model all for the fifth Monarchy. 1. To entrust none but honest
men.
Court of Parliament, if so be the fifth Monarchy is so nigh us, it concerns
them to set upon their Generation-worke then in these days, which is, to model
and conform the Civil affairs for Christ's coming, I mean more off of the
fourth Monarchy, and more on to the fifth; therefore

1 Constitute none but honest faithful men, such as follow the Lamb, into
places of trust, or offices of this Nation, seeing none but the Saints of
Christ shall be his Officers here in place and employment for Christ, and the
Commonwealth in the fifth Monarchy that is now entering, Dan. 7. 27. Rev. 17.
14. Psalm. 72. 10. Isa. 1. 26. Rev. 19. 14. wherefore the suffering of Lawyers
to live so by sin in Westminster Hall, and in
all Courts as they do, will be unexcusable in the day of his coming, 1 King.
20. 42. and give the visible brand of those Governors in Isa. 1. 23. Thy
Princes are rebellious, and companions of Thieves, etc. therefore verse. 24. Ah!
I will ease me of these my Adversaries, as Rev. 2. 20. I have an action against
thee, for that thou suffer that wicked woman Jezabel, etc. So may be said to
you, if that you suffer this monstrous society of open sinners that trade in
it, and live by it to continue. Nehemiah would not give his own brother
Hananiah a Commission, but because he was a man fearing God, chap. 7. 2. and
David does profess; that his eyes should be upon none but the faithful ones
of the land Psalm. 101. 6. and they that walk holily (and not the wicked) that
he would countenance: (...) but he even hates their wicked, and will not suffer
them in his sight; and it is noted of this man,
that he served his generation herein, Act. 13. 36. certainly our Parliament
will serve their generation (as well as God) most singularly, to put down these
men of sin from their trading in sin. So Psalm. 101. 8. (...) I will Throw
out men of sin.
early in the morning of my Government, the first thing I go about (says he)
shall be to throw down the wicked; O that our Parliament would eye and own
Davia's practice herein betimes, to begin this work which will make them
glorious, and as Gods in the eyes of the people; if they will not, but yet will
spare these Amalekites, they may then remember Saul, how he was rejected for
doing the Lords work negligently, and by halves, or deceitfully, and not
rightly, nor uprightly, in that he spared some of those wicked people that God
would not have spared; therefore was he, yea and his Household cut off with
reproach and shame, to scare us in after ages; let him be your Sea-mark herein.

Secondly, See that all the Laws of this Nation are agreeing 2. That the Laws
agree with Gods Laws.
with the Word of God, and those Laws which are contrary to sound reason or
religion, whether in things Civil or Ecclesiastic, that they may be abolished
for ever, that so our Governors may be the Ministers of God to us for good, as
Romans 13. 2, 4. so that those unjust, cruel Laws, that proportion not the
punishments to the offense, that put to death innocent ones, that delay
Justice, that rob and wrong the people, may be all tried at the High Court of
Justice, and receive their sentence. O what brave Bonfires on a Thanksgiving
day will the Popish Decrees, and tyrannical oppressing Laws that are yet
extant make? O how well they would warm us! And if our Governors would burn
the Whores Flesh with fire, Rev. 17. 16. then let them burn all those Acts,
Laws, and Ordinances, Civil or Ecclesiastical, that keep her warm and livel^
yet amongst us: For the Statutes of Omri are (yet) kept, (...) all the works
of Ahab, and ye walk in your Counsels, that I should make ye a desolation,
therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people, Micha 6. 16. Deuteronomy. 28. 33.
their not throwing down those sinful Laws offended God greatly. Saul's
disobedience was his consulting so much with his own reason, more then with
Gods Word, and this has ruined hundreds, and made them obstruct the work of
Christ in every Generation; State Policy a great enemy.
Jehu by Jeroboams reason of state winked at the Calves in Dan and Bethel,
although he bragged how little his Predecessor Ahab had done, 2 King. 10. 18.
and how he would exceed him, saying, Come with me, see my zeal for the Lord;
and yet ver. 29. he departed not from Jeroboams Calves. O this
State policy, and reasoning has been ever the Public enemy! but away with
that, in the work which is to do for Christ, by burning the Images, and
pulling down the Groves, wherein so much sin has been committed; so by
burning those Laws, and pulling down those Courts, Terms and Lawyers, yea
and Tithes too, which have occasioned such actions, continual complaints, and
vexations to the people, and wrongs to God and men, good and bad.

Thirdly, Improve your utmost for Jesus Christ, and his 3. To do all for
Christ and his Monarchy.
Monarchy at home and abroad, your Talents must not be hid in the earth, i. e.
minding earthly things; for your work is to set the oppressed free; and as
Mordecai said to Ester, chapter 4. 14. For if thou boldest thy peace at this time,
yet there shall enlargement and deliverance arise to the people from another
place, but you and your Fathers house shall be destroyed (then) and who knows
whether you are come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? Therefore look
to it now, whiles you have a time to do it; and let me add this to urge you,
that this Monarchy of Christ will deliver us from slavery and tyranny, and set
up the Laws of God in the stead of men's. See Isa. 42. 21, 22. The Lord is well
pleased, for his righteousness sake, he will Magnify the LAW, and Gods Law
must be set up.
make it HONORABLE; but (as yet in the Fourth Monarchy) this is a People
robbed and spoiled (as the Jews were by the Romans; so we by the Normans
robbed of all our rights which we hope to be restored into, yea) they are all
SNARED in holes, and bid in PRISON-HOVSES, they are for a PREY, and none
DELIVERS. (O sad! if it be said so
of this Parliament too!) and for a SPOIL, and none says RESTORE: my work
and word is to say, RESTORE, which if you that are in Power refuse to do it,
yet deliverance shall come, but woe be to you! as to the tail of the Fourth
Monarchy! (which is not as yet out of rule) for God has tried and trusted you
with the HONOR which else others shall take from you within few years; for
the Fifth MONARCHY must make work amongst you, and will make the LAW (of Gods
Law.
God) Great, Glorious, and Honorable. The Law of God, (which is now slighted,
as imperfect, whiles men set up their own Notions and Forms in the stead, and
prefer Gratians, or a Expos.
Justinians Law, and so make themselves as Heathens without the Law of God
amongst them) this Law lies in Deuteronomy. 6. 1. These are the Commandments (i. e.
the Ten in two Tables given Moses on mount Sinai, Exodus 20.) the Statutes (i.
e. the several Cases depending on, and arising out of each Command, tending to
establish and confirm each Command, as Master Brain well observes in his New
Earth, page 9. and the In the Fifth Monarchy.
Judgments, (i. e, the sentence upon the breach of every Law, how and what
punishment must be.) Now this Law, Statute-Booke, and Judgment Seat of God
must be set up, (and not 1.
man's) in this Fifth Monarchy, and then shall we be restored. 2.
1. To Gods Lowes, 2. In our own Language; 3. Read 3.
and expounded, and made known to the people, Deuteronomy. 30. 10. 4.
to 16. Job 7. 49. 4. At free-cost without charge. 5. Justice 5.
will be had at home then, and Judges sit in all the Gates of the Cities, Deuteronomy.
1. 6. And every man plead his own Cause by the 6.
Law of God (then no need of Lawyers.) 7. Justice will not 7.
then be delayed, Eccles. 8. 11. but speedy. 8. And executed 8.
without gaine-saying, according to the Law (set) of God, Hebr. 10. 28. Romans 2.
2. Deuteronomy. 1. 7. and without respect of persons, Levit. 24. 22. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17.
1 Samuel 12. 3. Levit. 19. 15. 9. Then Judges will be as at first, and Justice
also, 9.
Isa. 1. 26. in every City, 2 Chronicles. 19. 5. Deuteronomy. 16. 18. and 10. Then the Lord
will be our only Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 13. and 10
the Law abide for ever without alteration: (as there is now, and ought to be
in the forms of men) wherefore if you be the Men whom the Lord will own and
honor in this work: up
then! and about it! for the Body of Laws lies ready before you in the Word of
God. O that you might be used of God, for Christ in this work of magnifying
his Law in this Commonwealth of England! (I was ready to say of Israel, but it
is not so yet) which should be to your Fame for ever! The Lord Jesus awaken you
with the noise of his Monarchy! which is swift in motion, and now nigh us!
least you be surprised.

Fourthly, Avoid making of Parties, and running into factions, 4 To avoid
factions and parties.
(as the former Parliaments have done) to carry on selfish, sinful, or private
designs; such men as are spirited for the fifth Monarchy will be more unanimous
then have been hitherto for Christ against Antichrist. O what hot contests were
between the two Parties in general of Presbyterians and Independants (besides
particular factions) in the Parliament before! what ways they had, thereby to
advance and advantage themselves and friends, was obvious The pretty designs of
the former Parliament.
to every eye, and by this pretty Artifice they shared the Commonwealth
(almost) amongst them; besides private cheats, what abundance of open ones, by
gifts, rich Offices, and Employments in Committees and Treasuries they
obtained? and in pretense of serving the public too, they have shuffled the
trumps into their own hands. And how artificially have they confounded the
Accounts, by laying on numberless Taxes and Assessements, whilst the multitude
of money ran through so many muddy channels, Committees, Officers, and
Collecting lick-fingers, as it is impossible to make any public account
thereof. So that notwithstanding all fair promises to the people, no accounts
are, or ever will be given of those many millions of money which were made by
Kings Lands, Bishops, and Deans, and Delinquents Estates, arrears, Excize,
Assessements, and the like, which some have licked up so handsomely into
unsatiable tubs ((...) etc. that they have bought great Manors, and Lordships
of many hundreds
a year, whilst poor Publica fides is but Punica fides.

Thus by their Factions they had their several designs for themselves, and
interests of their own, and with their Hocus Pocasses could conjure up and
carry their own for the public; and in pretense of the public (with honor
and wealth enough) they did gladly sacrifice the public peace to their own
private interest; and when they had set all on fire (as several times they did
in the Nation by troubles and wars) they would with joy warm their own hands
at those unhappy and unhallowed flames, which themselves kindled; witness
Hollis, Stapleton, Massey, Sir John Clotworthy; and many others more lately,
whom I forbear. But see thus the issue of Parties and Factions in the
Parliament, to the So now parties about Tithes.
hindrance and hurt of the Public. And O, how do honest men's hearts ache
already to hear what Factions, Schisms, and Parties, are in this Parliament?
Yea, about the poor, petty, popish trash, and Trumpery of Tithes, which shall
tumble in due time, when selfinterest is more laid aside, and Christ is with
more unanimous concurrence accepted of; for the Whore shall be stripped as stark
naked as ever she was born, before it be long; Though Babylon-birds lament it
so. But in the interim we trust our good God will give these Governors a new
Clue to lead them out of this Labyrinth. And

Fifthly, Follow not Achitophels Counsel, for it will come to 5, To avoid
Achitophel, and Machiavell.
naught, nor yet Machiavils Prince, or Principles, which most States men have
been Students in, and Practitioners of ad unguem: But the Monarchy which is
coming will crush them to some tune. Does it not relish like a Paradox, that
those Statesmen are most Machiavilian, who give him the worst words? But
believe it, some are amongst us now who study his Politics and Vide Modern
Policies.
Tricks apace: and (least I should reflect upon the righteous, sober,
honest-hearted Statesman) I must show you them to shun them, and their cursed
principles.

1 Principle they hold is, To have the shadow of Religion, 1. Principle of
Policy.
though they have none of the substance. This they learned of Machiavel, who
notes it from Papirius, how handsomely he slighted the Pullarii with good
words, and was well rewarded; whereas Appius Pulcher doing it bluntly and
plainly was punished. How many imitate Herod's politics, who pretend to
worship, Machiavel^.
but intend to worry; such dissemble Piety so neatly, when they act against it
most strenuously, that in that very art and article of hidden impiety the poor
deluded people may Saint them, ipso sceleris molimine Tereus Creditur esse
pius; this is that which hallowes the most hellish enterprises, which surprise
honesty in an ambush, surdo verbere: But

1. Principle of Piety, is to have the substance of Religion, 1. Principle of
Piety.
though without the shadows and formet; this is vinum in pectore; and (...);
And I pray God by this change our Governors change these principles of Policy
for honest, and faithful Principles of Piety; and prefer the substance above
the shell, that God and men may not be mocked so by our State-Politicians as
they have been; nor the poor People (who are not able to unriddle them) be
made a prey to such Sphinxes, whiles like foolish Birds they follow the Kite in
hope of a prey, till they be made a prey.

2 Principle of Policy is, by the most insinuating applications 2. Pr. of
Policy.
to be popular, looking unto their own designs in a pretense as for Liberty,
Religion, Reformation, or the like. Their motto is, mel in ore, fell in cord;
they varnish their vices ((...)) and polish their Impostures, so as Pindar
says, (...), Pindar.
etc. And thus did our former States men even ^^vish and rejoice the hearts of
the people, with promises, and pretenses, as of freeing them from taxes,
troubles, and oppressions, even whilst they were creating new Acts, and Designs
of oppressing them, curling their smooth Complements into rugged Practices.

2 Principle of Piety is, to avoid Popularity, which will be 2. Pr. of Piety.
wisdom when all is done; and indeed our Lord and Lawgiver Jesus Christ went
away from them that would have made him King; and evermore he would avoid the
multitudes, when once they began to throng after him: Besides Piety accounts
Plain-dealing the Jewel; and though it be a maxim in morality, yet it is true
in Divinity too: Bonum oritur ex integris.

3 Principle of Policy is to temporize; like the Dutchman 3. Pr. of Policy
that sails with all winds, so they turn with the times, and like Ca^s, will be
sure to pitch upon their feet. If the times turn for Religion, who like him? if
for Brethren to preach, he will preach too; he can fashion himself fit for the
times, omnia pro tempore, Origin*
and nihil pro veritate.

3 Principle of Piety, the true Christian is constant to his 3. Pr. of Piety.
Principles, and holds fast his profession without wavering, Heb. 10. 24. for
all the times; If the ship, wherein Christ's Disciples are, miscarry, he had
rather ^^^re cum Christo, then regnare cum C(...)

4. Principle of Politicians, is to put a necessity upon the most exorbitant 4.
Pr. of Policy*
actions, as a Competant apology for them, (...)! So that be it for wars, acts
of oppression, banishment, taxes, or the like, necessity makes the Law. The
Andreans answered Themistocles (when he came for tribute, and told them he was
accompanied with two Goddesses: viz. eloquence and violence, they replied) they
had two Goddesses as strong, viz. necessity, and impossibility.

4. Principle of Piety, is to put an absolute necessity upon nothing 4. Pr. of
Piety.
but Christ and his Kingdom, and to hold no necessity to any thing that is
sin, but rather a necessity against it, which is the virtue.

5 Principle of Policy, is to calumniate and inculcate the lapses 5. Pr. of
Policy.
and failings of their former Rulers with the greatest advantage. For this does
indear the present Rulers the more.

5 Principle of Piety is to look upon infirmities and failings, as 5. Pr. of
Piety.
such, which the best of us are subject unto, and ingenuously to look upon the
good actions to imitate them; as well as the evil actions to avoid them; for
what is worse then (...).

6 Principle of Policy, is to urge good successes as arguments 6. Pr. of Policy.
to authenticate or canonize their cause, for this is a popular and taking
argument; as the Romans were wont to call their Victories the Arbitresse of
their just cause, Event us belli velut aequus Judex, unde jus stat, ei
victoriam dabit, etc.

6 Principle of Piety, is first to have our cause clearly authentic 6. Pr. of
Piety.
and good, and then to wait for what success God will give; knowing prosperous
vices are Cardinal ventues in the account of fools and ignorants, Prosperum ac
foelix scelus! says one, (...) are not one; wherefore let our cause be
canonized in heaven.

7 Principle of Policy, is to oblige some mercenany men that 7* Pr. of Policy*
have some influence on others to applaud their actions, and explode the
contraries. The Popish Politicians have employed the Jesuits to such Offices,
and so have other of the States, others that were as greedy of gain, and as
full of garrulity or tongue.
Was not this the reason that some Ministers, and others, were exalted into
great places? preferments? Colleges? or the like, above (...)

7 Principle of Piety, is to oblige such as have influence on 7. Pr of Piety.
God and Christ, to call for his spirit to be poured out upon them, and they
are content to have the righteous reprove them, Psalm. 141. 5. Yea, and find
comfort in it; and care not for such Clerical Statists, as would skreen them or
others from seeing their errors.

8 Principle of Policy, is to impose Oaths, Covenants, Engagements 8. Pr. of
Policy.
full of ambiguity, and yet pleasing and plausible in the vulgar sense, so as
may make for their design. Thus Plautus Plautus.
has it -- Pactum now Pactum est, non Pactum Pactum est, cum illis Lubet.
(...). Plutarch.
Plutarch tells us, thus men are couzened with oaths, as boys with toys.

8 Principle of Piety, is to be favorable and cautious in making 8. Pr. of
Piety.
or taking Oaths, and to be plain in the sense of them, when they are tendered
to the consciences of men, least they should (...) or (...); a promise is
derived of the performance, in the Etymol. (...), it ties a man's hands behind
him: in this Aristophanes.
let our Governors pursue Piety.

9 Principle, Politicians pursue the most impudent designs 9. Pr. of Policy.
with the most confident endeavors, and the foulest vice, with Cicero de offic.
lib. 1,
the fullest face, as Cicero says. Such carry things so cunningly, that when
they deceive most, they make appearance of dealing best.

9 Principle of Piety, is to act with moderation and discretion. 9. Pr. of
Piety.
by rule and measure according to the thing intended, Phil. 4. 5.

10. Principle of Policy, is to bribe such men to silence, whose 10 Pr. of
Policy
mouths would make a great noise, and whose words have influence upon the
people. And this our Statists have usually observed; yea, by the former
Parliament were many mouths stopped up, and filled with gifts, and gratuities,
that they could not C. P.
speak, and one I could name had five hundred pounds to put him to silence,
and say nothing, though he knew much of their corruption and injustice. But I
beseech the Lord to lead these our Governors into the Principles of Piety and
Honesty.

10. Principle of Piety, is as freely to accept of Articles ^ 10 Pr. of Piety.
Impeachment against a corrupt Governor, as against a corru^^ Subject; seeing
the evil of Governors is of as bad, yea, of worse consequence then the evils of
Subjects: And seeing the Governors are no more exempt from Laws then the
Subjects; Therefore we shall find Romulus made this agreement with the
Senators, that Fulgos. lib. 5. c. 6.
the People should make Laws, and he would take them both for himself and
others to obey them. And Ephron King of the Hittites Genesis 34.
could not grant Abraham the Sepulcher without the peoples consent: Nor Hemor
the Hivite, King of Sichem, contract alliance with Jacob without the people
would allow it, and give him ^eave. So that the public weal being above the
greatest Governors, it is of the greatest concernment and resentment to
receive complaints against them that are evil Governors, without ^ver^wing, or
overruling the Plaintiffs (as has been formerly;) see but how boldly Esther
accused Haman, chap. 7, 6. Saying, the adversary, and enemy is this wicked
Haman, and then Haman was afraid. O this would terrify the wicked Grandees
indeed! and no bribes would then do them good, or hide them in their iniquity
under golden coverings from the keen and quick eye of Justice.

11. Another Principle of Policy, I perceive much amongst 11 Pr. of Policy
them is, to show friendship to their enemies, and courtesy to Malignants,
thereby to oblige them and make them their own; whiles others (it may be) more
honest, and heartily their true friends, find not such fair and affable respect
from them, because they are sure of them (they think) already, as such whose
Principles and Consciences make them friends: this was Caesar's policy Caesar.
too, but this is but policy.

11. Principle of Piety, is to make such a difference betwixt 11 Pr. of Piety.
friends, and foes; Honest men, and Cavaleirs, that the faithful may be
encouraged and countenanced, and the enemies disabled and broken. It is ever
deemed most sordid, horrid ingratitude, to gratify foes with friends rights;
and what do they less that give their enemies good looks, and their friends
frowns? this may up to prove miserable policy. Ingrata Patria! ne ossa qui^^m?
Scipio.
said Scipio Africanns; O my Countrymen! have I gotten many Victories and
Triumphs for you? and must not my bones (...) much as lie among (...)ou? but
must I be banished, and your (...) bosomed? O ingrata Patria!

12. Principle of Policy, is to put others upon the hazard and 12 Pr. of Policy
Forelorne-Hope to fetch out their design (especially if it be dangerous and
hot work to have it) and never to give it over (once begun) till it be
attained, though they pass through the red Sea of blood to it: Like the Ape
that sees a Ch^s^ut in the fire, and not knowing how to get it out, snatches up
the S^a^ni^ls foot (that lies by) to fetch it out of the fire, and then he
falls to it,
and ca^es not how the Dogs foot is scorched for it. So the thing be had, some
care not how men lie wounded, and their Wives be widowed, to fetch it for them.

12. Principle of Piety, is to put none upon a design that is too 12 Pr. of
Piety.
bad for our own bodies or estates to engage in, and to take heed of eating and
drinking the blood of our Brethren; I mean by engaging their Lives, Limbs and
Liberties for our Interests or selfends. See why David would not drink of the
water of the Well of Bethlehem, which he had so longed for, in 1 Chronicles* 11. 19.
saying, My God forbid it me, shall I drink the blood of these men that have
put their lives in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives have they
brought it me; no! but in ver. 18. he poured it out to the Lord: So the price
of blood is not for us, nor The price of blood for God only.
poured out to pitch us in Estates, or Manors, but must be given to God. Woe
be to us! if our money, means, mansions, or the like be the price of blood! God
forbid! but let that design be all Gods for which blood has been so
abundantly shed: And some (blessed be God) in Parliament and Army are actuated
by this Principle of Piety, into such a solemn profession for Christ, that they
say as Mephibosheth said, 2 Samuel 19. 30. when the King said, thou and Ziba go
divide the Lands amongst you: Nay, says he, let him take all (and he will) for
as much as my Lord the King is come home again in peace; So let who will take
and divide the Lands, whiles the Lord Jesus Christ is coming to reign, for God
forbid but this blood should be poured out to him. In these and many other
Principles of Policy (which I might easily mention) were our former Governing
men most unchristianly conversant, to the contradiction of the honest and true
Principles o^ Piety; which I beseech the Lord our Jehovah that this Parli^ment
may more abundantly profess, and decline those (...) villian, and Jesuitick
tricks and arts, which will decei^e the (...) of them to the purpose at last.
We hear of many Jesuits sent abroad to drive on designs, and doubtless they
will be tampering with Churches and States as much as may be; and poor England
I fear has been palpably cheated with them under the Jesuited who*
guise of Politicians; for as Rhetoric is like the hand open, and Logic like
the hand shut; so is the Jesuit an open Politician, and the Machivillian
Politician, a close Jesuit: One machi-villanously principled, is subtle and
politic in his Divinity Sim.
and Religion; and one Jesuitickly principled, is divine and religious in his
Subtleties and Policies* so that as we say of Simnels,
it is but bread upon bread; Such Politicians and Statists are but Jesuits on
Jesuits.

But thus far for a Word and Warning to them which now sit at Stern, to steer
aright for Christ, and the Commonwealth, and to do much in a little time,
least they loose their opportunity and honor together for ever after, and be
rejected like Saul for doing the Lords work negligently, and but by halves, 1 Samuel 15. 26, 28. and 16. 13, 1^.

Lastly, My (...) to the People is this; First to be wise in Gods Use ^. Word
to the people to understand the times.
ways, and in (...) of this Generation; this the people practiced in primitiv^
times, and Issachar is much commended for understanding the times, whereby he
knew what Israel had to do (says the T^^t) 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. There be none that
(now) know what England has to do, but such as understand the times we live
in, how near to Christ's coming, the fifth Monarchy. What left the poor people
in blindness? and gave them up to destruction, or drowning in Noah's days, but
want of understanding of the times? And so will be the coming of the Son of
Man* Matthew. 24. 37. What left the Pharisees and Jews in blindness, (as to
Christ) and gave them up to hardness of heart, and the curse, but their
ignorance? in all ages ignorance of the times and seasons has been fatal to
the Inhabitants.

Obj. But in Deuteronomy. 14. 10. 18. God prohibits such a practice, Object.
of observing times, and makes it a curse, etc.

Answ. True, it is a very great curse, and contrary to the command Answ.
of God, to observe the times in that sense, i. e. by Planets, and Stars, as
Astrologers, and Southsayers, and such kind of Against Astrologers.
Di^iners, for so Mecash-sheph signifies; and so Menachesh and Kosem, this is
positively forbidden, Levit. 19. 26. Exodus 22. 18. and God will not have it in
Israel among his People, 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. Jer. 27. 9. Mal. 3. 5. but threatens
judgments upon it, and upon the Nation where it is professed. Wherefore let
Lilly, and The stinking ^^lly.
such unwholesome and ominous fellows look to it: For this divination (a Divis)
takes men off of God and his Word, and leads them by an imperfect and lurking
light* into dangers and depths of misery. This makes that eminent
Astrologo-mastix, I mean Mirandula, with indignation to conclude, that this
blazing and Mirandula.
gazing Art of theirs is but vanity of vanities, and vexation of the spirits.
Therefore how often does God gird and upbraid the Heathens and their Idols,
with their ignorance of the times and seasons (i. e. as to Christ etc.) (...)
Isa. 41. 23. But to this discovery which we speak, the Candle of Reason, or
mere natural light shines too darkly, and disenergetically. Yet the soul is
said to partake of three times. Viz. 1. Tempus praeteritum memoria. 2. Praesens
intellectu. 3. Futurum voluntate, etc. of times past, in the Memory; of times
present, in the Understanding; and of times to come in the Will. Now as to the
present times, a clear understanding is incumbent; I mean, an understanding
shining with the light of Gods Word, which is not only cognoscere res* but
ordinem and modum rerum, whereby we shall obviously understand those causae
intermediae, which the Schoolmen say are impedibiles and defectibiles, which
are contingents, and would interrupt Understanding ^nlightned.
that high and mighty work for Christ and his Kingdom, which is going on in
these days. Such an understanding, enlightened by Gods Word of Truth, we must
have, as Daniel had. For Daniel.
first Daniel knew the days and age he lived in, chapter 9. 2. So must we.
Secondly, Daniel learned it by Books, cha. 9. 2. of the Prophets, and the Word
of God relating to those times: So must we. And then thirdly, He saw and
observed the deliverance foretold to be ^igh the time of travel, and ready to
be revealed: And so must we. Then we shall f^ll to praying pell-mel.
And then he fell to his work of praying, and believing, and expecting; and so
shall we! and not till then, that we shall know what to do; as 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.
or be obedient to Gods will, accordi^^ to his work, which we must do in these
days. Wherefore,

1. Observe all the signs of the Son of Man's coming, and all the appearances of
the Fifth Monarchy now in sight. And

2. Hear the voice, that bids come up hither! i. e. out of Babylon,. and make
have! for Judgment is falling upon Babylon.

3. Wait with confidence for the next notorious change in England, And then
lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draws nigh, i. e. both in a
spiritual and civil reference. The
Times will light terribly upon Priests, and Lawyers; on Tithes* and Terms ere
long, (for all they find so many Advocates now.) I had intended to have added
much for direction and counsel to my Countrymen, but I am prevented by a
proud Alarm given by some ( bold as blind Bayard) of the fiery Clergy, who make
a mighty noise in the ears of many, of answering my Book of A false Alarm*
given the Author to take him off of thi^.
Church Discipline, called. A Tabernacle for the Sun, so that I will conclude
this the more imperfectly, that I may stop their Career upon their first
coming forth; and if they make haste, I will wait for them, as one ready to
receive their most resolute Summons or Sallies, being assured of my Armor, and
Shield of Truth in my Lord Jesus. Least of all do I value Crofton.
that very man of words, the Libeller of Garlick-Hith, who has sent to Renbury
to some of his own feather and spirit, for a Certificate of his good behavior
(as appears in the Epistle to the Reader) but his Rehoboham-like brazen shield
shall never defend him, or dignifie him in the hearts of honest, godly men
(whom he calls Devils, and damned Independants:) But empty vessels
make the greatest noise; if he be so tedious in his answer as it seems he is,
it is likely I shall be so publicly (and at such a distance) employed in my
Lord and Master Christ's work ere long, that I shall want idle time* to solace
my spirits in reading his Answer, or returning mine (if it be worth it, and
relish of the Spirit of Christ, which I have hardly faith enough to believe.)
But to conclude, The Day of our Deliverance is dawned; Let the Priests and
Lawyers, Antichrists Church and State Servants and Solicitors sit and howl;
and as many as trade with Babylon, and gain thereby, 1655.
let them look and lament by fifty five next, and cast dust on their heads,
Rev. 18. 19. for the hour of their torment makes have; wherefore woe! woe!
woe! to them that hear the voice which now them, and yet will not beware! and
come out*!

Infelix, cujus ^^lli sapientia prodest;
Infelix quirecta docet, cum vivat inique;
Infelix qui pauca sapit, sper^^tque doceri.
Let us not mind then so much as we do to purchase (...) and Estates, seeing
the Fifth Monarchy will make such mad work in the world; therefore as Jer. 45.
4, 5. Behold that which I have built (in the fourth Monarchy) I will pull down,
(in the Fifth) and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, says the Lord,
even this whole Land. And seek thou great things for thy self? seek them
not. The poor man will be the happiest man then.

Haud ullus usquam paupere est beatior,
Haud namque pejor metuitur ab eo status.
And let my Countrymen that long for the Liberties of the Sons of God,
exceedingly Rejoice, as Rev. 18. 20. Rejoice over her, for God has avenged you
on her. Ver. 6. Reward her, even as she has rewarded you; fill her double. Then

Rustica Gens erit optima flens, and pessima Gaudens.
Ungentem pungit, pungentem Rusticus ungit.
FINIS.

