A SERMON Preached at Blandford-forum IN DORSET-SHIRE, December the 19th, 1682.

AT THE Lord Bishop of BRISTOL's VISITATION.

By RICHARD RODERICK, B. D. Student of Christ-Church in Oxon, and Vicar of
Blandford-forum.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Henry Clements Bookseller in Oxford, 1683.

A SERMON Preached at BLAND FOR D-FORUM IN DORSET-SHIRE, December the 19th,
1682.
ACTS 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.
IT is too too observable that when Men have once wickedly complied with
discovered, or weakly given up their Assent to unsearch'd Errors, their main
business afterward is, right or wrong, to justify the Principles which they
have imbibed: The Care that should have been taken to prevent, is laid out to
hide their Deformity and disguise their Shame. Hence the Writings of Fathers,
and perhaps the Decrees of Councils are entitled to them; Scripture is
wrested, and Antiquity raked into, to give Patronage to the foulest
Misdemeanors.

Thus of old, St. Origin was made use of to defend the Heresy of the Arians,
St Cyprian of the Donatians, St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, and St. Austin of the
Pelagians: And of late the uncommissioned Zeal of Gregory Nazianzene, and the
Stories of Theodoret, have been cited to excuse Disobedience to Princes, and to
null the rights of their next Heirs.

Thus Schism has always fled for Sanctuary to the Altar, and from those who
most constantly attended upon it, (especially in the first Ages of
Christianity,) has endeavored to gain Credit and Success.

Thus also too many in our Days, (though God be praised their number decreases,
and was never such as they boasted of) too many for the defense of their
Separations, plead that Liberty in which they suppose the Primitive Christians
stood fast; and renounce that indispensible Communion which the Church enjoins,
upon pretense that from the beginning it was not so. Whereas indeed, we are
assured that the early Forerunners in the Faith, did not make, or follow
separate Congregations and divided Interests: but, They continued steadfastly in
the Apostles: Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

The Words are a Character of the Primitive Christians of the Church in the
times of the Apostles. (...) here rendered Fellowship, (...) breaking of Bread,
however taken by some learned Men, the former for that most liberal
distribution and wonderful Charity, conspicuous in those Days; the latter for
breaking of common Broad, according to the custom of the Jews, in the
beginnings of their Feasts: Yet by others of great Authority, This is supposed
to denote the Eucharist which the Apostles blessed, That the Communion which
they were the chief Members of.

Without any farther Explication of the Text.

I. I shall endeavor to show, that the Primitive Christians (not only such as
were contemporary with the Apostles, but those also that succeeded them) were
united in Judgment and Practice, as to Matters of Religion, and the Worship of
God, They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

II. I shall examine what Means were used in the Primitive Church, thus to
unite Men in Judgment and Practice, as to Matters of Religion, and the Worship
of God.

III. I shall enquire how far, now-a days, the Magistrate and those in
Authority under him may proceed, in order to the uniting Men in Judgment and
Practice, as to matters of Religion, and the Worship of God.

IV. I shall conclude with an Exhortation to what is here said to have been the
Practice of the Primitive Christians, and ought to be ours, that we also be
united, and continue steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

I. I am to show that the Primitive Christians were united in Judgment and
Practice, as to Matters of Religion, and the Worship of God, they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread,
and in Prayers.

At the time when that prodigious effect of Omnipotent Mercy was expressed in
the Incarnation of our Redeemer, the distracted World not keeping any regularly
traced Path toward Salvation, wandered in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death.
The Jews had made the written Law give way to the oral; they had prostituted
their Understandings to the Direction of those blind Guides, which taught for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and by magisterial Confidence, and precise
Hypocrisy, (Qualifications which often come together) so far enslaved the
Judgments of their Proselytes, that if two of them held contradictory Opinions,
each notwithstanding was thought infallible. The Heathens, though the Light of
Nature would not suffer them to be ignorant of what was good, yet could not
come to the knowledge of the Lord, much less of what he required in the acts of
Devotion. The Jews had lost their way, the Gentiles never knew it.

But after his coming, whom the Father sent to be a Light to lighten These, and
to be the Glory of Those, the Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile was broken
down, and both united into, and made Members of one Body, whereof Christ is
Head. Our Savior having thus gathered and constituted his Church, and settled
an orderly Government in it, the Primitive Christians knew it to be their Duty,
and accordingly held Communion with the one, and submitted to the other. They
rejoiced to be of one Fold, under one Shepherd, not loosely Joh. 10. 16.
scattered abroad as Sheep having none: They heard and obeyed his Voice, when
he spoke by them, whom the Holy Ghost made Overseers of Acts 20. 28.
his Flock. They contended earnestly for the Faith Jude 3.
which was once delivered unto the Saints; and, Christ having provided for his
Service in a regular way, came together in Unity to the House of the Lord, to
offer Prayers and Thanks-givings jointly to the Almighty, and Violence to
Heaven with united Forces. When the Disciples were but few, These all continued
with one accord in Prayer and Supplication, Act. 1. 14. And when the Word of
God mightily grew and prevailed, The multitude of them that believed were of
one Heart and of one Soul, Acts 4. 32. No foolish Prejudices, uncharitable
Surmises, or fruitless search after sarther Purity, excluded them from the
Fellowship of their Brethren, from a common Participation of the Sacraments and
Prayers, and carrying on the designs of Christianity with joint Endeavors and
Affections. They kept the Unity of the Spirit in Ephesians. 4. 3.
the Bond of Peace, of outward Communion, endeavoring to walk worthy of that
Vocation Verse. 1. Verse. 5.
wherewith they were called, in one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

They knew that the Lord had always even before the times of Christianity been
jealous of his Honor, and manifested his Jealousy by requiring an awefull
Observance, and punishing the least neglect of the Place, where his Honor
dwelt. An immediate stroke from Heaven was sent upon the Men of 1 Samuel 5.
Ashdod, of Gath, and of Ekron, for detaining the Ark of God; upon the Chap. 6.
Bethshomites for looking into, and upon Chron. 13.
Uzzah for rashly supporting it.

When that wandering Seat of his Glory, was at length, after above a thousond
Years, fixed in Mount Sion, thither the Tribes were bound in Duty to go up to
give Thanks unto the Name Psalm. 122. 4.
of the Lord.

And since (such antiquated Shadows being ceased) God has chosen him a more
lasting Habitation, built him a Church, and cemented it with the Blood of his
Son, and promised that shall be his Rest, there will he dwell for ever;
certainly to it shall the Gentiles seek: All are Isa. 11. 10.
invited, yea obliged to come in, that his House Luke 14. 23.
may be filled. The Members hereof who ought to be a Body fitly joined together
and compaited Ephesians. 4. 6.
by that which every joint supplyeth, dishonor their Head and make him the
Author of Confusion, when they do not approve themselves of the Household of
Faith by a common profession Gal. 6. 10.
of it, and united Endeavors to show forth and advance it.

This Union in Judgment and Practice was zealously observed by the Primitive
Christians, They continued daily with one accord in the Temple, Acts 2. 46.
Justin Martyr calls their Devotions (...), common Prayers. Upon the first day
of Acts 20. 7.
the Week (and this constantly as Ecclesiastical History assures us) the
Disciples came together to break Bread; that is to partake of the Lord's
Supper. Nay it is said that the Lord added to the Church such as should be
saved; intimating Acts 2. 47.
the Difficulty, not to say the Impossibility of Salvation out of the Pale of
it, in a State of Noncommunion with it. The truth is, there remain but slender
hopes of Glory, to such as live and dye unacquainted with, or in the neglect of
the Means of Grace.

It was then thought an indispensable Duty not to forsake the public
Assemblies. At first, the Temple, the Place set apart for religious uses, Mat.
21. 13. Luke 24. 53.
was their House of Prayer. And when they were driven thence, and Divine
Providence had ordered the Malice of Men, which scattered abroad the
Professors, to enlarge the Borders of Christianity, how distant soever in
their abode, they that embraced the same Truth still preserved Unity and
Concord. An external Fellowship in the Word and Sacraments with their Brethren,
with all their Brethren as occasion presented it self was judged necessary;
this transient Communion never to cease, 'till swallowed up by that which shall
be to everlasting in the Heavenly Jerusalem, in the general Assembly Heb 12.
22, 23.
and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven.

No care was neglected to prevent or reconcile Divisions. These were seldom
known, it being by no means accounted a sign of Grace and Holiness to fly off
upon every dislike, and forbear Society: And when they did break out, the
Churches Peace was for the most part secured; Men laying aside their private
Animosities in Religious Concerns (as Marcus Lepidus, and Marcus Fulvius in
Civil) in order to the common Good; and allowing that Communion was necessary
whenever not sinful, and that difference in Rites and Ceremonies in things in
themselves indifferent was never sufficient to excuse the breach of it.

When that great irreconcilable Controversy arose about the keeping of
Easter, Polycarp being sent from the Eastern Churches to Anicetus chief
Patriarch of the Western, though they could not agree as to the matter in hot
Dispute, yet all other Endearments passed between them, they received the
Blessed Sacrament together, and mutually consented in behalf of the Parties for
whom they treated; that, however the Business they met about could not be
composed, Peace and Communion should not withstanding be religiously maintained.

Such was the Unity of the then Christian World, even among those of different
Denominations and Interests, and that were independent upon one another.

Such from the beginning was, and continued to be the practice of all; except
that now and then that fretfull humor called Zeal, (which, when not according
to Knowledge, is at best but a well meaning Phrenzie,) or else Ambition,
carried on or defeated, made Men forsake the Communion of the Church, and
disturb its Peace (Let the present Troublers of our Israel assign which they
please, perhaps it would be hard to excuse some of them from either of these
Incentives to Separation) By the impulse of the former, the Catharists in the
East, the Novatians in the West and the Donatists in the South all Types of
modern Zealots, with a Pharisaical Haughtiness thanked God that they were not
as other Men; and concluded themselves too Holy to join in Prayers and
Sacraments with their Brethren. To the later, to wit, Ambition, Eusebius refers
the Heresy of Montanus, Tertullian that of Valentinus. When Aerius had in vain
aspired to a Bishopric, the disappointment moved him (after the barbarous
usage of that Tyrant, who cut on stretched others to the Proportions of his own
Stature) to deny the Distinction of Order, and shrink a Bishop into a
Presbyter. And however the Lord Bacon, and other learned Men, thought Arianism
took its rise from an aversion to Pagan Dotages, precipitant Zeal against many
Gods hurrying on to acknowledge but one Person in the Godhead; yet Theodoret
affirms, that Alexander's being preferred before Arius, incensed the rejected
Competitour to set on foot and propagate his detestable Doctrines.

It Is true indeed, many all along apostatized from the Truth, or held it in
unrighteousness. the Enemy presently sowed Tares in Christ's Wheat. There was a
Judas among the Apostles. And when the number of Professors increased to an
hundred and twenty, there were half Christans that durst not openly own, false
that soon forsook the Gospel. Among the seven Deacons, Nicholas was the Founder
of an abominable Heresy. Six of the seven Asian Churches are accused of deadly
Sin. In succeeding Ages sundry Heresies arose; St. Austin reckons eighty eight,
Bellarmine about two hundred. Nay once Christ's Promise of being with his
Church unto the end of the World seemed to be forgotten by him, and the Gates
of Hell to prevail against the truly Apostolical Religion; while Arianism,
that subtle Serpent which crept before and flyly insinuated it self, now
slush'd with Success raised its Head, and threatened ruin to all that durst
oppose its Reception. (For, after the famous Battle where the Cross was first
the Banner on each side, and Christians first fought against Christians,
Constantlus having totally defeated Magnentius, freed the Eastern Empire, and
gained the Western; Valens an Arian Bishop (as Numa to establish his Idolatry,
Mahomet his Impostures) pretended a secret Message from Heaven, and easily
persuaded the Conqueror to owe his Victory, and therefore afford all
imaginable Protection to that Doctrine which he had espoused, and the Almighty
was judged in so signal a manner to approve. Hence that blasphemous Heresy
secured in the Favor, and assisted by all the Power of the Emperor, mightily
increased, and its Title to Universality, like that of an Usurper's Race to
Sovereignty, seemed to be unquestionable when the only one and without a
Rival.)

But to return; However the forementioned troubled, and this last Pestilence
very much overspread the Roman Empire, yet in many places of Persia, India and
Ethiopia, of Egypt, France and Italy, the Orthodox Religion obtained: And they
that held it, especially when restored to its former Luster, censured the
others for being through zealous perverseness guilty of Heresy and Schism:
Heresy, that most dangerous denial of the Catholic Faith; Schism, than which
some of the Fathers thought that Idolatry, others that Sacrilege was not worse,
which St. Ignatius took to be the original of Evils, St. Cyprian to be a Sin of
so heinous a Nature, that Martyrdom it self could not expiate for it.

What was done to obviate or disperse the fatal Influence of such Offenses, my
second General now to be considered will discover. Wherein,

II. I am to examine what means were used in the Primitive Church to unite Men
in Judgment and Practice, as to matters of Religion and the Worship of God, to
keep them steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread and in Prayers.

The great Universal Architect, all the Works of whose Hands join together to
do him Service, not having put Enmity but requiring agreement among
themselves, the early Professors of the Gospel, the First Fruits of Christ,
thought the Members of his Mystical Body more especially concerned to maintain
Unity and Concord in the Church now newly established. Hence the many
affectionate Entreaties to enlarge and secure its Borders, the many servent
Exhortations to convince and win the froward to come into, and hold fast
Communion with it.

But the Congregation of Believers once gathered, if the soft still Voice would
not awaken lethargick Sinners and keep them watchful, nor the Shepherd's
gentle call bring back the wandering Flock, these mild Methods failing, harsher
were tried, yea gradually advanced to the utmost Severity. When notwithstanding
the most ardent Persuasives to Peace and Unity Dissentions sprung up, as Acts
15. it seemed good to lay upon the Brethren necessary things, not all of them
(as appears from the 29th verse) necessary antecedent to the Command, and
therefore such and so to be esteemed by virtue of it, because the Governors of
the Church, in their discretion, thought fit to enjoin them.

But not to insist upon these and other Injunctions of the Apostles to keep Men
in the true Faith and Orthodox Worship, or upon their extraordinary power of
punishing those which abused or forsook either: Not to tell of St. Paul's
striking Elymas with Blindness, St. Peter's speaking Ananias and Saphira dead,
and such like miraculous Inflictions; let us observe the ordinary regular
Discipline used in aftertimes to engage Men to be tenacious of the Doctrine,
and have regard to the Communion of the truly Apostolical Church. To this end
were frequent Penances, and sometimes Excommunications inflicted not only upon
immoral, but also upon heretical and schismatical Persons. Indeed none of these
Offenders could be restrained without authority to punish all: For Men will be
apt to run on blindly in the way to Hell, if they do not hearken to such as God
has appointed to be their Guides toward Heaven; and will soon become vicious
in their Lives, when they leave off being found in Faith, or being orderly in
Worship: And the Church will not long retain her Purity, if she cannot be
severe to the Disturbers of her Peace. Some of the greatest Troublers whereof
have kept up their Reputation in despite of, and justified their Separation
from her, by making a show of Reformation and greater Purity than others;
notwithstanding which Pretenses her Censures have fallen heavily and justly
upon them.

As a Community she must needs have this inherent Power to correct the Members
of her Society that offended against the Laws of it. Without the right exercise
of such Authority, Christ's Religion would in its Infancy have been buried in
Weakness, and have had no hopes of ever imitating him by rising again in Glory.
But the Influence of the forementioned Severities made the Christians that
lived under a due awe of them to shine as Lights in the midst of a wicked and
perverse Generation, to be exemplary Instances of Holiness in their Lives, lest
they should be such of Terror in their Punishments. To weak-sighted Men who
could not be so heartily affected with the Reversion of Joy or Misery, present
Penalties were, and always will be the chief Sanctions of the Evangelical Law,
most strongly fence and secure it from Violation.

In the nonage of the Gospel, when they that embraced it came with a true sense
of Religion to public Prayers and the Sacraments, then to be banished from
them, to be thrown out of the Church, as the Laodicean Synod, to be wholly cut
off from Communion, as the Apostolic Canons, to be delivered over unto Satan,
as Scripture styles it, this stamped upon their Minds melancholy frightfull
Reflections, and swallowed them up with Horror and Confusion. The
excommunicated were overwhelmed with such anguish of Soul, that to be freed
from the intolerable Distress, no penitentiary Humiliations were tedious to
them: With Tears, Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered they constantly
begged, and at last gained Absolution in the end of the appointed time; this
was seldom shortened, except when danger of Death, great Persecution, the
Number, Dignity, or Infirmity of Criminals, induced the Church to mitigate her
Sentence toward them. The most scandalous Ossenders, Heretics and Apostates
upon a through Repentance were admitted to public Penance and the Sacraments,
and the Novatians condemned who would have them excluded from both. By
impartial Severities, and charitable prudent relaxations of them. Christianity
was propagated in Purity and Holiness, and often without disturbance; became
victorious and triumphant over the Temptations of its Spritual, and the Rage of
its Temporal Enemies.

'Twas then as much as now morally impossible that all Men should be of the
same Mind, as to Faith and Worship; yet the open avowing of their Dissent was
thought necessary to be restrained. Really he that from the moral Impossibility
of an universal Agreement concludes no Laws should be made against Apostasy
and Separation, may as well say, that because all Men will never be virtuous
and religious, Liberty should be granted for Immorality and Profaneness; Not
that I affirm these later are Crimes in themselves of no deeper a dye than
those former, yet this will follow, that both being mightily destructive to the
good of the Community ought to be suppressed as far as may be, though there be
no hopes of totally rooting them out.

This will be farther evidenced in my third General next to be spoken to.
Wherein,

III. I am to enquire how far, nowadays, the Supreme Magistrate, and those in
Authority under him may proceed, in order to the uniting Men in Judgment and
Practice, as to matters of Religion, and the Worship of God, to the keeping
them steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of
Bread, and in Prayers.

It must be acknowledged that the Prince of Peace would have his Gospel taught,
as himself established it, with Meekness and Gentleness; would have Gainsayers
convinced, and the Cavils of unreasonable Men put to silence by the Power of
the Spirit. That the noblest Conquest which is quietly gained over Minds
revolted from God and Reason; Force may enslave the Man, but this fetters his
Will, and captivates his Understanding. Wherefore that restless unwearied Fury,
wherewith some Men carry on the business of Religion in a violent sanguinary
way, is not a Christian agreement to propagate our Savior's Doctrines, but a
conspiracy of Traitors against him; not the Zeal of Christians, but the rage
of Lunaticks.

But here let me not be mistaken, as if I intended to wrest the Sword out of
the Magistrate's Hands, who is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath
upon them that do Evil. That do Evil I say; for as long as Men keep their
Thoughts to themselves, they are indeed, can be accountable only to the
Searcher of Hearts. But when Pride, Obstinacy, Faction, or suppose we, Folly
broaches their Opinions to the disturbance of Church or State, to the dangerous
violation of the Laws of either, here Christianity does not forbid, nay
commands the public execution of Justice. Even the mischievous Fool (though
the designing Knave should not lurk under, as he too often does) may be justly
punished. Otherwise the Magistrate would bear the Sword in vain, would not have
Power to take edged Tools out of the Hands of those that ought not to be
entrusted with them, and really would be placed as unguarded Sheep in the midst
of Wolves.

Whatever be pretended on the part of Offenders, when the Public lies at
stake, Mercy to the Troublers of it is the greatest Cruelty to the Innocent, is
the tenderness of Children and Fools, is to destroy the whole Body in
compassion to a few corrupted Members. He that without very good reason winks
at Crimes, though perhaps in their own Nature small, yet in their Tendency of
fatal Consequence, has more to answer for than he that committed them; because
it is less excuseable to countenance Offenses in cold Blood, than to act them
in hot.

I appeal to the Consciences of those who now think themselves Wronged, and
have Advocates (it were to be wished I could not say among our selves) that
complain they are persecuted by the due execution of Laws, whether they can
imagine it to be a thing indifferent, of no concern to the Honor of God, and
the Peace of the State, whether Men be of one Heart and of one Soul or not?
Whether when every one says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas,
such Divisions do not naturally follow as crucisie Christ asresh, and put him
to open Shame? And certainly to conceive that our Redeemer would in his
Household, the Church, be so much less faithful than Moses as to leave such
necessary things out of order without Power somewhere to settle them, would be
no less absurd than to fancy with Epicurus, that the wise the gracious Father
of all, has abandoned the Orphan World to the blind direction of Chance.

This goodly Frame of the Universe, might as soon have jumpt together casually,
and be kept so, as Men will be joined together (as they should be) without an
over ruling Discipline, without a coercive Power. The most rational Persuasives
(we daily see) cannot pierce and break the Obstinacy that is rooted by
Prejudice, Peevishness or Design. The Madness of the People is sometimes such
that it will not be stilled by any Words, except of him who spoke the World into a
Being, and the roaring of the Sea into a Calm. What then, shall Men be
permitted to embrace and publish what Opinions they please, though such as
influence their Actions to the Hazard of Ecclesiastical or Civil Affairs? God
has not so left himself without a Witness; but besides establishing Divine
Laws, has authorized Humane whenever not repugnant to the other to give
knowledge of Salvation to his People, to give Light to them that sit in
Darkness, and to guide their Feet into the way of Peace. He demands not only
the Purity, but also the humble Submission of the Heart, expects the
Resignation of the Will and Understanding to him and his Vicegerents. These he
has empowered to add to, yea upon occasion to take from, what his own Wisdom
had ordained. God appointed the Exodus 12.
People to kill the Passover in the first Month, Hezekiah the 2 Chronicles. 30.
Levites in the second. Christ himself observed the Feast of Dedication, though
of Humane Institution, thereby acknowledging the Authority of Rulers in Matters
Ecclesiastical.

And certainly, since They are commissioned to lay Injunctions, it will be the
Subjects Duty to perform, and theirs to require, yea force Obedience to them.
For Authority supposes a right to assert it; and the power of enacting Laws,
implies an Obligation to make, and oftentimes to execute the Sanctions of them.

It is not here designed to whet the Magistrate's Sword and Rage, to put him
upon using the one, and laying out the other in Cruelty and Oppression. No;
there should be a Fellow-feeling among the Members of Christ. He that punishes
Offenses, may and ought to pity the Offenders. The Bowels may yern, while the
Hand strikes. The Father corrects in kindness; and by the bye, he spoils his
Child if he spare the Rod. God himself in Mercy thinks upon Wrath: the several
Chastisements of the Lord, whether immediately inflicted or only permitted by
him (as all Penalties should) chastise past miscarriages in order to prevent
future; the Sufferer's Obliquity is always the meritorious Cause, his or others
Amendment the Impulsive. And surely those that are deputed by him to do
Justice and to show Mercy upon the Earth, may be kind as our heavenly Father
is, that is, punish with design to reclaim.

And if gentler Methods will not prevail, if every Indulgence from the higher
Powers only encourages Men to be more saucy in their Demands; if a Factious
Seditious Party be manifestly hatching and carrying their treasonable
Associations to introduce a tyrannical Commonwealth in the place of the best
settled Monarchy, and a novel Religion instead of the truly Apostolical; If
designs of bringing in an Egyptian Bondage be so plainly set on Foot that only
they which are surrounded with an Egyptian Darkness can choose but see them,
when Dangers thus threaten the Government, undoubtedly they that sit at the
Helm of it may lay aside their injured Patience, and proceed to the utmost
Severities. Christian Liberty will not in the Subject patronize, or in the
Magistrate oblige to indemnifie the Licentious effects of it.

Be it for ever remembered, that the great, the good Constantine made severe
Edicts against Dissenters, the Apostate, the barbarous Julian tolerated them;
This the Policy of the most malicious Enemy of the Faith in hopes thereby to
overthrow it, That of the most religious Defender to propagate and establish it.

I proceed in the last place to conclude with,

IV. An Exhortation to what is here said, in the Text, to have been the
Practice of the Primitive Christians, and ought to be ours, that we also be
united, and continue steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

And here how shall I exhort? wherewithal shall I bespeak you? Let our
Thoughts be cast back upon the dreadful Consequences of Men's forsaking the
Truth, or departing from the Communion of the Church which is the Ground and
Pillar of it. Divisions besides that they naturally scatter and weaken a
People, also provoke God to pour out his Fury upon them, and to smite the Earth
with a Curse. When the Abomination of Desolation, spoken of by Daniel, was to
be accomplished upon the Jews, at the Siege of Jerusalem, the separating
Zealots within concurred no less than the Romans without. When Christians were
engaged in private Differences too busy to attend the Motions and obviate the
Designs of the common Enemy, then the Turks overrun so much of Asia and Europe.
When Pelagian Pride endeavored to advance the depraved Power of Nature, the
feeble Essays of Reason, and the corrupted Liberty of Man's will above the
necessity, and against the only sufficiency of Divine Grace, and upon this and
other Heresies Dissensions arose; then did God empty the full Vials of his
Wrath, raised up the Goths and Vandals, the Huns and Gauls, and other
Instruments of his Vengeance to chastise the unhappy Litigants.

Knowing therefore the Terrors of God on High when Men do not keep Peace upon
the Earth, be we persuaded at this time to lay aside our Divisions. No doubt
our Circumstances are very sad. What shall I equal to thee that I may comfort
thee O Daughter of Zion? For thy breach is great like the Sea, who can heal
thee? Fearfulness and Trembling are come upon the Land, and an horrible dread
has overwhelmed it. Manasseh is against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh,
and both against Judah. Fears and Jealousies, some just, more ungrounded
possess and distract Men. We seem fitted, appointed for Destruction. We sustain
Damocles his Fate, a single Thread keeps off the devouring Sword, aand
reprieves our ruin. Long, long may the Divine Protection with Favor compass
and defend as with a Shield the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the
Lord, under whose shadow we yet live among worse than Heathens, among those on
each side who surely put off the Bowels of Men when they took the Name of
Christians, whom neither the Vengeance of Heaven nor the Insamy of Earth can
fright or shame from brutish Cruelty.

In these our Distractions we sly for Succor unto thee O Lord, who for our
Sins art justly displeased. Let not Men's eager peevish Phrenzie that will not
brook being put off to thy time of bringing Salvation move thee to withhold it.
Be thou merciful to our Iniquities and to the Troubles of our Israel, for both
are great; great beyond any but thy Mercy and thy Wisdom to work out our
Redemption.

Dangers are wont to enlarge Men's Thoughts, to disturb them into warmth and
vigor, and make them with Croesus his dumb Son break through the Impediments,
if not with Sampson do things above the strength of Human Nature. And then
does not common Prudence invite, Self-preservation constrain us to be now
especially upon our guard and united, that we become not a Prey to the Enemies
of Church and State?

The contrivances of those that have evil will at Sion, should call forth and
put on work all the Powers of our Souls, provoke an uniform Constancy, and
quicken us to muster up and join all our Forces to prevent those Calamities,
which for ought we know, if once submitted to, can never be redressed.

Nothing can extricate us out of present Fears and Dangers, but engaging the
God of all strength to be on our side, by being perfectly joined together in
the same Mind and in the same Judgment. St. Paul assures us, that if we be of
one Mind and live in Peace, the God of Love and Peace shall be with us. What
then 2 Cor. 13. 11.
must be judged of them who obstruct God's Favor and Protection by refusing to
give up an Opinion, to sacrifice a Thought to Unity and Concord? What of others
who widen our Breaches by half-Conformity, by being politickly Orthodox, that
is, Rebels in disguise to God and the King? Yet all boast themselves true Sons
of the Church of England; surely such as Nero was to Agrippina, surely of a
viperous Brood, that unnaturally tear the tender Bowels which yern'd for them.

Oh, pity rather and bind up the Wounds of a bleeding Church. Think upon her
crying out, Is it nothing to you all yo that pass by' Behold and Lam. 1. 12.
see if there be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow which is done unto me wherewith
the Lord, provoked by your unwarrantable Divisions, has afflicted me in the
day of his fierte Anger. The ways of Zion do mourn because Men come not to
Verse. 4.
the solomn Feasts, to the public places of Assembly; her Gates are desolate,
her Priests sigh, she is in bitterness. And lest the Lord should be so far
enraged as to cast off his Altar and abhor his Sanctuary, be we persuaded to
approach them Lam. 2. 7.
constantly and reverently. Be we steadfast in the Doctrine delivered to and by
the Apostles, continue we in the Fellowship, and submit to the Government of
their Successors, and forsake not the assembling of our selves together as the
Heb. 10. 25.
manner of some is. Then from a joint Participation of the Sacraments and
Prayers, from the Communion of Saints on Earth, we may be translated to that
blessed everlasting Fellowship above in the highest Heavens, where the whole
Family of God's chosen with one Heart and with one Voice shall sing eternal
Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

FINIS.

